 
 
 
870 Market Street, Suite 688  San Francisco, CA 94102  tel 415 544 0444  fax 415 544 0456  info@cja.org  cja.org  
 For Immediate Release 
February 23, 2007 
 
Contacts: 
Center for Justice & Accountability  
Moira Feeney, Staff Attorney, mfeeney@cja.org , (415) 544-0444 x302 
Pamela Merchant, Executive Director, pmerchant@cja.org , (415) 544-0444 x307 
 
Holland & Knight LLP  
Susan M. Bass, Marketing Communications Manager for Holland & Knight LLP  
susan.bass@hklaw.com , (813) 769-4326 
HAITIAN COLONEL AND MEMBER  OF THE HIGH COMMAND 
ORDERED TO PAY $4.3 MILLION FOR HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES 
 
(Miami, Florida, February 23, 2007).  A federal ju ry in Miami found Colonel Carl Dorélien, a former 
member of the Haitian Military’s High Command, liable for torture, extrajudicial killing, arbitrary detention and crimes against humanity suffered by plain tiffs Lexiuste Cajuste, Marie Jeanne Jean and her 
two young children.  Colonel Dorélie n was ordered to pay a total of $4.3 million to the plaintiffs in 
compensatory and punitive damages. 
 
Lexiuste Cajuste was arbitrarily detained and severely tortured by Haitian military forces under Dorelien’s command because of his role as a union organi zer and pro-democracy activist.  Miraculously, 
he survived the beatings but, fourteen years af ter the ordeal, still suffers severe physical disabilities 
relating to his torture.  Upon learning of the jury’s  verdict in his favor Cajuste stated, “Today I have 
finally found justice, but I am only one person am ongst an entire population who suffered abuses.  My 
wish is to see that all the people of Haiti receive justice.”  Cajuste went on to say, “Although today’s 
judgment was rendered against Colonel Dorélien, I se e this is as a judgment against the entire armed 
forces of Haiti under the military dictatorship.  This is a wonderful day for justice for me and my family 
and for the Haitian people.” 
 
Marie Jeanne Jean lost her husband Michel Pierre dur ing the massacre by the Haitian military against the 
citizens of the Raboteau neighborhood in the seaside city of Gonaives.  Raboteau was known for being a 
stronghold of pro-democracy activism.  The Raboteau massacre was one of the worst atrocities committed 
against the civilian population in Haiti while Dorélie n was part of the High Command.  She brought this 
suit on behalf of herself and her two minor children. “Today is a proud and happy day.  This judgment is 
not just for me and my family, but for all of the many  victims of the Raboteau Massacre.  It is in their 
name that I am here in Miami today,” said Marie Jean about the jury’s verdict. 
 
Colonel Dorélien was a member of the High Command of the Haitian Armed Forces during the military 
dictatorship in Haiti from 1991 to 1994.  Dorélien’s presence in the U.S. became widely known after he 
won $3.2 million in the Florida state lottery in 1997.  Dorélien, along with many other members of the Haitian military, fled to the U.S. wher e they lived with impunity.  This case represents the first time that a 
U.S. jury has held a former member of the Haitian military responsible for the widespread human rights 
abuses that were committed by the military against the civilian population. 
 Matt Eisenbrandt, CJA Legal Director and member of the trial team said, “It is an honor to represent 
Marie Jean and Lexiuste Cajuste, their courage is an inspiration.  Justice has been served.” 
 
The plaintiffs are represented by the Center for Justice and Accountability (CJA) and Holland & Knight.  CJA is a San Francisco-based human rights organization that works to end impunity by bringing to justice perpetrators of human rights abuses, especially th ose who live in or visit the United States.  
www.cja.org .  
Holland & Knight is among the world's 15 largest law firms, providing representation in litigation, business, real estate and governmental law. 
www.hklaw.com . 
 
For more information and background on the case, please visit www.cja.org .  