 
 
 
870 Market Street, Suite 688  San Francisco, CA 94102  tel 415 544 0444  fax 415 544 0456  info@cja.org  cja.org  
 For Immediate Release 
May 7, 2007 
 
Contacts: 
Center for Justice & Accountability  
Moira Feeney, Staff Attorney, mfeeney@cja.org , (415) 544-0444 x302 
 
CJA STATEMENT ON THE DISM ISSAL OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS 
LAWSUIT AGAINST FORMER SOMA LI GENERAL AL I SAMANTAR 
 
(Alexandria, Virginia).  On April 27, 2007, the Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia 
dismissed the human rights lawsuit filed against former Somali General Mohamed Ali Samantar for his 
role in torture, extrajudicial killing, war crimes a nd other abuses committed against the civilian population 
of Somalia in the 1980s.  The plaintiffs in this case, represented by San Francisco-based human rights organization Center for Justice & Accountability (C JA) and pro bono co-counsel from Cooley Godward 
Kronish LLP in Reston, Virginia, will appeal the d ecision.  General Samantar left Somali in 1991 and 
currently resides in Fairfax, Virginia.  
 
The judge ruled from the bench and will issue a written opi nion at a later date.  She stated that the Foreign 
Sovereign Immunities Act (FSIA) prevents the plaintiffs  in this case, who are victims of torture and other 
abuses, from bringing a case in the US against a former foreign official such as General Samantar.  The judge’s ruling did not address the merits of the case which alleges that General Samantar had command 
responsibility for torture, killing and other abuses committed by his troops.  The judge did address the 
severity of the claims against General Samantar wh en she stated, “And I want to make sure it's 
understood clearly that the allegations are obviously very  serious. The kind of conduct that is described in 
the complaint is conduct that civilized societies ought not to tolerate.”   
Pamela Merchant, Executive Director of CJA stated , “While General Samantar is living in Northern 
Virginia and enjoying impunity, the people who suffered under his military command still wait their 
opportunity for accountability.  We are disappointed with the court’s ruling, but we are confident that we will prevail on appeal.”   
CJA has been successful in several other suits for similar abuses committed by high-ranking former officials from a number of countries.  The case ag ainst General Samantar, like these other cases, was 
brought under the Alien Tort Statue (ATS) and the Torture Victim Protection Act (TVPA).   
The case against General Samantar details the torture and mass-killings of the Somali people by members of the military under Samantar’s command.  During the period of brutal military dictatorship of the 1980s, 
General Samantar held the top military position in the country.  The stories of survival and loss of CJA’s 
clients and plaintiffs in this case represent a small sampling of the abuses committed by General 
Samantar’s army: 
• In 1981, members of Samantar’s military arr ested and tortured Bashe Abdi Yousuf for 
joining a student group dedicated to improving conditions in local schools and hospitals.  They kept him in solitary confinement for six and a half years.   
• In 1984, General Samantar’s soldiers arrested  John Doe I and his two brothers while they 
tended their camels and other livestock in a rural area of Somalia.  Soldiers tortured the three brothers for four days.  On the fourth day, John Doe I’s brothers were brought before an army 
firing squad and executed. 
• In 1985, Jane Doe, a secondary school student, w as arrested and brought to the local military 
headquarters.  Men in uniform subjected her to various forms of torture.  She was raped at 
least fifteen times.  Jane Doe spent three and a half years in jail. 
• In the spring of 1988, General Samantar’s  subordinates began arresting and summarily 
executing members of their own army from the Isaaq clan. John Doe II, a non-commissioned officer and mechanic in the army, was among t hose arrested and put in front of the firing 
squad.  He suffered only flesh wounds from th e shots, but had to hide among the dead bodies 
until the soldiers left.   
• In June 1988, the brutality of the Somali  National Army reached a peak with the 
indiscriminate bombing of the populated city of Hargeisa.  During the bombardment, Aziz Deria lost his father and brother who were abducted by twenty soldiers who stormed the 
family’s home while they hid from the bombing. The father and son were never seen again. 
While a setback, this recent development does not ma rk an end to the on-going commitment to justice 
shared by all those who suffered under General Sama ntar’s command.  CJA commends their courage and 
dedication, and will honor their commitment through  continued zealous advocacy for accountability.   
 
CJA is a San Francisco-based human rights organization that works to end impunity by bringing to justice perpetrators of human rights abuses, especially th ose who live in or visit the United States.  
www.cja.org .  
Cooley Godward Kronish LLP serves pro bono co-co unsel with CJA in the representation of Somali 
survivors of torture and other human rights abuses. 
 
For more information and background on the case, please visit www.cja.org .  