 
 
 
870 Market Street, Suite 688  San Francisco, CA 94102  tel 415 544 0444  fax 415 544 0456  info@cja.org  cja.org  
 For Immediate Release 
March 4, 2008  
Contact: Moira Feeney, Esq., Media Coordi nator; 415-544-0444 x302; mfeeney@cja.org 
(Version en Espanol a continuación.) 
JUDGE ORDERS FORMER PERUVIAN MILI TARY OFFICER TO PAY $37 MILLION IN 
DAMAGES TO SURVIVORS OF ACCOMARCA MASSACRE 
Tuesday, March 4, 2008, Miami, FL: Federal District Court Judge Adalberto Jordan ordered  former 
Peruvian Major Telmo Hurtado Hurtado to pay $37 million in damages to plaintiffs Teófila Ochoa 
Lizarbe and Cirila Pulido Baldeón and the estates of their deceased family members who were killed 
during the infamous Accomarca Massacre of 1985 in Peru.    
The Center for Justice & Accountability (CJA) brought the suit against Major Hurtado on behalf of Ms. 
Ochoa Lizarbe and Ms. Pulido Baldeón, who were 12 years old at the time of the massacre.   
 
Judge Jordan previously granted a default judgment against Major Hurtado for torture, extrajudicial 
killing, war crimes and crimes against humanity.  Duri ng a trial on damages in February, the judge heard 
emotional and courageous testimony from the plaintiffs about witnessing Major Hurtado and his men murder 69 civilians in the remote mountain village of  Accomarca, including Ms. Ochoa Lizarbe’s mother, 
four brothers and sister, and Ms. Pulid o Baldeón’s mother and brother.    
 
In his order, Judge Jordan stated, “As a general matte r, a human life is not subject to intrinsic monetary 
valuation.  Indeed, any arbitrary value placed on a lif e threatens to demean it or cheapen it because of its 
obvious inadequacy. The same goes for human suffering. But placing  values, for purposes of assessing 
damages, is all that a court can do.” 
 
Major Hurtado appeared in court by order of the judge, but invoked his Fifth Amendment right not to 
testify and refused to participate in the trial.  He is  currently being held in an immigration detention center 
while he fights deportation to Peru.  
 
The judge heard testimony about Major Hurtado’ s responsibility for these atrocities from Eduardo 
Gonzalez of the International Center for Transitiona l Justice, a senior editor of the Peruvian Truth 
Commission, and former Peruvian Senator Javier Di ez Canseco, a prominent human rights defender and 
member of the Senate Commission that interrogated those responsible for the massacre, including Major Hurtado who admitted to his role in the killings. 
 
Based on the evidence presented at the trial, the judge concluded, “Mr. Hurtado said he was following 
orders to capture and destroy the enemy, and justified the killing of children and infants by explaining that 
the young would be indoctrinated by the Sendero Luminoso [the Shining Path].  Significantly, Mr. Hurtado expressed no remorse for his actions.” 
 
Almudena Bernabeu, CJA attorney and member of th e legal team, stated, “The Accomarca Massacre was 
one of the first grave atrocities committed in Peru during the 1980s.  It confirmed that the military’s 
strategy used to fight terrorism was itself a form of  terror which cost the lives of thousands of innocent  2 of 2 
 
civilians.  This judgment, alongside the current trial ag ainst Fujimori, illustrates the courage of our clients 
and an important success in the struggle against impunity being waged by the Peruvian people.” 
 
CJA is a San Francisco-based human rights organiza tion dedicated to ending torture and other severe 
human rights abuses around the world and advancing the rights of survivors to seek truth, justice and 
redress. CJA uses litigation to hold perpetrators individually accountable for human rights abuses, 
develop human rights law and advance the rule of law in countries transitioning from periods of abuse.   
 
For more information and background on the case, please visit http://www.cja.org/cases/hurtado.shtml . 
 
### 
  