 
 
 
One Hallidie Plaza, Suite 406   San Francisco, CA 94102  tel 415 544 0444   fax 415 544 0 456  info@cja.org   cja.org  
 For Immediate Release           Contact:  Lisa Cohen, 310 -395-2544  
February 18 , 2015                                                        lisa@lisacohen.org  
 
 
Family of Víctor Jara Seeks Truth for 1973 Killing  Under Pinochet  
 
The Center for Justice and Ac countability (CJA) filed a brief yesterday  in our  historic case Jara v. 
Barrientos , accepting the defendant’s motion to set aside a default judgment and agreeing not to oppose 
the removal of the default j udgment against  former Pinochet Lieutenant Pedro Pablo Barrientos Nuñez , 
accused of torturing and killing Chilean folksinger and activist Víctor Jara . The default judgment was 
made o n November 20 , 2014, when the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Florida  had found 
Barrientos liable for torture , extrajudicial killing  and crimes against humanity  in connection with Mr. 
Jara’s death  after CJA and Ch adbourne & Parke, LLP filed a case against him in September 2013  and 
Barrientos failed to appear before the court .  The court ha s now  suspended the damages trial scheduled for  
February 23, 2015, pending the petition from Barrientos  to remove the default ju dgment .    
 
The family of Mr. Jara welcome s Barrientos’s motion, which, if granted, would allow  the case  to proceed 
to a full trial and bring to light the events that transpired surrounding  their loved one’s  death . Víctor Jara  
was detained , tortured, and k illed at the infamous Chile Stadium during General Augusto Pinochet’s coup 
in 1973 . CJA Le gal Director Kathy Roberts said : “With this case, we hope to  shed light on what 
happened  at Chile Stadium in the first days of Pinochet’s  coup, as these events have r emained shrouded in 
mystery for over 40 years . CJA’s case, along with the work of Chilean prosecutors who have indicted 
Barrientos, will finally provide judicial acknowledgement to the victims of Chile Stadium. ” 
 
On behalf of the Jara family, CJA and  co-counsel  Chadbourne & Parke, LLP filed a civil suit against 
Barrientos on September 4, 2013. The complaint alleges that Barrientos , who currently lives in Deltona, 
Florida , tortured and executed Mr. Jara during the mass detention of thousands of intellectuals , political 
leaders and perceived political supporters of the Allende government at Chile Stadium immediately after 
Pinochet’s coup . The district court will likely schedule a full trial  against Barrientos for later this year.  
  
About the Center for  Justice  and Accountability  
CJA is a San Francisco -based human rights organization dedicated to deterring  torture and other severe 
human rights abuses around the world and advancing the  rights of survivors to seek truth, justice and 
redress. CJA uses  litigation to  hold perpetrators individually accountable for human rights abuses, 
develop  human rights law, and advance  the rule of law in countries transitioning from periods of 
abuse.  www.cja.org   
 
About Chadbourne & Parke  
Chadbou rne & Parke is an award -winning international law firm, which includes a globally recognized 
team of Public International Law & International Dispute Resolution lawyers who have extensive 
experience in advising and litigating in relation to all aspects of public international law and related 
domestic court proceedings , including international commercial arbitration, international investment 
arbitration, international human rights claims, the law of the sea, and international humanitarian law . For 
additional  information on Chadbourne & Parke, please visit http://www.chadbourne.com/pil/  