 
 
 
870 Market Street, Suite 688  San Francisco, CA 94102  tel 415 544 0444  fax 415 544 0456  info@cja.org  cja.org  
 PRESS RELEASE 
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 
Contact: Pamela Merchant, Executi ve Director, 415-544-0444 ext. 307, 
pmerchant@cja.org 
 
U.S. JUDGE HOLDS BOSNIAN SERB LIABLE FOR TORTURE 
 
San Francisco, April 29, 2002. An Atlanta fede ral judge today ordered former Bosnian 
Serb soldier Nikola Vuckovic to pay $140 million in damages to four Bosnians whom the court found he had tortured during the Bosnia n Serb campaign of "e thnic cleansing" in 
the early 1990s. The case is the first legal act ion against a Bosnian living in the United 
States for human rights abuses during the Balk ans conflict. Vuckovic received asylum in 
the United States in 1997. Trial in the case was held in October 2001.  
The four plaintiffs are Bosniaks (Bosnian c itizens of Muslim Slavic  ancestry) who were 
detained by Serb forces and s ubjected to repeated beatings and other abuses by Vuckovic. 
The four were held for some six months w ith other Bosniaks and Croats in converted 
schools and warehouses in their hometown of  Bosanski Samac in northern Bosnia-
Herzegovina. Most were then transferred to other detention and labor camps in Bosnia. 
Serbs seized the plaintiffs' homes and businesse s, and their families were forced to flee. 
Two of the plaintiffs received  political asylum in the U.S. with their families, and are 
living in Salt Lake City, while the others now live with their families in Belgium and 
Germany. 
Judge Marvin H. Shoob found Vuckovic liable for severe acts of physical and mental 
torture. In the judgment he states: "[D]efenda nt repeatedly tortured and humiliated each 
plaintiff on a variety of different occasions and committed these abuses in furtherance of a deliberate campaign to destory, terrorize, and displace the Muslim population of large 
sections of Bosnia. These abuses were carr ied out wantonly and maliciously and violated 
the most fundamental international norms of  human rights. Accordingly, the court finds 
that an award of substantial punitive damages … is appropriate." 
"This victory comes at a particularly impor tant time," said Sandra Coliver, Executive 
Director of the Center for Justice and Accountability, a human rights law group that 
represents the four torture survivors. "Our country and the world are focused on the 
urgent need to ensure justice and accountabi lity for terrorists who have committed crimes 
against humanity. Judge Shoob's verdict highlight s the capacity of U.S. courts to hold 
such perpetrators accountable under U.S. a nd international law. The case underscores the 
U.S. legal system's commitment to justice for victims of crimes against humanity, whoever they are, be they Muslims from any part of the world, or U.S. citizens."  
Kemal Mehinovic, the lead plaintiff, said "I brought this case because I felt an obligation 
towards those who were killed or tortured by Vuckovic. I am satisfied with the result. He 
will no longer be able to live peacefully in the United States." Mehinovic noted that the 
amount of the judgment was not particularly im portant to him. "It is  enough that justice 
was done," he said. 
"One of the main purposes of this case was to disrupt Vuckovic's ability to live comfortably in this country," said Joshua Sondheimer, CJA's Litigation Director, "and we  2 of 2 
 
have succeeded in that regard. Vuckovic has le ft his previous address, and seems to be 
living as a fugitive. He will be responsible for paying everything that he has beyond basic 
living expenses to his victims. Many perpetrators seek to live in the United States so that 
they can take advantage of the economic opportunities this country offers, and preventing 
them from doing so serves as a form of puni shment and also can afford their victims a 
measure of justice." 
Paul Hoffman, the lead counsel in the case,  said that "Judge Shoob heard overwhelming 
evidence of the inhumane acts perpetrated by Vuckovic and other Bosnian Serbs on the 
plaintiffs and hundreds of other Muslims and Croats in Bosanski Samac during the ethnic 
cleansing that swept across Bosnia in 1992. He  has rendered a Judgment which gives the 
plaintiffs an official recognition of the human rights violations they have suffered, 
demonstrates that U.S. courts are open to the victims of human rights criminals and for 
the enforcement of international law and imposes a penalty on Vuckovic that will deny 
him a safe haven in this country." 
The case, profiled in a January 1999 segment of the ABC news show "20/20," was filed 
under two federal laws - the Alien Tort Cl aims Act of 1789 and the Torture Victim 
Protection Act of 1991 - that allow victims of torture and other serious human rights abuses to bring lawsuits agains t perpetrators who reside in or  visit the United States, even 
if the abuses were committed in a foreign count ry. Over the last twenty years, these laws 
have allowed victims to hold perpetrators in  the United States accountable in situations 
where the U.S. government has been unable or  unwilling to deport or prosecute them.  
All four of the plaintiffs in this case have or will testify in a trial concerning similar 
events conducted in the Hague by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The defendants there include the leaders of the campai gn of ethnic cleansing 
in Bosanski Samac. One of them, Stefan Todorovic, pled guilty in December 2000 to crimes against humanity. Vuckovic had served  as his bodyguard and had participated in 
many of the crimes that he organized or committed.  
Several attorneys worked on the case on a volunteer basis in cluding: lead counsel Paul 
Hoffman, a partner with the firm of Schonbr un, DeSimone, Seplow, Harris & Hoffman in 
Venice, CA; Gerald Weber, Legal Director of  the ACLU of Georgia; and Amanda Smith, 
associate with the San Francisco-based firm of Brobeck, Phleger & Harrison.  
CENTER FOR JUSTICE & ACCOUNTABILITY 
CJA, established in 1998, represents victims of egregious human rights abuses in actions 
against perpetrators who live in or visit the U.S. In addition to the Bosnian case, CJA has 
cases pending against perpetrato rs from El Salvador, Chile and China. CJA, together with 
two other human rights groups, recently won a $66 million judgment against an Indonesian general for atrociti es committed in East Timor in 1999. To receive updates on 
other CJA cases, please contact Chri s McKenna at Tel: 415-544-0444, x302, Fax: 415-
544-0456 and Email: cmckenna@cja.org. 
 
-end- 
 