For Immediate Release 
Thursday, November 19, 2005  
Contact: Elizabeth Chertoff, Media Coor dinator, 415-544-0444, ext. 303 
echertoff@cja.org  
 
JURY FINDS MEMPHIS RESIDENT RESPONSIBLE FOR HUMAN RIGHTS 
ABUSES IN EL SALVADOR  
COLONEL NICOLAS CARRANZA HELD LIAB LE IN U.S. COUR T FOR TORTURE, 
EXTRAJUDICIAL KILLING AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
Memphis, TN: November 18, 2005 . Today a jury of nine U.S. citizens sent a powerful 
message that torturers and human rights abus ers will not be allowed to reside in the 
United States with impunity. The federal c ourt jury found Memphis resident Colonel 
Nicolas Carranza, the former Vice-Minister of  Defense of El Salvador, responsible for 
overseeing torture and killings in  that country. The verdict is a partial verdict in favor of 
four of the five plaintiffs. The jury has yet to reach a verdict on the claim of the fifth 
plaintiff, Ana Patricia Chavez, a nd is continuing to deliberate.  
The verdict represents the fi rst time that a U.S. jury in  a contested case has found a 
commander liable for crimes against human ity. This means that violations were 
committed as part of a widespread or system atic attack against th e civilian population of 
El Salvador. The jurors awarded each of the four plaintiffs $500,000 in compensatory 
damages for a total of $2 million. 
The jury also recommended that Carranza should pay punitive damages. Additional 
testimony will be taken today or Monday to de termine the precise amount of that award.  
The case was brought by five courageous pe ople who were tortured or had family 
members murdered by government forces unde r Carranza’s command in the early 1980s. 
During the trial, all of the pl aintiffs – Erlinda Franco, Ceci lia Santos, Francisco Calderon, 
Ana Patricia Chavez and Daniel Alvarado – te stified about the abuses they and their 
relatives endured at the hands of the military, especially the notorious Security Forces.  
“My husband Manuel was one of six pro-demo cracy leaders of the Frente Democrático 
Revolucionario (FDR) who were abducted, tort ured and killed by the Security Forces,” 
said Erlinda Franco. “Now that  the jury has held Colonel Carranza responsible for these 
crimes my family has finally found the justice th at we have been seeking all these years.”  
Ana Patricia Chavez testified that she was forced to listen as military death squad 
members shot her mother, a member of th e ANDES 21 de Junio teachers’ union and the 
Christian Democrat Party. Minut es later, Chavez found her husband and father murdered.  
Francisco Calderon witnessed the murder of his father, also a member of ANDES, by plain-clothes gunmen working with the National Police. During the trial, he stated, “This is not about seeking revenge but about seeki ng justice.” Cecilia Santos testified that 
interrogators burned her with acid and ra n electrical shock th rough her body in the 
National Police headquarters.  
As Vice-Minister of Defense, Colonel Ca rranza exercised command authority over the 
Security Forces when they carried out these abuses in 1980. 
The jury also heard evidence that, in 1983, members of the Treasury Police abducted 
Daniel Alvarado and falsely accused him of the murder of U.S. military advisor Lt. 
Cmdr. Albert Schaufelberger. They tortured  him severely and forced him to sign a 
confession. As director of th e Treasury Police at the time , Carranza had contact with 
Alvarado on several occasions, including at a press conference. Eventually U.S. officials 
interviewed Alvarado, gave him a polygraph test, and concluded that he had confessed to 
the murder in order to stop the torture. 
The trial was marked by several important revelations. Former U.S. Ambassador to El 
Salvador Robert White testified that Colone l Carranza was a paid informant for the CIA 
while he was Vice-Minister of Defense and a member of the High Command in 1980. At 
that time White asked the CIA station chief in  El Salvador to rem ove Carranza from the 
CIA payroll because of his deplorable human  rights record but no action was ever taken. 
Carranza admitted on the witness stand that he had been receiving money from the U.S. 
government since 1965. 
Plaintiffs’ counsel Matt Eisenbr andt of the Center for Just ice & Accountability stated, 
“This verdict sends a strong message that the people of the United States, as represented 
by this jury, do not tolerate tortur e and other human rights abuses.” 
The suit was jointly brought by the Center for Justice & Accountab ility (CJA), a San 
Francisco-based non-profit human rights organiza tion that works to bring perpetrators of 
human rights abuses to justice, and the Te nnessee-based law firm Bass, Berry & Sims, 
PLC. CJA was represented at trial by Litiga tion Director Matt Eisenbrandt, Senior Legal 
Advisor Carolyn Patty Blum and International Attorney Almudena Bernabeu. The Bass, 
Berry & Sims team was led by partner David Esquivel and associates Steve Jasper, Matt 
Sinback and Jennifer Eberle. CJA and Bass, Be rry & Sims represented the plaintiffs pro 
bono. 
David Esquivel said, “I commend the courage of  these plaintiffs for coming forward and 
bringing this case to trial, then taking the br ave step of testifying in front of Colonel 
Carranza. I applaud the jury fo r upholding the principles of ju stice and the rule of law. 
This is a historic day for the people of Memphis just as it is historic for the people of El 
Salvador.” 
 