 
  
 
 
  
Contact: Lisa Cohen, at 310-395-2544 
 
CENTER FOR JUSTICE & ACCOUNTABILITY CALLS ON NEW YO RK TO 
REVOKE GITMO PSYCHOLOGIST’S LICENSE 
 
- Participation in Torture Violates Professional Stan dards - 
 
New York, NY: July 7, 2010 : Today, in what marks the latest step in the nationa l 
movement against torture, the Center for Justice an d Accountability (CJA) filed a 
complaint with the New York State Office of Profess ions, calling for an investigation of 
Dr. John Francis Leso for his participation in abus ive interrogation and torture, and for 
revocation of his psychologist’s license on that ba sis. CJA filed this case on behalf of Dr. 
Steven Reisner, a New York psychologist, teacher, a nd trauma expert and recent recipient 
of the Beacon Award by the New York State Psycholog ical Association for his work 
against torture. The Beacon Award has only been pre sented six times in NYSPA’s 
history. “Among the horrors arising from our government's us e of torture is the fact 
that physicians and psychologists played a major ro le in designing and 
implementing the techniques,”  says Dr. Reisner. 
 
Dr. Leso, a Major in the U.S. Army, led the first t eam of mental health professionals 
tasked with supporting interrogation operations at the U.S. detention camp at 
Guantánamo Bay, Cuba.  The complaint alleges that D r. Leso violated professional 
standards for New York psychologists when he recomm ended a series of escalating 
physically and psychologically abusive interrogatio n tactics to be used on detainees, 
personally supervised interrogations where his tact ics were used, and actually 
participated in the application of these tactics.  Many of the techniques and conditions 
that Dr. Leso helped put in place were applied to m en and boys held at Guantánamo and 
eventually to detainees held in U.S. custody in Ira q and Afghanistan.  
 
Neither Dr. Leso nor any other U.S. official involv ed has ever been held accountable for 
the cruel treatment of detainees at Guantánamo. 
 
The complainant, Dr. Steven Reisner, is Senior Facu lty and Supervisor at the 
International Trauma Studies Program, in New York C ity. He also serves on the faculties 
of the Department of Psychiatry and the Psychoanaly tic Institute at the New York 
University Medical School, and has been Adjunct Pro fessor in the Program in Clinical 
Psychology at Columbia University, Teachers College . He is licensed to practice 
psychology by the State of New York.   
 
“If the government isn't going to hold these doctor s legally accountable for the 
torture, at least their fellow health professionals  can hold them ethically accountable 
for violating our time-honored principles ,” says Dr. Reisner. “ The public has a right  
 
to expect that doctors who torture will be sanction ed no less than those who commit 
fraud or who have sex with their patients.”  
 
The Board of Psychology and the Office of Professio ns are responsible for licensing and 
regulating the conduct of New York psychologists.  Dr. Leso has never faced a criminal 
or civil trial for his actions, and he continues to  practice psychology under his New York 
State license.  “The Office of Professions has a responsibility to ensure that  
psychologists who abuse their position, such as Dr.  Leso, are prohibited from 
practicing,”  says Pamela Merchant, Executive Director of CJA.  “With the initiation of 
this action, New York can make sure that Dr. Leso d oesn’t abuse his position, and 
the people in his care, in the future.” 
 
* * * 
For additional information about the case, please s ee CJA’s website: www.cja.org .  
CJA is a San Francisco-based human rights organizat ion dedicated to deterring torture and other 
severe human rights abuses around the world and adv ancing the rights of survivors to seek truth, 
justice and redress.  CJA uses litigation to hold p erpetrators individually accountable for human 
rights abuses, develop human rights law, and advanc e the rule of law in countries transitioning 
from periods of abuse.  
 
 