 
 
 
 
 
 CONTACT:  BASS, BERRY & SIMS   CJA 
Edward Bowen     Almudena Bernabeu 
  615-259-6447     415-544-0444, xt 306   ebowen@bassberry.com
   abernabeu@cja.org  
CARRANZA VERDICT UPHELD  
 
Memphis, Tenn., March 17, 2009  – The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit has upheld the jury 
verdict holding Memphis resident Colonel Nico las Carranza liable for crimes against humanity.  
Carranza, the former vice-minister of defense of El  Salvador, was held liable for overseeing torture and 
extrajudicial killings in that country during the early 1980s.   
 The plaintiffs are hopeful that the upheld verdict w ill encourage the United States Justice Department to 
bring proceedings to revoke Carranza’s citizenship  based on his responsibility for gross human rights 
violations. Carranza came to the United States in 1985 and settled in Memphis.  He became a U.S. citizen 
in 1991.   
 In a decision issued this morning, the federal appeals court rejected Carranza’s argument that U.S. courts 
should defer to a Salvadoran amnesty law that woul d likely immunize him from suit in that country.  The 
court held that “as a citizen and resident of the Unite d States,” Carranza is “subjec t to civil liability for his 
violations” of United States human rights laws.  The court also rejected Carranza’s arguments that the 
lawsuit was not timely filed, as well as his challenge to  several evidentiary rulings by the trial court. 
 Five plaintiffs went to trial in federal court in Memphis, Tennessee, in October 2005.  On November 18, 
2005, after two weeks of testimony, the jury found Carranza responsible for overseeing the plaintiffs’ 
torture and the killing of their family members.  The jury  awarded four of the five plaintiffs a total of $2 
million in compensatory damages and an additional $4 million in punitive damages.  In deciding to award 
punitive damages, the jury found that Carranza w as not only responsible for the atrocities committed 
against the plaintiffs, but that his actions were intent ional, reckless, malicious, or wanton.  The jury could 
not reach a unanimous decision for the fifth plaintiff.  
 The verdict represents the first time that a U.S. ju ry in a contested case has found a commander liable for 
crimes against humanity.  This means that violati ons were committed as part of a widespread or 
systematic attack against the civilian population of El Salvador.  The suit was jointly brought by the Center for Jus tice & Accountability (CJA) and the law firm of Bass, 
Berry & Sims. 
 
"We are very pleased with the court's decision,” said David Esquivel, counsel for the plaintiffs and attorney at Bass, Berry & Sims.  “It affirms our c lients' steadfast commitment, over the course of three 
decades, to make sure justice was done.” Pamela Merc hant, Executive Director of the Center for Justice 
and Accountability, noted that the decision “also sends a strong message that the United States will not be a safe haven for human rights violators.”    
2 
 
  
 
 About Bass, Berry & Sims 
With more than 230 attorneys representing nume rous publicly-traded companies and Fortune 500 
businesses, Bass, Berry & Sims has been involved in  some of the largest and most significant business 
transactions and litigation matters in the country.  For more information, visit www.bassberry.com
. 
 
 
About CJA  is a San Francisco-based human rights organiza tion dedicated to deterring torture and other 
severe human rights abuses around the world and advanci ng the rights of survivors to seek truth, justice 
and redress. CJA uses litigation to hold perpetrators individually accountable for human rights abuses, 
develop human rights law, and advance the rule of la w in countries transitioning from periods of abuse. 
www.cja.org  
    
 
