  
     
  
   
 
 
 
                                        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ashton B. Carter  
Secretary of Defense  
Department of Defense  
1000 Defense Pentagon  
Washington, DC  20301 -1000  
 
The Honorable Loretta Lynch  
Attorney General  
Department of Justice  
950 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, DC 20530 -0001  
 
via US mail and fax  
 
         September 18, 2015  
 
Re: Information on Abu Zubaydah Case  
 
Dear Secretary Carter and Attorney General Lynch , 
 
We the undersigned organizations  write to express concern and urge you to reconsider a recent decision 
by a Guantanamo Bay Privilege  Review Team (PRT) to bar the disclosure of information related to  the 
CIA’s Rendition, Detention , and Interrogation (RDI) program. On September 10, 2015, the media 
report ed that lawyer s for current Guantanamo d etainee Abu Zubaydah  were refused permission from 
the PRT  to disclose information from their client  about treatment while in CIA custody.1 The information 
they presented for release  appears to fit a category which , according to government documents, is no 
longer classified.  
Earlier this year, following release of the Senate Intelligence Committee’s summary of the CIA’s former 
detention and interrogation activities  (Senate Summary), the gover nment  made clear in certain military 
                                                           
1 David Rohde, “U.S.  government blocks release of new CIA torture details,” Reuters, September 10, 2015,  
http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/09/11/us -usa-cia-torture -idUSKCN0RA2 RM20150911 . commission  cases and in  its own classification guidance pertaining to the RDI program , that the 
“conditions of confinement ” and the “treatment ” of detainees  while in CIA custody , among other things,  
were no longer classified.2 In line with this decision , in May the administration permitted the disclosure 
of lawyers’ notes containing the account of Majid Khan, also a current Guantanamo Bay detainee 
formerly held by the CIA, about some of h is treatment while in CIA custody.3 The declassif ication of  CIA 
treatment an d conditions of confinement shed further light on  facts of public importance that the 
government had kept secret  for far too long .  
Reports that the administration is now refusing to permit the release of Abu Zubaydah’s account of his  
treatment  is a setbac k for a trend towards greater openness . As reported by Reuters , Abu Zubaydah’s 
team of lawyers submitted 116 pages of  notes in 10  submission parts  to the PRT for review and all of it 
was denied.  The team’s lead lawyer, Joseph Margulies, also said that what his team submitted for 
clearance was limited to Abu Zubayda h's description of his torture and did not include prohibited 
information .4 Since the government has taken the position that treatment of  detainees and their 
conditions of confinement while in CIA custody is no longer classified, it is hard to understand the 
rationale for refusing to permit the notes  from being made public.   
The full release of information about the treatment of detainees in CIA custody is long overdue. The 
government’s original decision to classify former CIA detainees’ own thoughts, memories, o bservations, 
and experiences  about their time in CIA custody violat ed the administration’s own classification  rules , 
which only permit the classification of information produced by or in the control of the government . 
Those rules also bar classifying information to conceal violations of the law or prevent embarrassment.5   
Release of the Senate Summary was a watershed in many ways and it is important that the information 
contained in that document was disclosed  to the public . But as telling as the Senate Summary was about 
the treatment detainees suffered in CIA custody, it is mainly an account told from the government’s 
perspective. Still largely missing from the public record are the accounts of many detainees , including 
those  who, according to the Senate Summary, were subjected to  some of  the harshest CIA abuses.  More 
information must be made public , including the full 6 ,700-page Senate report with appropriate 
redactions  for legitimately classified information ; the pseudonyms, names and titles of non -covert CIA 
personnel , and CIA personnel who have acknowledged their CIA affiliation and are implicated in the RDI 
program; and more informat ion about the rendition aspect of the CIA’s RDI program, including the 
names of those the CIA unlawfully rendered to other countries.6  
                                                           
2 See e.g. “Government Motion to Amend AE013DDD Second Amended Protective Order #1 To Protect Against  
Disclosure of National Security Information,” January 30, 2015, 
http://www.mc.mil/Portals/0/pdfs/KSM2/KSM%20II%20(AE013RRR(Gov)).pdf ; pp. 4-6; see also “CIA, Classification Guidance 
for Information About the Central Intelligence Agency’s  Former Rendition, Detention and Interrogation Program,” available at 
OpentheGovernment .org, dated January 28, 2015,   
http://www.openthegovernment.org/sites/ default/files/RDIclassificationguidance.pdf , pp. 4-5. 
3 David Rohde, “Exclusive: Detainee alleges CIA sexual abuse, torture beyond Senate findings,” Reuters, June 2, 2015,  
http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/06/02/us -usa-torture -khan -idUSKBN0OI1TW20150602 . 
4 Rohde, “U.S. government blocks release of new CIA torture details,” Reuters.  
5 See Executive Order 13526 Sections 1.1(a)( 2) and 1.7(a)(1) and (2), December 29, 2009, https://www.whitehouse.gov/the -
press -office/executive -order -classified -national -security -infor mation . 
6 Letter to John P. Fitzpatrick, Director Information Security Oversight Office, from OpenTheGovernment.org, regarding the 
“Wrongful classification of information regarding CIA torture, in violation of Executive  
Order 13526,” September 15, 2015, http://www.openthegovernment.org/sites/default/files/ISOO_Complaint_CIA_torture.pdf  We understand that lawyers for several other detainees have requested that notes about their clients’ 
treatment  in CIA c ustody be released  as well  and a re awaiting decisions about their requests at this 
time.  We urge you to reconsider the decision regarding Abu Zubaydah’s account and quickly process the 
remaining requests . Failure to do so only delays a significant step tow ard needed  transparency and 
prevents the public and policy makers from knowing the  full truth about important aspects of the CIA 
program.  
We thank you for  your attention to this matter,  
American Civil Liberties Union  
Amnesty International USA  
The Center for Victims of Torture  
The Constitution Project  
Human Rights First  
Human Rights Watch  
National Religious Campaign Against Torture  
OpenTheGovernment.org  
Physicians for Human Rights  
 
cc:  James Clapper, Director of National Intelligence  
John Brennan, Director, US Central Intelligence Agency  
Lisa Monaco , Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism  
Susan Rice, National Security Advisor  