U.S. can't remain in denial of torture: Opinion - nj.comSkip to ArticleSet weatherBack To Main MenuCloseCustomize Your WeatherSet Your Location:Enter City and State or Zip CodeSubmitSubscribeNews never stops. Neither do we. Support NJ.comU.S. can't remain in denial of torture: OpinionPublished: Jun. 09, 2013, 10:15 a.m.NEW!By Star-Ledger Guest ColumnistBy George HunsingerA major new report has been released on how America resorted to torture — extensively, systematically and without precedent — after Sept. 11, 2001.The US flag flying next to the Capitol dome in Washington, DC. Meticulously documented, the report comes to nearly 600 pages of hard-hitting and detailed analysis. Based on more than two years of intensive research, it was signed by the distinguished Task Force on Detainee Treatment, sponsored by the Constitution Project, a Washington-based nonprofit think tank.The blue-ribbon credentials of the task force, consisting of prominent Republicans and Democrats, enhance the report’s credibility. The task force’s bipartisan nature demonstrates that torture is not a partisan issue. It underscores that all Americans of good will, regardless of political affiliation, are called to face up to this, our national shame. Only so can we ensure that U.S. complicity in torture never happens again.At least five main points are worth emphasizing from the report.First, the United States definitively engaged in torture. Propaganda to the contrary should be recognized for what it is. The report shrewdly draws upon official U.S. documents to make its point. Again and again, the United States became complicit in the kind of torture it has often condemned when practiced by other nations.How can we censure brutalities such as waterboarding, sleep deprivation, slamming detainees into the wall, exposing them to extreme temperatures of hot and cold, suspending them from the ceiling with shackled wrists, subjecting them to sensory deprivation, long-time standing and much else — all of which we have condemned when practiced by others — how can we rebuke such horrors while resorting to them ourselves?How can we pretend that when we are the perpetrators, it’s not torture?Second, the United States’ use of torture was illegal. Torture, as the report emphasizes, is an international crime. It also stands in flagrant violation of domestic law. The real crimes were not only committed in Guantànamo, Abu Ghraib and Bagram Air Base in Afghanistan. The real crimes were committed in Washington. It is important to see that torture is not just one offense among others. It is a war crime for which there is no statute of limitations.Third, torture was approved at the highest levels of government. Our top officials, including the president, the vice president and the Department of Justice, bear heavy responsibility.They were and are guilty of sins of omission and commission. They contributed to the spread of shocking interrogation techniques in theaters of conflict across the globe.Other government officials and certain military leaders also have dirty hands. The real heroes, as the report notes, were those within the government and the military who resisted the order to torture, sometimes resigning in protest. They have yet to receive the recognition they deserve.Fourth, torture produced nothing of value. No firm or persuasive evidence exists that the widespread use of torture and other outlawed forms of cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment led to information of significant value. In fact, substantial evidence exists that much of the information extracted by abusive techniques was neither useful nor reliable. Much of it was actually counterproductive. Our use of torture has perhaps been the No. 1 recruiting tool for attracting anti-U.S. terrorists.Finally, torture requires accountability. This is where we encounter the terrible failures of the Obama administration. It is true that President Obama has curtailed U.S. torture in its most egregious forms.Unfortunately, it is also true that his executive orders, issued on his second day in office, all turned out to have loopholes. Torture by proxy, for example, has continued to be widespread in Afghanistan and Iraq. Furthermore, no one in high office has been held accountable while, disturbingly, many have been promoted and rewarded.Contrary to Obama’s hope, it is impossible to move forward without looking back.The high level of secrecy still surrounding U.S. torture after 9/11, according to the report, can "no longer be justified on the basis of national security."I join the task force panel and the members of the National Religious Committee Against Torture in calling for the release of the Senate Intelligence Committee’s massive documentation of the CIA’s abuse of detainees. As should by now be clear, sunshine is the best disinfectant, and America cannot remain in denial forever. To ensure a better future, we need the truth.George Hunsinger is Hazel Thompson McCord Professor of Systematic Theology at Princeton Theological Seminary. In 2006, he founded the National Religious Committee Against Torture.FOLLOW STAR-LEDGER OPINION: TWITTER | FACEBOOKIf you purchase a product or register for an account through one of the links on our site, we may receive compensation.DisclaimerRegistration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser Agreement,Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement,and Your California Privacy Rights(User Agreement updated 1/1/21. Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement updated 7/1/2022).Cookie Settings© 2022 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us). The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.Ad Choices