“Our determination to survive as a distinct Indigenous
peoples comes from the will of our ancestors.  They suf-fered unspeakable crimes to their spirits and bodies,and we still struggle to beat back this legacy of genocide.To outsiders, it might appear as if the Indian wars areover.  We know that is not true.  Our battle today is withhistorical oppression and generational trauma.  Seeds ofdoubt and shame planted hundreds of years ago continueto take root in the darkness of each new generation,winding its way through our communities... ThroughoutIndian country, we are standing up against the crushingeffects of trauma, addiction, abuse, suicide and vio-lence against women, men, and children. Women aregathering to openly discuss the wounding - and wellness- of our people.  These important connections are hap-pening on our lands and reservations, under arbors, byrivers, in sweat lodges, longhouses, tipis, hogans, cook-houses, conference rooms and rehab centers... We willkeep gathering and keep carrying these ways forward.Most important, we cannot give up.  Our grandmotherswould have none of that.”  
— Beverly Cook, Wolf Clan, AkwesasneTTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122Table of Contents
Introduction ................................................................................................................ page 2
Executive Director’s Report ........................................................................................ page 4
Chairman’s Message .................................................................................................... page 6
The Board of Directors .............................................................................................. page 7
The National Support Committee ............................................................................ page 7 
The Preservation of Tribal Existence ...................................................................... page 9
The Protection of Tribal Natural Resources ........................................................ page 15
Major Activities 2011 - NARF Case Map ................................................................ page 22
The Promotion of Human Rights .......................................................................... page 25
The Accountability of Governments ...................................................................... page 34
The Development of Indian Law ............................................................................ page 36
Financial Report  ...................................................................................................... page 38
Contributors .............................................................................................................. page 39
NARF Staff .................................................................................................................. page 44
Main Office
Native American Rights Fund1506 BroadwayBoulder, CO 80302303-447-8760www.narf.org
Alaska Office
Native American Rights Fund801 B Street, Suite 401Anchorage, Alaska 99501907-276-0680
Washington, D.C. Office
Native American Rights Fund1514 P Street, NW, Suite D (Rear)Washington, D.C. 20005202-785-4166
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is a nonprofit, charitable organization incorporated in 1971 under
the laws of the District of Columbia. NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the provisions of Section 501(c)(3) ofthe Internal Revenue code. Contributions to NARF are tax deductible. The Internal Revenue Service has ruled that NARF isnot a “private foundation” as defined in Section 509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. NARF was founded in 1970 and incorporated in 1971 in Washington, D.C.
1Workplace Campaigns – NARF is a member of America’s Charities, a national workplace giving federation. Giving through
your workplace is as easy as checking off NARF’s box, #10350 on the Combined Federal Campaign (CFC) pledge formauthorizing automatic payroll deduction.  NARF is also a member of Community Shares of Colorado (CSC), member #5037.DETERMINATION
show how people are to interact on the basis
of spiritual and natural laws, with profoundrespect for the energetic basis and biologicalfabric of life.  The stories of these respectiveindigenous nations and peoples contain vitallyimportant knowledge and wisdom very muchneeded by the planet in this era of ecologicaldeterioration, breakdown and decline.
As people of European ancestry have gradually
awakened to the profound nature of indige-nous knowledge, accumulated over many millennia, only recently has the realizationdawned on some of them that the scientificknowledge of indigenous cultures holds infor-mation of tremendous importance for theplanet.  Mother Earth is definitely in crisis andindigenous knowledge of ecosystems pointsthe way to the paradigm shift and change inlifestyle that is needed at this time – a para-digm shift of healing and revitalization for allliving things.  In this way, the indigenous communities can become the natural guidesto restoring balance and harmony in the world. 
Indigenous peoples have been expert
observers noting climate and associated envi-ronmental changes for millennia.  The northerntribes of Canada and Alaska, for example, havelong noted the unprecedented changes in animal, bird and insect migrations. We sayunprecedented because oral history in indige-nous cultures has tremendous integrity; thesurvival of subsequent generations depends onthe integrity of these “stories”. The changesthat these tribes are now seeing are not foundin their oral histories. 
The strength of the indigenous perspective
builds on thousands of years of accumulatedobservation of the environment. The oral histories of indigenous cultures are a tremen-dous resource because the histories preserveinformation that reaches into data-sparse timeperiods unavailable to many modern sciencetechniques.
Indigenous cultures, with their close ties to
landscapes and ecological systems, are first-Introduction
2TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDThe Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is
the national Indian legal defense fund whoseprimary work centers on the preservation andprotection of Indian rights and resources.NARF began its work in 1970 with a planninggrant from the Ford Foundation and throughthe years has grown into a reputable and well-respected advocate of Indian interests.
Since its beginnings, NARF has worked in
conjunction with many people to seek judicialand negotiated solutions to long-standingIndian grievances, uncertainties and problems.NARF’s partners have included tribal leaders,tribal attorneys, government attorneys andlegal services attorneys.  
Indigenous communities now find them-
selves at ground zero in a fight that may welldetermine the survival of their way of life andas sovereign nations.  A fight where it is imper-ative that they be given a voice and a seat atthe table.
Climate change is widely recognized as the
number one threat to the well-being ofhumanity.  Indigenous peoples, who historicallyhave left a negligible carbon footprint, are suf-fering disproportionately from the effects ofclimate change. They have few resources available to mitigate the effects of climatechange and to adapt to them.  Because of thethreat that climate change poses to indigenouspeoples, the Native American Rights Fund is
committed to getting involved in the fight
against it.  
Indigenous cultures are woven from the
many intricate strands of traditional storiesthat extend back to the beginning of time.Indigenous knowledge is grounded in oral tra-ditions which recount the stories of their peoplesthroughout innumerable and multifaceted lifeexperiences.  These stories are constitutive ofand structure the existence of indigenousnations and peoples.  They tell of how lifecame to be and how indigenous peoples are toconduct themselves as they interact with thephysical and social world.  These teachingsOUR WAY OF LIFE AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122“If you are not at the table, 
you are on the menu.”
3Mission Indians, the Muckleshoot Tribe, the
Sycuan Band of Kumeyaay, the ConfederatedTribes of Siletz Indians, the Tulalip Tribes, theChickasaw Nation, and the Poarch Band ofCreek Indians.  United, these financial, moral,and intellectual gifts provide the framework forNARF to fulfill its goal of securing the right to self-determination to which all NativeAmerican peoples are entitled.  Finally, NARF’slegal work was greatly enhanced by the gener-ous pro bono contributions by the law firms ofDLA Piper and Patton Boggs LLP.  Their many
hours of work made it possible for NARFto present the best positions possible and tomove forward in insuring NARF’s success.
NARF’s Priorities
One of the initial responsibilities of NARF’s
first Board of Directors was to develop prioritiesthat would guide the Native American RightsFund in its mission to preserve and enforce thelegal rights of Native Americans.  That Boarddeveloped five priorities that continue to leadNARF today:
• Preservation of tribal existence
• Protection of tribal natural resources• Promotion of Native American human rights• Accountability of governments to Native
Americans
• Development of Indian law and educating
the public about Indian rights, laws, and issuesobservers of climate change and bring 
first-hand experience of the changes thataccompany a changing climate.  The changesin climate often represent life or death choicesfor subsistence economies. 
Because the knowledge and wisdom of
indigenous cultures is too often not under-stood by governments, indigenous peoplestend to be left out of intergovernmental discussions and processes. The inclusion of theindigenous voice significantly strengthenedthe IPCC Working Group II report, the USClimate Change Assessment, and the ArcticClimate Change Assessment reports.  We feelthat it is vitally important for indigenous peopleto be invited and supported to participatethroughout the process.  One of the unantici-pated benefits may be that an indigenous perspective may help all those involved trans-late the science back into human terms.
In the meantime, the urgency of the issues
requires that we continue to build bridgesbetween indigenous and scientific communities,federal and state governments, and environ-mental organizations so that indigenous cultures can build their own research programsthat build on the strengths of a rich and variedset of voices.
NARF’s Funding
NARF’s existence would not be possible
without the efforts of the thousands of individ-uals who have offered their knowledge,courage and vision to help guide NARF on itsquest.  Of equal importance, NARF’s financialcontributors have graciously provided theresources to give our efforts life.  Contributorssuch as the Ford Foundation have been withNARF since its inception.  The Open SocietyInstitute and the Bay and Paul Foundationshave made long term funding commitments.Also, the positive effects of NARF’s work arereflected in the financial contributions by agrowing number of tribal governments like theYocha Dehe Wintun Nation, the SeminoleTribe of Florida, the Shakopee MdewakantonSioux Community, the San Manuel Band ofIT IS ALL CONNECTEDwho have been long time members of TEDNA
were awarded grants under the program andmore funds will be sought in 2013.
A Boarding School Healing Symposium 
was convened in 2011 by NARF working withseveral other groups.  The Symposium broughttogether individuals from across the UnitedStates and Canada that have been working onvarious aspects of the issues to discuss the pri-orities and strategies to achieve both nationalrecognition of, and apology for, the wrongsvisited on Indian individuals and tribes and toobtain reparations to provide the frameworkfor healing of these historic and enduringwrongs The National Boarding School HealingCoalition was formed by the Symposium participants to continue this work and NARFcompleted the non-profit incorporation of theCoalition in 2012.
NARF successfully negotiated what we
believe is the first co-management agreementin federal waters with the trawl industry onbehalf of the Bering Sea Elders (BSE) Group, analliance of thirty-nine Yup’ik and Inupiat villages in Alaska that seeks to protect the sensitive ecosystem of the Bering Sea and thesubsistence lifestyle that the villages havedepended upon for centuries.  BSE and thetrawl industry will now study the effects on thesea floor habitat, the various subsistence usesof the area and the health of the fishery todetermine whether changes need to be madeto the fishery.
NARF represents the Bristol Bay Native
Corporation in their work on voter redistrictingin Alaska.  Their goal is to ensure compliancewith the provisions of the Voting Rights Actrequiring that the Native vote be protected.At the end of 2012, the Alaska Supreme Courtheld that redistricting plan used in the for the2012 election cycle was unconstitutional.  TheCourt ordered the Alaska Redistricting Board todevise a new reapportionment plan based onthe Alaska Constitution and deviating onlywhere necessary to satisfy the Voting Rights Act.Executive Director’s Report
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 4In 2012, the Native American Rights Fund
continued to provide legal advice and repre-sentation to Indian tribes, organizations andindividuals on important Indian legal issuesacross the country for the 42nd year.  Onceagain this legal assistance resulted in severalnationally significant victories and develop-ments for Native American people.
In Nez Perce v. Salazar, NARF was able to
reach settlement agreements for thirty tribeswith the federal government totaling nearly$400 million resolving their claims for full andcomplete accountings of their tribal funds heldin trust for them by the federal government.The case was filed in 2009 on behalf of 41tribes and settlement negotiations began in2010. Negotiations continue for the othereleven tribes who also hope to reach settle-ments soon.  A similar case on behalf of theChippewa Cree Tribe of the Rocky Boy’sReservation in Montana that was filed in 2002 was also settled in 2012.
An important milestone in the Klamath
Tribes’ effort the secure their treaty-reservedwater rights in Oregon was reached in 2012with a state administrative law judge rulingquantifying the water rights of the Tribes andthe United States as trustee for the Tribes in thefull amount they claimed in two water sources.The rulings confirm that the tribal water rightsare the most senior in the Klamath Basin andadd to six earlier victories achieved by NARFfor the Tribes in 2011.  These proposed ordersnow move forward for consideration by theOregon Water Resources Department’sAdjudicator.
After over twenty years of work, NARF
secured the first direct federal funding - $2 million in the Department of Education2012 appropriation - for tribal educationdepartments on behalf of the Tribal EducationDepartments National Assembly (TEDNA).The funds were distributed through a compet-itive grant process under a new State TribalEducation Partnership program.  Four tribesLEADERSHIPSince time immemorial, the eagle and other
raptor birds have been an integral part andintrinsic to the traditions, culture and religion of many tribes.  In recent years, theU.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and other federallaw enforcement agencies have been conduct-ing raids, confiscations and interrogations onmany Indian reservations and pow-wowevents in an “Eagle Feather Sting Operation.”NARF is part of a working group of Indianorganizations and tribal leaders addressinggovernment intervention in the lives of Nativepeople who work with or use eagle feathers intraditional ways.  As a result of meetingsbetween the working group and federal agen-cies, the Department of Justice in 2012announced a policy regarding the enforcementof laws that affect the ability of members offederally recognized Indian tribes to possess oruse eagle feathers.  In a helpful way, the policyspecifically defines the types of conduct thatwill not be subject to prosecution.
NARF’s Indian Law Support Center, which
works with the 32 basic Indian legal servicesprograms around the country, once againhelped secure federal funding under the IndianTribal Justice and Legal Assistance Act to sup-plement funding for Indian legal services pro-grams for their representation of Indian peopleand tribes which fall below the federal povertyguidelines.  In 2012, both civil and criminalgrants were awarded to NARF in the amountof $850,659 and $875,000 respectively for distribution to Indian legal services programs.
We thank all of you who provided us with
assistance in 2012.  Our victories and accom-plishments on behalf of Indian country in 2012would not have been possible without yourhelp.  We hope that you will continue yoursupport of our efforts to address the majorlegal challenges facing Native Americans.
John E. Echohawk
Executive Director
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122 5
John E. Echohawk
Executive DirectorChairman’s Message
Jerry Danforth 
Chairman, 
Board of Directors
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 6During the past year, the Native American
Rights Fund (NARF) has continued its missionof providing legal counsel throughout Indiancountry.  Every year new cases begin, existingcases continue, and hard-fought cases thathave been on the legal battlefield for yearscome to an end.
The NARF attorneys providing legal counsel
for legal cases throughout Indian country are tobe commended for their demanding and stead-fast convictions.  Likewise, NARF staff membersshould also be commended for their day-to-daycontributions to the success of NARF.
The complexity, depth, and expansion of
services and businesses in Indian country havegrown to new levels in modern-day time.  Withthis growth, also comes new and increasedcontroversy over a myriad of issues – manythat lead to legal battles.  Today the need forNARF to serve those who are unable to affordlegal counsel has never been greater.  It hasbecome increasingly clear in the growth inorganizations that challenge the sovereignright of Indian tribes to self-govern.  Many ofthese organizations provide financial supportto non-tribal entities to sponsor the fightagainst tribal government.  At NARF, we needyour support.  
In this message, I would like to call attention
to another component of the NARF organiza-tion that plays a vital role – the Board ofDirectors.  The faces and names on the NARFBoard continue to change year after year.Candidates selected to serve on the Board usu-ally come from recommendations of theincumbent Board members and staff persons.The recommendations are reviewed by NARF’sNomination Committee and ultimately selectedby action of the full Board of Directors.  Boardmembers serve a two-year term, and mayserve up to a maximum of three, two-yearterms.  
The NARF Board approves the annual budget,
reviews and accepts audit findings, and approvesstaffing changes, to name a few responsibilities.In addition to providing direction on the type
and number of cases to undertake, Boardmembers also serve on sub-committees forauditing, fund raising, evaluations, and nomi-nations.  Board members are ambassadors forNARF throughout Indian country, carrying theNARF message and encouraging financial support for the organization. 
I’m happy to introduce the current 
members of the Board: Virginia Cross ,
Chairwoman Muckleshoot Indian Tribe , has
served since 2009; Barbara Smith , Supreme
Court Justice, Chickasaw Nation , has served
since 2009; Julie Roberts-Hyslop , President,
Native Village of Tanana , has served since
2011; Natasha Singh , General Counsel,
Tanana Chiefs Conference , has served since
2010; Mark Macarro , Chairman, Pechanga
Band of Luiseño Indians has served since 2010;
Marshall McKay , Chairman, Yocha Dehe de
Wintun Nation , has served since 2009; Buford
Roland , Chairman, Poarch Band of Creek
Indians , has served since 2010; Moses Haia ,
Director, Native Hawaiian Legal Corporation , has
served since 2011; Peter Pino , Tribal
Administrator, Pueblo of Zia , has served since
2012; Ron His Horse Is Thunder , former
Chairman, Standing Rock Sioux Tribe , has served
since 2008; Stephen Lewis , Lt. Governor, Gila
River Indian Community , has served since 2012;
Gary Hayes , Chairman, Ute Mountain Ute
Tribe, has served since 2012, and myself,
Gerald Danforth , former Chairman Oneida
Indian Nation Wisconsin , has served since 2008.
The members of the Board respectfully
request that all of Indian country contributefinancial assistance at whatever level is possible.We must sustain the fight for Indian tribal sovereign rights in the courts and in Congress.
On behalf of the NARF Board of Directors, 
I thank all who have contributed to NARF in thepast and encourage you to continue giving inthe future.  
Yaw^Ko,     
Jerry DanforthChairman, Board of DirectorsLEADERSHIPThe Native American Rights Fund has a gov-
erning board composed of Native Americanleaders from across the country – wise and distinguished people who are respected byNative Americans nationwide. Individual Boardmembers are chosen based on their involve-ment and knowledge of Indian issues andaffairs, as well as their tribal affiliation, to ensure a comprehensive geographical 
representation. The NARF Board of Directors,whose members serve a maximum of six years, provide NARF with leadership and credibility, and the vision of its members isessential to NARF’s effectiveness in representingits Native American clients.NARF’s Board of
Directors: First row (left
to right) Mark Macarro
(Pechanga Band ofLuiseño Indians);Natasha V. Singh , Board
Vice-Chair (Native Villageof Stevens); Julie
Roberts-Hyslop , (Native
Village of Tanana);Barbara Smith(Chickasaw Nation).Second Row (left to right)Peter Pino , (Zia Pueblo);
Moses Haia , Board
Executive Committee,(Native Hawaiian); Ron
His Horse Is Thunder ,
Board ExecutiveCommittee (StandingRock Sioux Tribe);Gerald Danforth , Board
Chairman (Oneida IndianNation of Wisconsin); andBuford L. Rolin (Poarch
Band of Creek Indians.(Not Pictured) Marshall
McKay , Board Treasurer
(Yocha Dehe WintunNation);   Virginia Cross
(Muckleshoot IndianTribe); Gary Hayes (Ute
Mountain Ute Tribe); andStephen Lewis (Gila River
Indian Community).
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122 7Board of Directors
National Support Committee
The National Support Committee assists 
NARF with its fund raising and public relationsefforts nationwide.  Some of the individuals onthe Committee are prominent in the field ofbusiness, entertainment and the arts.  Othersare known advocates for the rights of the
underserved.  All of the 32 volunteers on theCommittee are committed to upholding the rights of Native Americans.
Randy Bardwell ,
Pechanga Band of LuiseñoMission Indians
Katrina McCormick
Barnes
Jaime Barrientoz ,
Grande Traverse Band ofOttawa and ChippewaIndians
John BevanWallace Coffey ,
Comanche
Ada Deer , Menominee Harvey A. Dennenberg
Lucille A. Echohawk ,
Pawnee
Jane Fonda James Garner Eric Ginsburg  Jeff Ginsburg  Rodney Grant , Omaha
Chris E. McNeil, Jr. ,
Tlingit-Nisga’a 
Billy Mills , Oglala Lakota
Amado Peña, Jr. ,
Yaqui/Chicano Wayne Ross  
Nancy Starling-Ross  Mark Rudick  Pam Rudick Ernie Stevens ,Jr.,
Wisconsin Oneida
Andrew Teller , 
Isleta Pueblo
Verna Teller , 
Isleta Pueblo 
Richard Trudell , 
Santee Sioux Rebecca Tsosie , 
Pasqua Yaqui 
Tzo-Nah , 
Shoshone Bannock 
Aine Ungar Rt. Rev. William C.
Wantland , Seminole 
W. Richard West ,
Southern Cheyenne 
Randy Willis , 
Oglala Lakota 
Teresa Willis ,Umatilla
Mary Wynne , 
Rosebud Sioux The Preservation of Tribal Existence
Under the priority of the preservation of tribal
existence, NARF works to construct the founda-
tions that are necessary to empower tribes sothat they can continue to live according totheir Native traditions, to enforce their treatyrights, to insure their independence on reser-vations and to protect their sovereignty. 
Specifically, NARF’s legal representation cen-
ters on sovereignty and jurisdiction issues andalso on federal recognition and restoration oftribal status.  Thus, the focus of NARF’s workinvolves issues relating to the preservation andenforcement of the status of tribes as sovereigngovernments.  Tribal governments possess thepower to regulate the internal affairs of theirmembers as well as other activities within theirreservations.  Jurisdictional conflicts often arisewith states, the federal government and othersover tribal sovereignty.
Tribal Sovereignty
The focus of NARF’s work under this priority
is the protection of the status of tribes as sov-ereign, self-governing entities. The UnitedStates Constitution recognizes that Indiantribes are independent governmental entitieswith inherent authority over their membersand territory. In treaties with the United States,Indian tribes ceded millions of acres of land inexchange for the guarantee that the federalgovernment would protect the tribes' right toself-government.  From the early 1800s on, theSupreme Court has repeatedly affirmed thefundamental principle that tribes retain inher-ent sovereignty over their members and theirterritory. 
Beginning with the decision in Oliphant v.
Suquamish Indian Tribe in 1978 and with
increasing frequency in recent years, theSupreme Court has steadily chipped away atthis fundamental principle, both by restrictingtribal jurisdiction and by extending state juris-diction.  These decisions by the Supreme Courthave made this priority more relevant thanever and have led to a Tribal SovereigntyProtection Initiative in partnership with theNational Congress of American Indians (NCAI)and tribes nationwide to restore the traditional
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122 9
CALL TO ACTION
principles of inherent tribal sovereignty where
those have been undermined and to safeguardthe core of sovereignty that remains.
This Initiative consists of three components.
The first component is the Tribal SupremeCourt Project, the focus of which is to monitorcases potentially headed to the Supreme Courtand those which actually are accepted forreview.  When cases are accepted, the TribalSupreme Court Project helps to ensure that theattorneys representing the Indian interestshave all the support they need and to coordi-nate the filing of a limited number of strategicamicus briefs.  A second component of theInitiative is to weigh in on judicial nominationsat the lower court and the Supreme Court lev-els.  Finally, there is a legislative component tofight bills that are against tribal interests and toaffirmatively push legislation to overturnadverse Supreme Court decisions.
The Tribal Supreme Court Project is a joint
project staffed by the Native American RightsFund and the National Congress of AmericanIndians. The Tribal Supreme Court Project isbased on the principle that a coordinated andstructured approach to Supreme Court advo-cacy is necessary to protect tribal sovereignty— the ability of Indian tribes to function assovereign governments — to make their ownlaws and be ruled by them.  Early on, the TribalSupreme Court Project recognized the U.S.Supreme Court as a highly specialized institu-tion, with a unique set of procedures thatinclude complete discretion on whether it willhear a case or not, with a much keener focuson policy considerations than other federalcourts. The Tribal Supreme Court Projectestablished a large network of attorneys whospecialize in practice before the SupremeCourt along with attorneys and law professors“Indian time... is now.”But contrary to every federal judge who had
reviewed the matter in the courts below, andwho had deferred to the Department’s inter-pretation of the IRA, eight of nine Justices onthe Supreme Court found that the term “now”in the phrase “now under Federal jurisdiction”is unambiguous and limits the authority of theSecretary to take land in trust only for Indiantribes that were “under Federal jurisdiction” onJune 4, 1934, the date the IRA was enacted.Yet the Court failed to provide any definition ofthe phrase, “under Federal jurisdiction.” 
The Court’s ruling in Carcieri is an affront to
the most basic policies underlying the IRA.The fundamental purpose of the IRA was torestore tribal homelands and to help Indiantribes—torn apart by prior federal policies ofallotment and assimilation—to re-organizetheir governments.  Therefore, in addition tothe authority to acquire lands in trust for alltribes, the IRA also provides authority for theSecretary to approve tribal constitutions inorder to assist tribes in their efforts towardsself-determination and to establish tribal busi-ness corporations in order to help tribesbecome economically self-sufficient.  In theshort-term, the Carcieri decision has beenPast Native Hawaiian
NARF Board members 
(L to R): Kaleo Patterson,
E Ho’oipo Pa, current
Board member 
Moses Haia, 
Mahealani Wendt, 
Kunani Nihipali.
10TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDMOVEMENTSThe Preservation of Tribal Existence
who specialize in federal Indian law.  The Tribal
Supreme Court Project operates under the theory that if Indian tribes take a strong, con-sistent, coordinated approach before theSupreme Court, they will be able to reverse, orat least reduce, the on-going erosion of tribalsovereignty by Justices who appear to lack anunderstanding of the foundational principlesunderlying federal Indian law and who areunfamiliar with the practical challenges facingtribal governments.
In February 2009, the Supreme Court issued
its devastating opinion in Carcieri v. Salazar —
a case that involved a challenge by the State ofRhode Island to the authority of the Secretaryof the Interior (“Secretary”) to take land intotrust for the Narragansett Tribe under the provisions of the Indian Reorganization Act(“IRA”).  For over 75 years, the Department ofthe Interior (“Department”) had exercised itsauthority under the IRA to take land in trust forall federally recognized Indian tribes and hadconsistently interpreted the phrase “nowunder Federal jurisdiction” in the IRA’s defini-tion of “Indian” to mean the present, or thetime of the exercise of the Secretary’s authorityto approve the trust land acquisition.  destabilizing for a significant number of Indian
tribes whose status in 1934 is uncertain.Carcieri invites expensive and previouslyunnecessary litigation over the IRA’s most basicterms, allowing litigants to raise even morequestions regarding the status of those tribes. 
The first direct evidence of the ripple-effect
of Carcieri, and the Roberts Court’s further
unraveling of Indian law, was supplied recentlyin the June 2012 decision in Match-E-Be-Nash-
She-Wish Band of Pottawatomi Indians (GunLake Tribe) v. Patchak. The Patchak litigation
resulted in two distinct holdings, both ofwhich will have long term negative impacts forall
Indian tribes. First, the Court in Patchak
trampled over the sovereign immunity of theUnited States and eviscerated the once-broadprotections for Indian lands under the QuietTitle Act. Second, through its finding of prudential standing, the Court widened thecourt room doors to most any challenge byany person who may feel “harmed” by a deci-sion of the Secretary made under the authorityof the IRA that benefits an Indian tribe. 
Only Congress can clarify its intent for the
Court.  In the weeks and months after theCourt’s decision in Carcieri, Indian country
worked hard to get legislation introduced inthe 111th Congress to simply amend the IRAto return to the status quo—a “clean” Carcieri -
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122 11fix to reaffirm the authority of the Secretary of
the Interior to take land in to trust for all fed-erally-recognized Indian tribes.  Although theHouse passed its version of the Carcieri -fix, and
the Senate Committee for Indian Affairs reportedout its legislation, neither bill was enacted intolaw by the end of the session in December2010.  At the start of the 112th Congress,Indian country moved quickly to resolve theproblems being created by Carcieri .  But the
Carcieri -fix legislation has stalled in the 112th
Congress over a few members’ concernsregarding the expansion of Indian gaming andthe exemption of Indian trust lands from localproperty taxes. 
There are now 15 Carcieri -related challenges
already pending before the courts and theDepartment of the Interior.  NARF has providedtestimony at several Carcieri -fix hearings before
the Senate Indian Affairs Committee. Congressneeds to act and send a message to theSupreme Court that they are not getting federal Indian legislation right and that theirrulings are just plain wrong.
The research objective of the Judicial
Selection Project evaluates the records of federalcourt judicial nominees on their knowledge ofNative American issues.  The Project’s analysisand conclusions are shared with tribal leadersEMPOWERMENT
Native Hawaiian Legal
Corporation staff.TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 12The Preservation of Tribal Existence
and federal decision-makers in relation to their
decision whether to support or oppose a partic-ular judicial nomination.  Given the number offederal court cases involving Native Americanissues, the Project works with the U.S. SenateJudiciary Committee to ensure that all nomineesare asked about their experience with Indiantribes and their understanding of federal Indianlaw during confirmation proceedings.  
As part of its outreach to Indian Country, the
Obama Administration has sought the namesof qualified Native American attorneys, tribalcourt judges and state court judges who areinterested in being considered for vacancies onthe federal bench. The Judicial SelectionProject developed a process to identify, evaluateand promote qualified Natives for nominationto the federal bench.  Currently, of the 866federal judges at all levels of courts, none are American Indian or Alaska Native.Unfortunately, while President Obama nomi-nated or announced his intent to nominatetwo Native American attorneys to federal judicial vacancies, neither nomination came tofruition due to opposition to the nominationsor intended nominations expressed by membersof the U.S. Senate.  NARF and NCAI continueto work with the White House General Counsel Office, the White House Office ofIntergovernmental Affairs and the U.S.Department of Justice Office of Legal Policy toensure that qualified Native candidates areconsidered and nominated to fill currentvacancies on the federal bench.  
The Project is broadening its approach to
developing potential Native candidates forstate level judgeships.  This involves targetingstates with high levels of Native populationssuch as Alaska, Arizona, Oklahoma andWashington.  The Project works with state barassociations and other interested organizationsand programs to provide information and recommendations.
Another part of NARF’s work under this 
priority is the environmental law and policy initiative.  NARF has played a key role in theimplementation of federal environmental law
and policy that recognizes tribal governmentsas the primary regulators and enforcers of thefederal environmental laws on Indian lands.NARF has worked with the National TribalEnvironmental Council (NTEC) on comprehen-sive climate change legislation.  NTEC, NARF,NCAI and the National Wildlife Federationworked together and created detailed legisla-tive proposals recognizing the role of tribalgovernments in proposed federal mitigationand adaptation programs to address climatechange.  Unfortunately, climate change legisla-tion stalled in the Congress.
Federal Recognition of Tribal Status
The second category of NARF’s work under
this priority is federal recognition of tribal status.  NARF currently represents Indian com-munities who have survived intact as identifiableIndian tribes but who are not federally recog-nized.  Tribal existence does not depend onfederal recognition, but recognition is neces-sary for a government-to-government relation-ship and the receipt of many federal services.
The Pamunkey Indian Tribe is the only tribe
located in Virginia to have filed a fully docu-mented recognition petition.  Established nolater than 1646, the Tribe’s Reservation is locatednext to the Pamunkey River, and adjacent toKing William County.  The Reservation com-prises approximately 1,200 acres and is theoldest inhabited Indian reservation in America.After years of preparing the necessary histori-cal, legal, genealogical and anthropologicalevidence to fully document its petition for fed-eral acknowledgment, the Pamunkey IndianTribe, located on the Pamunkey IndianReservation, Virginia, filed its petition with theOffice of Federal Acknowledgment (OFA) onOctober 14, 2010.  The Tribe received OFA’sletter of Technical Assistance (TA) in April,2011 and a response to the TA letter was filedin July 2012.  In late July 2012 the OFAinformed the Tribe that its petition was movedto the top of the “Ready” list and active consideration commenced August 2012. A proposed finding by the Assistant Secretary-SOVEREIGNTYAANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122 13Indian Affairs is expected by August 2013.
NARF has represented the Tribe in this effortsince 1988.
In February 1997, the Branch of Acknow-
ledgment and Research (BAR) placed the LittleShell Tribe of Chippewa Indians of Montanafederal recognition petition on active reviewstatus. In July 2000 the Assistant Secretary forIndian Affairs published a preliminaryDetermination in favor of recognition. InOctober 2000 a technical assistance meetingwas held with the Office of FederalAcknowledgment (OFA) to outline a programof action to strengthen the petition prior to thefinal determination. Substantial work was doneto strengthen the Tribe’s petition and the finalsubmissions were made in February 2005.Active consideration of the Tribe’s new materialbegan in August 2007, and OFA conducted athree week site visit in October 2007. OFA hadpreviously indicated it would reach a finaldetermination by the end of calendar 2007.This deadline was not met; the date wasmoved to the end of July 2008. Before thatdate arrived, the Assistant Secretary grantedOFA new deadlines of January 2009 and then
July 2009.  OFA granted itself an extension oftime to September 2009, and then a furtherextension to October 2009.  In October 2009,the Acting Assistant Secretary issued a FinalDetermination against recognition of theTribe, overruling the decision in thePreliminary Determination.  The stated ration-ale for Final Determination was the unwilling-ness to go along with the “departures fromprecedent” which the previous AssistantSecretary found to be justified by historical circumstances.  In February 2010, the Tribefiled a Request for Reconsideration with theInterior Board of Indian Appeals (IBIA).  TheIBIA allowed interested parties, if any, to fileopposition briefs by July 2010.  No one filed anopposition brief.  It is unclear how long theIBIA will take to rule.  The Senate Indian AffairsCommittee held hearings on the recognitionprocess in April 2011 and July 2012 at whichthe Tribe and NARF testified concerning LittleShell’s experience with the process and defectsof the process.  The Tribe continues to pursuelegislative recognition.
TREATY RIGHTSTraditional Native
Hawaiian ceremony forNARF Board members andNARF staff.The Protection of Tribal Natural Resources
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122 15“Our roots are deep in the lands where we live.
We have a great love for our country, for ourbirthplace is here. The soil is rich from thebones of thousands of our generations. Each of us was created in these lands and itis our duty to take great care of them,because from these lands will spring thefuture generations of our peoples. We walkabout with great respect, for the Earth is avery Sacred Place.” — Sioux, Navajo andIroquois Declaration – 1978 Throughout the process of European con-
quest and colonization of North America,Indian tribes experienced a steady diminish-ment of their land base to a mere 2.3 percentof its original size.  Currently, there are approx-imately 55 million acres of Indian-controlledland in the continental United States andabout 44 million acres of Native-owned land inAlaska.  An adequate land base and controlover natural resources are central componentsof economic self-sufficiency and self-determi-nation, and as such, are vital to the very existence of tribes.  Thus, much of NARF’swork involves the protection of tribal natural
resources. 
Protection of Indian Lands
Without a sufficient land base, tribal exis-
tence is difficult to maintain.  Thus NARF helpstribes establish ownership and control overlands which are rightfully theirs. 
NARF has been retained by the Eastern
Shoshone Tribe of the Wind River IndianReservation to analyze the legal implications ofthe Surplus Land Act of March 3, 1905, as itmay have affected the boundaries of thatReservation. NARF is working with the Tribe'sAttorney General and the Shoshone BusinessCouncil on a variety of fronts to secure the vindication of the boundary. The ShoshoneTribes and Arapaho Tribes, through theirrespective attorneys, are also cooperating in anapplication to the United States EnvironmentalProtection Agency (US-EPA) for delegation of“treatment in the same manner as a state”(TAS) in the administration of certain Clean AirAct programs. The determination supportingdelegation to the Tribes from US-EPA willrequire that US-EPA determine the location ofthe boundary of the Reservation. The TASApplication has been published by US-EPA andthey have received comments. The Tribes filedtheir Response to the comments in March2010. US-EPA also requested a written opinionfrom the Department of the Interior Solicitoron the boundary of the Wind River reservation.We are awaiting US-EPA’s decision about theapplication of delegation of certain Clean AirAct programs that are dependent on the deter-
mination of the boundary.
NARF represents the Hualapai Indian Tribe of
Arizona in preparing and submitting fourapplications for the transfer of 8 parcels of landowned in fee by the Tribe into trust status.  TheTribe is located on the south rim of the GrandCanyon in Arizona and claims a boundary thatruns to the center of the Colorado River.  Inaddition, NARF assisted the Tribe with thetransfer of lands gifted to the Tribe at ChollaCanyon Ranch. Because there were title con-cerns, NARF prepared a trust which the Tribeadopted and into which the lands were trans-ferred.  In addition, NARF is working on plac-ing these lands taken into trust but the UnitedStates will not take action until title to theRanch has been cleared of any claim arisingfrom questions related to transfer of title to theTribe from a private trust. NARF is workingwith a local firm and the attorney for the Trustto clear title to the Ranch. We also assist thereserved water rights are superior to all state-
recognized water rights created after the tribalpriority date.  Such a date will in most casesgive tribes valuable senior water rights in thewater-short west.  Unfortunately, many tribeshave not utilized their reserved water rightsand most of these rights are unadjudicated orunquantified.  The major need in each case isto define or quantify the amount of water towhich each tribe is entitled through litigationor out-of-court settlement negotiations.  Tribesare generally able to claim water for any purpose which enables the Tribe's reservationto serve as a permanent homeland.
NARF has represented the Nez Perce Tribe in
Idaho in its water rights claims in the SnakeRiver Basin Adjudication (SRBA) litigation andsettlement phases for many years. Congressenacted and President Bush signed into lawthe Snake River Settlement Act in 2004.  NARFcontinues to work with the Tribe on a very limited basis to secure final approval of the set-tlement by the state water court and on thefederal appropriations process.  The Tribe, theUnited States, the State, and private waterinterests are negotiating and drafting a finalunified decree that will be the capstone docu-ment closing the SRBA.  It is anticipated that thefinal decree will be signed by the judge in 2013.
NARF represents the Klamath Tribes of
Oregon who hold reserved water rights in theKlamath River Basin to support their treatyhunting, fishing and gathering rights with atime immemorial priority date, as well as waterrights to satisfy the agricultural purposes of the Klamath Reservation. The Tribes’ reservedwater rights for these purposes are currentlybeing quantified in a statewide water adjudi-cation. This involves asserting and defendingthe Tribes’ claims as well as prosecuting manycontests filed by non-Indian junior water users.
In December 2011 and April 2012 the state
administrative hearing judge issued ProposedOrders in the Tribe’ cases quantifying thewater rights of the Tribes and the United Statesin the full amount they claimed.  As this was a
16TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDThe Protection of Tribal Natural Resources
Tribe with work as assigned from time to time,
most recently related to the development of alocal water supply and an agreement withMohave County.
In Chalkitsik, et al v. United States, the Tribe
brought suit seeking judicial review of 25 C.F.R.Part 151 as it pertains to federally recognizedtribes in Alaska.  This regulation governs theprocedures used by Indian tribes and individu-als when requesting the Secretary of theInterior to acquire title to land in trust on theirbehalf.  The regulation bars the acquisition ofland in trust in Alaska other than for theMetlakatla Indian Community or its members.After nearly three years of no action by the federal court, the case was transferred to JudgeRudolph Contreras.  Judge Contreras issued anOrder in April 2012 requesting that the federalgovernment respond to six additional ques-tions in a supplemental brief in July 2012 andthe Tribe filed its reply brief in August 2012.We are now awaiting a decision.  
Water Rights
The culture and way of life of many indige-
nous peoples are inextricably tied to their aboriginal habitat. For those tribes that stillmaintain traditional ties to the natural world,suitable habitat is required in order to exercisetheir treaty-protected hunting, fishing, gather-ing and trapping rights and to sustain theirrelationships with the animals, plants and fishthat comprise their aboriginal habitats. 
Establishing tribal rights to the use of water
in the arid western United States continues tobe a major NARF priority.  The goal of NARF’sIndian water rights work is to secure alloca-tions of water for present and future needs forspecific Indian tribes represented by NARF andother western tribes generally. Under theprecedent established by the Supreme Courtin 1908 in Winters v. United States and con-
firmed in 1963 in Arizona v. California, Indian
tribes are entitled under federal law to sufficient water for present and future needs,with a priority date at least as early as theestablishment of their reservations.  These tribalLAND RIGHTStremendous victory, under Oregon’s general
stream adjudication process, the ProposedOrders are not final rulings, but are theAdministrative Law Judge’s proposals to theOregon Water Resources Department’sAdjudicator.  In 2013 the Adjudicator will issuea Findings of Fact and Order of Determination(FFOD) that will define not only the waterrights of the Tribes, but the rights of all waterclaimants in the KBA.  Upon its issuance, thewater rights decreed in the FFOD becomeenforceable.  Then the Tribes will likely face asequence of challenges in Klamath CountyCircuit Court and possibly subsequent appealscourts.  Nevertheless, the Judge’s rulings in theProposed Orders mark a very significant victoryfor the Claimants, one that puts the Tribes andthe BIA in the best position possible for thenext stages of the Adjudication.
After almost 30 years of advocacy work, the
Tule River Indian Tribe in California, represent-ed by NARF, successfully settled its water rightsin November 2007 by signing a SettlementAgreement with water users on the South ForkTule River. The Settlement Agreement securesa domestic, municipal, industrial, and com-mercial water supply for the Tribe. The Tribenow seeks federal legislation to ratify the
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122 17Settlement Agreement and authorize appro-
priations to develop the water rights throughthe creation of water infrastructure and reservoirs on the Tribe’s Reservation. Bills intro-duced in the House of Representatives andSenate in 2007, 2008 and 2009 did not pass.With the current Congress we are engaged instrategy meetings with the California congres-sional delegation about the possible introduc-tion of a water settlement bill early in 2013.Additionally we continue to work with the U.S.Bureau of Reclamation on necessary studies forthe feasibility and design of the Tribe’s waterstorage project.  
In June 2006, the Kickapoo Tribe in Kansas,
represented by NARF filed a federal courtaction to enforce express promises made tothe Tribe to build a  Reservoir Project to serveits Reservation. The Nemaha-Brown WatershedJoint Board #7, the Natural ResourcesConservation Service of the United StatesDepartment of Agriculture, and the State ofKansas made these promises to the Tribe overa decade ago. In the intervening years theseparties have been actively developing the areawatershed resources, resulting in the neardepletion of the Tribe’s senior federal waterrights in the drainage. 
NARF Executive Director
John Echohawk and NARF Board ChairmanJerry Danforth. CLIMATE CHANGE18TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDMoreover, according to the U.S Environmental
Protection Agency the remaining water supplyfor the Reservation is in violation of the SafeDrinking Water Act of 1974. The Kickapoopeople are unable to safely drink, bathe orcook with tap water. There is not enoughwater on the Reservation to provide basicmunicipal services to the community – theTribe is unable to provide local schools withreliable, safe running water and the fire depart-ment cannot provide adequate fire protectiondue to water shortage. The proposed ReservoirProject is the most cost-effective and reliablemeans by which the Tribe can improve thewater supply.
By August 2007 the parties expressed an
interest in taking a break from the litigation toexplore mutual benefits from settlement. TheUnited States, the State and the local water-shed district all concede the existence of theTribe's senior Indian reserved water rights; the real issue is the amount of water to satisfythe Tribe’s needs, and the source or sources ofthe water. In March 2011 the watershed district rejected a Condemnation Agreementthat the Tribe and the State had approved.That agreement would create the mechanismfor condemning the property needed for thewater storage project.  The Tribe and otherparties have since returned to litigation tofocus on discovery against the watershed district.  In addition, the parties hope to getthe condemnation component resolved by thefederal government.  
Protection of Hunting and Fishing
Rights in Alaska
The subsistence way of life is essential for the
physical and cultural survival of Alaska Natives.As important as Native hunting and fishingrights are to Alaska Natives’ physical, economic,traditional and cultural existence, the State ofAlaska has been and continues to be reluctantto recognize the importance of the subsistenceway of life. 
On January 5, 2005, the State of Alaska filed
a lawsuit in the U.S. District Court for theDistrict of Columbia challenging the final rule
implementing the mandate in a prior AlaskaNative subsistence case, John v. United States.
The prior case, in which NARF representedKatie John, an Alaska Native, established thatthe United States must protect subsistenceuses of fisheries in navigable waters where theUnited States possesses a reserved water right.In this new lawsuit, the State challenges theFederal agencies’ implementation of the man-date by arguing that the reserved waters doctrine requires a quantification of watersnecessary to fulfill specific purposes.  KatieJohn immediately filed a motion for limitedintervention for purposes of filing a motion todismiss for failure to join an indispensableparty.  The United States filed a motion totransfer venue to the U.S. District Court for theDistrict of Alaska in February 2005. JudgeCollyer entered an Order in July 2005, trans-ferring the case to the federal court in Alaska.The case was then consolidated with John v.
Norton (below).  The issues in the two cases
were bifurcated for briefing with the State’sclaims addressed first. In May 2007, the district court entered an Order upholding theagencies rule-making process identifying navigable waters in Alaska that fall within federal jurisdiction for purposes of Title VIII’ssubsistence priority.
In 2005, Katie John, represented by NARF,
filed a lawsuit in the U.S. District Court for theDistrict of Alaska challenging Federal Agencies’final rule implementing the prior Katie Johnmandate as being too restrictive in its scope.Katie John alleges that the Federal agenciesshould have included Alaska Native allotmentsas public lands and that the federal govern-ment’s interest in water extends upstream anddownstream from Conservation Units estab-lished under the Alaska National Interest LandsConservation Act.  The State of Alaska inter-vened and challenged the regulations as illegally extending federal jurisdiction to statewaters. In 2009 the Court upheld the agencies’final rule as reasonable.  While rejecting KatieJohn’s claim that the agency had a duty toidentify all of its federally-reserved water rights
The Protection of Tribal Natural Resources
WATER RIGHTSAANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122 19in upstream and downstream waters, the court
stated that the agency could do so at somefuture time if necessary to fulfill the purposesof the reserve.  The case was appealed to theU.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuitwhere oral argument was held in July 2011.One of the panelists, Judge Betty Fletcher,passed away in August 2012, and her docketwas assigned to Judge Canby.  We are nowwaiting for the Appeals Court’s decision.
In Native Villages of Eyak, Tatitlek, Chenega,
Nanwalek, and Port Graham v. Evans, NARF
represents five Chugach villages that sued theSecretary of Commerce to establish aboriginalrights to their traditional-use areas on theOuter Continental Shelf of Alaska, in Cook Inletand the Gulf of Alaska.  In 2002 the federal dis-trict court ruled against the Chugach.  NARFappealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for theNinth Circuit which in 2004 en banc vacatedthe district court’s decision and remanded fordetermination of whether the Tribes can estab-lish aboriginal rights to the areas.  In August2009 the court held that although the fiveChugach Tribes had established that they hada “territory” and had proven they had used the waters in question, the Tribes could nothold aboriginal rights as a matter of law.  TheChugach appealed to the Ninth Circuit enbanc panel which has retained jurisdiction overthis case.  Oral argument was heard by the enbanc panel in September 2011.  In July 2012,a 6-5 majority of the Ninth Circuit en bancpanel affirmed the district court’s ruling thatthe Tribes failed to establish entitlement tonon-exclusive aboriginal rights on the OCS. 
The majority concluded that the Villages
had satisfied the “continuous use and occu-pancy” requirement of the test for aboriginalrights, which is measured in accordance withthe particular ways of life, customs, and habitsof the tribe seeking to establish aboriginalrights.  The majority determined that the dis-trict court’s findings that the Villages’ ancestorshad hunted and fished on the OCS seasonallyand while traveling to outer islands was con-sistent with their way of life as marine huntersand fisherman, and thus satisfied this require-
ment.  However, the majority concluded thatthe Villages did not satisfy the “exclusivity”requirement of the test.  Exclusivity is estab-lished when a tribe shows it used and occupieda territory to the exclusion of other Indiangroups.  Five judges signed on to a vigorousdissent which agreed with the majority thatthe Tribes had satisfied the continuous use andoccupancy requirement but strongly disagreedwith the majority’s conclusion that the exclu-sivity requirement was not satisfied.  NARF hasfiled a petition for certiorari in the UnitedStates Supreme Court and the government isexpected to file its opposition in late January2013. 
Climate Change Project
Global warming is wreaking havoc in Alaska.
In recent years scientists have documentedmelting ocean ice, rising oceans, rising rivertemperatures, thawing permafrost, increasedinsect infestations, animals at risk and dyingforests. Alaska Natives are the peoples who relymost on Alaska’s ice, seas, marine mammals,fish and game for nutrition and customary andtraditional subsistence uses; they are thusexperiencing the adverse impacts of globalwarming most acutely. In 2006, during the
NARF Board member 
Ron His Horse Is Thunderand NARF senior attorneyRichard Guest.and on behalf of all tribal members against
defendants ExxonMobil Corp., PeabodyEnergy Corp., Southern Company, AmericanElectric Power Co., Duke Energy Co, ChevronCorp. and Shell Oil Co., among others.  In totalthere are nine oil company defendants, four-teen electric power company defendants andone coal company defendant.  The suit claimsdamages due to the defendant companies’contributions to global warming and invokesthe federal common law of public nuisance.The suit also alleges a conspiracy by somedefendants to mislead the public regarding thecauses and consequences of global warming.In October 2009, the District Court grantedthe Defendant’s motion to dismiss on the basisthat Kivalina’s federal claim for nuisance isbarred by the political question doctrine andfor lack of standing under Article III of theConstitution.
In September 2012, the US Court of Appeals
for the Ninth Circuit rejected the Tribe’sappeal.  The Court held, in a very short andcursory opinion, that the federal Clean Air Actdefines the full scope of all federal remedies forair pollution and, since there is no monetarydamages remedy under the Clean Air Act,there is no monetary damages remedy under
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 20NARF Board meeting.
Alaska Forum on the Environment, Alaska
Native participants described increased forestfires, more dangerous hunting, fishing andtraveling conditions, visible changes in animalsand plants, infrastructure damage from meltingpermafrost and coastal erosion, fiercer winterstorms, and pervasive unpredictability. Virtuallyevery aspect of traditional Alaska Native life isimpacted. As noted in the Arctic ClimateImpact Assessment of 2004, indigenous peo-ples are reporting that sea ice is declining, andits quality and timing are changing, withimportant negative repercussions for marinehunters. Others are reporting that salmon arediseased and cannot be dried for winter food.There is widespread concern about caribouhabitat diminishing as larger vegetation movesnorthward. Because of these and other dra-matic changes, traditional knowledge is jeopardized, as are cultural structures and thenutritional needs of Alaska’s indigenous peoples. Efforts are continuing to conveneCongressional hearings on climate changeimpacts on indigenous peoples.
In Native Village of Kivalina v. Exxon Mobil,
NARF represents the Native Village of Kivalina,which is a federally recognized Indian Tribe,and the City of Kivalina, which is an Alaskanmunicipality, in a suit filed on their own behalf
The Protection of Tribal Natural Resources
FISHING RIGHTSNARF senior attorney 
Don Wharton.
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122 21federal common law.  Writing a separate opin-
ion, Judge Pro noted that the most recent caselaw from the Supreme Court – the ExxonShipping case (i.e. Exxon Valdez oil spill case),holds the opposite; in his concurring opinionJudge Pro struggles to make sense of the lawsince older case law would deny Kivalina’sclaims while Exxon Shipping says that a federalenvironmental statute does not bar a federalcommon law claim for monetary damages.Based on the separate opinion by Judge Pro, a petition for rehearing en banc was filed in October 2012.  We are now awaiting a decision.
As ocean temperatures rise due to climate
change, marine mammals and fish are movingnorth. Commercially valuable fish that havetraditionally been in the Gulf of Alaska areshifting toward the Northern Bering Sea andthe large scale fishing fleets are planning to fol-low them and expand their operations into thishighly sensitive ecosystem. These fleetsemploy bottom trawling, a highly destructivepractice in which weighted nets are draggedinches above the sea floor, removing every-thing in their path.  Nevertheless, the NorthPacific Fishery Management Council (NPFMC)currently allows bottom trawling in the CentralBering Sea and it is having a profound effecton sensitive habitat and local Yup’ik communi-ties.  In addition, NPFMC has begun a processto consider whether to allow these fleets toexpand into the Northern Bering Sea, home tothreatened species like the walrus, endangeredspecies such as the Steller sea lion and thespectacled eider, and many isolated Yup’ik andInupiaq villages who have been the stewardsof this diverse ecosystem for centuries. 
The Bering Sea Elders Group (BSE) is an
alliance of thirty-nine Yup’ik and Inupiaq vil-lages that seeks to protect the sensitive ecosys-tem of the Bering Sea, the subsistence lifestyle,and the sustainable communities that dependon it.  NARF has designed a comprehensiveplan to help this group of Alaska Native vil-lages in their efforts to protect the area andbecome more engaged in its management.
NARF has been working with the Elders Groupon both issues and we have: (1) researchedpotential aboriginal rights that the EldersGroup and its constituent tribes may possessbased on their long term exclusive use andoccupancy of the area, (2) prepared the EldersGroup for negotiations with the trawl fisher-men, and (3) assisted the Elders Group with itsparticipation in the NPFMC process.  
NARF has successfully negotiated what we
believe is the first co-management agreementin federal waters with the trawl industry.  BSEand the trawl industry will now form a work-group to study the effects on the seafloor habi-tat, the various subsistence uses of the area,and the health of the fishery.  Based on thatinformation, the workgroup will then makerecommendations about changes that need tobe made to the fishery.  BSE is currently in theprocess of selecting their work group repre-sentatives and the group is expected to meetfor the first time in the Spring of 2013.MAJOR ACTIVITIES 2012 - NARF CASE MAPRincon Luiseno Band of
Indians – Tribal Trust Funds
San Luis Rey Indian Water
Authority – Tribal Trust Funds
Tule River Tribe – 
Water, Tribal Trust Funds 
Yurok Tribe – 
Tribal Trust Funds
COLORADONARF HEADQUARTERS
BOULDER, COLORADO
Ute Mountain Ute Tribe –
Tribal Trust Funds
Valmont Butte – 
Sacred Site Issue
IDAHONez Perce Tribe - Water
Rights, Tribal Trust Funds 
KANSASKickapoo Tribe – Water Rights
and Tribal Trust Funds
MINNESOTABois Forte Band of Chippewa
– Tribal Trust Funds
Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe –
Tribal Trust Funds
Minnesota Chippewa Tribe –
Tribal Trust Funds
Prairie Island Indian
Community – Tribal TrustFunds
White Earth Band of Chippewa
Indians - Tribal Trust Funds 
MICHIGANGrand Traverse Band of
Ottawa and Chippewa Indians– Tribal Trust Funds
Sault Ste. Marie Tribe of
Chippewa – Tribal TrustFunds
MONTANAChippewa-Cree Tribe of the
Rocky Boys Reservation -Tribal Trust Funds
Confederated Salish and
Kootenai Tribes – Tribal TrustFunds
Little Shell Tribe - Recognition
& Tribal Trust Funds
NEBRASKASantee Sioux Tribe – 
Tribal Trust Fund
NEW MEXICOMescalero Apache Tribe –
Tribal Trust Fund
Pueblo of Zia – 
Tribal Trust Funds
NEVADASummit Lake Paiute Tribe –
Tribal Trust Funds
NORTH DAKOTASpirit Lake Dakotah Nation –
Tribal Trust FundsALASKA
NARF ANCHORAGE OFFICE
Akiachak Native Community –
Land into Trust
Native Village of Atka – Tribal
Trust Funds
Aleut Community of St. Paul
Island – Tribal Trust Funds
Chilkoot Indian Association –
Land into Trust
Chalkyitsik – Land into TrustChistochina Tribe –
Subsistence
Churyung v. Alaska – 
Indian Child Welfare 
Native Villages of Eyak,
Tatitlek, Chenega, Nanwalek,and Port Graham –Subsistence & Aboriginal Title
Ivanof Bay Village – 
Sovereign Immunity
Kaltag Tribe – 
Indian Child Welfare
Native Village of Kasigluk –
Voting Rights Act Suit
Katie John v. Norton –
Subsistence
Kenaitze Indian Tribe – 
Tribal Trust Funds
Native Village of Kivalina -
Global Warming Project
Native Village of Kwigillingok
– Voting Rights Act Case
Gwich’in Steering Committee
– Environmental/Subsistence
Native Village of Nulato –
Indian Child Welfare
Ninilchick Tribe – SubsistenceNoocksack Indian Tribe –
Tribal Trust Funds
Qawalangin Tribe – 
Tribal Trust Funds
Tanana – Tribal SovereigntyTlingit and Haida Indian
Tribes – Tribal Trust Funds
Native Village of Tuluksak –
Trust Lands & Voting RightsAct Case
Native Village of Tuntutuliak –
Voting Rights Case
Village of Tyonek Village –
Subsistence & NAGPRA
Native Village of Venetie –
Subsistence
Voting Rights Act SuitARIZONAHualapai Tribe – Boundary
Issue and Tribal Trust Funds
Kaibab Paiute Tribe – Tribal
Trust FundsCALIFORNIACachil Dehe Band of Wintun
Indians of Colusa Rancheria –Tribal Trust FundsTurtle Mountain Reservation -
Tribal Trust Funds
OKLAHOMACheyenne-Arapaho Tribes –
Tribal Trust Funds
Pawnee Nation – Education,
NAGPRA & Tribal Trust Funds
Sac & Fox Nations – Tribal
Trust Funds
OREGONKlamath Tribes - Water Rights
& Tribal Trust Funds
Confederated Tribes of Siletz
Indians – Tribal Trust Funds
SOUTH DAKOTAOglala Sioux Tribe -
Environmental 
TEXASAlabama-Coushatta Tribe -
Land Claim 
VIRGINIAPamunkey Tribe – Tribal
Recognition
WASHINGTONSamish Indian Nation – Tribal
Trust Funds
Shoalwater Bay Tribe – Tribal
Trust Funds
Skokomish Tribe – Tribal
Trust Funds
Spokane Tribe – Tribal Trust
Funds
Tulalip Tribes – Tribal Trust
Funds
WASHINGTON, D.C.NARF WASHINGTON, D.C.
OFFICE
Tribal Supreme Court ProjectWISCONSINBad River Band of Lake
Superior Chippewa Indians –Tribal Trust Funds
Lac Courte Oreilles Band of
Ojibwe – Tribal Trust Funds
Lac Du Flambeau Band of
Lake Superior Chippewa –Tribal Trust Funds
WYOMINGEastern Shoshone Tribe -
Land Issue 
CANADANorthern Lakes Pottawatomi
Nation - Land Claim 
INTERNATIONALDeclaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples/ClimateChange Issues – Organizationof American States and UnitedNationsAlthough basic human rights are considered
a universal and inalienable entitlement, NativeAmericans face an ongoing threat of havingtheir rights undermined by the United Statesgovernment, states and others who seek tolimit these rights. Under the priority of the pro-motion of human rights, NARF strives toenforce and strengthen laws which aredesigned to protect the rights of NativeAmericans to practice their traditional religion,to use their own language and to enjoy theirculture. NARF also works with Tribes to ensurethe welfare of their children.  In the interna-tional arena, NARF is active in efforts to nego-tiate declarations on the rights of indigenouspeoples.
Religious Freedom
Because religion is the foundation that holds
Native communities and cultures together,religious freedom is a NARF priority issue. 
Legal work continues on a number of Native
American Graves Protection and Repatriation(NAGPRA) implementation issues.  NARF con-tinued a decade-long effort as a member ofthe Colorado Commission of Indian Affairs towork out agreements and protocols with theColorado State Historical Society for the repa-triation and reburial of hundreds of NativeAmerican human remains, both culturally affil-iated and unaffiliated. Part of the work alsoinvolved the development of a protocol for thefuture identification and disposition of NativeAmerican remains disturbed on state or privatelands, which specifies a process for consulta-tion with interested tribes and for the reburialon site of those remains whenever possible. 
The massive Chuitna Coal project threatens
to destroy a vital salmon habitat stream thatthe Tyonek Native Village utilizes for subsis-tence fisheries.  After agreeing to assist theTribe in protecting its subsistence fisheriesresources, legal research established that muchmore was at stake as recent field surveys andexcavations found numerous house pits, cultural features, and religious remains in theproject area.  Under such circumstances theThe Promotion of Human Rights
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122 25National Historic Preservation Act requires that
the federal agency tasked with jurisdictionimmediately contact the impacted Tribe toseek consultation regarding the protection ofthe historic resources. Under existing lawTyonek should be granted the opportunity toidentify its concerns about historic properties,advise on the identification and evaluation ofhistoric properties, including those of tradi-tional religious and cultural importance, artic-ulate its views on the undertaking’s effects onsuch properties, and participate in the resolu-tion of adverse effects.  NARF has engaged anexpert and has been working with the Tribe’sCouncil, the State Historic Preservation Office,the National Park Service and others to effec-tively engage the Army Corp of Engineers onNational Historic Preservation Act issues.  NARFalso met in Washington, D.C. with top agencypersonnel in October 2012 and received significant commitments from EPA, NOAA,Department of the Interior, NPS, NHPC, andthe White House Counsel on Native AmericanAffairs to monitor the process and ensure thattribal consultation is adhered to.“What really is needed is greater awareness 
by the broader American public... of the continuity of Indigenous Peoples within the American social political fabric... andreconciliation for the historical and ongoingwrongs that have occurred... With greaterawareness, people can take actions that areappropriate to their local circumstances.” 
— James Anaya, UN Special Rapporteur for
Indigenous Peoples Rightssuccessfully opposed these facilities.  In recent
years, the effort has been to monitor the devel-opment of the City’s proposed cleanup planand also to secure a County landmark desig-nation for the Butte and surrounding acreage.
NARF represents the Kaibab Paiute Tribe in
their dispute with the King County WaterDistrict and the Army Corps of Engineers whoare preparing to build a dam over a burialground that is known to contain the remainsof almost 100 people.  The Water District andthe Corps have not finished their study todetermine exactly how many people are stillburied there, and the Kaibab do not want thedam built or the reservoir filled until the fullextent of the burials are known and steps canbe taken to protect the site and the people.
The Native American Rights Fund is part of a
working group of Indian organizations andtribal leaders to address government interven-tion in the lives of Native people who workwith or use eagle feathers in traditional ways.
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 26NARF has been assisting the Denver area
Native American community and interestedtribes for almost a decade to give voice to theneed to clean up and preserve a prominentgeologic feature just to the northeast ofBoulder, Colorado. Valmont Butte is an ancient volcanic uplift that sits prominently onthe outskirts of town, just overlooking thenorth fork of Boulder Creek.  In pre-contacttimes it was the location of Ute and thenArapaho village sites.  Use and occupation ofthe area is known to go back at least 10,000years in antiquity.  The property, owned by theCity of Boulder since 2000, is known to con-tain substantial prehistoric materials, includingburial areas.  The Butte has also until recentyears been the site of an active sweat lodge.There is an abandoned mill on the property,and tailings from the fifty-plus years of millingactivities are now contained on the easternend of the property about forty acres in size.The City purchased the property to locate acomposting facility or fire training center. The tribes and the local Native communityThe Promotion of Human Rights
NARF Pow WowHUMAN RIGHTSAANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122 27Since time-immemorial, the eagle and other
raptor birds have been an integral part andintrinsic to the traditions, culture and religionof many tribes, pre-dating U.S. colonization.The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) andother federal law enforcement agencies hadbeen conducting raids, confiscations and inter-rogations on many Indian reservations andpow-wow events, in at least 14 states of thewestern United States under what purportedlyis referred to as an “Eagle Feather StingOperation.”
The immediate purpose of these investiga-
tions by the FWS was to address the illicit saleof eagles and eagle parts and the poaching ofeagles.  However, the impact of these investi-gations has awakened fear that the U.S. gov-ernment is once again encroaching upon tribalculture and religious practices, to the pointwhere the tribal culture and religion may beforced underground once again. 
The working group met with the FWS and
the Department of Justice (DOJ) in 2009 toexpress tribal concerns about raids that wereconducted by the FWS, FBI and other lawenforcement officials who seized feathers anddemanded documentation.  Under federal law,only Native people can possess eagle feathersthrough gifts or inheritance, or from a govern-ment-run repository near Denver which issuespermits specifically for individual birds or parts,generally after lengthy waits.
As a result of this meeting, FWS and DOJ
pledged to take action regarding their lack ofeffective outreach and education to tribes onpolicies regarding the possession, use, giftingand crafting of eagle feathers and otherendangered birds.  FWS proposed the devel-opment of a Tribal Advisory Group to work outlong-term solutions to the issues that tribesraised. 
The National Congress of American Indians
(NCAI) adopted a resolution supporting theestablishment of Tribal Advisory Group to theU.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in order to provide consultation on the policies, regula-
tions and procedures for the acquisition, possession, gifting, crafting and use of eaglesand other migratory birds by tribal members.It was also resolved that NARF shall serve as acentral clearinghouse for the cases appertainingto the “Eagle Feather Sting Operation” beingconducted by the FSW and other federal lawenforcement agencies.  NARF and NCAI continued meetings with the FSW and otherfederal law enforcement agencies to discussand seek solutions as to the effects andimpacts of eagle feather confiscations and todiscuss the drafting of an all-inclusive bill to"fix" the gap between current law and admin-istrative policies, regulations and procedures.
As a result of these efforts, the Department
of Justice announced in October 2012 adepartment-wide, internal policy regardingthe enforcement of laws that affect the abilityof members of federally recognized Indiantribes to possess or use eagle feathers.  Thepolicy provides that, consistent with theDepartment of Justice’s traditional exercise ofits discretion, a member of a federally recog-nized tribe engaged only in the followingtypes of conduct will not be subject to prose-cution: possessing, using, wearing or carryingfederally protected birds, bird feathers or otherbird parts (federally protected bird parts); traveling domestically with federally protectedbird parts or, if tribal members obtain andcomply with necessary permits, traveling inter-nationally with such items; picking up naturallymolted or fallen feathers found in the wild,without molesting or disturbing federally pro-tected birds or their nests; giving or loaningfederally protected bird parts to other membersof federally recognized tribes, without com-pensation of any kind; exchanging federallyprotected bird parts for federally protectedbird parts with other members of federally recognized tribes, without compensation ofany kind; and providing feathers or other partsof federally protected birds to craftspersonswho are members of federally recognized tribesto be fashioned into objects for the eventualuse in tribal religious of cultural activities.CULTURAL RIGHTSTTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 28NARF has also continued its representation
of the Native American Church of NorthAmerica in addressing issues concerning thesacramental use of peyote in their ceremonies.
Indian Education
Recent developments mark a historical shift
in Indian education law and policy by takingthe first step in accomplishing “educationaltribal sovereignty.”  NARF, other Indian organ-izations and tribes have been advocating forsystemic changes to American Indian/AlaskaNative (AI/AN) education. Changes that wouldincrease involvement of tribal governments,educators, parents, and elders in what AI/ANstudents are taught, how they are taught, whoteaches them, and where they learn. Tribalcontrol of these core issues can amount toeducational tribal sovereignty.  
NARF represents the Tribal Education
Departments National Assembly (TEDNA).TEDNA is a national advocacy organization fortribal education departments and agencies(TEDs/TEAs) that works to strengthen the legalrights of tribes to control the formal educationof tribal members.  NARF started TEDNA in2003 with a group of tribal education depart-ment directors from Indian tribes across thecountry.  Since its inception, NARF has hostedNational meetings with TEDNA to 1) identifyobstacles impeding educational tribal sover-eignty, 2) develop policy initiatives to addresssuch obstacles, and 3) advocate and providetechnical assistance on such policy initiatives.  
After over 20 years of work, NARF and
TEDNA secured the first source of direct federalfunding – $2 million – for tribal educationdepartments (TEDs) in the Labor, Health, and Human Services Fiscal Year 2012Appropriations Bill to be distributed via a com-petitive grant process under a new State TribalEducation Partnerships (“STEP”) Program.  TheSTEP program authorizes eligible TEDs to par-ticipate in a pilot project that allows TEDs tooperate federal education programs in schools(public and Bureau of Indian Education) located on Indian reservations.  STEP grantswere awarded to the Nez Perce Tribe, the
Confederated Tribes of the UmatillaReservation, the Navajo Nation, and theChickasaw Nation.  All of these tribes havebeen long time members of TEDNA.Currently, TEDNA is working on the FY’13budget and has been assured by the Labor,Health, and Humans Services Subcommitteeon Appropriations that funding for the STEPprogram will be included in its draft FY’13appropriations bill.
During the 19th and into the 20th century,
pursuant to federal policy, Native Americanchildren were forcibly abducted from theirhomes and put into Christian and governmentrun boarding schools.  The purpose was to“civilize” Indians and to stamp out native culture. It was a deliberate policy of ethnocideand cultural genocide.  Cut off from their fam-ilies and culture, the children were punishedfor speaking their native language, bannedfrom conducting traditional or cultural prac-tices, shorn of traditional clothing and identityof their native culture, taught that their cultureand traditions were evil and sinful, and thatthey should be ashamed of being NativeAmerican.  Placed often far from home, theywere frequently neglected or abused physically,sexually and psychologically.  Generations ofthese children became the legacy of the federalBoarding School Policy.  They were returned totheir communities, not as the Christianizedfarmers that the Boarding School Policy envi-sioned, but as deeply scarred humans lackingthe skills, community, parenting, extendedfamily, language, and cultural practices ofthose who are raised in their cultural context.
There has been scant recognition by the
U.S. federal government that initiated and carried out this policy, and no acceptance ofresponsibility for the indisputable fact that itspurpose was cultural genocide.  There are noapparent realistic legal avenues to seek redressor healing from the deep and enduringwounds inflicted both on the individuals andcommunities of tribal nations.  Lawsuits byindividuals have been turned aside, and unlike
The Promotion of Human Rights
EDUCATIONother countries that implemented similar 
policies – e.g. Canada and Australia – there hasbeen no official U.S. proposal for healing orreconciliation.
NARF, working with several other groups,
convened a Boarding School HealingSymposium in May 2011 at the University ofColorado Law School.  The Symposiumbrought together individuals from across theU.S. and Canada that have been working onvarious aspects of the issues to discuss the pri-orities and strategies to achieve both nationalrecognition of, and apology for, the wrongsvisited on individuals and communities of U.S.tribes, and to obtain reparations to provide theframework for healing of these historic andenduring wrongs.  The symposium partici-pants agreed that it was necessary to continuethe work on the issue and formed a Coalitionto formulate a specific strategy and frameworkto pursue broader support and participation.NARF Pow Wow
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122 29NARF completed non-profit incorporation of
the Coalition when the Certificate ofIncorporation was issued in June 2012 by the Navajo Nation’s Business RegulatoryDepartment.  The initial meeting of theCorporation was held in September 2012, theboard and its officers were elected, and theBylaws and an Amended Corporation wereadopted. NARF and the Coalition representa-tives are continuing to work to raise awarenessand funds to pursue a framework for repara-tions related to Boarding School trauma suf-fered by generations of victims.
Civil and Cultural Rights
From the embryonic days of our Nation,
Indian tribes have long struggled against theassimilationist policies instituted by the UnitedStates which sought to destroy tribal culturesby removing Native American children fromtheir tribes and families.  As an example, thefederal government failed to protect Indian
CIVIL RIGHTSTTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 30children from misguided and insensitive child
welfare practices by state human service agen-cies, which resulted in the unwarranted removalof Indian children from their families and tribesand placement of those children in non-Indianhomes. Statistical and anecdotal informationshow that Indian children who grow up in non-Indian settings become spiritual and culturalorphans. They do not entirely fit into the culturein which they are raised and yearn throughouttheir life for the family and tribal culture deniedthem as children. Many Native children raisedin non-Native homes experience identity prob-lems, drug addiction, alcoholism, incarcerationand, most disturbing, suicide.
In order to address these problems facing
tribes as a result of the loss of their children,the Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) was enactedby Congress in 1978. It established minimumfederal jurisdictional, procedural and substan-tive standards aimed to achieve the dual pur-poses of protecting the right of an Indian childto live with an Indian family and to stabilizeand foster continued tribal existence.  Sincethat time, there have been misinterpretationsand, in some cases, outright refusal to followthe intent of the law by state agencies andcourts. State services frequently do not reach village
Alaska. Tribal courts must therefore handlemost cases involving the welfare of village children. State recognition of those tribal courtproceedings is therefore critical to assure thatproceedings which occur in tribal court arethen respected by other state agencies.Otherwise, adoptive parents may not be ableto participate in state-funded assistance pro-grams, to secure substitute birth certificatesnecessary to travel out of state, to enroll children in school, or to secure medical care.  
Following the Alaska Supreme Court’s
March 2011 decision upholding tribal authorityto initiate children’s proceedings, NARF hasbeen working with the Alaska State AttorneyGeneral’s office to formalize policy and proto-col to implement the Tanana v. State decision.
In addition to policy revisions that will beinserted into the State’s Office of Child Servicesmanual, a committee is developing a proposedRule that would provide a procedure for Tribesto petition state courts to have tribal courtdecrees registered and enforced by state lawofficers. This work has been put on hold, how-ever, until the Court has an opportunity toaddress the questions at issue in the Parks v.
Simmonds case.The Promotion of Human Rights
CHILD WELFARE
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122 31After numerous hearings in the Parks v.
Simmonds ICWA case, the Minto Tribal Court
terminated the parental rights of the parentsand granted permanent custody of a child tothe Simmonds.  Mr. Parks sued in state court,claiming, among other things, that the tribalcourt has no jurisdiction over him and that hisright to due process was violated when theMinto Court – in accordance with its traditionalpractices and procedures – did not permit Mr.Parks’ an attorney to present oral argument.Based on these arguments, Mr. Parks claimsthat the tribal court termination order is notentitled to full faith and credit under ICWA.The Simmonds argued that the terminationorder is entitled to full faith and credit and theymoved to dismiss the state court action, butthis motion was denied by the state court inNovember 2010.  The state court reasonedthat failure to allow an attorney to present oralargument did violate Mr. Parks’ due processrights.  The Simmonds petitioned the AlaskaSupreme Court for review.  The petition wasgranted in March 2011 and the case wasremanded to the trial court for it to make spe-cific factual findings and legal conclusions.Briefing on remand was concluded in May2011 and oral argument was held in December2011.  The trial court issued findings and con-cluded in part that tribal courts may not havejurisdiction over nonmembers outside ofIndian Country, and also suggested that tribal courts must permit oral argument. TheSimmonds filed another petition for reviewwith the Alaska Supreme Court asking thatnumerous aspects of this decision be over-turned.  In July 2012, the Alaska SupremeCourt granted the petition for review and theSimmonds’ principal brief was filed inDecember 2012.  Oral argument is anticipatedto be held in late spring.
The Native Village of Kotzebue requested
NARF’s assistance to ensure that state courtsabide by the Tribe’s pre-adoption placementpreference under ICWA.  One of the primarylegal questions at issue is the proper burden ofproof that the state Office of Child Servicesmust meet in order to move a child from oneplacement to another.  This case settled on in
March 2012 when the Office of Children’sServices agreed to maintain placement withthe Tribe’s pre-adoption placement.  NARF isnow representing Kotzebue in drafting an ami-cus brief to be filed in a similar case where theburden of proof question is still at issue.  Thatbrief was filed in April 2012 and we are waitinga decision.
NARF represents the Bristol Bay Native
Corporation (BBNC) in their work on redistrict-ing.  Their goal is to ensure compliance withthe provisions of the Voting Rights Act (VRA),and specifically the provisions requiring thatthe Native Vote is protected. The AlaskaSupreme Court held that the original redis-tricting plan at issue was unconstitutionalunder the Alaska Constitution and remanded itback to the superior court to be remanded tothe Alaska Redistricting Board. The Boarddevised an Amended Proclamation Plan andfiled that in the trial court in April 2012.  Sixdifferent Native organizations (including NARFon behalf of BBNC) filed objections to theAmended Proclamation Plan and described
NARF Pow WowTTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 32why they felt it should not be approved by the
court, but the Alaska Supreme Court approvedthe use of the redistricting plan for the 2012elections.  In December 2012, the AlaskaSupreme Court held that the current plan –the one that was used for the 2012 electioncycle – is unconstitutional under the AlaskaConstitution and ordered that the RedistrictingBoard start over and devise a new reappor-tionment plan based on the AlaskaConstitution and deviating only where neces-sary to satisfy the Voting Rights Act.  
In August 2012, the State of Alaska filed a
lawsuit in the District of Columbia (Alaska v.
Holder) asking to strike down several sections
of the Voting Rights Act, both facially and asapplied to Alaska.  The VRA has long been con-sidered the crown jewel of civil rights legisla-tion so this is a strike at the heart of rights thatNative people hold dear.  Although the defen-dant is the Attorney General of the UnitedStates, NARF moved to intervene on behalf ofseveral individual Native voters and four tribalcouncils in order to ensure that this right isprotected and preserved.  In December 2012,the federal court stayed this case in order towait for a decision by the United StatesSupreme Court in Shelby County v. Alabama , a
case that presents similar issues.  NARF is sub-mitting an amicus brief in the Shelby County
case on behalf of the Alaska v. Holder clients
and the Alaska Federation of Natives.
International Recognition 
of Indigenous Rights
The development of international laws and
standards to protect the rights of indigenouspeoples greatly benefits Native American peoples.  NARF and NCAI entered into anattorney-client relationship over a decade agofor the purpose of working in the internationalarena to protect indigenous rights.  
NARF carries on a broad range of interna-
tional work on behalf of our clients, focusedprimarily on three areas.  The first area of workis on the United Nations Declaration on theRights of Indigenous Peoples on behalf ofNCAI.  We participated in the process to adopt
the Declaration from 1999 to its adoption in2007.  Since that time, we have utilized theDeclaration in our work on behalf of our clientsand Indian country at large.  We have engagedin educational presentations, workshops onimplementation, and academic conferencesconcerning the Declaration.  We are presentlyengaged in preparing for the WorldConference on Indigenous Peoples which willtake place in New York in 2014. We are working on developing a list of thematic issuesfor the Conference and will be attendingregional and international conferences to prepare indigenous peoples to obtain thestrongest possible outcome document.
The second area of our work is on the
American Declaration on the Rights ofIndigenous Peoples under consideration by theOrganization of American States.  We havebeen involved in this process on behalf ofNCAI since 1999 as well.  Unfortunately, thereseems to be a lack of political will among thestates of the western hemisphere to addressthis issue, given the adoption of the U.N.Declaration.  Nevertheless, the project has notbeen abandoned and we are committed toremain engaged to obtain a Declaration thatspeaks to the unique situation of indigenouspeoples in the Americas and to address areasnot covered in the U.N. Declaration.
The third area of international work is in 
climate change on behalf of the National TribalEnvironmental Council.  We became involvedwith climate change domestically in connec-tion with comprehensive climate change legis-lation and were soon drawn into the UnitedNations Framework Convention on ClimateChange process. We began in 2009 inCopenhagen at the fifteenth conference of theparties – COP 15.  Since that time, we haveattended preparatory sessions in Bonn,Germany, Oaxaca, Mexico and Tianjin, China,in addition to COP 16 in Cancun, Mexico,COP 17 in Durban, South Africa, and mostrecently COP 18 in Doha, Qatar.  Climatechange disproportionately affects indigenous
The Promotion of Human Rights
VOTING RIGHTSAANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122 33peoples.  Mitigation is essential, as ice is melting
all over the Arctic, devastating villages and traditional livelihoods, but indigenous rightsare at times vulnerable to the very process ofmitigation, such as REDD (Reduction of emis-sions due to deforestation and degradation).At the same time, resources for adaptation,capacity building and technology transferneed to be provided to indigenous peoples inthe north as well as in developing countries.
NARF represents the Pottawatomi Nation of
Canada, a band of descendants from theHistoric Pottawatomi Nation, which from 1795to 1873 signed a series of treaties with theUnited States.  These treaties provided for thepayment of certain annuities.  The ancestors ofthe present-day Canadian Pottawatomi fled toCanada following the signing of the final treatyand were never paid their annuities as prom-ised.  The American Pottawatomi bands recov-ered the payment of these annuities in theIndian Claims Commission (ICC), but thePottawatomi members who now reside inCanada could not bring a claim in the ICC.  In1993, NARF brought suit on behalf of thePottawatomi Nation in Canada in the Court ofFederal Claims, by way of a congressional reference bill, to seek redress.  The Nation andthe U.S. Department of Justice reached a 
settlement in principle and the Court ofFederal Claims accepted the settlement inSeptember 2000, and recommended the settlement to Congress in January 2001. 
Attempts to pass congressional legislation
approving the settlement agreement havestalled on several occasions in the 107thCongress through the 111th Congress. InJanuary 2011, Senator Inouye introducedSenate Bill 60 for consideration during the112th Congress.  Senate Bill 60 was referred tothe Senate Committee on the Judiciary whereNARF worked closely with Chairman Leahy’sstaff in coordination with Senator Inouye’sstaff.  NARF was successful in getting S.60“hot-lined” out of the Senate JudiciaryCommittee during the lame-duck session, but we were unable to secure unanimousconsent or a vote on the bill before the end ofthe session. With Senator Inouye’s untimelydeath during the lame-duck session of the112th Congress, NARF and the leadership forthe Pottawatomi Nation in Canada must nowdetermine whether and how to move forward.
NARF Pow Wowof Alaska; Aleut Community of St. Paul Island;
Bad River Band of Lake Superior ChippewaIndians; Bois Forte Band of Chippewa; CachilDehe Band of Wintun Indians of ColusaRancheria; Confederated Salish & KootenaiTribes; Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians;Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa and ChippewaIndians; Kaibab Paiute Tribe; Kenaitze IndianTribe; Kickapoo Tribe in Kansas; Lac CourteOreilles Band of Ojibwe; Lac Du FlambeauBand of Lake Superior Chippewa; Leech LakeBand of Ojibwe; Minnesota Chippewa Tribe;Native Village of Atka; Noocksack Indian Tribe;Prairie Island Indian Community; Pueblo ofZia; Qawalangin Tribe; Rincon Luiseno Band ofIndians; Samish Indian Nation; San Luis ReyIndian Water Authority; Sault Ste. Marie Tribeof Chippewa; Shoalwater Bay Tribe; SkokomishTribe; Spirit Lake Dakotah Nation; SpokaneTribe; Summit Lake Paiute Tribe; Tulalip Tribes;and Ute Mountain Ute Tribe.  The case is anaction in the federal district court for theDistrict of Columbia seeking full and completeaccountings of their trust funds. Such account-ings never have been provided by the federalgovernment which is the trustee for the funds.
In 2009 the Tribes represented by NARF in
this case were among the over 90 tribes whoworked to resolve equitably all Indian trustfund mismanagement litigation against thefederal government by beginning settlementnegotiations in this case and other tribal trustfund mismanagement cases. In 2010 and2011, NARF attorneys along with attorneys fordozens of other tribes litigating trust account-ing and mismanagement claims coordinatedand attended many meetings hosted by thePresident’s appointees in Washington, D.C. inpreparation for settlement negotiations. InDecember 2011 active claims settlementnegotiations on a tribe-by-tribe basis began formany tribes.  To date 30 of NARF’s client tribesin this case have reached settlement agree-ments with the United States totaling nearly$400 million.  These settlement agreementshave been approved by the federal districtcourt.  Per the settlement agreements, onceThe Accountability of Governments
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 34“I have seen the sun burn off the early morning mist as
many times as there are leaves on a dogwood tree.Just as often the stars have stood vigil over my dreams,
and the seasons, with their coming and going, brought
enough work to keep me from lamenting their passing.  Many strange things have happened duringmy lifetime. Often I could not understand thechanges.  I have been angered by some, shamed byothers, and saddened by many.  But nothing can giveme a greater feeling of loss than the way nature disappears to make room for people’s pleasures.”  
— Chief Dan George
Contained within the unique trust relation-
ship between the United States and Indiannations is the inherent duty for all levels ofgovernment to recognize and responsiblyenforce the many laws and regulations appli-cable to Indian peoples and the trust duties towhich those give rise. Because such lawsimpact virtually every aspect of tribal life, NARFmaintains its involvement in the legal matterspertaining to accountability of governments to
Native Americans. 
In Nez Perce v. Salazar , NARF represents
forty-one plaintiff tribes in a tribal trust fundsmismanagement case: the Nez Perce Tribe; theMescalero Apache Tribe; the Tule River IndianTribe; the Hualapai Tribe; the Klamath Tribes;the Yurok Tribe; the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribe;the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma; the Sac andFox Nation; the Santee Sioux Tribe ofNebraska; the Tlingit and Haida Indian Tribesthe tribes receive their settlement payments
their claims are dismissed with prejudice.NARF continues to represent its remainingclient tribes in this case in their on-going set-tlement negotiations.
The 30 settlements still leaves about 11 of
NARF’s tribal trust cases unsettled, but NARF isconfident that most if not all of these will reachsettlement soon as most of them are in activenegotiations. 
NARF represents the Turtle Mountain Band
of Chippewa in North Dakota, the ChippewaCree Tribe of the Rocky Boys Reservation inMontana, the Little Shell Tribe of Chippewa inMontana, and the White Earth Band ofMinnesota Chippewa Indians against theUnited States for damages for misaccounting,misinvestment, and mismanagement of thePembina Judgment Fund (PJF), a $50 milliontrust fund that the tribes were awarded by theIndian Claims Commission in 1964 and 1980.In 2006 the Tribes defeated the United States’motion to have the case dismissed.  Sincethen, the parties have been trying to resolvethe Tribes’ claims primarily through alternativedispute resolution proceedings before a settle-ment judge from the court.  In August 2009,the parties reached agreement at least for set-tlement negotiations on the population of“baseline” (non-investment) transactions inthe PJF.  Since that time the parties have beennegotiating the claims of the government’sinvestment mismanagement of the PJF anddiscussing numerous procedural matters in theevent that agreement is reached on a settle-ment amount.
Since April 2002 NARF has represented the
Chippewa Cree Tribe of the Rocky Boy’sReservation in Montana in its claims for historical trust accountings and damages forhistorical breaches of trust regarding theTribe’s trust accounts, funds and resources.  InJanuary 2009 the Tribe voluntarily joined thenationwide group of tribes litigating similarclaims that sought to resolve their claims at thepolitical level with the Obama Administration.
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122 35In March 2012 the Tribe and the United States
reached a settlement agreement which wasfiled in April 2012 and approved by the Courtin May 2012.  Per the settlement agreement,upon payment to the Tribe of the agreed uponsettlement amount, the Tribe’s claims were dis-missed with prejudice in October 2012.
The Tonkawa Tribe in Oklahoma has
retained NARF to represent it in its pendingaction in the federal district court for theWestern District of Oklahoma for historicalaccountings of its trust funds and assets.  NARFand experts retained by NARF are reviewingthe Tribe’s trust account data provided by thegovernment in the context of political negoti-ated claims settlement.identify the steps necessary to assist in healing
all affected parties and prevent future occur-rences and conflicts.
NARF has focused its initial efforts on the
creation of the clearinghouse, conductingneeds assessment of peacemaker resourcesand developing a sustainable business modelfor the program.  Most recently, NARF is in theprocess of analyzing the results of a nationalsurvey of peacemaking needs in Indian com-munities.  Approximately 230 survey formswere filled out and returned.  NARF and theAdvisory Committee attended meetings inDecember 2012 to discuss ways to increasefederal support for indigenous peacemakingsystems.
The National Indian Law Library 
The National Indian Law Library (NILL) is the
only law library in the United States devoted toIndian law. The library serves both NARF andmembers of the public. Since it was started asa NARF project in 1972, NILL has collectednearly 9,000 resource materials that relate tofederal Indian and tribal law. The Library’sholdings include the largest collection of tribalcodes, ordinances and constitutions; legalpleadings from major Indian cases; and oftenhard to find reports and historical legal infor-mation. In addition to making its catalog andextensive collection available to the public,NILL provides reference and research assis-tance relating to Indian law and tribal law and its professional staff answers over 2,000questions each year. In addition, the Libraryhas created and maintains a huge web site that provides access to thousands of full-textsources to help the researcher. Seewww.narf/org/nill/index.htm. 
With more than 300 participating tribes,
NARF’s National Indian Law Library (NILL)Comprehensive Tribal Law Index collection of
tribal laws continues to grow.  Web use statis-tics show that the online tribal law collection isseeing more visitors, with about 8,000 pagevisits per month. To accommodate this growthand increase usability, NILL has developed anThe Development of Indian Law
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 36“I believe that as Indigenous people, we
have a purpose on this earth. We arethe ones who must save the earth andbe a light in the time of darkness.” 
— Edna Little Elk 
The coordinated development of Indian law
and educating the public about Indian rights,laws and issues is essential for the continued
protection of Indian rights. This primarilyinvolves establishing favorable court prece-dents, distributing information and law mate-rials, encouraging and fostering Indian legaleducation, and forming alliances with Indianlaw practitioners and other Indian organiza-tions. NARF has three ongoing projects whichare aimed at achieving this goal: theIndigenous Peacemaking Initiative; theNational Indian Law Library; and the IndianLaw Support Center.
Indigenous Peacemaking Initiative 
The Indigenous Peacemaking Initiative’s (IPI)
mission is to promote and support Native peo-ples in restoring sustainable peacemakingpractices. This project provides NARF  with anopportunity to support traditional peacemakingand community-building practices as anextension of Indian law and sovereign rights.Peacemaking is a community-directed processto develop consensus on a conflict resolutionplan that addresses the concerns of all inter-ested parties. The peacemaking process usestraditional rituals such as the group circle, andClan structures, to involve the parties to a con-flict, their supporters, elders and interestedcommunity members. Within the circle, peoplecan speak from the heart in a shared search forunderstanding of the conflict, and togetherINDIAN LAWimproved architecture for the online tribal law
collection.  The new tribal law gateway wasreleased in August 2012 and as of October2012, more than 180 individual tribe’s pageshave been launched.  We plan to roll out all ofthe remaining tribal pages over the next sever-al months. Each tribe will have a web pageoutlining exactly what tribal law materials –from codes and constitutions to tribal courtopinions – are available and where they can be found.  
NILL is also working with the American
Association of Law Libraries, Law Library ofCongress and the National Congress ofAmerican Indians on a national Tribal LawInventory project.  The Tribal Law Inventoryproject is part of the larger National InventoryProject which includes providing and preserv-ing free public access to federal, state andmunicipal primary law. The inventory processutilizes volunteers to determine what informa-tion is available, whether this information isofficial and whether it is being preserved. NILLis working with its partners to determine whatinformation about legal resources will besought from tribes and how the informationmight be collected from tribal governments.
Indian Law Support Center
Since 1972, NARF’s Indian Law Support
Center (ILSC) has served as a national supportcenter on Indian law and policy for the nationalIndian legal services community and the 32basic field programs serving Native Americanclients.  NARF continues to perform Indian LawSupport Center duties by sending out regularmailouts to Indian Legal Services (ILS) programs, handling requests for assistance andworking with Indian legal services programs tosecure a more stable funding base fromCongress. 
The Indian Tribal Justice and Legal
Assistance Act of 2000 authorizes theDepartment of Justice (DOJ) to provide supplemental funding to Indian legal servicesprograms for their representation of Indian
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122 37people and Tribes which fall below federal
poverty guidelines. Congress appropriated $2million in FY 2003 under the Act, and ILSC andILS programs worked with the DOJ to devisean allocation methodology. The DOJ’s Bureauof Justice Assistance (BJA) awarded a grant of$1,987,000 to NARF on June 7, 2004, most ofwhich was contracted out to ILS programswith a small portion used to cover NARFadministrative costs. Funding in the amount of$1,726,626 for calendar year 2005 was appro-priated by Congress for the project. Fundingvia 2007, 2008 and 2009 Congressionalappropriations was unsuccessful. In 2010NARF secured a line item appropriation of$2.35 million from Congress. In FY 2011Congress appropriated $2.49 million for civiland criminal assistance in tribal courts.  In FY2012, both civil and criminal grants wereawarded to NARF in the amount of $850,659and $875,000 respectively. NARF is now working with BJA to secure additional grantsfrom FY 2013 funding.
Other Activities
In addition to its major projects, NARF 
continued its participation in numerous conferences and meetings of Indian and non-Indian organizations in order to share itsknowledge and expertise in Indian law.  Duringthe past fiscal year, NARF attorneys and staffserved in formal or informal speaking and lead-ership capacities at numerous Indian andIndian-related conferences and meetings suchas the National Congress of American IndiansExecutive Council, Midyear and AnnualConventions and the Federal Bar Association’sIndian Law Conference.  NARF remains firmlycommitted to continuing its effort to share thelegal expertise which it possesses with thesegroups and individuals working in support ofIndian rights and to foster the recognition ofIndian rights in mainstream society.KNOWLEDGEFY 2012 FINANCIAL REPORT
Based on our audited financial statements for the fiscal year
ending September 30, 2012, the Native American Rights Fundreports unrestricted revenues of $16,586,143 against total
expenditures of $7,643,630.  Total revenue and net assets at the
end of the year came to $19,357,268 and $15,981,472, respec-tively.  Due to presentation requirements of the audited financialstatements in terms of recognizing the timing of certain revenuesand expenses, they do not reflect the fact that, based on NARF’sinternal reporting, revenue exceeded expenses and other cashoutlays resulting in an increase of $9,105,444 to NARF’s reservefund.  When compared to fiscal year 2011:  The decrease in PublicContributions is mostly due to a decline in bequests (this area canvary widely from one year to the next).  The increase in TribalContributions is due to the donations from our Nez Perce vSalazar clients (who received settlement awards from the federalgovernment in the fiscal year).  Federal Awards held steady and
relates to our Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA) contracts (themajority of which is also included in expenses since it is paid-outto sub-recipients).  Foundation Grants also held steady.  Legal Feeincome increased slightly and mostly due to a settlement for oneof our clients.  The Gain on Disposal of Property relates to the saleof our Washington, DC building early in the fiscal year (we moved our office to another location in Washington DC).Along with the overall investment markets, NARF’s investments performed very favorably.
Unrestricted Revenue and Expense comparisons between fiscal
year 2011 and fiscal year 2012 are shown below (not includingcontributed services).
38TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDPublic Contributions
Tribal Contributions
Federal Awards 
Foundation Grants
Return on InvestmentsGain on Disposal of Property
Other
TOTALS   $ 1,729,051
      1,754,621      1,359,848         750,429
  1,135,010 
              -0-
          (55,381)
           32,291
   $ 6,705,869    25.7%
    26.2%
 20.3% 11.2% 16.9%
      -0-
 (0.8%)
 0.5%
    100%   $ 1,092,316
    10,122,098      1,366,143         752,707      1,245,587      1,186,853         674,152           35,987
   $ 16,475,843       6.6%
   61.4%     8.3%
 4.6%
     7.6%
     7.2%
     4.1%
     0.2%
    100%dollars percents
2011
dollars percents2012
Legal Fees
dollars percents2011
dollars percents2012
Litigation and Client Services
National Indian Law Library     Total Program Services
Management and GeneralFund Raising     Total Support Services
                         TOTALS            $4,871,455
           200,342
        5,071,797
           713,086
        1,315,682
        2,028,768
     $ 7,100,565  68.6%
   2.8%
 71.4%
 10.1%
 18.5%
  28.6%
 100%      69.9%
     3.3%
   73.2%
 9.7%
 17.1%
 26.8%
 100%         $ 5,267,067
          250,257
       5,517,324
          731,647
       1,284,359
       2,016,006
    $ 7,533,330UNRESTRICTED SUPPORT AND REVENUE COMPARISON
EXPENSE COMPARISON
Note: This summary of financial information has been extracted from NARF’s audited financial statements which received an unqualified
opinion by the accounting firm of BKD, LLP.  Complete audited financials are available, upon request, through our Boulder offic e or at
www.narf.org.NARF Acknowledgment of Contributions: Fiscal Year 2012
We thank each and every one of our supporters for
their commitment to the goals of NARF. NARF’s success could not have been achieved without thegenerosity of our many donors throughout thenation. NARF receives contributions from founda-tions, corporations, religious organizations, tribes and
Native organizations, bequests and trusts, benefactors,private donations, and in-kind contributions.  We grate-fully acknowledge these gifts received for fiscal year2012 (October 1, 2011 through September 30, 2012).
Tribes and Native
Organizations
Aleut CorporationArctic Slope Regional
Corporation 
Asa'carsarmiut Tribal
Council
Bad River Band of
Lake SuperiorChippewa Indians
Bering Straits Native
Corporation 
Bristol Bay Native
Corporation 
Colorado River
Indian Tribes
Confederated Salish
& Kootenai Tribes
Confederated Tribes
of Siletz Indians
Cook Inlet Regional,
Inc. 
Curyung Tribal
Council
Forest County
Potawatomi 
HualapaiKeweenaw Bay
Indian Community
Koniag, Inc. Lac Courte Oreilles
Band of Ojibwe
Minnesota Chippewa
TribeMuckleshoot Tribe
Native Village 
of Eyak
Native Village 
of Port Lions
Nez PerceOld Harbor 
Tribal Council 
Pechanga Band of
Luiseno Indians
Poarch Band of
Creek Indians
Pokagon Band of
Potawatomi Indians
Pueblo of PojoaquePuyallup Tribe 
of Indians
Rincon BandSan Manuel Band 
of Mission Indians
Santee Sioux TribeSeminole Tribe 
of Florida
Seven Cedars
Casino/JamestownS'Klallam
Shakopee
Mdewakanton SiouxCommunity
Spokane TribeSuquamish Indian
Tribe 
Sycuan Band of
Kumeyaay Indians
Tanana Chiefs
Conference
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122 39Tulalip Tribe
Tule River Indian
Tribe
Ute Mountain 
Ute Tribe
Yocha Dehe Wintun
Nation
Foundations,
Corporations andLaw Firms
444S Foundation A Better World FundAlaska Conservation
Found
Alaska Conservation
Foundation 
Aria FoundationBassett FoundationBay and Paul
Foundations
Bay and Paul
Foundations
Best & Flanagan, LLPBiedenharn
Foundation
Bruce R. Greene &
Associates, LLP
Catharine Hawkins
Foundation
Edward & Verna
Gerbic FamilyFoundation
Foley/Frischkorn
Wildlife FundFord Foundation 
Foundation to
Promote OpenSociety
Fredericks, Peebles &
Morgan, LLP 
Hester & Zehren, LLP JiJi FoundationLeighty FoundationLutheran Community
Foundation
McElroy, Meyer,
Walker & Condon,PC
Oak Foundation Peck Stackpoole
Foundation 
Phogg PhoundationRena M. Hymans, PC Rocky Hill Advisors,
Inc.
Running Horse
Foundation, The
Smith, Shelton,
Ragona & Salazar,LLC
Tilden McCoy+
Dilweg, LLP
Tzo'-Nah Fund
(Alaska - ClimateChange)
Ungar FoundationWinky FoundationCorporate
Matching Gifts –
Corporations nation-wide make matchinggifts to NARF onbehalf of their employ-ees.  Please check withyour human resourcesdepartment to partici-pate in this program.
Adobe Systems Inc.Ameriprise FinancialAT & T FoundationBank of AmericaDellFannie Mae
Foundation
GE FoundationGoogleHewlett PackardIBM Illinois Tool Works
Foundation
JustGive.orgMicrosoft
Corporation
Morgan StanleyPepsico FoundationP.S.E.G.The David and
Lucille PackardFoundation
The Pew 
Charitable TrustNARF Acknowledgment of Contributions: Fiscal Year 2012
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 40Bequests and
Trusts
AnonymousRodger D. AndrewsBetty BerensonElla C. BrauchClara Belle CampbellDiane D. DelpCarolyn FerridayJohn HodgsonEmily S. KirkJohn LaddDennis LivingstonMargaret RatheauNancy E. RussellMichelle SahfranDanya Krupska
Thurston
Rosalyn TrappJohn L. Vaupel
Peta Uha – Peta
Uha is an exclusivemembership programfor donors makingsubstantial annualcommitments toNARF.
Peta Uha
Pipestone 
Frederick & Judith
Buechner
Robert FriedeWilliam KilbournCecilia C LucasDan & Beth
WhittemorePeta Uha
Turquoise
Ann E. LarimoreFaith OtteryJohn & Carson TaylorPeta Uha GraniteKent BachAnna BradberryRichard W. CobbMark C. CookeWilliam GradyMarion HamptonRichard K. KnutsonDon LichtyNeeta LindDerek RichardsonWayne Ross & Nancy
Starling Ross
Amelia W. VernonMary Lee ZerbyPeta Uha FlintRoger & Camille
Abelson
Robert  T. AndersonGeorge BaetjerDavid BahrBarbara J. BastleByron T. BeasleyWilliam & Elsa BoyceDavid BoydPeter BronerJane A. BrownElizabeth L. CelioFay ChandlerBruce CobernMaren Curtis
Andrew J. DrexlerAlfred K. EckersbergBert & Jo Ann EderSusan E. EichhornPeter EmberBrad P. EngdahlJohn & Barbara
Everett
Andrew & Audrey
Franklin
Daniel FrenchAdam & Carol
Geballe
Richard GeorgeAnn GetchesJan GriesingerDuncan A. HaasGarnet W.
Hammond
Collier HandsMark HandschyBetty D. HardingRobert  M. HartKarin HolserJoan L. HowisonGerri KayRicki & Scott KresanAndrean LarsonEva LeeYvonne T. LeMelleJames LichtensteinJames MarienthalEric MarshB. MayfieldAndrew & Amanda
MbuviBarbara J. Meislin
Brent & Marilyn
Minney
Lisa MoersdorfAnthony & Lisbeth
Moores
Thomas V. MullerPaul & Julie Murphy-
Ribes
Cassandra S. NaylorSara D. NerkenMartha NewellFrannie OatesGeoffrey A. OelsnerDorothy T. ParrisHelene
Presskreischer
Bennett PudlinEdith S. QuevedoFaith RoesselBuford L. RolinErnest & Mary Sue
Schusky
Peter L. SheldonSusan SlaughterMary G. SpragueElizabeth SteeleWalter A. StockCraig K. ThomsonGeorge TinkerBrenda TomarasTom TremainePeta Uha ObsidianDean Scott AttawayJohn C. BierwirthDavid & Barbara
BoernerVivendi Universal US
Wells Fargo
CommunityFoundation
Xcel EnergyLiving Waters
Endowment
Elwood H. Brotzman
Memorial Fund
Jerome Davis Living
Waters EndowmentFund
Kathleen and Ruth
Dooley Family Fund
Edward & Verna
Gerbic FamilyFoundation 
Susan K. Griffiths
Memorial Fund
The Robert & Joy
Hanson LelandEndowment
Frank J. McCormick
Family Fund
Marvin W. Pourier, Jr.
& Donna M. DeansMemorial Fund
Mary Lou Mosca-
Ragona MemorialFund
Ernest L. Schusky
Endowment
The Snoqualmie
Indian Tribe
Helen & Sidney
Ungar MemorialEndowment FundAANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122 41Hermann Burchard
J. Fidel CandelariaRick DauphinaisLisa DavisRobert DuffieldHerbert D. FloydLinda FromiaRaymond GalvanFrank & Carole GrantJohn & Emile HellerRaymond C.
Honeywell
Anne HumesH. John JacobiJudy JuddMark A. KadzielskiAlbert & Skaye KirkLeslie A. KoleznarKathleen E. LentzJames & Cynthia
Leonard
Joan A. LesterAngeline LoweWilliam LymanMelody MackenziePatricia MarangoniOtwin MareninDouglas McFarlanJoseph B. ProctorPamela RobyRon & Jill RohdeLeRoy M. RostonSusan ShererJoseph SingerJennifer StanleyJay Stoner
Mio SuzukiGilbert TauckRomeo & Elena VivitJanice WarnerDavid WinstonSteven Zuckerman
Circle of Life –
Circle of Life membershave made a lastingcommitment byincluding NARF intheir wills.
Catches Bear & Judy
Adams
Rodney AddisonGloria AdkinsonDale M. ArmitageMaxwell BarnardBarbara BeasleyDiane Ben AriRoy BensonSandra Carroll BergerBobby BitnerBetty E. BlumenkampCharles BowersDale BrandWilliam BrownGloria BurgessPatricia BurnetThomas CampbellLawrence CandelArthur CarterRobert CarterMary CasmusCarter CastleEd Chasteen
Paul CliftonCharles ColeJanet CongeroJudity DayHarvey DennenbergLyle A. DethlefsenGary DickerhoofStarr DormannPatricia DuvalNoelle EdwardsAllison EmersonJudy Fair-SpauldingJames FeeDebra FrazierJan FreemanLyle FunderburkSuzanne GartzLawrence H. GellerDeborah GhoreyebEstela GoldsmithLouise Gomer BangelArline GoodrichBernard GordonGene GrabauJean GundlachMerrill HakimMichael HallKarin HolserMargaret HartnettTheodora HaughtonPatricia HeidelbergerChuck HoltzerAlfred HooseJudith Horton
Veronica IfillElizabeth A. JohnsonVusama KaribaEmily KirkBetty KleczyMargo M. KochrutheEllyne Krakower-RiceEdward KriegeJames LangharstSharon LaughlinIngrid LeblancJames LehnererFrank LovelandRichard LuersRima LurieSuzanne MacDonaldPatricia Marks-
Greenfield
Helen McCahillJoseph McNamaraStanley MetzgerPeter & Betty MeyerGary MontgomeryLeila V. MooreJeanne Morrel-
Franklin
Jeanne MoskalShirley NortonMarc PearceMoses PeterRandall PetersenDenise PfalzerRose PilcarskyThelma Populus
GordonB. Powell
Horace RainesRobert & Mary
Resnik
Maureen RipleyBarbara RobertsAndrea RobinsongRay RodgersJune RosenthalKeith RossWilliam RozierMary SacherB. SampsonPeter SchmidtLaRoy SeaverMichael SeeleyCharlotte SelverKatey SimetraCharles SmithKirk SperryCarolyn StabyHerbert StewartJames & Patricia
Straus
Michael & Carol
Sullivan
Louis TaboisValeria TenyakCharlotte ThompsonM. TurekJohn H. TylerRene' Vivo'William WadeTed WeitzRobert & Mary
WellmanTTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 42NARF Acknowledgment of Contributions: Fiscal Year 2012
Jonathan Briggs
Rose CunyJohn EchohawkKim GottschalkDavid GoverRichard GuestLori JohnsonHeather Kendall-
Miller
Melody McCoySteven MooreMauda MoranMorgan O'BrienChris PereiraRay RamirezDebbie ThomasDon WhartonIn-Kind Donations
There are many waysto support the NativeAmerican Rights Fund,in addition to cashgifts.  People who volunteer their timeand talents, or donatevaluable goods andservices, provide crucial support for the NARF mission.We would like toexpressly thank thefollowing individualsand organizations fortheir generosity:
DLA PiperAnn EstinPatton Boggs LLPMark Johnson,Attorney at Law,
Boulder, CO
Gerald Danforth Marshall McKay Ron His Horse Is
Thunder
Moses Haia Virginia CrossMark Macarro Barbara Smith Julie RobertsBuford Rolin Kenneth RichardsJulia GuarinoZoe OstermanChristina WarnerMariah FordMichael Holditch
Matt MolinaroOther Anonymous
IndividualsRoger Welsch
Gary WhiteDan & Beth
Whittemore
Karen Williams-Fast
Horse
Marcel WingateDavid YeomanWayne Zengel
NARF Employee
Giving – NARF
employees committhousands of hours toprotecting the rightsof tribes.  They also
commit their own fundsto help through payrollgiving.
Anonymous
Native Ways Federation – The Native Ways
Federation (Native Ways) is the only workplace givingprogram in the United States to exclusively fundNative nonprofits that serve people and communitiesin Indian Country.  Native Ways has been tested in theworkplaces of the seven founding Native nonprofits,and has received W.K. Kellogg Foundation funding toexpand the program more broadly.  To learn moreabout Native Ways and the participating nonprofits,or to see how your company can support IndianCountry through workplace giving, please visitwww.nativewaysfederation.org. Your business canmake a difference!
Boulder-Denver Advisory Committee – Lucille A.
Echohawk, Thomas W. Fredericks, Ava Hamilton,Jeanne Whiteing, Charles Wilkinson.Federated Workplace Campaigns
Thank you to the thousands of federal, state, munici-pal and private sector employees throughout thecountry who through their payroll deduction planscontributed $77,370 in fiscal year 2011.
Show Your Support in NARF’s programs – NARF
receives contributions from foundations, corporations,religious organizations, tribes and Native organiza-tions, bequests and trusts, benefactors, private dona-tions, and in-kind contributions. Below are descrip-tions of NARF’s donor programs and additional waysyou can get involved.
Peta Uha Membership – Peta Uha in the Lakota
(Sioux) language means firekeeper. One that honorstribal members who made a solemn commitment toensure that the sacred flame, source of light, heat andenergy for his people, always be kept burning. Like
the firekeepers of old, members of the Peta UhaCouncil can demonstrate constancy and vigilance byhelping to ensure that the critical work of the NativeAmerican Rights Fund continues to move ever for-ward.  For benefits associated with each level of PetaUha membership, please contact our DevelopmentDepartment, 303.447.8760. 
Tsanáhwit Circle – Tsanáhwit is a Nez Perce word
meaning equal justice. Tsanáhwit Circle membersprovide a regular source of income to NARF by pledg-ing and making monthly contributions at any level ofyour choice. You may sign up to receive monthlypledge reminders in the mail or your credit card maybe billed automatically.
Otu’han Gift Membership – Otu’han is the Lakota
Sioux word translated as giveaway. Otu’han is amemorial and honoring gift program modeled afterthe tradition of the Indian giveaway in which items ofvalue are gathered over a long period of time to begiven away in honor of birthdays, marriages, anniver-saries, and in memory of a departed loved one.
Circle of Life – NARF’s Circle of Life are donors who
provide a lasting legacy to the Native American RightsFund by including NARF in estate planning ordeferred gifts. The circle is an important symbol toNative Americans representing unity, strength andthe eternal continuity of life. These lasting gifts helpensure the future of NARF and our Indian clientsnationwide.
Endowments – NARF has two established endow-
ments, the 21st Century Endowment and the LivingWaters Endowment. The 21st Century Endowment isa permanent fund in which the principal is investedand interest income is used for NARF’s programs. Thisendowment is designed to provide a permanent,steady income that can support the ever-increasingcosts of providing legal representation to our tribalclients.  The Living Waters Endowment directly fundsthe 21st Century Endowment. It allows donors to
honor friends and loved ones by making an endow-ment gift of $10,000 or more.  By designating a giftto either endowment, you can be sure that your con-tribution will continue to generate annual funds inperpetuity. Endowment supporters are recognized ona special wall plaque displayed at NARF. Supporterswill also receive a memorial piece for their home andbe acknowledged in NARF’s annual report.
Workplace Campaigns – NARF is a member of
America’s Charities, a national workplace giving fed-eration. Giving through your workplace is as easy aschecking off NARF’s box, #10350 on the CombinedFederal Campaign (CFC) pledge form authorizingautomatic payroll deduction.  NARF is also a memberof Community Shares of Colorado (CSC), member#5037.
Matching Gifts – Currently, more than 20 founda-
tions and corporations nationwide make matchinggifts to NARF on a regular basis.  Employers matchtheir employees’ contributions sometimes doublingor even tripling their donation. Please check with yourhuman resources office and request a matching giftform.
E-Action – Sign up for our e-action network by 
providing NARF with your email address. This is agreat way to get periodic case updates, calls-to-action, special events information, invitations andother activities. Your e-mail address is confidential andwe will not share it with any outside sources. For further information about any of the programs orservices, please contact NARF’s DevelopmentDepartment at 303-447-8760.  Thank you.
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122 43NARF STAFF
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001122 44CORPORATE OFFICERS
John E. Echohawk(Pawnee)Executive Director/Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk
Litigation ManagementCommittee Member/Attorney
Natalie Landreth
(Chickasaw)Litigation ManagementCommittee/Attorney
Melody McCoy
(Cherokee)Litigation ManagementCommitteeMember/Attorney
Morgan O’Brien
Director of Development
Ray Ramirez
Secretary
Michael Kennedy
Chief Financial OfficerBOULDER MAIN 
OFFICE STAFFJohn E. Echohawk(Pawnee)Executive Director/Attorney
Amy Cordalis(Yurok)
Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk
Attorney
David Gover
(Pawnee/Choctaw)Attorney
Melody McCoy
(Cherokee)Attorney
Steven C. Moore
Attorney
Donald R. Wharton
Attorney
Eric Anderson
Legal Assistant
Rose Cuny (Oglala Lakota)
Office Manager
Chrissy Johnson Dieck
Paralegal
Michael Kennedy
Chief Financial Officer
Mireille Martinez
Development ProjectsManager
Katrina Mora 
(Oglala Lakota)Office Services Assistant
Morgan O'Brien
Director of Development
Christine Pereira
SystemsAdministrator/Webmaster
Ray Ramirez
Editor/Grant Writer
Jennifer Redbone
(Apache/Comanche/ Kiowa)Development Assistant
Jeff Schmidt
Paralegal
Joanne Soklin
Legal Assistant
Debbie Raymond-Thomas
(Navajo)Controller
Jennie Tsikewa (Zuni)
AccountantNATIONAL INDIAN
LAW LIBRARYDavid SeldenLibrarian
Mauda Moran
Library & InformationTechnology Assistant
ANCHORAGE 
OFFICE STAFFHeather Kendall-Miller(Athabascan)Attorney
Natalie Landreth
(Chickasaw)Attorney
Erin Dougherty
Skadden Fellow Attorney
Jonathan Briggs
Legal AdministrativeAssistant
WASHINGTON, D.C.
OFFICE STAFFRichard GuestAttorney
Colby Duren
Legal AssistantThe “Native American Rights Fund
Statement on Environmental
Sustainability.”
“It is clear that our natural world is undergoing severe,
unsustainable and catastrophic climate change thatadversely impacts the lives of people and ecosystemsworldwide. Native Americans are especially vulnerableand are experiencing disproportionate negative impactson their cultures, health and food systems. In response,the Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is committed toenvironmental sustainability through its mission, workand organizational values. Native Americans and otherindigenous peoples have a long tradition of living sustainably with the natural world by understanding theimportance of preserving natural resources and respectingthe interdependence of all living things. NARF embracesthis tradition through its work and by instituting sustainable office practices that reduce our negativeimpact on our climate and environment. NARF isengaged in environmental work and has established aGreen Office Committee whose responsibility is to leadand coordinate staff participation in establishing andimplementing policies and procedures to minimizewaste, reduce energy consumption and pollution andcreate a healthful work environment.” 1506 Broadway, Boulder, CO 80302
303-447-8760 • www.narf.org