Cover artwork by Angelica FraustoTABLE OF CONTENTS
1
3
5
7
1012
15
18
19
20Free Them All
Defund Hate
Communities Not Cages
Proactive LegislationMembership
Shifting the Narrative
Organizational Updates
Finances
Members, Board and StaffLetter from the  
Executive Director
Dear DWN Community, 
As we reflect on the unprecedented nature of 2020, I want to share my deep gratitude and appreciation 
for the community that Detention Watch Network has created over the last 23 years since our founding. 
In one of the most challenging moments of our collective lives, DWN staff, members, allies, and funders 
stepped up to do anything and everything possible to protect and support immigrants detained during 
the global pandemic. The call to Free Them All was an organic one that reverberated throughout the 
movement to end immigration detention and other forms of incarceration. DWN was able to anchor this 
call with resources for organizing, litigation, and funds to get people released; messaging and research to 
show the impacts of disease in jails and prisons; and coordinated actions to make the moment count and 
ensure long-term change on immigration detention. It was a remarkable effort, by a deeply committed 
and skilled community and one that I will remember and be inspired by for years to come.
In addition to the shifts in discourse on prisons and jails due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we also saw one 
of the largest protest movements in recent history take hold of the nation after the murder of George 
Floyd in late May 2020. Questions about the role of policing and incarceration in our society and the acute 
anti-Black racism inherent within these systems came to the forefront. DWN’s years of work to Defund 
Hate allowed us to pivot quickly to expose the connections between racist law enforcement agencies and 
the call to defund the police as well as ICE and CBP. 
After four years of an administration that did everything possible to target and dehumanize immigrants 
and communities of color, the need to lead with vision and our principles became that much more 
critical. DWN’s role in the movement has amplified significantly due to the growing awareness of 
immigration detention and the incredible effectiveness of our staff and members. In 2020, along with 
several partners we launched Moving Toward Justice, a project to develop an affirmative policy proposal 
for the immigrant rights movement rather than limit ourselves to tradeoffs on enforcement for wins 
1on immigration. We also joined the We Are Home campaign to build 
momentum for wins early in the administration to undo the harms of 
the Trump years, overhaul the enforcement system, and finally have a 
path to legalization for the undocumented community. 
In 2020, our Network grew to 254 committed members – 130 
organizational and 124 individual – in more than 31 states. Through our 
Organizing Support Program, we are able to provide funding to 18 organizational members to build the 
capacity for anti-detention work at the local level.  We also continued building our cohort of members 
who are formerly detained or their loved ones by hosting skills training and trauma-informed healing, 
and offering stipends to cohort participants.
The next four years have the greatest potential for a reduction in immigration detention since DWN’s 
founding in 1997. At times, given the pandemic and the harsh realities of the deportation machine, it is 
hard to remain hopeful. But thanks to the resilience of the DWN community and our ability to persevere 
despite the myriad challenges we face, I am more hopeful than I’ve been in a long time. I look forward 
to continuing this work with you all and more than anything I look forward to the day where we can 
celebrate our wins in person, together. 
In Solidarity,  
Silky Shah  
Executive Director
2 
FREE THEM ALL
As the coronavirus was rapidly spreading in the United States in early 2020, Detention 
Watch Network, along with members and allies, began making the urgent call to “Free 
Them All.” Doctors, people inside detention, and advocates sounded the alarm to 
release people from detention, knowing that the detention system is notorious for its 
fatally flawed medical care and abysmal conditions that only worsen in times of crisis. 
The demand to Free Them All has since become a powerful, values-centered message 
and the affirmative call to abolish detention.  
3 
As part of the Free Them All efforts in 2020, the Network:
• created an advocacy and organizing toolkit  in consultation with members to demand mass releases 
of people in Immigration Customs Enforcement (ICE) custody;
• organized Free Them All Days of Action, which included live video discussions with advocates, 
health experts, and community members, as well as car-caravan actions across the nation;
• created a Free Them All webpage  and messaging toolkit ;
• uplifted organizing efforts by people in detention through DWN’s Voices from Detention landing 
page ; 
• placed an opinion piece in Common Dreams, Listen to the Brave Hunger Strikers in ICE Detention , 
to amplify the rise in hunger strikes by people in detention (from March to July 2020, nearly 2,500 
people participated in COVID-19-related hunger strikes in detention centers nationwide); 
• released a Free Them All video ;
• met with Members of Congress (MOCs) and key government officials at the local, state, and national 
level to call for the release of migrants whose lives were at risk inside immigration jails;
• organized phone-banking sessions demanding that MOCs reject additional funding for immigration 
enforcement in COVID-19 relief packages;
• sub-granted $50,000 to grassroots organizations in support of their Free Them All post-release 
efforts;
• released a report in March 2020, Courting Catastrophe: How ICE is Gambling with Immigrant Lives 
Amid a Global Pandemic , exposing ICE’s incompetency in handling infectious diseases;
• released a report in December 2020, Hotbeds of Infection: How ICE detention contributed to the 
spread of COVID-19 in the United States , which details how ICE detention was responsible not only 
for thousands of COVID cases in detention centers but contributed to more than 245,000 additional 
COVID-19 cases in communities throughout the country.
Through DWN’s rapid response 
work to Free Them All, the 
Network collaborated with 
a broad range of experts 
and messengers. Nearly 800 
organizations, over 10,000 
people, and thousands of 
medical professionals showed 
solidarity with people in ICE 
custody by demanding to Free 
Them All. Through community 
pressure and the work of DWN 
members, public officials at 
varying levels called for the 
release of people in detention, 
including Tacoma City Council 
passing a Free Them All resolution in relation to the 
Northwest Detention Center in 
Washington State. 
Following the COVID-19 
outbreak, detention numbers 
were reduced nationwide and 
there were efforts to free people 
from immigration detention 
at more than 37 detention 
centers and across 22 states. A 
number of people in ICE custody 
were freed from the Mesa 
Verde and Adelanto detention 
centers in California. Releases 
across the country were made 
possible in partnership with grassroots organizations, people 
organizing inside detention, 
directly impacted individuals, 
legal service providers, policy 
organizations, and bond fund 
organizations. 
While there were some releases 
(as mentioned above), ICE 
ultimately refused to heed the 
calls to free people at scale, 
halt transfers, and take other 
precautions. As a result, in Fiscal 
Year 2020, 21 people tragically 
died in ICE detention, including 
eight from COVID-19, the highest 
death toll since 2005.
4In February 2020, the Defund 
Hate coalition hosted a planning 
meeting to determine the 
campaign’s goals for the FY21 
appropriations process and 
consider the potential for 
fundamental shifts after the 
upcoming presidential election. 
The coalition joined 28 other 
immigrant rights organizations 
in submitting immigration-
related appropriations language 
requests that emphasized 
the need to significantly 
scale down immigration 
enforcement funding. In early 
March, the coalition also led an 
organizational sign-on letter with 
over 250 signatures to Congress, 
urging accountability measures 
for ICE and CBP and demanding 
budget cuts.
 DEFUND HATE
Later in March, DWN shifted 
its priorities and aligned its 
Defund Hate work to respond 
to the COVID-19 pandemic. 
In response to ICE and CBP’s 
request for additional funding 
amid the pandemic, the coalition 
mobilized supporters to demand 
Congress reject this request 
and any additional funding for 
these agencies in any COVID-19 
stimulus package. The coalition 
urged that Congress instead 
prioritize halting all immigration 
enforcement, including through 
the release of everyone in 
detention, in order to invest in 
what immigrant communities 
need. As Congress worked to 
pass five COVID-19 emergency 
stimulus packages, the Defund 
Hate coalition successfully 
ensured that Members of 
Congress rejected additional funding for ICE and CBP each 
time.
In addition to the global 
pandemic, 2020 also exposed 
deep racial injustices in the US 
after the murder of George Floyd. 
During this period of activism 
in support of the Black Lives 
Matter movement and growing 
interest in the calls to defund 
police, the Defund Hate coalition 
was able to link these efforts 
with the need to defund all 
racist law enforcement agencies 
and created a resource “ Defund 
Racist Enforcement: Police, 
ICE, and CBP ”. The coalition 
advocated against increased 
funding for subgrants from 
the Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS) to local and state 
law enforcement included in 
the House proposal introduced Fiscal Year 2021 (FY21) Budget DWN is committed to divestment from Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and Customs 
and Border Protection (CBP), agencies that tear apart loved ones and harm communities. Instead, the 
Network wants to see tax dollars used to strengthen families and communities, including investment in 
education, housing, green infrastructure, and healthcare programs.
DWN continued to co-lead the Defund Hate campaign, which has effectively blocked more than $12 
billion in additional funding for ICE and CBP since the campaign launched in 2017. Throughout 2020, 
the Defund Hate coalition engaged in efforts to reduce funding in the Fiscal Year 2021 budget and 
strengthened the coalition’s field and organizing capacity. DWN also continued to drive Defund Hate 
communications efforts, including co-drafting press statements on behalf of the coalition and creating a 
Defund Hate microsite,  a significant accomplishment for the campaign and place to house co-branded 
materials. All of these communications efforts contributed to building Defund Hate’s brand recognition 
and popularizing the campaign’s narrative and messaging.
5in July. Despite this harmful 
provision, the House’s proposal 
was the most progressive DHS 
funding bill written under the 
Trump administration and 
included wins such as the 
reduction of detention levels by 
more than 50%, appropriations 
accountability language, and 
the prohibition and rescission 
of funds for border wall 
construction. The coalition 
worked with Congressional 
champions on an amendment 
strategy to push the bill even 
further, resulting in a proposed 
amendment to fund studies to 
dismantle DHS. Although the bill 
did not progress to the Senate, 
it signaled an important step 
forward in the Defund Hate 
campaign’s efforts to defund ICE 
and CBP.Organizing Efforts and Achievements 
DWN recognized the need to bring more grassroots 
organizations into the Defund Hate coalition to 
strengthen the campaign nationally and locally. Along 
with member group American Friends Service Committee, 
DWN co-led the Defund Hate field working group and 
throughout 2020 this group:
• held Spanish-language webinars to engage grassroots 
members in the campaign, including a bilingual 
webinar “Advocate to Defund Hate this Summer” 
and created a community resource called Guide for 
Congressional Meetings;
• organized phone zap events with members to drive 
calls to MOCs and urge them to reject funding for 
immigration enforcement and detention;
• organized a Facebook live event “Defund ICE and 
CBP and Stop Reproductive Violence” to make the 
connection between federal funding and these 
agencies’ abuses, including the reported forced 
gynecological procedures on women detained in ICE 
custody
6The expansion of immigration detention in the U.S. over 
the past few decades has led to the jailing of immigrants in 
a massive and mismanaged system of over 200 detention 
centers, rife with due process and human rights abuses. In 
response, people across the country are joining the call to shut 
down detention centers to protect immigrant family members, 
friends, coworkers, and neighbors.
DWN launched the Communities Not Cages (CNC) campaign in 
2018 to amplify the longstanding local organizing of members, 
advocates, and allies across the country. Throughout 2020, the 
campaign continued building a nationally coordinated strategy 
to prevent the expansion of ICE detention centers, shut down 
facilities, stop the proliferation of ICE detention into other 
government agencies, and ultimately abolish the detention 
system in its entirety.COMMUNITIES NOT CAGESPhoto: Grassroots Leadership
7In 2020, ICE escalated its attacks against immigrant communities and 
continued business as usual despite the global health crisis, resulting 
in the tragic and unnecessary loss of 21 lives. Lives are in jeopardy in 
ICE custody, and a growing body of evidence detailed the rampant 
medical neglect and abuse that occurs inside detention centers, 
including: the use of toxic chemicals, egregious medical neglect, 
unfettered use of transfers that resulted in COVID-19 outbreaks, and 
the systematic undercounting and underreporting of COVID-19 cases. 
In the context of a devastating pandemic, 2020 saw a powerful 
and concerted effort on behalf of DWN members, partners, and 
communities across the country to resist and fight for an end 
to immigrant detention. The Network’s Communities Not Cages 
campaign includes more than 20 local efforts to either shut down 
an existing detention center or stop a proposed expansion. Some 
notable wins in 2020 included:
How to Shut Down ICE Detention in Your Community, a Detention 
Watch Network Guide , was published in Teen Vogue, in which 
executive director Silky Shah shares grassroots strategies for shutting 
down ICE facilities. 
Through collective action and movement building, DWN supported 
organizations with their local organizing against detention while also 
creating avenues for them to connect and build power together. • In Wasco County, Oregon, the board overseeing the Northern 
Oregon Regional Correctional Facility ended the ICE contract. 
Rural Organizing Project and their community partners have been 
organizing against this facility for years. 
• A renewed bid by ICE to open the largest detention center in 
the Midwest was defeated (again) due to efforts led by DWN 
members: Illinois Coalition for Immigrant and Refugee Rights, 
National Immigrant Justice Center, and Organized Communities 
Against Deportations.
• Through grassroots organizing and advocacy, WyoSayNo 
successfully stopped the construction of a 1,000-bed immigration 
detention center in Wyoming.
• In California a federal district judge upheld the constitutionality 
of AB 32, state legislation which prohibits private incarceration 
for immigration detention. AB 32 initially passed in 2019 through 
advocacy efforts led by the Dignity not Detention Coalition, 
including DWN members Immigrant Legal Resource Center, 
Freedom for Immigrants, California Immigrant Youth Justice 
Alliance, and Inland Coalition for Immigrant Justice.
8Artwork by Angelica Frausto
9PROACTIVE LEGISLATION
In 2020, DWN’s leadership within the immigrant rights movement grew, 
particularly in preparation for the incoming Biden administration.
Given the increased attention to issues of detention, DWN sought to 
build momentum for proactive legislation. In 2020, DWN served on the 
steering committee of Moving Towards Justice, a project designed to 
create a visionary immigration policy proposal for a people-centered, just, 
and humane immigration system. Through playing a leadership role in 
the project, DWN ensured that the project maintained its commitment 
to creating proposals that are accountable to experiences of directly 
impacted communities and the Network’s vision of abolishing the cruel 
U.S. immigration detention system. In addition to pushing for short-term 
and incremental victories through other legislative efforts that DWN 
supports, Moving Towards Justice  seeks to serve as a “north star” for the 
immigration movement as a long-term goal.
DWN also sits on the steering committee of the We Are Home  campaign 
along with other national organizations. The We Are Home campaign, 
which officially launched after the 2020 elections, is a multi-racial, multi-
ethnic, multi-generational coalition calling on the new administration and 
Congress to take immediate action to protect millions of immigrants and 
end the cruelty of the interior detention and deportation system. As part 
of the steering committee, DWN is guiding efforts within the national 
campaign to undo the damage of the previous four years and build a 
new immigration system that is fair, humane, functional, and centered in 
racial justice. Through both executive and legislative changes to America’s 
immigration system, We Are Home seeks three major policy goals:
1. Undo the cruelty of the Trump administration 
2. Build a new immigration system that is fair, humane, and functional
3. Create a roadmap to citizenship
10Photo: Inland Coalition for Immigrant Justice
11Membership Growth and Retention
Our community power comes from our diverse, resilient, and committed 
membership.  Amid a challenging year, DWN grew and was strengthened, recruiting 
more members committed to freeing people in detention and building grassroots 
power to shut down immigration jails in their areas. In total, the Network recruited 
80 new members - 32 organizations and 48 individuals, of which 21 individuals are 
directly impacted by the detention system.
In our first year as a 501c3 organization, DWN also shifted our membership cycle 
(previously June 1st – May 31st) to match our January 1st – December 31st fiscal year 
and updated our annual member dues. Members received regular communication 
throughout the process.
Healing Towards Liberation Cohort
DWN continued its commitment of developing and uplifting the leadership of the 
most impacted by detention to be at the core of the fight against immigration 
incarceration. Especially given the pandemic context, uprisings against police 
brutality, and unprecedented elections in 2020, DWN centered its work in the cohort 
around healing and community support. Throughout the year, DWN staff conducted 
one-on-one conversations and held cohort-wide calls, including checking in about 
specific needs in the COVID context and planning alternatives to an in-person 
convening. Since many directly impacted immigrants are struggling even more 
economically due to COVID-19 and engagement can be challenging, DWN disbursed 
$1,000 stipends for cohort members to recognize and support the members’ 
commitment to the group. The Network also sub-granted funds to support seven 
mini-projects led by cohort members and others who have experienced detention 
and hosted virtual skill-shares around healing and managing mental health in 
difficult times. 
Organizing Support Program 
DWN is dedicated to capacity building and providing resources to grassroots 
organizational members to aid their innovative approaches to support people 
detained, stop expansion, and/or shut down detention centers. In 2020, DWN 
completed its fifth round of the Organizing Support Program (OSP) for the 2021 
cohort. DWN granted over $200,000 to 18 grassroots organizational members – the 
largest OSP cohort thus far. We invite you to learn more from this cohort and plug in 
to support their local organizing efforts.MEMBERSHIP
122021 DWN OSP Cohort of Grantees:
Advocate Visitors with Immigrants in Detention  - Organizing to Shutdown Otero  
Detention Center Targeted: Otero County Processing Center 
El Refugio Ministry  – Amplify and Abolish campaign  
Detention Center Targeted: Stewart Detention Center 
The Fang Collective  – Shut Down ICE  
Detention Centers Targeted: Bristol County House of Corrections,  
Donald Wyatt Detention Facility 
Inland Coalition for Immigrant Justice  – Resilient Voices   
Detention Center Targeted: Adelanto GEO 
Immigration Action Alliance  – Shut Down Glades  
Detention Center Targeted: Glades County Detention Center 
Juntos  – Jaulas de Oro (Golden Cages)  
Detention Centers Targeted: Visionquest and Devereux Advanced Behavioral Health 
La ColectiVA  – Migrant and Refugee Rights Initiative  
Detention Centers Targeted: ICA-Farmville, Caroline Detention Center 
La Resistencia  – Families and Formerly Detained Leadership Group  
Detention Center Targeted: Northwest ICE Processing Center
New Sanctuary Coalition  – Anti-Detention Project  
Detention Centers Targeted: Orange County, Bergen County, Hudson County, Essex County, 
Elizabeth County Detention Center 
No Detention Centers Michigan  – No Detention Center in Ionia  
Detention Centers Targeted: Ionia, MI proposal, North Lake Correctional CAR Facility
Organized Communities Against Deportations  – Free Them All IL  
Detention Centers Targeted: McHenry County Correctional, Jerome Combs Detention Center, 
Pulaski County Jail, Ogle County Jail 
Shut Down Etowah  – #ShutDownEtowah Campaign  
Detention Center Targeted: Etowah County Detention Center 
St Louis Interfaith Committee on Latin America  – Ending ISAP 
Queer Detainee Empowerment Project  – QDEP Organizing Base 
Rio Grande Valley Equal Voice Network  – Free Them All  
Detention Centers Targeted: El Valle Detention Center, East Hidalgo Detention Center, Port 
Isabel Service Processing Center 
Rural Organizing Project  – Rural Organizing to End Oregon’s Detention Pipeline  
Detention Centers Targeted: Northern Oregon Regional Correctional Facility, Northwest ICE 
Processing Center 
Siembra NC  – Expanding Community Defense Resistance  
Detention Centers Targeted: Alamance County Jail, Stewart Detention Center 
United Stateless  – Statelessness Coalition
13Photo: Queer Detainee Empowerment Project
Photo: Grassroots Leadership
14Towards Freedom  
Messaging Toolkit
In partnership with Goodwin Simon Strategic 
Research, DWN released Towards Freedom: 
A messaging guide for ending immigration 
detention  in September 2020. The toolkit was 
the culmination of a qualitative and quantitative 
deep messaging research project from 
September 2017 to November 2019. The toolkit 
serves as a resource to better equip all those 
working for immigrant justice to persuasively 
communicate and engage potential supporters 
to action and deeper engagement towards 
ending immigration detention. 
A topline finding of the research was that fully 
51 percent of survey respondents strongly 
favored, and 79 percent total favored ending 
detention and creating a new community-based 
support approach to immigration when it was 
articulated as part of a comprehensive vision. 
 At a glance, some of the key messaging 
recommendations  include:
• Utilizing diverse immigrant and non-
immigrant messengers
• Leading with shared values
• Fostering wholesome conflict
• Telling “journey stories” that center  
shared American ideals and values
• Using key facts to create openness
• Painting a credible picture of harm
• Indicting the system
• Painting a proactive vision
• Providing opportunities for action  
As part of the release, DWN convened three 
webinars, including a bilingual movement-
wide webinar to discuss the research and key 
recommendations with Amy Simon of Goodwin 
Simon Strategic Research. DWN staff also 
supported members to use the toolkit to enhance 
their influence and expand their base towards an 
abolitionist framework.SHIFTING THE NARRATIVEArtwork by Angelica Frausto
15Amplifying DWN’s Message
DWN garnered over 1,000 press hits in 2020 
resulting in over two billion impressions from being 
quoted in outlets ranging from the New York Times 
and Business Insider to Truthout and Colorlines. 
Most notably, Silky Shah authored an opinion 
piece, titled “Why America still needs to abolish 
ICE” in NBC Think and an explainer piece in Teen 
Vogue, titled “How to Shut Down ICE Detention in 
Your Community” to support the Communities Not 
Cages campaign. 
In addition to amplification of DWN’s message in 
the press, DWN executed more original content for 
social media in 2020 than ever before. Geared   
 
towards political education, calls to action, and 
breaking down the latest news on immigration 
detention, DWN coordinated events such as a 
Facebook livestream on embodying pro-Blackness 
in the immigrant rights movement with DWN 
members Families for Freedom, Colorado People’s 
Alliance, and Queer Detainee Empowerment 
Project. We also created content such as “Defund 
Racist Law Enforcement: Police, ICE and CBP.”  
DWN developed more artist partnerships in 
2020, including participating with the sky-typing 
project “In Plain Sight” led by Los Angeles-based 
multidisciplinary artists Rafa Esparza and Cassils.
Growth of DWN’s Audience
As a result of DWN’s social content creation 
and actions moving increasingly online 
with the pandemic, DWN saw tremendous 
growth across our digital platforms. 
DWN now has a collective cross-platform 
(Facebook, Instagram and Twitter) audience 
of 61,211 people. Furthermore, DWN 
devoted increased capacity to our email 
engagement strategy, resulting in a 7,397 
increase in email subscribers.
Facebook
New Fans: 2,010 
Engagements: 105,054Overall DWN growth across 
social media in 2020
20,633 new followers 
349,698 engagements
Twitter 
New Followers:  2,972
Engagements: 115,931
Instagram
New Followers: 15,651
Engagements: 128,713
Photo: Somos South Georgia
1617Organizational Growth
2020 marked the first year of Detention Watch Network operating 
as an independent 501c3 non-profit, spinning off from its fiscal 
sponsor on January 1. The Network is experiencing a pivotal shift 
from a smaller organization to a key national player within the 
immigrant rights movement and building with those fighting against 
the criminal punishment system. The Network’s budget continues 
to steadily grow, and in 2020 the organization created a six-month 
operating reserve fund. The organization closed out the year with 
14 staff spread across CA, DC, IL, TX, and WA. As part of the shift to a 
formal 501c3 entity, DWN developed and grew its Board of Directors, 
including offering trainings on financial management and governance 
and recruiting four new members to the Board.  
COVID-19 Response
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, DWN adopted new policies 
and provided additional resources to staff and members in an 
attempt to mitigate burnout and adapt to operating within a global 
pandemic. The Network implemented COVID leave which allowed 
staff to take care of themselves and loved ones if affected by 
COVID-19.  DWN also worked with staff members to modify their 
work schedules and provided home-office furniture and equipment. 
The Network continued its practices of offering a staff wellness 
fund, holding (now virtual) staff retreats with an emphasis on team 
building, and organizing political education for staff to strengthen 
the organization’s abolitionist framework and camaraderie with 
one another. The team participated in collective trainings, such as 
one hosted by the Anti-Oppression Resource and Training Alliance 
(AORTA) about creating equitable and interactive virtual spaces, and 
held virtual get togethers including: game night, a holiday gift swap, 
and a Halloween costume contest.ORGANIZATIONAL UPDATES
18Income
Expenses   Total Direct Contributions $1,098,549.51  
   Total Foundation Grants $1,750,000.00  
   Total Program Revenue $47,869.94  
Total Income $2,896,419.45  
Gross Profit $2,896,419.45  
   Total Salaries & Related Expenses $1,466,601.89  
   Total Grants & Direct Assistance $337,997.80  
   Total Contract Service Expenses $234,008.97  
   Total Nonpersonnel Expenses $58,120.58  
   Total Facility Expenses $99,240.51  
   Total Travel & Conference Expenses $66,118.54  
   Total Other Expenses $16,694.33  
Total Expenses $2,278,782.62  
Net Operating Income $617,636.83  
Net Income $617,636.83  68%27%5%
Program
Management and General
Fundraising2020 Expense by FunctionFINANCES
19Photo: Shut 
MEMBERS
Abolition Apostles
ACLU Immigrants’ Rights Project
Adelante Alabama Worker Center
Advocate Visitors with 
Immigrants in Detention in the 
Chihuahuan Desert
Alianza Americas
Amend Law LLC
American Friends Service 
Committee
American Gateways
American Immigration Council
American Immigration Lawyers 
Association
Americans for Immigrant Justice
Amnesty International USA
Arriba Las Vegas Worker CenterBenedictine Sisters of Baltimore
Brooklyn Community Bail Fund
California Immigrant Youth 
Justice Alliance
Center for Constitutional Rights
Center for Victims of Torture
Centro de Trabajadores Unidos
Chicago Religious Leadership 
Network on Latin America
Civil Rights Education and 
Enforcement Center
Colorado People’s Alliance 
(COPA)
Community Justice Exchange 
(National Bail Fund Network)
Comunidades Unidas en una Voz 
Cornell Law School Asylum ClinicDesis Rising Up & Moving (DRUM)
Detained Migrant Solidarity 
Committee
Dolores Street Community 
Services
El Refugio Ministry
Faith In Action (La Red, PICO)
Families Belong Together
Families for Freedom
First Friends of NJ & NY
Florence Immigrant and Refugee 
Rights Project
Freedom For Immigrants
Friends Committee on National 
Legislation
Georgia Detention Watch
Grassroots Leadership
“DWN has been a great support to us, especially around messaging and helping bridge gaps in our 
own knowledge. Around our last Abuse Documentation report release DWN provided support in 
helping us clarify advocacy goals, as we have very little knowledge and experience with advocacy. 
It’s great having an organizations whose abolitionist stance and political goals we can trust and 
share knowledge with.”  
- No More DeathsPhoto: Shut Down Etowah
20HIAS
Human Rights First
Illinois Coalition for Immigrant 
and Refugee Rights
Immigrant Action Alliance
Immigrant Defense Advocates
Immigrant Defense Project
Immigrant Legal Advocacy 
Project
Immigrant Legal Defense
Immigrant Legal Resource Center
Immigrant Youth Coalition
Immigrants’ Rights Clinic, 
Stanford Law School
Inland Coalition for Immigrant 
Justice
Innovation Law LabInterfaith Immigration Coalition
Interfaith Movement for Human 
Integrity
Jefferson County Immigrant 
Rights Advocates
Jewish Activists for Immigration 
Justice of Western MA
Juntos
Just Futures Law
Justice Strategies
La ColectiVa
La Colectiva Legal del Pueblo
La Resistencia
Latinx Therapists Action Network
LaUnidad11
Law Offices of Brelje and 
Associates
Long Beach Immigrant Rights 
Coalition
Make the Road
Mano Amiga
Mariposa Legal
Mid-South Immigration 
Advocates, Inc.Minnesota Interfaith Coalition on 
Immigration (MN ICOM)
Mission Presbytery
Movement for Justice in El Barrio
Mustino Times
National Immigrant Justice 
Center
National Immigration Law Center
National Immigration Project of 
the National Lawyers Guild
National Network for Immigrant 
and Refugee Rights
National Religious Campaign 
Against Torture
New Mexico immigrant Law 
Center
New Orleans Workers’ Center for 
Racial Justice
New Sanctuary Coalition of NY
“We are proud to be part 
of the DWN network, 
and to participate in 
the community-driven 
campaigns to abolish 
detention and defund ICE.” 
– Public Counsel 
“DWN is a valued 
national partner, and 
we are appreciative 
of the support of our 
regional organizer, Liz, 
as well as other DWN 
staff and resources.” 
- Georgia Detention Watch
21No Detention Centers in 
Michigan
No More Deaths
NorCal Resist
Northwest Immigrant Rights 
Project
Northwest Indiana Resist  (NWI 
Resist)
Organized Communities Against 
Deportations
Oxfam America
Private Corrections Working 
Group
Progressive Americans Action 
LeagueQueer Detainee Empowerment 
Project
Quixote Center Inc
RAICES
RGV Equal Voice Network
Rocky Mountain Immigrant 
Advocacy Network
Rural Organizing Project
Sanctuary DMV
Santa Fe Dreamers Project
Scott D. Pollock & Associates, P.C.
Sheriffs for Trusting 
Communities
Siembra NC
Sisters of Mercy of the Americas
Showing up for Racial Justice 
Education Fund 
South Asian American Leading 
Together
Southeast Asia Resource Action 
Center
Southeast Immigrant Rights 
Network
Southern Poverty Law CenterSt. Louis Inter-Faith Committee 
on Latin America
Sueños Sin Fronteras de Tejas
The FANG Collective
The Opportunity Agenda
Tsuru for Solidarity
UndocuBlack Network
Unitarian Universalist Service 
Committee (UUSC)
“RAICES has received 
imperative support 
from DWN and we find 
it important to continue 
our partnership with this 
coalition.” 
- RAICES“We strongly believe in the 
mission and collective 
organizing power of DWN.” 
- Tsuru for Solidarity
Providence Youth Student 
Movement 
Proyecto Azteca
Public CounselUnitarian Universalists for Social 
Justice
United Stateless
University of Miami School of 
Law Immigration Clinic
Waco Immigrants Alliance
Washington Defender 
Association
Women’s Refugee Commission
WyoSayNo
22STAFF
BOARDElizabeth Sweet, President  
Individual Member  
Washington, DC
Eunice Cho, Vice President  
ACLU Nation Prison Project  
Washington, DC
Romy Lerner, Secretary  
University of Miami School of Law 
Immigration Clinic  
Coral Gables, FL
Lauren Dasse, Treasurer  
Florence Immigrant  
and Refugee Rights Project  
Tucson, AZ
Victoria Lopez  
ACLU of Arizona  
Phoenix, AZAmilcar Valencia  
El Refugio Ministry  
Atlanta, GA
Emily Tucker  
Georgetown University Law Center 
Washington, DC
Shadé Quintanilla  
Digital Strategist 
Gabriela Marquez-Benitez 
Membership Director
Lissette Castillo  
Organizer
Feven Ferai  
Finance & Operations Director
Setareh Ghandehari  
Advocacy Director
Marcela Hernandez  
Senior Organizer
Aimee Nichols  
Managing Director
Carly Pérez Fernández  
Communications Director
Karen Roxas  
Development Associate
Jolie Steinert  
Administrative Associate
Luis Suarez  
Advocacy Manager
Silky Shah  
Executive Director
Gabriela Viera  
Advocacy Manager
Stacy Suh  
Organizing Director
Note: Staff list is 
as of early 2021Danielle Alvarado  
Fair Work Center  
Seattle, WA
Ana Ortiz Varela  
Innovation Law Lab  
San Antonio, TX
Tony Nam  
Indivisible Project  
Silver Spring, MD
23Anonymous
David Rockefeller Fund
Dr. Bronner’s Family Foundation
Ford Foundation
Four Freedoms Fund
Heising-Simons Foundation
Oak Foundation
Open Society Foundations
Solidaire Network
DWN Members,  
who contributed $71,260 in dues
Individual Supporters,  
who contributed $95,298 in donationsTHANK YOU  
TO THE FUNDERS  
WHO MADE DWN’S WORK  
POSSIBLE IN 2020Artwork by Jolie Steinert
24