INSIDE   The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
Ahmad , an 11-year-old Syrian 
boy, was having a hard time 
managing his anger. In Syria, he 
had survived a grenade attack when 
he was mistaken for a soldier. His 
family sought safety in Amman, 
Jordan, but life was still not peaceful. 
Ahmad had violent outbursts. He 
was aggressive and hit his siblings. 
He had internalized the violence 
from his experiences in Syria into 
his own young body. 
Increasingly, our staff in Jordan 
is seeing children and young people 
like Ahmad who need mental health 
and physical therapy care to cope 
with their traumatic experiences. 
Now, more than a third of our 
clients in Jordan are under the age 
of 18. Syrian adults report that the 
well-being and potential of their 
children constitute their greatest 
source of stress. Parents worry 
constantly about what their children 
have seen and experienced. 
Children like Ahmad have sur -
vived targeted torture and random 
violence. Family members have been abducted or killed. Boys and girls 
as young as nine have been raped. 
These children and young people 
now struggle with debilitating 
nightmares, fear and anxiety. 
Few children are able to attend 
school because of safety concerns 
or family obligations. Those who 
attend school may be marginalized 
by teachers. They may be bullied — 
or become bullies themselves. 
Syrian children also often express 
overwhelming responsibility for 
protecting their family. While still 
young, they may stand guard at 
apartment doors or resist sharing 
their feelings with their parents. 
To help heal these young survivors, 
the counseling and physical therapy 
staff developed ten-week joint 
physical therapy/counseling groups 
that provide age-appropriate 
activities. “Young children can’t 
verbally express themselves very well. 
They don’t have the vocabulary to 
explain their feelings,” said Veronica 
Laveta, clinical advisor. “And they 
typically don’t have the ability to sit 
still for long periods of time, so the 
combined groups address both 
physical and emotional concerns.” Restoring Hope and Childhoods VOLUME 24, ISSUE 5 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
2Letter from the Executive Director, Curt Goering 
4Job Onyango: From Kenya to Ethiopia 
4Year-End Gifts Bring Hope and Healing 
Restoring 
the Dignity of 
the Human Spirit 
THE sto rycloth 
NOVEMBER 2014 
Client’s name has been changed 
to protect his identity.After receiving care from CVT, survivors 
report increased hope, better coping 
skills and improved relationships. 
PHOTO © CVT 
“On the counseling side, we’re 
helping the children understand 
that their feelings of anger and 
sadness are normal,” said Veronica. 
“Then they are learning to identify 
those feelings in themselves and 
find appropriate ways to express 
those feelings.” 
“We have many fun activities 
that reinforce the counseling,” 
said MaryAnn de Ruiter, physical 
See page 3 170208.qxp  11/3/14  5:54 AM  Page 12Letter from the Executive Director 
Earlier this fall, our two training projects, Partners in Trauma 
Healing (PATH) and the National Capacity Building (NCB) project, 
both hosted training conferences. While our healing and advocacy 
work often headlines our news, our training work is essential to sharing 
what we’ve learned and building the torture survivor rehabilitation 
movement worldwide.  
Through PATH and NCB, we’re strengthening torture survivor centers with in-depth skills 
training and tools to expand treatment to survivors. This allows even more torture survivors to 
receive the high quality healing care they so desperately need. 
Job Onyango, who is profiled in this issue of Storycloth, was part of a previous training project 
in eastern and central Africa. Through this project, he developed his counseling skills and now will 
be training new counselors at our Ethiopia project. 
At the NCB institute in St. Louis, therapists deepened their understanding of complex trauma 
in torture survivors. Complex trauma can be thought of as layered and prolonged trauma resulting 
from a series of events such as exposure to violence, separation from family members and revictim -
ization. It can result in the disruption of a child’s development and attachment to others, and lead 
to serious mental health problems. 
As you’ll read in the lead article, nearly 40% of our clients in Jordan are under 18. The vast 
majority of these boys and girls have experienced ongoing trauma that can lead to complex trauma. 
They have endured torture, witnessed horrific violence (including torture and deaths of family 
members), and suffered from the destruction of their homes and forced relocation during their 
most formative years. 
In the coming year we’ll help more than 2,000 survivors, including children and their parents, 
rebuild their lives and restore their hope. Support from individual donors is a key component of 
all our healing projects, and as you consider your year-end charitable giving, I hope you’ll help 
these survivors reclaim their lives. Whether you use the enclosed envelope or respond to a separate 
mailing, please help with a contribution and please give as generously as you possibly can. 
Sincerely, 
Curt Goering 
Executive Director ...................................................... 
Curt Goering 
Clinical Advisors Amber E. Gray, David Gangsei, and 
Veronica Laveta welcomed participants to the Partners in 
Trauma Healing conference in Cambodia in September. 
PHOTO © EDIE LEWISON 170208.qxp  11/3/14  5:54 AM  Page 23Restoring Hope and Childhoods
From page 1
therapy advisor. “But physical therapy
itself promotes healing throughgreater body awareness. The children
learn how to use their bodies tointeract more positively with peersor improve their self-confidence.”
During a typical meeting, leaders
discuss an emotion such as anger,
fear or sadness. Then, through a
story or role-play, the children learn healthy ways to manage theiremotions. 
“Trauma happens just as intensely
in the mind through thoughts as itdoes in the body through physicalreactions,” said Ilona Fricker, physiotherapist/trainer. “We teachchildren to recognize that whenthey feel sad that it’s not just in
their minds, but also in their bodies.
Their posture changes. Their heads
hang low. They walk slowly. During
the groups, we talk about sadness
and act it out. Then we talk about
happiness and act that out. Finally,we teach them how they can use
their bodies to make themselves feel
better. For example, lifting your
head up and straightening your back
will stimulate positive emotionswhen you’re feeling bad.”
One favorite activity is “Kings
and Queens.” One at a time, eachchild walks into the room wearinga crown and sits in a chair decoratedphysical exercise. Parents also learnthe physical therapy techniques their
children are learning so they can do
them together to strengthen the fami-ly bonds. 
“Both the parent education groups
and the child physical therapy/counsel-
ing groups have been helpfulin bring-
ing a little peace to Syrian families,”said Veronica. “With morepeacefulhomes, these children have more
hope for healthy, productive lives.”
After Ahmad’s group ended, his
mother reported to CVT staff how
much he had improved. Ahmad
taught his mother breathing 
exercises and they now practicebreathing together. Instead of hitting
his siblings when he gets angry, heputs on the radio and dances. “He
has changed and is almost back to
normal before the war,” she said. 
CVT’s activities in Jordan are financed by
the United States Department of State’s
Bureau of Population, Refugees and
Migration (BPRM), the United NationsVoluntary Fund for Victims of Torture, 
and the support of the American Peoplethrough USAID. as a throne. The other children
then compliment the king or queen.
The activity teaches the children
how to carry themselves and to rec-
ognize feelings of pride and confi-
dence.
The children learn other simple
techniques to help them manage
their feelings, such as focused
breathing, counting, self-talk, guided
imagery, singing and dancing.
When practiced in the group and
then at home, children do a better
job managing their fears and anger.
Parent Education
Because of the nature of the
Syrian conflict, many families are
fragmented. Frequently, mothers
are left to parent and provide for
their children alone, while also
dealing with their own grief and
trauma. For parents and children
alike, managing emotions is
extremely difficult.
Through education groups, 
parents learn about typical child
development issues, as well as 
common behaviors of children 
who have experienced trauma. The
classes also provide suggestions to
help both parents and children healfrom their experiences, such as
alternatives to physical discipline,
speaking quietly, relaxation tech-
niques, soothing rituals and having
Parents are very worried about their 
children. Y oung children have a much
harder time regulating anxiety, fear 
and anger.
PHOTO © CVT
“My children have been psychologically very affected
[by the war] — they are anxious, scared and feel like
there is no safe place. I came to CVT to get help for 
my children. I have one daughter who is a client, but 
I wish all of my children could meet with CVT and 
benefit from their services. ”
— Syrian torture survivor and father of seven daughters
170208.qxp  11/4/14  5:27 PM  Page 3counseling 
to the most 
traumatized 
survivors. 
Job embodies 
CVT’s goal of 
hiring and 
training local 
counselors as a way of building a 
local infrastructure for healing 
torture survivors. “I’m excited to 
have this opportunity,” said Job. 
“It’s an honor to be part of the 
team and see people who have lost 
hope and dignity be transformed. 
That gives me the passion and drive 
to continue working with victims 
of torture and trauma.” 
..................................................................................................... Earlier this fall CVT employee Job 
Onyango relocated from Nairobi, 
Kenya, to Shire, Ethiopia. He’s the 
newest expatriate psychotherapist 
trainer at our Ethiopia project, but 
he has a long history with CVT. 
A Kenyan citizen, Job worked 
for several nongovernmental 
organizations in AIDS/HIV work 
before joining the Independent 
Medico Legal Unit (IMLU) as a 
consulting counselor. At IMLU, he 
was introduced to CVT and torture 
rehabilitation. IMLU documents 
torture and provides access to 
counseling and was a partner in 
one of CVT’s training projects. 
“At IMLU, I got training on working with torture survivors, and 
my interest in the work deepened,” 
said Job. “I decided to focus my 
work on the torture and trauma 
field and saw CVT as the experts. 
So when CVT Nairobi opened, I 
joined the team.” 
As a psychosocial counselor 
(PSC), Job continued his training, 
eventually leading counseling 
groups. When there was an opening 
for a psychotherapist/trainer at our 
Ethiopia project this summer, Job 
applied and beat out the competition 
for the position. Job is now working 
as a psychotherapist/trainer. In this 
new role, he’s training and supervis -
ing PSCs and providing individual 
649 Dayton Avenue 
St. Paul, MN  551 04
www .cv t.org 
© 20 14 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.14-NE5 As we near the end of the year, w e
find that many of our donors 
choose this time to make their 
tax-deductible contributions to 
support CVT’s work. These year-end 
gifts are particularly important in 
allowing us to care for survivors of 
torture and war atrocities and to 
drive our advocacy to end torture. 
Gifts that we receive before 
December 31 will also help us 
more effectively plan and allocate 
our resources for 2015. 
If you have yet to send a gift to 
CVT this year, please do so now. 
Or, if you’ve already supported us, 
but can make an additional tax- 
deductible donation, we will be par -
ticularly grateful. Your annual sup -
port is an inspiration to us — and 
gives hope to survivors around the world. 
Once again, you have the oppor -
tunity to make a Gift of Hope as a 
holiday gift. Your friends and family 
members will appreciate knowing 
that a survivor’s life is being restored 
in their names. With each Gift of 
Hope you send, we’ll send you cards 
you can use to announce your 
thoughtful gifts. 
Thank you for your ongoing 
generosity and commitment to 
helping torture survivors around 
the world. Please make your tax- 
deductible gift by check, credit 
card or online at www.cvt.org by 
December 31, 2014. If you’d like 
to discuss a gift of stock or a 
bequest gift, contact Michelle at 
1-877-265-8775 (toll-free) or at 
mwoster@cvt.org. Year-End Gifts Bring Hope and Healing Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor 
Your generous support brings healing 
to torture survivors worldwide. CVT 
welcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery 
of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your 
legacy of support . 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors 
while offering tax benefits to 
donors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific 
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or 
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a 
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,
MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 for 
other ways to give. Thank you for your 
ongoing commitment to healing the 
wounds of torture.Job Onyango: From Kenya to Ethiopia 
The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
PHOTO © C.C. STROM 
Job Onyango 170208.qxp  11/3/14  5:54 AM  Page 4