INSIDE 
2Letter from the Executive Director, Curt Goering 
3Atomic Data Sponsors Restoring Hope Breakfast 
4Friendship and Healing for Congolese and Burundian Girls 
4Maximize Impact with Your Company The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
The Center for Victims of Torture ™
(CV T) has opened its doors in 
Atlanta and is rebuilding the 
lives and restoring the hope of 
refugee survivors of torture through 
a partnership with the International 
Rescue Committee (IRC). CVT’s 
interdisciplinary model of care is 
now available in both Minnesota 
and Georgia in the United States, 
in addition to healing initiatives in 
Africa and the Middle East. 
This partnership, known as 
Thrive , makes it possible for CVT to offer care to survivors of torture 
among the refugee populations 
currently working with the IRC in 
its Atlanta location. Healing care 
is delivered utilizing a holistic 
model incorporating psychotherapy, 
mental health case management 
and interpretation to address the 
unique needs of each client in a 
safe therapeutic space. 
Combining the services offered 
by the IRC—an international 
humanitarian and refugee resettle -
ment services provider—with CVT’s CVT Opens Its Doors 
to Survivors in Atlanta VOLUME 26, ISSUE 3 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
Restoring 
the Dignity of 
the Human Spirit 
THE sto rycloth 
AUGUST 2016 
interdisciplinary care allows newly- 
resettled refugees the opportunity 
to receive a full spectrum of assis -
tance. This partnership was made 
possible through funding from the 
Office of Refugee Resettlement 
(ORR), and services are provided 
at no cost to the clients. 
The hundreds of refugees resettled 
by IRC annually in the Atlanta area 
are primarily from Burma, the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo, 
Bhutan and Iraq. Large numbers 
of these refugees are highly trauma -
tized, and, until now, Atlanta has 
lacked the robust safety net for 
mental health that CVT has worked 
to develop in Minnesota for more 
than 30 years. CVT’s healing center 
is the first torture rehabilitation 
facility to open in the state of 
Georgia. 
CVT often sees torture survivors 
who come to the St. Paul Healing 
Center after they have already lived 
in the U.S. for as long as a decade. 
This will be different in Atlanta, 
See page 3 
CVT staff in Atlanta 
celebrating opening 
of first torture 
rehabilitation center 
in Georgia.
PHOTO © HARMONY BLACKWELL 2Letter from the Executive Director 
Imagine what it would be like to be told that in a few short months, 
your world would be turned upside down. You would be turned out of 
the only home you’d ever known and expected, without resources, to keep 
body and soul together not only for yourself, but also for your children 
and family. Now imagine that you’re a torture survivor, in the middle of 
regaining control of your life, when this news comes. Residents of the 
Dadaab refugee camp in Kenya, where CVT has been helping torture 
survivors since 2011, are contending with this problem right now. 
With the Kenyan government declaring that Dadaab residents will be forced to relocate 
this year, a building feeling of suspense in the camp is palpable. Of the 611 survivors we saw in 
Dadaab in 2015, a full 562 of them reported they had endured torture. Therefore, the thought 
of “returning home” elicits feelings of hopelessness for some, because they fear that they have 
no home to return to, since the militia occupied their original homes.  
Our field coordinator, Sarah Farah, says she has heard clients’ burdens have increased 
and their healing process is affected. “Some clients fear that the government might use force 
to assure repatriation, or the process of returning a person to his or her place of origin, and so 
they are panicking,” said Sarah. “Our clients are being asked by other refugees for information 
about repatriation, and many are purchasing radios so they can listen to the latest news reports 
and stay informed,” she added.  
We know from decades of working with torture survivors how resilient the human spirit 
can be. I’ve witnessed what healing can do, and seeing these transformations is a humbling 
experience. In the midst of trying times, we will continue to stand with our clients in Dadaab 
and help them on their healing journey. Our presence is more important now than ever before. 
The situation in Kenya is complex and important. I urge all those involved in these 
decisions to remember the individuals whose lives are affected by the outcome, but also 
affected so deeply during this process. 
Your support has helped make so much healing possible in Dadaab and I know you are 
providing light in a dark time. I am ever inspired by your compassion and grateful for what 
your generosity enables us to accomplish. 
With my thanks, 
Curt Goering 
Executive Director ...................................................... 
Curt Goering 
3CVT Opens Its Doors to Survivors in Atlanta 
where the IRC works with refugees 
as they arrive. Identifying and 
treating emotional distress early in 
the resettlement process has the 
potential to save refugees years of 
suffering.  
“It is exciting to begin seeing 
clients here in Atlanta after several 
months of preparation. More 
importantly, it is remarkable that 
torture treatment services are now 
available to survivors of torture in 
the Atlanta area, where these services 
have been incredibly limited,” said 
Dr. Adaobi Iheduru, psychotherapist/ 
team lead in the Thrive office. 
“Providing holistic care to sur -
vivors of torture will ensure healing 
of the mind and body so that these 
individuals have an increased ability 
to function effectively in their new 
society.” 
“This is wonderful news for the 
survivors we serve,” said Pete 
Dross, CVT’s director of external 
relations. “With these funds, we 
will create new partnerships, 
strengthen existing alliances and 
build our capacity to reach more 
survivors. We value this recognition 
from ORR that CVT is providing 
excellent work, and these grants 
demonstrate their confidence in our 
ideas about new techniques and 
models.” 
“By partnering with IRC, we 
look forward to rebuilding the lives 
and restoring the hope of torture 
survivors living in a previously 
underserved region of the United 
States,” said Dr. Andrea Northwood, 
CVT’s director of client services. 
“Partnering with an experienced 
resettlement agency offers us the 
chance to intervene earlier in the 
adjustment process for new 
Americans, which can save unnecessary suffering that occurs 
when these needs go unmet and 
compound over time. Experience 
has taught us that, with coordinated 
care to address their social, physical, 
psychological and legal needs, tor -
ture survivors recover and eventually 
thrive, giving back to their commu -
nities.” 
“We are excited to bring this new 
and culturally appropriate service 
to the refugee and immigrant popu -
lation in Atlanta, and this partnership 
will provide critical services that 
will make lives better for survivors 
of torture,” said J.D. McCrary, 
executive director, IRC in Atlanta. 
“CVT’s expansion into Georgia 
and our partnership with the IRC 
make it possible for us to reach 
individuals who need rehabilitative 
care in a part of the country which has been underserved,” said Curt 
Goering, CVT’s executive director. 
“This extension of our services 
clearly aligns with our mission to 
heal the wounds of torture on 
individuals, their families and their 
communities. By partnering with 
an organization as well-respected 
and firmly established as the IRC, 
much-needed but previously 
unavailable services will now be 
offered to survivors arriving in 
Atlanta.”   From page 1 
Atomic Data Sponsors 
Restoring Hope Breakfast Experience has taught 
us that torture survivors 
recover and thrive, giving 
back to their communities. 
CVT is honored that Atomic 
Data is the Presenting Sponsor 
of our annual Restoring Hope 
breakfast on October 4, 2016. The 
company identifies, designs, imple -
ments and manages technology for 
businesses of all sizes, around the 
corner in Minneapolis, and around 
the globe. 
After attending last year’s event, 
Atomic Data CEO Jim Wolford 
said, “The mission, the people and 
the victims spoke to my heart as 
well as my pocketbook. Along 
with many other Minnesota-based 
organizations, CVT makes me 
feel proud to be a Minnesotan, 
American and human. So many in the world need our 
help, compassion 
and our financial 
assistance.”   
CVT is grateful 
to our partners at 
Atomic Data for 
their sponsorship 
of this year’s 
Restoring Hope 
breakfast and for 
supporting our 
healing work and advocacy for an 
end to torture worldwide. 
To learn more or RSVP for the 
Restoring Hope breakfast, visit 
cvt.org/breakfast2016 today! 
Jim Wolford, 
Atomic Data CEO 649 Dayton Avenue 
St. Paul, MN  551 04
www .cv t.org 
© 20 16 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.16-NC5 The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE Maximize Impact with Your Company 
Corporate Event Sponsorship 
Interested in corporate event 
sponsorship? CVT offers robust 
sponsorship packages for both our 
annual Restoring Hope fundraising 
breakfast and networking event 
and quarterly Healing Circle recep -
tions. This is a great opportunity 
for your company to engage with 
audiences that include key policy -
makers, influencers and high profile 
figures in the fields of healthcare, 
law, banking, immigration, higher 
education and politics. 
Workplace Giving Program 
Payroll deduction is an easy way 
to support CVT year-round. To 
participate, simply check with your 
personnel office to find out about 
your company’s Workplace Giving Program. If your company does 
not have a program or if CVT is 
not one of the listed charities, 
please let us know and we will 
gladly contact them on your behalf. 
Corporate Matching 
You can double or triple your 
impact with a corporate match! 
Hundreds of companies, both big 
and small, will match charitable 
contributions made by their 
employees or even volunteer hours. 
Your company’s personnel office 
can provide you with appropriate 
forms to help twice as many 
survivors.  
Contact CVT at 1-877-265-8775 
or cvt@cvt.org to learn more about 
any of these giving options! At CVT’s healing center in Nairobi, 
one of the group sessions is 
comprised of teenaged girls, all 
with heartbreaking stories of rape, 
hard labor, abandonment and 
childhood lost at a young age. Many 
are struggling with low self-worth. 
When a CVT counselor once 
remarked how nice they all looked, 
one of the girls quickly responded, 
“That’s only on our faces. Inside 
we’re deeply wounded.” 
One of the girls shared with the 
group how she was captured by rebels and held at a camp with 
15 men. “I was like their wife to 
them,” she said of the hard labor 
and sexual violence she endured 
before managing to escape six 
months later. Over the course of 
ten weeks of group sessions, the 
girls embark on a healing journey 
discussing the atrocities they sur -
vived, applying the therapeutic 
tools that are part of CVT’s group 
counseling model, building self- 
esteem and finding a brighter 
outlook in life. During a clinical check-in, most of the girls reported 
that being in the group has given 
them the confidence to speak in 
front of other people, something 
that previously terrified them. 
In sharing their stories, the girls 
are drawing strength from each 
other, gaining confidence and finding 
hope again. Since beginning their 
healing journey together, they’ve 
formed a bond of friendship that 
will endure even after their group 
sessions end. “Inside we’re deeply wounded. ” 
Friendship and Healing for Congolese and Burundian Girls 
..................................................................................................... 
Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor 
Your generous support brings healing 
to torture survivors worldwide. CVT 
welcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery 
of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your 
legacy of support . 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors 
while offering tax benefits to 
donors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific 
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or 
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a 
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,
MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 for 
other ways to give. Thank you for your 
ongoing commitment to healing the 
wounds of torture.