The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
Agroup of men, women and 
children lives in the bustle ofNairobi, Kenya, yet remains
largely unnoticed. They are refugeeswho have fled civil war, tribal conflicts and persecution at the handsof authorities. While they seek morepeaceful lives, their tortured pastsoften follow them in the form ofnightmares, despair or anxiety.
This spring, the Center for
Victims of Torture is launching itsnewest international project inNairobi to bring hope and healingto these urban refugees.
Up to 100,000 refugee men,
women and children are living inpoorer parts of Nairobi. They’vecome from Somalia, Ethiopia, Eritrea,Sudan, the Democratic Republic ofCongo, Rwanda and other countriesthat have experienced upheaval during the last few decades.
While Kenya is known for hosting
hundreds of thousands of refugeesin camps along its borders, Nairobiand other cities are also home tolarge numbers of refugees. Manychoose to live in Nairobi for its relative safety and anonymity. Othersbelieve there is more economicopportunity in an urban area. But
living in a city brings a unique set of challenges. Refugees aren’t ableto connect with the resources theyneed as easily as refugees who livein camps. In particular, accessinghealth care and education can beespecially challenging. 
Many refugees settle in Eastleigh,
a neighborhood in Eastern Nairobi.“Eastleigh is a thriving yet volatilecommunity of Somalis and Oromo.Business is booming with shops andkiosks selling all types of goods,”said Paul Orieny, CVT’s clinicaladvisor for the project. “But theroads are pitted with large potholesand so crowded with cars and matatus [privately-owned minibuses]that pedestrians scramble for safetythrough the waste and debris in thestreets.”
Without official work permits,
refugees eke out a living of a fewdollars a day by shining shoes,washing cars, cooking or workingas day laborers. It is often notenough to pay rent on a dwellingthat may lack direct access to wateror electricity.
“I left the Congo because of 
See page 3Healing in the Heart of NairobiVOLUME 23, ISSUE 1 •WWW.CVT.ORG
INSIDE
2 Letter from the Executive Director, Curt Goering
4 Donor Profile: Julien Courson and New T actics in the Middle East
4 Y our Annual Renewal Creates Hope and Healing 
Restoring 
the Dignity of the Human SpiritINSIDE   
Awo Jama Abdibile is a 55-year-old widow
who arrived in Nairobi in 2006 after escaping violence in Somalia. Of Awo’s eight children, two daughters and a son aremissing amid the chaos in her homeland.Her three grandchildren are orphans. Awosays she believes in hard work to sustain her family and hopes for a better future that includes a good education for her children and grandchildren.
PHOTO © ANNE RICHARD/INTERNATIONAL RESCUE COMMITTEE
THEstory cloth
FEBRUARY 20132Letter from the Executive Director
For a brief period after the election of Muhammad Morsi last 
summer, there was a sense of optimism as Egypt set off on a new path of democratic rule. But what followed was months of upheaval and turbulence.
Protests, some bloody, erupted after President Morsi granted 
himself broad new powers. As I write this, Egyptians are voting on the flawed constitution pushed forward by Morsi. 
The Arab Spring ignited a sense of hope and expectation in peoples across the region
which resonated around the globe for all people struggling for greater freedom, democracyand dignity.    
But Egypt’s struggles are not unexpected. We know countries emerging from autocratic
rule and systematic torture lack the civil society needed to support democratic transitions.Indeed, many people have never had an opportunity to learn the art of self-government.Torture destroys what every citizen needs to engage in public life: trust in government institutions, including the courts and police, even trust in neighbors. Building (or rebuilding)that trust is a long, slow process.
But it is not impossible. In Egypt, where CVT’s New Tactics in Human Rights program 
is working, there are hundreds of advocates striving for the change so many crave.
Since 2009, New Tactics has supported human rights activists in the Middle East and
North Africa. Through in-person trainings and Web-based discussions, we’ve worked withthem to build collaborations, develop effective strategies, and share ideas, resources and moral support needed to do this difficult work. 
I encourage you to visit www.NewTactics.org to see the new Web site. The new site
makes it easier to find information and allows you to search for inspiration and ideas by keywords, including regions and specific human rights topics. The Arabic version of the sitepromises to be a valuable tool to activists in the Middle East and North Africa. 
Thank you for your ongoing support of 
our work to stop torture and to restore the dignity of all survivors.
Sincerely, 
Curt Goering
Executive Director......................................................
Curt Goering
In January, Egyptian human rights defenders
gathered for a New Tactics in Human Rightstraining on developing effective strategies.
PHOTO © CVT3From page 1Healing in the Heart of Nairobi
the many killings,” said one 
woman recorded in a video by theInternational Rescue Committee.“In addition, when they came tothe homes, for example, my siblingwas raped and all the children,too.” She now washes clothes toearn a living. “But now life is hardsince getting food, medical carewhen we are sick…it becomes sucha problem for my family. Even paying the rent is becoming a difficulty.”
Building on our experience with
other international projects, CVTwill bring mental health care andcounseling to refugees who still suffer from the results of tortureand violence. 
“We’re just starting to train ten
local counselors who will assessrefugees and lead counselinggroups. They all have advanceddegrees or extensive experienceworking with refugees,” explainedPaul. The counselors will workunder the leadership and supervisionof an expatriate psychotherapistand trainer. Outreach workers willconduct community activities,develop relationships with non-governmental organizations and bea presence in the local communities.“We’re making very good connections with several local organizationsthat work with refugees and willcertainly be partners in our work.”
In our work at headquarters
and at our Jordan project, we havelearned that physical therapy canrelieve pain and impairment, whichcan reduce the depression, fatigueand despair that survivors experience.So the Nairobi project will includehiring two local physical therapiststo work with survivors who experience on-going pain. 
While the Somali and Ethiopian
populations have settled in Eastleigh,other refugee groups are scattered.CVT will be based in the Komarockcommunity to be within walkingdistance of Eastleigh and otherneighborhoods with high concen-trations of refugees.
Because CVT already has an
office in Nairobi that supports thework in the Dadaab refugee camps,we hope work in the capital canbegin quickly and that at least 600survivors can receive care this year.
“These men and women have fled
torture and war,” said Neal Porter,CVT’s director of international services. “But now they are livingin a difficult urban environment onthe margins of Kenyan society. Aswe begin to provide both individualand group counseling, these refugeeswill heal from their devastatingexperiences and find ways torebuild their lives with hope.”
CVT’s work in Nairobi is made
possible with support from theState Department Bureau ofPopulation, Refugees and Migration.
Photos are used with the permission
of the International Rescue Committee andChet Gordon/www.ChetGordon.com.Kenyan vendors sell ground nuts in the
Eastleigh neighborhood of Nairobi, Kenya,on Thursday, December 1, 2011. Eastleigh is the main commercial center for Somali ex-pats, and is traditionally known as “Little Mogadishu. ” 
While Somali and Ethiopian refugees 
have settled in Eastleigh, other groups are scattered. CVT will be based in theKomarock community to be within walking distance of Eastleigh and otherneighborhoods with high concentrations of refugees.
Refugees living in Nairobi’s Eastleigh neighborhood endure poverty as well
as harassment by the police. “Thousands of refugees are now living in fearof arrest even if they have identity papers, ” says Kellie Leeson, the IRC’scountry director in Kenya. Despite these challenges, many refugees saythat they would rather live here than in overcrowded camps where thereare few job opportunities.
PHOTO © ANNE RICHARD/INTERNATIONAL RESCUE COMMITTEEPHOTO © CHET GORDON / WWW.CHETGORDON.COMKelsch, New Tactics
program manager. “His engaging andapproachable mannerbuilds our credibility with localorganizations. But more importantly,it makes him more effective instrengthening the human rightsdefenders who are on the groundbuilding more just societies.”
New Tactics’ MENA initiative is
supported by the Human RightsDivision of the Ministry of ForeignAffairs of the Netherlands andOpen Society Foundations MiddleEast and North Africa Initiative. 
................................................................Since 2010, Julien Courson hasconsulted from his home inBeirut, Lebanon, as CVT’s New
Tactics in Human Rights MiddleEast North Africa (MENA) Liaisonand Lead Methodology Trainer.  
As the lead trainer, Julien has
brought the New Tactics tools andmethods to a number of organiza-tions across the Middle East. Mostrecently, he has been developingpartnerships with local humanrights organizations in Egypt andTunisia to co-host trainings, as wellas leading the trainings for thesegroups. Ultimately, these trainings
help local activists become moreeffective by teaching them how todevelop strategies and tactics thatsupport their work. 
Having worked as the executive
director of a Lebanese humanrights organization and in roles ineducation and conflict transforma-tion, Julien’s experience is invaluableas we support human rights activistsin the region. 
“Julien is committed to helping
human rights groups more effectivelycarry out their work,” said Kate
649 Dayton Avenue
St. Paul, MN  55104www.cvt.org
© 2013 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.13-NA5At the beginning of each year, we
encourage all of our supportersto show their commitment to
healing the wounds of torture byrenewing their annual support.Renewal gifts received early in theyear have a vital impact becausethey provide financial support thatsustains our work throughout theentire year. 
Because of your generosity, CVT
cared for nearly 2,000 men, womenand children in 2012—giving themhope and courage to rebuild theirlives. In the year ahead, we expectto serve even more survivors—herein the United States; in Jordan,where we care for Iraqis and arapidly growing number of Syrianrefugees; in Dadaab, Kenya, where500,000 Somalis languish in theharsh desert heat; in Nairobi,Kenya, where survivors are settlingafter fleeing countries in Easternand Central Africa; and in Ethiopia,
where we’ll extend care to Eritrean survivors.
Your renewal coupled with the
support from new donors allows usto provide funding for our work inWashington, D.C., against tortureand in support of human rights. 
When you receive your renewal
request, please respond promptly. If you wish to renew your annualsupport online via our secure server,visit www.cvt.org and click“DONATE NOW.” Our Web sitealso makes it easy for you to becomea member of CVT’s monthly givingprogram, the Circle of Hope. 
Or call us toll-free at 1-877-265-
8775 if you wish to use your creditcard or if you have any questions.Thank you, again, for your generosity, your compassion andyour partnership in restoring thedignity of the human spirit.
Y our Annual Renewal Creates Hope and Healing
PHOTO © CVT
Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Y our generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 forother ways to give. Thank you for yourongoing commitment to healing thewounds of torture.Julien Courson: Supporting the HumanRights Community in the Middle East
The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
..................................