I N S I D E 
2Letter from the Executive Director 
3Helping Refugee Families Resettle with Strong Community Resources 
4Advocacy in Uncertain Times 
4A Gift of Stock or Mutual Funds Can Restore Survivors’ Dignity and Hope The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
VOLUME 27, ISSUE 2 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
Restoring 
the Dignity of 
the Human Spirit 
TH E sto rycloth 
MAY 20 17 
“CVT was there when I fell down. 
CVT helps me to stand up.” 
My name is Kidane *. I was in 
the military service in Eritrea 
and planned to get an educa -
tion after I served. However, the 
military had a problem with me 
and they beat me. They tortured 
me. My head was badly damaged, 
and I was severely beaten on my 
back. I had a lot of pain in my legs 
and was unable to work because of the torture. 
I escaped to Ethiopia. When I 
got to the refugee camp, I was 
living a life of closed doors. I was 
isolated, always by myself. People 
noticed this, and they told me 
about CVT. 
I got hope at my first session 
at CVT. I got to talk about what 
had happened and about my feelings. The experts there were 
very polite, even when I was 
crying. 
CVT gave me a permanent 
medicine. Doctors can give you 
tablets to get rid of some problems. 
But at CVT, it is more. I have 
overcome the challenges. 
Today, I see that tomorrow is 
another day. I watch for others in 
the camp who are living behind 
closed doors or who think that 
CVT is for the “insane.” Now I 
reach out to them. I speak LOUDLY 
and tell them—Get to CVT. 
*Name and some details have been changed for safety and to protect confidentiality. 
CVT’s work with Eritrean 
refugees in Ethiopia is 
funded by a grant from 
the U.S. State Department’s Bureau of 
Population, Refugees, and Migration. 
Left:  CVT Ethiopia office, Adi Harush 
refugee camp 2Letter from the Executive Director 
Dear Friends, 
The global refugee crisis isn ’t slowing down. According to the United 
Nations High Commissioner on Refugees, there are more than 65 million 
forcibly displaced people in the world. At CVT, we know that up to 44% 
of refugees in the U.S. are survivors of torture. Each passing day, more 
and more survivors are coming to our centers in desperate need of help. 
Never before has demand for CVT ’s healing services been so high. 
All of our healing centers have waiting lists, some up to six months. 
Indeed, the refugee crisis is a torture crisis. 
And in the aftermath of the hate speech and anti-refugee and anti-immigrant sentiments that 
were unleashed during the U.S. presidential election, many of our clients are scared. Our staff in 
Minnesota and Atlanta tell me this is an issue in virtually every session with survivors as they 
worry about their own personal safety and the safety of their loved ones. They ask, “Will I be 
sent to an internment camp?” or “Will the police take my family to jail?” Some clients refused to 
leave their homes for days following the election, terrified that they would be grabbed off of the 
street, sent back to their home countries and back to their torturers. 
On top of being afraid for their own safety, clients also fear their relatives may never be able 
to join them in this country because of the attempted refugee bans. Survivors at our international 
healing projects share those fears as their dreams of joining family members in the U.S. are shattered. 
Pablo Traspas, country director, CVT Kenya, reports that some of the survivors of torture at 
our centers there were in the process of being vetted for resettlement in the U.S. when President 
Trump passed the ban. They feel like they have been victimized again.  
“I think the hope of refugees ... turned into anxiety the moment they received the news of 
the Executive Order,” Pablo said. “This is creating a kind of continuous trauma for our clients. 
That means the trauma is not healing.” 
We must continue to rise to meet the growing need for light in these dark global times. With 
your help, in the last year we ’ve been able to increase our impact to help more survivors than ever 
before. In 2016, nearly 4,700 individual survivors and more than 16,000 family members found 
hope with CVT ’s rehabilitative care. 
Thank you for standing with CVT as we rebuild lives and restore hope, while standing up 
for sensible and humane refugee admission policies that are life-changing for people fleeing from 
torture, terrorism, and other atrocious human rights violations. 
Warm regards , 
Curt Goering 
Executive Director ...................................................... 
Curt Goering 
3Helping Refugee Families Resettle 
with Strong Community Resources 
While news reports focus on 
refugees desperately seeking 
safety and stability in 
Europe, other refugees, who have 
been resettled, are working to 
integrate into new communities 
like St. Cloud, Minnesota.  
This past winter, the Center for 
Victims of Torture (CVT) facilitated 
a 10-week parenting class in St. 
Cloud for Somali-American moms 
who recently arrived in the U.S. 
The region, just an hour north -
west of Minneapolis, is now home 
to a large Somali population that 
fled war, torture, and persecution. 
It ’s a whole new world for them, 
an unfamiliar culture that can be 
challenging, especially for parents 
navigating a strange system while 
their children also try to acclimate. 
Somali parents engaged in a 
discussion of parenting topics and 
issues, including unfamiliar societal 
expectations they ’re learning to 
understand and opportunities 
they might not know about, to help their families settle into the 
community and feel comfortable. 
Parents ’ misconceptions about 
not being allowed to discipline 
their children or exercise parental 
authority in the U.S. were actively 
addressed, with a focus on providing 
tools for communicating effectively 
with children who are navigating 
two cultures. 
“Parents ’ rights and empower -
ment was a big topic in a class 
where parents routinely express 
fears of losing their children to 
Child Protective Services,” CVT ’s
director of client services Dr. 
Andrea Northwood said. 
Stress management was also a 
frequent topic, particularly in terms 
of its direct effect on parenting. 
Participants each made a string 
of relaxation beads to take with 
them and carry as a reminder to 
do ten relaxation breaths when 
they ’re feeling overwhelmed. 
Dr. Northwood spoke about the 
health benefits of taking slow, deep breaths. Anxious or fearful 
breathing—never emptying the 
lungs completely and using only 
the top half of the chest to breathe 
—becomes a habit in traumatized 
persons and inhibits their ability 
to relax and restore themselves, 
she explained. 
The class was a big hit with the 
women and has now been requested 
in 4 community locations in central 
Minnesota. One woman remarked, 
“The highlight of the class for 
me was to see how open and 
comfortable we have become with 
one another.” Another participant 
said, “Since this class started, I see 
a great improvement in myself. I 
breathe better and I feel better 
physically too.”  
Refugee communities like those 
in St. Cloud are stronger when 
resettling families have knowledge -
able resources to help them, and 
CVT was honored to play a part. 
Right:  
Relaxation beads 
help refugee 
survivors with 
deep breathing 
exercises. 
Left:  
CVT director of client services Andrea Northwood, 
Ph.D., LP , and Amal Hassan, CVT Somali community 
liaison, welcomed participants to the event. To ensure 
the community members could fully engage in the 
session, an interpreter was present to translate all 
comments, questions and answers. What will happen next in 
Washington? This seems to be 
the question on everybody ’s
mind with the eyes of the world 
focused on our nation ’s capital. 
This fledgling presidency has 
been marked by uncertainty, some 
of which is to be expected with any 
new administration. But in these 
stressful, seemingly erratic times, 
it is encouraging to remember that 
in addition to CVT ’s healing work, 
we have an advocacy presence in 
Washington, D.C. 
CVT ’s indefatigable team of 
lawyers works to effect change in policy concerning torture and related 
issues. The group focuses their 
work on four major issue areas: 
•ending torture in a post-9/11 
world 
•advocating for increased funding 
and access to high-quality trauma 
rehabilitative programs for 
survivors of torture 
•seeking to ensure that the United 
States offers safe haven to refugees 
fleeing persecution (as many as 
44% of refugees arriving in the 
U.S. are torture survivors), and 
•advocating for the integration of mental health and psychosocial 
support principles into humani -
tarian assistance, post-conflict 
development aid and transitional 
justice efforts to ensure survivor- 
and victim-centered approaches 
to healing 
During these uncertain times, 
supporters of CVT can be certain 
that the team in D.C. is doing 
everything in their power to pre -
serve the headway made in the 
human rights field and influence 
the hearts and minds and votes of 
politicians in Washington. 
2356 University Avenue W, Suite 430 
St. Paul, MN 55114 
www.cvt.org 
© 20 17 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.17-NC5 The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE A Gift of Stock or Mutual Funds 
Can Restore Survivors ’ Dignity and Hope 
With securities markets near 
all-time highs, a gift of stock or 
mutual funds can be a great 
way to maximize tax savings 
while helping rebuild the lives 
of torture survivors. 
If you wish to make contri -
butions of stock to CVT, you ’re 
welcome to contact our broker 
directly: UBS Financial Services 
Attn: Pam Schulte 
651 East Lake Street 
Wayzata, MN 55391 
(952) 249-4793 
Account Number: RP 25650 
DTC Number: 221 
To ensure that you receive 
appropriate credit for your 
stock gift, please contact Fawn Bernhardt-Norvell at 
fnorvell@cvt.org or 
612.436.4888 with your stock 
gift information (including 
name and number of shares). 
Or simply remind your broker 
to include your name, contact 
information and any special 
instructions for use of the gift 
with your transfer. 
The Center for Victims of Torture cannot provide legal or financial advice. 
You are encouraged to speak with your attorney or financial planner. Advocacy in Uncertain Times 