 
 
 
870 Market Street, Suite 688  San Francisco, CA 94102  tel 415 544 0444  fax 415 544 0456  info@cja.org  cja.org  
 PRESS RELEASE  
 
CONTACT:  
The Center for Justice & Accountability 
Joshua Sondheimer, Litigation Director -- jsond@cja.org Matt Eisenbrandt, Staff Attorney  -- meisenbrandt@cja.org 
office phone: (415) 544-0444 cell phone: (415) 385-8511 
Lawsuit for Torture, Disappearance, and Summary Execution Filed Against Honduran Intelligence Officer 
Residing in Florida  
San Francisco, July 15, 2002 
A high-ranking Honduran military officer livi ng in Florida since 1998, is responsible for 
the torture and disappearances of Honduran civilians, charges a lawsuit filed today in a 
Miami federal court by two torture victims and relatives of two of the disappeared. 
The victims' lawsuit, filed by the San Francisco-based Center for Justice & Accountability (CJA), claims that former Honduran military intelligence chief Lt. Col. Juan López Grijalba controlled a secretive battalion responsible for widespread human 
rights abuses in the early 1980's. A 1994 re port by Honduras' National Commissioner for 
the Protection of Human Rights found that it is "beyond question" that the unit, known as 
"Battalion 3 16," engaged in a "systematic program of di sappearances and political 
murder" between 1981-84.  
"The United States should not be a safe haven for foreign officials who ordered or 
allowed their subordinates to commit torture and political killings," said CJA attorney 
Joshua Sondheimer. "Officials responsible fo r human rights abuses in their countries 
should know that if they come to the United States, they can be held  accountable in our 
courts," he said. 
The six plaintiffs in the lawsuit, four of whom are now U.S. citizens, include Oscar and 
Gloria Reyes, abducted by soldiers wearing black masks in 1982 and subjected to electric 
shock and beatings in a clandestine torture facility, and Ricardo and Zenaida Velásquez, 
the son and sister of Manfredo Velásquez,  who was abducted by Honduran soldiers in 
1981 and has never been seen since. Velásquez is presumed to have been killed, one of 
the 179 or more civilians "disappeared" in Honduras during the 1980's, according to the National Commissioner's report. Velásquez was a student at the time of his disappearance 
in 1981. 
Velásquez' sister Zenaida, one of the plaintiffs in the lawsuit, came to the United States in 1988, and is now a naturalized U.S. citizen. Sh e is now a social worker in Northern 
California. Velásquez' son Ricar do, also a plaintiff, was eight years old at the time of his  2 of 2 
 
father's disappearance, and remained in Honduras  with his mother and two sisters. He is 
now a university student in Honduras. 
Plaintiff Oscar Reyes earned a master's degr ee in communications from the University of 
Minnesota in 1976, and founded and served as director of the school of journalism at the 
National Autonomous University of Honduras. Re yes and his wife were forced into exile 
in 1982 to secure their release from prison. Re yes and his family have lived in the United 
States since that time, and all are naturalized U.S. citizens. Reyes currently lives with his 
family in northern Virginia, and is the director of a Spanish language newspaper serving 
the Washington, DC area.  
The plaintiffs' lawsuit is based on two federal laws -- the 213-year old Alien Tort Claims 
Act, and the 1991 Torture Victim Protection Ac t -- that allow U.S. courts to assess 
damages against perpetrators of serious human rights violations committed abroad. 
Federal courts can hear these cases when the alleged perpetrator is living or traveling in 
the United States. 
The Center for Justice & Account ability, which represents plain tiffs in the case, works to 
end the impunity of human rights abusers by, among other means, representing survivors in lawsuits based under these laws. CJA is joined  in the suit by Florida attorney Robert G. 
Kerrigan of Kerrigan, Es tess, Rankin & McLeod. 
The Center for Justice & Accountability  was founded in 1998 with support from 
Amnesty International USA and the United Nations Voluntary Fund for the Victims of Torture to help victims of severe human right s abuses seek justice against perpetrators 
living in and traveling to the United States. 
 