 
 
 
870 Market Street, Suite 682  San Francisco, CA 941 02  tel 415 544 0444  fax 415 544 0456  info@cja.or g  cja.org  
 
For Immediate Release               Contact: Lisa C ohen, 310-395-2544 
November 29, 2010        lisa@lisacohen.org 
   Mike Cummings, 212-607-3368 
         mcummings@nyclu.org 
 
 
Center for Justice and Accountability and the New Y ork Civil Liberties Union 
Petition Court for Order to Investigate and Sanctio n Gitmo Psychologist  
 
 
CJA and NYCLU Demand that the N.Y. State Office of Professional Discipline be Required to Investigate 
the Conduct of Dr. John Francis Leso, Who Violated Professional Standards When he Designed and 
Participated in the Abusive Interrogation Program a t Guantánamo  
 
 
New York, NY – The Center for Justice and Accountab ility (CJA) and the New York Civil Liberties 
Union (NYCLU) have filed a petition in New York Sta te Court asking the Court to order the New York 
Office of Professional Discipline (OPD) to perform its duty to investigate a complaint of professional  
misconduct against Dr. John Francis Leso, who, as a sserted in the complaint, violated professional 
standards when he designed and participated in the abusive interrogation program at Guantánamo.   
 
In July 2010, CJA filed the professional misconduct  complaint with OPD calling for an investigation of  
Dr. Leso for his role in abusive interrogation and torture, and for revocation of his psychologist’s l icense 
on that basis. The case was filed on behalf of Dr. Steven Reisner, a New York psychologist, teacher, 
trauma expert and recent recipient of the Beacon Aw ard by the New York State Psychological 
Association for his work against torture.  OPD decl ined to investigate because it claimed it did not h ave 
jurisdiction.   
 
In the petition, filed last week, CJA asks the Cour t to invalidate OPD’s denial and to direct the OPD to 
initiate and complete the investigation of the alle gations of professional misconduct advanced in CJA’ s 
original complaint, which can be found here: http://cja.org/section.php?id=441 .  CJA argues “The duty to 
investigate allegations of professional misconduct is mandatory under the New York Education Law and 
under State rules and regulations.  The Complaint a gainst Dr. Leso alleges and documents multiple 
instances of professional misconduct, thereby impos ing a mandatory obligation upon the OPD to 
investigate.”   
 
According to CJA’s complaint, Dr. Leso, a major in the U.S. Army, led the first team of mental health 
professionals tasked with supporting interrogation operations at the U.S. detention camp at Guantánamo  
Bay, Cuba. The complaint alleges that Dr. Leso viol ated professional standards for New York 
psychologists when he recommended a series of escal ating physically and psychologically abusive 
interrogation tactics to be used on detainees, pers onally supervised interrogations where his tactics were 
used, and actually participated in the application of these tactics.  Many of the techniques and condi tions 
that Dr. Leso is accused of having helped put in pl ace were applied to men and boys held at Guantánamo  
and eventually to detainees held in U.S. custody in  Iraq and Afghanistan. Neither Dr. Leso nor any oth er 
U.S. official involved has ever been held accountab le for the cruel treatment of detainees at Guantána mo. 
 
The lawsuit does not, at this juncture, ask the cou rt to address the questions of whether the allegati ons 
about Dr. Leso’s conduct are true or whether he sho uld be sanctioned if the allegations are proved to be  
 
 
 true. At issue in this case is whether the Office o f Professional Discipline erroneously refused to 
investigate the allegations and consider disciplina ry measures. 
 
Petitioner Dr. Steven Reisner is Senior Faculty and  Supervisor at the International Trauma 
Studies Program in New York City. Dr. Reisner comes  from a family of Holocaust survivors. His 
mother lost her entire family at the hands of docto rs who determined who was to live and who 
was to die upon arrival at the Auschwitz concentrat ion camp.  Dr. Reisner described why he 
decided to file the complaint against Dr. Leso:   
 
“Psychologists and medical professionals must be he ld to the highest ethical standards. The 
involvement of medical professionals in the torture  of detainees at Guantánamo it is just the 
latest example of medical ethics corrupted and subv erted by those who would seek to harm 
instead of to heal.  By refusing to even investigat e the actions of Dr. Leso, the State of New York 
has indicated that it will immunize medical profess ionals who violate the most fundamental 
precepts upon which good medicine is practiced, inc luding the bedrock principle that a doctor 
shall do no harm."  Reisner continued, "I believe t hat granting blanket immunity from 
investigation to medical professionals who design, justify and inflict pain and abuse is contrary 
to our core common values, professional medical pri nciples, and New York law." 
 
The Board of Psychology and the Office of Professio ns are responsible for licensing and regulating the  
conduct of New York psychologists.  Dr. Leso has ne ver faced a criminal or civil trial for his actions , and 
his license remains in good standing.  
 
* * * 
 
About NYCLU 
 
The NYCLU is one of the nation's foremost defenders  of civil liberties and civil rights. Founded in 19 51 
as the New York affiliate of the American Civil Lib erties Union, it is a not-for-profit, nonpartisan 
organization with eight chapters and regional offic es and nearly 50,000 members across the state. Its 
mission is to defend and promote the fundamental pr inciples and values embodied in the Bill of Rights,  
the U.S. Constitution, and the New York Constitutio n.  Among the most fundamental principles are those  
protecting human dignity and the rule of law. 
 
About the Center for Justice and Accountability 
 
CJA is a San Francisco-based human rights organizat ion dedicated to ending torture and other severe 
human rights abuses around the world and advancing the rights of survivors to seek truth, justice and 
redress. CJA uses litigation to hold perpetrators i ndividually accountable for human rights abuses, 
develop human rights law, and advance the rule of l aw in countries transitioning from periods of abuse . 
 