 
 
For Immediate Release          
 
October 25, 2006         
       
Contacts:  
Center for Justice & Accountability:   
Pamela Merchant, Executive Director, (415) 544-0444 x 307, pmerchant@cja.org   
 
Sonnenschein Nath & Rosenthal LLP:  
Ivor Samson, Partner, (415) 882-2491, isamson@sonnenschein.com
Jeff Mutterperl, Media Relations, (212) 398 8470, jmutterperl@sonnenschein.com
 
The Center for Constitutional Rights:  
Jennie Green, Senior Attorney, (917) 697-8233, jgreen@ccr-ny.org   
 
HAITIAN DEATH SQUAD LEADER ORDERED TO PAY $19 MILLION 
TO TORTURE SURVIVORS 
 
JUDGE AWARDS DAMAGES TO THREE WOMEN FOR TORTURE AND CRIMES 
AGAINST HUMANITY  
 
(NEW YORK, October 25, 2006).  Emmanuel “Toto” Constant, the former leader of Haiti’s notorious death squad known as FRAPH, has been ordered to  pay $15 million in punitive and $4 million in 
compensatory damages to three women who surviv ed rape, other torture, and attempted killing 
committed by paramilitary forces under his command.  U.S. District Court Judge Sidney H. Stein, of the Southern District of New York, awarded the survivors a total of $19 million in damages after 
hearing testimony from the women and expert witnesses.  The damages award was entered late yesterday. 
 
The Court previously found Constant liable for torture, including rape, attempted extrajudicial killing, and crimes against humanity carried out as part of  FRAPH’s reign of terror during the period of 
military rule in Haiti from 1991 to 1994.  The ju dgment, entered August 16, 2006, marks the first 
judgment where someone has been held accountable for the state-sponsored campaign of rape in Haiti.  In yesterday’s order, Judge Stein stated, “Though no price tag can be placed on the atrocities visited 
upon these plaintiffs and other innocent civilians by FRAPH, plaintiffs are indeed entitled to monetary 
compensation and the Court will therefore grant it. . . .”   
 
Constant fled to the United States in December 1994.   Despite the outcry from the Haitian community 
and human rights organizations, he lived and worked freely in New York until he  was arrested in July 
2006 in connection with a mortgage fraud scheme in Suffolk County, NY.  He remains in jail awaiting 
a criminal trial on charges of grand larcen y, forgery and falsifying business records. 
 
The U.S. government moved to deport Constant in 1995.  However, after he disclosed on 60 Minutes 
that he had been on the CIA payr oll during the period when FRAPH was formed, he was released from 
detention and has been allowed to remain in the U.S.   
 
The lawsuit was filed in December 2004 by the Ce nter for Justice & Accountability (CJA) and the 
Center for Constitutional Rights (CCR) on behalf of the three women, all survivors of torture at the 
hands of FRAPH.  Sonnenschein Nath & Rosenthal LLP acted as pro bono co-counsel in this matter.  
   “Haitian Death Squad Leader Ordered to Pa y $19 Million to Torture Survivors” 
Page 2 of 2 
Due to an on-going fear of reprisals, the plaintiffs  had to submit their testimony anonymously.  Two of 
the women testified in open court behind a screen. 
  
During the hearing, Trinity University professor Robe rt Maguire testified that FRAPH worked closely 
with the Haitian Armed Forces and did the military’s “dirty work” in committing widespread human 
rights abuses and that FRAPH was “the muscle.”  Ivor Samson of Sonnenschein Nath & Rosenthal 
LLP argued in his closing that in addition to co mpensatory damages, the court should also award 
punitive damages to punish Constant for his wanton, oppressive and malicious actions.  A punitive damages award would send a message from the intern ational community that Constant’s conduct will 
not be tolerated, and that U.S. courts, through la ws such as the Alien Tort Statue and the Torture 
Victim Protection Act, can play an important ro le in discouraging and deterring future abuses. 
 
Judge Stein agreed, finding that “Constant’s c onduct was clearly malicious.  As commander of 
FRAPH, Constant founded and oversaw an organi zation that was dedicated principally towards 
terrorizing and torturing political opponents of the military regime.  His direction – or at a minimum, approval – of FRAPH’s state-backed campaign of violence constitutes an inexcusable violation of international law and merits a stiff punishment.” 
 
Upon hearing the ruling, one of the plaintiffs stated , “Although this case is about justice, not money, I 
am very pleased that the court has held Toto Constant  responsible for what happened to us.  This is a 
victory for all the Haitian people.” 
 
CJA’s lead attorney on the case, Moira Feeney, commented, “Yesterday’s ruling is a momentous step 
for accountability in Haiti.  I hope that this case against Toto Constant will lead to other prosecutions and will assist the Haitian government in bringi ng other human rights abusers to justice.” 
 
"Judge Stein's ruling on the monetary damages to be awarded to our clients is a terrific victory for the rule of law, " says Ivor Samson, Partner and Head of Sonnenschein Nath & Rosenthal LLP's San 
Francisco Litigation Practice.  "While there is no pri ce that can truly be put on our clients suffering, it 
is wonderful that they have had their day in court." 
 
Added Jennie Green, Senior Attorney at CCR, "In hol ding that rape is a form of torture, this 
decision is an important addition to the body of law prohibiting sexual violence.  The courageous women who brought this case have sent a message that torturers cannot live freely in the United States and will be held accountable.  We also wish to thank all of the members of the Haitian community, especially in New York, who fought  so  hard  over the years , often endangering their 
own security, to hold Constant accountable.”  
  
The Center for Justice and Accountability is a San Francisco based human rights organization 
dedicated to ending torture and other severe hu man rights abuses through litigation, education and 
outreach. 
 
For additional information about the case, please see CJA’s website: www.cja.org .   
 
### 