 
 
 
870 Market Street, Suite 680  San Francisco, CA 941 02  tel 415 544 0444  fax 415 544 0456  info@cja.or g  cja.org  
 
For Immediate Release     Contact:  Lisa Cohen, lisa@lisacohen.org , 310-395-2544 (U.S.) 
November 18, 2010                     
 
 
CRIMINAL TRIAL STARTS IN PERU FOR THE ACCOMARCA MAS SACRE 
 
Following the Civil Suits Brought by the Center for  Justice and Accountability in the United 
States, Survivors of the Massacre Will Finally Have  the Opportunity to Obtain Justice in Peru 
After 25 Years 
 
Lima, Peru --  Today, more than 25 years after the horrific Accom arca massacre that 
resulted in the killing of approximately 69 civilia ns, mostly women and children, a 
criminal trial begins in Peru against 26 former Per uvian Army officers, including Telmo 
Hurtado and Juan Rivera Rondón, two of the commande rs of the patrols responsible for 
the crime.  A key factor in getting a trial in Peru  is the fact that in 2007, the Center for 
Justice and Accountability (CJA) filed civil suits in the United States against these two 
defendants, who were living in the United States at  the time.  The suits, which accused 
the defendants of torture, extrajudicial killings, war crimes and crimes against humanity, 
became the legal basis for Rivera Rondón’s deportat ion to Peru on August 15, 2008 and 
Hurtado’s imminent extradition.  
 
In a combined litigation strategy with the Peruvian  Pro Human Rights Organization 
(APRODEH), CJA filed the suits with a goal of expos ing the defendants as human rights 
abusers and sending them back to Peru to face crimi nal prosecution. In CJA’s lawsuit 
against Hurtado, a U.S. judge ruled that he was res ponsible for the massacre and ordered 
him to pay $37 million in damages to the plaintiffs  and the estates of their family 
members.  The second case against River Rondón has been stayed to provide survivors 
with the opportunity to purse justice in their home  country. 
 
“Thanks to the hope and persistence of the survivor s of this terrible massacre, the day has 
finally come to obtain justice,” said Almudena Bern abeu, CJA’s international attorney 
who spearheaded the U.S. cases.  “The survivors hav e waited 25 long years for this day.  
All they seek is justice for the crimes that were c ommitted against their fellow citizens 
and family members and they are finally getting the ir day in Peru’s court.” 
 
Hurtado and Rivera Rondón are among 24 other defend ants being tried for their role in 
the 1985 massacre that took place in the midst of a  bloody civil war in Peru.  Despite 
efforts of the survivors, justice in Peru has never  been achieved and no one has been held 
responsible for the killings.  This is the first pr osecution in Peru for the abuses committed 
by the Armed Forces against civilians during the 19 80’s after president Alan Garcia took 
power in July 1985. 
 
CJA along with Peruvian Non-Governmental Organizati on partners, the Institute of Legal 
Defense (IDL) and APRODEH, have put together an int ernational legal team to provide  2 of 2 
 
survivors with legal representation and internation al support.   CJA’s clients, Teófila 
Ochoa and Cirila Pulido, were 12 years old at the t ime and survived the killings by hiding 
from the soldiers. Despite her own escape, Teófila Ochoa’s mother, four brothers and a 
sister were killed. Soldiers murdered Cirila Pulido ’s mother and brother.  The plaintiffs 
are both members of the Association of Relatives of  the Victims of Political Violence in 
Accomarca (AFAVPDA) which was formed by the survivo rs of the massacre.   
 
In 2002, Hurtado and Rivera Rondón fled Peru to the  United States after Peru’s Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission report was released that exposed their role in the massacre. 
According to the report, 26,259 civilians died or d isappeared in the area surrounding 
Accomarca during Peru’s civil war.  
 
The claims in the U.S. cases against Hurtado and Ri vera Rondón were brought under two 
U.S. federal statutes, the Alien Tort Statute and t he Torture Victim Protection Act, which 
permit victims of severe human rights abuses to see k redress in U.S. courts.  CJA 
supports transitional justice efforts in Peru and i n other countries through partnerships 
with local Non-Governmental Organizations and throu gh working with in-country 
prosecutors. 
 
For more information on the lawsuits against Hurtad o and Rivera Rondón, see 
www.cja.org. 
 
About the Center for Justice and Accountability 
 
CJA is a San Francisco-based human rights organizat ion dedicated to ending torture and 
other severe human rights abuses around the world a nd advancing the rights of survivors 
to seek truth, justice and redress. CJA uses litiga tion to hold perpetrators individually 
accountable for human rights abuses, develop human rights law, and advance the rule of 
law in countries transitioning from periods of abus e. 
 
 
 