In his 2009 article, “‘Motherhood and Apple
Pie:’ Judicial Termination and the Roberts’Court,” Native American Rights Fund senior staffattorney Richard Guest posed the questionwhether “Indian country may be facing anotherera of judicial termination—courts poised to‘whittle’ away tribal sovereignty one case at a timein the name of ‘motherhood and apple pie.’”Unfortunately, Indian country did not have towait for the ink to dry on that article before getting an answer.  Based on its 2009 opinion in Carcieri v. Salazar , and its recent opinion 
in Match-E-Be-Nash-She-Wish Band of
Pottawatomi Indians (Gun Lake Tribe) v. Salazar ,
it appears that the Roberts Court may not be sat-isfied to simply “whittle” away, but may haveinstead set its course towards “carving” outchunks of tribal sovereignty one case at a time. 
The Carcieri v. Salazar Decision
In February 2009, the Supreme Court issued its
devastating opinion in Carcieri v. Salazar — a
case that involved a challenge by the State ofRhode Island to the authority of the Secretary ofthe Interior (“Secretary”) to take land into trustfor the Narragansett Tribe under the provisions ofthe Indian Reorganization Act (“IRA”).  For over75 years, the Department of the Interior(“Department”) had exercised its authority underthe IRA to take land in trust for all federally rec-ognized Indian tribes and had consistently inter-preted the phrase “now under Federal jurisdic-tion” in the IRA’s definition of “Indian” to meanthe present, or the time of the exercise of theSecretary’s authority to approve the trust landacquisition.  
But contrary to every federal judge who had
reviewed the matter in the courts below, and whohad deferred to the Department’s interpretation ofthe IRA, eight of nine Justices on the SupremeCourt found that the term “now” in the phrase“now under Federal jurisdiction” is unambiguous
and limits the authority of the Secretary to takeland in trust only for Indian tribes that were“under Federal jurisdiction” on June 4, 1934, thedate the IRA was enacted.  Yet the Court failed toprovide any definition of the phrase, “underFederal jurisdiction.”  Rather, writing for themajority, Justice Thomas, joined by Chief JusticeRoberts and Justices Scalia, Kennedy, Breyer andAlito, reversed the decision of the U.S. Court ofAppeals for the First Circuit and simply found that“the record in this case establishes that the
VOLUME 37, NO. 2 SUMMER/FALL 2012Judicial Termination:  The Carcieri CrisisNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Judicial Termination:  
The Carcieri Crisis .......................... page 1
CASE UPDATES................................ page 6
- Tribal Supreme Court Project
National Indian Law Library............ page 9CALLING TRIBES TO ACTION! .... page 10NARF .............................................. page 11Narragansett Tribe was not under federal jurisdic-
tion when the IRA was enacted.”
In concurrence, Justice Breyer wrote separate-
ly to make the point that Indian tribes recognizedafter 1934 may still have been "under federaljurisdiction" in 1934, particularly where theDepartment made a mistake about their status orwhere there was a federal treaty in place.  JusticeSouter, joined by Justice Ginsberg, concurredwith Justice Breyer on this point, and concurredin part with the majority (i.e. the term “now” isunambiguous), but dissented to the Court’sstraight reversal, finding instead that the caseshould be remanded to the lower courts to pro-vide an opportunity for the United States and theNarragansett Tribe to pursue a claim that theTribe was under federal jurisdiction in 1934.Justice Stevens dissented from the majority’sopinion stating that he could not find any “tem-poral limitation on the definition of ‘Indiantribe’” within the IRA. 
The Court’s ruling in Carcieri is an affront to
the most basic policies underlying the IRA.  Thefundamental purpose of the IRA was to restoretribal homelands and to help Indian tribes—tornapart by prior federal policies of allotment andassimilation—to re-organize their governments.Therefore, in addition to the authority to acquirelands in trust for all tribes, the IRA also providesauthority for the Secretary to approve tribal con-stitutions in order to assist tribes in their effortstowards self-determination and to establish tribalbusiness corporations in order to help tribesbecome economically self-sufficient.  In the short-term, the Carcieri decision has been destabilizing
for a significant number of Indian tribes whosestatus in 1934 is uncertain. Carcieri invites expen-
sive and previously unnecessary litigation overthe IRA’s most basic terms, allowing litigants toraise even more questions regarding the status ofthose tribes. 
And as discussed below, in the long-run, the
impacts of Carcieri will ripple across Indian
country wreaking havoc for all Indian tribes.Indian country needs Congress to step up and tellthe Court that it got it wrong in Carcieri .  If
Congress remains silent, or continues to delayresolution, the Court will fill the void with itscurrent prevailing view that there is nothingexceptional about Indian law and that there isnothing special to protect in the relationship
between the United States and its Indian people.  
The Match-E-Be-Nash-She-Wish Band of
Pottawatomi Indians (Gun Lake Tribe) v.Patchak Decision
The first direct evidence of the ripple-effect of
Carcieri , and the Roberts Court’s further unrav-
eling of Indian law, was supplied recently in theJune 2012 decision in Match-E-Be-Nash-She-
Wish Band of Pottawatomi Indians (Gun LakeTribe) v. Patchak .  The Patchak litigation result-
ed in two distinct holdings, both of which willhave long term negative impacts for all Indiantribes. First, the Court in Patchak trampled over
the sovereign immunity of the United States andeviscerated the once-broad protections for Indianlands under the Quiet Title Act.  Second, throughits finding of prudential standing, the Courtwidened the court room doors to most any chal-lenge by any person who may feel “harmed” by adecision of the Secretary made under the author-ity of the IRA that benefits an Indian tribe.  
The long saga for the Gun Lake Tribe goes back
to time of the IRA’s passage, when the Bureau ofIndian Affairs decided to withhold federal recog-nition from the Lower Peninsula of MichiganTribes.  The Tribe submitted its petition for feder-al recognition in the 1980’s, and the UnitedStates finally acknowledged the Gun Lake Tribein 1998.  In 2001, the Tribe submitted an applica-tion requesting that the Secretary acquire 147acres of land located in Wayland Township,Michigan (the “Bradley Property”) in trust for thepurposes of gaming.  In 2005, after an extensiveadministrative review process, the Secretaryannounced her decision to take the BradleyProperty in trust for the Tribe.  
A group known as the Michigan Gambling
Opposition (MichGO) immediately sued theSecretary.  MichGO challenged the decision onthe grounds that her decision violated the IndianGaming Regulatory Act and the NationalEnvironmental Protection Act, and that Section 5of the IRA was an unconstitutional delegation oflegislative authority.  But MichGO did not raise aCarcieri challenge until after the federal district
court rejected all of its claims.  In 2008, after oralargument on appeal to the D.C. Circuit, MichGOsought to add the Carcieri claim.  But the motion
PAGE 2                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 3NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDto supplement the issues on appeal was denied
and the D.C. Circuit affirmed the judgment of thedistrict court. The Supreme Court denied review,and after the issuance of the mandate by the D.C.Circuit the Secretary acquired the land in trustfor the Tribe on January 30, 2009. 
However, one week after the D.C. Circuit denied
MichGO’s petition for en banc review—and overthree years after MichGO had filed its com-plaint—Mr. Patchak, a non-Indian landownerwho lived in “close proximity” to the BradleyProperty, filed a Carcieri claim in federal district
court under the Administrative Procedures Act(APA).  This district court dismissed his claimbased on the provisions of the Quiet Title Act(QTA) and questioned whether he had prudentialstanding to sue.  But in this case, the DC Circuitreversed the district court’s judgment, setting thestage for review by the Supreme Court with theUnited States and the Tribe seeking certiorari.
Up to this point in time, four other Circuits
–the Seventh, Ninth, Tenth, and EleventhCircuits—had held—contrary to the D.C.Circuit—that the QTA’s reservation of the UnitedStates’ sovereign immunity in suits involving“trust or restricted Indian lands” applies to all
suits concerning land in which the United States“claims an interest.”  But the Supreme Courtrejected the majority view of the Circuits.  In an8-1 majority opinion written by Justice Kagan,the Court held that the QTA as a whole onlyapplies to actions seeking to quiet title in a partywith a competing ownership interest in the landand therefore “addresses a kind of grievance different from the one Patchak advances.”
Although the Court conceded that Patchak wascontesting the United States’ title to the land, sincehe was not claiming any competing ownershipinterest in the land the Court found that the QTAand the Indian lands exception in the QTA were notapplicable to the litigation.
The Court also rejected the arguments of the
United States and the Tribe that Mr. Patchak couldnot bring a Carcieri challenge because he lacked
prudential standing under the IRA (i.e. is withinthe statute’s “zone of interests”).  The Court foundthat, although Section 5 of the IRA only specifi-cally addresses land acquisition, decisions madeby the Secretary under Section 5 “are closelyenough and often enough entwined with consid-erations of land use” to allow neighboring
landowners to bring “economic, environmental oraesthetic” challenges to the those decisions.
In her sole dissent, Justice Sotomayor provided
a concise synopsis of how detrimental the Court’sdecision is going to be for Indian tribes: 
After today, any person may sue under the
APA to divest the Federal Government of titleto and possession of land held in trust forIndian tribes—relief expressly forbidden bythe QTA—so long as the complaint does notassert a personal interest in the land.
Justice Sotomayor pointed out that the Court’s
decision works against one of the primary goalsof the IRA—new economic development andfinancial investment in Indian country. Now,trust land acquisitions for the benefit of Indiantribes will be subject to judicial challenge underthe APA’s six-year statute of limitations—not the30-day period provided for under the federal reg-ulations—substantially constraining the abilityof all Indian tribes to acquire and develop lands.Accordingly, lands taken into trust for Indiantribes pursuant to the IRA prior to the Patchak
decision could still be challenged if they fall with-in this six-year window. 
Most importantly, had Congress’ response to
Carcieri been swifter, Mr. Patchak would have had
no claim, and the Roberts’ Court no platform.
A Judicially-Created Crisis Which Can Only be
Abated by Congress
Only Congress can clarify its intent for the
Court.  In the weeks and months after the Court’sdecision in Carcieri , Indian country worked hard
to get legislation introduced in the 111thCongress to simply amend the IRA to return tothe status quo—a “clean” Carcieri -fix to reaffirm
the authority of the Secretary of the Interior totake land in to trust for all federally-recognizedIndian tribes.  Although the House passed its version of the Carcieri -fix, and the Senate
Committee for Indian Affairs reported out its leg-islation, neither bill enacted in to law by the endof the session in December 2010.  
At the start of the 112th Congress, Indian coun-
try moved quickly to resolve the problems beingcreated by Carcieri .  On March 20, 2011, SenatorAkaka, as the new Chairman of the Senate
Committee on Indian Affairs, introduced S. 676,cosponsored by Senators Conrad (D–ND),Franken (D–MN), Inouye (D–HI), Johnson(D–SD), Kerry (D–MA.), Tester (D–MT) and Udall(D–NM). Senators Baucus (D-MT) and Stabenow(D-MN) were later added as co-sponsors.  Inannouncing that the “clean” Carcieri -fix would
be one of his two top priorities for the 112thCongress, Chairman Akaka and the SenateCommittee on Indian Affairs favorably reportedout S. 676 less than three weeks later on April 7,2011.   S. 676 has the express support ofPresident Obama as well as Secretary Salazar.
But the Carcieri -fix legislation has stalled in
the 112th Congress over a few members’ con-cerns regarding the expansion of Indian gamingand the exemption of Indian trust lands fromlocal property taxes.  However, true to his word,Chairman Akaka held three hearings to keep theneed for a Carcieri -fix at the forefront of the
Congressional leadership’s priorities.  Equallyimportant, Chairman Akaka submitted his force-ful and complete Senate Report 112-166(“Report”) to accompany S. 676.  The Report pro-vides a detailed background on the history ofIndian land losses, the destructive effects of fed-eral allotment policies, and the remedial intent ofCongress in enacting the IRA.  Further, theReport thoroughly examines the government-to-government relationship between the UnitedStates and Indian tribes and the Congressionalpolicies and laws furthering that relationship.  Inparticular, the Report focused on the 1994amendments to the IRA—amendments over-looked by the Court in Carcieri —wherein
Congress, we thought, had made it abundantlyclear that all federally recognized Indian tribesare entitled to the same privileges and benefitsunder federal law:
The 1994 Amendments put an end to the dis-
criminatory practices that had been developingwithin [the Department of the Interior (DOI)].DOI had begun to classify tribes as either ‘‘his-toric’’ and entitled to the full panoply of inher-ent sovereign powers not otherwise divested bytreaty or congressional action or ‘‘created’’ andtherefore possessing limited sovereign powers.By enacting the 1994 amendments and broad-ening the definition of ‘‘tribe’’ in other federal
statutes, Congress explicitly rejected DOI’s clas-sifications. The amendments ensured that DOIupheld the original intent of the IRA to promotetribal sovereignty by allowing all federally rec-ognized tribes to organize and self-govern.  
* * *
Congress enacted the 1994 legislation to
ensure that DOI upheld the original intent ofthe IRA to allow tribes to organize and self-govern, and to ensure that tribal sovereigntywas not eroded by creating differing levels ofsovereignty. Signed into law by PresidentClinton on May 31, 1994, the amendmentsoverruled prior practices of classifying tribesbased on date of their date of recognition ormanner of recognition. These amendments aredirect declarations from Congress that the federal agencies do not have the authority todiscriminate between tribes based on the history of how a federally recognized tribereached that status. Congress has made it clearthat ‘‘if a tribe is federally recognized, they pos-sess the full panoply of powers of sovereignIndian tribes unless specifically divested bytreaty or Congressional action.’’
In the first oversight hearing held on June 23,
2011, the Committee heard testimony on “TheIndian Reorganization Act-75 Years Later:Renewing our Commitment to Restore TribalHomelands and Promote Self-Determination.”John Echohawk, Executive Director of the NativeAmerican Rights Fund, was invited to testify, andhe cautioned the Committee: 
By calling into question which federally recog-
nized tribes are or are not eligible for the IRA’sprovisions, the Court’s ruling in Carcieri threatens
the validity of tribal business organizations, sub-sequent contracts and loans, tribal reservationsand lands, and could affect jurisdiction, publicsafety and provision of services on reservationsacross the country. 
Mr. Echohawk provided the Committee with
summaries of the 15 Carcieri -related challenges
already pending before the courts and theDepartment, giving particular heed to the poten-tial damage awaiting Indian country in thePatchak litigation.
PAGE 4                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 5NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDThen, on October 13, 2011, the Committee held
its second oversight hearing on “The CarcieriCrisis: The Ripple Effect on Jobs, EconomicDevelopment and Public Safety in IndianCountry.”  As the senior staff attorney with theNative American Rights Fund who oversees thework of the Tribal Supreme Court Project,Richard Guest was invited to testify and testified: 
In my oral testimony here today, I want to
simply make one point – the Supreme Court’sdecision in Carcieri requires a prompt and
clear response from Congress to stop theharm being done to Indian tribes who arepursuing their right to self-preservation—their right to become self-governing andtheir right to be economically self-sufficient.   
To be clear–a clean Carcieri -fix does not
advance any issue or cause for Indian country.A clean Carcieri -fix—such as S. 676—simply
restores Indian tribes to the status quo—tothe status quo of 75-years of practice by theSecretary of the Interior to acquire lands intrust for all federally-recognized Indiantribes—regardless of the date of their federalrecognition.
Mr. Chairman, you have heard here today,
and will continue to hear about the rippleeffect of the Carcieri decision on jobs, eco-
nomic development and public safety inIndian country.  Without a clean Carcieri -fix
by Congress, litigation—much of it frivolouslitigation—over the meaning of the phrase“now under Federal jurisdiction” will contin-ue to flourish.  
In early 2004, NARF flagged Carcieri as a
potential threat to tribal sovereignty.  Earlyon, we understood the potential “rippleeffects” of an adverse decision in Carcieri . The
acquisition of trust lands has been thelifeblood for many Indian tribes who havemade tremendous progress after decades ofassimilation and termination policies threat-ened their very existence. 
And with still no action by the Congress 11
months later, the Committee held its final over-sight hearing on September 13, 2012, entitled“Addressing the Costly Administrative Burdensand Negative Impacts of the Carcieri and PatchakDecisions.” Once again, John Echohawk was
invited and testified:
Last year, NARF came before this Committee on
two separate occasions to discuss the Carcieri cri-
sis—a judicially-created crisis precipitated by theCourt’s 2009 decision in Carcieri v. Salazar .  
Today, we are here because of the Court’s more
recent decision in Match-E-Be-Nash-She-Wish
Band of Pottawatomi Indians (Gun Lake Tribe) v. Patchak . But make no mistake: the Patchak
decision is direct evidence of the judicially-created Carcieri crisis.  In other words, Patchak
is but a symptom of the larger Carcieri problem—
a problem which can only be solved by Congress.
* * *
Through our prior testimony, we warned
this Committee, and this Congress, thatPatchak and a significant number of other
cases were moving through the federal courtsand the administrative process whereCarcieri is being used to harass Indian tribes
and delay trust land acquisitions.  
In several cases, the claims are being
expanded beyond the question of whether anIndian tribe was “under Federal jurisdiction”in 1934.  For example, there are now chal-lenges as to whether a tribe also had to be“federally recognized” in 1934; whether thetribe even existed as an Indian tribe in 1934;or whether the tribe today is even “Indian”and should have ever been federally recog-nized.
Thus the Report, together with the testimony
from the three hearings, captures the real costsof Carcieri .  As the Report concludes:
Although the Carcieri decision involved only
one tribe, the devastating effects resulting fromthe decision impact all tribes. Failing to enact S.676 will deprive tribal governments of importantrights and benefits that the IRA intended to pro-vide; including the ability to restore and protecttheir homelands through the acquisition of tribal trust lands and the potential to develop andsustain tribal economic development throughthe creation of businesses that provide jobs andother economic opportunities for tribal membersand residents of the surrounding communities. 
Passage of S. 676 will cost taxpayers nothing.CASE UPDATES
The Tribal Supreme Court Project is part of the
Tribal Sovereignty Protection Initiative and isstaffed by the National Congress of AmericanIndians (NCAI) and the Native American RightsFund (NARF). The Project was formed in 2001 inresponse to a series of U.S. Supreme Court casesthat negatively affected tribal sovereignty. Thepurpose of the Project is to promote greater coor-dination and to improve strategy on litigationthat may affect the rights of all Indian tribes. Weencourage Indian tribes and their attorneys tocontact the Project in our effort to coordinateresources, develop strategy and prepare briefs,especially at the time of the petition for a writ ofcertiorari, prior to the Supreme Court acceptinga case for review. You can find copies of briefs andopinions on the major cases we track on theNARF website (www.narf.org/sct/index.html). 
The October 2012 Term of the Supreme Court
began recently and will require close attentionfrom tribal leaders and tribal attorneys. The fateof the Cobell Settlement rests with the SupremeCourt this term, as several Indian account holders
have challenged the fairness of the settlement. A significant number of parties opposed to Indiantribes have also petitioned the Supreme Court forreview, and we anticipate that others will petitionin the near future. Cases challenging tribal sov-ereign immunity are prominent, and we haveattached an addendum of Carcieri-related litiga-tion which is a continuing significant concern. Asusual, the Project encourages tribes to look forways to minimize or avoid federal litigation as thecurrent makeup of the Supreme Court is not gen-erally supportive of tribal government issues. 
Tribal Supreme Court ProjectThe costs to taxpayers if S. 676 is not passed will,however, continue to grow. Congressional inac-tion has also generated significant costs of timeand money for the federal government andtribes—merely to defend the challenges broughtas a result of Carcieri . Expending time and
resources examining issues that have alreadybeen settled is a misallocation of federal and tribal resources that could be used to promoteand develop tribal self-determination and self-government.
Conclusion
At the time of this writing, Congress is out of
session and the national elections are just a couple of weeks away.  There is great hope for aclean Carieri-fix during the lame-duck session,but Indian country has had more than its fairshare of disappointment.  As reported in themedia recently, Chairman Akaka released a press-release stating:  I am determined to pass a Carcieri -fix this
Congress.  I have been working hard for the pastnineteen months to make sure that my Senatecolleagues understand that a Carcieri -fix is 
the number one priority of tribes, theAdministration, and the Committee on IndianAffairs.  I am happy to report that Majority LeaderReid has committed to working with me toensure that the Carcieri -fix is enacted in this
Congress—and signed into law by PresidentObama.  
Unfortunately, even successful passage of a
Carcieri fix would not address all the new prob-
lems caused by the Roberts’ Court in Patchak .
Congress must eventually act to secure theSecretary’s ability to carry out his federal respon-sibilities under the IRA without having to defendhis administrative judgment to neighboringlandowners up to six years after a decision wasmade. 
❂
PAGE 6                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 7NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDAs always, the individualized facts and legal
issues of each case will drive litigation strategyand the Court’s decisions. 
Petitions For A Writ Of Certiorari Granted
At present, one Indian law case has been grant-
ed review by the Court during the October Term2012, and an important voting rights case with atribal party will also be heard: 
United States v. Samish Indian Nation (No. 11-
1448) – On October 9, 2012, the Court issued an
order granting the petition of the United States,vacating the judgment with respect to all mattersrelating to the Samish Tribe’s Revenue SharingAct claim, and remanding the case to the U.S.Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit withinstructions to dismiss that claim as moot. Thiscase arose from a series of suits brought by theSamish Tribe to obtain treaty rights and statuto-ry benefits from the United States as a result of itsefforts to be a “federally recognized” Indian tribewhich began in 1972. The U.S. had sought reviewby the Court of a decision by the Federal Circuitwhich held that the Samish Tribe may pursue itsclaims for money damages under the State andLocal Fiscal Assistance Act of 1972 (RevenueSharing Act). The Federal Circuit had held thatthe Revenue Sharing Act is a “money mandatingstatute” and is not limited by operation of theAnti-Deficiency Act, 31 U.S.C.§ 1341. 
Arizona v. Arizona Inter Tribal Council Et. Al.
(No. 12-71) – On October 15, 2012, the Supreme
Court agreed to decide whether Arizona law mayrequire proof of citizenship in order to register tovote in federal elections. Although this is not afederal Indian law case and many other partiesare involved, the Arizona Inter Tribal Council is anamed lead party and it is likely that the votingrights of American Indians will feature promi-nently in the briefing. The Supreme Court willhear arguments in the case early next year, andthe law will remain suspended in the meantime. 
The state law requires prospective voters to
prove citizenship by providing documents suchas birth certificates, passports or Arizona drivers’licenses. The federal law, the National VoterRegistration Act of 1993, allows voters to registerusing a federal form where each voter certifiesU.S. citizenship. The question for the SupremeCourt is whether the state is entitled to supple-ment federal voter registration requirements
with its own requirements. The Tribal SupremeCourt Project and NCAI are considering thedevelopment of an amicus brief. 
Petitions For A Writ Of Certiorari Pending
Several petitions for a writ of certiorari have
been filed in Indian law and Indian law-relatedcases and are pending before the Court. 
Adoptive Couple v. Baby Girl, Birth Father And
Cherokee Nation (No. 12-399) – On October 1,
2012, a non-Indian couple filed a petition seekingreview of a decision by the South CarolinaSupreme Court which affirmed the state familycourt denying the adoption and requiring theadoptive parents to transfer the child to the bio-logical father who is a member of the CherokeeNation. The South Carolina Supreme Court held:(1) the Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) extendsgreater rights to unwed fathers than state law inthe determination of whether an unwed father isa “parent”; and (2) state courts must consider theheightened federal requirements to terminateparental rights as to ICWA parents. The briefs inopposition are due on October 31, 2012. TheProject has coordinated with the father’s attor-neys and the Cherokee Nation attorneys on thedevelopment of the certiorari opposition brief. 
Furry v. Miccosukee Tribe (No. 12-376) – On
September 21, 2012, Mr. Furry, as personal rep-resentative of the estate for his daughter, filed apetition seeking review of a decision by the U.S.Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit whichheld that his wrongful death suit against theMiccosukee Tribe was barred by the doctrine oftribal sovereign immunity. Mr. Furry’s complaintalleged that the Miccosukee Tribe violated 18U.S.C. § 1161 and Florida’s dram shop law byknowingly serving excessive amounts of alcoholto his daughter, who drove while intoxicated, andended up in a fatal head-on collision with anothervehicle. The Tribe’s brief in opposition is due onOctober 26, 2012. 
Contour Spa At Hard Rock v. Seminole Tribe Of
Florida (No. 12-372) – On September 21, 2012,
Contour Spa filed a petition seeking review of adecision by the U.S. Court of Appeals for theEleventh Circuit which held that its breach-of-lease suit against the Seminole Tribe is barred bythe doctrine of tribal sovereign immunity. PAGE 8                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDThe Eleventh Circuit rejected the arguments of
Contour Spa that the Tribe’s immunity was: (1)voluntarily waived by the Tribe in its removal ofthe case from state to federal court; (2) impliedlywaived under the Indian Civil Rights Act; and (3)foreclosed under the principles of equitableestoppel. The Tribe’s brief in opposition is due onOctober 25, 2012. 
Goodbear v. Cobell (No. 12-355) – On
September 19, 2012, Carol Eve Good Bear,Charles Colombe and Mary Aurella Johns, mem-bers of the Cobell plaintiffs’ class, filed a petitionseeking review of the decision of the U.S. Court ofAppeals for the D.C. Circuit which affirmed thedistrict court’s judgment approving the Cobellclass action settlement agreement. The petition-ers are challenging the lower court’s finding of“commonality” in certifying the class certifica-tion and its ruling that no opt out procedure wasrequired for the mandatory HistoricalAccounting Class within the settlement. The U.S.filed its response brief on October 12, 2012, andthe Cobell brief in opposition is due on October22, 2012. 
Young v. Fitzpatrick (No. 11-1485) – On June 4,
2012, Mr. Young, as representative of the estate ofhis brother, filed a petition seeking review of anunpublished decision by the Washington StateCourt of Appeals which held that, based on thedoctrine of tribal sovereign immunity, statecourts do not have subject matter jurisdictionover claims against tribal police officers acting intheir official capacity on tribal lands. The tribalpolice officers filed their brief in opposition onJuly 9, 2012, and the petition was scheduled forconference on September 24, 2012. On October1, 2012, the court issued a CVSG, inviting theSolicitor General to file a brief expressing theviews of the United States. 
Marceau v. Blackfeet Housing Authority (No.
12-278) – On August 26, 2012, tribal members
who had bought or leased defective homes builtunder the auspices of the U.S. Department ofHousing and Urban Development (“HUD”) by theBlackfeet Housing Authority filed a second peti-tion seeking review of a decision by the U.S.Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit whichaffirmed the district court decision dismissingtheir Administrative Procedure Act claims relat-ing to the construction of homes using woodenfoundations based on the six year statute of limi-
tations. The Ninth Circuit also found that HUD isonly legally required to respond to requests forrepairs from the Tribe's housing authority, notfrom individual homeowners. The Ninth Circuitdid not revisit its previous decision that a trustrelationship was not created by HUD's involve-ment in the construction of the homes. The U.Sand Tribe’s briefs in opposition are due onNovember 5, 2012. 
New 49’ers, Inc. v. Karuk Tribe Of California
(No. 12-289) – On August 29, 2012, the New
49’ers, a recreational mining company whichowns and leases numerous mining claims in andaround the Klamath and Six Rivers NationalForests, filed a petition seeking review of an enbanc decision of the U.S. Court of Appeals for theNinth Circuit which held that U.S. Forest Serviceviolated the Endangered Species Act (“ESA”) bynot consulting with the appropriate wildlifeagencies before allowing suction dredge miningactivities to proceed under a Notice of Intent(“NOI”) in Coho salmon critical habitat withinthe Klamath National Forest. On September 12,2012, the Tribe filed a waiver of its right torespond, and the petition was scheduled for con-ference on October 5, 2012. However, on October4, 2012, the Court extended the time to file aresponse to November 8, 2012, as amicus briefsin support of the petition were filed by theNorthwest Mining Association and the EasternOregon Mining Association. 
Oravec v. Cole (No 12-222) – On August 20,
2012, Mr. Oravec, an agent with the FederalBureau of Investigation, filed a petition seekingreview of a decision by the U.S. Circuit Court ofAppeals for the Ninth Circuit which held that hewas not entitled to qualified immunity in aBivens action brought by the relatives of two
deceased Native American men. In their amendedcomplaint, the relatives alleged that Mr. Oravecviolated their right to equal protection when hefailed to conduct a sufficiently thorough investi-gation of the deaths out of an alleged animustoward Native Americans. The relatives allegedthat Mr. Oravec provided the family with lessinvestigatory services than he would have provedto a non-Native family. No brief in opposition hasbeen filed, and the petition has been scheduledfor conference on October 26, 2012. 
❂NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNational Indian Law Library
The National Indian Law Library needs
your financial support
You probably are familiar with the
great work NARF does in court roomsand the halls of Congress relating totribal recognition, treaty enforcement,trust fund settlements, NAGPRA, andmore.  Did you know that NARF also isthe go-to resource for legal research inIndian law?
Advance Justice through Knowledge!
Support the National Indian LawLibrary!
Historically, Indian people and advo-
cates fighting for indigenous rightshave found themselves limited by theirability to access relevant federal, state, and tribalIndian law resources. In direct response to thischallenge, the National Indian Law Library(NILL) was established over forty years ago as acore part of the Native American Rights Fund(NARF).  Today the library continues to serve asan essential resource for those working toadvance Native American justice.  As the onlypublic library devoted to Indian law, we supplymuch-needed access to Indian law research, newsupdates, and tribal law documents.  To extend thetradition of free public access to these services weask for your financial support. 
Each year, NILL responds to more than 1,000
individual research requests and receives severalhundred thousand visits to its online resources.Whether it’s through updates to the online Guide
to Indian Child Welfare or additions to the exten-
sive tribal law collection, NILL is committed toproviding visitors with resources that are notavailable anywhere else!  Additionally, our Indian
Law Bulletins and news blog deliver timely
updates about developments in Indian law andensure that you have the information you need tofight for indigenous rights.  However, we are notresting on our laurels; we are constantly improving
our online resources and access to tribal lawmaterials.  With your support we plan to developan innovative and valuable community basedwiki-source for Indian law information and greatlybroaden the scope of the Tribal Law gateway.   
The bulletins, research resources, extensive
catalog, and personal one-on-one librarian assis-tance can only exist with your help. The National
Indian Law Library operates on an annual budgetof $190,000—primarily from the donations ofconcerned and motivated individuals, firms, businesses, and tribes who recognize NARF andNILL as indispensable resources for NativeAmerican justice.  
By donating, you stand with the National
Indian Law Library in its effort to fight injusticethrough access to knowledge. You help ensure
that the library continues to supply free access toIndian law resources and that it has the financialmeans necessary to pursue innovative andgroundbreaking projects to serve you better.Please visit www.narf.org/nill/donate now formore information on how you can support thismission. ❂
Justice Through Knowledge!
Jenny Monet
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 9PAGE 10                                                                          NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
• Aleut Corporation
• Arctic Slope Regional Corporation• Asa`carsarmiut Tribal Council• Bad River Band of Lake Superior
Chippewa Indians
• Bering Straits Native Corporation• Bristol Bay Native Corporation• Colorado River Indian Tribes• Confederated Salish & Kootenai
Tribes
• Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians• Cook Inlet Regional, Inc.• Curyung Tribal Council• Forest County Potawatomi
Foundation
• Hualapai Tribe• Keweenaw Bay Indian Community• Koniag, Inc.
• Lac Courte Oreilles Band of Ojibwe• Minnesota Chippewa Tribe• Muckleshoot Tribe• Native Village of Eyak• Native Village of Port Lions• Nez Perce Tribe• Old Harbor Tribal Council• Pechanga Band of Luiseño Indians• Poarch Band of Creek Indians• Pokagon Band of Potawatomi
Indians
• Pueblo of Pojoaque• Puyallup Tribe of Indians• Rincon Band of Luiseño Mission
Indians• San Manuel Band of Mission
Indians
• Santee Sioux Tribe• Seminole Tribe of Florida• Seven Cedars Casino/Jamestown
S`Klallam
• Shakopee Mdewakanton Sioux
Community
• Spokane Tribe• Suquamish Indian Tribe• Sycuan Band of Kumeyaay• Tanana Chiefs Conference• Tulalip Tribes• Tule River Indian Tribe• Ute Mountain Ute Tribe• Yoche Dehe Wintun NationIt has been made abundantly clear that non-
Indian philanthropy can no longer sustainNARF’s work.  Federal funds for specific projectshave also been reduced.  Our ability to providelegal advocacy in a wide variety of areas such asreligious freedom, the Tribal Supreme CourtProject, tribal recognition, human rights, trustresponsibility, tribal water rights, Indian ChildWelfare Act, and on Alaska tribal sovereigntyissues has been compromised.  NARF is nowturning to the tribes to provide this crucialfunding to continue our legal advocacy onbehalf of Indian Country.  It is an honor to listthose Tribes and Native organizations who havechosen to share their good fortunes with theNative American Rights Fund and the thousandsof Indian clients we have served.  The generosity
of Tribes is crucial in NARF’s struggle to ensurethe future of all Native Americans.
The generosity of tribes is crucial in NARF’s
struggle to ensure the freedoms and rights of allNative Americans. Contributions from thesetribes should be an example for every NativeAmerican Tribe and organization. We encourageother Tribes to become contributors and part-ners with NARF in fighting for justice for ourpeople and in keeping the vision of our ances-tors alive.  We thank the following tribes andNative organizations for their generous supportof NARF for our 2012 fiscal year – October 1,2011 to September 30, 2012:
CALLING TRIBES TO ACTION!NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 11NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDTHE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF Annual Report: This is NARF's major report on its programs
and activities.  The Annual Report is distributed to foundations, majorcontributors, certain federal and state agencies, tribal clients, NativeAmerican organizations, and to others upon request.  Ray RamirezEditor, ramirez@narf.org.   
The NARF Legal Review is published biannually by the Native
American Rights Fund.  Third class postage paid at Boulder, Colorado.Ray Ramirez, Editor, ramirez@narf.org.  There is no charge for sub-scriptions, however, contributions are appreciated.
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund is a nonprofit, charitable
organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws of the District ofColumbia.  NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the provisions of Section 501 C (3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and contributions to NARF are tax deductible.  The Internal Revenue
Service has ruled that NARF is not a “private foundation” as defined inSection 509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Main Office: Native American Rights Fund, 1506 Broadway, 
Boulder, Colorado 80302 (303-447-8760) (FAX 303-443-7776).http://www.narf.org  
Washington, D.C. Office: Native American Rights Fund, 1514 P Street,
NW (Rear) Suite D, Washington, D.C. 20005 (202-785-4166) (FAX 202-822-0068).
Alaska Office: Native American Rights Fund, 801 B Street, Suite 401,
Anchorage, Alaska 99501 (907-276-0680) (FAX 907-276-2466).The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is the oldest and
largest nonprofit national Indian rights organization in the coun-try devoting all its efforts to defending and promoting the legalrights of Indian people on issues essential to their tribal sover-eignty, their natural resources and their human rights. NARFbelieves in empowering individuals and communities whoserights, economic self-sufficiency, and political participation havebeen systematically or systemically eroded or undermined. 
Native Americans have been subjugated and dominated.
Having been stripped of their land, resources and dignity, tribestoday are controlled by a myriad of federal treaties, statutes, andcase law. Yet it is within these laws that Native Americans placetheir hope and faith for justice and the protection of their way oflife. With NARF’s help, Native people can go on to provide leader-ship in their communities and serve as catalysts for just policiesand practices towards Native peoples nationwide. From a histori-cal standpoint Native Americans have, for numerous reasons,been targets of discriminatory practices.
For the past 42 years, NARF has represented over 250 Tribes in
31 states in such areas as tribal jurisdiction and recognition, landclaims,  hunting and fishing rights, the protection of Indian reli-gious freedom, and many others. In addition to the great stridesNARF has made in achieving justice on behalf of Native Americanpeople, perhaps NARF’s greatest distinguishing attribute hasbeen its ability to bring excellent, highly ethical legal representa-tion to dispossessed tribes. NARF has been successful in repre-senting Indian tribes and individuals in cases that have encom-passed every area and issue in the field of Indian law. The accom-plishments and growth of NARF over the years confirmed thegreat need for Indian legal representation on a national basis.This legal advocacy on behalf of Native Americans continues toplay a vital role in the survival of tribes and their way of life. NARFstrives to protect the most important rights of Indian peoplewithin the limit of available resources. 
One of the initial responsibilities of NARF’s first Board of
Directors was to develop priorities that would guide the NativeAmerican Rights Fund in its mission to preserve and enforce thelegal rights of Native Americans.  The Committee developed fivepriorities that continue to lead NARF today:
• Preservation of tribal existence
• Protection of tribal natural resources• Promotion of Native American human rights• Accountability of governments to Native Americans• Development of Indian law and educating the public about
Indian rights, laws, and issuesUnder the priority of the preservation of tribal existence,
NARF works to construct the foundations that are necessaryto empower tribes so that they can continue to live accordingto their Native traditions, to enforce their treaty rights, toinsure their independence on reservations and to protecttheir sovereignty. 
Throughout the process of European conquest and colo-
nization of North America, Indian tribes experienced a steadydiminishment of their land base to a mere 2.3 percent of itsoriginal size.  Currently, there are approximately 55 millionacres of Indian-controlled land in the continental UnitedStates and about 44 million acres of Native-owned land inAlaska.  An adequate land base and control over naturalresources are central components of economic self-sufficien-cy and self-determination, and as such, are vital to the veryexistence of tribes.  Thus, much of NARF’s work involves theprotection of tribal natural resources.  
Although basic human rights are considered a universal
and inalienable entitlement, Native Americans face an ongo-ing threat of having their rights undermined by the UnitedStates government, states, and others who seek to limit theserights. Under the priority of the promotion of human rights,NARF strives to enforce and strengthen laws which aredesigned to protect the rights of Native Americans to practicetheir traditional religion, to use their own language, and toenjoy their culture. Contained within the unique trust rela-tionship between the United States and Indian nations is theinherent duty for all levels of government to recognize andresponsibly enforce the many laws and regulations applicableto Indian peoples.  Because such laws impact virtually everyaspect of tribal life, NARF maintains its involvement in thelegal matters pertaining to accountability of governments toNative Americans.
The coordinated development of Indian law and educating
the public about Indian rights, laws, and issues is essential forthe continued protection of Indian rights.  This primarilyinvolves establishing favorable court precedents, distributinginformation and law materials, encouraging and fosteringIndian legal education, and forming alliances with Indian lawpractitioners and other Indian organizations. 
Requests for legal assistance should be addressed to the
Litigation Management Committee at NARF's main office,1506 Broadway, Boulder, Colorado 80302.  NARF’s clients areexpected to pay whatever they can toward the costs of legalrepresentation.NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Gerald Danforth, Chairman .................................................................................. Wisconsin Oneida
Natasha Singh, Vice-Chairman .................................................................. Native Village of StevensMarshall McKay, Treasurer  .................................................................... Yocha Dehe Wintun NationVirginia Cross  ...................................................................................................... Mucklesho ot Tribe
Moses Haia.................................................................................................................. Nat ive Hawaiian
Gary Hayes ………………………………………………………………. Ute Mountain Ute TribeJulie Roberts-Hyslop …………………………………………………… Native Village of TananaRon His Horse Is Thunder ................................................................................ Standing Rock SiouxStephen Lewis ……………………………………………………... Gila River Indian Community Mark Macarro .............................................................................. Pechanga Band of Luiseño IndiansPeter Pino ………………………………………………………………………………. Zia PuebloBuford Rolin ........................................................................................ Poarch Band of Creek India ns
Barbara Anne Smith .............................................................................................. Chickasaw Nati on
Executive Director: John E. Echohawk .................................................................................. Pawnee
NARF LEGAL REVIEW • VOLUME 37, NO. 2 • SUMMER/FALL 2012Native American Rights Fund
1506 Broadway
Boulder, CO 80302Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage
PPAAIIDD
Boulder, Colorado
Permit No. 589
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER
