A settlement agreement was announced on
December 8, 2009 between Elouise Cobell, leadplaintiff in the Cobell v. Salazar class action law-
suit over federal mismanagement of individualIndian trust fund accounts, and the ObamaAdministration. Under the terms of the settle-ment, the federal government will create a $1.4billion Accounting/Trust Fund and a $2 billionTrust Land Consolidation Fund. The settlementalso creates an Indian Education Scholarshipfund of up to $60 million to improve access tohigher education for Indians. The settlementagreement must be approved by Congress and afederal district court.
John Echohawk, Executive Director of the
Native American Rights Fund, expressed supportfor the settlement. “We have been waiting forPresident Obama and his Administration to fulfill his campaign promise to settle the Indiantrust fund litigation and he has met that commitment. We are very pleased,” he said. TheNative American Rights Fund was co-counsel forthe Cobell plaintiffs when the case was originally
filed in 1996 and participated in the case until2006 when it undertook the filing of a similarcase for Indian tribes over federal mismanage-ment of tribal trust fund accounts, Nez PerceTribe, et al. v. Salazar .
Echohawk said that he is hopeful that the
Obama Administration can soon focus its effortson settlements for the tribal claims. The NativeAmerican Rights Fund currently represents 42tribes in the Nez Perce case. There are also about
100 other tribal cases asserting claims stemmingfrom federal mismanagement of tribal trust fundaccounts. By the government’s own figures, tribaltrust accounts hold five times as much money asthe individual Indian trust accounts involved inthe Cobell case.
VOLUME 35, NO.1                                                            WINTER/SPRING 2010Cobell Settlement Now Before Congress .......... page 1
NARF Addresses Climate Change Issues .......... page 3The Kennedy Report: Robert and Edward Kennedy
Understood Trust Responsibility for Indian Educationin 1969.  NARF Executive Director John EchohawkShares How Far We Have Come ...................... page 6
CASE UPDATES- The State of Alaska, NARF , Northern Justice Project andACLU Reach Settlement in Yup’ik Language and Voter
Assistance Case ........................................................ page 9
- Tribal Supreme Court Project Update ............ page 10
New Board Members ............................................ page 11National Indian Law Library ............................ page 13CALLING TRIBES TO ACTION! ...................... page 14NARF ................................................................ page 15Cobell Settlement Now Before CongressNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
LegalReview 05/10  5/13/10  8:48 PM  Page 1On the announcement of the settlement,
President Obama stated that...“As a candidate, I heard from many in Indian Country that theCobell suit remained a stain on the Nation-to-Nation relationship I value so much. I pledgedmy commitment to resolving this issue, and Iam proud that my Administration has taken thisstep today. I came to Washington with a promiseto change how our government deals with diffi-cult issues like this, and a promise that the factsand policies, and not politics, will guide ouractions and decisions. But it is important to notethat today’s actions are not the final step. TheDistrict Court for the District of Columbia mustformally endorse the settlement, and Congressmust enact legislation to authorize implementa-tion. I urge Congress to act swiftly to correctthis long-standing injustice and to rememberthat no special appropriations are required. I congratulate all those in Indian Country thathave waited for this news, and join them in waiting for a quick conclusion to the process.”
The settlement funds will be paid out of the
federal judgment fund if Congress and the federal district court  approve the settlementagreement.  Once Congress approves the settle-ment, the federal district court will begin itsproceedings to determine whether it willapprove the settlement.  Congress had untilDecember 31, 2009 to approve the settlementagreement under its terms, however, this waspushed back to February 28, 2010, and then toApril 16, 2010.  After further inaction byCongress, the date has once again been pushedto May 28, 2010. 
Senior Judge James Robertson of the U.S.
District Court for the District of Columbia,whose court Cobell v. Salazar is under,
expressed concern that Congress has failed topass legislation approving the settlement.  JudgeRobertson stated that the settlement is a win-win proposition for the plaintiffs and thegovernment and that the government needs toact. If Congress fails to approve legislationapproving the settlement, Robertson said thathe would convene a public hearing in May toseek an explanation as to why Congress has not
acted to approve the settlement.  The InteriorDepartment reiterated the Administration’scommitment to moving the settlement forward.
The Cobell v. Salazar case was filed in 1996. It
was brought on behalf of approximately 300,000past and present individual Indian trust benefi-ciaries.  The individual Indian money accountholders (plaintiffs) sought a full accounting oftheir trust assets for the entire period that suchassets have been held in trust – since 1887.Trustees, without exception, have a duty to provide accurate and complete statement ofaccounts to each beneficiary at regular intervalsand a complete and accurate accounting upondemand. Yet, the United States has never provided an accounting to individual Indiantrust beneficiaries. It has never provided benefi-ciaries accurate and complete statement ofaccounts. In addition, plaintiffs asked that theaccount balances be restated in accordance withthe accounting. Finally, plaintiffs seek reform of the trust management and accounting system. ❂
PAGE 2                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
LegalReview 05/10  5/13/10  8:48 PM  Page 2NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 3NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNARF addresses climate change issues
Despite their historically low carbon footprint,
Indigenous peoples throughout the world arealready suffering, and will increasingly suffer,the effects of man made climate change. NARF isworking with its client, the National TribalEnvironmental Council(NTEC) to help ensurethat tribes in the UnitedStates are treated assovereign partners inassessing and address-ing climate change atthe local, regional,national, and interna-tional levels. Given theimmense amount of traditional ecologicalknowledge of the natural world gained throughmillennia of stewardship, indigenous peopleshave much to offer the efforts at mitigation andadaption. 
A focus of NARF and NTEC’s efforts has been
the various Congressional bills introduced inCongress. Legislation introduced in previousyears had little or no mention of tribes. In theWaxman-Markey Bill passed by the House lastsummer, there were over 200 such mentions.Much has been accomplished, but much moreneeds to be done, as proposed levels of fundingfor tribes were inadequate, and tribes wereunjustifiably left out of certain programs alto-gether. Given the time and attention that HealthCare has taken, comprehensive legislation hasstalled in the Senate. It is unclear when the matter will be taken up in earnest again.
At the international level, indigenous interests
are seriously implicated in the legislation thathas been proposed. One of the most effectiveways identified to reduce carbon emissions, andto subsidize large parts of the carbon reductioneffort, is through a process known by theacronym REDD+ - Reduction of Emissions fromDeforestation and Degredation (the “+” inREDD+ draws attention towards the activitiesrelated to the conservation and enhancement of
carbon stocks). Basically, money is paid to getpeople to stop cutting down forests. Some of thisreduction would contribute to an overalldecrease in carbon emissions, and some of the
reduction would resultin the issuance of offsetcredits which could beused to pollute else-where. Much of theremaining forest land inthe third world is locatedon indigenous landsand the payment ofmoney for not cutting is
sure to increase pressure on those lands.Safeguards to date in the proposed legislationare totally inadequate to protect indigenous peoples’ human rights, including their rights totheir lands, territories and resources, as well astheir rights to full participation at every level indecisions concerning the implementation ofREDD+.
The recent meeting of heads of state in
Copenhagen (COP 15) to work on post KyotoTreaty agreements was not a success. From thestandpoint of indigenous peoples, it was veryfrustrating. It is difficult to be heard in a forumwith hundreds of nation-states and thousands ofNGOS clamoring for attention. NARF and NTEChad representatives in Copenhagen workingwith the indigenous caucus to draw attention toindigenous issues, but the document that cameout of the conference, the Copenhagen Accord,had not one reference to indigenous peoples. Intwo weeks of trying, indigenous representativesfrom the United States did not succeed in getting a meeting with the US delegation. Therewill be meetings throughout the year to getready for the next meeting in Mexico City inNovember of 2010. Indigenous peoples needmuch more representation there to make animpact. 
LegalReview 05/10  5/13/10  8:48 PM  Page 3PAGE 4                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDThe following letter was sent to the United States Senate by NARF and thirty other national 
organizations urging the Senate to pass comprehensive climate and energy legislation into law.
1Sky • Alliance for Climate Protection • American Rivers • Blue Green Alliance • Centerfor American Progress Action Fund • Center for International Environmental Law • Clean Water Action • Climate Solutions • Conservation Law Foundation • Defenders ofWildlife • Environment America • Environmental Defense Fund • Environmental Law &Policy Center • Green For All • Interfaith Power and Light • Izaak Walton League ofAmerica • League of Conservation Voters • National Audubon Society • National TribalEnvironmental Council • National Wildlife Federation • Native American Rights Fund •Natural Resources Defense Council • Ocean Conservancy • Oceana • Pew EnvironmentGroup • Rails-to-Trails Conservancy • Sierra Club • The Trust for Public Land • The Wilderness Society • Union of Concerned Scientists • World Wildlife Fund
April 27, 2010 
United States Senate Washington, DC 20510 
Dear Senator: Representing thirty-one national organizations and millions of Americans who support
strong clean energy and climate change legislation, we write to urge the U.S. Senate not tosquander the great promise of bi-partisan action we've witnessed over the last six months.This must be the year that the United States passes comprehensive climate and energy legislation into law in order to create jobs, strengthen our national security, and reducecarbon pollution. We can’t afford to delay action any longer; we urge the Senate to take upa comprehensive energy and climate bill in June. 
Special interests have fought energy reform for decades. They’ve kept America dependent
on foreign oil and protected corporations that pollute the air our children breathe and thewater they drink. It is long past time to end our reliance on old technology and dirty energysources and put America back in control of its energy future. Every day that goes by without a comprehensive clean energy and climate policy helps our enemies, hurts oureconomy and puts our security at risk. 
Without a bipartisan, comprehensive national clean energy and climate policy, America’s 
businesses are hamstrung and cannot make the investments that will create millions ofjobs in the new clean energy sector. Without a comprehensive policy, we cannot achieve thereductions in carbon pollution that are necessary to protect the planet. Without a compre-hensive policy, we cannot end the practice of exporting $1 billion a day for foreign oil andwill remain at the whim of hostile regimes. LegalReview 05/10  5/13/10  8:48 PM  Page 4NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 5NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDThe United States Senate stands at a moment in history in which decisions made today will
have a lasting impact on generations of Americans to come. The Senate faces a choicebetween leading America forward in a new clean energy economy or holding America backby preserving the failed energy policies of the past. The Senate has a profound responsibilityto future generations to enact policies that enhance our economic, environmental andnational security. Now is the time to pass a strong comprehensive clean energy and climatebill. It is up to you to ensure that it happens this year. 
Sincerely, 
Gillian Caldwell,
Campaign Director 1Sky 
Maggie L. Fox,
President & CEOAlliance for ClimateProtection 
Rebecca Wodder,
President American Rivers 
David Foster, Executive
Director Blue Green Alliance 
John D. Podesta,
President & CEO Center for AmericanProgress Action Fund 
Daniel Magraw,
President Center for InternationalEnvironmental Law 
John DeCock, President
Clean Water Action 
Gregg Small, Executive
Director Climate Solutions 
John Kassel, President 
Conservation LawFoundation Rodger Schlickeisen,
President & CEO Defenders of Wildlife 
Margie Alt, 
Executive Director Environment America 
Fred Krupp, President 
Environmental DefenseFund 
Howard A. Learner,
Executive DirectorEnvironmental Law &Policy Center 
Phaedra Ellis-Lamkins,
Chief Executive Officer Green For All 
The Rev. Canon Sally G.
Bingham, President Interfaith Power andLight 
David Hoskins,
Executive Director Izaak Walton League ofAmerica 
Gene Karpinski,
President League of ConservationVoters Frank Gill, President 
National AudubonSociety 
Jerry Pardilla,
Executive Director National TribalEnvironmental Council 
Larry Schweiger,
President National WildlifeFederation 
John Echohawk,
Executive Director Native American RightsFund 
Frances Beinecke,
President & CEO Natural ResourcesDefense Council 
Vikki Spruill,
President & CEO Ocean Conservancy 
Andrew Sharpless,
Chief Executive Officer Oceana 
Joshua Reichert,
Managing Director Pew EnvironmentGroup Keith Laughlin,
President Rails-to-TrailsConservancy 
Michael Brune,
Executive Director Sierra Club 
Will Rogers, 
President The Trust for PublicLand 
William Meadows,
President The Wilderness Society 
Kevin Knobloch,
President Union of ConcernedScientists 
Carter Roberts,
President & CEO World Wildlife FundLegalReview 05/10  5/13/10  8:48 PM  Page 5I am proud of the amazing amount of hard
work undertaken on behalf of tribal students atall levels by federal, state, and tribal officials,administrators, teachers, parents, families, communities, and organizations.As you know, in federal law and policy,
American Indian and Alaska Native tribes aresovereign governments. Under the great leader-ship of Native and non-Native people in thiscountry, for the last fifty years or so, the exerciseof tribal sovereign governance has been stead-fastly increasing in many areas, such as lawenforcement, natural resources protection, andeconomic development.
In education we also see some progress, with
an increasing number of Tribal EducationDepartments, more state education laws recog-nizing tribal sovereignty, and Executive Ordersfrom the past two Presidents that affirmativelyacknowledge the government-to-governmentrelationship between the United States and tribalnations in education.
Robert and Ted Kennedy understood and
embraced Tribal Sovereignty completely inEducation. Today, we strive to make tribal sovereignty in education the law as the reautho-rization of the Elementary and SecondaryEducation Act (ESEA) and in amending part ofenacting other federal education legislation.
In 1969, after a two-year study by a Special
Senate Subcommittee on Indian Education ledby Senators Robert and Ted Kennedy, the historic Kennedy Report was released. TheKennedy Report spoke aptly about both the failures and the potential of Indian education. Itnoted that, at that time, of about 160,000 elementary and secondary tribal studentsnationwide, one third were in schools run by theBureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), and two-thirdswere in the state public schools. Neither school
PAGE 6                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDThe Kennedy Report: 
Robert and Edward Kennedy Understood Trust
Responsibility for Indian Education in 1969.
NARF Executive Director John Echohawk Shares How Far We Have Come
LegalReview 05/10  5/13/10  8:48 PM  Page 6NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 7NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDsystem was doing a good job; problems included
poor facilities, irrelevant curricula, and indifferentor hostile teachers. Indians were prohibitedfrom serving on many state public schoolboards, and most of the BIA schools didn’t evenhave school boards.
The Kennedy Report made 60 specific 
suggestions for improvement.
Many were quite similar to those made 40
years before, in the previous most comprehen-sive Indian education study, The Meriam Reportof 1928. This in itself suggested the difficulty orfailure of the federal government and the statesto improve Indian education. Thus, the primaryrecommendation of The Kennedy Report was“increased Indian participation in and controlover their own education programs andschools.”
Congress responded to The Kennedy Report in
1972 by enacting the Indian Education Act(IEA). The IEA authorized new supplementaleducation programs for Indian students, includinga formula grant program to meet the “uniqueeducational and culturally relevant academic needs of Indian students” thatrequires open consultation by state publicschools with Indian parents. I remind you, thevast majority – today over 90% – of the over500,000 elementary and secondary tribal students attend state public schools; so, the IEAprograms are not and never have been adminis-tered by the BIA (or, currently, the Bureau ofIndian Education (BIE)); they are now adminis-tered by the Department of Education and theyprimarily serve tribal students in the state public schools.  
Over the years the IEA’s formula grant 
program, along with IEA discretionary grants,teacher training programs, graduate school fellowships, and national activities grants havehelped tribal students. Precisely how many students wouldn’t be where they are today with-out the IEA we may never know. Yet every timethe ESEA gets reauthorized, there are those inCongress that would eliminate some or all of the
IEA programs. In fact some of the programs(like the graduate fellowships and adult literacyprograms) have been de-funded by Congressnow for years; others, like funding for TribalEducation Departments, the authorization forwhich came in the ESEA reauthorization of1994, never have been funded. But the originalbasis of the IEA – that the federal governmenthas a moral obligation to help remedy the pastinjustices it caused to American Indians –remains intact; it is the law. 
All these good things can be attributed to
Robert and Ted Kennedy.
Now, in this 21st century, we need another
individual or individuals to champion Indianeducation.
LegalReview 05/10  5/13/10  8:48 PM  Page 7The IEA is almost 40 years old. The current
incarnation of the ESEA, including the IEA,known as the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act,is again up for reauthorization. And what weneed now is not just an IEA, but a “TribalSovereignty Education Act.” 
Notwithstanding all of its good provisions, the
IEA simply doesn’t recognize tribal sovereigntyas much as it could. The IEA pre-dates theIndian Self-Determination and EducationAssistance Act of 1975 and all the other modernlaws that more fully recognize tribal sovereignty.The IEA pre-dates contemporary ExecutiveBranch policy strongly affirming the govern-ment-to-government relationship between theUnited States and Native nations. 
Congress can and should align education 
legislation with these other federal laws andpolicies. Significantly, NCLB took some impor-tant steps in this direction by adding to the IEApolicy provisions the recognition of the federalgovernment’s trust relationship in Indian education, and its commitment to work in education with Indian tribes. NCLB added specific provisions to help enhance the exerciseof tribal sovereignty over the BIE-fundedschools, including options for tribal accredita-tion and tribal AYP standards. In this upcomingESEA reauthorization, we urge Congress to takethese kinds of next steps with respect to thestate public schools, which most tribal studentsattend. 
Some states already are moving in this direc-
tion on their own – without any federal mandateto do so. At least a dozen states now have comprehensive Indian education laws. Some ofthese laws recognize tribal sovereignty not justin terms of public school tribal language coursesand teacher certification – though these areextremely important matters – but with respectto general education requirements and programs. And five states – California, Maine,Montana, Oregon, and Wisconsin – now man-date the teaching of tribal sovereignty itself intheir public school curricula. Congress needs tosupport these growing
tribal-state efforts thatacknowledge the role of tribal sovereignty inpublic school educationby authorizing and fund-ing inter-governmentaloptions for tribes andstates (or local educationagencies), perhaps startingwith existing programsand funding like the IEAgrants, Title I, andImpact Aid. Congressneeds to fund TribalEducation Departments– these authorizations are now 20 and 15 yearsold and never have been funded. 
Also, Congress very much needs to put tribal
education agencies on a par with state educationagencies regarding public school data collec-tion, reporting, and analysis. Many of these recommendations are in or follow from existingfederal reports, like the Indian Nations at RiskReport (1991), and the annual reports toCongress of the National Advisory Council onIndian Education (NACIE), an under-utilizedentity created by the IEA. Over the years tribesand national organizations like NIEA, theNational Congress of American Indians, and theTribal Education Departments NationalAssembly have made other helpful recommen-dations for federal education law and policy.Very useful federal-tribal collaborative work led to the two Executive Orders on IndianEducation signed by Presidents Clinton andBush. A tremendous amount of reason and wisdom lies behind the many new state Indianeducation laws, and in state public educationorganizations working with tribes to help Nativestudents like the Council of Chief State SchoolOfficers. The partnerships are there, and withthe leadership and action of individuals and collective bodies like NIEA, we can put togethera Tribal Sovereignty Education Act. ❂
PAGE 8                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
John E. Echohawk
Executive Director
Native American
Rights FundLegalReview 05/10  5/13/10  8:48 PM  Page 8NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 9NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
The State of Alaska, NARF, Northern
Justice Project and ACLU ReachSettlement In Yup'ik Language and VoterAssistance Case 
Alaska state officials along with Native
American Rights Fund (NARF), the AmericanCivil Liberties Union, the Northern JusticeProject, four Alaska Native elders and four tribalgovernments today jointly announced a settle-ment of Nick, et al. v. Bethel, et al. According to
the settlement, the state of Alaska will makeenhancements to language assistance forYup’ik-speaking voters available at elections inthe Bethel area.
The resolution of the case, originally filed in
June 2007 on behalf of Alaska Native elders AnnaNick, Billy McCann, Arthur Nelson and David O.David and the tribal governments of Kasigluk,Kwigillingok, Tuluksak and Tuntutuliak washailed by all parties involved.
“This settlement recognizes improvements to
language-assistance protocols implemented bythe state during the 2008 and 2009 elections,while providing for enhancements to ensurethat limited-English-proficient voters receiveeffective assistance,” said Alaska AttorneyGeneral Dan Sullivan. “We support fair votingpractices and effective access to the voting booth for all Alaskans, and we will vigorously implement the terms of this settlement.”
“We are extremely pleased the state of Alaska
will provide Yup'ik-speaking voters in the Bethelarea with the tools they need to fully participatein the political process,” said Natalie Landreth of Native American Rights Fund (NARF). “Thatis what this case was all about – equal access tothe polls.”
“Our right to vote is one of the most important
that we as Americans possess,” said AlaskaLieutenant Governor Craig Campbell, who over-sees the Division of Elections. “Here in Alaska,we want all our citizens to exercise that right,regardless of where they live or the languagethey speak. We are pleased to have come together
to ensure that this case is a win-win for Yup'ik-speaking voters and the State of Alaska.”
“Every American deserves an equal voice in
the political process,” said Laughlin McDonald,Director of the ACLU Voting Rights Project.“The Constitution protects all Alaskans’ right tovote regardless of what language they speak.”
Key protocols for the Division of Election
include: 
• Training bilingual poll workers to provide
language and voter assistance to voters;
• Coordinating language assistance through 
a bilingual staff person with a toll-free number;
• Relying on Yup'ik language experts to 
translate election materials, including infor-mation on ballot measures, candidates,absentee and special-needs voting and voterregistration;
• Preparation of a Yup'ik-English glossary 
of election terms and phrases to guide bilingual poll workers providing languageassistance;
• Providing sample ballots in Yup'ik;• Pre-election publicity in Yup’ik through
radio ads, television programs, public service announcements and announcementsover VHF radios in villages that do notreceive local radio stations;CASE UPDATES
LegalReview 05/10  5/13/10  8:48 PM  Page 9PAGE 10                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND• Undertaking outreach to the villages in the
census area. 
“I have said all along that all we wanted was to
be able to understand what we are voting for.Now that will happen, and I am very, veryhappy,” said Billy McCann, a plaintiff in the case.Being a Plaintiff is not easy but when you cometogether to fix a problem like this, it is worth it.”
Tribal Supreme Court Project Update
The U.S. Supreme Court granted review in
United States v. Tohono O’odham Nation , a case
seeking review of a decision by the U.S. Court ofAppeals for the Federal Circuit that 28 U.S.C. §1500 does not preclude jurisdiction in the Courtof Federal Claims when a Indian tribe has alsofiled an action in Federal District Court seekingdifferent relief (e.g. money damages versus historical accounting).  A number of Indiantribes have filed identical claims for breach offiduciary duties in both the Court of FederalClaims and the Federal District Court seekingseparate relief.
At present, most of the resources of the Tribal
Supreme Court Project have been focused on litigation pending in the lower courts.  Projectattorneys are tracking lower court litigationbased on subject matter area to allow the Projectan opportunity to assist in earlier stages of litigation.  For example, the Project has beenmonitoring five cases involving challenges toReservation status of certain lands (diminish-ment) or challenges to the continuing existenceof an entire Reservation (disestablishment).Currently, in Osage Nation v. Irby (Oklahoma
Tax Commission) , the Project worked diligently
with the attorneys representing the OsageNation in developing an amicus strategy andpreparing amicus briefs in support of their petition for rehearing of a Tenth Circuit decisionwhich held that the legislative history and subsequent events to the Osage Allotment Actevidence Congress’ intent to disestablish theOsage Reservation.  
In similar fashion, the Project has been moni-toring 11 cases involving challenges to the
authority of the Secretary to take land in trustfor tribes based on the Supreme Court’s decisionlast year in Carcieri v. Salazar .  Currently, the
Project is preparing materials and developingstrategy in anticipation of amicus support forthe tribes and the United States as the Carcieri-related litigation works its way through thecourts.  The Project is also tracking litigationinvolving challenges to the doctrine of tribalsovereign immunity; challenges to the authorityof Tribes to regulate the activities of non-Indianson-reservation or adjudicate disputes involvingnon-Indians; attempts to undermine tribal cultural values and laws protecting Native religious freedom; and attacks against theauthority of tribal courts to impose consecutivesentences of more than one-year for violentcrimes committed by Indians on the reservation.
Copies of briefs and other materials for each of
the cases are available on the NARF website athttp://www.narf.org/sct/index.html. ❂
LegalReview 05/10  5/13/10  8:48 PM  Page 10Enoch Adams , Chairman of the Kivalina IRA
Council in the State of Alaska, was elected to theNative American Rights Fund Board of Directorsin November 2009. Chairman Adams holds aBachelor of Sciences in History Education fromLiberty University, Lynchburg, Virginia.  Upongraduation from Liberty, Enoch was hired by theNorthwest Arctic Borough School District as asecondary teacher, spending his first year at theNoorvik School, Noorvik, Alaska, teaching mathto the middle and high school students. Thenext school year, a position became open atKivalina and Enoch moved to his hometown toteach for the next 15 years. Because of thenature of the rural schools in Alaska, secondaryteachers become general practitioners for mid-dle and high school students. Over those years,Enoch has had to teach math, science, socialstudies, health/PE, English and history, untilresigning from the district in 2001.
In 1994, with the guidance and counseling
from the Center on Race, Poverty, and theEnvironment’s chief counsel, Luke Cole, mem-bers of the KRPC sued the Red Dog Mine for itscountless violations against the Clean Water Act,after being denied standing as a viable committeeof the community. Stemming from that success-ful litigation, in Adams, et.al. vs. Tech Cominco ,
the Red Doc Mine producer was forced to settlewith the plaintiffs to respond in favor of thecommunity its ongoing violations that wereflowing into the Wulik River, Kivalina’s drinkingwater source, promising to build a pipeline from
its outfall directly to the ocean and in the mean-time, provide reverse osmosis units to eachhome that wants one until the pipeline is builtand operating.
For a brief time, 2005-2006, Enoch became a
city council member. Then successfully ran forthe IRA council in 2008 and has been re-electedin 2009. 
Virginia Cross is an Elder of Puget Sound’s
Muckleshoot Indian Tribe and currently servesas Chairman of the Tribal Council. Virginia was
elected to the Native American Rights Fund
Board of Directors in November 2009. She hasdevoted her lifetime to public service, especiallyin the field of education. She served for 22 yearsas Director of Indian Education for the Auburn,Washington public school district and played anactive role in shaping many of today’s programsfor Native American students in the State ofWashington. The Virginia Cross NativeEducation Center, operated by the AuburnSchool District in conjunction with the Tribe,was named in her honor. Education continues tobe Virginia’s top priority today as she chairs the
NEW BOARD MEMBERS
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 11NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
LegalReview 05/10  5/13/10  8:48 PM  Page 11PAGE 12                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDTribe’s Executive Committee for Education.
In the three decades Virginia has served on its
Tribal Council, the Muckleshoot Tribe hasbecome one of the most progressive and pros-perous tribes in the Pacific Northwest. She wasserving as Tribal Council Chair a quarter-centuryago when NARF joined the Tribe’s legal staff inlitigating a key case involving the diversion ofwater from the White River to generate powerfor a utility company. This case was resolved in the Tribe’s favor, and in the years that havepassed since then, enormous progress has been made in restoring the White River’s salmon runs.
Tribal Chairman Marshall McKay , Yocha Dehe
Wintun Nation, was elected to the Native
American Rights Fund Board of Directors inNovember 2009. Chairman McKay was born inColusa, California and grew up in Brooks,California near his present-day home in theYocha Dehe’s tribal community.  He began hissuccessful career in tribal government in 1984,culminating in his election as Chairman in2006, and re-election in 2009.
Chairman McKay leads Yocha Dehe’s elected
tribal council, governing body of the sovereigntribal nation, and oversees operations for theTribe and its business enterprises. A cornerstoneof Chairman McKay’s leadership is his commit-ment to cultural renewal and preservation, andhis focus on economic development, whichhelps to secure the independence of the Tribe.McKay oversees the day-to-day operations of thetribal government and the Tribe’s businessenterprises, including the Cache Creek CasinoResort and the Yocha Dehe Farm and Ranchoperations. Chairman McKay also serves asChair of the Yocha Dehe Wintun AcademyBoard, and as a member of the Yocha Dehe FireCommission, the Cultural Renewal Committeeand the Health and Wellness Committee. Hepreviously served as Tribal Treasurer and TribalSecretary.
Chairman McKay currently sits on theUniversity of California Davis Foundation Board,
the Board of the Autry National Center and theSmithsonian’s National Museum of Americanthe Indian (NMAI). In 2009, Chairman McKaywas appointed to the Board of Trustees for theSmithsonian’s National Museum of theAmerican Indian. NMAI is dedicated to thepreservation, study, and exhibition of the life,languages, literature, history, and arts of NativeAmericans.  He also serves as a founding mem-ber of the Native Arts and Cultures Foundationand in November 2007, was appointed to theNative American Heritage Commission Board byGovernor Arnold Schwarzenegger.
The Native American Rights Fund Board and
staff look forward to working with EnochAdams, Virginia Cross and Marshall McKay.They bring a wealth of knowledge and experi-ence to our Board and our organization. ❂
LegalReview 05/10  5/13/10  8:48 PM  Page 12NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 13National Indian Law Library
About the Library
The National Indian Law Library (NILL) located
at the Native American Rights Fund in Boulder,Colorado is a national public library serving theIndian law information needs of people acrossthe United States. Since 1972 NILL has collectednearly 10,000 resource materials that relate tofederal Indian and tribal law. The Library’s holdings include the largest collection of tribalcodes, ordinances and constitutions in theUnited States and hard to find reports, hand-books and conference proceedings. We believethe real value of NILL is the professional staffthat responds to about 150 questions from thepublic each month – providing copies of docu-ments in a timely way. In addition, the freeIndian Law Bulletin Service helps keep the legalprofessional, student and general public
informed on weekly developments in Indian law.Visit the NILL web site to learn more and to register for the free Indian Law Bulletin alerts.www.narf.org/nill/index.htm
Support the Library
The National Indian Law Library is unique in
that it serves the public but is not supported bylocal or federal tax revenue. NILL is a project ofthe Native American Rights Fund and relies onprivate contributions from people like you. Forinformation on how you can support the libraryor become a sponsor of a special project, pleasecontact David Selden, the Law Librarian at 303-447-8760, dselden@narf.org or visit us inBoulder, Colorado. ❂
Justice Through Knowledge!LegalReview 05/10  5/13/10  8:48 PM  Page 13PAGE 14                                                                          NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
• Akiak Native Community
• Cow Creek Band 
of Umpqua Indians
• Lummi Commercial Company• Nome Eskimo Community• Saginaw Chippewa 
Indian Tribe of Michigan
• San Manuel Band 
of Mission Indians
• Shakopee Mdewakanton 
Sioux Community• Sitka Tribe of Alaska
• Yoche Dehe Wintun NationIt has been made abundantly clear that non-Indian
philanthropy can no longer sustain NARF’s work.Federal funds for specific projects have also beenreduced.  Our ability to provide legal advocacy in awide variety of areas such as religious freedom, theTribal Supreme Court Project, tribal recognition,human rights, trust responsibility, tribal waterrights, Indian Child Welfare Act, and on Alaska tribalsovereignty issues has been compromised.  NARF isnow turning to the tribes to provide this crucialfunding to continue our legal advocacy on behalf ofIndian Country.  It is an honor to list those Tribesand Native organizations who have chosen to sharetheir good fortunes with the Native American RightsFund and the thousands of Indian clients we haveserved.  The generosity of Tribes is crucial in NARF’sstruggle to ensure the future of all Native Americans.
Yocha Dehe Wintun Nation grants $1.5 million 
to NARF
NARF has received a $1.5 million grant from the
Yocha Dehe Wintun Nation of Brooks, Calif., to bedistributed in $500,000 allotments over three yearsand used for general operating expenses and specialprojects.
“This generous grant provides the Native American
Rights Fund fiscal security for the next three years,enabling us to focus on legal advocacy and insuringthe survival of tribes and their ways of life,” saidExecutive Director John E. Echohawk. “Our deepestthanks go to the Yocha Dehe Wintun Nation and
their dedication to the legal rights of IndianCountry.”
Tribal contributions are extremely important to
help underwrite NARF’s vital work. This gift from theYocha Dehe Wintun Nation—one of the largest tribalcontributions ever bestowed on NARF—not only setsan example for other tribes, but also is a testament tothe value and impact of the organization’s work.
“The Tribal Council of Yocha Dehe Wintun Nation
is committed to Native rights and the preservation oftribal sovereignty,” said Yocha Dehe Tribal ChairmanMarshall McKay. “This grant to the Native AmericanRights Fund tangibly expresses our belief in theimportance of the outstanding work that they do.”
“The generosity of tribes is crucial in NARF’s
struggle to ensure the freedoms and rights of allNative Americans,” said Echohawk. “The history ofYocha Dehe’s giving should be an example for everyNative American Tribe and organization. We hopeothers will follow with their support of our organizationand other Native organizations across the country.”
We encourage other Tribes to become contributors
and partners with NARF in fighting for justice forour people and in keeping the vision of our ancestorsalive. We thank the following tribes and Native organizations for their generous support of NARFthus far for our 2010 fiscal year – October 1, 2009 toSeptember 30, 2010:
CALLING TRIBES TO ACTION!LegalReview 05/10  5/13/10  8:48 PM  Page 14NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 15NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDTHE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF Annual Report. This is NARF’s major report on
its programs and activities.  The Annual Report is distributed to foundations, major contributors, certainfederal and state agencies, tribal clients, NativeAmerican organizations, and to others upon request.Ray Ramirez Editor, ramirez@narf.org.  
The NARF Legal Review is published biannually by 
the Native American Rights Fund.  Third class postage paid at Boulder, Colorado. Ray Ramirez, Editor,ramirez@narf.org.  There is no charge for subscriptions,however, contributions are appreciated.
Tax Status.  The Native American Rights Fund is a 
nonprofit, charitable organization incorporated in 1971under the laws of the District of Columbia.  NARF isexempt from federal income tax under the provisions ofSection 501 C (3) of the Internal Revenue Code, andcontributions to NARF are tax deductible.  The InternalRevenue Service has ruled that NARF is not a “private
foundation” as defined in Section 509(a) of the InternalRevenue Code.
Main Office: 
Native American Rights Fund1506 Broadway, Boulder, Colorado  80302 (303-447-8760) (FAX 303-443-7776).http://www.narf.org 
Washington, D.C. Office:
Native American Rights Fund1514 P Street, NW (Rear) Suite D, Washington, D.C. 20005(202-785-4166) (FAX 202-822-0068).
Alaska Office: 
Native American Rights Fund801 B Street, Suite 401, Anchorage, Alaska 99501 (907-276-0680) (FAX 907-276-2466).The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) was
founded in 1970 to address the need for legal assis-tance on the major issues facing Indian country.  Thecritical Indian issues of survival of the tribes andNative American people are not new, but are thesame issues of survival that have merely evolved overthe centuries.  As NARF is in its fortieth year of exis-tence, it can be acknowledged that many of the gainsachieved in Indian country over those years aredirectly attributable to the efforts and commitmentof the present and past clients and members ofNARF’s Board and staff.  However, no matter howmany gains have been achieved, NARF is stilladdressing the same basic issues that caused NARFto be founded originally.  Since the inception of thisNation, there has been a systematic attack on tribalrights that continues to this day.  For every victory, anew challenge to tribal sovereignty arises from stateand local governments, Congress, or the courts.  Thecontinuing lack of understanding, and in some caseslack of respect, for the sovereign attributes of Indiannations has made it necessary for NARF to continuefighting.NARF strives to protect the most important rights
of Indian people within the limit of availableresources.  To achieve this goal, NARF’s Board ofDirectors defined five priority areas for NARF’s work:(1) the preservation of tribal existence; (2) the protection of tribal natural resources; (3) the promotion of human rights; (4) the accountability ofgovernments to Native Americans; and (5) the devel-opment of Indian law and educating the public aboutIndian rights, laws, and issues.
Requests for legal assistance should be addressed
to the Litigation Management Committee at NARF’smain office, 1506 Broadway, Boulder, Colorado80302.  NARF’s clients are expected to pay whateverthey can toward the costs of legal representation.
NARF’s success could not have been achieved with-
out the financial support that we have received fromthroughout the nation.  Your participation makes abig difference in our ability to continue to meet ever-increasing needs of impoverished Indian tribes,groups and individuals.  The support needed to sustainour nationwide program requires your continuedassistance.LegalReview 05/10  5/13/10  8:48 PM  Page 15NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Delia Carlyle, Chairwoman .................................................................... Ak Chin Indian Community
Kunani Nihipali, Vice-Chairman .............................................................................. Native HawaiianEnoch Adams  ............................................................................................ Native Village of Kiva lina
Alfred Berryhill .......................................................................................... Muscogee (Creek) Nat ion
Virginia Cross  ...................................................................................................... Mucklesho ot Tribe
Gerald Danforth ...................................................................................................... Wisconsin Oneida
Beasley Denson ........................................................................ Mississippi Band of Choctaw IndiansRichard Luarkie ...................................................................................................... Pueblo of  Laguna
Marshall McKay  ...................................................................................... Yocha Dehe Wintun NationLydia Olympic ................................................................................................................. . Yupik/Aleut
Barbara Anne Smith .............................................................................................. Chickasaw Nati on
Ron His Horse Is Thunder ................................................................................ Standing Rock SiouxExecutive Director: John E. Echohawk .................................................................................. Pawnee
NARF LEGAL REVIEW • VOLUME 35, NO.1 • WINTER/SPRING 2010Native American Rights Fund
1506 Broadway
Boulder, CO 80302Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage
PAID
Boulder, Colorado
Permit No. 589
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER
LegalReview 05/10  5/13/10  8:48 PM  Page 16