Disputes about the boundaries of an Indian
reservation are neither uncommon nor unimpor-tant.  They arise from the foundations of the agree-ments between the United States and the Tribesinvolved, most often solemn treaties.  All too oftenthey arise from the violation of those treaties by,and unkept promises from, the United States.  Thathistory marks the relations between the UnitedStates and Eastern Shoshone Tribe where on thisoccasion the United States is actually acting toprotect the interests of the Tribe in the defense ofthe Tribe’s Reservation boundaries.
The most recent controversy arises out of efforts
of the Eastern Shoshone and Northern ArapahoTribes, who jointly share the Wind RiverReservation in Wyoming, to secure delegation ofcertain non-regulatory programs from the UnitedStates Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)under the Clean Air Act (CAA).  One of those pro-grams requires that EPA identify where the bound-ary of the Reservation is located.  Having done soconsistent with the Tribes’ description of theboundary has triggered significant oppositionfrom the State of Wyoming, the City of Riverton,Fremont County, and some private parties. The history leading up to the controversy
The Eastern Shoshone Tribe settled the
Shoshone Reservation in Wyoming in 1868 whenthe Tribe, with the United States, entered into theTreaty of July 3, 1868.  That treaty set apart3,054,182 acres “for the absolute and undisturbeduse and occupation of the Shoshone Indians..., andfor such other friendly tribes or individual Indiansas from time to time they may be willing, with theconsent of the United States, to admit amongst
VOLUME 39, NO. 1 WINTER/SPRING 2014NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Environmental Protection Agency Rules in Favor of
Shoshone and Northern Arapaho Tribes
Environmental Protection Agency Rules in
Favor of Shoshone and Northern ArapahoTribes ...................................................... page 1
In memory of Billy Frank Jr. .................. page 7
Case Updates .......................................... page 8
- Department of the Interior proposes 
regulations to make trust land acquisitionsfor Alaska Natives
- Supreme Court Upholds Tribal Sovereign
Immunity in Michigan v. Bay Mills
New NARF Board Member .................. page 12National Indian Law Library ................ page 13Calling Tribes to Action! ...................... page 14NARF .................................................... page 15
them.”  The Shoshone Reservation was established
in exchange for the Tribe’s relinquishment of theirformer reservation of 44 million acres.  TheReservation is situated in the shadow of the WindRiver Mountain Range which serves as the head-waters for the rivers and streams that feed theReservation’s Big Wind and Popo Agie Rivers, theprimary source of all the water on the Reservation. 
Br
oken tr eaties, br oken pr omises lead to a
reduced r eservation and Easter n Shoshone and
Northern Arapaho T ribes sharing the Reser vation
Shortly after the Reservation was established the
Shoshone Tribe was visited by Felix Brunot, acommissioner from the United States, requestingthat the Tribes relinquish a portion of the south-ern end of the Reservation because,  “since thedate of [the] treaty, mines have been discovered,and citizens of the United States have madeimprovements within the limits of said reserva-tion, and it is deemed advisable for the settlementof all difficulty between the parties, arising in con-sequence of said occupancy, to change the south-ern limit of said reservation.”  The “difficulty”which had arisen was that non-Indian settlers and
miners had trespassed on the Reservation and theUnited States was unwilling to honor the treatyand remove them.  The United States paid $25,000for 712,000 acres of land; about 3.5 cents per acre,under legislation enacted by Congress in theLander Purchase Act, 18 Stat. 291 (1874).  
Meanwhile the Northern Arapaho Tribe was con-
tinuing to petition the United States to honor itsagreements in the Treaty of Fort Laramie of 1851and the Treaty of 1868 to establish a reservationfor the Arapahos.  The United States failed tohonor those agreements, leaving the Tribe to wan-der the plains while non-Indian settlers increas-ingly encroached on their hunting grounds, dis-placing them from their traditional homelands.  In1878, the federal Superintendent of the ShoshoneReservation Agency approached Chief Washakie ofthe Shoshone Tribe with a request that theNorthern Arapaho’s be allowed to rest on the east-ern end of the Shoshone Reservation while theycontinued to seek establishment of a reservation oftheir own.  Deliberately misled by representativesof the federal government, everyone on the
PAGE 2                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 3NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Reservation believed the Arapaho tenancy was
temporary.  Not so.  After a time it became appar-ent that the federal government intended to leavethe Arapaho on the Shoshone Reservation.  Theresult was that the Arapahos became equal ownerswith the Shoshone of the land and resources of theReservation, which became known as the WindRiver Reservation. What is unique about the rela-tionship of the Eastern Shoshone and NorthernArapaho Tribes is that they are the only Tribes inthe United States that share a reservation in jointownership but maintain their separate sovereignty.They make decisions about shared resourcesthrough a Joint Business Committee. 
Continuing pr
essur e from the United States
leads to an opening of Reser vation to non-Indian
settlement 
In 1887 the United States adopted a new policy,
the General Allotment Act (GAA), which wasintended to accomplish the assimilation of Indianpeople into the majority culture through breaking
up of communal ownership of tribal lands and thedestruction of Native American culture.  The realpurpose of the Act was identified at the time bySenator Teller from Colorado, who remarked that“[t]he provisions for the apparent benefit of theIndian are but a pretext to get at his lands andoccupy them and making available to non-Indiansettlement lands within the Reservations.”
1The
GAA was implemented through individual “sur-plus land acts” negotiated with the tribes of thevarious reservations.  Under pressure from non-Indian interests and the State of Wyoming, theUnited States continued to pressure the EasternShoshone and Northern Arapaho Tribes to relin-quish lands on the Reservation.  After two failedattempts in 1891 and 1893 to negotiate furthercessions, Indian Inspector James McLaughlincame to the Tribes seeking the cession of the hotsprings and 55,040 acres of land surrounding pre-sent day Thermopolis, Wyoming.  McLaughlin wassuccessful in obtaining the Thermopolis agree-
1Sen Teller went on to say that, “If this were done in the name of greed, it would be bad enough; but to do it in the name of hu manity, and under the
cloak of an ardent desire to promote the Indian’s welfare by making him like ourselves whether he will or not, is infinitely wo rse.” Otis, D.S. The Dawes
Act and the Allotment of Indian Lands. Norman: U of OK Press, 1973, pp. 18-19. Originally published in 1934ment.  Congress ratified the agreement which
included an agreement to pay the Tribes $60,000for the cession at $1.09 per acre. ThermopolisPurchase Act, 30 Stat. 93 (1897).
Inspector McLaughlin was not done. He came
back in 1904 to seek the largest cession of all.  Henegotiated with the tribes to open for settlementnearly two-thirds of their land situated in thenorth and eastern portion of the Reservation,bounded in the south by the Big Wind and PopoAgie Rivers.  Unlike in the past, McLaughlinadvised the tribes that the United States didn’trequire their agreement.  Based on a case in theUS Supreme Court decided in 1903, Congresscould exercise its “plenary power” over Indianaffairs and open the reservation for settlement by non-Indians by legislative fiat. Moreover,McLaughlin said, the United States would not bepaying for the land when it was opened for settle-ment, but rather, would pass the proceeds of thesale of the lands to the Tribes as they were collected.It was in this context that the “negotiations” wereconducted. In 1904, agreement was reached for the opening
of Reservation land north and east of the Big Windand Popo Agie Rivers.  The agreement was that theUnited States would act as the trustee on behalf ofthe Tribes for the sale of any lands entered by set-tlers of and for the establishment of townsites.  Inorder for the United States to be able to transfergood title to those seeking land, it was necessaryfor the Tribes to surrender all right title and inter-est to the United States.  But the tribes retainedthe rights to any proceeds from the lands resultingfrom non-sale activities, such as leasing for graz-ing, mining for oil, gas, sand and gravel, and use ofthe surface for other activities.  For every purposeexcept transfer for sale, the Tribes retained thebeneficial ownership of the land.
The 1904 Agreement was amended and ratified
by Congress by the Act of March 3, 1905 (1905Act).  The key question related to the 1905 Act isits effect, if any, on the boundary of theReservation as it existed at the time of the adop-tion of that legislation.  Either it had the effect oferasing the boundary surrounding the landsopened for settlement, i.e. “diminished” the
PAGE 4                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 5NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Reservation boundary, or it left the boundary
intact and the lands within that boundary weresimply opened for settlement. 
Significant oil and gas development takes place
and the Tribes have increasing concerns aboutenvironmental impacts
Recently, the number of oil and gas wells on or
near the Reservation increased, the Tribes’ jointenvironmental agency, the Wind RiverEnvironmental Quality Commission (WREQC),became increasingly concerned about environ-mental monitoring and regulation.  To begin toget a handle on air quality, EST and NAT filed ajoint application on December 17, 2008 with theEPA for delegation of “treatment in the same man-ner as a state” (TAS) in the administration of cer-tain Clean Air Act programs.  The Applicationasked for delegation pursuant to Clean Air Act(CAA) for Affected State Status – which would pro-vide the Tribes with the right to receive notice ofany activity that could impact air emissions with-in 50 miles of the boundary of the Reservation – aswell as the right to apply for certain grant pro-grams from EPA.  The Application contains no
request for any program that would include regu-latory authority. 
After careful review, including securing an opin-
ion from the Solicitor for the Department of theInterior on the boundary of the Reservation, EPAissued its Approval of the Application on December11, 2013 – published in the Federal Register, Vol.78, No. 244, 76829, December 19, 2013.  That deci-sion determined that the boundaries of the WindRiver Reservation were not altered by the SurplusLand Act of March 3, 1905.   
The State of Wyoming petitioned EPA for recon-
sideration and a stay on January 6, 2014. That peti-tion was granted in part by EPA as to lands overwhich jurisdiction is in dispute.  Wyoming alsofiled a petition for review in the Tenth CircuitCourt of Appeals in Denver, Colorado on February14, 2014, which was followed in due course by sep-arate petitions for review from Devon Energy andthe Wyoming Farm Bureau.  The Court consoli-dated the three petitions into one case.  The Cityof Riverton and Fremont County have filed
motions for intervention on the side of the 
petitioners. Those motions are pending. TheNorthern Arapahoe Tribe filed a motion for inter-vention which the Court granted, and the EasternShoshone Tribe filed a notice of interventionwhich the Court also granted. The Tribes are urging the parties to sit down to negotiations inmediation or other settings to address the broadrange of issues facing all of the parties.  So far, theState of Wyoming has indicated no interest intalks.
Wyoming congressional delegation drafts legisla-
tion to define the boundary
In March 2014 the Wyoming Congressional del-
egation shared with the Eastern Shoshone Tribe adraft of legislation entitled “To clarify the bound-aries of the Wind River Reservation and for otherpurposes.”  The language of the draft appearsintended to set the boundary of the Reservation toexclude the lands that the State of Wyoming
prefers.  If that would be the case it would accom-plish very little, and nothing more would beaccomplished if the State were to prevail in thepending litigation; that is, it would simply draw aline.  None of the issues that presently trouble thecommunity would be addressed; including: crimi-nal jurisdiction, rights-of-way and maintenance ofroads, environmental regulation and permitting,the administration of water rights, taxation andrevenue sharing, and other areas including zon-ing, building codes and other management issues.These issues deserve the attention of the leader-ship of the communities involved and the EasternShoshone Tribe is committed to seeking meaning-ful and acceptable agreements to improve the livesof all involved. 
❂
PAGE 6                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 7NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
“I don’t believe in magic. I believe in the sun
and the stars, the water, the tides, the floods,the owls, the hawks flying, the river running,the wind talking. They’re measurements.They tell us how healthy things are, howhealthy we are, because we and they are thesame.  Now that’s what I believe in.”  
— Billy Frank Jr., Where the Salmon Run
Former NARF Board member Billy Frank Jr.,
died Monday, May 5 at age 83.  Billy was a vision-ary, a fiery leader and a hero for Indian rights.Everyone in the NARF family—members, staff,board of directors—will miss his warmth, generosity and strength of conviction.  
A Nisqually Tribal member, Frank grew up 
fishing for salmon and steelhead on the NisquallyRiver. Frank was first arrested for salmon fishingas a boy in 1945 — an event that led him on along campaign for tribal rights. He and otherswere repeatedly arrested as they staged “fish ins”demanding the right to fish in their historicalwaters, as they were guaranteed in treaties whenthey ceded land to white settlers in the 19th century. 
He was on the front line when the battle over
treaty-guaranteed Indian fishing rights eruptedin the 1960s and 1970s. His perseverance landedhim in jail more than 50 times but helped lead toreaffirming the tribal treaty fishing rights whenthe U.S v. Washington (Boldt Decision) was
decided in 1974. NARF represented five tribes inthat litigation, including Nisqually.
The ruling, supported by the Supreme Court in
1979, reaffirmed the treaty-protected fishingrights of the tribes. Among other things, the ruling stated that the tribes have a right to catchup to fifty percent of the harvestable resource,and that the state and the tribes must manage theresource as co-managers.As Chairman of the Northwest Indian Fisheries
Commission, Frank worked to achieve a numberof key agreements between the tribes and variouslocal, state and federal officials that furtherstrengthen treaty-guaranteed fishing rights andenvironmental protection laws. His involvementin areas like the unique Timber-Fish-WildlifeAgreement, the Chelan Agreement (a waterresources planning document), and the CentennialAccord placed Frank in a powerful leadership rolefor Indian and non-Indian alike. It’s a leadershiprole that’s been recognized from Olympia toWashington, D.C. 
❂
In memory of Billy Frank Jr. 
March 9, 1931 – May 5, 2014PAGE 8                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDCASE UPDATES
The Department of the Interior published a
proposed regulation today authorizing petitionsfor lands to be taken into trust status on behalf ofAlaska Native Tribes and individuals.  KevinWashburn, Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs,announced the long standing regulatory prohibi-tion on Alaska petitions would come to an end.The proposed regulation comes nearly one-yearafter the historic court victory for Alaska NativeTribes in Akiachak Native Community, et al. v.
Salazar , which affirmed the ability of the
Secretary of Interior to take land into trust onbehalf of Alaska Tribes and also acknowledged therights of Alaska Tribes to be treated the same asall other federally recognized Tribes. 
In 2006, four Tribes and one Native individual—
the Akiachak Native Community, ChalkyitsikVillage, Chilkoot Indian Association, TuluksakNative Community (IRA), and Alice Kavairlook—brought suit challenging the Secretary of theInterior’s decision to leave in place a regulationthat treats Alaska Natives differently from otherNative peoples.  On behalf of our clients, NARFand Alaska Legal Services Corporation soughtjudicial review of 25 C.F .R. § 151 as it pertains tofederally recognized Tribes in Alaska.  This federalregulation governs the procedures used by Indian
Tribes and individuals when requesting theSecretary of the Interior to acquire title to land intrust on their behalf.  The regulation bared theacquisition of land in trust in Alaska other thanfor the Metlakatla Indian Community or its mem-bers.  Plaintiffs argued that this exclusion ofAlaska Natives—and only Alaska Natives—fromthe land into trust application process is voidunder 25 U.S.C. § 476(g), which nullifies regula-tions that discriminate among Indian Tribes.  TheState of Alaska intervened to argue that the dif-ferential treatment is required by the AlaskaNative Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA).  TheDistrict Court for the District of Columbia agreedwith Plaintiffs on all counts.  
Today’s announcement from the Department of
the Interior, along with the District Court’s rulinglast year, will allow Alaska Tribes to begin peti-tioning the Secretary to have their tribally-ownedfee lands placed into trust status. With such status, Alaska’s Tribal governments will have theopportunity to enhance their ability to regulatealcohol and generally protect the health, safety,and welfare of tribal members. Department of the Interior proposes regulations to
make trust land acquisitions for Alaska Natives
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 9NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
In a stunning victory for
Indian tribes, the SupremeCourt of the United States onMay 27, 2014 issued its opin-ion in Michigan v. Bay Mills
Indian Community , reaffirm-
ing the doctrine of tribal sov-ereign immunity.  In a 5-to-4
decision, Justice Kagan, joined by Chief JusticeRoberts, Justices Kennedy, Breyer and Sotomayor,upheld the lower court’s decision that that Indiantribal governments possess sovereign immunityagainst lawsuits, including lawsuits brought bystate governments, and reaffirmed the principlethat it is for Congress, not the Court, to determinethe circumstances where Indian tribes should besubject to suit.  In an unexpected development,Chief Justice Roberts provided the crucial fifthvote to secure this legal victory, having not votedin favor of tribal interests in a single case since hejoined the Court in 2005.
The lawsuit had its origin in a dispute between
the State of Michigan and the Bay Mills IndianCommunity over whether a particular locationconstituted Indian lands eligible for gamingunder the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act, butthen turned into a much larger legal battle overthe rights of all Indian tribes across the country. 
“This is a good day for tribal governments,” said
NCAI President Brian Cladoosby and Chairman ofthe Swinomish Tribe.  “Congratulations to theBay Mills Indian Community!  We always thoughtthis case was an overreach by the State ofMichigan.  Tribal and state governments worktogether and find common ground all the time.All governments are working to create jobs, edu-cate our children, provide public safety and pro-tect our environment.  We find agreement onthousands of issues, but every now and then wedisagree.  When that happens, we have to negoti-ate solutions on a government-to-governmentbasis.  That takes leadership, and we can’t takeeach other to court.  The Supreme Court agrees.”Upon learning of the decision and the fact that
Chief Justice Roberts voted in favor of tribal inter-ests, NARF’s Executive Director John Echohawk’sinitial response was a simple “WOW!”  After a sighof relief, he stated:  “I am pleased that the Courttoday stood upon the foundational principles ofIndian law that we are all familiar with, instead ofchanging the rules on us all the time.  The victo-ry in this case is attributed to the hard work anddedication of the tribal leaders and attorneys forBay Mills, as well as the on-going efforts of theTribal Supreme Court Project.”
In parts of the opinion aside from the main
holding, the Supreme Court found that the statescan use other remedies to address issues off-reservation, including negotiations, permitenforcement, and lawsuits against tribal officialsin their individual capacities.  A dissent writtenby Justice Thomas strongly disagreed with theholding, stating that sovereign immunity is ajudicially created doctrine and could be modifiedby the Supreme Court.  However the majorityemphasized that tribal sovereignty is an inherentright of Indian tribes recognized in a string ofSupreme Court decisions from the founding ofthe United States.
NCAI and NARF filed an amicus brief before the
argument, and would like to thank all of the trib-al leaders and attorneys who participated in theefforts on this case.
On December 2, 2013, in Michigan v. Bay Mills
Indian Community , the Supreme Court heard oral
argument involving the petition filed by the Stateof Michigan seeking review of a decision by theU.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit whichheld that federal courts lack jurisdiction to adjudi-cate the State’s claims against the Bay Mills IndianCommunity under the Indian Gaming RegulatoryAct (IGRA) to the extent those claims are based onan allegation that the Tribe’s casino is not on“Indian lands,” and that the claims are also barredby the doctrine of tribal sovereign immunity. 
Supreme Court Upholds Tribal Sovereign Immunity
in Michigan v. Bay Mills
The Bay Mills Indian Community opened a casino
in late 2010 on fee land about 90 miles south ofits Upper Peninsula reservation. The Tribe hadpurchased the land with interest earnings from asettlement with the federal government overcompensation from land ceded in 1800s treaties.Under the Michigan Indian Land ClaimsSettlement Act of 1997, any land acquired withthese settlement funds would "be held as Indianlands are held." Michigan argued that the tribeopened the casino on lands that do not qualify as“Indian lands” under IGRA and in violation of astate-tribal gaming compact. The questions pre-sented in the petition are: The Indian GamingRegulatory Act, 25 U.S.C. § 2701 et seq. (IGRA),authorizes an Indian tribe to conduct class IIIgaming under limited circumstances and only on“Indian lands.” 25 U.S.C. § 2710(d)(1). This dis-pute involves a federal court’s authority to enjoinan Indian tribe from operating an illegal casinolocated off of "Indian lands." The petition pre-sents two recurring questions of jurisprudentialsignificance that have divided the circuits: (1)Whether a federal court has jurisdiction to enjoinactivity that violates IGRA but takes place outsideof Indian lands; and (2) Whether tribal sovereignimmunity bars a state from suing in federal courtto enjoin a tribe from violating IGRA outside ofIndian lands. 
In its opening brief, Michigan mounted a full
frontal attack on tribal sovereign immunity seek-ing to extend the authority of states to regulate“gaming activity” under the Indian GamingRegulatory Act (IGRA). First, Michigan asked theCourt to examine “IGRA as a whole” to findCongressional intent to waive of tribal sovereignimmunity or, in the alternative, to overrule Santa
Clara Pueblo and apply a “less strict standard”
when considering whether legislation such asIGRA abrogates tribal sovereign immunity.Second, if the statutory arguments are not suc-cessful, Michigan asked the Court to recognizethat tribal sovereign immunity “is a federal com-mon law doctrine” created by this Court and sub-ject to adjustment by this Court. Thus, accordingto Michigan, the Court should narrowly readKiowa as a “contract-based ruling” and (at theextreme) hold that a tribe’s immunity is limitedto its on-reservation governmental functions. Two amicus briefs in support of Michigan were
filed. First, the State of Alabama, joined by fifteenother states, asked the Court to allow states tosue tribes for declaratory and injunctive reliefwhen tribes are operating “unlawful gambling,payday lending, and similar activities” within thestate. The states’ amicus brief characterize thecommercial activities of Indian tribes as“hav[ing] built everything from brick-and-mortarcasinos to Internet-based banks, based on theperception that they can evade federal and stateregulations within state territory.” Second, theState of Oklahoma filed its own amicus brief todraw the Court’s attention to three examples ofwhat it characterizes as the failure of the UnitedStates and the National Indian GamingCommission to stop “illegal tribal gambling”within the state. 
In response, the Tribe informed the Court that
this case “is one of the rare cases before thisCourt that is squarely controlled by settled prece-dent.” Based on the Court’s 1998 decision inKiowa , the Tribe argued that an Indian tribe is
entitled to sovereign immunity unless Congresshas abrogated its immunity, or the tribe haswaived it, neither of which applies to this case.The Tribe goes on to point out that there are avariety of means for resolving this dispute,including arbitration which is the dispute resolu-tion process agreed to by the state and the tribein their gaming compact. Accordingly, “[t]here isno reason for the Court to rewrite the law or dis-card settled doctrine simply because Michigan isnow unhappy with the bargain it struck.” 
Four amicus briefs were filed in support of the
Bay Mills Indian Community. The United States,in support of the tribe, argued that IGRA does notauthorize a suit against a tribe to enjoin gamingthat takes place off Indian lands and that theCourt’s settled precedents recognize that Indiantribes have immunity from suit. In an effort topersuade the Court to preserve the doctrine oftribal sovereign immunity, the United Statespointed to other alternative resolutions for thiscase, including mutual waivers of immunity infederal court; pending Ex Parte Young actions
against state or tribal officials; tribe seekingNIGC final agency action; and enforcement of
PAGE 10                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 11NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDstate’s gaming laws. The National Congress of
American Indians, joined by the National IndianGaming Association, other intertribal organiza-tions, and 51 federally recognized Indian tribes,filed an amicus brief challenging whether subjectmatter jurisdiction exists for the Court to consid-er the states’ broad attacks on the doctrine oftribal sovereign immunity and educating theCourt in relation to Congress’ careful considera-tion of immunity in the wake of Kiowa and its
decision to not curtail the doctrine in a mannersuggested by the states. 
As expected, Michigan Solicitor General John J.
Bursch began oral argument with the State’sprincipal contentions: (1) it makes no sense thatCongress intended States to have a federalinjunctive remedy for illegal gaming on-reserva-tion under IGRA, but no remedy if that gamingtook place on land outside the reservation andwithin the State’s exclusive jurisdiction; and (2) atribe should not have greater immunity than aforeign nation, such as France, which would nothave blanket immunity if it opened up an illegalbusiness in Michigan. 
To begin questioning, Justice Sotomayor
inquired about a “jurisdictional” issue raisedwithin the amicus brief submitted by NCAI, et al. ,
(i.e. whether the State could pursue its appealsince the District Court had made clear that theState had not filed the motion for the injunction,had not intervened, and had only filed a brief sup-porting another party’s motion in a related suit).However, no other Justice joined in the discus-sion which ended abruptly after Chief JusticeRoberts inquired whether this issue involves ajurisdictional objection or a procedural objection(a procedural objection is waived by a party if it isnot timely raised, whereas a jurisdictional objec-tion can be raised at any time by any party or theCourt). Therefore, it appears that a majority ofthe Court views the issue as procedural, thereforewaived, and this case is properly before the Court. 
The Court spent most of the oral argument
exploring several interrelated issues: (a) the pos-sibility of alternative remedies available to theparties that would resolve their dispute withoutrequiring the Court to modify its 1998 decision inKiowa ; (b) assuming such alternative remedies
are insufficient to resolve the dispute, the ways inwhich the Court could modify or limit tribal sov-ereign immunity to provide a remedy to theState; and (c) whether it would be proper for theCourt to modify the tribal sovereign immunity atall, or whether such modification is within theprovince of Congress. 
Justice Ginsberg began the discussion of alter-
native remedies by asking why the State did notpursue arbitration—the dispute resolution agreedto by the parties under the gaming compact.Several of the Justices seemed to agree with theState that, in the end, although arbitration underthe compact appears well-suited to resolve theunderlying merits of the dispute, there is skepti-cism regarding whether or not Bay Mills wouldre-assert sovereign immunity if Michigan success-fully invoked the arbitration provision. JusticesSotomayor and Kagan appeared more convincedby the plausibility of an alternative remedy in theform of an Ex Parte Young action against tribal
officials to enjoin them from operating the casino(raised in the amicus briefs submitted by theUnited States and the Indian Law Scholars). TheState responded that an Ex Parte Young suit is an
imperfect remedy in this case for a number of rea-sons and looked to turn the discussion towardsthe need for the Court to modify Kiowa. However,the Justices observed that Ex Parte Young would
likely provide all of the relief being sought by theState except for its claim for monetary damages.
Generally, the Court appeared to accept the fact
that Michigan or the federal government couldresolve the matter by initiating criminal proceed-ings against the individuals operating or workingat the casino, but questioned their efficacy. BayMills conceded (as it did in regard to arbitration)that both the Ex Parte Young and criminal pros-
ecution options were available remedies thatcould be pursued by the State. Bay Mills remind-ed the Court that the casino is currently closedand that the parties are currently in the processof renegotiating their state-tribal gaming com-pact where the State can bargain for additionalremedies. However, several Justices appeared toview tribal sovereign immunity as a hurdle to anypotential remedy. PAGE 12                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Larry N. Olinger , Vice Chairman of the Agua
Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians located in PalmSprings, California, was elected to the NativeAmerican Rights Fund Board of Directors inNovember 2013.  Larry has always been interestedin tribal activities and service.  He was first electedto the Tribal Council in 1961, subsequently servedas Secretary/ Treasurer in 1969 and served asChairman of the Tribal Council in 1970-71.  Hehas been the Vice Chairman since 2012.
Larry has also served on numerous tribal boards
and was the first Chairman of the Agua CalienteDevelopment Authority when it was establishedin 1989.  He currently serves on the State ofCalifornia Coachella Valley MountainsConservancy which works to protect the naturaland cultural resources of the Coachella Valley.
In 1988, Mr. Olinger was responsible for the
enactment of federal legislation that exemptsfrom taxation the proceeds of investment incomerelated to Native American land taken by eminentdomain for public purposes.  He spent his profes-sional career working in the defense industry,specializing in test equipment for the Polaris sub-marine.  He has an AA degree from Long BeachCity College and attended the University ofNEW NARF BOARD MEMBER
California Riverside. He also spent many years
breeding and racing thoroughbred horses.
The NARF Board of Directors and staff welcome
Larry and look forward to working with him. ❂Throughout the argument, various Justices
noted several ways by which the Court couldmodify the doctrine of tribal sovereign immunity.Justice Kennedy, observing the unusual proce-dural posture of the case, proposed a ruling thatwould limit Kiowa to make the tribal sovereign
immunity defense unavailable in the context ofIndian gaming. Other Justices questionedwhether Indian tribes should enjoy greater sover-eign immunity than States or foreign nations.Justice Ginsburg proposed making a distinctionbetween governmental and commercial (off-reservation) activity, whereby the latter wouldnot be covered by tribal sovereign immunity.Michigan argued that the Court could eithermodify Kiowa on this governmental-versus-com-
mercial distinction, or simply distinguish Kiowa
on the basis that States are different—States areconstitutional sovereigns entitled to be treateddifferently than ordinary business plaintiffs. 
Finally, the Court discussed whether it should
modify the doctrine of tribal sovereign immunity,or whether, in line with Kiowa , once again defer
any changes to Congress. A majority of theJustices, including Chief Justice Roberts,expressed a belief in the inherent power of theCourt to modify tribal sovereign immunitydespite its holding in Kiowa . NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 13NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNational Indian Law Library
The National Indian Law Library needs your
financial support
You probably are familiar with the great work
NARF does in court rooms and the halls ofCongress relating to tribal recognition, treatyenforcement, trust fund settlements, repatria-tion, and more.  Did you know that NARF alsois the go-to resource for legal research inIndian law?
Advance Justice through Knowledge! Support
the National Indian Law Library!
Historically, Indian people and advocates
fighting for indigenous rights have found them-selves limited by their ability to access relevantfederal, state, and tribal Indian law resources. Indirect response to this challenge, the NationalIndian Law Library (NILL) was established overforty years ago as a core part of the NativeAmerican Rights Fund (NARF).  Today thelibrary continues to serve as an essentialresource for those working to advance NativeAmerican justice.  As the only public librarydevoted to Indian law, we supply much-neededaccess to Indian law research, news updates, andtribal law documents.  To extend the tradition offree public access to these services we ask foryour financial support. 
Each year, NILL responds to more than 1,000
individual research requests and receives sever-al hundred thousand visits to its onlineresources. Whether it’s through updates to the
online Guide to Indian Child W
elfar eor addi-
tions to the extensive tribal law collection, NILL
is committed to providing visitors withresources that are not available anywhere else!Additionally, our Indian Law Bulletins
and news
blog deliver timely updates about developments
in Indian law and ensure that you have theinformation you need to fight for indigenousrights.  However, we are not resting on our lau-rels; we are constantly improving our onlineresources and access to tribal law materials.
With your support we plan to develop an innov-ative and valuable community based wiki-sourcefor Indian law information and greatly broadenthe scope of the Tribal Law gateway.   
The bulletins, research resources, extensive
catalog, and personal one-on-one librarianassistance can only exist with your help. The
National Indian Law Library operates on anannual budget of $190,000—primarily from thedonations of concerned and motivated individu-als, firms, businesses, and tribes who recognizeNARF and NILL as indispensable resources forNative American justice.  
By donating, you stand with the National
Indian Law Library in its effort to fight injus-tice through access to knowledge. You help
ensure that the library continues to supply freeaccess to Indian law resources and that it hasthe financial means necessary to pursue innov-ative and groundbreaking projects to serve youbetter. Please visit www.narf.org/nill/donatenow for more information on how you can support this mission. ❂Justice Through Knowledge!
PAGE 14                                                                          NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
• Chickasaw Nation
• Comanche Nation of
Oklahoma
• Confederated Salish 
& Kootenai Tribes
• Confederated Tribes 
of Siletz Indians
• Fort Mojave Indian Tribe• Lummi Nation• Native Village of Fort Yukon• Native Village of Port Lions
• Nome Eskimo Community• Organized Village of Saxman• Pechanga Band 
of Luiseno Indians
• Poarch Band 
of Creek Indians
• San Manuel Band 
of Mission Indians
• Seminole Tribe of Florida• Seven Cedars
Casino/Jamestown S’Klallam
• Spirit Lake Dakotah Nation• Tonkawa Tribe• Yoche Dehe Wintun NationIt has been made abundantly clear that non-
Indian philanthropy can no longer sustainNARF’s work.  Federal funds for specific projectshave also been reduced.  Our ability to providelegal advocacy in a wide variety of areas such asreligious freedom, the Tribal Supreme CourtProject, tribal recognition, human rights, trustresponsibility, tribal water rights, Indian ChildWelfare Act, and on Alaska tribal sovereigntyissues has been compromised.  NARF is nowturning to the tribes to provide this crucialfunding to continue our legal advocacy onbehalf of Indian Country.  It is an honor to listthose Tribes and Native organizations who havechosen to share their good fortunes with theNative American Rights Fund and the thousandsof Indian clients we have served.  The generosity
of Tribes is crucial in NARF’s struggle to ensurethe future of all Native Americans.
The generosity of tribes is crucial in NARF’s
struggle to ensure the freedoms and rights of allNative Americans. Contributions from thesetribes should be an example for every NativeAmerican Tribe and organization. We encourageother Tribes to become contributors and part-ners with NARF in fighting for justice for our people and in keeping the vision of ourancestors alive.  We thank the following tribesand Native organizations for their generous support of NARF for our 2014 fiscal year –October 1, 2013 to September 30, 2014:
CALLING TRIBES TO ACTIONNARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 15NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDTHE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF Annual Report: This is NARF's major report on its programs and
activities.  The Annual Report is distributed to foundations, major contributors, certain federal and state agencies, tribal clients, NativeAmerican organizations, and to others upon request. Ray RamirezEditor, ramirez@narf.org.  
The NARF Legal Review is published biannually by the Native American
Rights Fund.  Third class postage paid at Boulder, Colorado. RayRamirez, Editor, ramirez@narf.org.  There is no charge for subscrip-tions, however, contributions are appreciated.
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund is a nonprofit, charitable
organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws of the District of Columbia.  NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the provisions of Section 501 C (3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and con-tributions to NARF are tax deductible.  The Internal Revenue Service hasruled that NARF is not a "private foundation" as defined in Section 509(a)
of the Internal Revenue Code.
Main Office: Native American Rights Fund, 1506 Broadway, Boulder,
Colorado  80302 (303-447-8760) (FAX 303-443-7776).  http://www.narf.org
Washington, D.C. Office: Native American Rights Fund, 1514 P Street,
NW (Rear) Suite D, Washington, D.C. 20005 (202-785-4166) (FAX 202-822-0068).
Alaska Office: Native American Rights Fund, 745 W. 4th Avenue, Suite
502, Anchorage, Alaska 99501 (907-276-0680) (FAX 907-276-2466).
Workplace Campaigns: NARF is a member of America’s Charities, a
national workplace giving federation. Giving through your workplace isas easy as checking off NARF’s box, #10350 on the Combined FederalCampaign (CFC) pledge form authorizing automatic payroll deduction.  The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is the oldest and
largest nonprofit national Indian rights organization in the countrydevoting all its efforts to defending and promoting the legalrights of Indian people on issues essential to their tribal sover-eignty, their natural resources and their human rights. NARFbelieves in empowering individuals and communities whoserights, economic self-sufficiency, and political participation havebeen systematically or systemically eroded or undermined.
Native Americans have been subjugated and dominated.
Having been stripped of their land, resources and dignity, tribestoday are controlled by a myriad of federal treaties, statutes, andcase law. Yet it is within these laws that Native Americans placetheir hope and faith for justice and the protection of their way of life. With NARF’s help, Native people can go on to provideleadership in their communities and serve as catalysts for justpolicies and practices towards Native peoples nationwide. Froma historical standpoint Native Americans have, for numerousreasons, been targets of discriminatory practices.
For the past 44 years, NARF has represented over 250 Tribes
in 31 states in such areas as tribal jurisdiction and recognition,land claims, hunting and fishing rights, the protection of Indianreligious freedom, and many others. In addition to the greatstrides NARF has made in achieving justice on behalf of NativeAmerican people, perhaps NARF’s greatest distinguishingattribute has been its ability to bring excellent, highly ethicallegal representation to dispossessed tribes. NARF has been successful in representing Indian tribes and individuals in casesthat have encompassed every area and issue in the field of Indianlaw. The accomplishments and growth of NARF over the yearsconfirmed the great need for Indian legal representation on anational basis. This legal advocacy on behalf of Native Americanscontinues to play a vital role in the survival of tribes and theirway of life. NARF strives to protect the most important rights ofIndian people within the limit of available resources. 
One of the initial responsibilities of NARF’s first Board of
Directors was to develop priorities that would guide the NativeAmerican Rights Fund in its mission to preserve and enforce thelegal rights of Native Americans.  The Committee developed fivepriorities that continue to lead NARF today:
• Preservation of tribal existence
• Protection of tribal natural resources• Promotion of Native American human rights• Accountability of governments to Native Americans• Development of Indian law and educating the public about
Indian rights, laws, and issuesUnder the priority of the preservation of tribal existence, NARF
works to construct the foundations that are necessary to empow-er tribes so that they can continue to live according to theirNative traditions, to enforce their treaty rights, to insure theirindependence on reservations and to protect their sovereignty. 
Throughout the process of European conquest and coloniza-
tion of North America, Indian tribes experienced a steady dimin-ishment of their land base to a mere 2.3 percent of its originalsize.  Currently, there are approximately 55 million acres ofIndian-controlled land in the continental United States and about44 million acres of Native-owned land in Alaska.  An adequateland base and control over natural resources are central compo-nents of economic self-sufficiency and self-determination, and assuch, are vital to the very existence of tribes.  Thus, much ofNARF’s work involves the protection of tribal natural resources.
Although basic human rights are considered a universal and
inalienable entitlement, Native Americans face an ongoingthreat of having their rights undermined by the United Statesgovernment, states, and others who seek to limit these rights.Under the priority of the promotion of human rights, NARFstrives to enforce and strengthen laws which are designed toprotect the rights of Native Americans to practice their tradi-tional religion, to use their own language, and to enjoy their cul-ture.  Contained within the unique trust relationship betweenthe United States and Indian nations is the inherent duty for alllevels of government to recognize and responsibly enforce themany laws and regulations applicable to Indian peoples.  Becausesuch laws impact virtually every aspect of tribal life, NARF main-tains its involvement in the legal matters pertaining to account-ability of governments to Native Americans.
The coordinated development of Indian law and educating the
public about Indian rights, laws, and issues is essential for thecontinued protection of Indian rights.  This primarily involvesestablishing favorable court precedents, distributing informa-tion and law materials, encouraging and fostering Indian legaleducation, and forming alliances with Indian law practitionersand other Indian organizations. 
Requests for legal assistance should be addressed to the
Litigation Management Committee at NARF’s main office,1506 Broadway, Boulder, Colorado 80302.  NARF’s clients areexpected to pay whatever they can toward the costs of legalrepresentation.NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Gerald Danforth, Chairman .................................................................................. Wisconsin Oneida
Natasha Singh, Vice-Chairman .................................................................. Native Village of StevensVirginia Cross ........................................................................................................ Mucklesh oot Tribe
Moses Haia ................................................................................................................ Nati ve Hawaiian
Tex G. Hall ........................................................................................................ Three Affil iated Tribes
Gary Hayes ………………………………………………………………. Ute Mountain Ute TribeJulie Roberts-Hyslop …………………………………………………… Native Village of TananaStephen Lewis ……………………………………………………... Gila River Indian Community Mark Macarro .............................................................................. Pechanga Band of Luiseño IndiansRobert McGhee .................................................................................... Poarch Band of Creek IndiansLarry N. Olinger .................................................................. Aqua Caliente Band of Cahuilla IndiansPeter Pino ………………………………………………………………………………. Zia PuebloBarbara Anne Smith .............................................................................................. Chickasaw Nati on
Executive Director: John E. Echohawk .................................................................................. Pawnee
NARF LEGAL REVIEW • VOLUME 39, NO. 1 • WINTER/SPRING 2014Native American Rights Fund
1506 Broadway
Boulder, CO 80302Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage
PPAAIIDD
Boulder, Colorado
Permit No. 589
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER
