2012  
Annual  
Report169 men  
remain imprisoned  
at Guantánamo  
without trial685,724
NYC Stop and Frisk 2011
84% Black and Latino  
 6% result in arrests  
2% contraband found
The Center for Constitutional Rights is dedicated to advancing and protecting  
the rights guaranteed by the United States Constitution and the Universal  Declaration of Human Rights. Founded in 1966 by attorneys who represented  civil rights movements in the South, CCR is a non-profit legal and educational organization committed to the creative use of law as a positive force for  social change.
www.CCRjustice.orgAnnual Report 2012  1table of contents
Letter from the Executive Director  ........................................................................................ 2
Guantánamo
 
.............................................................................................................................. 4
International Human Rights
 
................................................................................................... 8
Government Misconduct and Racial Injustice
 
................................................................ 12
Movement Support
 
.................................................................................................................. 16
Social Justice Institute
 
........................................................................................................... 18
Communications 
 
.................................................................................................................... 20
Letter from the Legal Director
 
.............................................................................................. 22
Case Index
 
................................................................................................................................ 23
Partners in Litigation
 
............................................................................................................. 36
Friends and Allies
 
................................................................................................................... 40
President’s Reception
 
............................................................................................................. 44
Message from the President
 
................................................................................................. 46
CCR Donors
 
.............................................................................................................................. 47
CCR Board and Staff
 
.............................................................................................................. 62
Financials
 
................................................................................................................................. 63
In Memoriam
 
............................................................................................................................ 64
2 center for constitutional rights Messa Ge fRoM tHe eXecUtIVe DIRectoR
The Bold Way Through To Social c hange
This is the sixth year that I’ve been at CCR as Executive Director. On every day since I’ve 
started, I have been inspired by CCR’s extraordinary staff and the bold, broad and effective advocacy they do. When I wake up in the morning, I am eager to get to work with my col-leagues to deeply engage in the social concerns of the day. Like many of you, when power and greed overshadow what’s good in the world, I say “thank goodness for CCR” because I know our job is to find a bold way through for the disenfranchised and those with the least access to justice. 
Over the last six years, I’ve seen miracles happen as we have moved forward our vision to 
create the most fearless and effective human and civil rights legal organization in the country; one committed to the core values of justice, accountability, transparency and meaningful social change. With these values as our guide, CCR has been highly effective in our litigation and advocacy efforts. I have seen our staff procure extraordinary wins for justice and social change against all odds. I have seen the lives of our clients and their communities changed for the better because of our efforts. And I have seen governments and corporations change their repressive, sometimes deadly, policies and practices as a result of our intervention. The courage of my colleagues is only matched by the courage of the people on whose behalf we advocate: those demanding and working for social change; often they are those with the least access to justice. The partnerships we form with clients, activists and communities are the keys to our effectiveness. The bold way through to social justice does not look like a good lawyer standing alone in court, but it does look like people demanding justice with a creative lawyer at their side. That is what CCR is all about and what makes us unlike any other organization on the planet. And we’re not even close to stopping!
Annual Report 2012  3
CCR’s bold way forward for this upcoming year has us taking on huge corporations; the 
United States military; Immigration and Customs Enforcement; the States of Michigan and Louisiana; homophobic evangelicals; the highest level Vatican officials; the New York Police Department and California’s infamous Pelican Bay prison, just to name a few. We will be exploring new work in the areas of detention; gender justice; surveillance and racial profiling; militarism and abuse of executive power among other key areas. Although this administration stubbornly refuses to respect human rights in its own policies, we will continue to challenge drone killings; free the men cleared for release in Guantánamo and close it once and for all; and seek to hold U.S. torturers accountable.
But we can’t do all of this alone, which is why our partnership with supporters like you is so 
important. The challenges moving forward are monumental and the stakes are literally life and death for many of our clients. Thanks to your dedication to CCR and our battles, our work together will continue to be successful and effective. As you will see in this Annual Re-port, CCR’s fight for the world we want continues and grows. Thank you from all of the CCR staff for your wonderful support as we speak truth to power, defend and expand our rights and blaze a path toward justice for those with the most to lose.
Vincent Warren
CCR Executive Director Vince Warren speaking at a rally to 
commemorate the 10th anniversary of the first men brought to Guantánamo.
CCR Executive Director Vince Warren with Mario Joseph, Managing Attorney at Bureau des Avocats Internationaux (BAI), and Meena Jagannath, BAI Legal Fellow, in Haiti.4 center for constitutional rightsGuantánamo
Annual Report 2012  5Political Will
January 2012 marked the 10th anniver -
sary of the creation of a lawless prison in Guantánamo, and the anniversary of President Obama’s unfulfilled promise to shutter the prison—an anniversary CCR marked by leading a national campaign to mark this dark chap -
ter. Two developments made closing Guantánamo even more challenging, reinforcing our view that creative, long-term, and multi-faceted solutions are necessary.Roadblocks to Justice:  Courts, Congress, the PresidentFirst, Congress passed, and then Presi-dent Obama signed the National De-fense Authorization Act (NDAA) of 2012, which contained provisions designed to make it exceedingly difficult to trans-fer detainees out of the camp, even the 87 detainees who the U.S. government itself has “cleared for transfer.” CCR fought against the passage of these transfer restrictions, and is developing strategies to either work around them or satisfy their terms, and resume the pro-cess of resettling the men indefinitely detained without charge.
Second, the Supreme Court appeared 
to abandon its promise, made in the 2008 Boumediene v. Bush  ruling, that 
detainees would be entitled to meaning-ful habeas review of their detentions. Following the decision, detainees were successful in a remarkable number of cases—nearing a 70% success rate—in proving their detentions unlawful in the 
CCR in coalition with human rights groups marches on the Capitol to protest the continued 
existence of Guantánamo Bay.10 Years Too Long
CCR is proud of the legal work we have  done over the course of our 10 year struggle  to bring justice to Guantánamo. We won  the fight to gain access to the base and  the detainees, exposed the horrendous  abuse at the camp, and built a network  of hundreds of lawyers, legal workers and  activists who secured the right of detainees  to have their day in court in two historic  Supreme Court victories. Together these  efforts helped improve conditions in the  prison and shed light on deplorable U.S.  policies, including torture, and ultimately  offered hope that our country would  recognize and correct the wrongs of  the past.
6 center for constitutional rightsdistrict courts. But when presented with 
7 petitions for review, the Supreme Court regrettably refused to hear any. This failure was a devastating blow for the men remaining in the camp. The Court’s inexplicable decision leaves detainee habeas petitioners at the hostile door of the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals.
Litigation
There are currently 169 detainees at Guantánamo, including 87 men who have been “cleared for transfer.” As traditional habeas litigation grows less promising, we are developing other, creative litigation possibilities, such as pursuing cases in international courts. In addition to core Guantánamo habeas cases, CCR continues to press other liti-gation challenging expansive executive authority, duration of detention; chal-lenge increasing restrictions on counsel access militarism and seeking account-ability for torture.
Resettlement
As CCR recognized long ago, litigation is only one tool among many advocacy strategies. Release from Guantánamo has almost always come as the result of diplomatic pressure, public censure, and deal-making, not court order. We do direct advocacy and negotiations with foreign governments to receive detain -
ees, particularly those who have been cleared for release, and we are increas -
ing our work with partners in Yemen to pressure the U.S. to lift the ban on transfers of Yemeni detainees. Non litiga -
tion advocacy not only helps to inform the public, but also supports our resettle -
ment or repatriation efforts. The Supreme Court’s decision not to review habeas cases this term makes judicial relief for our clients even more remote and thus the advocacy work even more critical. Media & AdvocacyWhen, despite public condemnation, CCR took on this work, neither the lawyers nor the public knew the men in Guantánamo or had any access to the base. The Bush administration simply told the public to trust that these were the “worst of the worst.” But this is not the case—the majority of the men who remain detained are there because of political reasons rather than because of anything they have done. CCR’s advocacy was critical to exposing this lie, and to building the public outcry and political pressure that helped bring some measure of transparency to Guantánamo. However, the grim reality is Bush’s detention regime is deeply institutionalized by Obama, and re -
mains an egregious and critical part of a larger, illegal, inhumane, and unjust system of U.S. detention rationalized  
by an illegitimate and rebranded “war on terror.”
Conclusion 
For CCR, this fight is not yet over, nor can it be measured by court victories alone. Fred Korematsu is powerful proof that history will make critical judg-ments about a movement’s success. Similarly, Augusto Pinochet provides convincing evidence that the judgment of international law is patient.
Indeed, to CCR, it is now, when the 
enthusiasm of others to do this work has waned, that we are most vital. CCR was the sole voice in 2002, when we challenged the illegality of Guan -
tánamo; we will not now abandon our leadership at a time when others have acquiesced to the current, un -
fortunate state of affairs. The struggle against indefinite military detention and accountability for torture has, like so many other historic struggles for justice, become long and far-reaching. The interconnected practices of brutal conditions of confinement, extra-con -
stitutional detentions and xenophobia that are so apparent on the ground in Guantánamo could not be eradicated by court decision or presidential elec-tion. It may take decades, but CCR is committed to ending this injustice, once and for all.
Detainees in orange jumpsuits sit in a holding area under 
the watchful eyes of Military Police at Camp X-Ray at Naval Base Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, on Jan. 11, 2002.
“10 years after the opening 
 of the prison camp, the  whole story, in all its horror, still remains to be told.  The American people are entitled to know exactly how the government has betrayed fundamental American  values and the rule of law.” 
CCR Legal Director Baher Azmy
Annual Report 2012  7Djamel is an ethnic Berber who has 
been detained in Guantánamo since February 2002. He fled unrest in his na -
tive Algeria, worked as a highly skilled chef in Vienna and then moved to Montreal. After he was denied political asylum in Canada, and fearing depor -
tation to Algeria where he may face persecution, he traveled to Afghani -
stan and fled when the U.S. began its attacks. Although he participated in no training or fighting, he was arrested after crossing the border into Paki -
stan, sold to the U.S. for a bounty and brought to Camp X-Ray where he faced repeated abuse.
In May 2009, the U.S. District Court 
stayed his habeas case without ruling on the legality of his detention, and since then he has been unable to exercise his constitutional right to pursue habeas relief. Although he poses no threat to the U.S., he has been imprisoned for over a decade without charge, nearly 25% of his lifetime, and the National Defense Authorization Act signed into law by President Obama in December 2011 makes it difficult for any detained man to be released.
In March 2012, the Inter-American 
Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) accepted CCR’s petition and claimed jurisdiction over Ameziane. Despite years of unlawful imprisonment, he is hopeful that his IACHR case will help him achieve safe resettlement in a third country. He loves to read and create beautiful paintings, which he sends to his family in Canada, optimistic that one day they’ll be to talk about them together. CCR is currently making a documentary about Ameziane.“The past years were all  
the worst moments. I would  describe them as a boat  out at sea, battered by  successive storms during  its trip towards an unknown destination, benefiting only from very short periods of respite between two storms. These respites were the  best moments.”
Djamel Ameziane
Artwork created by Djamel Ameziane while imprisoned at 
Guantánamo.“I have only wanted to…  
live quietly and peacefully  in a country where I would not suffer persecution. That  is still my goal.”
Djamel AmezianeCCR client Djamel Ameziane
8 center for constitutional rightsInternational 
        Human     Rights
Annual Report 2012  9The Center has found, time and time again, 
that overbroad executive power corrupts  
absolutely and that only transparency and  
accountability can serve as a meaningful democratic check. We also know that  
the rights of those who are already the most marginalized are the first to be sacrificed. This holds true regardless of the source  
of the power: whether it’s governments,  
corporations, or patriarchal religious  
institutions such as the Vatican. Without  
fail, the powerful institutions and individu -
als resist transparency, resist accountability, and seek impunity for their crimes. In order to secure human rights, violations and violators must be exposed, the truth must be told, and those who committed crimes must be held accountable—regardless of how much power those individuals or institutions hold. 
Honduran protestor holds picture of President Manuel Zelaya, who was ousted by a military 
coup in 2009.
CCRis known for tak-
ing risks, for push-ing the envelope, 
and for the “impossible” or improbable cases we choose. We take cases on principle, to expand rights, to expose abuses; we do not hesitate to challenge those who think they are too powerful to be challenged. The past year has seen the Center tackle some of the most ambitious International Human Rights work in our 46 year history.Religious ExtremismIn September, 2011 the Center filed a groundbreaking complaint at the International Criminal Court (ICC) on behalf of the Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests (SNAP). The com-plaint asked the ICC to investigate four high-level Vatican officials, including the Pope himself, for aiding and abet-ting a system of sexual violence and abuse that allowed priests all over the world to prey on the most vulnerable, and to get away with it. The case has already helped to build the movement for accountability—after the filing more than 500 victims from more than 65 countries have come forward to SNAP for services and seeking to be involved in the case.
In March, 2012 the Center filed the first 
known Alien Tort Statute case seeking accountability for persecution on the basis of sexual orientation and gender 
10 center for constitutional rights table of contents
identity, on behalf of Sexual Minorities 
Uganda (SMUG) against Massachusetts based evangelical, Scott Lively. The suit 
alleges that Lively’s active participation 
in the formulation of anti-gay legisla-tion and policies in Uganda aimed at stripping away fundamental rights from LGBT persons constitutes persecu-tion. Persecution is a “crime against humanity” under international law and is defined as the severe deprivation of fundamental rights based on identity or collectivity.
Corporate Power
CCR pioneered bringing cases in U.S. courts for human rights abuses commit -
ted overseas through the use of the Alien Tort Statute. From the murder and torture of activists to environmental destruction, multinational corporations must be held accountable when they violate human rights to increase profits. If corporations have the same rights as people when it comes to free speech, then they should be legally responsible for their actions when they commit grave crimes. Over the past year our litigation focused on the torture and other unlawful acts committed by Private Military Contrac-tors while they were hired to provide interrogation and translation services at facilities in Iraq, including the notorious Abu Ghraib prison. 
Government Officials
Prosecuting government officials for their illegal activities is a meaningful mechanism for securing justice for the victims and the survivors of torture and war crimes, as well as for deterring fu-ture government officials from repeating this conduct. CCR continues its critical work to hold U.S. officials accountable for human rights violations commit-ted under the auspices of the so-called “Global War on Terror.” These efforts continue in Spain, seeking to prosecute U.S. officials for war crimes via Univer-sal Jurisdiction, and in Canada under the Convention Against Torture. In addition, the Center is seeking to hold Roberto Micheletti Baín accountable for extrajudicial killing, crimes against humanity of murder and persecution, wrongful death and other gross human rights violations that occurred after the 2009 Honduran coup d’état under his au -
thority and direction. We also are work-ing to expose the U.S. role in enabling the continuation of repressive tactics in Honduras.
Threats to the Alien Tort Statute
Thirty years ago, CCR pioneered the use of the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) for human rights violations, creating a new trail for litigation to assist victims of these viola -
tions, who often have no way to seek justice in their home countries, to pursue justice in U.S. courts. This law, which 
In February, the Supreme Court heard arguments in Kiobel 
v. Royal Dutch Petroleum Co., which will decide whether corporations can be sued in U.S. courts for violations of international human rights law under the Alien Tort Statute (ATS). CCR Board Member and ATS pioneer Peter Weiss with Kiobel plaintiff Charles Wiwa and allies.
Private military contractors guarding U.S. State Department employees in Baghdad, Iraq.“U.S. evangelical leaders  
like Scott Lively have actively 
and intensively worked to eradicate any trace of LGBT advocacy and identity.  
Particularly damaging has been his claim that children are at risk because of our existence. We have to stop people like Scott Lively from helping to codify and give legal cover to hatred.”
Frank Mugisha, executive director of Sexual 
Minorities Uganda, client in Sexual Minorities Uganda v. LivelyAnnual Report 2012  11Client from the Vatican filing who reclaimed her body by 
moving from victim to survivor.has underpinned so much of the Center’s 
landmark human rights litigation for decades, is at stake in October 2012. The Supreme Court will decide under what circumstances violations of international law committed outside the United States can be heard in U.S. federal courts, po -
tentially severely narrowing the scope of the ATS. If U.S. courts cannot hear cases about human rights abuses committed abroad, the Court will have essentially granted impunity for complicity in forced labor, torture, extrajudicial killings, and other crimes against humanity, leaving many victims and their families with no recourse or accountability.CCR client survivors holding photos of themselves at the age at which they were abused.
“The question before the 
Court is ultimately a simple one: will multi-national corpo -
rations enjoy impunity when they engage in the most egre-gious conduct, like torture, in far corners of the world, or will they be held to account for their actions?”
CCR senior staff attorney Katherine Gallagher.
12 center for constitutional rights  Government   
      Misconduct  
  and Racial              Justice
Annual Report 2012  13
Police response to immigrant rights protest on May Day.CCR’s Government  
Misconduct and Racial  Justice docket tackles  a broad spectrum of the  most critical issues facing  the United States today.  We defend the democratic  principles like equality,  free speech and government  accountability and transpar -
ency. We strive to complete  the unfinished civil rights  movement and dismantle  the modern-day manifes-  
tations of racial repression.
In addition to challenging the Global 
War on Terror internationally over the years, CCR has confronted the 
ripple effect of the national security state taking hold in our domestic poli-cies. The common scapegoats, often members of already marginalized communities, bear the burden of state policing. Thus, CCR has ramped up our work fighting alongside immigrants and activists who have been targeted by the government in its broad-sweeping profiling measures. The Center is per-sistently breaking new ground to ensure the rights of the most marginalized in our society and those with the least ac-cess to justice.
Racial and Economic Justice
Securing real racial and economic justice has formed the cornerstone of the Center’s work since its founding in 1966 at the height of the American Civil Rights Movement. CCR has won countless historic court victories over the decades, yet genuine equality con -
tinues to elude the nation. Thus, CCR continues to bring cases that challenge obstacles to the full realization of hu -
man rights. Whether we are challeng -
ing the New York City Fire Department’s racially discriminatory hiring practices that have resulted in a force that is only 9% Black or Latino in a city that is 51%; or the use of a state’s financial crisis to disenfranchise poor and majority-14 center for constitutional rightsminority cities and communities across 
Michigan; or getting a court to stop Louisiana from placing on the sex offender registry people convicted of soliciting non-procreative sex acts for a fee, the Center’s work is always on the frontlines in the battle for racial and economic justice. 
Policing and Prisons
As a client in CCR’s new case chal-lenging the use of solitary confinement said so eloquently: “Our Constitution protects everyone living under it; fun-damental rights must not be left at the prison door.” That ethos has informed the Center’s work since our founding, and has brought us to the forefront of countless battles against mass incar-ceration, racist policing, and the biased laws that lead to the exponentially higher rates of people of color being imprisoned. Through CCR’s broad challenge to the New York City Police Department’s unconstitutional practice of suspicionless stop and frisks, which disproportionately target young men of color; our case against the warehous-ing of Muslim and Arab medium level security prisoners in isolative Com-munications Management Units in the Federal Bureau of Prisons; or our lawsuit naming and shaming as torture California’s practice of keeping prison-ers in solitary confinement for more than a decade, CCR works to ensure the fundamental human rights of prisoners are respected and towards reform of the prison system.
“I no longer feel free to  
speak my mind on these  issues out of fear that my  advocacy could actually  convince people to stop  eating foie gras—affecting those businesses’ bottom line and turning me into an  animal enterprise terrorist.”
Plaintiff Sarahjane Blum in Blum v. Holder
One of the cramped, windowless cells in the Security Hous-
ing Unit at Pelican Bay State Prison where prisoners spend 22 ½ to 24 hours each day.Occupy Wall Street protesters join a labor union rally before marching on Zuccotti Park.Annual Report 2012  15Immigrant Justice
Although immigrant populations in the United States have always been vul -
nerable to harassment, scapegoating, 
abuse, and deportation, there has been 
a surge in targeting and ‘otherizing’ since 9/11. CCR works in partnership with grassroots immigrant rights groups, especially the National Day Laborers Organizing Network, on a major Free -
dom of Information Act lawsuit, uncover -
ing the truth about the racial profiling “Secure Communities” program, which we use to dispel the myths of the official rhetoric, which has resulted in many states and municipalities opting out of the program. We also continue our land -
mark post-9/11 immigrant rights case seeking accountability for the high-level Bush administration officials respon -
sible for the racial profiling and abuse of immigrants immediately following 9/11, including allegations that Ashcroft ordered the INS and FBI to investigate individuals for ties to terrorism by, among other means, looking for Muslim-sounding names in the phonebook.
Defending Dissent
In the age of increased security and crackdowns on dissent following 9/11, CCR has redoubled our efforts against governmental silencing of controversial and effective advocacy. Over the past year we’ve stood in stalwart solidar-ity with and support of the Occupy movement. We won a victory against harsh police practices which prevented journalists from doing their job at the Republican National Convention, and launched a challenge to the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act, which pun-ishes peaceful protests that cause animal-related businesses to lose profit or increase their security costs, turn-ing non-violent civil disobedience into “terrorism.” The work of activists and community organizers as a “check” to imbalanced and unfair government practices and corporate media depic-tions of policy and news is one of the key tenets of our democracy.“The merger of immigration 
enforcement and local  
police is not only a bad  
public policy decision; it will compound current abuses within New York’s criminal justice system as well as  
the systematic racial profiling that goes unchecked within Black and Brown communities in New York City.”
CCR statement issued in response to news that 
the Department of Homeland Security and Im-migration and Customs Enforcement will activate the problematic “Secure Communities” program in a number of New York jurisdictions, including New York City.
CCR and our allies continue to challenge the Immigration and Customs Enforcement’s “Secure Communities” pro-
gram, which puts local police on the front lines of immigration law enforcement.16 center for constitutional rights
1. CCR is working in solidarity with the Honduran resistance movement and affiliated groups to change U.S. policy that has been supportive of the coup government and further militarization 
of the region. 2. CCR launched a website (www.stopandfrisk.org) highlighting our advocacy efforts around the New York Police Department’s stop and frisk practice. The website features a report, Stop and Frisk: The Human Impact, which documents the human stories behind the statistics and the effects on communities. 3. CCR and New Orleans-based Women with a Vision (WWAV) worked together, along with other allies, to successfully challenge the sex offender registration of people convicted of Crime Against Nature by Solicitation (CANS). WWAV contin-ues to provide advocacy support in CCR’s follow-up lawsuit to eliminate the requirement for the almost 500 people who remain on the registry due to past CANS convictions. 4. CCR staff marked the 10th anniversary of indefinite detention without charge or trial at Guantánamo by supporting and participating in public demonstrations, including this one in front of the U.S. Supreme Court. 5. CCR staff went to Haiti to investigate U.S. deportations to the devastated nation and visited these recent deportees who had been illegally jailed. US deportees are routinely jailed without cause in cells covered in filth, which is particularly dangerous given the cholera epidemic. CCR continues to call for an immediate halt to all deportations to Haiti. 6. African Heritage Day celebration in Colombia. CCR was a member of an international delegation invited by Proceso de Comunidades Negras, a collective of more than 100 grassroots organizations, 
1
4CCR’s commitment to the creative use of the law for social 
change is deeply wedded to our dedication to strengthening, supporting and linking peoples’ movements for justice  and accountability. As we face an increasingly hostile and often intractable judiciary, and an alarmingly overreaching  Executive branch, CCR recognizes that we must remain steadfast in our use of international law and universal  human rights principles not only in our litigation but in our  political and movement-based advocacy as well. This past year, CCR has once again proudly stood with the many grassroots and community-based leaders—across the globe—whose struggle for real justice and dignity is  a constant inspiration to us and a driving force behind  CCR’s mission. Moving forward, as we all face mounting challenges, CCR‘s work outside of the courtroom will focus even more acutely on the non-litigation strategies, tools  and principles of solidarity that have fortified justice  movements for decades. 
2
3 MoVeMent sUPPoR tAnnual Report 2012  17
community councils and civil rights activists, based in Colombia. The delegation’s mission was to witness and report back on the status of Afro-descendant Colombians, who have been 
severely impacted by transnational corporations, government abuse and neglect, and free trade agreements. 7. On the day CCR filed SMUG v. Lively against antigay extremist Scott Lively for LGBT persecution, CCR held a press conference and march in Springfield, MA—Lively’s hometown—with the local Stop the Hate and Homophobia coalition. 8. Know Your Rights Mural in Washington Heights, New York by Peoples’ Justice for Community Control and Police Accountability. This is the first of many murals located in neighborhoods with high rates of police violence in all 5 boroughs. Artist: Cekis. 9. Signs represent participants of the June 17th Father’s Day Silent March in New York City to end discriminatory policing, including Communities United for Police Reform, a grassroots campaign of which CCR was a founding member. 10. CCR presented “Red to Green: Political Panic from McCarthyism to `Eco-Terrorism’,” a panel discussion that examined the fear of communism in the 20th century, the contemporary treatment of environmental and animal activism as so called “eco-terrorism” and the U.S. government’s persistent persecution of individuals deemed a political threat. 11. Photo of Abdulrahman Al-Aulaqi, a 16-year old U.S. citizen killed by a U.S. drone strike. CCR joined allies in organizing an International Drone Summit to better inform the public about the U.S. government’s expanding use of both killer and surveillance drones and to facilitate networks and strategies to resist this expansion. CCR’s litigation and advocacy against the U.S. practice of “targeted killing” continues. 810
11
9
6
7
518 center for constitutional rights socIal JUstIce InstItUte
The world is changing. Social justice 
lawyers entering practice today are doing so in a world where economic 
crises of global proportions are the norm; corporations act with impunity across the global supply chain; ecological and man-made disasters of the scale of Haiti and New Orleans are commonplace; and governments swiftly suppress dissent from Occupy to the Arab Spring. From navigating the courts and the media, to drafting legislation, to repre-senting individuals and organizations—be-ing a people’s lawyer requires more skills than ever before. Despite these increasing demands, young movement lawyers often find few training programs or employment opportunities that meet their unique needs. 
This year, in partnership with the Bertha 
Foundation, CCR launched the Social Justice Institute (SJI) to train the next generation of movement lawyers. Building on over two de-cades of experience mentoring law students in our Ella Baker Fellowship program, the SJI will support legal workers, law students, recent graduates and experienced lawyers in the U.S. and abroad as they engage in the theory and practice of movement lawyering.
 SJI DirectorIn May, CCR hired Purvi Shah, a former Ella Baker Fellow, as the director of the Social Justice Institute. Purvi came to CCR with over a decade of experience as an activist, orga-nizer and litigator. In 2006, she launched the Community Jus-
tice Project at Florida Legal Services to pro-vide legal support to community and worker movements. From 2008-2012, Purvi founded and ran a movement lawyering training program for progressive law students, and served as an adjunct clinical professor at University of Miami School of Law where she co-founded and co-directed the Community Lawyering Clinic. We are confident that the SJI is poised to become the premier training institute for movement lawyers in the U.S.
Training Programs
This year marks the 25th anniversary of CCR’s Ella Baker Fellowship program. Since 1987, the program has used an innovative combination of theory and practice to trans-form passionate law students into technically sophisticated legal advocates for human rights and social justice. To date, CCR has trained over 300 law students through the Ella Baker Fellowship.
In 2012, CCR had the largest Ella Baker class 
with 21 Fellows working in our New York City office; in New Orleans with Loyola University law professors Davida Finger and Bill Quigley (CCR’s associate legal director); and in Haiti with Mario Joseph and Meena Jagannath at the Bureaux Des Avocats Internationaux (BAI). 
The Social Justice Institute is also invested 
in training the next generation of people’s lawyers in other parts of the world. This year, CCR funded four fellowships at BAI to train post-graduate lawyers from Haiti. The SJI is working closely with the Bertha Foundation and our partner organization in Germany, the European Center for Constitutional and Human Rights to develop a global program to enrich the traditional training offered by most law schools and to facilitate exchanges between more experienced lawyers. 
Conferences 
The Institute hosted two regional confer-ences this spring to deepen the conversa-tion about movement lawyering and create networking opportunities for lawyers and law students. The People’s Law Conference was held in March in New Orleans and brought together more than 100 law students, journalists, activists and lawyers. Panelists discussed LGBTQ rights, environmental in-justice, access to housing and education, and oppressive policing and incarceration prac-tices. Conferences like this one, in regions of the U.S. where opportunities for progressive students are rare, create a chance to support and reinforce students’ commitment to con-tinue to work in these underserved areas.
In June, the SJI’s inaugural Social Justice 
Conference brought together more than 170 public interest attorneys, activists and law students in NYC to talk about movement law-yering. The conference included a brilliant keynote address by Michelle Alexander, law professor and author of The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblind-ness; afternoon breakout panels; and closing remarks by Bill Quigley. 
SJI Fellows
One of the major impediments to social justice lawyering is the dearth of high-quality jobs for graduating law students. As a result, the Social Justice Institute hired three new post-graduate fellows for the next two years. Along with receiving extensive support and training, fellows will serve as mentors for law students and as ambassadors for CCR. 
CCR is deeply grateful to the funding and stra-
tegic support provided by the Bertha Founda-tion in enabling the Center to greatly expand its mission to train the next generation. With the development of the SJI program, CCR will train a new generation of passionate, account-able and creative lawyers committed to move-ments for social change across the world.
Annual Report 2012  19
6
1. 2012 Social Justice Conference Keynote Speaker Michelle Alexander 2. Meena Jagannath, Ella Baker Haiti Coordinator and Mario Joseph, Executive Director BAI with Haitian Finissants 
after a winning a jury trial in Mirbelais, Haiti. 3. (left to right) Plenary panelists Jennifer Ching, Archana Prakash, and Davida Finger at the 2012 Social Justice Conference in NYC. 4. CCR Associate Legal Director Bill Quigley giving closing remarks at the 2012 Social Justice Conference in NYC. 5. 2012 Ella Baker Fellow Lindsey Laveaux legal observing at a protest of housing activists in Port-Au-Prince, Haiti. 6. 2011 Ella Baker Fellow Olivia Quinto at the People’s Law Conference in New Orleans. 7. Justine Palacios, 2012 New Orleans Ella Baker Fellow, at the Social Justice Conference, generously funded by our partners the Bertha Foundation.2
35
41
720center for constitutional rights CO MMUNI CATIONS
CCRis a prominent 
voice in the public debate around 
many of today’s most pressing human rights and constitutional issues. We believe that public advocacy is an essential tool for making legal and political change, and we work tirelessly to get our message out. In the ﬁrst half of 2012 alone, CCR was mentioned in nearly 4000 news stories. From mainstream press to progressive outlets, and from print, TV and radio to the expanding world of social media, CCR’s work is discussed daily across the country and around the world.
Our biggest cases of the year were cov-
ered and editorialized in dozens of outlets. The New York Times called our ﬁling in the International Criminal Court on behalf of survivors of clergy sexual violence “the most substantive effort yet to hold the pope and the Vatican accountable in an international court for sexual abuse by priests,” and after a federal judge granted class status to our stop-and-frisk case against the NYPD, a Times  editorial sized up the ruling sharply: 
“The message of this devastating ruling is clear: The city must reform its abusive stop-and-frisk policy.” 
Meanwhile, CCR has been a regular voice in 
progressive, niche, and international outlets, including Democracy Now! and Al Jazeera, 
as they publicize the stories that are underre -
ported in mainstream U.S. press. Our lawsuit against U.S. evangelical Scott Lively for his anti-gay efforts in Uganda has been covered widely and consistently by LGBT press, help-ing to galvanize efforts against the persecu-tion that LGBT persons face there. 
Over the past year, CCR has published three 
dozen opinion pieces. We blog regularly at The Hufﬁngton Post, Truthout, and  Fire-
doglake , and have been invited several 
times to contribute to “Room For Debate” at NYTimes.com. Most notably this year, we placed several ﬁrst-person op-eds from our clients. In the San Francisco Chronicle , 
Gabriel Reyes, a client in our lawsuit chal-lenging long-term solitary conﬁnement at Pelican Bay State Prison explained, “unless you have lived it, you cannot imagine what it feels like to be by yourself, between four cold walls,…for years on end.” The next 
Ugandan LGBT Rights Groups Sue Antigay U.S. Pastor
Annual Report 2012 21Follow @TheCCR on Twitter and LIKE us on Facebook.Last September, CCR staff mem -
bers and our clients, the Survivors 
Network of those Abused by Priests 
(SNAP), traveled to The Hague to ﬁle a complaint with the International Criminal Court seeking an investigation of high-level Vatican ofﬁcials—including the Pope—for crimes against humanity. (see page 35) Then the CCR and SNAP teams traveled to 12 cities in 10 days, culminating in a large press conference in Rome and giving hun -
dreds of interviews along the way.
In addition to the ﬁling, which included 
physically delivering to the court dozens of boxes containing many of the 20,000 pages of damning evidence supporting the claims, the purpose of the trip was an equally important media campaign. We sought to help expose the widespread and devastat-ing nature of the problem; to help prevent further abuse; and to get word to survivors around the world about the availability of support groups and other resources. 
The CCR communications team in New York 
worked virtually 24 hours a day with those on the trip, and press coverage was aston-ishing: thousands of stories appeared in over 70 countries. Outlets in South America, Africa, South Asia, East Asia, Australia and the U.S. carried news that survivors were standing up against one of the most power-ful institutions in the world. Requests for assistance, resources and support poured  in through SNAP’s website.
The coverage of the legal issues often 
explained how this case was the ﬁrst serious threat to the impunity of the Catholic Church and added gravity to the ﬁling. These stories have helped foster discussions in countries where the subject is still taboo and let survi -
vors know that they are not alone.
ALL ROA DS LEAD TO RO ME: 
STRATEGIC CO MMU NICATIONS AN D OUTR EACH CA MPAIGN
best way to convey the experience of these barbaric conditions is to share the words of those who suffer under them. CCR is com-mitted to telling the personal stories that drive our work.
CCR led the day in press coverage on the 
shameful tenth anniversary of Guantánamo Bay, January 11, 2012. We ran 10 opinion pieces in various outlets, including the National Law Journal , CNN.com and The 
Guardian , and were featured in nearly all of the day’s stories. Ten years after we were the only organization to stick our necks out in defense of human rights and the rule of law at Guantánamo, CCR is still considered the go-to authority on this issue. 
Finally, in today’s world, media is a two-way 
conversation, and everything CCR does is ampliﬁed through social media. In the last year, we have doubled our Twitter followers and Facebook “likes,” making social media connections with nearly 17,000 individuals and organizations. Social media allows us to be in direct contact with activists, advocates and reporters, and to participate in real time in the social justice debates in which our work is embedded.
CCR client Barbara Blaine, President of SNAP and Vince Warren, 
Executive Director of CCR, interviewed at the Vatican for Italian TV.
22 center for constitutional rights letteR fRoM tHe leGal DIRectoR
My first year as Legal Director has 
been equal parts eventful and exciting. Viewed from the inside, 
CCR is even more dynamic, creative and passionate than I knew it to be from working as a cooperating attorney for many years. We achieved some genuinely dramatic victories in our cases and campaigns—and we enter 2013 poised to build on these successes.In our International Human Rights docket area, we continued our pursuit of official accountability, by filing actions against two of the most powerful entities in the world: the Vatican (a criminal complaint in the Interna-tional Criminal Court) and the President (with prosecutors in Canada), for their respective roles in sanctioning and perpetuating sexual violence, torture and abuse. Each of these actions are emblematic of CCR’s unique ap-proach: they exhibit fearlessness of authority and orthodoxy; they document crimes in exquisite detail in order to create a durable historical record; and, they seek to give meaningful voice to the real human victims of human rights abuses.Also in the International Human Rights docket area, we won a major appeal in federal court in our twin cases challenging torture and abuse of 76 Iraqi citizens by private military contractors operating in Abu Ghraib and other prisons. The ruling means that the victims will be able to proceed to trial—and makes this one of the only surviving challeng-es to torture and war crimes committed by U.S. entities in the 9/11 decade. We also filed a historic lawsuit on behalf of Ugandan LGBTI activists (Sexual Minorities Uganda) against a Massachusetts fundamentalist preacher, Scott Lively, who has engaged in a decade-long campaign to deprive LGBTQ communities of fundamental human rights—a crime against humanity under international law.
In our Government Misconduct and Racial 
Justice docket area our broad-based cam-paign against the NYPD’s unconstitutional and discriminatory stop and frisk practices gained considerable momentum, fueled by dramatic victories in our federal class action litigation, Floyd v. City of New York. At the same time, we obtained a historic judgment on behalf of the Vulcan Society of African-American firefighters in their federal class action discrimination suit against New York City—that requires major structural changes in the hiring and retention of minority firefighters and awards up to $128 million in back pay to African-American firefighter applicants.
We expanded our work challenging prison 
conditions by filing a class action lawsuit challenging long-term solitary confinement as a form of torture, at one of this country’s most brutal and iconic solitary confinement regimes: Pelican Bay, California. We also continued our work defending political dis-sidents and social activists, by filing a major challenge to the federal Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act on behalf of animal rights activists who fear that their peaceful advo-cacy and activism would be criminalized as “terrorism” under the Act. In addition to our historic FOIA litigation on behalf of the National Day Laborer Organizing Network, which has revealed thousands of documents that undermine the legal and moral basis for the federal government’s Secure Communi-ties program, we are heavily involved in two major cases challenging a pattern and prac-tice of warrantless home raids undertaken by Immigration and Customs Enforcement SWAT-teams in New Jersey and in New York.
In grimmer news, CCR marked the 10th an-
niversary of the opening of Guantánamo and the third anniversary of President Obama’s now-broken promise to shutter the doors of this ugly, iconic symbol of lawlessness. Nev-ertheless, even as this struggle gets harder we carry on—into the second decade of this country’s depressing experiment in Guantá-namo—our resolve to fight for men who are unlawfully detained, to develop a record of the injustices occurring there and ultimately help to bring an end to this sad chapter in American history.
And, as we do so, I remain excited and 
humbled to be part of this struggle.
Baher Azmy
Annual Report 2012  23 case InDeX
GUa nt Án a Mo  baY clIe nt  lItI Ga tIo n
Al-Bihani v. Obama
Representation of Ghaleb Al-Bihani, a Yemeni citizen held at Guantánamo for over ten years without charge or trial. His habeas petition was denied based on a finding that he was an assis-tant cook for a group allegedly associated with the Taliban. The ruling was twice upheld by the D.C. Circuit, once by a three-judge panel which concluded that international law was not applicable in its review of Al-Bihani’s detain-ability, and again by the full court, the majority of which concluded that the panel’s interna-tional law ruling was unnecessary, but that he was nonetheless detainable. The Supreme Court declined to review the case.Status: Ongoing efforts to challenge indefinite detention.
Al-Hamiri v. Obama 
Habeas petition filed on behalf of Mohammed Al Hamiri, a Yemeni citizen who was raised in Saudi Arabia. He was arrested by police in Pakistan and transferred to Guantánamo and has never been charged with a crime. In January 2011, the D.C. district court heard oral argument on his habeas petition. After the judge retired, the case was transferred to a new judge who called for additional argument in the matter.Status: Awaiting oral argument.
Al Laithi v. Rumsfeld
Civil suit for damages on behalf of Sami Abdu-laziz Al Laithi, an Egyptian doctor who is now confined to a wheelchair due to the torture and mistreatment he experienced at Guantánamo. Al Laithi was cleared by a military tribunal and found innocent of any offense against the U.S.Status: The government has moved to dismiss in light of the Supreme Court’s refusal to review the Court of Appeals’ decision in CCR’s case Rasul v. Rumsfeld. The motion to dismiss has been pending for over two years.
Al Qahtani v. Obama
Habeas petition for Mohammed al Qahtani, victim of the United States’ extraordinarily abusive “First Special Interrogation Plan” “enhanced interrogation techniques” person-ally authorized by Donald Rumsfeld. He is the only detainee the U.S. admits to torturing. This torture program violated both domestic and international law, and leaves U.S. officials open to war crimes charges. Status: The case has been stayed since October 2010. CCR is seeking public release of videotapes of al Qahtani’s torture and inter-rogations via the Freedom of Information Act.
Al-Zahrani v. Rumsfeld
Civil suit brought by the families of Yasser Al-Zahrani of Saudi Arabia and Salah Al-Salami of Yemen, who died at Guantánamo in June 2006 along with a third man, Mani Al-Utaybi. While the military claims that the men committed suicide, four soldiers stationed at Guantánamo at the time later came forward with first-hand accounts suggesting that the military covered up the actual cause and circumstances of the deaths, and that the men may have been killed at a secret site at Guantánamo. The case was dismissed and appealed to the D.C. Circuit, which affirmed, holding that the courts lacked jurisdiction over the case under the Military Commissions Act. Status: CCR attorneys continue ongoing ef-forts for accountability.
Ameziane v. Obama / Ameziane v.  
United StatesHabeas petition on behalf of Djamel Ameziane, an Algerian man who has never been charged with any crime and has been at Guantánamo since 2002. Ameziane has suffered various abuses in the prison, including profound isolation in solitary confinement, and requires urgent resettlement protection to keep the U.S. government from returning him to Algeria, a country he fled nearly 20 years ago to escape violence, instability and oppression. In 2008, CCR filed a petition and request for precaution -
ary measures with the Inter-American Com -
mission on Human Rights (IACHR). The IACHR accepted jurisdiction over Ameziane’s case, marking the first time the IACHR has done so in a case of a Guantánamo detainee and under -
scoring the fact that there has been no effective domestic remedy available to victims of unjust detentions and other abuses at the base. Status: Habeas case has been stayed, IACHR ruling pending.
Ba Odah v. Obama 
Habeas petition filed on behalf of Tariq Ba Odah, a Yemeni citizen who has never been charged with a crime and who requires urgent release from Guantánamo for humanitarian reasons. Ba Odah has been on a peaceful 
CCR activists and allies march in Washington D.C. on the 
10th anniversary of the first prisoners brought to Guantá-namo.
24 center for constitutional rightshunger strike at Guantánamo since February 
2007 to protest his indefinite detention, now in its second decade. Guards at Guantánamo continue to strap him to a restraint chair every morning and night and force-feed him in an excruciating process by inserting a tube through his nasal passage. He is also held in near complete isolation as punishment for his refusal to end his strike. Status: The case is stayed. 
Barre v. Obama 
Habeas petition filed on behalf of Mohammed Sulaymon Barre, a citizen of Somalia who had been living in Pakistan under the mandate protection of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees. Barre was never charged with any crime, but since Somalia had no functioning government to accept him, he was told he would be at Guantánamo “for a long time.” Barre was transferred to the Republic of Somaliland in December 2009, and has sought to continue his habeas case post-transfer in an effort to clear his name and get out from under the cloud of suspicion and persecution of be-ing a former Guantánamo detainee.Status: Dismissed post-transfer; appeal pend-ing in the D.C. Circuit.
Celikgogus v. Rumsfeld
Civil suit for damages against Donald Rums-feld and others responsible for the detention, torture and mistreatment of five men illegally detained in Guantánamo for years, including two men released years after being classified as non-enemy combatants.Status: The government moved to dismiss in light of the Supreme Court’s refusal to review the Court of Appeals’ decision in CCR’s case Rasul v. Rumsfeld. The motion to dismiss has been pending for over two years.Hamdan v. United States Amicus brief filed in support of Salim Ham-dan’s appeal from his conviction of providing material support for terrorism before a military commission at Guantánamo. CCR argues that Hamdan and other Guantánamo detainees are civilians under the laws of war; that a civilian’s direct participation in hostilities alone does not constitute a war crime; and that conflation of the combatant-civilian distinction undermines a core purpose of the laws of war—to identify and protect civilians. Status: Amicus brief filed in the D.C. Circuit in November 2011; appeal pending.
United States v. Khan 
In February 2012, Majid Khan, who was se-cretly held and tortured in a CIA secret deten-tion site for several years prior to his transfer to Guantánamo, was charged before a military commission at Guantánamo with various of-fenses. He pled guilty to those offenses follow-ing a pretrial agreement with the prosecution. He will be sentenced within four years of the date of his guilty plea. This case supersedes Khan’s habeas petition, Khan v. Obama .
Status: Khan faces between 0 to 19 years of imprisonment at sentencing, minus credit for time served from the date of his guilty plea.
Khan Tumani v. Obama
Habeas petition filed on behalf of a Syrian father and son, Abdul Nasser and Muhammed Khan Tumani, who were detained at Guan-tánamo for over seven years without charge and without being able to see each other. Muhammed was a juvenile when he came into U.S. custody and was held apart from his father for the duration of his detention. Both men were ultimately cleared for release; Muhammed was resettled in Portugal in 2009, and his father was resettled in Cape Verde a year later.Status: Ongoing efforts for their reintegra-tion and reunification. Father and son remain separated and have not been allowed to see each other to date.
Kiyemba v. Obama (I and III)
Coordinated habeas petitions filed on behalf of seventeen Chinese Uighurs held at Guantá-namo, who won their cases in 2008. A federal judge ordered the Uighurs, members of a per-secuted minority in China, to be released into the United States since they were unable to return to China for fear of torture and persecu-tion and did not have a third country to accept them. The D.C. Circuit reversed in Kiyemba I, and the Supreme Court considered whether a habeas court has power to order actual release from custody. The Uighurs were then offered resettlement in third countries, which all but five of them accepted, and the Supreme Court vacated Kiyemba I and remanded. In Kiyemba III, the D.C. Circuit reinstated Kiyemba I. The Supreme Court declined review of Kiyemba III.Status: Three Uighurs remain at Guantánamo more than three years after their exoneration, with no remedy for their indefinite detention, which the court determined was unlawful. Resettlement efforts continue.
Extended family of Mohammed Sulaymon Barre in front of 
Mr. Barre’s home, Borao, Somaliland. case InDeXAnnual Report 2012  25Kiyemba v. Obama (II) 
Nine Uighurs held at Guantánamo filed habeas petitions challenging their detention and sought orders requiring the government to provide 30 days’ notice before transfer-ring them to countries where they may be at risk. The district court entered the requested orders. The D.C. Circuit reversed in Kiyemba II, holding that the district court has no power to bar the transfer of a Guantánamo detainee on the grounds that he might face death, tor-ture, or further imprisonment in the recipient country. The Supreme Court declined review of Kiyemba II.Status: Guantánamo detainees may be trans-ferred without prior notice; two detainees have since been forcibly repatriated to Algeria, despite their fears of torture and persecution in that country, and one of them has recently suffered severe persecution. 
Othman v. Obama 
Habeas petition for Khaled Abd Elgabar Mo-hammed Othman of Yemen. Yemenis comprise 88 of the 169 men still detained at Guantána-mo. In December 2009, the Obama administra-tion indefinitely suspended all repatriations to Yemen regardless of detainee status.Status: The district court stayed Othman’s case in late 2008. These men sit in limbo as casual-ties of American politics.
coR P oRa te  a ccoUn tabIlItY
Al-Shimari v. CACI and Al-Quraishi  
v. Nakhla
Two lawsuits on behalf of 76 Iraqi civilians, 
alleging that private military contractors and the corporations that hired them (CACI and L-3) participated in a torture conspiracy at Abu Ghraib and other detention facilities in Iraq.Status: In September 2011, a divided panel of the Fourth Circuit found that it had jurisdic-tion over defendants’ interlocutory appeal, and dismissed the cases. Plaintiffs successfully sought en banc review, and in May 2012, by a vote of 11-3, the panel dismissed the appeals and remanded the cases to the district court for further proceedings.
Balintulo v. Daimler (amicus)
Case against American and German corpora-tions for providing the South African apart-heid regime with products and services that advanced human rights abuses including apartheid, torture and extrajudicial killing. CCR’s brief emphasized the critical role of the Alien Tort Statute in enforcing international human rights, including the right of victims to a remedy. Status: The appeal is pending. 
Wiwa v. Royal Dutch Shell, Wiwa v.  
Anderson, Wiwa v. Shell Petroleum  Development CompanyCase filed by CCR in 1996 and joined by other organizations and co-counsel over the course of the 13-year-long battle on behalf of Ogoni human rights defenders and their relatives suing Shell for complicity in torture, arbitrary detention and extrajudicial killings in Nigeria.Status: CCR continues to monitor the $15.5 million settlement compensating plaintiffs and establishing a trust fund to benefit the Ogoni people.
Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum Co.  
(amicus)Amicus arguing that corporations can be liable under the Alien Tort Statute, including for conduct that occurs outside the territory of the United States. International law is primar-ily enforced through domestic remedies, and domestic federal law permits lawsuits against corporations as well as lawsuits for conduct that occurs abroad.Status: After a Second Circuit dismissal, plaintiffs filed a petition for certiorari, which was granted. Argument was heard in February 2012; the Supreme Court asked for supple-mental briefing and re-argument will be heard in fall 2012. 
Movsesian v. Versicherung (amicus)
Heirs of victims of the Armenian genocide su-ing German corporations for unpaid insurance owed to their relatives. CCR and EarthRights International’s amicus brief argued that the case should be permitted to move forward under California law and not be barred by the foreign affairs doctrine.Status: The en banc Ninth Circuit Court of  Appeals found that the California procedural law intruded on foreign affairs and was there-fore preempted, and remanded the case for dismissal of the claims brought pursuant to it.
In 1980, CCR pioneered the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) as a 
crucial defense against corporate human rights abroad. In October 2012, ATS principles will be challenged before the Supreme Court.26 center for constitutional rights case InDeX
GoVeR nMe nt a cco Un tabIlItY
ACLU, CCR, et al. v. Department  
of Defense
Freedom of Information Act lawsuit arguing 
that U.S. government agencies illegally with-held records concerning the torture and abuse of detainees in American military custody.Status: In August 2011, plaintiffs filed a reply brief for the Second Circuit appeal challenging the CIA’s withholding of documents describ-ing waterboarding as an intelligence source or method. The plaintiffs also argued before the U.S. District Court that the CIA should be held in contempt for the destruction of videotapes, flouting a court order to release them. The judge declined to find the CIA in contempt for the destruction of the videotapes but did order the CIA to pay attorneys’ fees as a sanction.
Amnesty International, CCR, et al. v. CIA, 
Department of Defense, et al.Freedom of Information Act lawsuit against the CIA, Department of Defense, Department of Justice, Department of State and Department of Homeland Security seeking information about renditions, secret detention, including the CIA “ghost” sites and facilities with unreg-istered prisoners, and torture.Status: The case is currently pending, with periodic disclosures of documents.
Arar v. Ashcroft
Seeking redress and accountability for the U.S. government’s extraordinary rendition of Cana-dian citizen Maher Arar to Syria to be tortured. Arar v. Ashcroft alleged U.S. officials violated Arar’s Fifth Amendment rights by conspiring to subject him to arbitrary detention and torture in Syria and blocking his access to the courts. In 2008, a Court of Appeals dismissed the case, concluding that in cases of extraordinary rendition, it is not the court’s role to decide whether U.S. officials can be held accountable due to foreign policy, national security, and secrecy concerns. In 2010, CCR petitioned the Supreme Court to hear the case, which it rejected. The Canadian government found no evidence that Arar committed any crime and settled Arar’s civil case in Canada in 2007. Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper apologized to Arar and his family and called on the U.S. to “come clean.”Status: CCR continues to seek accountability for Arar’s torture and to advocate for the  U.S. to apologize and remove him from the watch list.
Bigwood v. Department of Defense
Case representing investigative journalist Jeremy Bigwood in a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit over requests for materials from the U.S. government regarding various U.S. inter-ests, actors or agencies and their knowledge of or role in the 2009 coup d’état in Honduras. CCR supports his efforts to understand how and why the coup took place, to ensure ac-countability for human rights violations stem-ming from it and to achieve genuine truth and reconciliation in Honduras.Status: Filed in March 2011, awaiting response. Since CCR filed the case, the Department of Defense has turned over a number of docu-ments. CCR continues to fight for release of more information. Summary judgment briefing is scheduled for the fall 2012.
Bush Torture Indictment (Canada)   
A criminal indictment against George W. Bush for torture, filed in British Columbia, Canada in October 2011 on behalf of four individuals who had been subjected to the U.S. torture program, including our Canadian client  
Maher Arar.Status: Canada’s failure to initiate a criminal investigation against Bush under the Conven-tion Against Torture is being pursued at the international level.
Maher Arar holding the Canadian report recommending a 
government apology and compensation for his torture.
CCR continues seeking legal action to hold Bush administra-tion officials accountable for their direct roles in the U.S. torture program.
CCR v. Department of Defense et al.  
(Gaza Flotilla Freedom of Information Act) Freedom of Information Act lawsuit seeking the release of U.S. agency records regarding the May 2010 attack by Israel, in international waters, on a flotilla seeking to deliver humani-tarian aid to Gaza and regarding U.S. policy towards the blockade of Gaza.Status: Following the filing of the case in May 2011, more than 2,000 pages of documents have been released, with CCR continuing to challenge withholdings and redactions.
CCR v. Obama
Challenging NSA warrantless domestic elec-tronic surveillance, asserting that it violates the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act and the First and Fourth Amendments. The lawsuit is on behalf of CCR attorneys seeking to protect our clients’ right to confidential attorney-client communications. The current claims in the case center on our request that the court order the government to destroy any records of surveillance that it still retains from the illegal NSA program.Status: In January 2011, the district judge  dismissed all plaintiffs’ claims. CCR appealed. The case was fully briefed and set for argu-ment on June 1, 2012, but eleven days before-hand, the Supreme Court granted cert in a similar case, and the Ninth Circuit stayed this appeal pending the Supreme Court’s decision.
CCR v. United States 
A petition for extraordinary relief filed in the military appeals courts, seeking access to doc-uments in the court-martial proceedings for Private First Class Bradley Manning, including the government’s motion papers, the court’s own orders, and transcripts of proceedings, none of which have been made public to date.Status: The Army Court of Criminal Appeals denied relief. CCR filed its appeal to the Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces in June 2012. CCR continues to monitor the hearings.
Haiti – IACHR Precautionary Measures  
on U.S. DeportationsIn January 2011, CCR and partner organiza-tions filed an emergency petition with the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) to halt the roundup, detention and imminent deportation by the U.S. of hundreds of Haitian nationals being sent back to disease-ridden detention facilities in post-earthquake Haiti. The petition argues that deporting people to Haiti while it is still reeling from the devastating 2010 earthquake, and is burdened with a massive cholera epidemic, political unrest, and rampant street violence, will result in serious human rights violations, includ-ing deprivations of the rights to life, family, and due process, and freedom from cruel or unusual punishment.Status: The IACHR expanded the precaution-ary measures to cover additional people facing deportation to Haiti. As of this printing, the U.S. is still actively removing people to Haiti and CCR and its partners have continued to file updates and requests with the IACHR. Haiti – IACHR Precautionary Measures  on Forced EvictionsHundreds of thousands of people who are still living in inadequate camps after the 2010 earthquake in Haiti are threatened with forced eviction by the Haitian government. These illegal evictions are being carried out in dis-placement camps across the country, leaving already displaced people in even more vulner-able circumstances. CCR and our partner organizations filed a request for precautionary measures with the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) in November 2010.Status: The Commission granted petitioners’ request and urged Haiti to implement a mora-torium to stop the evictions. The government of Haiti failed to respond to the Commission’s inquiries or implement the moratorium. In February 2012, CCR joined partner organiza-tions in submitting an update on the status of the camps.
Honduras – True Commission Freedom of 
Information ActIn June 2010, the Human Rights Platform of  Honduras created the True Commission (Comisión de Verdad) to respond to the need for a thorough and independent inquiry into 
Annual Report 2012  27Place Sainte Anne, a displaced persons camp that Vince 
Warren visited on his last trip to Haiti.Honduras protest at San Francisco Honduran consulate.
28 center for constitutional rights case InDeX
the 2009 coup d’etat and to the inadequacies 
of the coup government’s appointed Truth and Reconciliation Commission. The True Commis-sion is investigating human rights violations, including conducting extensive interviews with victims or their survivors. Its goal is to make a full analysis of what led to the coup, explore the historical significance of the overthrow of President Manuel Zelaya, and provide informa-tion to grassroots organizations in Honduras for use in their activism.Status: In March 2011, CCR filed a series of Freedom of Information Act requests on behalf of the True Commission for information from the Department of Defense and the CIA. 
Ibrahim v. Department of Homeland  
Security (amicus) Because of her inclusion on the U.S. govern -
ment’s “no-fly list,” Stanford doctoral student Rahinah Ibrahim was arrested when she showed up to board a flight to Malaysia. Now living in Malaysia, she sued to have her name removed from the list but the court dismissed her claims, agreeing with the government’s ar -
gument that non-citizens no longer living inside the United States had no constitutional rights. CCR signed onto an amicus brief arguing that non-citizens outside of the United States are not outside the protection of the U.S. Constitu -
tion based solely on that categorization.Status: The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed the district court and re -
manded the case for further proceedings in February 2012.
Mamani v. Sánchez de Lozada, Mamani v. 
Sánchez BerzaínCases against former president and former minister of defense of Bolivia for their roles in the killing of civilians during popular protests against the Bolivian government in September and October 2003.Status: Oral argument was heard in May 2011; decision pending.
Mamilla Cemetery Human Rights Petition
Petition supporting descendants of people buried in the historic Muslim Mamilla Ceme-tery in Jerusalem who seek to halt construction of a “Museum of Tolerance” atop the cemetery by the Los Angeles-based Simon Wiesenthal Center, to re-bury the removed remains, and to protect and preserve the remaining cemetery.Status: Plans to construct the “Museum of Tolerance” persist; CCR continues to appeal to the Simon Wiesenthal Center and the inter-national community to stop desecration of the cemetery. 
Murillo v. Micheletti Baín
Lawsuit against Roberto Micheletti Baín, for-mer president of the Honduran National Con-gress who took power immediately following the 2009 military coup, on behalf of the family of Isis Obed Murillo who was killed during a peaceful demonstration protesting the coup. The suit seeks accountability for extrajudicial killing, crimes against humanity, wrongful death and other human rights violations that occurred in Honduras under the authority and/or direction of Micheletti. Status: Filed in June 2011; additional filings made in November 2011.
Rahim v. Department of Justice, FBI
Freedom of Information Act litigation against the Department of Justice and FBI on behalf of New Orleans organizer Malik Rahim in efforts to uncover any records related to informants and/or surveillance by the FBI of the Common Ground collective post-Katrina. Status: Plaintiffs filed their complaint in No-vember 2011. Defendants filed their answer in January 2012.Sanders v. SzubinChallenging the U.S. government’s require-ment for individuals to provide potentially self-incriminating information, under threat of civil penalties, as part of the U.S. embargo against Cuba.Status: Sanders lost in the district court and ap -
pealed the decision to the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. In July 2012, the case settled with an agreement to pay part of the penalty.
Simels v. United States (amicus)
New York attorney Robert Simels was con-victed after a judge allowed the court to hear communications between himself and his client that were illegally intercepted by the government. CCR filed an amicus brief in sup-port of the petition for cert in this case, seeking confirmation that the Wiretap Act flatly prohib-its using illegally intercepted communications in court. 
Status: Cert denied by Supreme 
Court in March 2012.
Spanish Investigation into the U.S.  Torture ProgramThe Center has made filings in two cases in Spain that seek to hold former high-ranking U.S. officials accountable for their individual roles in directing, implementing or planning 
Annual Report 2012  29the U.S. torture program. There is an open 
investigation into “an authorized and system-atic plan of torture and ill-treatment on persons deprived of their freedom without any charge and without the basic rights of any detainee, set out and required by applicable interna-tional conventions,” in U.S. detention facilities. A case filed against the “Bush Six” (lawyers from the Bush administration) for torture and war crimes, is on appeal. CCR filed a complaint with the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Independence of Judges and Lawyers alleging interference by U.S. and Spanish authorities with the Spanish judicial process. Status: CCR’s subpoena request for Geoffrey Miller, former commander at Guantánamo, is pending in the ongoing investigation into the global torture program. The case against the “Bush Six” was closed in April 2011. Following dismissal of an appeal in April 2012, CCR is supporting the plaintiffs’ appeal to the Spanish Supreme Court. The complaint before the Special Rapporteur is pending.
United States v. Pool (amicus)
CCR joined with the Electronic Frontier Foun-dation (EFF) and other civil liberties groups to file an amicus brief to challenge the constitu-tionality of taking and indexing DNA samples from arrestees—individuals who remain inno-cent until proven guilty. The EFF brief argues that the government may not seize a person’s most private and personal information, his/her DNA, without a warrant and without individu-alized suspicion.Status: Shortly before this case was to be heard in the Ninth Circuit, the defendant pleaded guilty and the case was dismissed.
PolIcInG & PRI sons
Aref v. HolderChallenging policies and conditions at two ex-perimental prison units called Communications Management Units (CMUs) that unconstitu-tionally target certain prisoners for extreme social isolation, including a complete ban on any physical contact with visiting friends and family and severely restricted access to phone calls, work, and educational opportunities. More than two-thirds of these prisoners are Muslim, and many others have unpopular po-litical views, including environmental activists designated as “eco-terrorists.”Status: In March 2011, the court denied defen-dants’ motion to dismiss in part, and granted it in part, allowing plaintiffs to proceed on their procedural due process and retaliation claims. The case is now in discovery.
Floyd v. City of New York
A class action lawsuit challenging the current “stop-and-frisk” policy and practice of the New York City Police Department (NYPD) as unconstitutional and racially discriminatory. These NYPD practices have led to a dramatic increase in the number of suspicionless stop-and-frisks occurring per year in the city, with the majority of stops taking place in commu-nities of color and with the greatest impact on Blacks and Latinos. This case stems from CCR’s landmark racial profiling case, Daniels v. City of New York , which was settled in 2003. 
That settlement ended the notorious Street Crimes Unit after the outrage over the death of Amadou Diallo, and required the NYPD to maintain and report stop and frisk data—provi -
sions that have allowed the Center to build our Floyd case and work towards systemic reform of NYPD policies and practices.Status: In August 2012, the Judge set a trial date for March 2013. Earlier this year, the Judge ruled in favor of CCR’s motion for class certification, making anyone stopped after January 2005 a class plaintiff in the lawsuit. The City has petitioned the Second Circuit for permission to appeal the class certification decision, and we are currently awaiting ruling.
Glik v. Cunniffe (amicus)
Amicus brief on behalf of several Copwatch  organizations, arguing that concerned individ-uals and Copwatch groups have a First Amend-ment right to record public police activity.Status: In August 2011, the Judge issued a strong ruling in favor of Glik and First Amend-ment rights of individuals to publicly record police activity.
Syed Fahad Hashmi
Representation of a former Brooklyn College student, incarcerated at a federal “supermax” prison after being convicted of material sup-port for terrorism, in efforts to challenge his solitary confinement. Hashmi’s material sup-port charges were based largely on allegations 
CCR attorney Rachel Meeropol and Advocacy Program  
Manager Nahal Zamani with members of the Jayyousi  family, one of the many families affected by Communica-tions Management Units. 30 center for constitutional rights
 table of contents
that he stored an acquaintance’s luggage in his 
apartment for two weeks, which was alleg-edly later delivered to Al Qaeda. Hashmi pled to one count of material support after nearly three years in solitary confinement and under Special Administrative Measures.Status: CCR in partnership with allies continues efforts to challenge solitary confinement at the Administrative Maximum prison in Colorado.
Miller v. Alabama (amicus)
CCR contributed to an amicus brief to the Supreme Court in this case challenging mandatory life without parole sentencing for defendants who committed crimes as children (under the age of 18).Status: The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in June 2012 that such mandatory sentencing schemes violate the 8th Amendment of the Constitu-tion. Going forward, courts may only sentence juvenile offenders to life without parole after they first consider all relevant mitigating fac-tors, including a defendant’s age at the time they committed the offense.OWS Freedom of Information LawCCR joined a coalition of attorneys, Occupy Wall Street protesters, and community groups in filing a Freedom of Information Law request demanding that the NYPD disclose all informa-tion concerning the policies around the report-edly aggressive law enforcement response to Occupy demonstrations.Status: Awaiting City’s response. 
Patel v. Arpaio
CCR attorney Sunita Patel was arrested with -
out cause while legal observing for protests against SB1070 in front of Sheriff Arpaio’s jail in Phoenix. Charges were later dismissed. This case challenges her unlawful arrest and Arpaio’s practice of excessive force and repressive law enforcement in Arizona. The Department of Justice opened an investigation which includes assertions that Arpaio targets legal advocates. Status: The case was dismissed; CCR attorneys have filed an appeal to the dismissal.
Ruiz v. Brown 
In May 2012, we filed a federal class action suit on behalf of prisoners at Pelican Bay State Prison who have spent between 10 and 28 years in Security Housing Units (SHU). The case grew out of a 2011 hunger strike by thou-sands of California prisoners protesting the inhumane conditions. Originally filed by our cli -
ent as a pro se suit, CCR and several advocate and legal organizations in California joined the case, alleging that prolonged solitary confine-ment violates Eighth Amendment prohibitions against cruel and unusual punishment, and that the absence of meaningful review for SHU placement violates the prisoners’ right to due process.Status: Awaiting Judge’s ruling on our amend-ed complaint and then starting discovery.Armstrong v. City of PittsburghChallenge to Pittsburgh police’s harassment and injury of activists before and during the 2009 G20. The G20 accountability action is a damages action challenging the Pittsburgh police’s harassment and false arrest of activists during the G20. Status: Both cases are proceeding with  
discovery.
Wright v. Corrections Corporation of 
America (FCC Rule-making Petition)Petitioning the FCC to regulate interstate prison telephone calls to ensure fair and rea-sonable rates for prisoners and their families.Status: The petition is under consideration by the FCC.
IMMIGR a nt  JUs tI ce
Aguilar et al. v. Immigration  
and Customs Enforcement:
Challenge by 23 Latino citizens, lawful perma-
nent residents, and others, including several young children, alleging widespread Fourth and Fifth Amendments by Immigration and Customs Enforcement during warrantless Pablo Alvarado of NDLON at the June 23 vigil outside the 
Maricopa County “Tent City” jail. case InDeX
CCR staff and allies stood alongside and supported OWS protestors in Zuccotti Park, New York.
Annual Report 2012  31
 table of contents
home raid operations seeking civil immigration 
violators in New York. Status: The court has set a trial-ready date of October, 2012. Awaiting decision by Second Circuit on Plaintiffs’ petition seeking leave to appeal denial of class certification.
Argueta et al. v. Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement et al.Challenging a pattern and practice of warrant-less raids on immigrants’ homes in New Jersey undertaken by so-called “Fugitive Operations Teams” that seek to enforce record deportation quotas established by Immigration and Cus-toms’ Enforcement’s 2006 “Operation Return to Sender” program.Status: Discovery is ongoing and settlement negotiations have commenced.
National Day Laborer Organizing Network  
v. Department of Homeland Security Freedom of Information Act lawsuit seeking documents relating to Immigration and Cus -
toms Enforcement’s “Secure Communities”  
(S-Comm) data sharing program, which institutes immigration fingerprint checks for all arrestees, even when charges are minor and there is no criminal conviction. Broad coalitions of activists and officials across the country have mobilized against the program, organizing protests against S-Comm and initiating local legislation to fight the effects of the program.Status: Waiting for a decision on plaintiffs’ Adequacy of Search challenge, while receiving new re-released documents from the govern-ment. Government agencies—Immigration and Customs Enforcement, FBI, Department of Homeland Security, and the Executive Office for Immigration Review—produced more than 200,000 pages of documents to plaintiffs.Orian v. FIDH Defending the International Federation for Hu-man Rights (FIDH), of which CCR is a member organization, against a lawsuit by California-based Global Horizons, Inc. and its president for statements made about their treatment of Chinese migrant workers that appeared in a 2003 FIDH report. Status: Case was dismissed and CCR and co-counsel won Anti-SLAPP (Strategic Lawsuit Against Public Participation) motion on behalf of FIDH and attorneys’ fees and costs.
Ragbir v. Holder (amicus)
Supporting Ravidath Ragbir’s appeal of a deportation order and requesting that his immigration case be sent back to the Board of Immigration Appeals with instructions to apply the new and broader evidentiary standards that were established in 2009.Status: Amicus filed at the Supreme Court in May 2011, in support of Ragbir’s request that the Court hear his case. Cert was denied on October 2011.Turkmen v. AshcroftClass action lawsuit seeking to hold former Attorney General John Ashcroft and other high-level officials accountable for unlawful racial profiling, mass detention, and abusive treatment of South Asian, Arab, and Muslim non-U.S. citizens after 9/11. In 2009, five of CCR’s clients won an important $1.26 million settlement from the U.S. government. In 2011, CCR has continued its efforts by filing a new Fourth Amendment complaint in the case. The latest complaint includes detailed allegations directly tying Ashcroft, FBI Director Robert Mueller and former INS Commissioner James Ziglar to illegal roundups and abuse based on information that CCR compiled through discovery and depositions during our years of Turkmen  litigation. 
Status: The defendants, who vigorously op-posed CCR’s right to continue the case on behalf of new clients, have moved to dismiss the entire case once again on qualified immu-nity grounds. Oral argument on defendants’ motions to dismiss was heard in March 2011; awaiting ruling.
Ra cIa l  & econo M Ic  JUs tIc e
Brown v. Snyder 
Challenging the Michigan law that allows the Governor to appoint so-called “emergency managers” to take control of democratically elected local governments and/or school districts. The lawsuit charges Michigan Gov-ernor Rick Snyder and the Legislature with implementing an unconstitutional power grab that effectively silences and disenfranchises citizens and ends democratic government in some of Michigan’s poorest communities and communities of color.Status: Filed in June 2011, litigation is  ongoing.
Protestors convene outside Governor Cuomo’s NYC Office 
on July 1. case InDeX32 center for constitutional rights case InDeX
Gulino v. Board of Education of NY
Class action lawsuit on behalf of public school teachers of color who are challenging discrimi-natory tests and licensing rules which stripped them of their permanent teaching licenses, se-niority, and in some cases their tenured teach-ing positions, resulting in drastic reductions in salary and benefits. Many of these teachers were retained, on a per diem basis and without benefits or pensions, in the same teaching positions with the same course loads. Status: Judge ruled against plaintiffs; however Court of Appeals remanded the matter for reconsideration. Briefs on remand were filed in February 2010; awaiting decision. 
Harrington v. New York Metropolitan Trans-
portation Authority (MTA)Suing the City of New York on behalf of Kevin Harrington, a Sikh subway motorman who, following the 9/11 attacks, was ordered by the transportation authority to either replace his turban with an MTA cap or choose a yard job out of public sight. As a practicing Sikh, Har-rington is required by his religion’s tenets to wear the turban.Status: The case settled in May 2012, when the MTA abandoned both its initial attempts to force Sikh workers to remove their turbans and its later attempt to force them to wear an MTA corporate logo on the turban. Instead, Sikhs will be allowed to wear their turbans, with or without the MTA logo, as long as the color of the fabric is blue (consistent with the MTA uniform).Johnson v. LockeLawsuit charging that the government’s use of arrest records as a strike against applicants for well-paid temporary positions within the U.S. Census Bureau was racially discrimina -
tory. Applicants were required to produce documentation for any past arrest, including minor charges—such as participation in a demonstration—and regardless of whether or not the arrest resulted in conviction or of how long ago it occurred. Using arrest records as an employment screening criteria compounds the already existing injustice of extreme racial disparity in the criminal legal system in which people of color are arrested at disproportion -
ately higher rates. The practice denies these populations the option to work in these dif -
ficult economic times and further deepens the poverty in their communities.Status: Litigation ongoing, awaiting ruling on proposed amended complaint.U.S. and Vulcan Society v.  City of New YorkChallenging racially discriminatory hiring practices of the NYC Fire Department (FDNY) on behalf of the Vulcan Society, an associa -
tion of Black firefighters and individual class representatives. New York City has the least diverse fire department of any major city in America. Only 7.4 percent are Black and Latino, whereas 57 percent of Los Angeles’ firefighters, 51 percent of Philadelphia’s, and 40 percent of Boston’s are people of color. The case charged the FDNY with intentionally discriminating against minority applicants. In a strongly worded rebuke to the City, the district judge ruled in favor of CCR and the Vulcan Society firefighters in 2009 and 2010 on their claims of discrimination.Status: After conducting a full trial on what measures would be required to remedy this persistent pattern of discrimination, the judge ordered broad injunctive relief, including 10 years of court-supervised monitoring of FDNY and enhanced recruitment and retention efforts. The judge also separately issued an order awarding eligible class members back pay in an amount up to $128 million. The City has appealed the judge’s decision, while the process for individual class members to apply for and receive back pay continues to proceed in the district court.
In a sweeping victory for the Vulcan Society, the court 
ordered relief including 10 years of court-supervised moni-toring of the New York Fire Department’s recruitment and retention process.Annual Report 2012  33De fen D I nG D Is sent  & actI VIsM
Blum v. Holder
Federal lawsuit challenging the Animal Enter-prise Terrorism Act (AETA) as an unconstitu-tional infringement on free speech. The plain-tiffs are five longtime animal rights activists whose advocacy work has been chilled due to fear of being prosecuted as terrorists under the AETA. One of the plaintiffs has already been prosecuted for free speech activity around hosting a website that promoted peaceful demonstrations.Status: Blum v. Holder was filed in the U.S. District Court in the District of Massachusetts in December 2011. The parties have briefed the Government’s motion to dismiss, and oral argument is expected in August 2012. 
BNY Mellon v. Occupy Pittsburgh
CCR, the National Lawyers Guild and the American Civil Liberties Union represented Occupy Pittsburgh in BNY Mellon Bank’s attempt to evict Occupy from a public square owned by Mellon. Status: The judge permitted Mellon to evict Occupy Pittsburgh.
City of New York v. Hirsch
Criminal defense case for Brooklyn Bridge ar-rest during Occupy Wall Street.Status: Client took adjournment in contempla-tion of dismissal in June 2012.
Davis v. Cox 
Defending Olympia Food Co-op Board  Members against lawsuit brought by five of 22,000 members in response to boycott of Israeli goods.Status: CCR and co-counsel won Anti-SLAPP (Strategic Lawsuit Against Public Participation) motion on behalf of Board Members. They were awarded costs, fees, and $160,000  
in damages. 
Goodman v. St. Paul
Lawsuit filed on behalf of three Democracy Now!  journalists arrested during the 2008 
Republican National Convention charging law enforcement agencies with unlawful arrests, unreasonable use of force, and the violation of the journalists’ First Amendment rights as members of the press to report on matters of public concern and the public actions of law enforcement.Status: In October 2011, a settlement was announced which includes $100,000 for the plaintiffs as well as an agreement by the St. Paul police department to implement training aimed at educating officers about the First Amendment rights of the press and general public with respect to police operations, in-cluding police handling of media coverage of mass demonstrations.
DIs ab IlItY J Us tIc e
Civic Association of the Deaf v.  City of New YorkIn 2010 the City of New York brought a motion to vacate a permanent injunction that CCR had secured in a 1995 class action lawsuit brought by the Civic Association of the Deaf of New York City. The injunction prevented the City from removing street alarm boxes the Deaf and hard of hearing can use to summon emergency  
CCR client Sarahjane Blum, one of the animal rights activ-
ists whose advocacy work has been chilled due to fear of being prosecuted as a terrorist under the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act.
CCR Legal Director Baher Azmy, joined by Amy Goodman of Democracy Now!, spoke before press after a $100,000 settlement was reached on behalf of Goodman v. St. Paul plaintiffs.Olympia co-op members and supporters rally outside court-house before case hearing.
34 center for constitutional rights
 table of contents
assistance from the street, and it halted a plan 
for the public to use pay telephones instead. Status: In August 2011, the Judge ruled for the Civic Association of the Deaf class, finding that the “injunction remains an equitable solution” in order to provide deaf and hearing impaired persons meaningful access to report emergen-cies from the street and for the City to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
NYCQAL v. MFY & CIAD (amicus)
Amicus brief in support of MFY Legal Ser -
vices in a case about access of lawyers and paralegals to adult home residents. These guidelines called for facility representatives to operate as intermediaries between resident advocates and residents, prohibited advo -
cates from accessing the facility unless their purpose was to visit a particular resident, and permitted the providers to restrict access for those who, in their view, failed to comply with the guidelines. CCR supported MFY’s argument that this would interfere with resi -
dents’ access to advocates, particularly those residents fearing retaliation.Status: In October 2011, the New York Court of Appeals sided with MFY Legal Services, ruling that the guidelines imposed on advocates for adult home residents were unenforceable. The Court reiterated that the guidelines conflict with NYS Department of Health regulations and impermissibly restrict lawyers’ access to adult home residents.
Ge nDeR J U s tIc e
Atala v. Chile (amicus)CCR signed onto an amicus brief in support of Karen Atala’s petition to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR). Atala lost custody of her children in Chile’s family law courts because she is a lesbian. The brief argues that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation violates international human rights principles.Status: In March 2012, the IACHR condemned the Government of Chile for its 2004 Su-preme Court decision that denied Karen Atala custody of her children. In its first ruling on a case regarding sexual orientation and gender identity, the IACHR determined that sexual orientation and gender identity are protected categories and discrimination based on these factors violates international law.
Doe v. Jindal 
Challenging a Louisiana law that requires sex offender registration for individuals convicted of Crime against Nature by Solicitation, a statute that targeted solicitation of oral or anal sex for a fee and treated it more harshly than a prostitution conviction though alleg-ing the same acts. This archaic law singled out non-procreative sex acts associated with homosexuality for harsher punishment, and disproportionately affected women, African Americans, members of the LGBTQ communi-ties, and poor people. Status: In June 2011, after an advocacy campaign led by community group Women with a Vision, CCR and other community partners, the Louisiana Legislature equalized all penalties for convictions under this statute with those for prostitution, and eliminated the sex offender registration requirement going forward. The legislation did not, however, provide relief to the hundreds of people on the registry due to past conviction under this statute. In March 2012, the Court unambigu -
ously ruled that it is unconstitutional to require someone to register as a sex offender solely because of a CANS conviction. To date, how -
ever, the state has not taken corrective action for the almost 500 people who remain on the Louisiana sex offender registry because of a CANS conviction. CCR filed Doe v. Caldwell to continue this challenge.
Doe v. Caldwell 
Federal class action lawsuit seeking to elimi-nate the sex offender registration requirement for the hundreds of people who are still forced 
CCR’s Jeremy Rye on a site visit in Uganda with Frank Mu-
gisha, Executive Director of Sexual Minorities Uganda and the 2011 Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights Award Laureate. case InDeX
CCR Associate Legal Director Bill Quigley and CCR partner Women with a Vision stand together outside the court in New Orleans after the filing of Doe v. Jindal.
Annual Report 2012  35
 table of contents
to register due solely to a Crimes Against 
Nature by Solicitation (CANS) conviction. This is a continuation of the victory achieved in Doe v. Jindal. Status: The case was filed in June 2012. 
Sexual Minorities Uganda v. Lively
Suit brought under the Alien Tort Statute by Ugandan LGBTI advocacy organization Sex-ual Minorities Uganda against Scott Lively, the anti-gay extremist in Massachusetts who uses an evangelical platform to pursue his agenda of persecution, for his direct role in an ongoing conspiracy to persecute LGBTI individuals on account of their sexual orienta-tion and deprive them of their fundamental human rights, including freedom of speech and association and freedom from arbitrary detention and torture.Status: CCR filed suit in March 2012; Lively has filed a motion to dismiss the suit; briefing on various legal issues is ongoing.
Request to the International Criminal 
Court for an Investigation of Vatican Offi-cials for Torture, Rape and Sexual Violence Filed at the ICC on behalf of the Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests (SNAP). CCR requested an investigation and pros-ecution of high-level Vatican officials for the widespread and systematic torture, rape and other sexual violence committed by priests and others associated with the Catholic Church as crimes against humanity. SNAP is seeking accountability for church officials, including Joseph A. Ratzinger (now Pope Benedict XVI), who knew of or had ample reason to know of widespread sexual vio-lence by priests and others within the church, and either ignored or took steps to conceal the offenses, obstructed justice in national legal systems and transferred known offend-ers to other locations where they continued to commit rape and other acts of torture and sexual violence.Status: Sealed communication filed in May 2011. Detailed public filing delivered directly to prosecutor by survivors, along with more than 20,000 pages of evidence, in September 2011. Additional evidence submitted by CCR in April 2012.
This map shows the countries of origin of those whose stories were included in the Vatican filing.
 case InDeX36center for constitutional rightsPARTNERS  IN LIT IGAT ION
Aguilar v. Immigration and Customs  
Enforcement
• D EWEY & L EBOEUF , LLP
Donna L. Gordon, Aaron Hand, Lawrence Hirsh, Eridania Perez, Urvashi Sen
• LATINO JUSTICE  PRLDEF
Richard Bellman, Juan Cartagena, Elizabeth Joynes, Marisabel Abbas Kanioros (Parale-gal), Foster S. Maer, Jose Perez, Alba Villa
• W INSTON  & S TRAWN , LLP
Aldo Badini, Leslieann Cachola, Jennifer Kenna (Paralegal), Kelly Librera, Jennifer Opheim, Matthew Stark, Robert Winterode
Al-Bihani v. Obama
• T HE NATIONAL  SECURITY  CLINIC, UNIVERSITY  OF 
TEXAS SCHOOL  OF LAW
Ahmed Ghappour
Al Hamiri v. Obama
• C LIFFORD  CHANCE
Jeff Butler
Al Laithi v. Rumsfeld
• Carolyn Patty Blum
• C OHEN MILSTEIN  SELLERS  & T OLL, PLLC
Kit A. Pierson
• O RRICK, LLP
Russell P . Cohen, Robert A. Rosenfeld, Timothy Vann Pearce, Jr.
Al Qahtani v. Obama
• C ENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL  HUMAN RIGHTS, 
NORTHWESTERN  UNIVERSITY  SCHOOL  OF LAW
Sandra Babcock
• CLEAR P ROJECT , CUNY S CHOOL OF LAW
Ramzi Kassem
• G IBBONS  P.C.
Lawrence LustbergAl-Quraishi v. Nakhla and L-3
• A KEEL & V ALENTINE  PLC
Shereef Akeel
• B URKE PLLC
Susan L. Burke, Susan Sajadi
Al Shimari v. CACI
• A KEEL & V ALENTINE  PLC
Shereef Akeel
• B URKE PLLC
Susan L. Burke, Susan Sajadi
Al Zahrani v. Rumsfeld
• G OODMAN  & H URWITZ , P.C.
William Goodman
• Gitanjali S. Gutierrez
• Johanna Kalb
• Joshua M. Rosenthal
Ameziane v. Obama
• R EFUGEE  LAW OFFICE
Andrew J. Brouwer
• Sophie Weller
Ameziane v. United States
• C ENTER FOR JUSTICE  AND INTERNATIONAL   
LAW (CEJIL)
Annette Martínez Orabona, Francisco Quintana 
Amnesty International, CCR, et al. v. CIA, Department of Defense et al.
• M ORRISON  & F OERSTER  LLP
David Brown, Madeleine Hensler, Jamie Levitt, Anthony Radice
• 
NYU WASHINGTON  SQUARE  LEGAL SERVICES
Margaret SatterthwaiteAref v. Holder
• PORTLAND  LAW COLLECTIVE
Kenneth A. Kreuscher
• W EIL, GOTSHAL  & M ANGES  LLP
Eileen Citron, Kavita Desai, John Gerba, Gregory Silbert, Andrey Spektor, Lara Veblen
Argueta v. Immigration and Customs  Enforcement
 • L OWENSTEIN  SANDLER
Heather Colleen Bishop, Natalie J. Kraner, Aurora Franceca Parrilla, R. Scott Thompson, Scott L. Walker, Catherine Weiss, Kenneth H. Zimmerman
• SETON HALL LAW SCHOOL  CENTER FOR SOCIAL 
JUSTICE
Barbara Moses
Assange, Wikileaks v. United States, LTC Paul Almanza
• Michael Ratner
• SETON HALL UNIVERSITY  SCHOOL  OF LAW
Jonathan Hafetz
Ba Odah v. Obama
• C LIFFORD  CHANCE
Jeff Butler
Barre v. Obama
• R EPRIEVE
• LIFE AFTERGUANTÁNAMO  PROJECT  
Bigwood v. Department of Defense
• T HE GEORGE  WASHINGTON  UNIVERSITY
Zachary Wolfe
Blum v. Holder
• B ENJAMIN  N. C ARDOZO  SCHOOL  OF LAW
Alexander Reinert
• LAW OFFICES OF HOWARD  FRIEDMAN
Howard Friedman, David Milton The Center for Constitutional Rights is grateful to the many cooperating attorneys, co-counsel and private law ﬁrms that joined with us in our legal work this past year. The people named in the list below were a critical part of our efforts to use the law in the struggle for social justice and human rights. We couldn’t do it without you.Annual Report 2012 37BNY Mellon v. Occupy Pittsburgh
• Marvin Fein
• H EALEY AND HORNACK , P.C.
Michael Healey
Brown v. Snyder
• G OODMAN  & H URWITZ , P. C.
Bill Goodman, Julie Hurwitz
• M ILLER COHEN PLC
Keith Flynn
• T HE SANDERS  LAW FIRM
Herbert Sanders
• T HE SUGAR LAW CENTER
Tova Perlmutter, John Philo
CCR v. Department of Defense et. al. (Al 
Qahtani FOIA)
• C ENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL  HUMAN RIGHTS 
NORTHWESTERN  UNIVERSITY  SCHOOL  OF LAW
Sandra Babcock
• G IBBONS , P.C.
Alicia Bannon, Lawrence Lustberg
CCR v. Department of Defense et al (Gaza Flotilla FOIA)
• U NIVERSITY  OF VIRGINIA  INTERNATIONAL  HUMAN 
RIGHTS LAW CLINIC
Deena Hurwitz 
Celikgogus v. Rumsfeld
• Carolyn Patty Blum
• C OHEN MILSTEIN  SELLERS  & T OLL, PLLC
Kit A. Pierson
• O RRICK, LLP
Russell P . Cohen, Robert A. Rosenfeld 
Civic Association of the Deaf vs. City of New York
• B ROACH  & S TULBERG , LLP
Amy F . Shulman, Robert B. Stulberg 
• SYRACUSE  UNIVERSITY  COLLEGE  OF LAW  
DISABILITY  RIGHTS CLINIC
Michael A. Schwartz
• N EW YORK LAWYERS  FOR THE PUBLIC INTEREST , 
INC.
Aditi Kothekar Shah
• Franklin SiegelDavis v. Cox
• D AVIS WRIGHT TREMAINE
Bruce Johnson, Devin Smith
• Steven Goldberg
• Barbara Harvey
Doe v. Caldwell
• LOYOLA  LAW SCHOOL  STUART  H. S MITH LAW 
CLINIC & C ENTER FOR SOCIAL JUSTICE
Davida Finger, Bill Quigley
• Andrea Ritchie
• K AIRYS, RUDOVSKY , MESSING  & F EINBERG , LLP
Jonathan Feinberg. David Rudovsky
• Nikki Thanos
• U NIVERSITY  OF PENNSYLVANIA  LAW SCHOOL
Seth Kreimer
Doe v. Jindal
• C LEARY GOTTLIEB  STEEN & H AMILTON , LLP
Claire Bo Kwon, Carmine Boccuzzi, Jr., Katharine Cooper, Kyle Dandelet, Lauren Peacock
• LOYOLA  LAW SCHOOL  STUART  H. S MITH LAW 
CLINIC & C ENTER FOR SOCIAL JUSTICE
Davida Finger, Bill Quigley
• Andrea Ritchie
Floyd v. City of New York
• B ELDOCK , LEVINE AND HOFFMAN , LLP
Jenn Borchetta, Jonathan Moore
• C OVINGTON  & B URLING , LLP
Dan George, Eric Hellerman, Gretchen Hoff Varner, Kristine Hrinik, Philip Irwin, Kasey Martini 
Armstrong v. City of Pittsburgh
• A MERICAN  CIVIL LIBERTIES  UNION OF  
PENNSYLVANIA
• H EALEY AND HORNACK , P.C.
Michael Healey
Goodman v. St. Paul
• Albert Goins
• Bruce Nestor
• W EIL, GOTSHAL  & M ANGES , LLP
Devon Cain, Christine Di Guglielmo, Alex Khachaturian, Alex LevineGulino v. The Board of Education of the City of New York and the New York State Education Department
• D LA PIPER
Anthony Gill, Joshua Sohn
• Joel Hellman
• Steve Seliger
Haiti—IACHR Precautionary Measures on United States Deportations
• A LTERNATIVE  CHANCE
Michelle Karshan
• A MERICANS  FOR IMMIGRANT  JUSTICE
• G OODMAN  & H URWITZ , P. C.
Bill Goodman, Julie Hurwitz
• LOYOLA  LAW SCHOOL  STUART  M. S MITH LAW 
CLINIC & C ENTER FOR SOCIAL JUSTICE
• U NIVERSITY  OF MIAMI INTERNATIONAL   
LAW CLINIC AND UNIVERSITY  OF MIAMI  
 IMMIGRATION  CLINIC
Caroline Bettinger-Lopez
Haiti — IACHR Precautionary Measures on Forced Evictions
• B UREAU  DES AVOCATS  INTERNATIONAUX  (BAI)
• INSTITUTE  FOR JUSTICE  & D EMOCRACY  IN  
 H AITI
• INTERNATIONAL  HUMAN RIGHTS LAW CLINIC  
 A T AMERICAN  UNIVERSITY ’S WASHINGTON   
 C OLLEGE  OF LAW
• Y OU.ME.WE.
Harrington v. Metropolitan Transportation Authority
• Ravinder S. Bhalla
• SIKH COALITION
Amardeep Singh
Ibrahim v. Department of Homeland Security (amicus)
• A SIAN LAW CAUCUS
Veena Dubal
• B INGHAM  MCCUTCHEN , LLP
Sujal Shah38center for constitutional rightsPARTNERS  IN LIT IGAT ION
Johnson v. Locke
• C OMMUNITY  LEGAL SERVICES  OF PHILADELPHIA
• C OMMUNITY  SERVICE  SOCIETY
• INDIAN  LEGAL RESOURCE  CENTER
• LATINOJUSTICE  PRLDEF
• LAWYERS  COMMITTEE  FOR CIVIL RIGHTS
• O UTTEN  & G OLDEN , LLP
Sam Miller
• PUBLIC CITIZEN LITIGATION  GROUP
Khan v. Obama (habeas)
• JENNER  & B LOCK, LLP
Brian Fischer, Colleen Harrison, Eddie Jaure-
gui, Katya Jestin, Prashant Yerramalli
Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum Company (amicus)
• A MNESTY  INTERNATIONAL
• EUROPEAN  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL  AND 
HUMAN RIGHTS
• G LOBAL WITNESS
• H UMAN RIGHTS WATCH
• INTERNATIONAL  COMMISSION  OF JURISTS
• INTERNATIONAL  FEDERATION  FOR HUMAN RIGHTS 
(FIDH)
• R EDRESS
• W ORLD ORGANIZATION  AGAINST  TORTURE  
(OMCT)
Kiyemba v. Obama (I and III)
• B AKER & M CKENZIE , LLP
Angela C. Vigil
• B INGHAM  MCCUTCHEN , LLP
Susan Baker Manning, Neil McGaraghan, 
Jason S. Pinney, Rheba Rutkowski, Sabin Willett 
• Elizabeth P . Gilson
• K RAMER  LEVIN NAFTALIS  & F RANKEL , LLP
Leah Grossi, Sarah Rosen, Eric A. Tirschwell
• M ILLER & C HEVALIER  CHTD
George Clarke
• R EPRIEVE
Cori Crider, Clive Stafford Smith
• Seema SaifeeKiyemba v. Obama (II)
• B INGHAM  MCCUTCHEN , LLP
Susan Baker Manning, Neil McGaraghan, Jason S. Pinney, Rheba Rutkowski, Sabin Willett
• C LEARY GOTTLIEB  STEEN & H AMILTON , LLP
Jonathan I. Blackman, Christopher P . Moore, Rahul Mukhi, Aaron Marr Page
Mamani v. Sánchez Berzaín
• A KIN GUMP STRAUSS  HAUER & F ELD, LLP
Meredith Bentley, Jeremy Bollinger, Steven Schulman, Michael Small, John Van Sickle
• Judith Chomsky
• Jennie Green
• Geoffrey Hoffman
• T HE INTERNATIONAL  HUMAN RIGHTS CLINIC AT 
HARVARD  LAW SCHOOL
James Cavallaro, Susan Farbstein, Tyler Giannini
• K AIRYS, RUDOVSKY , MESSING  & F EINBERG , LLP
David Rudovsky
• K URZBAN , KURZBAN , WEINGER  & T ETZOLI
Ira Kurzban
• SCHONBRUN , DESIMONE , SEPLOW , HARRIS  
& H OFFMAN , LLP
Paul Hoffman 
• Beth Stephens
Mamani v. Sánchez de Lozada
• A KIN GUMP STRAUSS  HAUER & F ELD, LLP
Meredith Bentley, Jeremy Bollinger, Steven 
Schulman, Michael Small, John Van Sickle
• T HE INTERNATIONAL  HUMAN RIGHTS CLINIC AT 
HARVARD  LAW SCHOOL
James Cavallaro, Susan Farbstein, Tyler Giannini
• Geoffrey Hoffman• Jennie Green
• K AIRYS, RUDOVSKY , MESSING  & F EINBERG , LLP
Judith Chomsky, David Rudovsky, Beth Stephens 
• K URZBAN , KURZBAN , WEINGER  & T ETZOLI  
Ira Kurzban 
• SCHONBRUN , DESIMONE , SEPLOW , HARRIS  
& H OFFMAN , LLP
Paul HoffmanMamilla Cemetery Human Rights Petition
• Dima Khalidi
• Richard Levy
• Michael Steven Smith
Movsesian v. Versicherung (amicus)
EARTHRIGHTS  INTERNATIONAL
National Day Laborer Organizing Network v. Department of Homeland Security
• B ENJAMIN  N. C ARDOZO  SCHOOL  OF LAW IM-
MIGRATION  JUSTICE  CLINIC
Sarah Amin, Caroline Fuchs, Sonia Lin, Peter  Markowitz, Liz Seaver
• M AYER BROWN , LLP
Norm Cerullo, Therese Craparo, Anthony Diana, Bridget Kessler, Lisa Plush, Jeremy Schildcrout, Paula Tufﬁn
New York Coalition for Quality Assisted Living v. Coalition of Institutionalized Aged & Dis-abled (amicus)
• D EWEY & L EBOEUF , LLP
John Aerni
Orian v. International Federation for Human Rights
• B OSTWICK  & JASSY, LLP
Gary Bostwick, Jean-Paul Jassy, Kevin Vick
Occupy Wall Street Freedom of Information Law Request
• Emi Maclean
• NYU G LOBAL JUSTICE  CLINIC
Sarah Knuckey
Palestine advocacy suppression projectDima Khalidi
Patel v. Arpaio
• R OBBINS  & C URTIN, P.L.L.C.
Joel Robbins
Ragbir v. Holder (amicus)
• Alexander Arpad
• Jason D. Specht
• Kevin M. GreenAnnual Report 2012 39Rahim v. Department of Justice, FBI
• LOYOLA  LAW SCHOOL  STUART  M. S MITH LAW 
CLINIC & C ENTER FOR SOCIAL JUSTICE
Davida Finger, Bill Quigley
• Miles Swanson
Ruiz v. Brown
• C ALIFORNIA  PRISON FOCUS
Marilyn S. McMahon
• LAW OFFICES OF CHARLES  CARBONE
Charles Carbone, Evan Greenberg
• LEGAL SERVICES  FOR PRISONERS  WITH CHILDREN
Carol Strickman
• Jules Lobel
• SIEGEL & Y EE 
Anne Weills
• W EIL, GOTSHAL  & M ANGES , LLP 
Carmen Bremer, George Gardner,  
Aaron Huang, Greg Hull, Sarah Nilson,  Tim Saulsbury
Seeds of Peace v. City of Pittsburgh
• A MERICAN  CIVIL LIBERTIES  UNION OF  
PENNSYLVANIA  
• H EALEY AND HORNACK , P.C.
Michael Healey
Simels v. United States (amicus)
• ELECTRONIC  FRONTIER  FOUNDATION
Hanni Fakhoury
Sexual Minorities Uganda v. Lively
• T HE LAW OFFICES OF SASSON  TURNBULL  RYAN 
AND HOOSE
Luke Ryan
Spanish Investigation into U.S. Torture  Program
• B OYE-ELBAL Y A SOCIADOS
Gonzalo Boye
• T HE EUROPEAN  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL  
AND HUMAN RIGHTS
• Wolfgang Kaleck, Andreas Schueller, Claire 
Tixeire Take Back the Land
• R ANKIN & T AYLOR
David Rankin, Mark Taylor
Turkmen v. Ashcroft
• C OVINGTON  & B URLING , LLP
Nancy Kestenbaum, Jennifer Robbins
• Michael Winger
Vulcan Society v. City of New York
• LEVY, RATNER
Richard Levy, Dana Lossia, Robert Stroup
• SCOTT & S COTT
Judy Scolnick 
United States v. Khan (military commissions)
• JENNER  & B LOCK, LLP
Katya Jestin, Prashant Yerramalli
• O FFICE OF THE CHIEF DEFENSE  COUNSEL  
Ltc Jon Jackson
• S.F .C. Melker Johannsen
• P .O. Stephen Thaggard
United States v. Pool (amicus)
• ELECTRONIC  FRONTIER  FOUNDATION
Hanni Fakhoury, Jennifer Lynch, Lee Tien
Bush Torture Indictment - Canada
• C ANADIAN  CENTRE FOR INTERNATIONAL  JUSTICE
• Matthew Eisenbrandt
Wiwa v. Royal Dutch Shell
• Judith Chomsky
• Anthony DiCaprio
• EARTHRIGHTS INTERNATIONAL
• Paul Hoffman
• C OHEN MILLSTEIN
Wright v. Corrections Corporation of America
• FLETCHER , HEALD & H IDRETH , PLC
Lee G. Petro
• W ASHINGTON  LAWYERS ’ COMMITTEE  FOR CIVIL 
RIGHTS AND URBAN AFFAIRS
Phil Fornaci, Deborah Golden, Stacey Litner40 center for constitutional rights fRIenDs anD allIes
9/11 Families for  
Peaceful Tomorrows
A Thousand Kites
Rick AbelPatricia AckermanAction Réfugiés  
Montréal
All of Us or NoneAndrew AdamsJohn AdcockSuzanne AdelySadia Ali AdenBina AhmadFahd AhmedZohra AhmedMizue AizekiAmna AkbarShahzad AkbarEzzeddine Al-AsbahiCathy AlbisaAmanda AlexanderMichelle AlexanderNadia AlexisAll OutMohammad AllawoAlternative ChancePablo AlvaradoEric AlvarezNadia AlwadiDiane AmdorAmerican Civil Liberties 
Union
American Civil Liberties 
Union of Arizona
American Civil Liberties 
Union of  Massachusetts
American Civil Liberties 
Union of Northern CaliforniaAmerican Federation 
of State, County and Municipal Employees
American Values 
Institute
Amnesty InternationalAmnesty International 
Canada
Chris AndersClaudia AngelosAnglican Diocese of 
Montreal
Cara AnnaAnother Life & A Festi-
val of Conscience 
Rumzi ArajLaurie ArbeiterDeborah ArcherAhmad ArmanNan AronHuwaida ArrafJulian AssangeBarbara AubreyJohn AustriaMichael AveryNadia AwadDenisha BacchusBADILJessica BaenBahraini Press  
Association
Murali BalajiRadhika BalakrishnanAsha BandeleKevin BankstonNatasha BannanAbdulrahman BarmanAndrew BashiKip BastedoMonika Batra KashyapThomas BeanThomas Becker, Jr.David BeckwithCarola BeeneyAntoine BelleBellevue/NYU Program 
for Survivors of Torture
Emily BeneferJason BenfordMedea BenjaminPhyllis BennisCarl BergquistBerkeley CopwatchAntoine BernardAlison BernsteinFrida BerriganTucker BerryCarrie Bettinger-LopezSahil BhatiaChandra BhatnagarShikha BhattacharjeeBig DuckJeremy BigwoodChris BilalBill of Rights Defense 
Committee
Barbara BlaineMariel BlockRobert BloomJocelyn BogdanHeidi BoghosianVictoria Bolton Audrey BomseMaissa BoulosBrooke BoydGonzalo BoyeBill BraginBri Kouri Nouvèl GayeVictoria BrittainYael BrombergBronx DefendersStefan & Laura BudacBryan BullockCharlotte BunchBureau Des Avocats  
Internationaux
Breion BurnsPaul ButlerShahid ButtarCesar CabezasGreger CalhanCalifornia Prison FocusCampaign to Preserve 
Mamilla Jerusalem Cemetery
Canadian Council for 
Refugees
Sheila CarapicoLaura CareyClaudia CaryevschiMark CasebowGillian Cassell-StigaCenter for Economic 
and  Policy Research
Center for Justice and  
International Law
Center for National 
Security Studies
Center for New  
Leadership
Center for Race, Crime 
& Justice (CRCJ) of John Jay College of Criminal Justice
Center for Reproduc-
tive Rights
Center for Women’s 
Global  Leadership
Ellen ChapnickNathaniel CharnyMarco CheloErwin ChermerinskyJennifer ChingNusrat ChoudhuryAnna ChristensenCivic Association of the 
Deaf of  New York City
Civil Liberties Defense 
Center
David ClohessyCoalition for Women 
Prisoners
Codepink COFADEHCharles CogginsRosa Cohen-CruzCindy CohnMarjorie CohnTanya CokeAlison ColeSandy ColiverLoyda ColonCommon Ground ReliefCommunities United 
against  Police Brutality
Communities United 
for Police Reform
Brian ConcannonBrendan ConnorSophia ConroyPeter Cook Correctional Associa-
tion of New York
Andrea CostelloNicholas CosterDan CoughlinCouncil for Global 
Equality 
Council on American 
Islamic  Relations (CAIR)
Kurt CoutainCovington & Burling 
LLP
Creating Law Enforce-
ment  Accountability &  Responsibility (CUNY CLEAR)
CREDO Mobile/Work-
ing Assets
Bradley CrowderJoanna Cuevas-IngramCulture ProjectElizabeth CummingCUNY International 
Women’s  Human Rights Clinic
CUNY Law SchoolCUREJulia CurrieJamil DakwarMatthew DaloisioRon DanielsLeslie DarhersoffAlina Das Lauren DasseGail DavidsonErin DaviesAngela DavisLauren DavisLisa DavisYasmin DavisDeaf Justice Coalition
Over the past year, the Center for Constitutional Rights has worked with hundreds of activists, attorneys, organizations and 
clients on our cases, campaigns and fundraising efforts. CCR extends its deepest appreciation for all they have done as allies in the struggle for justice.Annual Report 2012  41Debevoise & Plimpton 
LLP
Defending Dissent 
Foundation
Maddy DeLone
Mark DenbeauxDetention Watch 
Network
Janet DickersonEjim DikeDisability Advocates, 
Inc.
Rosalee DorfmanBarbara DorrisTanya DouglasDrug Policy AllianceChris DupontEarthRights InternationalSally EberhardtEducators for Civil 
Liberties
Electronic Frontier 
Foundation
Deb EllisJerry Elster Anthony EnriquezJoshua EpsteinFanm Ayisyen Nan 
Miyami (Haitian Women of Miami)
Nina FarniaDavid FathiMichelle FeiFellowship of  
Reconciliation
Praveen FernandesFabrice FerrierRalph FertigWilfried FesselmannEugene FidellMichael FiguraDavida FingerJordan FlahertyLaura FlandersFlorida Immigrant 
Advocacy Center 
Marc FlormanFordham Muslim Law 
Students Association
Foundation for  
Responsible and Open Government
Deborah FrancoisCaroline FredricksonFree Gaza MovementEric FreedmanSpencer FreedmanRob FreerSherry & Leo FrumkinAgnieszka FryszmanKate GallagherMargaret GarrettRobert GassLauren GazzolaMary GeissmanAnnie GellGenerations Ahead Jennifer GennaroFrances Geteles-
Shapiro
Ahmed GhappourGibbons, P .C.Ryan GibbsJohn GilmoreLeah GitterRachel GodsilMiriam GoharaCarla GoldsteinJacinta GonzalezAmy GoodmanJanice GoodmanH. Candace GormanKevin Gosztola Desiree GraceAnna GrantGlenn GreenwaldColin GreerSimon GreerBret GroteLauren GumbsVanita GuptaGitanjali GutierrezClara GutteridgeJonathan HafetzHiba HafizSameera HafizLisa HajjarTravis HallLieve HalsbergheTalat HamdaniStephen HandwerkMonique HardenChino HardinJordan HarlowRachel HarperCole Harrison Gerald & Barbara 
Harting
Harvard Human Rights 
Program
Dalia HashadFaisal HashmiLana HassanHavaar: Iranian  
Initiative Against War, Sanctions and  State Repression
Joseph HaydenDeon HaywoodDJ Ian HeadArt HeitzerEmmanuel HenckensNorris HendersonAnne HessDamon HewittNyasa HickeyCarolyn HicksMorgan HillJane HirschmannSarah K. HogarthMarcia HollingsworthHonduras Solidarity 
NetworkHonduras True  
Commission
Scott HortonSusan HowardJennifer HuangMargaret HuangJayne HuckerbyAlissa HullHuman Rights FirstHuman Rights Infor-
mation & Training Center (Yemen)
Human Rights Institute, 
Columbia Law School
Human Rights WatchChaumtoli HuqDeena HurwitzRear Admiral John 
Hutson
Idil IbrahamGigi IbrahimIGLHRCImmigrant Justice  
Solidarity Project
Institute for Justice and 
Democracy in Haiti (IJDH)
Institute for Policy 
Studies
Institute for Redress 
and Recovery at Santa Clara  University
International Black 
Firefighters  Association
International Federation 
for Human Rights (FIDH)
International Network 
for Economic, Social and Cultural Rights  (ESCR-Net)Iraq Veterans Against 
the War
Ayisha IrfanGary IsaacPeter IselyAli IssaSantita JacksonThe Reverend Jesse 
Jackson
Amy JacobsenOmar JadwatTamara JafarSarah JafariJameel JafferMeena JagannathSunny JainMaryam JayyousiMedaya JayyousiReem JayyousiSara JayyousiLizzie JenkinsJenner & BlockJimmy JohnsonZeke JohnsonClyde JonesDelores Jones-BrownKeith JordanMario JosephJudson Memorial 
Church
Angie JunckJustice CommitteeJuvenile Justice Project 
of Louisiana
David Kalal Wolfgang KaleckJoo-Myun KangJoy KanwarCraig KaplanDana KaplanHannah Kapp-KloteTawakkol KarmanJessica KarpRamzi KassemDara KellAllen KellerSarah KermenskySara KershnarAteqah KhakiBushra KhalidiDima KhalidiLamya KhalidiRaja KhalidiZakir KhanMichael KieschnickDarold KillmerKillmer Lane &  
Newman LLP
Robert KirschRachel KleinmanKnow DronesElizabeth KoobIsabelle KosticSharif Abdel KouddousMakane KouyateRuth KreinikFrank KroghMeghan KrumholzRamah KudaimiTerry KupersRobert LancasterRebecca LandySean LarkinLindsey LaveauxKhary Lazarre-WhiteCristina LeeJessica LeeLegal Services for 
Prisoners  with Children
Anna LellelidDavid LernerAlan LevineKirsten LevingstonMarcia LevyMich LevyLynn LewisNoah LewisKelly Lewis Rita Lewis Milla42center for constitutional rights F RIENDS AND ALLI ES
Jane Li
Donna Lieberman Yul-san LiemLife After Guantánamo 
Project
Tina LinBeatrice LindstromDahlia LithwickPaula & Barry LittEricka LockBenjamin LockeB. LoeweTanuka LohaJose LopezLoyola University New 
Orleans  Immigration Clinic
Leila LucevicAna LukatelaGerard LynnYing-Ying MaChase MadarMADRE Joan MagoolaghanFaiza MajeedMake the Road New 
York
Malcolm X Grassroots 
Movement (MXGM)
Anji MalhotraKaren MalpedeAmina MamaRobin MartinMiranda MassieSuchita MathurBeverley MbuRuby McBrideRobert McCawSean McGrailMarilyn McMahonTamer MehannaAri MelberNina Melendez IbarraMetro New York  
Religious Campaign Against Torture  (NYRCAT)
Danny MeyersMFY Legal ServicesMichigan National 
Lawyers Guild
Milwaukee Police Ac-
countability Coalition
Charo Mina RojasBahar MirhosseiniJulie MoaDean ModinoJoey MogulKate MogulescuInca MohamedJane MoisanMandisa MooreBrad MorganDamonika MorganMorrison & Foerster 
LLP
Barbara MosesNick MotternCarroll MuffetClaudia Muller-HoffDaragh MurrayMuslim Justice Initia-
tive
NAACP Legal Defense 
& Education Fund
Peter NacaratoRanjana NatarajanNational Coalition to 
Protect Civil  Freedoms (NCPCF)
National Day Laborer 
Organizing Network (NDLON)
National Economic 
and Social Rights Institute (NESRI)National Immigration 
Project – National Lawyers Guild 
National Lawyers GuildNational Lawyers Guild 
– Detroit & Michigan Chapter
National Lawyers Guild 
– National Ofﬁce
National Lawyers Guild 
– New York City Chapter
National Lawyers Guild 
– San Francisco Bay Area Chapter
National Organiza-
tion for Defending Rights & Freedoms – HOOD (Yemen)
National Prison Phone 
Campaign
National Religious 
Campaign Against Torture
Merry NeisnerNetroots NationNew York City Human 
Rights Initiative
New York Civil Liberties 
Union (NYCLU)
New York Coalition  
Against Torture
New York Law SchoolNew York University 
Global Justice Clinic/Washington Square Legal Services
Chris NewmanMari NewmanCraig NewmarkHung NguyenChris NizzaNo More GuantánamosNodutdol for Korean 
Community  Development
William OberkehrOccupy Wall Street 
Archives
October 22nd Coali-
tion to Stop Police BrutalityUdi OferOfﬁce of the Chief 
Defense Counsel, Military Commisions
Ofﬁce of the Federal 
Public Defender,  District of Oregon
Stephen H. OleskeyGideon OliverOlympia BDSMaryvelma O’Neil/
ARCH
Ana OnofreRachel OostendorpOrganisation of 
Women’s Freedom in Iraq
Roxanna OrrellRamona OrtegaAlexis OrtizOut Now!Pakistan Foundation for  
Fundamental Rights
Pakistan Solidarity 
Network
Justine PalaciosPalestinian Center 
for Human Rights (PCHR)
Scott PaltrowitzHong ParkBruce ParkerDennis ParkerTom ParkerKathryn PearsonTaylor PendergrassPeoples’ JusticeJose PerezMegan PetersonNicole PhillipsPhysicians for Human 
Rights
Sara V . PicCollette Pichon BattlePicture the HomelessAdrienne PineAshley PlattPolicyLink Political Research 
Advocates
Ai-jen PooDeborah Popowski
ELLA BAK ER FELLOW S POTLIGHT
Kenavon T. Carter “KC” is a criminal defense attorney, com-
munity organizer, and former educator who founded the Carter Law Firm. Prior to creating the Carter Law Firm, KC was the director of HipHop Against Police Brutality, a project hosted by the ACLU of Texas. During that time he successfully organized communities around issues such as police brutality, racial proﬁling and public safety. A University of Texas School of Law graduate, he has spoken on numerous panels and conferences throughout the country on criminal justice issues and HipHop organizing. 
“My experience as an Ella Baker Fellow was simply outstanding! While the work was 
incredible and groundbreaking, it was witnessing the connection between community organizing and lawyering that really opened my eyes. Much of what I learned about so-cial justice lawyering as an Ella Baker Fellow I have incorporated into my own practice.”
Annual Report 2012  43Warren Popp
Madeline PortaKatherine PorterfieldPortland CopwatchEmily PosnerArchana PrakashFred PrattDavida PriestPrison hunger strikersPuenteLi PuichunBill QuigleyOlivia QuintoRachel Corrie  
Foundation for  Peace and Justice
Ravi RagbirMalik RahimAshu RaiMax RameauCamilo RamirezKaren RanucciEmily RatnerLizzy RatnerMartha RaynerRe-Entry RoundtableBruce ReillyAlex ReinertSteven ReisnerDavid RemesReprieveRha GoddessRights ActionRights for Imprisoned 
People with  Psychiatric  Disabilities (RIPPD) 
Rights Working GroupSara RiosRiptide  
Communications
Andrea J. RitchieJoleen RiveraRiverside ChurchRobins, Kaplan, Miller 
& Ciresi LLPJennifer RobinsonRob RobinsonMaria Robins- 
Somerville
Rockwood Leadership 
Institute
Kelly Fay RodriguezMaria RomaniJonathan RombergAmy RosenbergKarmen RossKari RotkinLaura RovnerAlbert RubenJulie RubenAl RubinKate RubinSafe Streets/Strong 
Communities
Naomi SagerRahul SaksenaLorelei SalasYanick SalazarAnjana SamantJessica SanchezJessica SanclementeDouglas B. SapolaSusan SarandonSally SaulvesterZina SaundersPhilip SavianoGabriel SayeghJeremy ScahillAnn Marie ScaliaDaniel SchenckAndrew SchererPeter ScheySchool of the Americas 
Watch
Huberta G. SchroedelKristina SchwabBonnie Scott JonesRandy Scott- 
McLaughlin
Liliana SeguraBrad SeligmanRita SethiSexual Minorities 
Uganda (SMUG)
Jeena ShahNaureen ShahParomita ShahPurvi ShahSilky ShahSvati ShahAdam ShapiroDavid ShapiroMoh SharmaRobert SharyAzadeh ShashaniCarey ShenkmanPeter ShepherdRafael ShimunovSholay ProductionsReggie ShufordFranklin SiegelSikh CoalitionJulian SimcockAadika SinghAmrit SinghAnita SinhaNuvia SkadenJakub SkrzypczykBert SmeetsJohnathan SmithMcGregor SmythMajeeda SneedSolitary WatchRaji SouraniJim SquireJunior St. VilPamela StamoulisColin StargerGeorge StavisNancy StearnsIrene SteinerBryan StevensonJulie StoeverBrett StoudtStop the Hate and 
Homophobia  Coalition of Western  Massachusetts
Streetwise and SafeJonathan Stribling-UssCarol StrickmanDamonike StrokesVivian StrombergMatthew StrugarSarah SturgesSundiata Acoli Support 
Coalition
Survivors Network of 
those Abused by Priests (SNAP)
Yifat SuskindMiles SwansonChristina SwarmsDebra SweetJavid SyedSylvia Rivera Law 
Project 
Jenny SynanMadiha R. TahirTake Back the LandNancy TalanianAya TasakiSyeda TasnimBonnie TennerielloHoang Thanh HoangNikki ThanosThe Brecht ForumThe Bureau of Investi-
gative Journalism
The Center for Social 
Justice at  Seton Hall University School of Law
The NationTheaters Against War 
(THAW)
Jeanne TheoharisBrittany ThomasTu Thomas HoangJohn ThompsonAimee Thorne- 
Thomsen
Sam Thypin-BermeoLinda TiganiClaire TixeireMargaret TobinCandis TolliverAtif ToorGabriel Torres RiveraTorture Abolition and 
Survivors  Support Coalition (TASSC)
TransAfrica ForumSue Lee TroutmanFred TsaoU.S. Boat to GazaU.S. Human Rights 
Network
Sue UdryUganda Civil Society 
Coalition on  Human Rights and  Constitutional Law
Max UhlenbeckUniversity of Denver 
Sturm College of Law
University of Miami  
Human Rights Clinic
University of Miami  
Immigration Clinic
University of New 
Hampshire School of Law
Urban Justice CenterSarahi UribeUS Campaign to End 
the Israeli  Occupation
US Human Rights FundJavier ValdezYohana ValdezAndrew van HouterJeremy VaronVenceremos BrigadeJoan VermeulenStephen VladeckVocal-NyVulcan SocietyWalter Leitner Interna-
tional Human Rights Clinic
War Resisters LeagueMary Ward CaplanKeisha WaringHazel WeiserLouise WeissmanSophie WellerLynntrell WestbrookCoya White Hat- 
Artichoker
Laura WhitehornEmily WhitfieldSabin WillettAmy WilliamsWilmerHaleWitness Against 
Torture
Witness for PeaceBen WiznerWomen Journalists 
Without Chains
Women with A VisionWomen’s Link  
Worldwide 
Chris WoodsWorld Can’t WaitWORTHAndy WorthingtonAngela WrightAnn WrightGlover WrightCatheranne WylyYemeni American  
Coalition for Change
Abu YousufMonette ZardDorothy ZellnerMarie Zieger44 center for constitutional rights  2012 PResIDent’s ReceP tIon
Ally for Social Change:  
Women with a Vision  Accepted by Deon Haywood, WWAV Executive Director
tHe Hono ReesThe Center for Constitutional 
Rights held our annual Presi-dent’s Reception in New York 
City in May. This event is an opportu-nity for CCR to show our deep gratitude to our generous donors and supporters, who are indispensable partners in the fight for social justice. This year’s hon-orees were Women with a Vision, The Bertha Foundation, and CCR President Emeritus Michael Ratner.
Women with a Vision
CCR presented the Ally for Social Change award to Women with a  Vision for their strong partnership with CCR to fight Louisiana’s archaic and discriminatory Crime Against Na-ture by Solicitation statute. CCR and Women with a Vision worked together, along with other allies, to successfully challenge the registration of people convicted of Crime Against Nature by Solicitation as sex offenders.
 W
omen with a Vision’s mission  
is to improve the lives of marginal-ized women, their families, and their communities by addressing the social conditions that hinder their health and well-being through advocacy, health education, supportive services, and community-based participatory research.
CCR President Jules Lobel with CCR Executive Director  
Vince Warren.
Philanthropic Partnership AwardBertha FoundationRelentless Radical AwardMichael RatnerCCR President EmeritusPresented by Michael’s longtime friend and CCR supporter Susan SarandonAnnual Report 2012  45Michael Ratner
CCR presented Michael Ratner with the Relentless Radical 
award for his more than forty years as an activist, people’s lawyer and leader at the Center. Since graduating from  Columbia Law School in 1970 and starting at CCR after clerking for Judge Constance Baker Motley, Michael has filled numerous roles at the Center—attorney, Legal Director, Vice President, and President. 
 For decades he has worked on the side of the oppressed 
and remains on the front lines today whether working with OWS, W
ikileaks or trying to bring an end to Guantánamo. 
Protecting activists against government abuse and surveil-lance has always been central to Michael’s work. His belief, like those who founded the Center, is that real change is made by mass movements. 
 He has opposed, often in the courts, every war in which 
the U.S. has engaged. His work has involved legal support for liberation struggles, particularly efforts to get out from under U.S. hegemony such as V
ietnam, Puerto Rico and  
Central America.
Thank You to those who generously made a gift in honor of Michael Ratner’s 40+ years 
with the Center for Constitutional Rights! If you would like to make a gift in tribute to Michael’s leadership, you may do so online at www.CCRjustice.org/giftsinhonor or by mail to CCR. For a full list of people who gave in honor of Michael see page 57.Michael Ratner with his family and former President of Nicaragua, Daniel Ortega. Michael 
Ratner at Bush Impeachment Rally, 2005.CCR presented the Philanthropic Partnership award 
to the Bertha Foundation for their passionate belief in the power of social activism to generate social, political, economic and environmental change. The Bertha Foundation has partnered with CCR to launch the Social Justice Institute, a program that expands our capacity to train the next generation of peoples’ lawyers and human rights activists.
“Two years ago a leading member of The Bertha 
Foundation came to visit CCR. It just happened to be graduation day for the 2010 class of summer Ella Baker Fellows. As the students described how trans-formative the experience had been, and the deep impact it would have on their lives, he was so moved that he immediately pledged to expand the program and, in partnership with CCR, replicate our model in sites around the world.
The foundation’s mission and passion is to support  
activists, lawyers, storytellers and social entrepre-neurs as they work to create change in the world.  It was the incredible vision, confidence in CCR’s pro-gram, and dedication of The Bertha Foundation that  allowed us to build the Social Justice Institute; training the next generation of people’s lawyers and ensuring that social justice movements will not stand alone.” 
ccr executive director Vincent Warren
46 center for constitutional rights Messa Ge fRoM tHe PResIDent
We know we’ve picked the right 
fight when we feel the most backlash. It’s a sign that our 
actions pose a threat to unchecked powers of governments, corporations, and patriar-chal institutions. Just over 10 years ago, we decided to fight the U.S. government over Guantánamo. Standing nearly alone, we told them that torturing men and detaining them indefinitely was not only an ethical disgrace but violated core constitutional and human rights principles. The reaction was hostile, to say the least. Our staff received death threats, verbal attacks from right-wing groups, and we fought an uphill courtroom battle where the government convinced judge after judge that our clients had no rights and that national security trumped the law—until we finally won in the Supreme Court. Suffice it to say, we touched a nerve.
CCR has a history of striking nerves. In 1980, 
the Center pioneered the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) claim in Filártiga v. Peña-Irala, which has, to date, been the single most power-ful legal tool to challenge torture and other human rights violations committed by U.S. corporations outside of the country. Yet the corporations are now counterattacking, seek-ing impunity from off-shore deeds, such as the ruthless murder and torture of civilians. Their reaction to our unrelenting pursuit of accountability is not dissimilar to that of the U.S. government’s fight for impunity at Guantánamo. This fall, the Supreme Court will hear the corporate claim that the ATS should not cover corporate crimes, and that the victory CCR won for foreign citizens tor-tured abroad should be reversed. We know we’re fighting giants but, most importantly, we know we’re fighting the right battles and that we’re not alone.
We proudly stood among the thousands of 
people who came together in Zuccotti Park to begin a national movement in protest of sleazy politics, Wall Street cronyism, and the shameful economic inequities that burden the overwhelming majority—the “99 percent”—of Americans. I, along with a legal team of CCR cooperating attorneys and other activist lawyers, represented Occupy Pittsburgh as they fought Mellon Bank’s lawsuit to evict them from a park that Mellon built with public subsidies. And, we continue to stand with Bradley Manning and Julian Assange as they face the severity of a flawed system that privileges its own preservation over fundamental human rights.
While the Center has grown, we are proud to 
have stayed true to our radical founding ide-als. CCR accepts cases and projects based on principle and not solely by using the calculus of victory. This ensures that we use litigation to guarantee the constitutional and human rights of those with the fewest protections and least access to legal resources. As a result, over the past four decades, CCR has lent support and expertise to virtually every popular contemporary movement for social justice. And, though at times we feel the backlash of giants, we have the history of movements on our side.
This year alone, we filed a number of critical 
lawsuits and garnered notable victories on behalf of disenfranchised and oppressed individuals and communities. We filed a class action complaint representing hundreds of prisoners in California’s Pelican Bay prison who have been held in solitary confinement for more than a decade, won a victory allow-ing judicial accountability for crimes commit-ted by private contractors in Iraq, prevailed in a challenge to Louisiana’s discriminatory and archaic Crimes Against Nature by Solicitation law, and won an important class certifica-tion motion in our case challenging the NYC Police Department’s unlawful stop and frisk policies. Whether we win or lose in court, it is CCR’s hallmark that we don’t back down in the face of injustice and oppression, no mat-ter how powerful the opponent.
It is at this particular moment—where the 
breadth and scope of the Center’s work is at its pinnacle—that we stand in awe of the legacy of a few scrappy civil rights lawyers in the 1960s. We could not be more proud to be a part of their vision to change the world and look forward to immersing ourselves in the great movements that lie ahead, just as they did almost 50 years ago.
Jules Lobel
Annual Report 2012  47 ccR DonoRs
Anonymous
Ethel G. AckleySalah and Catherine 
Al-Askari
Elizabeth AlexanderVicki A. AlexanderEvelyn AlloyThomas E. and Donna 
Ambrogi
Barbra ApfelbaumCarol AscherFrank and Blythe 
Baldwin
Ruth BardachPhilip BereanoGene C. BernardiHarvey BlendDavid M. BlockRobert H. BonthiusBelinda Bull BreeseFrederick and Betty 
Briehl
Peter BronerMary CarrMatthew CooperMargaret R. de RiveraShulamit DecktorTheresa Del PozzoMarial DeloJeffrey DickemannGeorge and Minna 
Doskow
Carol F . DriskoWendy DwyerDonald and Martha 
Farley
Carl H. FeldmanGeorge and Mary 
Ferger
Leona FeyerCurt J. FirestoneSolomon FisherCecily FoxMichele Garden and  
Lawrence Pruski
Mary J. GeissmanNona GlazerFrances GoldinEdward E. Goldman 
and Judith Riven
Ellen and Ellis HarrisJohn HaywardMarjorie HeinsMartin and Mildred 
Hird
Timothy A. HolmesSumi HoshikoMartin and Carolyn 
Karcher
Richard Aronson and  
Joyce Kirschner
Hilda KnoblochElizabeth S. LandisRobert E. and Helen 
S. Lane
Janet L. LarsonSusan LeeJoan LewisDonald LipmansonEvelyn C. LundstromGrant MarcusNorman MasonsonPriscilla J. McMillanEva K. Millette CoombsJoseph MortonEva S. MoseleyJames OdlingEdward H. PageWilliam ParsonsLovel P . PerkinsCarolyn Pomeroy and  
John A. Broussard
Rachel PorterJeanne Audrey PowersDolores M. PriemDavid G. RichMarie Henderson  
Rothman
Jeremy RyePatricia R. Sax Michael A. SchlosserAnn ShapiroAntonia Shouse  
Salpeter
Robert M. SiegelLinda SleffelRosalie K. StahlMargot SteigmanBarbara StewartNancy and Bill StrongClio TaraziGlen C. ThamertEthel TobachMari VlastosFlorence WagnerJonas WaxmanPeter WeissBarbara WestGinia D. WexlerJohn H. WilsonEllen YaroshefskyRichard H. Yurman
Our planned giving program forms the bedrock of our efforts to build an endowment for CCR and to create an institutional 
legacy dedicated to upholding the hard-won victories of your lifetime and protecting them from future attacks. By becom-ing a member of the Thelma Newman Society, you will join others committed to ensuring that CCR will be there to fight into the next generation. Please contact us if you have any questions about making a bequest, endowment, gift annuity, or other form of estate gift, or to let us know that you have included CCR in your estate plan.
tHelMa newMan Planne D GIVInG socIetY
planned gi Ving SpoT ligh T
patricia Sax
 retired 10 years ago after 30 years of 
practice as a psychiatric social worker in San Fran-
cisco. Now she volunteers as Development Director for an organization she helped to found, dedicated to preventing cervical cancer in developing countries, where it is often fatal. Pat has been giving to CCR for more than a decade, but in the past year she has become increasingly alarmed at the unconstitutional and unlawful actions of the U.S. government.
“A good cause is not enough. I support CCR because they are effective at creating 
change. My relatives are now educated and able to provide for themselves, so it’s not necessary for them to be provided for upon my death. On the other hand there is a great need to do something about what is going on in our country. I decided to include CCR in my will because our Constitution is going to need protection for a long,  long, time.”
48 center for constitutional rights ccR DonoRs
$1,000,000 +
The Bertha Foundation
$250,000–999,999
AnonymousThe Atlantic Philanthropies (USA)Rhonda Copelon 
†
The Ford FoundationThe Helena Rubinstein FoundationThe Oak FoundationOpen Society FoundationsThe Vanguard Charitable Endowment 
Program
$100,000–249,999AnonymousThe CS Fund/Warsh-Mott LegacyFidelity Charitable Gift FundThe Kaphan FoundationShel KaphanDavid G. RichThe Vital Projects Fund, Inc.The Wallace Global Fund
$50,000–99,999
AnonymousThe 1848 FoundationThe Angelina FundThe Bardon-Cole FoundationCivic Association of the Deaf of  
New York City and Franklin Siegel
craigslist Charitable FundShirley EvenitskyJoan HollisterEleanor J. LewisThe Normandie FoundationCarolyn Pomeroy and John A. BroussardThe Ratner FamilyVictoria WardSamuel Wiener, Jr.
$25,000–49,999
AnonymousLaurie Arbeiter and Jennifer HobbsC. Edwin Baker 2001 TrustThe Charles Evans Hughes Memorial 
Foundation
The Common Counsel FoundationThe FireDoll FoundationRobert A. Friedman and Anita DavidsonSherry and Leo FrumkinJohn and Kathryn GreenbergVictor and Lorraine HonigThe JKW FoundationThe Libra FoundationZella LuriaNancy Meyer and Marc WeissKatherine and David 
† Moore
Andrew Palese †
Domitila Barrios de Chungara Fund  
of the Silicon Valley Community  Foundation
Rotonda FoundationSamuel Rubin FoundationSilicon Valley Community FoundationJean SteinThe Tides Foundation
$10,000–24,999
AnonymousThe Alfred and Jane Ross FoundationThe Altschul FoundationEric and Cindy ArbanovellaBert and Barbara AubreyEugene AuerbachFrederick and Jutta BenensonAra and Linda BernardiThe Blue Oak FoundationCaipirinha FoundationElizabeth A. CastelliWhitfield Cobb 
†
David Kimmel FoundationThe Epstein Teicher PhilanthropiesLois Blum FeinblattThe Frances and Benjamin Benenson  
Foundation
The Funding Exchange National  
Community Funds
John GilmoreThe Grodzins FundJohn B. and Sarah L. HenryNeil A. HoltzmanEileen and Paul F . LeFortThe Lois and Irving Blum Foundation, Inc.Hubert and Rachelle MarshallMicrosoft Matching Gifts ProgramHolly Myers and Kirk NeelyAnne PoselFrances R. PoselRalph E. Ogden Foundation, Inc.The Richard A. Busemeyer Atheist  
Foundation
Alfred and Jane RossEric C. and Fiona RudinThe Bright Horizons Fund of the Tides 
Foundation
The San Francisco FoundationSteve M. SlabyLouis SlesinAdam and Jane SteinBeatrice SternNancy and Bill StrongMerry TuckerNancy Kimmel Viola
† deceasedAnnual Report 2012 49John H. Wilson
Chic WolkYork Foundation
$5,000–9,999
AnonymousFranz and Marcia AllinaJoan Antonucci 
†
Kay Berkson and Sidney HollanderJohn D. BernsteinDiane BoehmVirginia BrodyKaren BurkhardtL. Sandra ColiverDistracted Globe FoundationRodney and Carole DriverThomas DurstDonald and Martha FarleyFowey Light FundJames B. and Louise FrankelThe Friendship FundThe Fritz and Yvonne Pappenheim Fund  
of the Tides Foundation
Marge HarburgRichard S. Hobish and Florence WienerLisa HonigThe Jewish Communal FundJon and Katherine Dart Charitable  
Foundation
The Key FoundationWilliam D. KirbyLuis and Lee LainerLandau Family FoundationLee & Luis Lainer Family FoundationThe Lehman-Stamm Family FundJoan LewisThe Liberty Hill FoundationPaula and Barry LittTom Wallace LyonsRob McConnell and Maria DeCastroVincent McGeeMahmoud D. and Laila MohamedMorgan Stanley Smith Barney  
Global Impact Fund, Inc.
Maryanne MottNetwork for GoodPeter J. Neufeld and Adele BernhardMAJOR DONOR S POTLIGHT
Thirty years is a long time for a foundation 
to provide support for an organization—in fact, it’s virtually unheard of. But that is precisely what the CS Fund/Warsh-Mott Legacy has done for CCR—provided generous support for three decades and counting. It is for this stalwart dedication that CCR presented an award to the Fund at our annual Reception by the Bay in San Francisco in June. The CS Fund was created in 1981 by Herman Warsh and Maryanne Mott, who strongly believed in providing long-term support for defenders of civil liberties and human rights, so that these institutions would always be ready to respond to new chal-lenges, regardless of the changing political landscape.  The CS Fund has stood with CCR through some of our longest fought battles—cases and campaigns that have taken more than a decade to resolve. The prescience of its founders has never been clearer than in the past few years as we have seen President Obama deepen policies and programs put in place by the Bush administration in truly unthinkable ways. The unwavering support of the CS Fund has allowed CCR to continue to challenge the interconnected national security and counterterrorism policies—from the prison at Guantánamo to domestic immigration and detention practices to the targeted assassina-tion of American citizens—that threaten civil liberties and human rights. As this work transitions from a short-term crisis to a long-term struggle for justice, the CS Fund con-tinues to stand by CCR, knowing that as Martin Luther King, Jr. so famously said, “The moral arc of the universe is long, but it bends toward justice.”
“CCR’s impressive history includes countless instances when they were the early and 
sometimes the only organization willing to take the principled stand, and where they were the last organization in the successful ﬁght for justice. CCR is a bedrock defender of civil liberties and human rights, and we are extremely proud to support their far sighted and strategic work.” 
—Roxanne Turnage, CS Fund Executive Director
† deceased50 center for constitutional rights ccR DonoRs
The New York Community Trust
Richard L. PearlstoneThe Peggy Meyerhoff Pearlstone  
Foundation, Inc.
The Posel FoundationMitzi C. RaasSchwab Charitable FundSeymour & Sylvia Rothchild Family  
2004 Charitable Foundation
Donald ShafferRichard A. SobleThe Spingold FoundationThe Stewart R. Mott FoundationDianne V . ThielThe Tom Fund at the National  
Philanthropic Trust
Wendy Vanden HeuvelGeorge WallersteinWilliam B. Wiener, Jr.The William B. Wiener, Jr. Foundation
$2,500–4,999
AnonymousSalah and Catherine Al-AskariNabil M. and Ann S. AmerRita L. and William J. BenderAlexis and Michael BleichMartin BranningIda G. BraunJohn CarusoJohn A. Chandler and Elizabeth V . TanisLaura and Richard ChasinThe Chicago Community FoundationDavid D. Cole and Cornelia T. L. PillardAlvin and Rochelle DorfmanThe Elizabeth M. Gitt FoundationDaniel and Anita FineMary J. GeissmanGobioff FoundationNeil Gobioff and Gianna  
Rendina-Gobioff
Google Matching Gifts ProgramDaniel Greenberg and Karen NelsonSusan J. Haas and Keith J. PattiWilliam LankfordSusan E. ManuelPatricia F . MullahyThe Overbrook FoundationStuart OzerLovel P . PerkinsNancy R. PoselClaire ReedWilliam L. and Sandra L. RosenfeldAlice RothchildAlfred H. Schwendtner  
and Carole Wagner
Wallace M. ShawnPeter and Elizabeth C. ShepherdAntonia Shouse SalpeterSidney Stern Memorial TrustAlan and Victoria SussmanNajmeh VahidSteven R. VanBeverStephen WarrenBarbara S. WebsterAnne Heath WidmarkWorkable Alternatives Foundation
ella  BaKer Fello W SpoT ligh T
l
indsey 
l
aveaux is a third-year student at Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania Law School. Born to Haitian 
parents, her interest in human rights work started with visits to Haiti as a child and became active at New York University through her involvement in organizations that battled for social equality and human rights. Prior to law school, Lindsey served as a Peace Corps Volunteer in Cameroon where she taught English at a local high school and worked with women and girls to promote empowerment and personal development skills. She later joined the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund as a paralegal. 
“As a Haitian-American and Ella Baker Fellow, it was an honor and unique opportu-
nity to live and work in my family’s troubled country of origin. Through the powerful combination of grassroots advocacy and direct legal representation, I addressed issues of gender based violence, housing and public health concerns in Port-au-Prince, Haiti. A significant lesson I learned about social change is that it is a multilayered process and takes time to come to fruition…to have worked on cases that help to shape the Haitian legal system has allowed me to gain the fundamental skills needed to thrive as a public interest attorney.”
Annual Report 2012  51$1,000–2,499
AnonymousA & J Saks Foundation, 
Inc.
Leslie Abbey and Steve 
Dietz
Paul J. AllenTheresa F . AltDonna Katzin 
Altschuler and Alan Altschuler
Heather Andersen and 
Leslie Christian
Harry Anduze MontañoCarol Hope ArberJanet S. Arnold and 
Michael H. Rubin
Sally Arnold and  
Christine Weir
Shane BaggsMargo BaldwinCindy L. Barber and 
Horace Horton
Bruce E. Barkley and 
Sonia Baur
Gale BartleRainer C. BaumRichard BealeThe Beavertides  
Foundation
Judith E. BelskyDouglas J. Bender and 
Emma B. Trejo
Matthew A. Berlin and 
Simone Liebman
Francella W. and Jose F . 
Betancourt
Catherine Bishop and J. 
Kenneth Donnelly
Linda and Mitchel S. 
Bollag
Eve BorensteinElizabeth BranchDavid and Patty BroilesPeter and Alice BronerAllan and Muriel 
Brotsky
John CallasCalvert Social Invest-
ment Foundation
James T. Campen and  
Phyllis Ewen
Ira CarpWaifun Becky Chan 
and Kurt Breuninger
Jerry and Caroline 
Cohen
Jesse ColemanJeffrey D. ColmanThe Columbus  
Foundation
The Community  
Foundation  of Santa Cruz
Janet M. ConnMichael A. CooperLynn-Marie CriderCigy CyriacThe David and Sylvia 
Teitelbaum Fund, Inc.
David P . Dean and  
Catherine M.  Bergmann
Emily Deferrari and Mel 
Packer
Theresa Del PozzoMadeline H. deLone 
and  Robert L. Cohen
The Diamondston 
Foundation
Daniel L. and Lee M. 
Drake
Paul DurrantDiane Early and Daniel 
Gigone
Shiva EftekhariHarrison Eiteljorg, IITony and Jennifer EliasDolores and Frank 
Emspak
Joseph EspositoRobert M. FactorEvan M. FalesMarc D. FalkoffRosemary F . FaulknerRobert Fertik and  
Antonia Stolper
Solomon FisherAbraham FlaxmanJane FosterKatherine FrankeFranklin E. and Alice 
Fried
Eleanor Friedman and  
Jonathan Cohen
Lola GellmanJohn J. GibbonsMary G. GleysteenSherna B. and Marvin 
Gluck
Tom GoetzlWaleed K. and Hannah 
Gosaynie
Arrel Thomas GrayIvan GreenCollier M. HandsGail HarperLouis R. HellwigRobert and Claire 
Heron
Anne H. Hess and 
Craig Kaplan
Hewlett-Packard  
Company
Rosemary R. Hicks and 
David Kaiser
Michael J. Hirschhorn 
and  Jimena P . Martinez
John Hoffmeyer and  
Janet M. Corpus
Randall D. Holmberg 
and Evelyn YeeCatherine Newman and  
Stephen D. Holmes
Timothy A. HolmesEmbry M. HowellRuth Wald HubbardSteven and Miriam 
Hyman
Zeljko IvanekAbdeen M. Jabara and  
Holly Maguigan
Jewish Community 
Federation  of Cleveland
Kenneth M. Jones and 
Carol Koury
Wilhelm Joseph, Jr.William Josephson and  
Barbara Haws
Just GiveEugenia KalnayHerschel and Margrit 
Kaminsky
Martin and Carolyn 
Karcher
Terry Lynn KarlPatrice KaskaIra G. KawallerJulie Kay and Tom 
Fergus
David and Anita KellerCharles L. and Anna 
Kerstein
Jerry KickensonAshish KilamRichard Aronson and  
Joyce Kirschner
Joanna KnoblerDavid KormanRochelle KormanMelodee KornackerKaren Krahulik and 
Susan Allee
Fayette F . KrauseMerle and Phyllis 
KrauseDoug and Wendy 
Kreeger
Edward M. Krishok and 
 Peggy K. Hong
Rachel KruskalThe Lederer  
Foundation
Kay Lehman SchlozmanPhyllis B. and John 
Lehman
Thomas A. LehrerJudy LernerStephen O. LesserEric L. LewisWilliam L. LewisJudith Lichtenberg and  
David J. Luban
Philip and Elsa R. Lich-
tenberg
Richard and Rita G. 
Lipsitz
Jules Lobel and Karen 
Engro
Leslie LomasGail K. Lopez- 
HenriquezM. Brinton Lykes and  
Catherine M. Mooney
Ramsay MacMullenAnnie MakhijaniWilliam G. MascioliWarren E. and Joyce W. 
Mathews
Gary E. McDoleThe McKenzie River 
Gathering Founda-tion
Robert H. and Ellen V . 
Meeropol
Juliet A. MelamidCarrie Menkel- 
Meadow and  Robert Meadow
Middle Road  
Foundation
Donald and Suzanne 
Miller
Shelley and Joseph R. 
Miller
Jeanne E. and Franklin 
E. Mirer
L. David Mirkin
Joanna Knobler, Carol Drisko and Ira Kawaller at CCR’s  
annual President’s Reception.52 center for constitutional rights ccR DonoRs
Daphna H. Mitchell
Karen MockCharles O. MooreRichard W. and Barbara 
F . Moore
John MuellerRachel MustinJudy and Roy  
Nakadegawa
Shirley NashNational Philanthropic 
Trust
Jill W. Nelson and 
Thomas R. Bidell
New Directions  
Foundation
Hans NollHenry NorrSanford M. OrlowIsabelle C. OsborneMary R. and Benjamin 
I. Page
Eve PellRosalind PetcheskyGloria C. Phares and  
Richard Dannay
Hanna F . PitkinSandra PolishukEllyn and James PolshekEllen PoselMargaret J. Randall and  
Barbara Byers
Brian J. RatnerMarcus Rediker and  
Wendy Z. Goldman
Joyce L. RichardsonLawrence and Janet A. 
Rivkin
Christy RobbTim RobbinsJames Roberts and  
Patricia Calberson
Fredelle and John C. 
Robinson
John H. RodgersJill and Ronald RohdeAlex J. RosenbergElizabeth RosenthalSarah Rosenwald VaretJudith RothchildAlbert RubenDean Graham RubyJoseph L. RubyNaomi SagerArnold S. SaksEdmund SassoonJack SawyerJames A. Schamus and  
Nancy Kricorian
Julie SchecterRobert E. Schoen and  
Nancy Bernstein
William J. and Kather-
ine L. Schrenk
Anne and Bennett M. 
Schwartz
Steven SchwartzRenata Manasse 
Schwebel
William SeamanSteve SeltzerEvan D. and Janet 
Shaad
Albert D. Shuldiner and  
Emily B. Myers
Lawrence E. SilvertonSingh FoundationMichael Steven Smith 
and Debby Smith
Michelle D. SmithMorton Sobell and 
Nancy Gruber
Romaine Gustava 
Solbert
Ann W. SpeckmanEmily A. Spieler and  
Gregory Wagner
James SquireBen R. Stavis and  
Marjatta Lyyra
Nancy StearnsLewis M. and Kitty 
Steel
Amanda StentMarilyn R. Stern and 
Elaine Reily
Elizabeth and Byron 
Stookey
Clayton A. StruveSusan D. SusmanThe T. Rowe Price  
Program for  Charitable Giving
Clio TaraziRichard TeitelbaumBonnie E. Thomson  
and Eugene Tillman
Martha Claire TompkinsHazel Tulecke and  
William B. Houston
Barbara C. and Franklin 
M. Turner
James S. TyreJoan VermeulenStephen WaiteDaniel J. and Judith 
Walkowitz
James E. WallaceIan Wallach and Cindy 
Chupack
White Cedar FundSabin and Marta WillettThe Winky FoundationLincoln and Wilma C. 
Wolfenstein
Richard K. WorthingtonAnn WrightAnn YasuharaSandra A. ZagarellMichael F . Zweig and  
Kathy Chamberlain
$500–999AnonymousDaniel L. Alterman and 
Li Wah Lai
Mark AmsterdamBarbra ApfelbaumM.L. ArmstrongThe Arthur & Henrietta 
A. Sorin Charitable Trust
Judy A. Austermiller 
and  Warren R. Betty
Radhika Balakrishnan 
and  David W. Gillcrist
The Baltimore Family 
Fund
David BaltimoreVictor BarallBo BarkerMekayla Beaver and  
Gregory K. Brown
Myron Beldock and 
Karen Dippold
James M. Bergin and  
Ellen P . Lukens
Estelle A. and Howard 
A. Bern
Rick Best and Susan 
Douglas Taylor
Kara Black and Kurt 
Yandell
George and Eleanor 
Bollag
Charles R. and Linda 
Brainard
Lila BraineKevi P . BrannellyBelinda Lawrence 
Breese
Sally BreiterJudith T. and Donald S. 
Broder
Edward J. and Marion 
D. Bronson
Richard J. BrownVicente L. Caride and 
Melissa Marks
Tim Caro and  
Monique Borgerhoff MulderAva CheloffThe Christopher  
Reynolds  Foundation
Ciel FoundationKevin ColeJohn J. Connolly and  
Mary Abbot Bolte
Farok J. ContractorCharles M. Crane and  
Wendy Breuer
Susan CrilePaul CurninE. Patrick Curry and  
Susan B. Campbell
Thomas E. DeCourseyAnnette W. DickersonGerald DickinsonJeron E. and Marjorie B. 
Donalds
David DowAlan and Susan S. 
Dranitzke
Barry N. and Ismartilah 
Drummond
Susan L. EinbinderNorman Eisner and 
Zelda Aronstein
Solveig EskedahlWallace B. and Heike 
Eubanks
Nancy Falk and Dick 
Cluster
Lenore Feigenbaum 
and Simon J. Klein
The Fein FoundationEd and Ann FergusonCatherine FoleyKathleen FonesThe Foundation For  
Appalachian Ohio
Maria C. Freeman and  
Donald K. Larkin
Bernard Friedman and 
Lesley Hyatt
Vincent Warren, Julie Ruben, and Albert Ruben celebrate the 
release of Albert’s book The Peoples’ Lawyer: The Center for Constitutional Rights and the Fight for Social Justice, From Civil Rights to Guantánamo.Annual Report 2012 53Julian N. Gaa and Ruth 
Y . Gaa-Spano
Kit Gage and Steven J. 
Metalitz
Cynthia Gallagher and  
Shaun Manchand
Ronald E. and  
Jacqueline Garrett
Margaret A. Geddes
Sheila GeistPaula GellmanDaniel GillmorCarlos and Carrington 
Goodman
Linda GordonKurt and Sorel GottfriedLorraine GraceFrank and Judith 
Greenberg
Allen and Nancy 
Greenleaf
Lynn Greiner and John 
B. Midgley
Ariela GrossRuthe S. and Arnold 
Grubin
Hans C. and Linda 
Haacke
Judy Hanlon and Judith 
Plaskow
James HargroveGuy M. HarrisPaul Hathaway and 
Lynda Dailey
Jenny HeinzBetty and Jackson 
Herring
David G. HerrmannJoseph Herron and 
Patricia Baird
Virginia S. Hildebrand 
and Jan Neffke
Hans HimeleinChristopher W. Hornig 
and  Nancy J. Garruba
Alice S. HuangInstitute Of Women’s  
Policy Research
Chung-Ja and Cassim 
M. Jadwat
Jean R. Jean-PierreJewish Community  
Endowment Fund
The Jewish Commu-
nity Foundation
JM Morgan FundGail K. JohnsonNorman I. JohnsonCatherine JonesWarren and Marian A. 
Jones
Judicial Conference 
of the District of Columbia Circuit
Henry S. Kahn and  
Mary Gillmor-Kahn
James M. and Andrea 
M. Kane
John Brian KingDonald D. and Marga-
ret A. Kioseff
Joanne Kliejunas and 
Irving Lubliner
Peter S. KlostermanSarah KnightRoger S. and Belle 
Kuhn
Emily KunreutherJeffrey LamkinJohn W. and Claudia 
Lamperti
Timothy J. Lee and 
Eleanor McBride
David LeferLevy Ratner, P .C.Richard A. Levy and  
Jane R. HirschmannDavid R. LewisFrancis LorsonDouglas K. MacdonaldRic MacDowellGreen Meadow Fund 
of the Maine Com-munity Foundation
Richard Makdisi and  
Lindsay Wheeler
Malcom Cravens  
Foundation
Elena S. ManitzasAlice Anne Martineau 
and Olivia Bartlett
Arnold H. and  
Margaret W. Matlin
Medco Health  
Solutions
Barbara J. MeislinBeth and David P . 
Meshke
John MinekaMelissa D. MizelHelen R. MooreThomas V . MullerEdward S. MunyakWilliam J. and Patricia 
Fox Murphy
The New Prospect 
Foundation
Nancy J. Newman and  
Mark Walstrom
Thomas B. and  
Johannah Newman
Louie D. Nikolaidis and  
Rachel Horowitz
Matthew J. and  
Barbara O’Hara
Claes OldenburgWayne OuttenThe Pew Charitable 
Trusts
Nancy PickTim Plenk and Janet 
Axelrod
Barbara B. PolkMarshall and Rosie 
Potamkin
Bennett M. Pudlin and  
Margaret Ann Judd
William P . and Debra 
Dupre Quigley
Susan G. RadnerRobert and Patricia 
Ralph
Camilo RamirezJulia B. RauchPaul W. Rehm and  
Katja Sander-Rehm
Janice C. and Shaheen 
Rehman
Ann E. ReinhartSteven RiskinPaula RogovinBarbara and Oren RootThe Rose Foundation 
for Communities and the Environment
Stephen Rose and 
Christina Cerna
Daniel RosenbergGeorge S. Rothbart  
and Ingrid  Scheib-Rothbart
Sigrid A. SaloGilbert and Alicia 
Saucedo
Edward L. Schiff and 
Betsy PinoverGordon Schiff and 
Mardge Cohen
Daniel SchlozmanElizabeth and Stephen 
Shafer
Rupa ShahSusan L. SheinfeldMary and Henry N. 
Shoiket
Alix Kates Shulman and 
Scott York
Alan SierotyMelvin V . and Giulia 
Simpson
Jaswinder Pal Singh and  
Silvia Ercolani
Dorothy Slater-BrownSteve SmahaCherida Collins SmithStephen Samuel SmithDouglas K. SpauldingGeorge N. StavisVictoria A. Steinitz and  
Elliot G. Mishler
The Stonbely Family 
Foundation
Lucy A. Suchman
MAJOR DONOR S POTLIGHT
The overriding theme of R obert Friedman’s career is representing poor people against 
the state, beginning with representing migrant farm workers in 1977. In 1990 he started 
his own Seattle-based law ﬁrm where he represents combat veterans with PTSD in the Veterans Administration and people who are trying to get Social Security Disability beneﬁts. A nita D avidson, a native New Yorker, served 18 years as an administrative law 
judge for the Washington State Ofﬁce of Administrative Hearings, where individuals and businesses often experience the justice system for the ﬁrst time. She saw ﬁrsthand the transformative power that access to justice can have, even on the very local level.
“As lawyers, we have particular admiration for how the Center combines solid legal 
work with movement strategy and social justice principles. We decided to become major donors to CCR because they have the insight, knowledge and fortitude to do the cases that no one else will do.” 54 center for constitutional rights ccR DonoRs
David Suisman
Ronald J. TabakThe Polly-Rose  
Charitable Fund
Martin ThomsonMurray TobakMichael Touger and 
Margaret Levitt
The U.S. Charitable 
Gift Trust
Thomas Van BurenBenedict VigliettaRobert VitarelliAlan M. Weiner and 
Nancy Maizels
Daniel Weiss and Anne 
Stewart
The Weithorn and 
Ehrmann  Families Foundation
John WetherholdBlanche Wiesen Cook 
and Clare M. Coss
Jeffrey and Lucinda 
Wilner
Sherri H. WolfAndrea WolperThomas ZaslavskyNoah ZatzSusan Fein ZawelMitchell H. and Jane 
Zimmerman
$250-499AnonymousDavid J. AalderksRobert and Miriam 
Abramovitz
Merritt and Barbara 
Abrash
Andrew AckermanEthel G. AckleyAlice K. AdamsWilliam AdelmanHarold AhrensCathy AlbisaEthan D. and Sandra D. 
Alyea
William L. and Diane P . 
Ames
Susan D. Amussen and  
David E. Underdown
Clifford E. AndersonClifford AndoAndrew M. Ansorge 
and Laura S. Koopman
Dennis AntenoreSholey Argani and 
Walter A. Miles
Bella D. August and  
Everett Belvin  Williams
Jaime S. and Christine 
Austria
Kent AutreyGeorge S. and Jill S. 
Avrunin
Lee BakerRebecca BakuninWillard BaldwinHarriet BarlowMischa BeckerSara E. BeinertEdith and Alice BellBellin Family TrustMarvin L. BellinRobert Bender and 
Loretta E. Nash
Alvin BennettTerry BennettRicardo and Michele 
Bertran
Bani BhattacharyaJudy BierbaumHelga K. BilikEvelyn BlackmanHarvey BlendFraser BonnellRenee L. BowserBarton and Barbara 
Boyer
Bill BraginNahama BronerRobert E. L. and Sylvie 
Maria Brown
Stefan and Laura BudacEdmund B. BurkettDennis BurnsAntonio W. Burr and  
Diane di Mauro
Thomas CaffreyBlair and Josephine 
Campbell
Michael CavanaughGordon A. ChapmanMichael Alan ChinnRenee D. Chotiner and  
Stuart W. Gardner
Wallace B. ClelandHope CobbHarvey and Maxine 
Colchamiro
Douglas ColeCommunity Founda-
tion for  Southeast Michigan
Community Shares of 
Minnesota
The Compton  
Foundation
Jessie CookAsho I. CraineRobert A. CunninghamJulia and Craig CurrieSusan R. Curtiss and  
John M. Gresham
Elizabeth K. and Scott 
G. Danielson
Joanne DelaplaineDale S. and  
Peter M. Demy
Richard A. DenisonMeera DeoRiva DewittEjim DikeGreg DingerStephen N.  
and Phyllis B. Dorsi
George and Minna 
Doskow
Lewis and Edith S. 
Drabkin
Cathy DreyfussDavid B. DunningMichael EhrlichSteven ElkintonRay H. and Marilyn 
Elling
Gilbert and Kathleen 
English
Saralee E. EvansTraci L. ExtJeffrey A. Fagan and  
Connie S. Fishman
Joan M. FerranteCurry and Bonnie FirstNoam FischhoffStuart M. FlashmanThe Foundation for 
Worker,  Veteran, and Envi-ronmental Health
William H. FrelickChris FridenAnn FridlindWilliam R. GarnerMartin GellertMargo R. George and  
Catherine Karrass
John GerassiFrances Geteles-
Shapiro
Ayesha E. GillWilliam J. Gilson and  
Georgia Wever
Stephen GimberRichard A. and Carolyn 
Glickstein
Maxine S. GoadFrederick S. Golan and 
 Anne M. Kenney
Harriet S. Goldberg and  
Gregory C. Johnson
Debbie GoldsmithRichard A. Gollub and  
Rita A. Clark-Gollub
David S. and Kim 
GordonClaire GottfriedMarcelle GreenfieldRonald J. GreleKathy Gruber and Fred 
Levy
Lloyd H. and Mary  
Ellen Guptill
Alice L. Hageman and  
Aubrey N. Brown
Dwight HahnH. K. Hall, Jr.Peter HanauerDavid HarbaterJed HartmanLarry HartsoughEmily HauptmannKeith Hefner and Diana 
Autin
Dick S. and Loretta 
Heiser
David Henkel and Cleo 
Griffith
Zach Hochstadt and 
Sadie Honey
Jean Kemper Hoffmann 
†
Richard R. and  
Elizabeth C. Howe
Stephen J. HrinyaDerrick A. HumphriesJulie Y . HungarKevin M. Hunt and 
 Margaret Downing
Stella JacobsOmar Jadwat and Molly 
Doherty
Roberta JaffeJewish Foundation of 
Greensboro
Lee T. JosephRachel Kahn-HutRobert KehrJudy K. KernAlka KhushalaniJacqueline M. KienzleHilda Knobloch
Longtime supporter Victor Chechanover with CCR’s Legal 
Director, Baher Azmy, at our Reception by the Bay.
† deceasedAnnual Report 2012  55Jane and Ladis Kristof
Dennis J. and Estelle I. 
Krumholz
Robert P . KunreutherLouise LamphereEleanor LangeWilliam E. LeavittMartin S. and Gita M. 
Lefstein
Shari LeinwandThe Leo J. & Celia 
Carlin Fund
Sue LeonardJoe LervoldCathy J. LevineMini Ann LiuMatthew LondonWilliam LorentzMarsha L. Love and  
Maarten Bosland
Russell LyonsGene Marchi  
and Travis SmithIsabel MarcusMichael MasonWilliam H. and Judith 
W. Matchett
Marc Mauer and  
Barbara Francisco
Alan MaximukRobert J. and Maryann 
Maxwell
Mary Gayle McCallThomas McCullochMartin and Margaret 
Melkonian
Michael and Heli 
Meltsner
Robert E. and Cama C. 
Merritt
Cora MilesBruce K. and Jane O. 
Miller
Marvin and Marline 
Miller
William MinnemanEdward T. and Julie R. 
Morman
J. Malcolm and Mary 
Morris
Stephen MorrisPeter D. and Gail S. 
Mott
Kathryn L. MulveyRobert C. NewmanCraig OettingerStephen Oleskey and 
Judith Tick
Scott OliverEric OrlinMarina Oshana and 
David Copp
Edward H. PageWilliam ParsonsSunita Patel and  
Chandra Bhatnagar
Patricia J. PattersonTimothy PattersonSteven PedersonDonald C. and Edith 
Pelz
James N. Perlstein  
and Lolly McIver
Pfizer Foundation 
Matching Gifts Program
Charlotte Phillips  
and Oliver Fein
Jeffrey PipoBruce K. PollockRachel PotasznikFlorence B. PrescottChristopher H. and 
Cynthia F . Pyle
John I. QuimbyJudy RabinovitzJim RadfordAmelie L. RatliffJulie RatnerLisa RobinsonTheodore RomerDara RoseJeffrey I. RosenbergSusan RosenbergDennis A. Rosenblitt 
and  Arlene M. Pitman
R. William Rosenfeld 
and  Suzanne M. Rubel
Patricia RosnelJohn RubinMichael RufoMary M. and William 
H. Russell
Gladys B. RustayLowell SachnoffTony SaidyPaul SayvetzHelen Schiff and  
Richard Congress
Steven A. and Janet H. 
Schneider
Henry SchreiberRuth and Charles B. 
Schultz
Michael SchwalbeJoan W. ScottJill M. SeversonKaren Shatzkin and  
Michael E. Breecher
Anthony ShihAnn and Ahmad ShiraziRobert M. SiegelShirin SinnarSkadden, Arps, Slate,  
Meagher & Flom LLP
Barbara S. SmithCarl and Jane SmithCarol Smith and Joseph 
Esposito
Marjorie M. SmithTed SmootRebecca SolnitTimothy SozenVera Spohr Cohen
Marite AcostaPhil AdelmanJosiane Fiori Alpert-
Sandler
Lauren AmsterdamVallyn AndersonNatasha Lycia Ora 
Bannan
Frances BarnesLiz BarnesGabe BenderJohanna BenderAnna BiblowitzRobert A. BloomCarolyn Patty BlumKaren BourgeoisJulia BrownMarina BrownMarilyn CahnJean CallahanMartha CodyTimothy CollinsEllie ConnollyKimberle CrenshawTheodore Ade CrooksMonika DessereauPam ElliottDebra EvensonEli, Leora, and Talia 
Fastow
Feldman and WallachJohn FlintMarilyn ForbesSally ForutanKatherine GallagherSheila GeistCharles GoetzlDavid GoldhaberAlbert GoodmanJames GormleyJerry GriffinLevi and Eden HahnEd HalpertLuke HarrisAmy HirschPeter IsraelStephen JonesMatthew, Aaron, and 
Jeremy Kaplan
Jeremy KoehlSarah KoehlStefan KoehlBoris KolbaZac KosBernhard KroegerErnest LeeJudy LernerMarti LewisCherlyne MajorsMonique MajorsJoshua MatereseRichard MeyerJuan Carlos MoralesIan C. MossFrances MottHolly MyersMerry E. NeisnerLinnea NelsonMindy NobleNicholas K. PeartJordan PowellMichael D. RatnerJulia B. RauchJorge RivasLawrence RivkinRobert C. RosenCatherine SevillaIrene ShigakiAaron StarkNancy StearnsAndrew Sullivan
in honor o F
T
hose listed below had donations made to CCR in their honor by thoughtful friends, family members or organizations that wanted to make  
a meaningful gift with lasting impact. Many of these donations were in lieu of birthday, wedding or holiday gifts, or in commemoration of a  
special occasion. We thank both the donor and the recipient for sharing their support and for introducing new people to CCR’s work.56 center for constitutional rights	 CCR	DONORS
Jerold M. and Judy 
Starr
Jens Stenger
Melvyn T. StevensIan E. StockdaleBert Stover and Teresa 
Holder
Alice Sturm SutterCharles J. SugnetHarsh P . Sule and 
Katharine Larsen
Joel K. SwadeshCarlyn Syvanen and  
Stephen F . Vause
Billie TaylorKelly F . and Benjamin 
Taylor
Michael C. ThielmannWilliam ThomasJoseph and Cornelia C. 
Tierney
Kenneth E. TilsenHugh R. TobinRobert TraverRandall H. Trigg and 
Caitlin Stanton
Andrew H. TrottSue Lee K. TroutmanSelma and William 
TuckerDavid B. TurnerLisa Van Dusen and 
John A.D. Kelley
Todd WalkerJennifer WarburgJoan M. WarburgMichael J. and Sandra 
M. Wax
Chris WayDavid R. and Joan 
Weimer
Peter and Cora WeissJames M. and Lori 
Wellman
Carol Ann Wells and  
Theodore T. Hajjar
Carolyn M. WelshhansLawrence WeschlerOlof B. WidlundRichard P . and Tobey 
M. Wiebe
David WilsonEllen J. Winner and 
David A. Lewis
William J. WittThomas and Carol WolfNeville WoodruffMiranda Worthen and  
Brian Shillinglaw
Alec WysokerRobert J. and Karen R. 
Zelnick
Loy ZimmermanThomas Zimoski
$101-249
AnonymousSusan AblaoWilliam H. AbrashkinEmily AchtenbergPatricia AckermanEmory W. and Marilyn 
M. Ackley
Robert AisenbergEdward AlbeeTom AldenCharles K. Alexander, IIGregory and Hanita 
Alexander
Jane AlexanderDeborah AllenAnnamaria AmentaAmeriprise FinancialStuart H. AndersonTom AngottiR. S. AnthonyRona Zelnick ArmillasSona AronianIvan A. BackerMartin BahlRoxanne BalesAjamu BarakaKeith D. BartonWill BeattyNatalie BeckerMalcolm H. and Nancy 
Bell
Christina BenacciCharles L. and Leslie A. 
Berger
Jerry BernhardDale L. BerryJonathan BinesStephanie G. and Jacob 
G. Birnberg
Meredith A. and Bill 
Blau
Stanley and Naomi 
Bleifeld
Carolyn Patty Blum and  
Harry W. Chotiner
Herman T. Blumenthal 
and  Margaret G. Phillips
Max and Margot  
Bollock
James R. and Elizabeth 
W. BoylanRobert M. and Monica 
Bradbury
Susan BradleyEileen BrennerFrank BrezelRobert S. Briggs and 
Virginia I. Lohr
Harold BrokerCarole R. BrownElizabeth R. BrownJonathan Brown and 
Brynnen Ford
June L. BrumerDaniel J. BrusteinJennifer BurdenPeter ByrneJames ByrnesRenee CafieroPhil M. CampbellLaura CareyAlan CarlsonWilliam CarsonLynne and George 
Carvell
Anna CascioJoseph CassesseJim CassidyMichael CatesDarlene Ceremello and  
Jessea Grennman
Mortimer H.  
Chambers, Jr.
Chantal and Gregory L. 
Cherlin
Sara P . and Ralph C. 
Chernoff
David R. ChipmanJames R. and Roshan 
Christensen
Antonie K. Churg and  
Enrique De Los Santos
Serena ClaytonRanya CohenDavid M. ColbertThe Community 
Church of New York Unitarian Universalist
Lynn ConantDavid B. Cone and  
Kellie Stoddart
Jim and Cecilia A. 
Conroy
Christie CooperJuliette Ramirez and  
Micaela Salort Corazon
In memory of
Friends, family and loved ones made gifts to CCR in memory of the people listed below. By designating CCR for support (often instead of 
flowers), donors both promote their own social justice values and recognize that the individual being honored shared these values  and would 
want the work to continue after them. 
Olivia I. Abelson
Sybil AlznauerJules BloomLarry BogdanowEsther BronerRhonda CopelonGregory D'EliaMary EssesLotte FeinbergPhilip FieldAlbert C. FilardoGregory H. FingerNancy E. FosterManuel GitlinWalter GoodwinWilliam GordonJane Schwartz GouldSpalding GrayFielding Lewis    GreavesSteve J. HeimsWilliam HildebrandLeo M. HurvichNaomi JuraSamuel M. KaplanMary KarisArthur KinoyJoseph KruskalJonah LevyBen LinderFannie LockeMichael MadowBetty MorganrothMahlon Fay PerkinsCicely Phippen MarksBella RosenbergEdwin E. SalpeterDoris ShafferBarbara ShufordMorty StavisWilliam StringfellowElton Juliette WarrenCharis WilsonWarren J. WithamAnne WysokerAnnual Report 2012  57Ralph V . and Ellen S. 
Core
Brenda Coughlin and 
Anthony Arnove
Karen Cowgill
William CowlinNigel CoxeDeborah CrawfordWilliam Carl CromwickPrudence CrowtherBarbara Cuneo and 
Alan Kesselhaut
Susan DavidoffLindsay DearbornShulamit DecktorKenneth DeedRobert DenisonShirley DiamondAnne DixonRichard DobersteinLiam DonohoeLarry D. Doores and 
Janet R. Wolfe
Barbara L. DudleyH. Stewart DunnMargaret L. EberbachLeslie EbertArthur EfronHester Eisenstein and 
Michael Tanzer
Jacqueline J. and Tareck 
Ralph Elass
Bernice B. ElkinFlint Ellsworth and 
Fanee Aaron
Mary Taggart Emeny 
and Hunter Ingalls
Brian EstlinAnne H. EvansThomas R. EvansRussell EverettDorothy and James 
Fadiman
Frances T. FarentholdJames FarisHarriet A. FeinbergNancy J. FeldmanWendy FieringDolly Filartiga and 
Diego Calles
Nancy FleischerPat L. FlierlAnne E. FlynnJohn M. FosterRyan FosterEdward A. FoxSteve FrankelJane M. and Howard 
Bruce Franklin
Barb FraserHerbert FreemanPaul FriedlanderTimur FriedmanDavid F . FunkhouserStephen GallantDean GalleaGay GardnerSheryl P . GardnerEdward and Katherine 
Garner
Susan L. and  
James D. Garrison
Heather D. GautneyWilliam H. GavelisEdward I. GeffnerJean GerardAlex GibneyTerry H. GilbertTom GilmoreMimi GilpinElizabeth P . Gilson and 
Joel Cogen
Russell GinnsLeah GitterJessica GivensAmy GladsteinJim GlecklerDavid C. GlickBrian GobleNate Goldshlag and 
Jane A. Auger
Susan D. GoldwomonElizabeth GolubitskyMarilucy GonzalezRobert GouldRichard GreenbergPaul GrekinGregory GriffinKaren GropperMargaret and David 
Gullette
Jean L. GuttmanHenrietta GwaltneyAlbert L. and Virginia 
T. Hale
Thomas W. and  
Katherine B. Halton
John L. HammondJames R. HansonPaul R. Hanson and 
Betsy A. Lambie
Genifer HarrisonSameer S. and Juliette 
S. Hassan
James W. Hauser and  
Katharine A. Hunter
Mary Jean HaydenMike and Elisabeth 
Healey
Elizabeth HealyRobert W. HegartyPatricia A. HeidenChristopher L. HenleyRussell K. Henly and 
 Martha Lee Turner
Ellen Hertzmark and 
S.M. Gedwiser
John and Rachel HeumanBarbara HillDavid HirschDavid HodgesIngrid HogleKaren HooverEric Hopley, Jr.
Zahabia Adamaly
H. R. and D.L. AlalusiDaniel L. Alterman and 
Li Wah Lai
Barbra ApfelbaumHarriet BarlowSara BeinertShawn BostromKevi P . BrannellyRenate BridenthalPaul BurksHeather B. and Philip 
Cantino
Laura CareyDavid ColeSandra ColiverLynn ConantRobert ConwayBrenda Coughlin and 
Anthony Arnove
Distracted Globe  
Foundation
Alan and Susan Dra-
nitzke
Thomas DurstRussell EverettFrances T. FarentholdJames FishEdward O. and Mari-
anne B. Fisher
Katherine FrankeJane and Bruce FranklinSherry and Leo FrumkinThe Funding Exchange 
National Community Funds
Mary GeissmanLola GellmanPaula GellmanMargie GilbertFlorence GilchristEmily Jane GoodmanJoan GrishmanMichael HaertingJonathan HafetzLeo O. HarrisAlan HarwoodJenny HeinzDavid G. HerrmannVirginia S. HildebrandBarbara HillJean K. Hoffmann †Joyce M. HormanDerrick A. HumphriesAbdeen M. JabaraJill JacobsWilhelm JosephJulie KayRichard Kassel and 
Penny Venetis
Caroline LagenfeltRobert LeuzeRichard Levy and Jane 
Hirschmann
Judy LernerLevy Ratner, P .C.The Liberty Hill  
Foundation
Lucy LippardMini Ann LiuVirpi O. LoomisJune MakelaRobin MartinHeiko MauermannJohn C. MaxwellLynne MayocoleBill McAfeeVincent McGeeRobert and Ellen 
MeeropolAri MelberLeora MosstonLovel PerkinsTim Plenk and Janet 
Axelrod
Ellyn and James PolshekThe Puffin FoundationWilliam P . and Debra 
Dupre Quigley
Julie RatnerClaire ReedPaul W. Rehm and Katja 
Sander-Rehm
William A. and Nancy 
W. Rice
Christina M. RyanSally SaulvesterKathryn ScarboroughJames A. Schamus and 
Nancy Kricorian
Helen Schiff and  
Richard Congress
Terry SchwartzJack ShuckMohammad SmidiAnthony H. SmithMichael S. SorgenEleanor SteinSean SullivanShamus ThorntonEthel TobachSomil TrivediSue Lee K. TroutmanJames E. WallaceVincent WarrenBarbara S. WebsterPeter and Cora WeissSamuel WienerAnn Wright
in honor o F michael raT ner
Thank You to those who generously made a gift in honor of Michael 
Ratner’s 40+ years with the Center for Constitutional Rights! If you would like to make a gift in tribute to Michael’s leadership, you may do so online at www.CCRjustice.org/giftsinhonor or by mail to CCR.
58 center for constitutional rights ccR DonoRs
Philip Hornik
Richard A. HorvitzSumi HoshikoRichard HudsonStanley Trezevant 
Hutter
Joan B. IndusiJayne IrelandJoel and Helen R. 
Isaacson
William and Harriet 
Isecke
J. Leon Curtis, Jr.Judy and Henry JacobsCorinne B. JohnsonJeffrey A. JonesSarah JonesKiara JordanKenneth JosephMary Anne JoyceDavid A. JuddKaren JuddDavid KadishRuth G. KahnLouis KampfJane Ruth Kaplan and  
Donatello Borato
Stephanie KaplanAntje KatcherJ. Kehaulani KauanuiCaryn B. KauffmanKean University Federa-
tion of Teachers
James E. KeenanSeymour KellermanClare KellyJonathon KemperBilly KesslerJohn T. and Phyllis M. 
Kirkwood
Stefi L. Kirschner and  
Gilbert Z. Schneider
Heinz J. Klug and Gay 
Seidman
Wolf M. KnappPhilip O. KochStephen KoczianLawrence Koplik and 
Sarah Roberts
Richard Koretz and 
Judy E. Bauer
Bonnie Korman and 
Robert Bishop
Kathleen KosRobert E. and Francoise 
Kulp
Nsombi LambrightAnthony LamorticellaThomas R. LansnerRobert B. and Nathalee 
Lapidus
Susan LeeMary LelloucheDebbie Peters and 
Gerson T. Lesser
Alan D. LevineCharlotte LevineJerry D. LevineMark LevitanJay LevyLisa Levy and Carrie 
Davis
Julia LeydaEdward R. LeydonDonald LipmansonLucy R. LippardDavid A. LoebVirpi O. LoomisSivia LoriaDana E. Lossia and 
Rahul Mukhi
Paul LufkinNancy LukensMary Waterman LuntAndrea LurieJune MakelaMargaret Ann MalloyLaura C. and Robert S. 
Marin
Elaine MatthewsPeter J. MayerJason Matthew  
Mayerfeld
Eileen M. McCarthyDelbert McCombsSteven McKinney and 
Jane Shofer
Jennifer E. MeeropolAri MelberSaul H. MendlovitzWilliam P . MenzaCarlin MeyerGerald Meyer and Luis 
Romero
Paul MichabofskyLinda B. MichaelsArthur MilhollandElizabeth J. MillerRalph E. MinerThomas C. MitchellDonna L. and Sean C. 
Moffat
Philip C. MonradJohn MoranClaudia Shropshire 
Morcom
Mary MorganJose Luis Morin and 
Jeanette Guillen-Morin
David MorrisRichard H. MorseJames MoschellaDenis D. Mosgofian 
and Lori Liederman
David MuellerShadi Nahvi and Mitra 
Rastegar
Claudia L. NelsonRonald NeschisBruce D. Nestor and 
Susana De Leon
Rael NidessRalph NielsenWilliam K. NisbetJulie NovkovJamie and Anne 
O’Connell
Richard M. OhmannLucienne O’KeefeMargaret OkuzumiJames OldhamOlaf S. and Sondra S. 
Olsen
Martin OrnerHelen M. OrtmannNorman Oslik and 
Madeleine Golde
Alicia and Jeremiah P . 
Ostriker
John OtaNancy M. PageBarbara ParsonsStephen and Debbie 
Paschall
Lowell C. PaulRobert and Ruth PeckDavid PerkDorothy Z. PetersErika PetersenSuzanne D. and Robert 
J. Petrucci
Cathryn PhelpsLemoine D. PierceCharles Allen PigottEdward D. and  
Bernadine Pillar
Robert PlunkettSuzanne PolenLouise B. PopkinRobert and Marcia 
Popper
Thomas V . Potts and 
Lory Dryden
Homer E. PriceBruce and Dianne 
Pringle
The Puffin FoundationRobert J. Quartell and  
Florence D’Emilia
Carolyn QuenonJoni Rabinowitz and 
John Haer
Joanna M. Rankin and 
Mary Fillmore
Gertrude ReaganAnn B. Reichsman and  
Bruce A. Catalano
Stephanie RemingtonMatthew RileyRoberta RobanRonald A. and Susan 
Hirtz Robboy
Susan Robinson and 
Dave Peterson
Leonard RodbergStephen F . Rohde and  
Wendy A. Herzog
Carl F . Rosen and  
Josefina Maria Yanguas
Henry W. Rosenberg 
and  Katherine M. Hicks
Roxanne Turnage, Executive Director of CS Fund/Warsh-Mott Legacy, accepts the Fund’s 
award at our Reception by the Bay, with an audience of CCR supportersAnnual Report 2012  59Paul C. Rosenblatt
Carl J. RosensteinAnton B. RosenthalBeth RosnerGerald F . and Concetta 
V . Ross
Polly RothsteinLewis and Esther 
Rowland
Eva and William RumpfJeremy RyeHoward D. SacksJohn J. SaemannNancy F . and Stefan 
Sage
Robert SalmonAlison SalzingerDonald E. SandersonDon Erik Sarason and  
Mary H. Jennings
Sally SaulvesterPatricia R. Sax and Kay 
Taylor
Robert Schaibly and 
Steven Sorla
Vivian SchatzSybil E. Schlesinger and  
Steven Rosenberg
Michael A. SchlosserPaul G. SchmidtFlorence SchreibsteinMarc and Anne 
Schwartz
Celia and Peter L. ScottAnastasia SeagerMarilyn SearcyEstelle and Ralph 
Shabetai
Sallie ShawlDavid Shayer and Lisa 
Post
Joy ShigakiRafael ShimunovJack ShuckStephen ShuttleworthCarol M. SichermanChristopher SimpsonJames SiskElmer D. and Patricia 
Sitkin
Victor Skorapa, Jr.William H. and Ursula 
Slavick
Daniel SleatorLinda SleffelWilliam and Helen 
Slivka
Elizabeth A. SmithLisa Snedeker and Mike 
Short
James M. SoberAnthony Sobieski and  
Katharine Berton
Denise SoffelFred J. Solowey and 
Kathryn L. Ries
Stanley Sorscher and 
Judith M. Arms
John Spragens, Jr.Ann I. Sprayregen and  
Stanley Sperber
Peter D.L. StanskyKenneth S. StarHenry J. and Pamela  
Pomerance Steiner
Susan StenovecEvelyn SternSusan M. StrasserMyles SussmanSusan SwartzAlice C. and Arthur R. 
Swift
Marie T. and Daniel A. 
Switkes
Harold TaggartDolores S. TallerIgor TandetnikCharles A. Tate and 
Louis Putzel
Evelyn P . TaylorHannah TennantC. Gomer Thomas and  
E. Jane Cameron
Douglas ThompsonTeresa ThompsonAlan C. ThomsonJean TocheStacy TolchinElizabeth Weir and 
Herbert L. Toor
Betsy D. TowleBernard TuchmanRobert TwomblyCharles W. and Letitia 
Ufford
Thomas G. UrdaJohn and Mira  
Van Doren
Jane VanDeBogartVerizon FoundationLisa M. Vidigal and 
Antony P . Falco
Robert S. Vinetz and 
Nancy Kezlarian
Steven Vogel and Jane 
Henderson
Katherine Waldbauer 
and Ronald L. Henry
The Wallace  
Foundation
Myrna WaltonCarol A. WatsonLowell WaxmanElisabeth WeberBarbara WestKevin WhelanHilda Mader WilcoxDaryl T. WilliamsLawrence B. WilliamsPatricia WinerSteven J. WolfJo-Anne WolfsonJonathan A.  
Woodbridge and  Diane Steingart
Arnold C. Woodrich, Jr.Michael WoodsJohn C. WoolumGregg WrightRachel WysokerJudith Yanowitz and  
Harry S. Hochheiser
Kate YavendittiPeter W. YoungLeonard and Ellen 
Zablow
June ZacconeJeanette ZelhofMargaret ZierdtMartine Leila  
Zundmanis
Heather ZupecBennet D. Zurofsky and  
Susan J. Vercheak60center for constitutional rights CC R DONORS
$100
A-C Anonymous • Stephen R. and Virginia Abrams • Karen Abravanel • M. Eloise Adams • Adobe Systems Incorporated • Sheila B. and Alfred J. Ainbinder • Hen-
rietta B. and Robert H. Alsdorf • Daniel Altman • Thomas E. and Donna Ambrogi •  Daniella Ambrosino • Charles Amjad-Ali •  Bridget Anderson and Jeremy Colan-
gelo • Louise Anderson •  Stephen C. and Betty Ann Anderson • Carl E. and Sharon L. Anduri • Daniele Armaleo and Laurie Fox • Barbara Mains Armento •  T. Whit 
and Jean L. Athey • Erik and Allegra H. Azulay • Richard Bachmann • Fred R. Baisden •  Herb and Jane C. Bardavid • Jean D. Barrett and David A. Ruhnke • Richard 
H. and Joanne L. Barsanti • Martha Baskin • Patricia Bass • Richard Baum •  Lenore Beaky •  William P . Beckwith • Nick Bell • Clifﬁth Bennette • Peter Bentley • 
Daniel Berger •  Amanda Bergson-Shilcock •  Birch Berman • Beyer: Buyer Home Evaluations Service, LLC • Lynn T. Biddle • J aime Biderman and Lauren Leroy • Bill 
Bushnell Charitable Gift Fund • Jonilyn Blandy • David Boehm • Ellen Beth Bogolub and Neil Friedman • Beth Marie Bonora and Michael Laine • Eric R. Boucher • 
Bob Bowes • Adele and Samuel Braude • Timothy J. Brennan • Elizabeth P . Brenner and Thomas B. Stibolt • Renate Bridenthal • Karen Brodkin • Angela Brooks • 
Frieda S. Brown • Thomas W. Browne • Thomas Brudenell • Rachel Burd •  Jerrold S. and Barbara H. Buttrey • Gerald Camarata • Frances S. Carlin • Florence Chan 
• Wendy Chavkin • Atessa Chehrazi •  Michelle Chen • Ryan Chesley • Steve A. and Laurel Chessin •  Rosemary K. Coffey • Joseph D. and Cathy J. Cohen • Robert 
F . Cohen and Kathleen Abate • Cindy Cohn •  Emily Collins • Willis Coglin • The Community Foundation of Western Mass. • Karen Cooper and George Grifﬁn • Craig 
R. and Cynthia B. Corrie •  Mary F . Counihan • Lee Cranberg and Sherry Flasman • James Crittenden •  Brian Crooks •  Lea Csala • Esther D. Curtwright D-G Ali 
Dalili • Mary Daniels •  Anya Elizabeth Darrow • Chandler Davis and Natalie Zemon Davis •  Ernest Simon and Bianca Iano Davis •  Judith Davis • Charles Day •  Rob-
ert DeBarge • Gabriel Demombynes •  Larry Denenberg • Judith Deutsch • Steven and Elizabeth Deutsch • Bob Dietz and Donna Liu • Masada Disenhouse • Lori 
Divine-Hudson • Joseph F . Doherty • Richard Doherty • Jim Douglas and Alexandra J. Harmon • Kingman S. and Susan U. Douglass • Lee Draper • Roger Drew • 
Carol F . Drisko •  Christopher Dugan • Carolyn Dulchinos • Grover C. Dye • Paul Wells and Michelle Edlund • Julie Elson • Brad P . Engdahl and Patricia L. Layton •  
Laura and Jean G. Enriquez •  Steve and Amy Eppler-Epstein • Susan Epstein • Caroline L. Everts • Edward A. Everts and Deborah C. Davis • Hillary Exter • Moneim 
and Lieselotte Fadali • Hossam E. and S. H. Fadel • Janice N. and James R. Falls • Sonia Farago • Carolyn Federoff • Salvatore Ferarello • Beatrice Ferleger • Thomas 
J. Ferrito • Wallace and Nannette B. Feurzeig •  A. Belden Fields and Jane Morhaz •  Amy E. Fine and Chester W. Hartman • Davida Finger • Alan L. Fisher • Donovan 
Fong • Elliot Fratkin and Martha A. Nathan • Ellen J. Friedland •  Florence Friedman • George Friemoth and Dale Sorensen • Margaret Fung • Victoria J. and Marjorie 
A. Furio •  Gregory T. and Gladys S. Furness • Georgene A. Gardner • Ann Geffen • Laura Gentile • Ellen F . Gesmer and Alan S. Hyde •  Michael T. Gilmore • Mark 
Ginsburg • Nona Glazer • Herbert P . Gleason •  John B. and Patricia P . Glore •  Dan Goldberg and Melissa Jacobs • David Goldberg • Jeremy P . Goldman • Phil Gold-
smith and Susan Newman • Robert A. Goldstein • Alison Goodwin Schiff • Kathy Goos and Barry A. Werth • Michael and Roberta R. Gordon •  Dorothy C. Gosting 
• Diana Gould • Gerald E. and Sheila R. Gould •  Michelle Granas • Elizabeth P . Greenberg • Stuart J. and Kathleen A. Greenberg • Philip I. and Gloria Greenblat • 
Harold Greenblatt • Newton H. Gresser • Edward B. and Mary Louise Grevatt • Gross • William and Sharon Gross • Kimberly A. Groves •  John W. Grula and Joan 
Depew • Alberto Gutierrez H-M William Mark Habeeb • Jonathan Hafetz • Frederic S. Halper • Laura Hanks • Frances Harrington • Gerald and Barbara Harting • 
Syed Shamsul Hasan •  Marguerite H. V . Hasbrouck • Mark A. and Jane D. Heald • Joseph E. and Joan G. Heckel • Virginia P . Held • John and Joanne Hendricks •  
Brian Keith and Rose Batchelor Henley • Susan J. Hessel • Martin and Mildred Hird • Charles J. Hitchcock and Deborah M. Snyder • David K. and Judith A. Hoffman 
• Sherrill Hogen •  Penny Holland • Dolores and Nate Holman • Gerald D. and Patricia L. Holmberg •  Honeybee Foundation • Joyce M. Horman • Carole R. Horow-
itz and Richard L. Last • Todd B. Hotchkiss and Katherine T. Araki • Babe Howell • Geoff Huggins • David and Katherine Hurst • David Igasaki •  Deborah Jacobs •  
Jill Jacobs • Myriah Jaworski • David Jerome • Brian P . Johnston • Ben and Kathleen Jone •  Lynn K. and Mark M. Jones • David Joyce • Robert G. Kahl • Beatrice 
and Robert Kahn • Rhoda H. Karpatkin • Joanna B. Katz • Sara Katz • Lynda Keating • Gregory Kelly • Elizabeth L. Kennedy and Barbara J. Prebis • Linda Kerber • 
James Kerwin and Gretchen E. Steadry • Joan D. and Arthur J. Kidnay • Edwin King • Ellen Kirshbaum •  Jay C. Klemme and Anne S. Wilson • Eric Klinger •  Daniel 
L. Kniesner • Peter and Jane Knobler •  Sharon L. Knopp and Ingolf Vogeler •  Rivko Knox •  James T. Kofron, Jr. • Sarah and Morris Kornbluth • Ellen L. Koteen and 
Diane N. Palladino • Gerald A. and Nancy A. Krause •  Saul Kripke • Duane W. and Mary Alyce Krohnke •  Mirjam Kuenkler •  Elizabeth Kushigian • Steve Peter LaBash 
• Gloria Lamont • Elizabeth S. Landis • Lynn Lane •  Robert J. Lavenberg • William J. and Ellen S. Leibold • Stephanie Leighton • Lesly Lempert • Edward and Ann 
Leonard • Robert Levey • Marilyn Levin •  Daniel J. Levy • James Lewis • Alan Lezak • Charlotte and Martin Lichterman • Raven and Russell M. Lidman • Jeffrey D. 
Lifson and Aloha E. Keylor •  Bruce and Louise Lincoln • Pearl A. and Israel Lindenbaum • Ying-Jen Lo and Shih-Lin Lu •  John R. Long • Nancy S. Lovejoy •  Ellen Luks 
• Maribeth S. Lynn • Sandra N. and David B. Lyons • Robert D. Mabbs • Carolyn Macadam •  Peter Magnuson • Louise R. and Michael P . Malakoff • Marcia Malkoff 
• Howard Manchel • Peter and Frances Marcuse • Mary B. Marx • Clara R. and Bernard Maslow • Eisha Mason •  Doris L. and Meyer Master •  Jocelyne Mayas • 
Steven M. McAllister • Leon R. and Judith McCulloh • Leila McDowell •  Kieran McGrath • Sarah McKee • Jim and Roberta McLaughlin • Donald M. and Sandra B. 
McPherson •  Bruce J. and Judith E. McWhirter • Lynn M. McWhood • Howard D. and Mameve S. Medwed •  Brigitte Meier • Isa-Kae Meksin •  Joan Mellen • Bob Annual Report 2012 61This list includes gifts of $100 and over made between July 1, 2011 and June 30, 2012. All gifts are greatly appreciated and collectively allow CCR to continue our 
work; unfortunately, space limitations prohibit us from listing every gift. Many stock transfers come to us without attribution, untraceable to the donor, so if your gift of stock (or any kind of gift) is not listed, please contact us so that we may correct our ﬁles and acknowledge you in our next newsletter.Mendelsohn • Alvin and Edna Meyer • Paul Meyer-Strom • George Michael • Richard Migliore •  Joyce Miller • David H. Millstone • Lourene Miovski • Margaret 
S. Misch •  Michael E. Mone, Jr. • Marilyn Montenegro • Alida V . Montiel • Cornelius G. Moore •  Alan B. and Anne S. Morrison • Lawrence B. and Claire K. Morse 
• Eva S. Moseley • Holly L. Mosher • Jerome B. Moss •  Norman Mullen •  George Murray • John H. Muse 
N-S Andrea E. Nash • Antonia Nash •  Donald M. Neill 
• Marilyn Kleinberg Neimark and Alisa Solomon • Charles D. Nelson and Susan P . Croissant • Robert M. Nelson • New York City People’s Life Fund • Harry Newman 
• John S. and Margaret Newton • Rudi H. and Laureen K. Nussbaum • Robert E. and Frances T. Nye • OdysseyRe • Patricia Oldham •  John R. and Mary R. Oleson 
• Christine Olson • David R. Oran and Silvia M. Arrom • Jim D. Oswald • John M. and Suzanne C. Otter •  Palo Alto Friends Meeting • Cynthia L. Pansing and Arlin 
S. Wasserman • Jeff Parish, III • Greg and Carol Paulson • Frank Paysen •  Cliff Peery • Edith C. and George P . Penty • Arthur Perkins and Bertille De Baudiniere • 
Louis Perkins • Rudy Perkins • Kira Perov and Bill Viola • Melissa Peters •  Edgar G. and Pauline Petry •  Stephen Pew • Katrina C. Pﬂaumer • Robert V . and Ruth H. 
Poignant •  Hertha Poje-Ammoumi •  John A. Pollack • Wendy Pollock • Roberta L. Ponce-Barger • James Porter, Jr. • Marjorie Green Power •  Joan C. and Charles W. 
Pratt • BeVan Presley • Alan and Andrea Rabinowitz •  Jean Rabovsky • Nancy Rader and Richard B. Norgaard • J. Patterson Rae and Melissa Greenspan • Connie 
Rafferty • Soﬁa Rahman and Mark Shuster •  Ajay Raikar • Vicki Rajendra and R. S. Krishnaswamy • Tina L. Rasnow • Helen Reed-Gray •  John M. Reinke •  George 
Renninger • Judy R. and Jeffrey L. Reynolds •  Nina Reznick • Paul D. Rheingold • Albert D. Rich • Kathleen L. Richardson •  Janis D. Roberts • R. Andrew Rock • 
Valerie Rodriguez • Maria C. Rodriguez-Pagan • Lisa Rofel • Jan Roll-Mederos and Fernando Mederos • David Romportl • Sheila Ronsen • Bernice M. and Seymour 
L. Rosen • Lawrence Rosenberg and Judith Somberg •  Barry Rosenzweig • Robert Roth and Judith Lerner • Matthew and Jean Rothschild • Daniel Rous •  Ted and 
Eileen Rowland • J ohn W. Rudolph and Sheryn R. Holinsworth • Jennifer Ryan • Angelo D. Sacerdote • Ann Salmirs • Miriam and David M. Sanders •  Richard Sand-
ers •  Gail A. and M. H. Sangree •  Juliet Sarkessian •  Bob Schacht • Alan L. Scheinine • Lawrence Schiff • Deborah Schifter and Alan Schiffmann • Penny Schoner • 
Frederick A.O. Schwarz and Frederica Perera • Steve A. and Nancy H. Schwerner •  John Craig and Carol Joan Scott • Gerda Seaman •  Steve Selby and Joyce O’Quinn 
• Lew D. Serbin • Grace and Solomon Sevy • Willard B. and S. W. Shapira • Nina and Dan Shapiro Smith • Peter Shaw and Jessica Ly • Nancy Shealy • Al Shehadi 
• Carol Ruth Sheinfeld and Yoshifumi Tanaka • Way Shen and Chris George • Frederick L. and Susan C. Shriver • Victor W. and Ruth Sidel • Dorothy E. Siegel and 
Michael R. Abram • Norman Siegel • Lisa Siegman and John K. Young • Edward Sikov • Laura Simpson • Margaret P . Skinner • Peggy Skinner • Blanche J. and Eu-
gene D. Skurnick •  Jeffrey Smedberg • Daniel Smith • David Smith • David Smith •  Maureen Smith • Marc A. Snyder • Neal Sonnett • Alexis Soule • Lawrence 
Spears • Nathan Spam • John D. Spence and W. Katherine Yih • William and Karen Stansbery • Burton Steck •  Cary Stegman • David J. Steichen, Jr. • Eleanor Stein 
and Jeff Jones • Mae Stephen •  Anne Fausto Sterling •  Ian A.F . Stokes and Nancy Zimny • Roger A. Stoll • Monroe W. Strickberger and Ursula T. Rolfe • Phyllis 
Subin • Alan Sukoenig • Richard P . Sutter •  William Sweeney T-Z Ilene Tannenbaum and David Goren •  Vivien C. Tartter • Doris Tennant • Eugene and Penelope 
Teselle • Richard Thomas • Donald L. and Alice J. Thompson • Shamus Thornton • Harriet B. Todd • Joseph and Minette Tolciss • Karen L. Topakian • George S. 
Trevor • Bruce Trigg • Somil B. Trivedi and Shanta A. Tewarie •  Scott L. Tyler and Marilyn K. Imura • Mark Underwood • Gregory P . and Sharon A. Urban • Marc Van 
Der Hout and Jodie Le Witter • Jorge A. Vazquez and Carmen A. Perez • Grete Viddal • Judy Vladimir • Mark Waite • Michael S. and Johanna H. Wald •  Jenny 
Walker • Thomas Wartenberg • Arthur O. Waskow and Phyllis O. Berman • J. Richard and Margaret Weaver •  Joel Weisberg and Janet Watchman • Rebecca C. 
Weiss • Marti Weithman • Henry Werner and Holly Thau • Charles C. and Ruth C. West •  Verity A.J. Weston-Truby and T. James Truby • John L. and Linda Wetherby 
• Alan L. White • Brian C. White and Esther M. Gokhale •  David A. White • Steven White •  Frances and Henry N. Whittelsey • Mary Willans-Izett and Jeffrey Kay 
Smith • Hope D. Williams •  Teresa F . Wilson •  Richard C. Winant • Barbara Winslow • Margaret E. Witham • Richard M. Wolfe • Charles B. Woodbury • Robert 
and Gay Worthing • Muriel Ann and Laurence Wyatt • Ellen Yaroshefsky • Samuel Young • Mona Younis • George and Gertrude Gray Yourke • Ronald H. and Lor-
raine S. Yuccas • John T. Zagula • Arlene S. Zaucha • June Zeitlin • H. Berrien Zettler • Mara Zimmerman and John W. Kessler62 center for constitutional rights ccR boaRD anD staff
Board o F direc Tor S 
Catherine Albisa, 
Chair 
Harry Anduze Montaño
Radhika Balakrishnan, TreasurerAjamu BarakaChandra Bhatnagar, Vice ChairDavid ColeKatherine FrankeSherry FrumkinAbdeen JabaraWilhelm H. Joseph, Jr.Julie F . Kay, Secretary Nsombi LambrightPaula LittJules Lobel, PresidentMichael Ratner, President Emeritus Alex Rosenberg, Vice-PresidentMichael Steven SmithRichard A. SoblePeter Weiss, Vice-PresidentEllen Yaroshefsky
mana
gemen
T T
eam 
V
incent Warren, Executive Director
Baher Azmy, Legal Director Dorothee Benz, Communications Director  
(as of March 2012)
Kevi Brannelly, Interim Communications 
Director (through March 2012)/  
Development Director
Carolyn Chambers, Associate Executive 
Director
Annette Warren Dickerson, Director of  
Education & Outreacha dmini ST raT i V e S Ta FF 
Amnah Almukhtar
, IT and Administrative 
Assistant
Gregory Butterfield, Administrative Manager
Orlando Gudino, IT ManagerLisa Levy, Human Resource Systems and 
Special Projects Manager
Chase Quinn, Executive AssistantJeffrey Weinrich, Finance DirectorAlberto White, Office Manager
communica T
ion
S
 
d
epar T
men
T 
Lauren Gazzola,
 Communications Associate 
(temp hired permanently)
Jen Nessel, Communications CoordinatorAlison Roh Park, Communications Associate 
(through July 2011)
Camilo Ramirez, Communications Associate 
(temp hired permanently)
d
e
V
elopmen
T
 
d
epar T
men
T 
Sara Beinert,
 Associate Director of Develop-
ment, Individual Giving
Pam Bradshaw, Grant WriterKevin Gay, Database and Online Giving 
Manager
Emily Harting, Associate Director of Develop-
ment, Foundations 
Christine Kim, Annual Fund ManagerJosé Monzon, Development AssociateJeremy Rye, Major Gifts Officer
e
duca T
ion & 
o
u
T
reach 
d
epar T
men
T
Loyda Colon, Coordinator
, Coalition for Com-
munity Safety (through March 2012)
Qa’id Jacobs, Web Communications and 
Multimedia Manager
Leili Kashani, Advocacy Program Manager, 
Guantánamo Global Justice InitiativeLaura Raymond, Advocacy Program Manager, 
International Human Rights
Nahal Zamani, Advocacy Program Manager, 
Government Misconduct and Racial Justice
legal 
d
epar T
men
T 
Alexis Agathocleous, 
Staff Attorney
Liz Bradley, Legal Worker (through July 2011)Darius Charney, Senior Staff AttorneyClaire Dailey, Legal WorkerJ. Wells Dixon, Senior Staff AttorneyAbigail Downs, Legal WorkerOmar Farah, Staff AttorneyKatherine Gallagher, Senior Staff AttorneyGitanjali Gutierrez, Senior Staff Attorney 
(through September 2011)
Ian Head, Legal WorkerAliya Hussain, Legal WorkerShayana Kadidal, Senior Managing AttorneyPardiss Kebriaei, Senior Staff AttorneyMaria LaHood, Senior Staff AttorneyRachel Meeropol, Senior Staff AttorneySunita Patel, Staff AttorneyIbraham Qatabi, Legal WorkerAnjana Samant, Senior Staff Attorney 
(through August 2011)
Ghita Schwarz, Senior Staff AttorneyPurvi Shah, Social Justice Institute Director Pamela Spees, Senior Staff AttorneyClaire Tixeire, Legal Research Associate 
(through July 2011)
Leah Todd, Assistant to Legal DirectorAn-Tuan Williams, Social Justice Institute 
Administrative AssociateAnnual Report 2012 63Program:  
Litigation, Education & Outreach $5,659,133
Administrative/General  $778,109
Development  $911,560
Total Expenses  $7 ,348,802Net Assets as of June 30, 2011 $7,726,103
Change in Net Assets -$425,738
Net Assets as of June 30, 2012 $7,300,365 EXPENSES  NET ASSETS
For an independent evaluation of our ﬁnancial health 
and accountability, visit CharityNavigator.org which has given CCR a four-star rating.TOTAL
REVENUE
$7,063,475 F INANCI AL REPORT JULY 1 2011–JUNE 30 2012
n Grants & Contributions $6,947,120
n Investment Income (after fees) $48,582n Court Award/Attorney Fees $46,668n Other Income* $16,515n Special Event Income $4,950	Net Realized Loss $-12,118
* Other Income = Miscellaneous, Publications Income,  
 and Speaker Fees64 center for constitutional rights In MeMoRIaM
Jean Hoffmann
Jean Hoffmann had many passions: writing, poetry, and 
political activism. Jean was the author of two books of poetry and her op-ed pieces and short stories appeared in various publications. She was active in the reproductive justice and anti-war movements, animal rescue, and the Occupy Wall Street movement. Up until the time of her death, she remained active as a swimmer, yoga enthusiast and walker, member of The East End Poetry Workshop, and a student taking classes at New York University and Julliard. She was a warm, accomplished, strong woman, who helped bring people together and touched the lives of many. Jean was a stalwart supporter during her lifetime, and we are grateful that she also designated CCR for gifts in her memory.
Adrienne Rich
Adrienne Rich was a renowned poet of national stature whose work shined a beacon on the oppression of women and lesbians. She rebelled against the constraints of poetry by going beyond the socially-accepted theme of the routine of women’s lives, opting instead to delve into such risqué topics as sexual love between women, her Jewish identity and the Holocaust, and the struggles of black women. Adri-enne saw the interconnectedness between politics and art. In 1997 she declined the National Medal of Arts to highlight the “increasingly brutal impact of racial and economic injustice.” In a 1984 speech she summed up her reason for writing: “the creation of a society without domination.” CCR was one of Adrienne’s favorite organizations; she was a donor for many years and was part of our Founders Circle. 
Margaret B. Thompson 
Maggie Thompson died in early 2012 at the age of 92. A lifelong activist, she became one of CCR’s earliest staff members through her work with founder Morton Stavis (Maggie’s name even appears on CCR’s 1966 Certificate of Incorporation!). Graduating from college in 1941, she moved to Charlotte, NC, to work for civil rights includ-ing serving on the board of the NAACP . In the 1950’s she became active in peace and justice advocacy and civil rights in New Jersey. She was on the frontlines of many of CCR’s early notable cases, including the trial of the Gainsville 8, the case against the Mississippi Sovereignty Commission and CCR’s case freezing President Ferdinand Marcos ill-gotten gains stolen from the people of the Philippines. At age 91, Maggie wrote a memoir, “From One to Ninety-One: A Life.” Maggie encouraged, befriended and nurtured generations of CCR’s enfants-terribles and financially supported CCR from its founding until her death. 
The following CCR supporters 
passed away this year and many thoughtfully honored CCR with a bequest. It is always sad to lose a member of our community, but their ideals will live on in the work they supported at CCR.
Norman Altstedter
Eugene Auerbach
Derrick A. Bell
Jules Bloom
Russell D. “Toby” D’Oench
Kenneth F. Emerick
Albert C. Filardo
Louis Flum
John Glasel
William Hildebrand
Jean Hoffmann
Rosalie Kolbert
Emanuel Margolis
David Moore 
John J. Murnin
Dory S. Myers
Kenneth Reiner
Adrienne Rich
Michael Rothenberg
Margaret Thompson
Robert VelgosStay up-to-date and share our news!  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook and bookmark CCR’s website:  
www.CCRjustice.org. Forward our newsletters and action alerts to your friends.
Make an online gift  at www.CCRjustice.org/Donate.  
It’s fast, easy and secure, and your gift will go to work right away. Online gifts are a greener way to give –and reduce mailing expenses and supplies so more of your gift goes to the programs you care about.
Consider making your gift recurring.  
These gifts provide CCR with a reliable, steady source of income support and are a “greener” way to give by reducing mailing expenses and supplies making it possible for us to plan better and take on more cases. Sign up online for a monthly or quar-terly recurring gift at our website: www.CCRjustice.org/Donate. 
Make CCR your birthday gift!
Ask friends and family to make gifts to CCR in your honor as your holiday/ birthday/anniversary/no-reason-at-all gift OR make gifts to CCR in honor of the folks on your shopping list. These gifts will pay tribute to our shared social justice values, while fueling CCR’s efforts to restore the Constitution and protect and extend human rights. 
Donate stock.  
If you sell depreciated stock and give the proceeds to CCR, you may be able to claim the loss on your taxes, as well as the charitable deduction. If you donate appreciated securities to CCR, you may avoid capital gains taxes and receive a charitable deduction. Please contact CCR at 212-614-6489 for stock transfer instructions. 
Host a house party  
to fundraise for CCR and to introduce friends and allies to CCR’s work. Attend a local event if CCR is in your neighborhood—and bring a friend! If you are on our email list you will receive invitations. Public events are listed on our calendar: www.CCRjustice.org/calendar.
Include CCR in your will
Including CCR as a beneficiary in your will is an excellent way to make a statement about the values you held during your lifetime. You may choose to make a bequest to CCR of a specific dollar amount or for a percentage of your estate. Call us at 212-614-6448 for more information.waYs t o s UPP o Rt cc R
Research and Writing: Tamara Jafar • Design: Jessica Mezyk • jessicamezyk.com • Consultant: Nicholas Coster • nicholas@modino.com. Photo credits: Front cover: left to right © Adam  
Tanner/Reuters/Corbis, ©Tom Giebel, Atomische.com, Sarah K. Hogarth , © Tony Savino/Corbis, © Eric Gay/AP/Corbis. Back cover: left to right © Rodrigo Abd/AP/Corbis, Frank Mugisha, Tom Bean, ©George Esiri/epa/Corbis, Vincent Warren. Inside front cover: left to right: Sarah K. Hogarth, © Jason Reed/Reuters/Corbis, Tom Bean. p 2: Yanick Salazar. p 3: Davida Finger, Rafael Shimunov. p 4: © Brennan Linsley/AP/Corbis. p 5: Sarah K. Hogarth. p 6: Petty Officer 1st class Shane T. McCoy, U.S. Navy. p 8: © Eric Gay/AP/Corbis. p 9: © Rodrigo Abd/AP/Corbis. p 10: Creative Commons, EarthRights International. p 11: Tom Bean. p 12: © Tony Savino/Corbis. p 13: © Justin Lane/epa/Corbis. p 14: © Jason DeCrow/AP/Corbis, © Adam Tanner/Reuters/Corbis. p 15: John Moore/Getty Images. p 17: 1-COPINH, 4 Sarah K. Hogarth, 5- Laura Raymond, 6-Annette Dickerson, 7-Rafael Shimunov, 8-Cerkis, 9-KahEan Chang. p 21: Tom Bean. p 23: Sarah K. Hogarth. p 25: © Bebeto Matthews/AP/Corbis. p 27: Vincent Warren. p 28: © Jason Reed/Reuters/Corbis. p 30: ©Tom Giebel, Atomische.com, Dea Brayden, UUA. p 31: Nahal Zamani. p 33: GourmetCruelty.com, Rafael Shimunov, Olympia BDS. p 52: Christine Kim. p 54 & 58: Kevi Brannelly. p 64: Adrienne Rich: Colleen McKay
The Center for Constitutional Rights is a 501(c)3 nonprofit ofganization. On request, a copy of CCR’s latest financial report may be obtained from us or from the Office of the Attorney General of 
the State of New York, Charities Bureau, 120 Broadway, New York, NY 10271.400,000+
# of Haitians
still living in  
tent camps
ccrjustice.org500+
# of Pelican Bay prisoners  
in solitary conﬁnement  
for more than 10 years 
% Black and Latino  
ﬁreﬁghters
9% NYC
57% Los Angeles
51% Philadelphia
40% Boston