ANNUAL 
REPORT2020VISION
The Center for Constitutional Rights fights for a world 
without oppression—where people use their power to 
achieve justice and guarantee the rights of all. 
© 2020 center for constitutional rights   
666 BROADWAY FL 7  |  NEW YORK, NY 10012  |  212.614.6448  
CCRJUSTICE.ORGMISSION
The Center for Constitutional Rights stands with social 
justice movements and communities under threat—fusing 
litigation, advocacy, and narrative shifting to dismantle 
systems of oppression regardless of the risk.Message from the Board Chair  ..................................................................................... 1
Message from the Executive Director  ......................................................................... 2
Structural Racism: Dismantling White Supremacy  ................................................... 5
Patriarchy: Fighting Gender Oppression .................................................................... 9
Oppressive Economic Structures: Combating Abusive Corporate Power  ........ 12
Abusive State Power: Challenging Unjust Government Policies ......................... 15
The Center for Constitutional Rights in the News ................................................. 22
Building the Next Generation of Movement Lawyers
	 Bertha	Justice	Fellowship	Program ........................................................................ 23
	 Ella	Baker	Internship	Program ................................................................................. 24
Thank You
	 Donor	Spotlights ........................................................................................................ 25
	 Tributes	in	Honor 	of… ................................................................................................ 27
	 Tributes	in	Memory 	of… ............................................................................................ 28
Financial Report  .............................................................................................................29
Welcome Our New Board Members .........................................................................30
Board, Staff, Ella Bakers, Interns, Volunteers ........................................................... 31
Ways to Support the Center for Constitutional Rights ......................................... 32
Attributions .....................................................................................................................33TABLE OF CONTENTSWhen	the	Trump	administration	made	the	outrageous	claim	that	
asylum	seekers	at	the	U.S.-Mexico	border 	were	geographically 	
outside	the	U.S.,	and	therefore	beyond	protection	under 	U.S.	law,	
we	were	ready	because	we	had	faced	a	similar 	argument	from	the	
Bush	administration	 when	he	detained	people	in	Guantánamo	in	the	
aftermath	of	9/11.	When	Trump’s	Justice	Department	labeled	Black	
Lives	Matter	activists	“domestic	terrorists” 	and	illegally	monitored	
their	activities,	we	were	ready,	having	defended	the	rights	of 	Puerto	
Ricans	who	were	spied	on	by 	the	Commonwealth’s	Police	Intelligence	
Division	and	placed	on	a	 “Subversives List”	in	1987.	 And	when	Trump’s	
FDA	moved	to	ban	over-the-counter 	access	to	the	Morning-After 	Pill	
(also	known	as	“emergency 	contraception” 	or	“Plan	B”)	we	were	ready,	
having	brought,	in	1972,	the	first	challenge	to	the	constitutionality 	of	
abortion	statutes	in	 which	women	were	the	plaintiffs	and	the	issues	
raised	were	those	of 	a	woman’s	right	to	abortion	rather 	than	the	right	
of	the	doctor	to	practice	medicine.	 As	Vince	Warren	and	Baher 	Azmy	
observed	in	 Episode 25 of our podcast, “The Activist Files”:	 we’ve	
been	here	before,	and	 we’re	always	ready 	to	out-maneuver,	outsmart,	
and	outlast	the	enemies	of 	the	people.
We	can’t	do	this	 work	without	you.	Thank	you	to	all	of	the	 
Center	for	Constitutional	Rights’ 	new	and	longtime	individual	and	
institutional	supporters	and	partners.	Special	heartfelt	thanks	to	 
those	who	have	supported	the	Michael	Ratner 	Campaign	for 	the	 
Next	Generation,	the	 Justice	Sustainers	 who	contribute	monthly,	
and	the	Thelma	Newman	Society 	members	who	have	so	thoughtfully 	
included	us	in	their 	estate	plans.	As	a	result,	our 	family	is	stronger	than	
ever	and	we’re	ready	for	the	fights	that	lie	ahead.		
It	is	often	said	that	 who	you	walk	with	says	all	you	need	to	know 	about	
who	you	are.	The	Center	for	Constitutional	Rights	is	proud	to	 walk	with	
you,	our	dedicated	donors,	hand-in-hand	 with	our	movement	partners,	
clients,	board,	and	staff 	—	we	are	strongest	 when	we	walk	together.
Peace,
Katherine	Franke
Chair, Board of Trustees
1|		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|		MESSAGE FROM THE BOARD CHAIRFour	years	ago,	
I	convened	
the	Center	for	
Constitutional	
Rights’	Board	of	
Trustees	to	discuss	
organizational	
direction	and	
strategies	under 	
two	different	
scenarios:	Hillary 	
Clinton	or	Donald	
Trump	as	president.	
We	sketched	out	
how	we	would	
show	up	for	our	
key	partners	with	a	
centrist	Democrat	
or	an	extreme	
Republican	populist	
in	the	White	House.	 Thankfully,	the	last	54	 years	of	protecting	social	
justice	movements	prepared	us	to	respond	to	the	cataclysmic	events	
of	the	last	four	years.	Now,	we	face	another 	critical	juncture,	and	once	
again	we’re	ready	for	whatever	political	direction	 we	face	domestically 	
and	globally.		
The	Center	for	Constitutional	Rights	 was	born	out	of 	the	fight	against 	 
racial	injustice,	and	these	 critical	struggles	are	 woven	into	our 	organizational	
DNA.	The	communities	that	 we	support	in	our 	litigation	and	advocacy 	
–	particularly	Black	and	Brown	people,	immigrants	and	asylum	seekers, 	
Indigenous	communities,	incarcerated	people,	trans	people,	and	poor 	
communities	–	are	among	the	hardest	hit	by 	the	COVID-19	pandemic 	 
and	the	most	at	risk	to	its	consequences,	both	medical	and	financial. 	
The	Center	for	Constitutional	Rights	 will	continue	to	show 	up	on	 
the	frontlines	with	activists,	lawyers,	and	movement	leaders	fighting 	
the	deadly	effects	of	structural	racism,	exacerbated	by 	the	COVID-19 	
pandemic.	We	are	more	than	ready 	for	the	fight.message from THE
BOARD CHAIRWhether	it	is	ending	discriminatory 	curfews,	fighting	for 	the	rights	
of	transgender	folks,	or	releasing	medically 	vulnerable	people	from	
detention	centers	during	a	pandemic,	 we	have	long	known	how 	to	
move	rapidly	and	creatively 	during	the	toughest	of 	times.	
When	courts	were	open	only 	for	criminal	and	emergency 	motions	in	
the	initial	weeks	of	the	pandemic	shutdowns,	 we	used	the	opportunity 	
to	create	a	suite	of 	powerful	litigation	that	released	people	from	
immigration	detention.	Even	as	 we	moved	to	a	remote	 working	
environment	to	keep	ourselves	safe,	 we	remained	focused	on	people	
more	vulnerable	than	us	and	halted	 Trump’s	Asylum	Ban	and	Public	
Charge	rule.
But	crises	also	create	opportunities	for 	change	and	transformation. 	 
This	country	is	in	the	midst	of 	a	historic	reckoning	around	racism,	and 	 
we	are	here	for	it	as	we	prepare	for 	our	55th	year	of	doing	this	work.	
Today,	we	are	not	just	in	a	fight	for 	reform	of	the	existing	system,	 we	
are	here	to	dismantle	 white	supremacy,	 which	includes	a	commitment 	
to	abolition.	Any	society	that	would	rather	police	than	counsel	kids,	that 	
would	rather	cage	people	coming	for 	a	better	life	than	support	them, 	
that	would	criminalize	LGBTQIA+	people,	that	 would	refuse	to	keep 	
people	safe,	is	a	society 	that	needs	the	Center 	for	Constitutional	Rights.
Thank	you	for	joining	us	in	this	historic	fight,	 for	giving	generously 	and	
ensuring	we	have	the	resources	 we	need	to	keep	 going	until	freedom	and 	
justice	are	here.	Please	enjoy 	this	annual	report	and	take	pride	in	the	 wins	
we	have	achieved	in	the	past	 year.	And	thank	you	for	your	commitment	to 	
supporting	the	critical	and	transformative 	work	that	is	to	come.
I	hope	you	are	all	safe	and	holding	 your	loved	ones	close	(in	a	socially 	
distanced	manner).
With	Gratitude	and	Solidarity,
Vince	Warren
Executive Director
MESSAGE FROM THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR  |		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|	2It’s	been	quite	a	
year.	Not	a	time	
for	the	timid	or	the	
fainthearted	and,	
as	we’ve	learned,	
not	a	time	to	wait	
for	the	government	
to	come	and	save	
us.	Like	many	of	
you,	I’ve	had	some	
time	to	reflect	
during	the	first	
half	of	2020	on	
what’s	important	
and	what	a	group	
of	human	beings	
can	do	when	all	of	
our	government	
structures	have	
failed	us.	I’ve	come	
to	the	conclusion	that	although	this	government	has	failed	—	and	it	has	
done	so	completely 	—	it	was	never	made	to	work	for	all	of	us,	even	in	
its	most	functional	form.	So,	as	the	country 	seeks	to	fix	what	is	broken	
within	the	presidency,	I	ask	 you	to	also	remember 	that	—	on	its	best	
day	under	any	administration	—	the	state	creates	incalculable	harm	to	
the	most	vulnerable	people	in	our 	society,	including	people	 who	look	
like	me.	The	path	forward	holds	only 	two	options	for 	us:	first,	to	fight	
all	forms	of	abusive	power;	and	second,	to	build	all	forms	of 	liberatory	
power	in	our	communities	so	they 	may	define	what	safety	actually	
looks	like	for	us	moving	forward.
During	the	current	global	and	national	crises,	the	Center 	for	
Constitutional	Rights	has	doubled	down	on	these	two	options	to	
successfully	support	communities	at	risk	this	 year.	And	with	your	
crucial	support,	 we	can	continue	to	sustain	the	 vital	work	of	supporting	
our	movements,	challenging	abusive	power,	and	dismantling	 white	
supremacy,	patriarchy,	and	oppressive	economic	structures	piece	by 	
piece,	no	matter 	what	gets	thrown	at	us.message from THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR3|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS STRUCTURAL RACISM
OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES
PATRIARCHY
ABUSIVE STATE POWER44 INTRODUCTION  |  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS  | Rooted in a long tradition of visionary, radical 
lawyering and advocacy, we use bold legal 
work as a tool to dismantle structural racism, 
patriarchy, oppressive economic structures, 
and abusive state power; to build the power of 
social movements; and to redistribute power  to 
the oppressed, under-resourced, criminalized, 
and disenfranchised. Blending litigation with 
movement organizing, campaigns, public 
education, and other strategies, we both deploy 
and build power outside the courtroom. 
Rather than working to merely ameliorate 
the effects of systems of oppression, we 
work to fundamentally transform them.  We 
simultaneously fight the exercise of power by 
the most oppressive systems, and build power 
in communities and among individuals that 
have suffered under these oppressive systems.
We work both boldly and with humility, with 
a critical awareness of the role we play in larger social movements. We value the leadership 
of those  most impacted by oppression.  We aim to be accountable to our clients and to the 
communities and social justice movements we serve. 
When we deploy our expertise and resources in these ways, we make a unique, significant, and 
tangible contribution to social change. It is for these reasons that the Center for Constitutional 
Rights invests in, supports, and trains lawyers, legal workers, law students, jailhouse lawyers, 
and activists. It is for these reasons that we are different from any other organization in the 
United States.
Our approach can surface the hidden motives of power, amplify unheard voices, and generate 
extraordinary justice outcomes. Our successes often define the visionary edge of what’s possible 
when using the law. 
We will continue to fight until social and economic justice, liberation, and the democratic 
sharing of power and resources are not only possible, but here. We thank you for making this 
fight possible.Our Strategy 
for Change
At the Center for 
Constitutional Rights, 
we believe power and 
resources should be 
shared democratically 
across society — and  
that the law is equally 
capable of operating  
as a lever for social 
control or a lever  
for social justice.  5
5|		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS  |  STRUCTURAL RACISMSTRUCTURAL 
RACISMDISMANTLING  
WHITE SUPREMACY
“The checkpoints 
and over-ticketing 
are radicalized 
criminalizations that 
are painted as public 
safety measures, but 
that’s not the truth. 
This case is a huge 
narrative shift from 
the status quo .… It’s 
powerful when we are 
able to collectively 
say, ‘No, this is not 
keeping us safe.’”
— Marielle Smith 
Racial justice activist  
and former Black Love 
Resists in the Rust member
Racial Justice Activist and former Black Love Resists in the Rust Member Marielle Smith leads a protest in Buffalo 
against police misconduct6
6 STRUCTURAL RACISM  |		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|	STRUCTURAL RACISM
The Center for Constitutional Rights was born out of 
the fight for racial justice — our work began in support 
of Civil Rights Movement activists in the 1960s — and 
a commitment to dismantling white supremacy lies 
deep within our organizational DNA. Understanding 
that white supremacy has shaped the law in profoundly 
harmful ways, we place this fight at the core of all the 
work we do. Our work today builds on a long legacy 
of domestic and international litigation and advocacy 
that challenges anti-Blackness, settler colonialism, 
xenophobia, and all forms of racist oppression. We 
welcome the overdue and widespread realization that 
dismantling white supremacy must be our society’s 
collective mission, and continue our long-standing 
efforts to grow the legal and political framework 
to do so. This includes advocating for abolition of 
a fundamentally racist carceral system, massive 
divestment from the police, and a correspondingly 
massive investment in the communities that have paid 
the price of centuries of subjugation, persecution, and 
violence. Thank you for your visionary and steadfast 
support of the broad and deep work of uprooting 
structural racism and advancing liberation. DISMANTLING WHITE SUPREMACY
Fighting Structural Racism in Policing 
The	police	murder 	of	George	Floyd	sparked	a	flashpoint	in	the	
centuries-long	history 	of	structural	anti-Black	racism,	firing	
up	communities	to	rise	in	protest.	Recognizing	that	racist	
violence	is	embedded	in	the	U.S.	criminal	justice	system,	the	
Center	for	Constitutional	Rights	has	tenaciously 	challenged	
discriminatory 	policing	for	decades.	Today,	we	are	proud	to	join	
our	movement	partners’ 	calls	to	divest	from	the	police,	invest	
in	our	communities,	and	abolish	a	 white	supremacist	system	of 	
policing,	prisons,	and	surveillance.	
From	rapidly	responding	to	pandemic	policing	practices	to	
continuing	years-long	fights,	several	cases	this	 year	challenged	
specific	police	practices	 while	building	momentum	for 	 
systemic	change.		Protest after killing of George Floyd, Harlem7
7|		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|		STRUCTURAL RACISMNew Rules, 
Persistent 
Discrimination 
Social	distancing	
to	slow	the	 
spread	of	a	
pandemic	
must	happen	
universally.	Yet	
when	data	this	
spring	revealed	
that	the	NYPD’s	
enforcement	of 	
social	distancing	
requirements	
discriminated	
wildly	against	Black	and	Latinx	New 	Yorkers	—	at	the	same	level	
as	the	NYPD’s	stop-and-frisk	practices,	 which	we	successfully 	
challenged	in	our 	landmark  Floyd v. City of New York 	litigation	
—	we	went	to	court	to	demand	an	investigation	into,	and	
temporary	moratorium	on,	the	NYPD’s	social	distancing	
enforcement	practices.	Even	if 	social	distancing	is	new,	 
racially	biased	policing	is	not.	
Our	demand	for	a	moratorium	highlighted	the	capacity 	of	 
non-police-department	and	community-based	alternatives	to 	
enforce	social	distancing	norms,	underscoring	 the	movement’s 	
demands	to	defund	the	NYPD	and	to	invest	in	 alternatives	 
that	genuinely	protect	vulnerable	communities. 	
Media	including	 Politico,	New York Daily News,	and amNY  
quickly	picked	up	this	newsworthy 	moratorium.	
Where Racist Policing and  
Economic Exploitation Intersect 
The	City	of	Buffalo,	NY,	has	for 	years	over-ticketed	Black	
and	Latinx	drivers	to	generate	revenue,	alleges	our 	case,	
Black Love Resists in the Rust v. City of Buffalo .	Illegal	vehicle	
checkpoints	were	erected	in	majority-Black	neighborhoods	
to	stop,	search,	and	ticket	Black	motorists	 without	probable	
cause	or	reasonable	suspicion.	 After	the	City	of	Buffalo	gained	
permission	to	keep	almost	all	revenue	from	traffic	tickets	in	
2015,	financially 	onerous	ticketing	increased.	City	revenues	grew,	unpaid	traffic	tickets	resulted	in	driver’s	
license	suspensions,	and	as	a	result	Buffalo	made	money 	on	
the	backs	of	predominantly 	Black	individuals.	Following 	the	
activism	of	local	groups,	we’ve	fought	these	practices	since	2018	
alongside	the	National	Center 	for	Law	and	Economic	 Justice	and	
the	Western	New	York	Law	Center.	In	April,	five	new 	plaintiffs	
joined	the	case,	 which	challenges	both	discriminatory 	policing	
and	an	economic	structure	that	balances	the	City’s	budget	at	the 	
expense	of	poor	people	of	color.	
Local	NPR	affiliate	 WBFO	covered	this	development.	
Sometimes We Succeed in Increasing  
Justice Even When We Lose in Court  
In	2016,	we	joined	with	Arch	City	Defenders	of	St.	Louis	in	
Furlow v. Belmar	to	challenge	a	practice 	that	was	leading	to 	
unconstitutional	arrests	of 	poor	Black	people.	 Although	the	
district	court	decided	in	favor 	of	St.	Louis	in	2018	(we	plan	to 	
appeal),	the	attention	drawn	to	“wanteds” 	—	which	permit	police	
officers	to	designate 	an	individual	“wanted” 	for	up	to	24	hours 	
without	seeking	a	judicial	determination	of 	probable	cause	— 	
recently	compelled	the	St.	Louis	County 	Police	Department 	
to	scale	back	the	practice,	and	the	newly 	elected	county 	
prosecuting	attorney 	has	pledged	to	eliminate	it.
  
And Sometimes We Win Big 
The	Center	for	Constitutional	Rights	has	been	 working	with	
coalition	partners	for 	years	on	legislation	to	hold	New 	York	
police	forces	accountable	for 	brutality	and	anti-Black	policing.	
In	June,	we	celebrated	a	major 	victory	with	Communities	
United	for	Police	Reform	 when	the	long-fought-for 	Safer	NY	
Act	—	which	repealed	a	1976	law 	that	blocked	public	access	to	
police	officer	misconduct	and	discipline	records	—	 was	enacted	
into	law.	While	massive	uprisings	created	the	pressure	for 	 
New	York’s	Governor 	Andrew	Cuomo	to	finally 	sign	the	law,	
this	win	is	the	result	of 	longtime	work	by	visionary	community	
members	and	activists.	 We	celebrate	the	 victory	while	keeping	
up	the	fight.	
As	the	need	for 	police	reform	made	national	news,	reporters	
from	national	outlets	such	as	 Fast Company, Fortune ,	and	
Refinery 29	amplified	this	story,	along	 with	local	reporters	 
from	the	 Albany Times Union.STRUCTURAL RACISM
DISMANTLING WHITE SUPREMACY8
8Dismantling White  
Supremacy on Many Fronts 
Decarceration: Belton v. Gautreaux
As	part	of	a	national	effort	to	release	people	from	Immigration	
and	Customs	Enforcement	(ICE)	detention,	prisons,	and	
jails	during	the	pandemic,	 we,	along	with	co-counsel	(The	
Advancement	Project,	Hogan	Lovells,	 The	Claiborne	Firm,	
and	Bill	Quigley 	of	Loyola	University 	New	Orleans	College	of 	
Law),	filed	a	federal	class	action	lawsuit	seeking	the	immediate	
release	of	medically	vulnerable	people	imprisoned	at	the	
East	Baton	Rouge	Parish	Prison	in	Louisiana	(a	prison	 whose	
population	is	80	percent	Black,	in	a	state	that	is	the	carceral 	
capital	of	the	world)	and	a	total	overhaul	of 	the	facility’s	virus	
transmission	prevention	procedures.	Our 	litigation	and	advocacy 	
work	supports	the	demands	of 	the	East	Baton	Rouge	Parish 	
Prison	Reform	Coalition,	community 	members,	local	advocacy 	
groups,	and	those	imprisoned	and	their 	families,	to	ultimately 	
close	this	notoriously 	dangerous	and	decrepit	facility.	Reporters 	
from	the	state	newspaper,	The Advocate,	reported	on	this 	
important	case.
Indigenous Rights:  
Ramapough Mountain Indians, Inc., v. Township 
of Mahwah, Ramapo Hunt & Polo Club
In	the	fight	against	settler 	colonialism,	dispossession,	and	
environmental	exploitation,	the	Center 	for	Constitutional	
Rights	continues	to	stand	 with	and	fight	for 	members	of	the	
Ramapough	Lenape	Nation.	 A	settlement	with	the	Mahwah,	
New	Jersey,	municipality 	lifted	oppressive	fines	levied	on	
the	Ramapough	and	allows	them	to	pray 	and	erect	religious	
structures	on	their 	land.	We	continue	to	represent	them	as	
they	face	racial	and	religious	harassment	by 	a	neighboring	
homeowners’	association	—	a	member 	of	which	filed	an	action	
trying	to	dismantle	the	settlement.	In	 January,	the	court	
rejected	his	attempt.	State	paper 	The Star-Ledger	led	the	
coverage	on	this	story,	along	 with	the	hyperlocal  NJ Patch.STRUCTURAL RACISM
DISMANTLING WHITE SUPREMACY
Land and History 
As	many	as	six	cemeteries	in	St.	 James,	Louisiana,	containing	
the	remains	of 	formerly	enslaved	people	may 	exist	on	a	site	
slated	for	a	toxic	plastics	facility.	 The	Center	for	Constitutional	
Rights	is	supporting	the	grassroots	group	RISE	St.	 James	in	
their	struggle	to	protect	and	access	their 	ancestors’	graves	
and	more	broadly 	to	safeguard	their 	communities	from	the	
continued	environmental	devastation	and	pollution	created	by 	
chemical	factories	(see	also	 page 13).		
Culture Matters
We	refuse	to	accept	
racism	in	fashion	—	or 	
any	other	field.	Center	
for	Constitutional	Rights	
Senior	Staff	Attorney	
Chinyere	Ezie	filed	a	
complaint	with	the	NYC	
Human	Rights	Commis-
sion	over	a	Prada	product	line	based	on	blackface	imagery.	In	
February,	the	fashion	giant	agreed	to	a	settlement	that	requires	
them	to	strengthen	policies	and	training	on	racial	equity 	at	the	
company,	including	the	creation	of	scholarships	for	people	from	
communities	underrepresented	in	the	fields	of 	fashion	and	
design.	Like	the	filing	of 	the	complaint,	the	outcome	received	
global	attention.	Reporters	from	the	 New York Times,	Refinery 
29,	Yahoo Philippines ,	MSN,	The Today Show,	NY1,	and	  
Harlem World Magazine	covered	this	 victory.	
An Evening on Repair  
and Historical Justice 
On	October	15,	2019,	the	Center 	for	
Constitutional	Rights	and	Race	Forward 	
presented	“Towards	 Reparations,”	a	
discussion	with	Board	Chair 	Katherine	
Franke,	author 	of	Repair: Redeeming the 
Promise of Abolition;	Executive	Director 	
Vince	Warren;	Race Forward President Glenn	Harris;	and	Monifa 	
Bandele,	SVP	of	Moms	Rising	and	contributor 	to	the	Movement 	
for	Black	Lives’	“Reparations	Now” 	Toolkit.	Panelists	and 	
attendees	had	a	powerful	conversation	about	our 	collective	
obligation	and	capacity 	to	achieve	historical	justice	through 	
reparations	for 	Black	people.
STRUCTURAL RACISM  |		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|	Senior Staff Attorney Chinyere Ezie and colleagues at 
press conference in front of Prada in Manhattan in 
February 2020
Left to Right: Vince Warren, 
Monifa Bandele, Glenn 
Harris, & Katherine Franke9
9“It was not only 
unconstitutional, 
but inhumane. I was 
physically, mentally, and 
emotionally abused every 
day from the moment I 
woke up to the moment 
I went to bed by both 
guards and inmates .…
The challenges I faced 
on parole were plentiful. 
Not only was I forced to 
remain in rural hells of a 
historically racist town 
from which I came, I dealt 
with transphobic parole 
officers who treated  
me awfully.”
— Ashley Diamond 
Center for Constitutional 
Rights ClientFIGHTING GENDER- 
BASED OPPRESSIONPATRIARCHY
|		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS  |  PATRIARCHYAshley Diamond, a Black transgender woman, and social justice and prisoners’ rights activist, whose landmark victory against the Georgia Department of Corrections (GDC) in 
2016 made  national headlines.  Since her re-imprisonment as a result of a technical parole violation, we have advocated on her behalf to end her continuing brutal treatment in 
GDC custody10
10 PATRIARCHY  |		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|	PATRIARCHY
fighting gender-
based oppression
Working to End the  
Discrimination-to-Incarceration Pipeline
The	Center	for	Constitutional	Rights	has	 worked	for	decades	
to	protect	members	of 	LGBTQIA+	communities	and	HIV-
positive	people	from	discrimination,	censorship,	 violence,	
criminalization,	and	persecution.	One	front	in	the	struggle	is	
our	fight	against	the	discrimination-to-incarceration	pipeline.	
Last	summer,	along	 with	the	Transgender	Law	Center,	we	filed	
an	amicus	brief 	with	the	U.S.	Supreme	Court	that	elevated	
the	voices	of	more	than	30	transgender 	people	who	have	
experienced	workplace	discrimination.	 Their	experiences	clearly 	
showed	that	when	transgender 	people	are	turned	away 	from	
jobs	without	legal	recourse,	they 	face	poverty,	homelessness,	
and	criminalization.
In	a	society	rooted	in	white	supremacy	and	mass	incarceration, 	
this	means	trans	people	–	especially 	Black	trans	people 	
and	other	trans	people	of 	color	–	end	up	imprisoned	at 	
disproportionately 	high	rates.	And	then	the	nightmare	continues: 	
they	experience	further 	state	violence,	are	denied	medical	care, 	
and	suffer	physical	and	sexual	assault	 while	incarcerated. 		
We	are	actively 	working	to	dismantle	this	devastating	pipeline	
from	discrimination	to	incarceration	and	abuse.	 We	are	
demanding	several	U.S.	agencies	abandon	proposed	rule	
changes	that	would	permit	discrimination	in	employment	and	
services	by	any	entity	that	claims	a	religious	purpose,	 which	
could	impact	marginalized	groups	including	racial	and	religious	
minorities,	women,	and	LGBTQIA+	people.	In	late	2019	and	early 	
2020,	we	filed	nine	public	comments	to	oppose	these	rules.	
We	also	denounced	a	 Trump	administration	change	to	 
the	Affordable	Care	 Act	that	eliminated	anti-discrimination	
protections	in	accessing	health	care	and	insurance	for 	trans	
people,	pregnant	people,	and	people	 who	have	had	abortions.	
We	have	joined	amicus	briefs	in	cases	challenging	the	rule	in 	
four	U.S.	states.	In Lopez v. NYC Department of Homeless Services, 	we	are	
supporting	Mariah	Lopez,	a	transwoman	 with	disabilities	who	
faced	denials	of 	service,	violence,	and	inaccessible	housing	in 	
the	NYC	homeless	shelter 	system.	The	case	has	the	potential 	
to	change	the	city’s	shelter 	system,	making	it	more	safe	and 	
accessible	for	LGBTQIA+	people	and	people	 with	disabilities. 	
 
The	Center	for	Constitutional	Rights	is	also	supporting	
incarcerated	trans	people	as	they 	face	and	fight	state-
sponsored	violence	and	discrimination.	 Together	with	the	
Southern	Poverty 	Law	Center,	we	are	counsel	to	 Ashley	
Diamond,	a	Black	trans	activist	incarcerated	by 	the	Georgia	
Department	of 	Corrections	who	is	fighting	for 	the	rights	of	
incarcerated	trans	people	to	be	protected	from	assault	and	to	
have	access	to	appropriate,	competent,	and	gender-affirming	
medical	and	mental	health	care.	 We	also	filed	an	amicus	brief 	
in	support	of	Adree	Edmo,	a	transwoman	incarcerated	in	Idaho.	
In	a	groundbreaking	decision	in	 August	2019,	the	Ninth	Circuit	
Court	of	Appeals	ruled	that	denying	gender 	confirmation	
surgery	to	trans	prisoners	constitutes	a	 violation	of	their	
constitutionally 	protected	health	care	rights.	
State-sponsored	discrimination	impacting	LGBTQIA+	people	is 	
an	epidemic	in	the	United	States,	and	 we	are	sounding	the	alarm 	
at	the	international	level.	In	September 	2019,	in	partnership	 with	
more	than	50	 legal	experts	and	advocacy 	organizations,	 we	filed	
a	submission	to	the	UN	Office	of 	the	High	Commissioner 	for	
Human	Rights	highlighting	how 	the	U.S.	government’s	conduct 	
toward	LGBTQIA+	people	 violates	international	human	rights 	
laws	and	norms.	In	October 	2019,	we	authored	a	report	to	the 	
UN	Human	Rights	Council	as	part	of 	the	UN’s	Universal	Periodic 	
Review	of	the	United	States	and	included	a	section	concerning 	
the	status	and	treatment	of 	LGBTQIA+	people.
The	discrimination-to-incarceration	pipeline	is	a	travesty 	of	
justice.	We’ll	keep	fighting	until	it	stops.	The Center for Constitutional Rights has long 
worked to advance gender equity and gender 
justice — championing human rights, challenging 
discrimination, and supporting movements to end 
violence against cis and trans women and queer, 
trans, non-binary, and gender-non-conforming people. 
With an intersectional approach that understands all 
systems of domination as connected, we are fighting 
to uproot patriarchy and sexism everywhere they are 
embedded, from employment to health care, from 
homeless shelters to prisons, and beyond. Fueled by 
your essential partnership, we won’t stop fighting 
until gender-based oppression in all forms ends.   11
Chinyere 
Ezie Honored 
by New York 
City Bar 
Senior	Staff	
Attorney	Chinyere	
Ezie	is	a	2020	
recipient	of	the	
Art	Leonard	
Award,	which	
recognizes	
compelling	
commitment	to	
LGBTQ	equality 	
through	the	law.	
The	New	York	City	Bar’s	LGBTQ	Rights	Committee	 will	present	
the	award	at	a	ceremony 	this	fall.PATRIARCHY
fighting gender-based oppression
Podcast: “The Activist Files”
“The	Activist	Files”	is	a	podcast	by	the	Center	for	Constitutional	
Rights	where	we	feature	the	stories	of 	people	on	the	frontlines	
fighting	for	justice,	including	activists,	lawyers,	and	artists.	 We	
interview	movement	partners,	our 	clients,	and	people	using	
storytelling	to	create	change,	and	look	to	highlight	lesser 	
known	aspects	of 	the	work.	Learn	more	at	 ccrjustice.org/
activist-files.
“Liberation is Not Linear,” episode 23 of “The Activist Files,” 
featured	Raquel	 Willis,	a	Black	transgender 	activist,	writer,	
former	executive	editor 	of	Out	magazine,	and	founder 	of	Black	
Trans	Circles,	and	Derecka	Purnell,	a	human	rights	lawyer,	
activist,	writer,	and	deputy 	director	of	the	Union	Theological	
Seminary	Spirit	of	Justice	Center.	Listen	on	our 	website	or	
various	streaming	platforms	for 	their	thoughts	on	organizing	
within	the	spectrum	of 	privilege	and	oppression,	how 	they	
bring	multiple	identities	into	their 	advocacy,	cultural	and	
coalition-building	 work,	and	the	unfinished	project	of 	liberation.
“How It Would 
Feel to Be 
Free: Southern 
Resistance to 
Race and Gender 
Oppression,” 
episode 24,	
was	recorded	in	
February	in	front	
of	a	live	audience.	
Communications	
Director	Chandra	
M.	Hayslett	led	
a	discussion	
about	the	fights	
for	racial,	gender,	and	LGBTQIA+	justice	in	the	South	 with	
Lakeesha	Harris,	Reproductive	 Justice	and	Sexual	Health	
Program	Manager,	 Women	with	a	Vision;	Valencia	Robinson,	
CEO	and	Founder,	Mississippi	in	 Action;	and	Quita	 Tinsley,	
Deputy	Director,	Access	Reproductive	Care-Southeast.	Listen	
for	a	dynamic	discussion	of 	topics	like	crossing	state	lines	to	
access	abortions,	discrimination	 by	doctors,	and	the	importance	
of	centering	Black	trans	 women.	Senior Staff Attorney Chinyere guest lecturing on sex 
discrimination in Legal Director Baher Azmy’s Civil Rights  
Law Class at Brooklyn Law School in October of 2019
This year, advocates celebrated a major victory when 
the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the 1964 Civil Rights 
Act protects LGBTQIA+ people against discrimination. 
The Center for Constitutional Rights, together with the 
Transgender Law Center, had filed an important amicus 
brief with the Supreme Court that elevated the voices of 
more than 30 transgender people who had experienced 
workplace discrimination firsthand. This year, advocates 
for equality celebrated a major victory when the U.S. 
Supreme Court ruled that the 1964 Civil Rights Act 
protects LGBTQIA+ people against discrimination.  
The Center for Constitutional Rights, together with the 
Transgender Law Center, had filed an important amicus 
brief with the Supreme Court that elevated the voices of 
more than 30 transgender people who had experienced 
workplace discrimination firsthand.“As this moment reminds us, the struggle for 
racial justice, trans justice, and LGBTQIA+ 
rights are interconnected and more urgent than 
ever.”   —Chinyere Ezie |  Senior Staff Attorney
11 |  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS  |  PATRIARCHY12
OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC 
STRUCTURESCOMBATING ABUSIVE 
CORPORATE POWER
“The enslaved people in these 
gravesites had no choice in 
where they lived, where they 
worked, where they died, and 
where they were buried .… Our 
ancestors are crying out to us 
from their graves — they are 
telling us to not let industry 
disturb their burial sites. Formosa 
Plastics did not inform the 
citizens of St. James or the 
parish council of the existence 
of the graves … they don’t care, 
they just want to profit from  
St. James Parish.”
— Sharon Lavigne  
RISE St. James, speaking to the media,  
March 2020
OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES  |  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS  | 1213
Supporting Community-Based  
Movements to Fight Environmental Racism
Private	companies	profit	from	toxic	petrochemical	facilities 	 
they	operate	in	Black	communities	throughout	Louisiana’s 	
“Cancer	Alley,”	an	area	between	Baton	Rouge	and	New 	Orleans	
so	named	for	its	high	rates	of 	cancer	and	other	diseases.	Since 	
2017,	we	have	supported	local	Black-led	organizations	and 	
environmental	activists	in	the	area	 who	assert	that	lives,	land, 	 
air,	water,	and	the	right	to	protest	are	all	far 	more	important 	 
than	the	interests	of 	the	oil	and	gas	industry. 			
The Bayou Bridge Pipeline 
The	Bayou	Bridge	Pipeline	(BBP),	built	by 	the	company	behind	
the	infamous	Dakota	 Access	Pipeline,	ends	in	the	historic	
Black	community 	of	St.	James,	Louisiana.	 We	represent	three	
landowners	in	their 	challenge	to	the	Bayou	Bridge	Pipeline	
Company’s	eminent	domain	lawsuit.
The	landowners	celebrated	a	resounding	 victory	in	July	when	
the	court	ruled	the	company 	had	“trampled” 	their	constitutional	
rights.	“When	BBP 	consciously	ordered	construction	to	begin	
on	this	property 	prior	to	obtaining	a	judicial	determination	
of	the	public	and	necessary 	purpose	for	that	taking,	it	not	
only	trampled	defendants’ 	due	process	rights	as	landowners,	
it	eviscerated	the	constitutional	protections	laid	out	to	
specifically	protect	those	property 	rights,”	the	court	wrote.	
The	story	was	covered	by 	74	local	and	national	news	outlets,	
including	local	NBC	news	outlet	 KPLC,	national	environmental	
blog	 DESMOG,	and	 The American Prospect.Whose Land Rights?
On	Juneteenth	2020,	members	of 	the	grassroots,	faith-based	
group	RISE	St.	 James	held	a	prayer 	service	at	a	site	 where	  
their	formerly	enslaved	ancestors	are	believed	to	be	buried.	
RISE	members	had	to	fight	in	court	for 	their	right	to	do	so.	  
We	represented	them	in	their 	successful	request	for 	a	
temporary	restraining	order 	that	allowed	the	community 	
members	to	access	the	cemetery,	 which	is	on	land	currently 	
owned	by	the	Taiwan-based	company 	Formosa	Plastics.
The	company	plans	to	construct	a	plastics	facility 	that	would	
double	the	already 	high	levels	of	toxic	emissions	in	St.	 James	
Parish.	On	behalf 	of	RISE	St.	James,	we	submitted	public	
records	requests	and	enlisted	independent	archaeologists	 who	
discovered	there	may 	be	as	many	as	six	cemeteries	of 	formerly	
enslaved	people	on	the	site.	 We	also	requested	that	the	  
St.	James	Parish	Council	rescind	its	land	use	grant	to	Formosa	
Plastics	because	the	company 	did	not	disclose	its	knowledge	  
of	graves	while	its	land	use	application	 was	pending.
While	those	efforts	continue,	 we	have	rallied	Black	civil	rights	lead-
ers	across	the	country 	to	speak	out	in	support	of	the	local	commu-
nity	members.	We	have	also	partnered	 with	civil	society 	in	Taiwan	
who	are	similarly	fighting	against	Formosa,	 and	are	witnessing	pow-
erful,	transnational	solidarity 	efforts	in	defense	of 	environmental 	
and	historic	justice.	 We	will	continue	to	stand	 with	RISE	St.	James	
in	arguing	that	a	community’s	right	to	 visit	ancestral	graves	 –	and	to	
breathe	clean	air	–	should	rise	above	a	corporation’s	right	 to	pollute	
and	profit.	This	deeply	personal	story 	was	reported	369	times	all 	
over	the	globe,	from	The Washington Post and	NPR to	Sierra  
magazine,	 Chemical & Engineering News,	and	 The Toronto Star.The Center for Constitutional Rights has a decades-long 
history of exposing and combating oppressive economic 
structures in the United States and around the world.  
We challenge corporate abuses and exploitative 
economic models and support movements striving 
for economic, environmental, and social justice. Your 
generous giving makes it possible for us to fight corporate 
abuses, corporate capture of government law and policy 
making, and environmental racism. 
|		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|		OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURESOPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES
COMBATING ABUSIVE CORPORATE POWER
Our clients Myrtle Felton (right) and Sharon Lavigne (left) from RISE St. James, a faith-based grassroots 
community group, protesting the proposed site of Formosa Plastics in St. James Parish,  
Louisiana in December 201914
OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES
COMBATING ABUSIVE CORPORATE POWER
OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES  |		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|	Defending the Right to Defend  
Communities and the Environment   
Since	the	protests	against	the	Dakota	 Access	Pipeline	in	2017, 	
more	than	60	bills	have	been	introduced	in	30	 states	that	heighten 	
the	risk	and	criminal	penalties	for 	people	who	protest	against	
pipelines.	Many 	of	these	seek	to	frame	righteous	protests	as	
“riots”	and	human	rights	activists	as	“terrorists.” 	In	May	2019,	we	
filed	White Hat v. Landry	on	behalf 	of	three	protesters,	as	 well	as	
landowners	and	environmental	and	climate	justice	organizations, 	
to	challenge	a	new 	Louisiana	law 	that	dramatically 	increased	
the	penalties	protestors	face	for 	engaging	in	civil	disobedience	in 	
and	around	pipelines	and	pipeline	construction	sites.	 The	law,	
which	went	into	effect	in	2018,	 was	drafted	and	pushed	by 	a	trade	
association	that	represents	the	oil	and	gas	industry,	and	has	already 	
led	to	16	felony 	charges	against	protestors.	In	 July	2020,	the	
federal	district	court	in	Louisiana	ruled	that	the	case	could	proceed 	
over	our	motion	to	dismiss.	News	outlets	from	The Louisiana  
Weekly	to	ProPublica	and The Advocate	covered	this	story.
The People Push Back  
Against Corporate Control  
of State Law-Making 
The	American	Legislative	Exchange	
Council	(ALEC)	brings	together 	state	
lawmakers,	corporate	leaders,	conservative 	
activists,	and	lobbyists	to	privately 	draft	
and	promote	model	legislation	across	
the	country	that	sustains	corporate	power 	
and	white	supremacy.	 With	a	45-year 	
legacy	of	designing	and	lobbying	for 	
laws	that	have	negatively 	impacted	the	
environment	and	harmed	 Black	and	Brown 	
people	—	including	Stand	 Your	Ground	and	
Voter	ID	laws		—	ALEC	is	a	poster 	child	for	
“corporate	capture,” 	or	the	commandeering 	
of	state	law	and	policy-making	by 	private	industry 	for	private	gain.	
After	years	of	visioning	and	building,	this	 year	we	confronted	 ALEC	
in	two	major	ways.
In	December,	 we	partnered	 with	Dream	Defenders,	Palestine	
Legal,	The	Red	Nation,	and	the	U.S.	Campaign	for 	Palestinian	
Rights	to	release	“ALEC	 Attacks:	How	Evangelicals	and	
Corporations	Captured	State	Lawmaking	to 	Safeguard	White	
Supremacy	and	Corporate	Power.” 	The	landmark	report	documents	the	origins	of 	ALEC-backed	
legislation	and	its	impact	on	communities	of 	color.	The	same	
month,	we	filed	 Puente v. Arizona State Legislature	on	behalf 	of	
organizations,	including	Black	Lives	Matter 	Phoenix	and	Mijente. 	
The	lawsuit	asserts	that	dozens	of 	Arizona	state	lawmakers	
violated	Arizona’s	Open	Meeting	Law 	by	attending	ALEC’s	closed-
door	meetings	to	develop	draft	laws	outside	the	public	 view.	
ALEC’s	decades-long	effort	to	control	state	law-making	and	
harm	Black	and	Brown	communities	is	little	known.	 We’re	
working	hard	to	change	that	by 	supporting	communities	in	
efforts	to	separate	corporate	and	state	power 	and	reclaim	
democratic	institutions	for 	the	people.	Since	the	report	 was	
issued,	our	case	has	been	mentioned	187	times	in	media	
outlets	from	the  Arizona Daily Star	to	The Guardian	and	the	
Associated Press .
Challenging Corporate Capture 
Through International Advocacy
We	are	participating	in	the	development 	
of	international	human	rights	law 	so	that	
we	can	better	restrict	corporate	influence 	
over	state	law	and	policy-making.	In 	
October,	Advocacy	Program	Manager 	Dominic	Renfrey 	joined	
with	our	allies	fighting	 corporate	capture	around	the	 world	for	
the	ongoing	international	negotiations	for 	a	forthcoming	UN 	
Treaty	on	Business	and	Human	Rights.	Each	of 	the	three	years	
we	have	attended	the	negotiations,	our 	advocacy	efforts	have	
grown	the	momentum	and	support	among	UN	member 	states	
for	a	vital	element	to	be	included	in	the	forthcoming	treaty 	that	
will	require	countries	to	make	sure	corporations	do	not	interfere 	
in	the	way	laws	and	policies	are	made.	 As	we	expand	the	base 	
of	countries	willing	to	support	this	provision	each	 year,	we	
make	it	more	likely 	that	this	new	treaty	will	be	the	first	piece	of 	
international	human	rights	law 	to	address	corporate	capture. 		
Holding Companies Accountable for Abuse
We	are	well	into	the	second	decade	of 	Al Shimari v. CACI,	
a	federal	lawsuit	brought	by 	Iraqi	victims	of	torture	against	
a	U.S.-based	government	contractor 	that	is	alleged	to	have	
directed	and	participated	in	a	conspiracy 	to	torture	at	Abu	
Ghraib	prison.	 With	a	petition	for 	review	filed	by	CACI	pending	
before	the	U.S.	Supreme	Court,	 we	have	continued	to	ensure	
that	our	clients’	voices	are	heard	as	this	important	human	rights	
and	corporate	accountability 	case	presses	on.People’s Law Firm co-
counsel Heather Hamel; 
Bertha Justice Fellow Aya 
Saed; Advocacy Program 
Manager Dominic Renfrey; 
representatives from Black 
Lives Matter Phoenix Metro, 
Puente Human Rights 
Movement, Mijente Support 
Committee, and Arizona 
Palestine Solidarity Alliance, 
at a press conference outside 
Arizona state court after 
filing Puente v. Arizona 
State Legislature. 15
15|		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS  |  ABUSIVE STATE POWERABUSIVE STATE 
POWERCHALLENGING UNJUST 
GOVERNMENT POLICIES
“I am the 40-year-old 
mother of a 7-year-
old girl ... I am  
also trapped in  
immigration detention, 
severely immuno-
compromised, and 
terrified of dying 
from COVID-19, which 
is ravaging the state 
and will inevitably 
reach my detention 
facility.”
— Tatalu Helen Dada  
in Common Dreams 
in April
Tatalu Dada and her daughter16
16 ABUSIVE STATE POWER  |		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|	Tatalu Helen Dada is the lead plaintiff in Dada v. 
Witte (WDLA), a federal lawsuit we filed on behalf of 
16 medically vulnerable people held in immigration 
detention centers in Louisiana. We filed similar suits in 
Mississippi and Alabama on behalf of numerous other 
detained people. A former nursing student from Nigeria, 
Dada had been held in ICE detention for two years when 
the pandemic hit. Suffering from severe asthma, she 
was terrified of what would happen with the inevitable 
outbreak of COVID-19 at an overcrowded facility that 
was ill-equipped to prevent the spread of the virus, let 
alone adequately care for those who contracted it.  
“I am fighting for my life,”  
Dada wrote in Common Dreams.
The Center for Constitutional Rights sought immediate 
release of Dada and others from six different detention 
centers, arguing the institutions could not provide the 
basic health care to which incarcerated people are 
constitutionally entitled. On May 22, after our vigorous 
emergency advocacy, the court ordered that Dada and 
13 others be released.
“No one deserves to die from COVID-19 because of 
government abuse and indifference,” said Dada. As of the 
summer, Dada was with family, and doing well.               ABUSIVE STATE POWER
CHALLENGING UNJUST GOVERNMENT POLICIES
Human Rights For All. Period.
The	very	foundation	of 	this	country	is	rooted	in	a	false	and	
deadly	hierarchy	of	human	life,	with	laws	and	policies	enacted	
to	protect	and	serve	 white	supremacy 	and	to	marginalize	
entire	communities.	 That	legacy	continues	as	we	see	the	state	
abuse	its	power 	to	target	immigrants,	Muslims,	and	many 	other	
groups	in	the	U.S.	and	around	the	 world.	But	together 	with	our	
partners,	we	are	building	power 	and	fighting	back.
This	year,	we’ve	had	significant	successes	defending	the	rights	
of	immigrants,	men	detained	at	Guantánamo,	people	 who	are	
incarcerated	in	the	U.S.,	and	those	 who	have	suffered	from	 war	
crimes	and	human	rights	 violations.		
Defending the Right to Move, to Return and to Belong
While	the	current	administration	dedicates	itself 	to	closing	all	
avenues	for	immigration	—	 with	daily,	devastating	impacts	on	  
asylum	seekers	and	others	—	 we	continue	to	challenge	abusive	
immigration	policies.	
This	year,	we	saw	victories	in	three	major 	lawsuits	challenging 	
practices	at	the	U.S.-Mexico	border,	 where	the	government	is 	
effectively	ending	this	country’s	decades-long	commitment	to 	
asylum	by	consistently	turning	people	away 	and	forcing	them 	
to	return	to	countries	 where	they	face	violence	and	risk	death. 	
In	Al Otro Lado v. Wolf,	the	court	affirmed	the	U.S.	has	a	legal 	
obligation	to	provide	asylum	seekers	access	to	the	asylum 	
process,	and	later 	granted	a	preliminary 	injunction	allowing	the 	
thousands	who	were	metered	before	the	so-called	“Transit	Ban” 	
(which	denied	access	to	asylum	to	those	 who	had	transited 	
through	a	third	country 	on	their	way	to	the	U.S.)	the	opportunity 	
to	apply	for	asylum.	In	East Bay Sanctuary Covenant v. Barr and	
East Bay Sanctuary Covenant v. Trump,	the	Ninth	Circuit	upheld 	
injunctions	against	two	separate	 Trump	administration	rules 	 
that	would	severely 	restrict	access	to	the	asylum	process.
“…	the	[Transit	Ban]	rule	the	government	promulgated	topples	
decades	of	settled	asylum	practices	and	affects	some	of 	the	
most	vulnerable	people	in	the	 Western	Hemisphere	—	 without	
affording	the	public	a	chance	to	 weigh	in.”	—Justice	Sotomayor,	
joined	by	Justice	Ginsburg,	in	their 	dissent	to	East Bay 
Sanctuary Covenant v. Barr .The Center for Constitutional Rights has been 
challenging abuses of power by government officials 
and institutions for more than half a century. Under this 
authoritarian, xenophobic, and racist administration, our 
work has only heightened as we continue confronting 
abuses in the areas of foreign policy, immigration, racial 
and religious profiling, and crackdowns on activism and 
dissent. We couldn’t do it without your crucial support  
of our work during this critical time. Thank you! 17
Immigrant	women	in	sanctuary 	who	have	spoken	out	  
against	U.S.	immigration	policy 	have	been	hit	 with	hundreds	of 	
thousands	of	dollars	in	fines.	 Along	with	Grassroots	Leadership,	
Free	Migration	Project,	and	 Austin	Sanctuary 	Network,	we	
have	filed	a	Freedom	of 	Information	Act	request	and	lawsuit	
to	obtain	information	about	the	policies	behind	the	fines	and	
other	penalties.	
“All immigrants in ICE detention are now living  
in an epidemiological tinder box. They must  
be released.” — Baher Azmy  |  Legal Director
The	COVID-19	pandemic	has	thrown	into	stark	relief 	the	
inhumanity	of	detention	and	incarceration.	People	in	prisons,	
jails,	and	ICE	detention	centers	are	trapped	in	overcrowded,	
unsafe,	and	unsanitary 	facilities	where	physical	distancing	and	
frequent	hand	 washing	are	impossible	—	in	some	places,	there	
isn’t	even	soap	—	and	medical	care	is	 woefully	inadequate.	It	is	
a	situation	that	could	turn	any 	detention	into	a	death	sentence.
We	filed	emergency 	lawsuits	in	Louisiana,	Mississippi,	and 	
Alabama	seeking	the	immediate	release	of 	medically	vulnerable	
people	held	in	immigration	detention	centers.	 Working	closely 	
with	local	and	national	partners,	 we	supported	#FreeThemAll 	
actions,	helping	to	make	 visible	the	racism	and	cruelty 	of	
detention	and	to	demand	that	elected	officials	decarcerate 	
facilities.	In	May,	in Dada v. Witte	(WDLA),	the	court	ordered	 the	
release	of	14	people	held	in	Louisiana	facilities	 whose	medical 	
conditions	put	them	at	heightened	risk	of 	contracting	COVID-19.
For Those Detained at Guantánamo,  
the Struggle for Justice Continues 
Challenging	the	 widespread	human	rights	 violations	and	abuses	of 	
state	power	in	the	never-ending	“War 	on	Terror,”	we	continue	to 	
represent	16	men	currently 	detained	at	Guantánamo,	as	 well	as	
many	who	have	been	released.
This	year,	a	federal	court	issued	a	favorable	ruling	in	the case of  
Mohammed al Qahtani.	 Al	Qahtani	suffered	from	severe	mental 	
illness	long	before	he	 was	captured	by 	the	U.S.	and	brought 	
to	Guantánamo	in	2002.	In	addition	to	his	schizophrenia,	the 	
systematic	torture	al	Qahtani	survived	at	Guantánamo	has 	
caused	him	to	suffer	from	Post-Traumatic	 Stress	Disorder	(PTSD).	
The	Geneva	Conventions	mandate	that	independent	medical	experts 	
|		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|		ABUSIVE STATE POWERABUSIVE STATE POWER
challenging unjust government policies
should	decide	 whether	someone	is	so	infirm	they 	are	unable	to	
participate	in	armed	conflict,	in	 which	case	there	is	no	longer 	a	
rationale	for	their	detention	and	they 	must	be	sent	home.	 We	argued	
that	the	government	should	convene	such	a	medical	commission	to 	
evaluate	al	Qahtani,	and,	in	March,	a	judge	ordered	the	government 	
to	do	so	—	a		decision	that	could	have	significant	implications	for 	
the	growing	population	of 	aging,	sick	men	at	Guantánamo.	
In	a	potentially 	path-breaking	move	in	
the	case	of	cooperating	witness	Majid	
Khan,	we	requested	that	his	approved	
sentence	be	cut	in	half 	as	a	remedy	for	
the	war	crimes	committed	against	him.	
In	June,	the	judge	issued	a	historic	ruling	
that	he	had	the	legal	authority 	to	do	this.	
The	carefully	framed	decision	noted	the	
“shocking	mistreatment” 	Khan	allegedly 	suffered,	indicating	that	
if	Khan’s	allegations	of 	abuse	are	accepted	as	true,	they 	rise	to	
the	level	of	torture	and	violate	norms	of 	international	law.		
In	May	2020,	the	Inter-American	
Commission	on	Human	Rights	published	
a	landmark	report	on	the	human	rights	
violations	committed	against	our 	client	
Djamel	Ameziane,	who	spent	almost	12	
years	imprisoned	at	Guantánamo	 without	
charge	or	trial	before	being	repatriated	to	
Algeria.	The	IACHR	report	issued	a	series	
of	recommendations,	including	that	the	United	States	should	
provide	material	and	moral	reparations	for 	the	human	rights	
violations	Ameziane	suffered.	It	is	the	first	decision	ever 	made	
by	a	major	regional	human	rights	body 	regarding	the	 violations	
committed	at	Guantánamo.
Our	work	on	Guantánamo	over 	the	past	year,	like	always,	has	
also	entailed	crisis	 work.	This	year	saw	a	tragic	decline	in	the	
mental	and	physical	health	of 	our	client	Sharqawi	 Al	Hajj,	a	
45-year-old	man	from	 Yemen	who	has	been	held	without	charge 	
at	Guantánamo	since	2004,	after	two	years	in	CIA	sites,	and	faces	
endless	continuing	detention.	 We	fought	in	court	for 	emergency	
outside	medical	care;	 while	care	was	shamefully 	denied,	the	
effort	succeeded	in	generating	critical	outside	scrutiny 	of	
Guantánamo’s	response.	 Together	with	the	help	of 	steadfast	allies 	
at	the	Center	for	Victims	of	Torture	and	Physicians	for 	Human	
Rights,	we	will	continue	to	fight	for 	Al	Hajj’s	life	and	health.Djamel AmezianeMajid Khan18
Victories for Immigrants
The	Trump	administration	has	been	relentless	in	its	attack	on	
immigrants	of	color,	and	we	are	supporting	immigrants’ 	rights	
organizations	in	fighting	back.	 With	our	co-counsel	the	Legal	
Aid	Society	and	Paul,	Weiss,	Rifkind,	 Wharton	&	Garrison	
LLP,	we	have	led	the	fight	against	the	 Trump	administration’s	
public	charge	rules,	 which	seek	to	overhaul	the	process	for 	
granting	green	cards	by 	penalizing	immigrants	for 	low	incomes	
and	medical	conditions.	Having	 won	an	injunction	against	
the	Department	of 	Homeland	Security’s	public	charge	rules	
in	Make the Road New York v. Cuccinelli 	in	October,	we	filed	
the	companion	suit	 Make the Road New York v. Pompeo	in	
December,	seeking	to	block	the	Department	of 	State’s	rules	as	
well	as	a	presidential	proclamation	barring	entry 	to	immigrants	
without	private	health	insurance.	 After	the	Supreme	Court,	
in	a	highly	unusual	move,	stayed	our 	injunction	against	DHS	
in	January,	we	kept	pushing.	 We	collaborated	 with	the	New	
York	Attorney	General’s	office	in	an	attempt	to	seek	new 	
relief	to	address	the	COVID-19	crisis,	and	 with	the	National	
Immigration	Law 	Center	we	fought	hard	for 	a	nationwide	
injunction	against	the	Department	of 	State	rules,	which	the	
district	court	enjoined	in	 July.	The	Second	Circuit	affirmed	the	
district	court’s	original	preliminary 	injunction,	adopting	our 	
team’s	argument	that	 Trump’s	public	charge	rules	dramatically 	
broke	with	historical	precedent	and	Congressional	intent.	 While	
DHS	Rule	has	gone	into	effect	as	the	government	appeals,	our 	
brave	clients	–	both	community 	organizations	and	individuals	
–	continue	to	do	incredible	advocacy 	to	fight	the	targeting	of 	
low-income	immigrant	communities.
18 ABUSIVE STATE POWER  |		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|	18ABUSIVE STATE POWER
CHALLENGING UNJUST GOVERNMENT POLICIES
Protecting Dissent and 
Human Rights Defense  
In	a	campaign	reminiscent	of 	federal	efforts 	
to	weaken	progressive	organizations	
in	the	1960s	and	1970s,	Immigration	
and	Customs	Enforcement	has	targeted	
members	of	Migrant	Justice,	a	Vermont-
based	activist	group,	 with	surveillance,	
harassment,	arrests,	and	detention	—	
with	help	from	the	 Vermont	DMV,	 which	
provided	personal	information	about	the	targeted	activists.	In	
January,	Migrant	 Justice	and	the	 Vermont	DMV 	announced	a	
settlement	that	 will	restrict	communication	and	information-
sharing	between	the	DMV 	and	federal	immigration	agencies.	  
This	victory	was	covered	by 	local	and	hyperlocal	outlets,	  
including	 The Vermont Digger,	WAMC Radio ,	and	 Seven Days.
Challenging  
Islamophobic State Policy 
Tanzin v. Tanvir
On	October	6,	2020,	the	Supreme 	 
Court	heard	arguments	in	our 	case	against	
Muslim	profiling,	Tanzin v. Tanvir. The 
FBI	placed	our 	clients	on	the	No-Fly 	List	as	a	way	to	coerce	
them	into	becoming	informants	and	spying	on	their 	Muslim	
communities,	which	they	refused	to	do.	 We	argued	that	our 	
clients	were	entitled	to	damages	for 	the	harms	they 	suffered	
under	the	Religious	Freedom	Restoration	 Act	(RFRA),	 
a	congressional	statute	protecting	minority 	religions.
Dobashi v. Trump
The	U.S.	government	unlawfully, 	
retroactively	applied	the	so-called	Muslim 	
Ban	to	the	families	of 	people	who	already	
had	approved	 visas	when	the	ban	 went	
into	effect.	We	filed	Dobashi v. Trump	in 	
September	2019	on	behalf 	of	13	Yemeni-
Americans,	and	today,	all	but	one	of 	those	
families	have	been	reunited	as	a	result	of 	our	advocacy.	The	
families	at	the	center 	of	this	case	were	featured	in	The American  
Prospect,	SF Gate,	The Real News Network,	and	The Nation.
Members of Migrant Justice 
marched to the Burlington, 
VT DMV to file a lawsuit 
against ICE, DHS, and 
the DMW for targeting 
immigrant leaders in 
retaliation for activism
Muhammad Tanvir
Our Dobashi client  
Tufaic Mohamed Nagi  
and his son19
ABUSIVE STATE POWER
challenging unjust government policies
|		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|		ABUSIVE STATE POWERHuman Rights for Incarcerated People
We	are	witnessing	an	extraordinary 	moment	in	the	movement	
to	fundamentally 	reimagine	public	safety 	beyond	the	racist	
U.S.	system	of 	policing	and	prisons.	 As	grassroots	partners	
and	communities	across	the	United	States	 work	to	advance	a	
vision	of	abolition,	we	are	proud	and	determined	to	bring	the	
full	value	of	our	longtime	and	 wide-ranging	work	challenging	
detention	and	discriminatory 	policing,	as	well	as	our	political	
analysis	about	the	carceral	state,	in	support	of 	this	necessary 	
movement	towards	justice.	
Ashker v. Governor of CA 
Our	landmark	2015	settlement	in	
Ashker v. Governor of CA	succeeded	
in	its	main	goal	of 	releasing	nearly 	
every	prisoner	who	had	been	held	
in	long-term	solitary 	confinement	
in	California.	Yet	the	California	
Department	of 	Corrections	and	
Rehabilitation	continues	to	 violate	
the	human	rights	of 	people	in	prison.	
After	proving	continuing,	systemic	due	process	 violations	
related	to	the	settlement,	 we	won	the	right	to	a	second	 year-
long	monitoring	period	and	defended	that	 victory	in	the	Ninth	
Circuit.	We	are	now	working	with	our	incarcerated	partners	to	
move	for	a	third	monitoring	period	to	ensure	that	California	
stops	fabricating	confidential	information	to	send	people	back	
to	the	torture	of 	solitary.	Our	clients’	stories	were	amplified	in	
The Progressive,	Solitary Watch,	and	 San Francisco Bay View. Aref v. Barr 
The	long-running	case	 Aref v. Barr	challenged	a	Bureau	of 	
Prisons	(BOP)	policy 	that	severely	isolated	certain	prisoners.	
In	spring	2019	—	more	than	a	decade	after 	the	policy	was	
created	—	the	BOP 	argued	the	case	should	be	dismissed	as	
moot	because	our 	clients	had	been	released	from	prison,	so	
a	court	order	changing	BOP 	policies	could	no	longer 	help	
them.	In	opposition,	 we	argued	that	the	policy 	had	led	to	the	
creation	of	false	prison	records	for 	our	clients	and	that	 we	
are	seeking	expungement	of 	these	records	because	of 	their	
potential	impact	on	our 	clients’	future.	In	November,	the	
court	ruled	in	favor 	of	one	of	our	clients,	setting	an	important	
precedent.	After	nearly	ten	years	of	litigation,	we	will	finally	get	
a	decision	from	the	district	court	on	our 	claim	that	the	BOP’s	
fundamentally 	flawed	procedures	 violated	due	process.	
U.S. v. Ahmed Abu Ali
International	investigations	following	the	murder 	of	Jamal	
Khashoggi	presented	an	opportunity 	for	a	new	post-conviction	
habeas	challenge	to	the	life	 without	parole	sentence	of 	Ahmed	
Abu	Ali,	who	was	convicted	in	2005	of 	terrorism	charges	
that	relied	on	a	“confession” 	obtained	under 	torture	by	the	
Saudi	secret	police,	or 	Mabahith.	Abu	Ali	was	detained	and	
interrogated	by 	the	Mabahith	for 	two	years	prior	to	his	U.S.	
prosecution.	New 	evidence	showed	that	the	same	police	
agency	that	tortured	 Abu	Ali,	then	denied	it	in	U.S.	court,	
was	involved	in	the	murder 	of	Khashoggi	and	its	international	
cover-up.	In	October,	 we	filed	a	motion	to	 vacate	Abu	Ali’s	
sentence	based	on	the	new 	evidence.	While	it	was	ultimately 	
denied,	it	was	part	of	a	long	struggle	that	 will	continue	until	the	
unjust	life	sentence	is	overturned.Dolores Canales, community 
outreach director for The 
Bail Project, visits Center for 
Constitutional Rights Plaintiff  
Todd Ashker in prisonActivists in Philadelphia march to support campaigns to abolish the police20
In	June	2020,	the	D.C.	Circuit	Court	of 	Appeals	affirmed	
dismissal	of	the	federal	case,	finding	that	plaintiffs	had	not	
alleged	sufficient	injuries	to	be	in	federal	court.	Plaintiffs	also	
sued	in	D.C.	Superior 	Court,	where	we	filed	an	anti-SLAPP 	
motion,	which	is	currently 	on	appeal	in	the	D.C.	Court	of 	Appeals.			
Awad v. Fordham University
We	continue	to	 work	with	Palestine	Legal	to	challenge	efforts	
to	suppress	speech	in	support	of 	Palestinian	rights.	In	Awad v. 
Fordham University ,	we	are	advocating	on	behalf 	of	Fordham	
students’	right	to	have	a	Students	for 	Justice	in	Palestine	(SJP)	  
club	at	the	university.	
We	won	the	case	in	 August	2019,	 when	the	court	annulled	
Fordham’s	decision	to	deny 	SJP	club	status	and	ordered	
Fordham	to	recognize	SJP.	Fordham	has	appealed,	despite	
the	fact	that	Fordham	students	have	had	a	successful	SJP 	
club	since	the	court’s	decision.	National	education	and	news	
magazines	 Inside Higher Ed	and	 Newsweek	and	local	outlet	  
The New York Post 	helped	amplify 	this	victory.
Amicus Briefs in Anti-BDS Legislation Challenges
Along	with	Palestine	Legal,	 we	filed	amicus	briefs	in	cases	
challenging	the	2016	 Arizona,	2017	 Texas,	and	2017	 Arkansas	
anti-BDS	laws	that	 require	government	contractors	to	certify 	that	
they	will	not	boycott	Israel.	In	 January,	the	Ninth	Circuit	Court	of 	
Appeals	found Jordahl v. Brnovich moot	because	 Arizona	changed 	
the	law	in	response	to	the	lawsuit.	In	 April,	the	Fifth	Circuit	
Court	of	Appeals	found	the	same	for 	the	Texas	law	in	Amawi 
v. Paxton / Pluecker v. Board of Regents of the University of Houston 
System. Arkansas Times v. Waldrip challenging	the	 Arkansas	law	is	
currently	on	appeal	in	the	Eighth	Circuit	Court	of 	Appeals.		
ABUSIVE STATE POWER  |		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|	The Freedom to Support Palestinian Rights
We	continue	to	support	activists	and	grassroots	organizations	
facing	legal	attacks	for 	their	advocacy	on	behalf	of	Palestinian	
rights,	including	attempts	to	restrict	Boycott,	Divestment,	and	
Sanctions	(BDS)	campaigns.	
Jewish National Fund v.  
U.S. Campaign for Palestinian Rights
The	Jewish	National	Fund	and	individuals	 who	live	in	Israel	near 	
Gaza	have	filed	an	outlandish	lawsuit	against	the	U.S.	Campaign 	
for	Palestinian	Rights	(USCPR),	 which	casts	collective	activism,	
expression	of	solidarity,	and	human	rights	campaigning	as	
unlawful.	The	suit	abuses	the	U.S.	material	support	statute	and	
is	intended	to	smear 	Palestinian	rights	advocacy 	and	to	isolate	
Palestinian	organizations	by 	rendering	them	radioactive.	 We,	
along	with	cooperating	attorneys	 Judith	Chomsky 	and	Beth	
Stephens,	and	co-counsel	Marks,	O’Neill,	O’Brien,	Doherty 	&	Kelly,	
P.C.	have	filed	a	motion	on	behalf 	of	USCPR	to	dismiss	the	case. 	
Davis v. Cox
In	February,	a	 Washington	appeals	court	upheld	a	ruling	
that	dismissed	a	lawsuit	against	former 	board	members	of 	
the	Olympia	Food	Co-op	for 	their	2010	decision	to	boycott	
Israeli	goods.	The	case	was	dismissed	in	2012	after 	we	and	
co-counsel	argued	it	 was	a	Strategic	Lawsuit	 Against	Public	
Participation	(SLAPP),	but	 was	reinstated	after 	Washington’s	
anti-SLAPP	statute	was	struck	down.	 This	year’s	ruling	
dismissed	the	case	a	second,	and	final,	time,	deferring	to	
the	business	judgment	of 	the	board	members,	 who	had	the	
authority	to	adopt	the	boycott.		
Bronner v. Duggan 
We	are	representing	  
Dr.	Steven	Salaita	in	the	ongoing	
case	 Bronner v. Duggan,	filed	by 	four	
American	Studies	 Association	(ASA)	
members	against	the	 ASA	and	ten	
individuals	after 	the	ASA	passed	
a	2013	resolution	to	endorse	and	
honor	the	call	of	Palestinian	civil	society 	for	a	boycott	of	 
Israeli	academic	institutions.	ABUSIVE STATE POWER
CHALLENGING UNJUST GOVERNMENT POLICIES
Steven SalaitaLegal team and clients after court argument in Awad v. Fordham21
ABUSIVE STATE POWER
challenging unjust government policies
|		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|		ABUSIVE STATE POWERAccountability for  
International Crimes in Palestine
Accountability 	for	International	Crimes	in	Palestine	“It	is	time	
for	justice.	It	is	time	for 	an	investigation,” 	read	an	April	2020	
open	letter	signed	by	the	Center	for	Constitutional	Rights	  
and	more	than	180	organizations	expressing	support	for 	 
an	International	Criminal	Court	(ICC)	investigation	into	 war	 
crimes	and	crimes	against	humanity 	committed	on	the	  
territory	of	Palestine.	
In	December,	the	International	Criminal	Court	prosecutor 	
concluded	there	is	a	reasonable	basis	to	proceed	 with	an	
investigation	into	 war	crimes	and	crimes	against	humanity 	
committed	on	the	territory 	of	Palestine.	The	Pre-Trial	Chamber 	
invited	victims	to	submit	observations,	and,	in	March,	Center 	
for	Constitutional	Rights	Senior 	Staff	Attorney	Katherine	
Gallagher	made	a	submission	on	behalf 	of	20	Palestinian	
victims	of	persecution	from	all	parts	of 	Palestine	and	the	
diaspora	urging	the	ICC	to	authorize	an	investigation	of 	 
high-ranking	Israeli	military 	and	civilian	 officials	without	delay.
Accountability for  
U.S. Torture in  
Afghanistan and Beyond
After	18	years	of	the	Center	for	
Constitutional	Rights	seeking	justice	
and	accountability 	for	victims	of	the	
post-9/11	global	torture	program	in	
U.S.	courts,	foreign	courts,	and	before	
international	bodies,	former 	senior	U.S.	
officials	may	face	criminal	liability 	for	
their	involvement	in	unlawful	detention,	
rendition,	and	torture.	Following	an	
intervention	and	argument	by 	the	Center	
for	Constitutional	Rights	and	other 	victims	representatives,	the	
Appeals	Chamber 	of	the	ICC	authorized	an	investigation	into	
alleged	crimes	against	humanity 	and	war	crimes	by	U.S.	armed	
forces	and	members	of 	the	CIA	in	Afghanistan	and	on	the	
territory	of	other	States	Parties	to	the	Rome	Statute	implicated	
in	the	U.S.	torture	program.	 The New York Times,	The Guardian 
and	Just Security	covered	these	developments	and	our 	role.	In	retaliation,	the	 Trump	administration	issued	an	Executive	
Order	that	could	impose	sanctions	on	the	ICC	or 	those	who	
assist	the	investigation.	 The	Center	for	Constitutional	Rights	is	
closely	monitoring	developments	to	ensure	the	investigation	
proceeds	without	improper 	interference.
Supporting Art, Envisioning a Better Future
Knowing	that	art	and	cultural	organizing	have	the	power 	to	
effect	change,	we	continue	to	create	space	for	artists	to	inspire,	
shift	narratives,	and	help	us	all	envision	a	 world	of	justice	and	
liberation.	Many 	of	the	men	we	have	represented	created	
beautiful	artwork	 while	detained	at	Guantánamo,	proving	that	
the	human	spirit	and	creativity 	can	thrive	in	even	the	most	
harrowing	circumstances.
Guantánamo 
[Un]
Censored
Guantánamo 
[Un]Censored: 
Art from Inside 
the Prison, which	
opened	at	the	
CUNY	School	of	
Law	on	February	
19,	coincided	
with	the	18th	anniversary 	of	the	opening	of 	the	Guantánamo	
Bay	prison.	The	exhibition,	presented	by 	the	Center	for	
Constitutional	Rights,	the	Sorensen	Center 	for	International	
Peace	and	Justice,	and	the	Immigrant	&	Non-Citizen	Rights	
Clinic	at	CUNY 	Law	School,	featured	art	by 	men	imprisoned	
without	charge	or 	fair	trial	at	the	infamous	detention	center,	
including	our	client	Djamel	 Ameziane	whose	art	is	proudly 	
pictured	above.
The Pencil Is a Key 
Djamel	Ameziane,	who	was	unjustly	detained	for	more	than	a	
decade	at	Guantánamo	and	 whom	we	have	been	representing	
since	2006,	was	among	the	artists	featured	in	The Pencil Is a Key: 
Drawings by Incarcerated Artists,	 which	was	on	view	at	the	Drawing 	
Center	in	NYC	from	October 	11,	2019	to	January	5,	2020.Senior Staff Attorney 
Katherine Gallagher 
represented victims of the 
U.S. torture program arguing 
before the Appeals Chamber 
of the International Criminal 
Court (ICC) to reverse a 
decision that blocked the ICC 
Prosecutor from investigating 
the grave crimes committed 
under the programScan of Ameziane’s art22
The Center for Constitutional 
Rights Communications team has 
had an incredible year, spreading 
our unapologetic perspective to 
millions of readers and viewers 
on traditional and social media, 
and expanding our use of new 
media, such as videos and graphics, 
to reach new audiences. With 
reporters focusing much of the last 
fiscal year on the health pandemic, 
the Communications Department 
had to be more strategic than ever 
to garner attention from reporters 
whose work shifted to cover the 
coronavirus. There were times 
when it was not appropriate  
to insert ourselves into the  
news cycle, but as our Legal  
and Advocacy work transitioned 
to address how marginalized 
communities were impacted  
by COVID-19, so did our 
communications tactics.
 
Your continued support 
enables the Center for 
Constitutional Rights 
to keep amplifying our 
wonderfully radical 
perspective through  
diverse media channels, 
shift public opinion on  
our critical issues, and 
expand our audiences.IN 
THE 
NEWSPress releases and statements on breaking news 
that get to reporters’ inboxes first, which helped 
the team secure 4,748 media hits.MEDIA 
HITS
Our monthly podcast, “The Activist Files,” which 
features the stories of people on the front lines fighting 
for justice, including activists, lawyers, and artists, 
averages 600 downloads a month. The editorial team 
also produced its first live episode in February and its 
first cross-promoted episode with PolicyLink’s podcast 
“Radical Imagination” in July.
Staying connected with reporters, producers,  
and bookers to keep them informed on our  
range of issues through relationship building  
and media briefings.
Op-eds from our clients and the legal and 
advocacy teams offering cutting-edge thought 
leadership on the pages of major newspapers 
and magazines from The New York Times to the 
Washington Post , and  Teen Vogue.
Frequent appearances on MSNBC, Al Jazeera, 
Vice News, CNN, Democracy Now! and more, 
bringing our distinctive analysis to TV audiences.
Facebook Live streams to bring our thousands of 
supporters into the conversation during and after 
hearings, press conferences, and actions.
Growing engagement on Twitter, Facebook, 
LinkedIn, and our Instagram accounts.
Frontlines of Justice, our weekly email newsletter 
that brings you the Center for Constitutional 
Rights’ latest every Monday.
The Daily Outrage, the Center for Constitutional 
Rights’ blog, which among other topics features  
a four-part series on the movement response  
to COVID-19.
Emails on breaking news, upcoming events, and more.4,748
600
DOWNLOADS A MONTH
4-PART  
BLOG SERIESSTAYING CONNECTED
OP-EDS
APPEARANCES
FACEBOOK LIVE
ENGAGEMENT
EMAIL NEWSLETTER
MORE EMAIL
22 IN THE NEWS  |  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS  | 23
23 |  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS  |  BERTHA JUSTICE FELLOWSHIP PR OGRAMBuilding 
the Next 
Generation  
of Movement 
Lawyers
Bertha Justice Fellowship Program
 
“Bertha Justice Fellows 
experience lawyering that is 
bigger than winning (or losing)  
in the courtroom. Together,  
we are working to force the law 
to serve the needs of those 
who are fighting for justice.”
— Rachel Meeropol 
Senior Staff Attorney and Associate  
Director of Legal Training and Education  
The Bertha Justice Fellowship Program is a two-year 
program for emerging lawyers interested in gaining both 
practical experience working on Center for Constitutional 
Rights cases and a theoretical understanding of how legal 
advocacy can create social change. Bertha Justice Fellows 
are sponsored by the Bertha Foundation, which hosts 
emerging lawyers at legal organizations across the world.
 
We are excited to introduce you to the next class  
of Fellows, all of whom are passionately dedicated to 
using legal advocacy for social change. They just  
joined us this fall!Luna Martinez
Luna	Martinez	studied	at	Berkeley 	Law,	 
where	she	was	active	with	the	Journal of 
African-American Law,	 Womxn	of	Color	
Collective,	Students	for 	Justice	in	Palestine, 	
and	the	National	Lawyers	Guild.	She	has 	
worked	with	Center	for	Constitutional	Rights 	
partners	including	Pal	Legal	and	Earthjustice.	Luna	grew 	up	in	Mexico	
City	and,	prior	to	college,	she	founded	a	nonprofit,	No	Puedo	Callar,	that 	
organized	in	indigenous	Zapatista	communities	around	issues	including 	
education,	transportation,	and	economic	support.	Luna	is	passionate 	
about	environmental	justice	and	 working	with	marginalized	communities. 	
Elsa Mota
Elsa	Mota	studied	at	 Yale	Law	School,	where	
she	has	spent	two	 years	advocating	for 	
juveniles	facing	carceral	consequences	as	
part	of	the	Educational	Opportunity 	and	
Juvenile	Justice	clinic.	She	has	interned	at	the	
International	Refugee	 Assistance	Project,	the	
Asylum	Seeker 	Advocacy	Project,	Bronx	Defenders,	and	the	NAACP 	
Legal	Defense	and	Educational	Fund.	She	has	also	 worked	at	the	
Community	Justice	Project	in	Miami.	Elsa	is	excited	about	sinking	her 	
teeth	into	our	work	for	racial	justice,	including	efforts	to	decriminalize	
communities	and	dismantle	the	school-to-prison	pipeline.
Samah Sisay
Samah	Sisay	is	a	refugee	from	the	civil	 war	
in	Liberia	and	a	2018	graduate	of 	NYU	
Law	School,	where	she	was	involved	in	the	
Immigrant	Rights	Clinic	and	international	
human	rights	law.	 As	a	fellow	with	the	
African	Services	Committee	in	New 	York,	
she	focused	on	providing	legal	representation	on	immigration	
matters	to	low-income	 African	and	Caribbean	 women	impacted	by 	
sexual	and	gender-based	 violence.	Samah	has	interned	at	the	Sylvia	
Rivera	Law	Project	and	was	previously 	an	intern	at	the	Center 	for	
Constitutional	Rights.	She	has	also	 volunteered	at	Survived	&	Punished,	
an	abolitionist	organization	 working	to	initiate	mass	defense	projects	
to	free	criminalized	survivors	of 	violence.	Samah	aims	to	 work	at	the	
intersection	of 	gender	justice,	criminalization,	and	migrant	rights,	in	the	
United	States	and	in	 Africa,	through	an	international	human	rights	lens.	
Rafaela Uribe
Rafaela	Uribe	is	a	2019	graduate	of 	Temple	
Law	School	and	was	a	2018	Ella	Baker 	Intern	
at	the	Center	for	Constitutional	Rights.	She	
has	worked	at	the	Defender 	Association	of 	
Philadelphia	as	a	child	advocate	attorney,	
and	at	the	Education	Law 	Center.	Before	law 	
school,	Rafaela	spent	three	 years	as	an	advocate	at	Bronx	Defenders.	
After	her	fellowship	at	the	Center 	for	Constitutional	Rights,	she	plans	
to	return	to	the	Bronx	to	help	 women	and	girls.24
“My experience at the Center for 
Constitutional Rights … showed 
me how the rubber meets the 
road when it comes to law and 
social justice.” 
Drew Heckman 
Drew	Heckman	has	just	completed	his	studies	at	Harvard	Law 	School	
and	the	joint	Master 	in	Public	Policy 	program	at	the	Harvard	Kennedy 	
School	of	Government.	Prior 	to	law	school,	Heckman	spent	 years	
fighting	for	LGBTQIA+	employment	protections	in	Nebraska.	 At	
Harvard,	he	volunteered	with	the	Harvard	Immigration	Project	and	the	
Harvard	Immigration	and	Refugee	Clinic,	and	 worked	on	the	 Harvard 
Journal on Racial and Ethnic Justice.	Heckman	previously 	interned	at	the	
Mexican	American	Legal	Defense	and	Educational	Fund.	
As	an	Ella	Baker 	intern,	Heckman	 worked	on	 Black Love Resists in 
the Rust v. City of Buffalo ,	which	challenges	discriminatory 	policing;	
LGBTQIA+	case	development;	and	 Energy Transfer v. Greenpeace,  
Earth First!,	where	we	are	defending	Earth	First!	and	Krystal	 Two	Bulls	
in	a	SLAPP	(strategic	lawsuit	against	public	participation)	suit	brought	
by	Dakota	Access	Pipeline	to	harass	environmental	activists.
“I	also	learned	 what	strong	leadership	and	good	teamwork	look	like,	
and	how	much	they	contribute	to	the	culture	of 	an	organization	and	its	
work,”	he	said.		
Heckman	continues	to	fight	for 	justice	and	pursue	public	interest	
law.	During	the	uprisings	in	the	 wake	of	the	murders	of 	George	Floyd	
and	Breonna	Taylor,	he	served	as	a	legal	observer 	with	the	National	
Lawyers	Guild.	In	fall	2020,	he	 will	be	a	fellow 	at	the	  
National	Immigrant	 Justice	Center.
 “CCR made it possible for  
me to understand myself  
as an emerging attorney  
and an activist.” 
Emahunn Raheem Ali Campbell
Emahunn	Raheem	 Ali	Campbell,	who	is	studying	law 	at	Rutgers	
University,	has	been	involved	 with	social	movements	for 	more	than	a	
decade.	In	college,	he	served	as	founder/co-chair 	of	the	Black	Student	
Union	and	national	anti-racism	coordinator 	of	Young	Democratic	
Socialists.	As	a	doctoral	student	—	Emahunn	holds	a	PhD	in	 Afro-
American	Studies	from	the	University 	of	Massachusetts,	 Amherst	—	  
he	established	the	 Western	Massachusetts	chapter 	of	Students	Against	
Mass	Incarceration	and	 Justice	for	Charles,	a	successful	campaign	to	
free	a	young	Black	man	 who	was	serving	life	in	prison	for 	a	murder	he	
did	not	commit.
At	the	Center	for	Constitutional	Rights,	Emahunn	 worked	on	 Ashker 
v. Governor of California ,	a	class	action	suit	challenging	prolonged	
solitary	confinement	at	Pelican	Bay 	State	Prison,	and	supported	our 	
ongoing	efforts	to	fight	the	alt-right	and	to	challenge	environmental	
racism	in	Louisiana’s	Cancer 	Alley.
Since	his	Center 	for	Constitutional	Rights	internship,	Emahunn	has	
worked	with	people	incarcerated	in	New 	Jersey	and	with	the	Newark	
Water	Coalition,	and	interned	at	the	NAACP 	Legal	Defense	and	
Educational	Fund.
“My	time	at	what	I	sincerely 	believe	to	be	the	most	innovative	civil 	
and	human	rights	legal	organization	in	the	country 	has	only	deepened	
my	passion	to	use	my 	legal	career	to	work	alongside	marginalized 	
communities	and	grassroots	movements.	 The	Center	for	Constitutional 	
Rights	has	both	affirmed	and	changed	my 	view	on	how	the	law	works	
best	when	it	helps	build	movements	on	the	ground,” 	he	said.			
24 ELLA BAKER INTERNSHIP PROGRAM  |		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|	Building the Next Generation  
of Movement Lawyers
Ella Baker Internship Program
 
The Center for Constitutional Rights created the Ella Baker 
Summer Internship Program in 1987 to honor the legacy of  
Ella Baker, a hero of the civil rights movement, and train 
the next generation of social justice lawyers. Through our 
program, interns gain practical litigation experience and 
sharpen their theoretical understanding of the relationship between social change, organizing, and lawyering. Ella Baker 
Interns also become connected to a global community of 
social justice law students and lawyers through our Ella Baker 
Alumni Network.
 
We are proud to introduce you to two 2019 Ella Baker 
Interns who are working with passionate commitment at the 
intersections of law and grassroots movements for justice.   Thank you
25
25|		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|		DONOR SPOTLIGHT“For years, perhaps beginning 
with the Center for Constitutional 
Rights’ important challenges to 
the opening of Guantánamo  
Bay, and the stop-and-frisk 
campaign, I have felt strongly 
that the organization never  
shies away from taking on 
issues that many of the larger 
organizations try to avoid.” Barbra 
Apfelbaum DONOR SPOTLIGHT
A	retired	teacher 	of	ESL	to	adult	immigrants	and	refugees,	
Apfelbaum	holds	a	PhD	in	Italian	and	spent	many 	years	as	a	
full-time	activist	in	the	feminist	and	peace	movements.	She	cut	
her	activist	teeth	 with	the	New	American	Movement,	a	feminist	
and	socialist	organization	of 	the	1970s,	and	 was	active	in	the	
Central	America	solidarity 	movement	in	the	1980s.			
Today,	she	feels	“more	than	ever 	the	importance	of 	supporting	
all	the	brave	and	inspiring	activism	happening	in	the	U.S.,	
grateful	that	I	can	offer 	some	financial	support,	and	especially 	
grateful	that	the	Center 	for	Constitutional	Rights	is	there	as	my 	
legacy	organization.” 	
As	a	member	of	the	 Thelma Newman Planned Giving Society,	
Apfelbaum	has	included	the	Center 	for	Constitutional	Rights	in	
her	estate	plan.	“Once	I	made	the	decision	to	do	that,	it	really 	
gave	me	a	sense	of 	having	taken	care	of 	something	that	is	
important	to	me,” 	she	said.	
She	also	supports	our 	work	on	a	monthly 	basis	as	a	Justice Sustainer. 
“Back	in	April,	when	I	started	obsessively 	following	the	news	
about	the	coronavirus	pandemic,	the	Center 	for	Constitutional	
Rights	sent	out	a	statement	that	 was	for	me	a	ray	of	light	in	
the	darkness.	It	just	made	me	feel	a	bit	more	hopeful,	 which	is	
what	the	very	existence	of	the	Center	for	Constitutional	Rights,	
with	its	tireless	and	brave	 work,	always	makes	me	feel.	 And	
this	has	continued	to	be	the	case	because	of 	its	commitment	
to	defending	Movement	for 	Black	Lives	protestors,	to	
fighting	police	abuse,	to	defending	the	most	 vulnerable	and	
marginalized	groups	in	this	period.	 War,	state	violence,	race,	
gender	...	the	Center	for	Constitutional	Rights	is	always	at	the	
forefront	of	the	good	fight.” 	Thank you
26
26 DONOR SPOTLIGHT  |		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|	Gretchen	Sisson	has	been	engaged	in	advocacy 	and	
philanthropy	for	years,	with	a	focus	on	reproductive	health	and	
reproductive	justice.	But	 when	Trump	became	president-elect	
in	2016,	she	and	her 	husband	knew 	they	wanted	to	commit	to	
political	giving	in	a	more	strategic	and	robust	 way.	
They	made	a	list	of	priorities,	thinking	about	 which	people	and 	
institutions	would	be	most	at	risk	in	a	 Trump	administration, 	
and	reached	out	to	friends	and	colleagues	for 	suggestions.	They	
wanted	to	give	to	organizations	that	 would	protect	rights	and 	
justice	and	vulnerable	communities	at	risk	—	and	that’s	 when	
someone	mentioned	the	Center 	for	Constitutional	Rights. 		
Gretchen	has	been	particularly 	inspired	by	the	deepening	of 	
our	work	in	the	U.S.	South.	 As	a	sociologist	 who	focuses	on	
issues	around	reproductive	decision-making,	she	is	concerned	
about	threats	to	abortion	rights	and	 what	reproductive	rights	
might	look	like	in	the	coming	 years,	especially 	in	vulnerable	
states	in	the	South.			
Gretchen	serves	on	the	boards	of 	Emerge	America	and	WDN	
Action	(a	sister 	organization	of 	the	Women	Donors	Network),	
and	on	the	steering	committee	for 	Electing	Women	Bay	Area.	
She	lives	in	San	Francisco	 with	her	husband	and	three	children,	
and	is	actively 	nurturing	what	she	hopes	 will	be	a	lifelong	spirit	
of	giving	in	her	family’s	next	generation.	
“I	want	my	kids	to	have	the	sense	that	giving	back	is	part	of 	
their	lives,”	she	said.	“They 	should	always	be	thinking	about	
how	to	support	the	people	in	our 	community	and	create	the	
world	they	want	to	see.”	Gretchen 
Sisson
“One thing I value about the 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
is they don’t view issues as 
either/or – they are pursuing 
different forms of justice 
simultaneously in a way  
that’s really important.” 
DONOR SPOTLIGHT27
27|		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|		TRIBUTES IN HONOR OFKatherine Acey
Julia Alvarez
Baher A. Azmy
Babette Barton
David Bess
Brian Biglin
Robert A. Bloom
Fraser A. Bonnell
Ralph Capobianco
Gary Caughey
Michael Chertkov
Judith Clark
Sallee Coss
Leonard Costello
Walter Cronkite
Elijah Cummings
Phil Dakin
Rachel Davidson
Dave Dunlop
Marjorie Fine
Katherine Franke
David Freedman
Paul Friedlander
Gail Friedman
Alison G
Renee Gardner
Mary J. Geissman
Steve Giordano
Lawrence Goldberg
Peggy Freedson
Madeline Gordon
Brandon Greene
Molly Schultz Hafid
Hiba Hafiz
Emily B. Harting
Pat Hunt
Aliya H. Hussain
Theda Jackson-Mau
Donita Judge
Katharine Kagel
Greg Kahn
John King
Arthur KinoyMaria LaHood
Austin H. LaPore
Samuel Lawrence Foundation
Lorelei Lee
Jeffrey Lee
Erika Levy
Michael N. Litrownik
Jules Lobel
Rachel E. Lopez
Sarah Lyons
Daphene R. McFerren
Mark Mogavero
Phil Nadel
Ajani Nazario
Jen Nessel
Ernest Parker
Karlton Pfann
Urooj Rahman
Bernice Johnson Reagan
John S. Richardson
Elsie Richardson
Eric Rieder
Lynn Rosen
Amanda Schor
Pastor Isaac Scott
Ann Shirazi
Charles E. Sikorovsky
Andrew E. Sledd
Veeta T. Sledd
John Sullivan
Stephen Swanson
John S. Tracy
Barbara Troxell
Charles Varner
Sara Vurek
Vince Warren
Henriette Warren
Peter Weiss
Anne White Hat
Lane Williams
Miranda Winder
Kevin & Kristin WinklerTRIBUTES  
IN HONOR OF 
Those listed HERE had 
contributions made  
to the Center for 
Constitutional Rights 
in their honor . 
We thank these 
individuals for 
inspiring such 
support and their 
friends and family 
for their thoughtful 
generosity.Thank you28
28 TRIBUTES IN MEMORY OF  |		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|	Ahmaud M. Arbery
Ella J. Baker
Kathleen Baldwin
Jane Barnett
Beverly Barsy
Beatrice Bereano
Tippy Blum
Gladys Blum
Allan Brotsky
Leslie Brown
Marilyn B. Clement
Rhonda Copelon
Robert Ellis
Debra Evenson
Lotte E. Feinberg
Philip Field
Olga Field
Gregory H. Finger
George P. Floyd
Laurent Frantz
Jack Friedman
Vicki Gabriner
Ernest Goodman
Regina Grady
Helen Gros
Fannie Lou Hamer
Letitia Haworth
Robert S. Hayes
Meyer Heller
Nat Hentoff
Lorraine and Victor Honig
Warren Jordan
Damon J. Keith
John I. Kennedy
Arthur Kinoy
Austin H. LaPore
Phyllis Levinson
Anne Lueck
Gary MagerCharles S. Mansour
Iris Mansour
Tony McDade
Alice G. McGrath
Marvin Miller
Helen Moorehead-Laurencin
Jan Neffke
Mahlon F. Perkins
Louis Pollak
Victor Rabinowitz
Harry Rand
Michael Ratner
Everett Reimer
Mel Robins
Josefina P. Saldana
Edwin E. Salpeter
Gloria Scher
Martin M. Scher
Julia Schwendinger
Gerda Seaman
Irwin Silber
Paul Smith
Marilyn Soble
Sally Stanley
Morton Stavis
Breonna Taylor
Edith Tiger
Gordon Tombe
Elton J. Warren
Richard F. Watt
Lee Weintraub
Cherie Wichman Schroeder
Florence Wilm
Diane M. Woodstock
Anne Wysoker
Jack Wysoker
Sam Zaslavsky
Genie Zeiger
Ciro ZoppoTRIBUTES  
IN MEMORY OF Thank you
We are grateful 
for the thoughtful 
support provided  
by the friends  
and family of the 
people listed HERE.  2929 |  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS  |  FINANCIAL REPORTFinancial 
ReportYour dedication 
and generosity  
are indispensable  
in the fight  
for justice. 
Program Services  
(Litigation and Advocacy) .................... $8,324,922
Suppporting Services  
(Administration and General)  ..............$2,449,456
Grants and Contributions  ................$10,616,556
Court Awards and Attorney Fees  ...$2,661,846
Net Investment Income  ...................$313,597
In-Kind Income  ................................... $434
Other Income ...................................... $6,491.82Total Revenue,  
Gains, Other Support
$13,598,925Total  
Expenses
$10,744,379The Center for Constitutional Rights is a 
nonprofit charitable organization that relies 
on individual and foundation support.
Thank you!3030 WELCOME OUR NEW BOARD MEMBERS |		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|	WELCOME OUR  
NEW BOARD MEMBERS
Amna Akbar
Columbus, OH
Associate Professor of Law  
at Ohio State University
Amna’s	research	and	teaching	focus	
on	social	movements,	critical	theory,	and	policing,	race,	
and	inequality.	Her 	scholarship	explores	the	intersections	
of	national	security 	and	criminal	law,	and	the	potential	of 	
social	movements	to	transform	our 	thinking	about	law,	law 	
enforcement,	and	law 	reform.	She	writes	for	academic	and	
popular	audiences	in	outlets	including	 NOMOS, Citizenship 
Studies, Journal of Legal Education, Law and Political Economy, 
The Nation, and Boston Review.	In	her 	teaching	and	lawyering	
work,	she	is	deeply 	engaged	with	law	and	organizing	in	Ohio	
and	around	the	country.	Before	Ohio	State,	 Amna	taught	at	
NYU	Law	School	and	CUNY 	Law	School.	She	received	her 	B.A.	
from	Barnard	College,	Columbia	University,	and	her 	J.D.	from	
the	University 	of	Michigan,	where	she	served	as	editor-in-chief 	
of	the	 Michigan Law Review.	 After	law	school,	she	clerked	for 	
Judge	Gerard	E.	Lynch	in	the	U.S.	District	Court,	Southern	
District	of	New	York,	and	worked	as	a	staff 	attorney	at	
Queens	Legal	Services	Corp.	in	a	community-based	project	for 	
survivors	of	domestic	violence.	She	is	a	former 	Law	and	Public	
Affairs	Fellow	and	Visiting	Scholar 	at	Princeton	University.
 
Jumana Musa
Takoma Park, MD
Human rights attorney and racial justice 
activist, Director of the Fourth Amendment 
Center at the National Association of 
Criminal Defense Lawyers (NACDL)
As	director,	Jumana	oversees	NACDL’s	initiative	to	build	a	new,	
more	durable	Fourth	 Amendment	legal	doctrine	for 	the	digital	
age.	The	Fourth	Amendment	Center 	educates	the	defense	bar 	
on	privacy	challenges	in	the	digital	age,	provides	resources	to	
help	lawyers	identify 	opportunities	to	challenge	government	
surveillance,	and	establishes	a	tactical	litigation	support	
network	to	assist	in	key 	cases.	Prior	to	joining	NACDL,	 Jumana	served	as	deputy 	director	for	
the	Rights	Working	Group,	a	national	coalition	of 	civil	rights,	
civil	liberties,	human	rights,	and	immigrant	rights	advocates, 	
where	she	coordinated	the	“Face	the	 Truth”	campaign	against 	
racial	profiling.	She	 was	also	the	advocacy 	director	for	Domestic	
Human	Rights	and	International	 Justice	at	Amnesty	International	
USA,	where	she	addressed	the	domestic	and	international 	
impact	of	U.S.	counterterrorism	efforts	on	human	rights.	 Jumana	
holds	a	B.A.	in	International	Relations	from	Brown	University 	and	
a	J.D.	from	Georgetown	University 	Law	Center.
 
Vincent M. Southerland
Brooklyn, NY
Executive Director, Center on Race, 
Inequality, and the Law at NYU Law
Vincent	has	dedicated	his	career 	to	
advancing	racial	justice	and	civil	rights.	Before	NYU,	he	served	
as	an	assistant	federal	public	defender 	with	the	Federal	
Defenders	for 	the	Southern	District	of 	New	York.	Prior	to	
that,	Vincent	spent	seven	 years	at	the	NAACP 	Legal	Defense	
and	Educational	Fund,	Inc.	(LDF),	 where	he	was	a	senior	
counsel.	While	at	LDF,	he	engaged	in	litigation	and	advocacy 	
at	the	intersection	of 	race	and	criminal	justice,	including	the	
successful	representation	of 	people	sentenced	to	death	across	
the	South	and	children	sentenced	to	life	imprisonment	 without	
parole.	He	also	led	LDF’s	advocacy 	efforts	around	race	and	
policing,	and	was	lead	counsel	in	school	desegregation	and	
employment	discrimination	matters.	 Vincent	previously 	served	
as	a	staff	attorney	at	the	Bronx	Defenders	and	an	E.	Barrett	
Prettyman	Fellow 	at	Georgetown	University 	Law	Center.	He	
began	his	career 	as	a	law	clerk	to	the	Honorable	 Theodore	
McKee,	Judge	of	the	United	States	Court	of 	Appeals	for	the	
Third	Circuit,	and	the	Honorable	Louis	H.	Pollak,	of 	the	United	
States	District	Court	for 	the	Eastern	District	of 	Pennsylvania.	
Vincent	holds	an	L.L.M.	from	Georgetown	University 	Law	
Center,	and	received	his	 J.D.	from	Temple	University 	School	of	
Law	and	his	B.A.	from	the	University 	of	Connecticut.	He	serves	
on	the	boards	of 	The	Bail	Project	and	the	Federal	Defenders	of 	
New	York.
 31
31|		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|		BOARD  |  STAFFBoard 
Katherine Acey  |  Treasurer
Amna Akbar
Lumumba Akinwole-Bandele
Laila Al-Arian
Leonardo M. Aldridge
Amanda Alexander
Natasha Lycia Ora Bannan 
   Governance Committee Co-Chair
Colette Pichon Battle
Rosemary R. Corbett  |  Secretary
Lisa Crooms-RobinsonMichelle DePass
Jean Entine  |  Development Committee  
   Co-Chair (through June 2020)
Marjorie Fine  
   Development Committee Co-Chair
Katherine Franke  |  Chair
Justin Hansford 
   Governance Committee Co-Chair
Leila Hessini  |  Vice Chair
Nsombi Lambright
Gay McDougall
Jumana Musa
Vincent Southerland
Management Team
Vincent Warren  |  Executive Director
Baher Azmy  |  Legal Director 
Nadia Ben-Youssef  |  Advocacy Director 
Chandra Hayslett  |  Communications Director 
Theda Jackson-Mau  |  Director of Development Donita Judge  |   Associate Executive Director
Maria LaHood  |  Deputy Legal Director
Grace Lile  |  Director of Operations 
Jeffrey Weinrich  |  Finance Director
Operations Staff
Gregory Butterfield  |  Finance Manager
Orlando Gudino  |  IT Manager
Meriam Haider  |  Receptionist/  
   Administrative Assistant 
Lisa Levy  |  Senior Human Resources ManagerKen Montenegro  |  Technology Director  
   (as of January 2020)
Wan Yin Lui  |  Operations Manager
Edwin Santana  |  Administrative 
   Associate, Operations 
Lynette Seymour  |  Executive Associate
Anderson Taveras  |  IT Associate
Communications
Lauren Gazzola  |  Communications  
   Associate for Publications 
Charles Greene  |  Web Communications  
   and Multimedia Manager 
Jen Nessel  |  Communications CoordinatorObiajulu Nwabuzor  
   Strategic Events Manager
Alessandra Perotti 
   Digital Engagement Manager
Alex Webster  |  Communications Assistant 
Emily Ballas  |  Graphic Design Associate  
   (as of March 2020)
Development
Michelle Anthony  |  Donor Relations  
   Associate (as of July 2019)
Mimi Clara  |  Senior Major Gifts Officer  
   (as of January 2020)
Doug Edelson 
   Foundation Relations Officer Fernando Garcia  |  Capital Campaign  
   Associate (as of March 2020)
Amy Greenstein 
   Associate Director of Development 
Rob Santiago  |  Senior Major Gifts Officer 
Daniel Strum  |  Database and Online  
   Giving Manager (through March 2020)
Charisse Waugh  |  Grant WriterLegal and Advocacy 
Departments 
Lupe Aguirre  |  Bertha Justice Fellow 
Darius Charney  |  Senior Staff Attorney
Claire Dailey  |  Senior Legal Worker
J. Wells Dixon  |  Senior Staff Attorney
Chinyere Ezie  |  Senior Staff Attorney
Omar Farah  |  Senior Staff Attorney;  
   Associate Director of Strategic Initiatives
maya finoh  |  Advocacy Associate  
   (as of March 2020)
Katherine Gallagher  |  Senior Staff Attorney
Angelo Guisado  |  Staff Attorney 
Ian Head  |  Senior Legal Worker
Aliya Hussain  |  Advocacy Program Manager 
Shayana Kadida  |  Senior Managing Attorney
Pardiss Kebriaei  |  Senior Staff AttorneyRachel Meeropol  |  Senior Staff Attorney |  
   Associate Director of Legal Training  
   and Education
Afrika Owes  |  Administrative 
   Associate, Legal & Advocacy
Ibraham Qatabi  |  Senior Legal Worker
Dominic Renfrey  |  Advocacy Program Manager
Aya Saed  |  Bertha Justice Fellow 
Ghita Schwarz  |  Senior Staff Attorney
Diala Shamas  |  Staff Attorney
Astha Sharma Pokharel  |  Bertha Justice Fellow
Pamela Spees  |  Senior Staff Attorney
Brittany Thomas  |  Bertha Justice Fellow 
Leah Todd  |  Senior Legal Worker 
Nahal Zamani  |  Advocacy Program Manager  
    (through May 2020)
2019 - 2020  
Ella Bakers
Anika Ades
Emahunn Campbell
Jessica Halperin
Drew HeckmanKarla Hernandez
Vivek Kembaiyan
Lorelei Lee
Tania Murillo
Victoria Pilger
Calypso Taylor
Daniela Ugaz
Interns
Tessa Baizer
Juan Bedoya
Daniel Cirincione
Isabel Durante
Madison Koenig
Libby LewisShannon Marcoux
Alicia Morejón
Samantha Morris
Luca Nelson
Dannelly Rodriguez
Lara Russo
Tiffany Wong
Volunteers
Merry NeisnerBOARD, STAFF, ELLA BAKERS,  
INTERNS, VOLUNTEERS For	more	information	on	any 	of	the	above,	  
please	contact:
Theda Jackson-Mau  
Director of Development  
tjackson-mau@ccrjustice.org or 
212.614.6448
32
32 WAYS TO SUPPORT THE CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS  |		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|	WAYS TO SUPPORT THE CENTER  
FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS
We are calling on you
Join forces with activists, lawyers, and 
storytellers to fight oppression and build power. 
You have a role to play. Donate. Act. Share.  
Make an online gift at  
ccrjustice.org/donate
It’s	fast,	easy,	and	secure,	and	 your	gift	will	go	to	work	
right	away.	Online	gifts	are	a	quicker 	and	greener	way	to	give.
Join the Justice Sustainers 
These	gifts	provide	us	 with	a	reliable,	steady 	
source	of	income,	making	it	possible	for 	us	to	plan,	leverage,	
and	allocate	resources	in	a	 way	that	means	more	hope	for 	our	
clients,	more	support	for 	movements,	and	more	justice	and	
accountability.	Sign	up	online	for 	a	monthly	recurring	gift	at	
ccrjustice.org/donate. 
Include the Center for  
Constitutional Rights in your will
Including	us	as	a	beneficiary 	in	your	will	is	an	excellent	 way	
to	make	a	statement	about	the	 values	you	held	during	 your	
lifetime	while	ensuring	that	 we	will	be	here	for 	the	long	haul.	
You	may	choose	to	make	a	bequest	to	us	of 	a	specific	dollar 	
amount	or	a	percentage	of 	your	estate.	
Make the Center for 
Constitutional Rights your 
birthday gift! 
Ask	friends	and	family 	to	make	gifts	to	the	Center 	for	
Constitutional	Rights	in	 your	honor	as	your	holiday/	birthday/
anniversary/no-reason-at-all	gift	OR	make	gifts	to	us	in	honor 	
of	the	folks	on	your	shopping	list.	 These	gifts	will	pay	tribute	to	
our	shared	social	justice	 values	and	build	our 	audience,	while	
fueling	our	efforts	to	fight	for 	the	most	vulnerable	and	building	
the	power	of	social	movements.	Donate stock
If	you	sell	depreciated	stock	and	give	the	  
proceeds	to	the	Center 	for	Constitutional	Rights,	 you	may	 
be	able	to	claim	the	loss	on	 your	taxes,	as	well	as	the	charitable	
deduction.	If	you	donate	appreciated	securities	to	us,	 you	 
may	avoid	capital	gains	taxes	and	receive	a	charitable	
deduction.	For 	stock	transfer 	information,	go	to	 
ccrjustice.org/gifts-stocksfunds .
Attend a virtual event  
— and bring a friend! 
If	you	are	on	our 	email	list,	you	will	receive	invitations.	  
Public	events	are	listed	on	our 	calendar	at	 
ccrjustice.org/calendar .
Stay up-to-date and  
share our news! 
Follow	@theCCR	on	 Twitter,	CCRJustice	on	 Instagram,	 
and	Center	for	Constitutional	Rights	on	 Facebook	and	  
LinkedIn,	and	bookmark	our 	website:	 ccrjustice.org.  
Sign	up	for	our	weekly	newsletter,	the	Frontlines	of 	Justice,	  
at ccrjustice.org/up-to-date.	Share	our 	newsletters,	action	  
alerts,	and	appeals	 with	your	friends.3333|		CENTER	FOR	CONSTITUTIONAL 	RIGHTS		|		ATTRIBUTIONSATTRIBUTIONS
Photo Credits
Activists of Buffalo ..................................................................... Cover  
........................................................................................................ Page	5
Farhan Almathil  ............................................ bottom right 	|		Page	18
Vlad Archin  .................................................................................. Page	6  
............................................................................ bottom right		|		Page	8  
.......................................................................... bottom right		|		Page	11
Dolores Canales  ............................................. bottom left		|		Page	19
Debi Cornwall ............................................... bottom right 	|		Page	17
Tatalu Dada  .............................................................................. Page	15
Jaffa Graves  ................................................... bottom right		|		Page	18
Robin Henson  |  SPLC  ............................................................. Page	9
International Criminal Court ....................... bottom left		|		Page	21
joepiette2  
(licensed	under 	CC	BY-NC-SA 	2.0) .............. top center		|		Page	19
Matt Mercado  ............................................................................ Page	2
Steven Salaita  ................................................ bottom left		|		Page	20
Alex Webster  ......................................................... top right		|		Page	8  
........................................................................................ right		|		Page	20
Wikipedia  ..................................................................... right		|		Page	14Shutterstock
Ron Adar  ..................................................................................... Page	7  
Research and Writing
Jessica Hoffmann  
jess@jessicahoffmann.com
Artwork
Djamel Ameziane   ................................................................... Page	21The Center for 
Constitutional Rights 
is grateful for your 
dedication and 
partnership. You make 
it possible for us to 
think big and to stake 
out daring positions.  Because of you, our litigation and 
advocacy are holistic, fearless,  
and relentless.  
Together, we are transforming the  
power structures that oppress vulnerable 
communities, building the strength of 
social justice movements, and training 
the next generation of movement 
lawyers and activists.
CCRJUSTICE.ORGThank you!© 2020 center for constitutional rights   
666 BROADWAY FL 7  |  NEW YORK, NY 10012  |  212.614.6448  
CCRJUSTICE.ORG