1
2017 annual report
RESISTANCE
is our civic duty
center for
constitutional
rights2
© 2017 center for constitutional rights   666 broadway fl 7, new york, ny 10012  212.614.6464  ccrjustice.org1table of contentsHere’s what you did in 2017!
Together we are a force for justice!
Message from the Board Chair
Message from the Executive Director
Case Update: Ending Muslim Profiling
Case Update: Discriminatory Policing and Racial Injustice
Case Update: Abusive Immigration Practices
Case Update: Torture/Guantánamo Bay
Case Update: Economic and Political Repression in Puerto Rico
Case Update: LGBTQI and Gender-Based Repression
Case Update: Palestinian Solidarity
Case Update: White Supremacy on the Rise
CCR in the News
Bertha Justice Fellowship Program
Case Index
#NotMyPresident Reception
50th Anniversary Celebration
In Memoriam
Financial Report
Welcome to New Board Members
Board, Staff, Ella Bakers, Interns, Volunteers
Ways to Support CCR
Attributions2
3
4
7
11
14
17
19
22
24
28
30
32
40
41
43
44
45
47
50
512Last fall, the Center for Constitutional Rights’ Board of Trustees convened a 
strategy meeting to plan for what either a Hillary Clinton or a Donald Trump 
win would mean for this organization and for the social movements of 
which we are a part. The last 51 years of protecting civil rights movements 
prepared us for the cataclysmic results of that election.
Immediately after the election, CCR’s staff and board leapt into action, 
motivated by the idea that: “resistance is a civic duty.” For all of us in 
the CCR family, resistance isn’t just something we do – it is something 
that calls us. A year into this horrendous administration, the horror 
wrought by the election has been even worse than many of us imagined. 
It marked the uncorking of a toxic brew of hatred, self-interest, and 
fear. It has demanded the kind of vigilant, passionate, and creative 
resistance that has characterized CCR’s work since its founding over 
50 years ago.
We all know that the toxicity of this political time is not new, it’s just been 
uncorked and weaponized in the form of a small man who occupies the 
Oval Office. 
This administration is now targeting for special surveillance Movement 
for Black Lives activists – calling them “Black Identity Extremists” – at 
a moment when “white identity extremists” – a real, not imagined threat 
– are running the country. But this isn’t new, it echoes the COINTEL Pro 
program launched by the FBI in the 1960s to discredit the Black Panthers 
and other Black activists, and the red-baiting efforts used by Joseph 
McCarthy to turn progressives into traitors in the 1950s.
The Center for Constitutional Rights’ founders stood up for activists 
who were red-baited by McCarthy, stood up for the Panthers when they 
were targeted by J. Edgar Hoover. And we’re standing up today for social 
movements that are under assault by the likes of Jeff Sessions. 
With partners like the Movement for Black Lives, Color of Change, 
Mijente, and Al Otro Lado, CCR is challenging government surveillance 
of Black activists, suing Customs and Border Patrol for turning away 
asylum seekers at the U.S. border, and taking on the government’s controversial bed quota that guarantees public funding of 34,000 beds 
in private detention facilities per day. 
CCR also continues to fight for the release of men detained illegally in 
Guantánamo, works closely with community activists to dismantle the 
New York Police Department’s discriminatory stop-and-frisk program, 
presses to hold the Vatican accountable for systematic sexual abuse 
by priests, and challenges the use of democratically unaccountable 
emergency managers in Flint, Michigan and in Puerto Rico.
Please join CCR in the resistance at a time when our coordinated efforts 
are necessary to both challenge illegitimate power in Washington and 
build power in our communities. 
 
Your backing supports CCR as a leader in the resistance movement, and 
allows us to push forward on the frontlines of justice, holding the line 
against a dangerous slide into American fascism. In partnership with 
committed supporters like you we will move forward in this battle for 
freedom and justice.
Thank you,
Katherine Franke
Message from the Board Chair
KATHERINE FRANKE
3
Message from the Executive Director
VINCE WARREN
We can’t thank you enough for partnering with us during this extraordinary 
point in history, one in which our society’s commitment to constitutional 
and human rights is being supremely tested. Moreover, the principles upon 
which we work to build a better society – support for our people, our quest 
for the truth, our ability hold our government accountable when it targets 
our people or the truth – has come under swift, vehement, and relentless 
attack.  When I wrote to you a year ago, things were bad.  Today, things 
are unhinged and chaotic. But the current chaos doesn’t signal the end of 
our work; it’s only the beginning. As the great civil rights leader Septima 
Poinsette Clark said, “I have a great belief in the fact that whenever there 
is chaos, it creates wonderful thinking. I consider chaos a gift.”
Because of your support, we can fight back at full strength and using all of 
our creative energy. We are amplifying the voices of silenced communities, 
defending progressive movements for social change, and employing 
creative strategies to challenge the attacks on our basic rights by holding 
those who commit abuses responsible for their actions. It is clear you value 
and understand the importance of our work – to help build power in poor 
communities and communities of color, to realize the guarantee of rights to 
those with the fewest protections and least access to legal resources, to train 
the next generation of fearless attorneys and advocates, and to strengthen 
the broader movement for social justice. And together, we are enough.
Our collaboration is even more important in this new political landscape 
in which our country is being led by an unapologetic racist, misogynist, 
Islamophobe, and homophobe. Less than a year into his term, Trump has 
moved with lightning speed to try to implement his bigoted, regressive, 
and dangerous campaign promises to erase immigrant communities and 
communities of color. From the Muslim Ban to mounting ICE arrests, the 
repeal of DACA, the outrageous pardoning of Joe Arpaio, and labeling 
Movement for Black Lives protesters “Black Identity Extremists,” 
communities on the frontlines are experiencing ever-escalating attacks 
from the White House. But as Trump attacks, we, in partnership with 
communities on the ground, fight back, and our work grows; through 
litigation, advocacy, and communications we are sending Trump a clear 
message that the people reject and resist his policies; we will neither 
accept his view that he is above the law, nor accept his attempts to 
undermine our democratic principles below the radar. While we are fighting to stop this administration, as well as other human 
rights atrocities around the world, we are calling on lawyers, activists, and 
storytellers to join with CCR. Recognizing that each provides an important 
tool for social change, we are investing in this collaboration to see what 
magic we can create together. Lawyers have the ability, through litigation, 
to demand accountability. However, they need to partner with activists, 
who are on the ground and connected to those who are experiencing 
human rights abuses. And storytellers, of all kinds, have the unique 
ability to creatively depict the world we are working for. This cutting-edge 
partnership merges our collective and individual visions; but sometimes, 
when others can’t immediately see it, they become discouraged. Our 
venture into this space will hopefully move us beyond desperation into 
strategic and powerful action because, at CCR, we believe if you have an  
activist, a lawyer, and a storyteller, you can change the world.
And with your generous donations, we are changing the world. Part of 
CCR’s mission is to train the next generation of movement lawyers and 
activists. As our work becomes more challenging, we find this purpose to 
be critical in contributing to our legacy. This is why your continued support 
of The Michael Ratner Campaign for the Next Generation is so meaningful. 
This campaign, announced in October 2016, six months after Michael’s 
death, builds the next generation of movement lawyers and activists, 
deepens CCR’s ability to act as the preeminent team of legal advisors 
to our partners in social movements, and enhances our capacity and 
our network to spend more time in the field. Your support of the Michael 
Ratner Campaign for the Next Generation will secure the future for this 
profoundly vital work.
Thank you again for your tremendous endorsement of our mission for the 
past year. CCR exists because your generous gifts have paved the way 
to ensure we remain impactful and are able to move with the sense of 
urgency our work demands. Your encouragement reminds us every day 
that resistance is our civic duty. 
Thank you,
Vince Warren
4
ending 
muslim 
profiling
Since the 9/11 attacks, Muslims’ civil rights have been under steady assault in the name of the so-called “War on Terror.” Muslims have 
been detained without just cause, surveilled in a secret spying program by the New York Police Department, and barred from the U.S. by 
Trump’s Muslim ban. 
CCR has repeatedly challenged these gross government abuses, which violate our most fundamental rights. Our advocacy dates back to the 
fraught, chaotic days of 9/11 when Muslim men disappeared off the streets of New York. Our work on behalf of Muslims also includes litigating 
against their segregation into experimental prison units and government coercion of Muslims to act as informants in their communities. With 
your support, CCR will continue to challenge the growing Islamophobia and fearmongering that have driven law enforcement violations and 
government overreach against Muslim communities.CCR challenges 
religious/racial 
profiling against 
Muslimscase update5Ziglar v. Abbasi (formerly Turkmen v. Ashcroft)
In the days after the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the FBI and the Immigration 
and Naturalization Service (INS) detained hundreds of Muslim, South 
Asian, and Arab non-citizens in a sweeping dragnet. Presumed 
guilty until proven innocent and labeled “terrorism suspects,” these 
men endured dangerous, inhuman conditions in detention based on 
nothing more than their faith and ethnicity. They were held in solitary 
confinement, beaten, harassed, and denied the ability to practice 
their religion. Once cleared of any connection to terrorism, they were 
eventually deported, without apology or explanation. 
In 2002, CCR filed a class-action lawsuit challenging the detentions 
and abuse. We argued that high-level officials in the George W. Bush 
administration, including former-Attorney General John Ashcroft and 
former-FBI Director Robert Mueller, violated the detainees’ rights to 
Equal Protection and Due Process. The case also sought damages from 
prison wardens and supervisors for their role in the abuse.
CCR lawyers spent the next decade and a half doggedly arguing on 
behalf of our clients as the case wound its way through the courts. The 
government expected the case to end in 2009 after we successfully 
negotiated a $1.26 million settlement for five of the detainees, but 
instead we fought to amend the complaint, adding new plaintiffs and 
continuing the struggle to hold the architects of the sweeps responsible 
for their actions. That struggle led us to the Supreme Court in January 
of 2017. In June, a short-handed six-Justice Court ruled against us 
(Justices Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan recused).  Over a scathing 
dissent by Justices Stephen G. Breyer and Ruth Ginsburg, the Supreme 
Court ruled that high-level federal officials cannot be sued for money 
damages, even when they create governmental policy that violates 
clearly established constitutional rights.  
The Supreme Court’s ruling was devastating to principles of justice 
and the rule of law, but we persist. The Court left open the question of 
whether one of our claims against one defendant can move forward, so 
as the case nears its 15th birthday we will be back in federal district 
court in Brooklyn, seeking to hold the warden of the federal jail where 
the 9/11 detainees were abused accountable for his actions, and 
seeking compensation for our clients. 
Hassan v. City of New York
From halal butcher shops to kebab restaurants to even schools, the 
New York Police Department (NYPD) conducted a vast, suspicionless 
and secretive surveillance program that focused on Muslim-American 
communities in New York, New Jersey, and beyond. None of these 
investigations produced a single credible lead on terrorist activities. The 
6NYPD’s ultimate goal, bolstered by widely discredited “radicalization” 
theory that presupposed that nearly every young Muslim man was on a 
conveyor belt to violence, was to create an expansive human mapping 
system that would identify all Muslims in the tri-state area and place 
every mosque in a 250-mile radius of New York under surveillance. 
Reporters for the Associated Press revealed the program in 2011 in a 
series of Pulitzer-Prize-winning stories.
CCR joined a lawsuit initiated by Muslim Advocates in 2012 in the 
U.S. District Court of New Jersey on behalf of plaintiffs in the Garden 
State. In Hassan v. City of New York , we are asking to have the program 
declared unconstitutional, have the NYPD immediately stop spying on 
our clients, and have the NYPD destroy any records collected secretly 
during this program. We are also seeking financial compensation on 
behalf of our clients, who have suffered economic and dignitary harm 
from being targeted based on religion.
In 2014, a federal judge dismissed the lawsuit against New York City. 
We appealed the case to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, 
which reversed the previous dismissal and affirmed that Muslims in 
New Jersey under surveillance had a valid claim of discrimination on 
the basis of their religion. In a soaring decision, the court likened the 
discrimination undertaken by the NYPD to past episodes of government 
misconduct, such as the Red Scare and Japanese Internment. In 2016, 
New York City filed an answer against the case’s initial complaint while 
denying the plaintiffs’ accusations.
With your support, we will keep up the pressure on the NYPD and New 
York City and hold them responsible for targeting innocent Muslim 
Americans.Trump’s Muslim Ban
Days after Trump assumed office, he made good on his 
promise to target Muslims by signing an executive order 
banning Muslims from several countries from entering 
the United States. Chaos descended on airports all 
over the country as Customs and Border Protection 
officials struggled to implement the directive on the 
fly. Those detained were not allowed access to legal 
counsel, while some were deported against court 
orders or pressured to waive their rights. Attorneys at 
CCR and the Kathryn O. Greenberg Immigration Justice 
Clinic at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law sent 
a February 2017 letter to John Roth, Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) Inspector General, detailing 
26 accounts of abuses at the airports following the 
executive order.  The letter also strongly recommended 
that DHS create a mechanism for individuals detained 
at airports to communicate with attorneys.
7
discriminatory 
policing & 
racial injustice
Fighting for racial justice is embedded in CCR’s DNA. Founded during the Civil Rights Movement in 1966, CCR remains deeply passionate 
about advocating for communities  and challenging and dismantling white supremacist practices in government and policing. In the past, 
CCR defended peaceful protestors of color assaulted during the historic Selma march, led challenges to de facto segregation, and litigated 
many Voting Rights Act cases.
 
Opposing the use of unelected emergency managers in Michigan is a recent example of CCR’s work for racial justice. Abolishing abusive and 
unconstitutional police tactics and pushing for prison reform are intimately tied with protecting the rights of Black and brown communities, 
who are too often the target of discriminatory policing. 
With your generous support, CCR will continue this fight. CCR pushes for police 
reforms and helping minority 
communitiescase update8Floyd v. City of New York
In 2013, after a nine-week trial, a federal judge found that the NYPD 
was liable for racially profiling Black and Latinx New Yorkers and 
subjecting them to unconstitutional stops and frisks. The historic ruling 
in the federal class action lawsuit, Floyd v. City of New York,  came after 
years of hard litigation and committed partnerships with the police 
accountability movement.
The four named plaintiffs in the case represented the thousands of 
mostly Black and Latinx New York residents who have been stopped 
by police without any cause in their neighborhoods, traveling to work or 
school, or just walking outside.
Under the new administration of Mayor Bill de Blasio, the City agreed 
to drop the Bloomberg Administration’s appeal, and begin enacting 
reforms that the judge ordered. Police unions tried to stop progress, 
but their obstruction was rejected by the courts, and the joint reform 
process – incorporating input from impacted communities – came 
together to hammer out solutions.
In June 2017, CCR submitted a court filing that highlighted continuing 
racial profiling in the NYPD’s stop-and-frisk practices despite reforms 
that have been put in place. The filing was in response to an earlier 
report by court-appointed monitor Peter L. Zimroth that downplayed 
these racial disparities.
“While it is true that overall stops have decreased, the same disparities 
between stops and frisks of Black and Latinx New Yorkers and whites 
remain, even after controlling for higher crime rates in certain parts of 
the city,” said CCR Senior Staff Attorney Darius Charney. “Decreasing 
the overall number of stops is an important step in the right direction, but 
the unconstitutional elements of the NYPD’s stop-and-frisk practices 
will not be remedied until Blacks and Latinxs are no longer targeted for 
stops because of their race, which the data indicate is still happening.”
With your partnership, CCR will continue to monitor whether the 
lawsuit’s reforms are being effectively carried out by the NYPD. 
Furlow v. Belmar
Police officers in St. Louis and surrounding Missouri counties have been 
running roughshod over many residents’ civil rights by arresting them for 
any reason, at any time, with no judicial oversight. This practice, which 
has been happening for many years, allows police officers to unilaterally 
issue the equivalent of a statewide arrest warrant or a “Wanted” without 
ever going before a judge to obtain a determination of probable cause. 9Wanteds can be used for a variety of offenses, from serious state-level 
crimes, to minor code violations, traffic offenses, or, in some cases, if an 
officer simply wants to bring a person in for questioning. This practice 
primarily impacts low-income Black communities in the St. Louis area. 
“The use of Wanteds violates the protected liberty interests of poor 
people and Black people and creates the modern day equivalent of a 
police state, where poor people and Black people are afraid to leave 
their houses, drive their cars, go to their jobs, visit friends and family 
members, or otherwise conduct their daily lives because they are 
subject to summary arrest and detention at the whim of a St. Louis 
County police officer,” reads Furlow v. Belmar , the original complaint 
against St. Louis, filed in 2016 by CCR and ArchCity Defenders, a local 
civil rights NGO.
After the 2014 death of Michael Brown at the hands of Ferguson, 
Missouri police, the U.S. Department of Justice issued an investigative 
report detailing the Wanted practice, featuring interviews with police 
officers who admitted to arresting people without cause, and concluded 
that the Wanteds can be abused by officers to coerce residents to 
submit to questioning instead of getting arrested. Police officers also 
admitted they were holding people in custody for longer periods of time 
– up to 24 hours – without cause. In August 2017, we filed a motion seeking partial summary judgment on behalf of the plaintiffs, based 
on discovery evidence we obtained confirming a widespread, unlawful 
practice.
Ashker v. Governor of California
Solitary confinement cells in California prisons are a bleak place. At 
California’s Pelican Bay State Prison, the cells, also known as Security 
Housing Units (SHU) consisted of bare concrete cells with no windows 
and little natural light, and were designed to minimize human contact 
in every conceivable way. Inmates would stay in their rooms for 22 to 
24 hours a day with no access to telephone calls, contact visits, and 
vocational, recreational, or educational programming. 
At Pelican Bay, scores of prisoners were kept in these brutal conditions 
for over 10 years, some for more than 20 years – a form of punishment 
that can be considered torture under international law. Studies have 
shown that solitary confinement, even for as little as 15 days, can 
cause lasting emotional damage.
10The push for SHU reform was started by thousands of SHU prisoners 
going on hunger strike in 2011 and 2013 in protest of their living 
conditions. In 2012, CCR, along with several California legal and 
advocacy organizations, filed a federal class action lawsuit against the 
state, charging that SHU violates the Eighth Amendment’s prohibition 
against cruel and unusual punishment, and that inmates were denied 
any meaningful review of their SHU placement. Named plaintiffs in the 
case included strike leaders and other inmates who took part. 
The lawsuit was part of a larger movement aimed at improving 
conditions at California’s SHUs. Hunger strike leaders demanded reform 
of prison policy labeling gang members, adequate food, and expanded 
vocational and recreational opportunities.
In 2015, the state largely acceded to all the lawsuit’s demands, and 
ended indeterminate solitary confinement in prisons across the state. 
This landmark litigation also led to a series of prison reforms. In 2016, 
the courts granted final approval of the settlement agreement.
With your generous support, we were able to win this landmark case, 
end a starkly inhuman practice, and lead the path towards real prison 
reform. Your ongoing partnership will continue to defend our country’s 
most vulnerable residents.Bellant v. Snyder 
(Phillips v. Snyder)
Lead poisoned the water supply in Flint, Michigan 
after state-appointed emergency managers 
decided to switch to a new water source to save 
money in 2014. This crisis was emblematic of the 
dangers in Public Act 436, a state law that took 
power away from local elected representatives, 
many in Black and brown communities, and gave 
them to unelected emergency managers to oversee 
communities deemed to be under “fiscal distress.”
CCR filed the federal lawsuit Bellant v. Snyder , 
challenging the constitutionality of this law. In 
March 2017, CCR and a coalition of Michigan legal 
advocates asked the Supreme Court to review the 
case’s merits. Allies in our fight filed amicus briefs 
in support of our clients’ petition for cert.
Unfortunately, in early October 2017, the Supreme 
Court denied our petition. The legal team is now 
in the process of deciding whether to return to 
the trial court to pursue our claim that Public Act 
436 violates the Equal Protection Clause of the 
Fourteenth Amendment.
11
abusive 
immigration 
practices
CCR is committed to 
protecting immigrants 
and their communities
Even before Trump’s current push to criminalize the undocumented and deport scores of people, many in these vulnerable communities 
were already living in fear during the administrations of presidents Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, and Barack Obama. Their enforcement 
and deportation regimes resulted in the removal of millions of immigrants.   
CCR has been on the frontlines in many battles to defend immigrant communities. Our litigation and advocacy strategies focus on empowering 
immigrants and immigration advocacy organizations with tools to fight back against massive and illegal government attacks. 
In the mid-1980s, we defended against government prosecution targeting sanctuary workers, often religious group members, who had 
offered medical care, shelter, and protection for refugees from El Salvador and Guatemala. After the attacks on 9/11, we defended the rights 
of Muslim, South Asian, and Arab non-citizens who were unfairly swept up for detention. 
Thanks to your support, we will continue to combat unlawful tactics against immigrants and refugees, hold those responsible for abuse 
accountable, and push for greater government transparency when public dollars are used to oppress people and enrich private companies.case update12
Al Otro Lado, Inc. v. John F . Kelly
State-sponsored and state-condoned violence and economic instability 
in Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, and Mexico have sent scores of 
refugees, some as whole families, to seek asylum at the U.S.-Mexico 
border. But officials with Customs and Border Protection (CBP) are 
flouting U.S. and international laws by continuously turning away 
asylum seekers and sending them back to countries where they may 
be attacked or killed.
In July 2017, CCR, along with American Immigration Council and 
Latham & Watkins LLP as co-counsel, filed a class action lawsuit, Al 
Otro Lado, Inc. v. John F . Kelly , against officials at the U.S. Department 
of Homeland Security (DHS) and CBP in a federal district court in 
California. The suit accuses the CBP and DHS of consistently denying 
individuals access to the U.S. asylum process, an unlawful act, and 
seeks an end to the illegal practice of rejecting asylum seekers at the 
border before they even have a chance to apply for relief. Our lead 
plaintiff, Al Otro Lado, a cross-border organization dedicated to serving 
both people deported from the United States and those fleeing life-
threatening conditions in Central America, Mexico, and Haiti, is joined 
by several individual asylum seekers who presented themselves at a 
port of entry along the U.S.-Mexico border and were unlawfully turned 
away. Asylum seekers, including women fleeing domestic violence, 
transgender people threatened with death, and children and families 
who have been subject to rape, assault, death of family members, and 
blackmail as they escape, are entitled under U.S. immigration laws to 
apply to the United States for protection.
The lawsuit details many instances of CBP officials using illegal tactics 
to deter asylum seekers from seeking refuge, including coercion, 
misrepresentation, threats, intimidation, and verbal and physical 
abuse. CBP officials have lied to asylum seekers, saying that Trump 
abolished asylum, threatened to take away their children unless they 
signed away their rights to claim asylum, and forcefully kicked them out 
of designated ports of entry. 
CCR is fighting for greater government accountability and compliance 
with the rule of law. Your support helps fuel this fight, which is part 
of a larger struggle for humane and just treatment of immigrants and 
refugees.
13
ICE Raids Toolkit
In January 2017, in response to the election, CCR and the 
Immigrant Defense Project (IDP) released “Defend Against 
ICE Raids and Community Arrests: A Toolkit to Prepare and 
Protect Our Communities.”  This comprehensive report and 
organizing resource is designed to empower communities 
under threat from the Trump administration’s sweeping 
deportations and attacks on immigrants.
This toolkit, which draws on community data as well as 
documents produced in FOIA litigation against ICE, contains 
detailed information on common ICE strategies and tactics, 
targets of deportation, and priority locations for ICE activity. 
The toolkit also provides important guidelines and know your 
rights resources for people at risk for deportation. It has 
been disseminated nationally to thousands of immigrants 
and advocates in English and Spanish. Detention Watch Network (DWN) v. Immigration Customs and 
Enforcement (ICE) and Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
Since 1996, the United States immigration agencies have been steadily 
expanding our civil immigration detention system, which depends on 
the jailing of non-citizens arrested by DHS and ICE to funnel money to 
both local governments and private companies. Annual congressional 
appropriations bills fund the detention of more than 34,000 immigrants 
per day, a number that the Trump administration has promised to 
dramatically increase.  
DHS and ICE detain tens of thousands of immigrants daily in local jails 
and privately- and publicly-owned detention facilities. As the system 
has expanded, so has the influence of private prison corporations, 
which have enormous political lobbying power and stand to profit by 
keeping as many people locked up as possible, often in crowded, dirty, 
and dangerous conditions.
In 2013, CCR and the Detention Watch Network (DWN) filed a Freedom 
of Information Act (FOIA) request with DHS and ICE for information and 
documents on the detention bed quota and the arrangements between 
ICE and its public and private contractors. We filed suit in 2014. 
DWN and CCR have used documents produced through the litigation 
to publish widely disseminated reports on the effects of local lockup 
quotas, even as the government redacted crucial pricing information in 
its releases. After a federal district court ruled that ICE was not entitled 
to keep its contractual agreements secret, the government declined 
to appeal. In an unprecedented move, the nation’s two largest private 
prison contractors, the GEO Group and CoreCivic (formerly known as 
Corrections Corporation of America), intervened in the litigation to stop 
the government from releasing information in government contracts. 
Dismissed by the Second Circuit Court of Appeals, the GEO Group 
petitioned the Supreme Court, and was denied certiorari in October 
2017. The outcome is a decisive victory for government transparency 
and represents an important obstacle to private contractors’ attempts 
to keep their profiteering arrangements secret.  
Defend Against  
ICE Raids and 
Community Arrests
A TOOLKIT TO PREPARE AND 
PROTECT OUR COMMUNITIES14
torture/
guantánamo 
bay
CCR is committed 
to ending indefinite 
detention and torture 
The prison at Guantánamo is one of the starkest examples of how the so-called “War on Terror” has failed. Many detainees, held without 
charge or trial, have spent years at the prison with no idea when they would go home, if at all. Their unending imprisonment is embarrassing 
on the world stage, and goes against the most fundamental rights enshrined in the Constitution and international law.
Since the very first days of the prison, we at CCR have been central to the legal fight to end indefinite detention and torture at Guantánamo. 
We have represented many former and current detainees and won landmark Supreme Court cases that established U.S. court jurisdiction 
over the prison and affirmed detainees’ right to judicial review of their detention.
Though many detainees have been released, dozens of inmates are still at Guantánamo. With your generous support, we will not give up on 
these men and will continue working towards their release and close Guantánamo forever. case update15Duran v. Trump
CCR is continuing the fight to end the indefinite and unjust detention of 
Guantánamo detainees, such as Guled Hassan Duran, a Somali citizen, 
who has been held without cause for more than a decade.
In December 2003, Duran became seriously injured when gang members 
attempted to steal his motorcycle in Mogadishu. He was shot during the 
robbery and left with a broken arm and a bullet hole in his torso. On 
March 4, 2004, Duran was on his way to Sudan for surgery because 
his wound was not healing well when he was captured while traveling 
through Djibouti. He was rendered to CIA secret detention and eventually 
shipped to Guantánamo in September 2006, where he has since been 
detained without charge or, until last year, legal representation. 
CCR filed a lawsuit, a habeas corpus petition, on behalf of Guled in 
federal court in Washington, D.C. in November 2016. CCR is challenging 
the legality of his indefinite detention and arguing that Guled’s detention 
is not permissible under the Authorization for Use of Military Force 
(AUMF) as informed by the laws of war because he was captured well 
outside the Afghan theater of war, and he is not part of Al Qaeda.
The government provided a declassified version of CCR’s factual 
supplement to the habeas petition in February 2017. That document 
detailed important information about the time between his capture 
and his eventual detention at Guantánamo – information that was not 
previously available until we started to represent him.  The government 
also provided a classified factual return to the habeas petition in May 
2017, which outlines its purported evidence justifying Guled’s detention.In the case’s latest update, the court entered a case management 
order in September 2017 that requires the government to provide CCR 
with exculpatory evidence that is favorable to Guled’s case, and other 
discovery material that is at least helpful to his case, and established a 
procedure to bring the case to a trial on the merits in 2018.
“In the 13 years that Mr. Duran has been held in U.S. custody, neither 
President Bush nor Obama was willing to charge him with a crime, and 
yet the government claims the authority to continue imprisoning Mr. 
Duran indefinitely – perhaps for the rest of his life,” said CCR Legal 
Director Baher Azmy. “That is an absurd distortion of the Constitution 
and the laws of war. The government will now – finally – have to explain 
how and why Mr. Duran ended up at Guantánamo, and why he remains 
there over a decade later.”
With your generous support, CCR will continue the hard work to free 
Duran from indefinite detention so that he may be finally reunited with 
his wife, children, and family.
Al Shimari v. CACI
After the invasion of Iraq, private military contractors hired by the 
U.S. government participated in a conspiracy to torture and seriously 
mistreat Iraqi civilians held in U.S.-run detention centers in 2003-4. On 
behalf of four Iraqi torture victims once held at Abu Ghraib prison, CCR 
is pursuing a federal lawsuit, Al Shimari v. CACI , against U.S.-based 
government contractor CACI Premier Technology, Inc. for torture and 
other war crimes. 
CCR’s four clients were all held at the “hard site” in Abu Ghraib prison, 
where CACI interrogators and certain government co-conspirators 
16subjected them to a variety of torture methods: electric shocks, food and water deprivation, threats by dogs, forced nudity, stress positions for long 
periods of time, and sexual abuse. All four men were released without charge. 
In 2008, CCR brought the case against CACI under the Alien Tort Statute (ATS), a 1789-statute revived by CCR in the landmark case Filártiga v. Peña-
Irala, which allows for foreign victims of human rights abuses to seek civil remedies in U.S. courts.
During the long course of bringing CACI to account for their actions, CCR has been relentless in pursuing redress for its clients through various setbacks 
and successes in the legal system. Over the last year, we have had a number of victories: in October 2016, a unanimous panel of the Fourth Circuit 
Court of Appeals rejected CACI’s effort to have the case dismissed because it raised a “political question,” and made clear that torture is illegal, 
reviewable, and cannot be a policy choice. Following remand to the federal court in Virginia, and a detailing of the brutal treatment the plaintiffs 
endured, the district court affirmed that the claims of war crimes, torture, and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment can proceed. 
“The case has taken a long time but we are now reaching its final steps, and I have hope that justice will be achieved. At that time, the success won’t 
be only mine, but also to all those who have been tortured around the world. We will have our day in court, and the story of Abu Ghraib will be told by 
me and other men who lived – and survived it,” said plaintiff Salah Al-Ejaili.
The Darkest Corner: 
Special Administrative Measures and Extreme 
Isolation in the Federal Bureau of Prisons
In September 2017, CCR and the Allard K. Lowenstein International Human Rights 
Clinic at the Yale Law School released a chilling and important report on the 
government’s use of Special Administrative Measures (“SAMs”). The report, “The 
Darkest Corner: Special Administrative Measures and Extreme Isolation in the 
Federal Bureau of Prisons,” documents the brutality of these prison regulations, 
which compound the debilitating effects of solitary confinement with additional 
contact and communication restrictions that deny individuals almost any 
connection to the human world. The report is the first to focus on the use of SAMs 
in federal prisons.
Primarily through  interviews with attorneys and family members, as well as never-
before published FOIA documents obtained through litigation by Human Rights 
Watch, Columbia Law School’s Human Rights Institute, and Yale Law School’s 
Media Freedom and Information Access Clinic, the report discusses the near-total 
isolation created by SAMs, which some prisoners have lived under for decades; 
their coercive effect when imposed on defendants awaiting trial; the manner in 
which the gag on prisoners, family members and attorneys, and an explicit ban 
on prisoners’ communication with the media, operate to prevent scrutiny of the 
effects of SAMs; and the way such lack of transparency and accountability enables 
discrimination and abuse – a concern of particular import under an administration 
that has openly discriminated against Muslims and other “disfavored” populations. 
The report calls for the practice, which can be tantamount to torture, to end; for the 
government to release basic information on its use of SAMs; and for independent 
human rights monitors to have access to affected prisoners. 
17
economic 
and political 
repression in 
puerto rico
CCR seeks to support 
Puerto Ricans in 
obtaining transparency 
Because of your support, we are pushing for greater scrutiny 
of Puerto Rico’s colonial-style fiscal control board, created 
to deal with the territory’s debt crisis, and to hold it accountable 
to Puerto Ricans rather than the interests of the mainland.
18Puerto Rico’s future and its people are on the line after the one-two 
punch of a mounting debt crisis and the pounding from Hurricane 
Irma and Maria in 2017. After the storms, hospitals were at capacity 
and malfunctioning due to an island-wide power outage, while residents 
scrounged for food, water, and gasoline amidst destroyed homes and 
infrastructure.
Many residents are concerned that Puerto Rico’s recovery from these 
man-made, political disasters is hamstrung by the presence of the 
Financial Oversight and Management Board for Puerto Rico (“la Junta”), 
created under the Puerto Rico Oversight, Management and Economic 
Stability Act of 2016 (PROMESA) to respond to the debt crisis. Made 
up of unelected officials, la Junta is not accountable to residents and 
yet effectively governs the island – impacting Puerto Rico’s future. In 
January 2017, in a push for greater transparency and accountability, 
CCR, together with other rights groups, demanded government records 
concerning la Junta under the Freedom of Information Act.
The request seeks all records related to and on la Junta’s board 
members, whether proper financial disclosures were made, and any 
information on the process to vet any conflicts of interests when the 
board was created. For the record request, we joined the Latino Justice 
PRLDEF and the San Juan-based Center for Investigative Journalism.
The push for records was sparked by la Junta’s secretive decision- 
making and management practices and the lack of publicly filed 
documents related to any ethical conflicts and disclosure of financial 
interests by board members. 
“PROMESA was signed into law by a U.S. president Puerto Ricans have 
no say in electing, to govern a debt crisis affected in no small way by 
U.S. economic policies and laws,” said Stephanie Llanes, a Bertha 
Justice Fellow at CCR. “PROMESA means ‘promise’ in Spanish, and the 
people of Puerto Rico deserve more than empty promises, more than an 
unelected board that will now govern not only the ‘debt’ but also their 
lives with no real transparency or accountability.”
Real harm has happened in communities where unelected officials, 
appointed for emergency situations, are not answerable to residents, 
Llanes said, pointing to the water contamination crisis in Flint, Michigan, 
as an example.
We will continue to monitor the request’s progress and work with other 
Puerto Rican advocacy groups alongside the people of Puerto Rico, who 
have long deserved and continue to fight for a voice in the future of their 
home.
19
lgbtqi & 
gender-
based 
repression
CCR continues the fight 
for LGBTQI justice
Though recent years have seen the LGBTQI community win rights and growing support in the United States and abroad, they still face vast 
discrimination, censorship, violence, and persecution here and in many parts of the world. CCR has a long tradition of fighting for the rights of 
sexual minorities since the 1990s, having fought against employment discrimination in the Peace Corps and for inclusion in the Saint Patrick’s 
Day Parade in New York City. We have taken our advocacy abroad to other countries, where extremists in the U.S. have exported their hate. Back 
in the U.S., CCR is continuing its push against unconstitutional and homophobic sodomy laws that unfairly target the LGBTQI community.case update20Sexual Minorities Uganda v. Scott Lively
Scott Lively, a U.S.-based anti-gay extremist, has a long history of pushing for the criminalization of homosexuality and advocacy for the rights LGBTQI 
people. After suffering a series of setbacks in the United States in the 1990s, Lively directed his efforts abroad, pushing for harsh legislation aimed 
at eradicating pro-LGBTQI speech and advocacy through criminalizing expression. Lively had a particular impact in Uganda where his efforts and 
collaborations sparked controversial legislation that included the death penalty and long sentences of imprisonment for those who publicly advocate 
for LGBTQI equality and rights. Lively later tried to distance himself from the bill, but CCR kept him accountable for his actions. On behalf of Sexual 
Minorities Uganda (SMUG), a non-profit umbrella organization for LGBTQI advocacy groups in Uganda, CCR filed a federal lawsuit against Lively. This 
was the first Alien Tort Statute (ATS) case seeking accountability for persecution on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity. The ATS allows 
for foreign victims of human rights abuses to seek civil remedies in U.S. courts.
Lively repeatedly tried to get the case dismissed, arguing that his actions were protected under the First Amendment and that persecution of LGBTQI 
people is not a crime. In 2013, Judge Michael Ponsor of the U.S. District Court in Springfield, Massachusetts denied Lively’s request, holding for the 
first time that persecution on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity is a crime against humanity. In 2017, when Lively again moved to 
dismiss the case, Judge Ponsor issued a scathing ruling where he noted that Lively had indeed worked to deprive LGBTQI people in Uganda of their 
fundamental rights, while at the same time dismissing the case on narrow jurisdictional grounds. Subsequently, Lively filed a notice of appeal to the 
First Circuit Court of Appeals, asking to have Ponsor’s blunt words on Lively’s “crackpot bigotry” to be eliminated. On behalf of SMUG, CCR filed a 
motion to dismiss appeal.
“The ruling clearly vindicates what SMUG and the LGBTQI community in Uganda have known and said all along about Lively and his role in Uganda,” 
said CCR Senior Staff Attorney Pamela Spees. “They have shown incredible courage, dignity, and determination in the face of rising repression and 
persecution. No matter what happens next in this case, they have made an important difference in demanding their day in court, achieving the 
recognition that persecution of LGBTQI people is a crime against humanity, and facing down one of their key persecutors armed only with the truth of 
their experience and moral courage.”
21Doe v. Hood
In 2003, in the landmark case Lawrence v. Texa s, the Supreme Court 
ruled that statutes criminalizing “sodomy” violate the Fourteenth 
Amendment, observing that the mere existence of sodomy laws “is 
an invitation to subject homosexual persons to discrimination both in 
the public and the private spheres.” Despite this unequivocal ruling, 
Mississippi continues to enforce its pre- Lawrence  sodomy prohibition 
– the “Unnatural Intercourse” statute – by requiring individuals with 
sodomy convictions to register as sex offenders.  
 
In 2016, CCR filed a class action lawsuit against Mississippi’s sex 
offender registration scheme on behalf of individuals with both 
Unnatural Intercourse convictions and with out-of-state convictions 
that Mississippi considers the equivalent of Unnatural Intercourse.  
The suit alleges that requiring our clients to register as sex offenders 
violates the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses and seeks to 
strike the Unnatural Intercourse statute down on its face. 
The suit is a companion to Doe v. Jindal , a lawsuit CCR brought in 
Louisiana on behalf of individuals convicted of Crimes Against Nature 
by Solicitation (CANS) who were required to register as sex offenders.  A 
federal district court judge found that registration for CANS convictions 
violated the Equal Protection Clause, and over 800 people were removed 
from Louisiana’s sex offender registry. Despite this success, plaintiffs 
and class members in the Doe v. Jindal  case who moved to Mississippi 
continue to be forced to register as sex offenders there, even though the 
state of Louisiana recognizes that registration for CANS offenses is no 
longer constitutional.
Sex offender registration burdens almost every aspect of daily life. In 
recognition of the significant restrictions on our clients’ personal and 
public lives, CCR immediately moved for summary judgment and class 
certification. The federal district court has instead ordered discovery, 
with a trial scheduled for late 2018. 
With your support, CCR will continue to pursue the case to its end and 
make sure that our clients’ dignity is restored.Discrimination in 
the Guise of Liberty
In May 2017, Trump signed an Executive Order 
“Promoting Free Speech and Religious Liberty” as 
a nod towards evangelical Christian supporters, 
who have long advocated for discrimination on the 
basis of sexual orientation, gender identity, and 
reproductive choices under the guise of religious 
freedom.
Some in the religious right said the order did not 
go far enough because it did not contain provisions 
from a leaked draft in February that permitted 
many forms of discrimination on religious grounds. 
Though relatively tepid, the May order is a stepping 
stone towards curtailing reproductive freedom, 
gives vague leeway to Attorney General Jeff Sessions 
to “issue guidance interpreting religious liberty 
protections in Federal law,” and to not punish 
religious organizations for political speech. 
When the draft was leaked in February, CCR 
responded with a point-by-point legal analysis 
on “religious freedom.” In “Discrimination in the 
Guise of Liberty,” CCR explains how the order would 
create special exemptions for individuals and most 
businesses to discriminate on virtually any basis 
and carve out sub-classes of people to exclude from 
basic rights protected by the U.S. Constitution and 
international human rights law.
22
Because of you, CCR has litigated against the Israeli government’s violations of international law, including seeking to hold Israeli officials 
accountable for war crimes and suing Caterpillar for providing bulldozers to Israel knowing they would be used to unlawfully demolish 
Palestinian homes. The recent work detailed here supports the flourishing movement in the United States for Palestinian rights as part of 
CCR’s proud tradition of upholding the principles of justice and the right to dissent.
Palestinian rights advocacy continues to grow in the United States, demanding an end to Israel’s occupation of Palestine and accompanying 
human rights violations, as well as an end to unchecked U.S. funding and diplomatic support.  In response to this growing movement, efforts 
to suppress Palestinian rights advocacy have become increasingly aggressive.  palestinian
solidarity
CCR is protecting the 
right to advocate for 
Palestinecase update23Awad v. Fordham University
A group of students at Fordham University applied to start a Students 
for Justice in Palestine (SJP) club to build support on campus for justice 
and human rights for Palestinians. But Fordham’s Dean of Students 
Keith Eldredge took the unprecedented step of overruling the club’s 
approval by the student government, after more than a year of delay 
and bureaucratic red tape. The explanation for the denial was that the 
dean believed the group’s mission was “contrary to the mission and 
values” of the university and that the topic and the group would have a 
polarizing effect on campus.
CCR and our partner, Palestine Legal, joined together to represent the 
students in a lawsuit brought in New York State court, arguing that 
Fordham’s decision violated its own policies guaranteeing freedom of 
expression and inquiry. The students are seeking a judgment compelling 
the university to officially recognize SJP and provide it the same rights 
enjoyed by all other clubs at Fordham.  
The prohibition of the SJP group at Fordham is part of a widespread 
campaign against student activists advocating for Palestinian rights on 
campus.  Along with Palestine Legal, CCR documented the extensive 
suppression of Palestinian rights advocacy in a 2015 report entitled 
“The Palestine Exception to Free Speech: A Movement Under Attack in 
the U.S.”
CCR Condemns Anti-BDS Bills 
Inspired by the South African anti-apartheid movement, the Palestinian 
call for Boycotts, Divestment, and Sanctions (BDS) urges non-violent 
pressure on Israel to comply with international law by ending the 
occupation, recognizing the rights of Palestinian citizens of Israel to full 
equality, and respecting the rights of Palestinian refugees to return to 
their homes.
Alarmed by growing support for BDS in the U.S., Israel and right-wing 
organizations defending it are expending resources on trying to ban BDS, 
and chill advocacy in support of it. At least 21 states have enacted anti-
BDS laws, several of which establish a blacklist of entities that boycott 
Israel and prevent the state from investing in them or contracting with 
them. The Israel Anti-Boycott Act has been introduced in Congress to 
punish supporting a boycott of Israel fostered by the United Nations or 
another international governmental organization with exorbitant fines 
and up to 20 years in prison.      
CCR and Palestine Legal have joined with other rights organizations to 
oppose such legislation, which violates the First Amendment. Boycotting 
is a protected form of political expression and a time-honored means 
of challenging racism and injustice, from the Boston Tea Party to the 
Montgomery Bus Boycott, and from the global movement against South 
African apartheid to BDS for Palestinian freedom.   PALESTINE DELEGATION
CCR and Interfaith Peace-Builders (IFPB) sent a 
delegation of experienced lawyers and legal academics 
to Palestine and Israel to witness for themselves the 
occupation and accompanying human rights violations, 
as well as to connect with organizations and activists 
engaged in resistance on the ground. CCR’s Executive 
Director Vincent Warren, Legal Director Baher Azmy, and 
Deputy Legal Director Maria LaHood were part of the 
delegation.
The 2016 delegation saw the reach and impact of illegal 
settlements in the West Bank, and met with community 
members in Bil’in who successfully challenged the wall 
built on their occupied land. In Hebron, the delegation 
met with human rights defender Youth Against 
Settlements’ Issa Amro, who was subsequently arrested 
and charged by Israeli and Palestinian authorities for 
his activism. The delegation attended Israeli military 
court proceedings subjecting Palestinians to indefinite 
administrative detention, and visited Dheisheh Refugee 
Camp in the West Bank, where Palestinians have been 
living as refugees since 1949.  Because of the 10-year-
old closure of Gaza, delegates had to meet with noted 
human rights lawyer, Raji Sourani of the Palestinian 
Center for Human Rights via video-conference.  
The delegation expanded and strengthened CCR’s 
relationships with partners in Palestine and Israel, and 
deepened CCR’s longstanding commitment to advocating 
on behalf of Palestinian rights. 24
white 
supremacy 
on the rise
CCR is on the front lines 
against hate groupscase update
The ascendance of Donald Trump to the presidency has sparked a very visible wave of emboldened white supremacists, whether they call 
themselves the Alt Right, Neo Nazis, or white rights activists. They have taken their hate from internet chatrooms, such as 4chan, and are 
now marching in the streets. They have rallied three times in Charlottesville, Virginia, with tiki torches. The second rally resulted in the death 
of a 32-year-old woman, Heather D. Heyer, who was protesting against them. Trump seemed to tacitly support the hate groups after the rally.
CCR is actively protesting and looking at legal and non-legal remedies against these white supremacist groups, who are dangerous, often 
armed with guns and ammunition, and have powerful allies in government and media. After the second rally in Charlottesville, many people 
asked how they could protect their neighbors and homes. With your continued support, CCR is fully engaged in this fight.25A March to Confront White Supremacy
After the violent clashes from the second white supremacists rally in 
Charlottesville, concerned people and civil rights activists organized an 
over 100-mile, 10-day march from Charlottesville’s Emancipation Park 
to Farragut Square in Washington, D.C. dubbed the “March to Confront 
White Supremacy.” The peaceful protesters walked rain and shine 
and endured tired, bruised shins and feet in a powerful, moving show 
against hate. 
They held up signs advocating for immigrant rights, condemning police 
violence against the Black community, and calling for the decolonization 
of Puerto Rico, an end to the occuation of Palestine, and other allied 
causes.
Stephanie Llanes, Bertha Justice Fellow at CCR, participated in the 
march and was prominently featured in a video about the event from 
Mic. Llanes brandished a bullhorn and urged her fellow marchers to 
fight for freedom.
“I was born in San Juan, Puerto Rico,” she told Mic about her reasons 
for marching. “When you think about white supremacy, it’s not just 
affecting folks in the United States. Where else has white supremacy 
gone? One of the ways that we see that is the ways in which the United 
States has literally colonized people and lands around the world.”
“This administration has been incredibly violent,” she continued. “And 
we should not have an administration that is literally committing acts of 
violence against our people.”The march, which grew from about 35 to nearly 180, attracted a 
diverse range of people, young and old, cis and trans, from white allies, 
undocumented activists, and Movement for Black Lives activists. 
Llanes succinctly summed up every marcher’s intent for Mic.
“What connects all of us is the fact that white supremacy is the root 
cause of a lot of the dehumanization of our people, the criminalization 
of our people.”
Crumsey v. Justice Knights of the Ku Klux Klan
What can vulnerable communities do to effectively protect themselves 
from today’s hate groups, many of whom are empowered by the 
current political atmosphere and have support in the highest reaches of 
government and mass media?
By peering into the U.S.’s past during the Reconstruction Era and CCR’s 
own proud history in fighting violent hate groups, we know there are 
legal avenues that have proven to be successful in combating racially-
motivated violence and preventing them from happening again. We hold 
up Crumsey v. Justice Knights of the Ku Klux Klan  as one powerful 
example for today’s communities under attack.
In 1980, the Justice Knights of the Ku Klux Klan burned a large wooden 
cross in the middle of the local Black community in Chattanooga, 
Tennessee, and then shot at four female African-American senior 
citizens who were walking in the neighborhood. After attacking the 
women, two of whom suffered over 100 shotgun pellets on their legs, 
26
the Klansmen shot at the parked car of Fannie 
Crumsey. The impact sent shards of window 
glass into the neck of Ms. Crumsey, who could 
have been killed if she had been standing.
The Klansmen got off relatively lightly. Two of the 
participants were acquitted of all charges while 
the shooter was slapped with a minor assault 
conviction. He was ordered to pay a fine of $50 
and served six months out of a nine-month jail 
sentence.
CCR attorneys filed a federal civil rights lawsuit 
against the Klansmen by using the Ku Klux Klan 
Act of 1871 (42 U.S.C. section 1985) to argue 
that the Klansmen were motivated by racial 
hatred and violated the victims’ constitutionally-
protected rights. Under this law, people who have 
suffered from the violent actions of Klansmen can 
seek damages and a federal injunction. Because 
of this strategy, CCR won $535,000 in damages 
for the women and the Klansmen were served with 
an injunction banning them from inciting violence 
and harassment against the Black community in 
Chattanooga. Because it was a federal injunction, 
the case’s outcome was not dependent on the 
whims of local, elected prosecutors or a possibly 
biased all-white jury.
The Crumsey  case could be a powerful legal 
template for communities to use against hate 
groups who seek parade permits or who spark 
acts of violence and harm. 27
28It’s been a stellar year for the CCR Communications Department, thanks 
to your loyal support and participation. 
From Guantánamo, to discriminatory policing and racial justice, to 
making sure Trump and his administration don’t abuse the rule of law, 
we made sure the issues you care about were in the news, on social 
media, and in your in-box. Our multi-channel approach strategically 
combines an array of communications platforms to maximize the 
impact of your donation dollars. 
These include: 
• Press releases and press statements on breaking news 
developments 
• Media outreach to reporters, producers, and bookers throughout 
the year to keep our issues on their radars 
• Op-eds and blogs that help frame the issues 
• Frequent appearances on Democracy Now!, MSNBC, Al Jazeera 
and other shows that offer our distinctive and authoritative 
analysis 
• Videos that connect to viewers with emotional impact 
• 24/7 social media that pushes our content out to additional 
audiences
• Frontlines of Justice, our weekly email newsletter that puts all the 
latest news from our cases in your in-box every Monday morning
• The Daily Outrage, CCR’s own blog
• Emails on breaking news, upcoming events, and more
Our success is a result not just of your generous and faithful support, 
but also your direct participation. With each Facebook comment, 
retweet, website share, and email forward, you enable us to expand our 
audience and broaden our influence.CCR in the news
29
CCR 
in the news
New York Times : Judge Clears Way for Police Body 
Cameras in New York
The Intercept: Major New Court Ruling Says “Even The 
President” Can’t Declare Torture Lawful
New York Daily News: Supreme Court’s ruling on ‘vague’ Trump 
travel ban may spur bias, New York immigration advocates fear
Democracy Now!: Vowing to “Stop Political 
Correctness,” Gen. John Kelly to Head 
Department of Homeland Security
Washington Post: There’s a lot of chatter about 
‘stop and frisk.’ Here are the facts.
New York Magazine: Fordham University’s 
Suppression of Pro-Palestinian Views Shows 
Why Liberals Should Fight for Free Speech
Huffington Post: How The BOP Uses CMUs 
To Silence Prison Writers
Salon: FBI, Homeland Security sued for 
records on surveillance of Black Lives 
Matter activists
ColorLines: SCOTUS Watch: Will 
Government Officials be Penalized for the 
Post 9/11 Profiling?
Los Angeles Times: Border officers 
illegally used lies and coercion to 
thwart asylum seekers, lawsuit saysTruthout: If We Don’t Have Accountability, There’s Nothing to 
Stop Unlawful Detention From Happening
Slate: Amicus: Immunity in High Places
CNN: Can Trump send American citizens to Guantanamo Bay?
Sacramento Bee: Easing of solitary confinement brings hope
The Village Voice: New Toolkit Helps Immigrants Fight Back In Era 
of ‘No Limits’ Deportations
30BERTHA JUSTICE FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM
The Bertha Justice Fellowship is a two-year program for emerging lawyers (0-2 years out of 
law school) who are interested in gaining both practical experience working on CCR cases 
and a theoretical understanding of how legal advocacy can create social change. CCR hosts 
four new Bertha Fellows every two years.
The Bertha Fellows are assigned to work alongside lawyers in one of our three docket areas: 
(1) Guantánamo Global Justice Initiative; (2) Government Misconduct/Racial Justice; 
and (3) International Human Rights. There have also been opportunities to do work that 
straddles different dockets.
Bertha Fellows at CCR are sponsored by the Bertha Foundation, which hosts emerging 
lawyers at several legal organizations across the world. In addition to gaining legal 
experience on CCR cases, Bertha Fellows at CCR have had opportunities to (1) attend 
regional and international meetings, (2) network with lawyers from around the world and 
(3) receive additional mentoring and non-traditional training such as leadership, media and 
advocacy, activism, and movement building.
CCR is currently hosting four Bertha Fellows, through September 2018. Stephanie Llanes 
is a 2016 graduate of the University of California, Berkeley School of Law and has worked 
on a range of CCR’s immigration cases and our Pelican Bay solitary confinement case. 
She is also a leader inside and outside of CCR in raising calls for justice for the people of 
Puerto Rico. Ruhan Nagra  is a 2016 graduate of Stanford Law School, who has been deeply 
immersed in all aspects of CCR’s Palestine solidarity and human rights work. Britney 
Wilson is a 2015 graduate of the University of Pennsylvania School of Law and completed 
a one-year fellowship at the ACLU before joining CCR, where she has been an integral 
member of the Floyd  remedial team and the Furlow  team challenging St. Louis County’s 
practice of issuing unconstitutional “Wanteds.” Noor Zafa r is a 2016 graduate of Harvard 
Law School. She has worked on a variety of Guantánamo-related briefs and visited clients 
there twice, in addition to working on a range of cases challenging domestic post-9/11 law 
enforcement practices. Collectively, they rushed to the airports after the Muslim travel ban, 
led social justice marches and actions, appeared in print and video media, and counseled 
clients and partners; they are at the heart of CCR’s mission to train the next generation of 
radical lawyers.
BERTHA JUSTICE FELLOWS
 Stephanie Llanes
Ruhan Nagra
Britney Wilson
Noor Zafar31
ELLA BAKER SUMMER INTERNSHIP PROGRAM
The Ella Baker Summer Internship Program is a training program named after the pioneering civil rights activist, that provides intensive experience 
working on CCR cases for first- and second-year law students. Our goal is to develop talented and committed law students to work alongside social 
movements, community organizations, and impacted individuals. The program allows students to gain practical litigation experience, bridges their 
theoretical understanding of the relationship between organizing and lawyering, and introduces them to CCR’s approach to social change work.
The interns are paired with seasoned lawyers who serve as mentors. Each program offers opportunities to work with dockets, such as Government 
Misconduct/Racial Justice, Guantánamo Global Justice Initiative, and International Human Rights. They also have a chance to work with CCR’s Advocacy 
staff on various campaigns. 
Our late President Emeritus Michael Ratner absolutely loved this aspect of CCR’s work and took great pride in working to instill each summer’s Ellas 
with the strength, tenacity, and courage needed to do this work. For both Ella Baker and Michael, we will continue to train those who want to continue 
the fight for equality and social justice.
FREEDOM FLICKS
At CCR, we believe that with an activist, a lawyer, and a storyteller, you can change the 
world. The transformative power of art and culture can fuel social justice movements by 
opening hearts and minds to new possibilities. We believe that stories of struggle and 
courage, be it in film, journalism, music, or a legal case, have the power to challenge 
paradigms of oppression and inspire people to seek change. 
We are bringing some of these compelling stories to new audiences through Freedom Flicks, 
a film series designed to engage people across disciplines in the defining stories of political 
and social unrest that shape our world, past and present. Freedom Flicks programming 
includes cutting-edge, socially engaged documentaries, and harnesses the power of film to 
educate, activate, and build community. Each screening is followed by a short conversation 
with a combination of prominent artists, filmmakers, lawyers, and activists where we 
discuss the film’s themes, criticisms, and intersecting issue areas.32CASE/PROJECT NAME CASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
Policing, Profiling & Immigration Enforcement
Immigrant Defense Project (IDP) v. 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE)Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request and 
litigation against Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS) and Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (ICE) seeking information related 
to ICE’s home raids policies and arrest data as 
well as the particulars of a December 2011 ICE 
warrantless home raid.Immigrant Defense Project; Hispanic Interest 
Coalition of Alabama
Turkmen v. AshcroftClass action lawsuit challenging the detention 
of Muslim, Arab, and South Asian men following 
9/11 immigration sweeps.Nancy Kestenbaum, Jennifer Robbins, Joanne 
Sum-Ping, Matthew Q. Verdin, and David Zionts 
of Covington & Burling LLP; Michael Winger
Al Otro Lado v. KellyClass action lawsuit against officials at DHS 
and Customs and Border Protection (CBP) 
challenging CBP’s unlawful practice of depriving 
asylum seekers along the Mexican border access 
to the U.S. asylum process.Al Otro Lado; American Immigration Council 
(AIC); and Latham & Watkins LLP
U.S. v. Ganias (Amicus)Amicus brief in support of accountant who 
challenged search warrant to seize computer 
data originally collected, copied, and kept 
indefinitely pursuant to an earlier warrant 
directed to his clients.Alan R. Friedman, Samantha V. Ettari, and Noah 
Hertz-Bunzl of Kramer Levin Naftalis & Frankel 
LLP
Hassan v. City of New YorkChallenge to NYPD’s suspicionless surveillance 
of American Muslims in New Jersey on the basis 
of their Muslim identity.Glenn Katon, Farhana Khera, Adil Haq, and 
Naheed Qureshi of Muslim Advocates; Lawrence 
Lustberg, Portia Pedro, and Joseph A. Pace 
of Gibbons, P .C.; Ravinder S. Bhalla of Florio, 
Perrucci, Steinhardt & Fader, LLC
Tanvir v. Tanzin (formerly Tanvir v. Holder)Challenge to the FBI’s abuse of the No-Fly List 
to coerce law-abiding American Muslims into 
spying on their religious communities.Ramzi Kassem of Creating Law Enforcement 
Accountability and Responsibility of CUNY School 
of Law; Jennifer R. Cowan, Bob Shwartz, Erica 
M. Davila, Erol Gulay, and Brandon H. Johnson of 
Debevoise & Plimpton
Floyd v. City of New YorkA federal class action lawsuit against the 
City of New York that successfully challenged 
the NYPD’s practice of racial profiling and 
unconstitutional stop and frisks, and that is 
implementing broad reforms to NYPD policing 
practices.Jonathan Moore and Joshua Moskovitz of Beldock 
Levine & Hoffman LLP; Jenn Rolnick Borchetta of 
Bronx Defenders; Communities United for Police 
Reform (CPR)case  indexI33CASE/PROJECT NAME CASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
Furlow v. BelmarFederal lawsuit challenging the so-called 
Wanteds system as used in St. Louis County, 
Missouri, because it routinely leads to 
unconstitutional arrests of area residents, the 
majority of whom are Black.Arch City Defenders (St. Louis); Paul, Weiss, 
Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison LLP
Color of Change v. FBI, DOJ & DHSFOIA request and litigation against federal law 
enforcement agencies, seeking information on 
their surveillance of Movement for Black Lives  
protestors.Color of Change; Avidan Cover of the Civil Rights 
and Human Rights Clinic at Case Western 
University School of Law 
NSEERS FOIAFOIA request by South Asian Organizing Center 
(DRUM) and CCR to various federal agencies 
seeking information about the National Security 
Entry-Exit Registration System (NSEERS), a 
special registration program that targeted 
Muslim, Arab, and South Asian communities. The 
request seeks information about how NSEERS 
was developed and implemented, including 
the criteria used to target individuals and data 
showing the race, religion, and national origin of 
those subject to the program.Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison LLP
Defending Dissent
United States v. JohnsonCriminal defense of two animal rights activists 
charged under the Animal Enterprise Terrorism 
Act for allegedly liberating animals from fur 
farms.  Michael Deutsch of People’s Law Office; Lillian 
McCartin; Geoffrey Meyer of Federal Defender 
Program in Chicago
Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Herbert 
(Amicus)Amicus brief supporting plaintiffs’ motion for 
summary judgment invalidating Utah’s “ag-gag” 
law.R. Shane Johnson of R. Shane Johnson, PLLC
Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Wasden 
(Amicus)Amicus brief supporting affirmation of lower 
court ruling that Idaho’s “ag-gag” law violates 
the First Amendment, on behalf of two journalism 
professors who are experts in undercover and 
participatory reporting.
Palestinian Solidarity
Davis v. CoxDefending former Olympia Food Co-op board 
members who are being sued over their decision 
to boycott Israeli goods.Bruce Johnson and Brooke Howlett of Davis 
Wright Tremaine LLP; Barbara Harvey; Steven 
Goldberg
Palestine LegalAdvocacy and legislative work challenging 
suppression of Palestinian rights.Dima Khalidi, Liz Jackson, Radhika Sainath, 
Rahul Saksena, Zoha Khalili, Angela Campion, 
and Dylan Fahoome of Palestine Legal; National 
Lawyers Guild; Jewish Voice for Peace; Institute 
for Middle East Understanding34CASE/PROJECT NAME CASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
Awad v. Fordham UniversityLawsuit challenging Fordham University’s 
decision to deny students’ application to start 
Students for Justice in Palestine (SJP) on 
campus.  Radhika Sainath, Dima Khalidi, and Rahul 
Saksena of Palestine Legal; Alan Levine, Esq.
New York BDS Executive Order FOILNew York Freedom of Information Law (FOIL) 
request seeking information on the decision-
making process behind Governor Cuomo’s 
anti-BDS Executive Order.Dima Khalidi, Radhika Sainath, and Rahul 
Saksena of Palestine Legal; Jewish Voice for 
Peace
CCR v. Department of Defense / Gaza 
Freedom Flotilla FOIAA FOIA lawsuit seeking information regarding 
U.S. knowledge of, role in, and response to a 
deadly Israeli attack on a humanitarian flotilla to 
blockaded Gaza.
Doğan v. BarakAmicus brief on behalf of the parents of Furkan 
Doğan, who was killed in the 2010 attack on 
the Gaza Freedom Flotilla, arguing that the 
former Israeli official defendant is not entitled to 
immunity. 
Guantánamo
Barhoumi v. TrumpSuccessful Periodic Review Board (PRB) 
representation of an Algerian citizen held at 
Guantánamo since 2002.Maj. Justin Swick (USAF) of Military 
Commissions Defense Organization; Richard 
Reiter; Jared Kneitel
Al-Bihani v. TrumpRepresention of Yemeni citizen held without 
charge at Guantánamo from 2002 until his 
release in 2016.National Organization for Defending Rights and 
Freedoms (HOOD)
35CASE/PROJECT NAME CASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
Ameziane v. United States / Ameziane FOIAHuman rights petition and request for 
precautionary measures before the Inter-
American Commission on Human Rights 
(IACHR), urging the IACHR to declare that the 
U.S. government violated Ameziane’s human 
rights and prescribe relief, including a public 
apology for what was done to him.  FOIA action 
seeking information about alleged government 
policy of keeping seized detainee property.Andrew J. Brouwer of Refugee Law Office; 
Sophie Weller;  Jennifer Oscroft of Cornerstone 
Barristers; Francisco Quintana and Charles 
Abbott of Center for Justice and International 
Law (CEJIL)
Al Qahtani v. Trump A habeas corpus petition on behalf of the only 
Guantánamo detainee  the government has 
openly admitted was tortured.Ramzi Kassem; Sandra Babcock of Center for 
International Human Rights at Northwestern 
University School of Law; Lawrence Lustberg and 
Joseph A. Pace of Gibbons P .C.
Khan v. Trump / Khan v. Gates / United States 
v. KhanRepresentation of Guantánamo prisoner Majid 
Khan, who was charged in military commissions 
and a victim of the CIA torture program.Katya Jestin and Natalie Orpett of Jenner & 
Block LLP; LTC Jon Jackson and LT Tia Suplizio 
of Military Commissions Defense Organization; 
Anna Gallagher of Maggio + Kattar, P .C.; Sameer 
Khosa of Axis Law Chambers (Pakistan)
Duran v. TrumpHabeas corpus case on behalf of a native of 
Somalia, who was captured in Djibouti and 
rendered to the CIA in March 2004. He was 
brought to Guantánamo in September 2006, 
where he has since been held indefinitely and 
without charge.
GTMO IACHR General Precautionary 
MeasuresThematic hearing on U.S. Guantánamo detention 
policy.Francisco Quintana and Charles Abbott of Center 
for Justice and International Law (CEJIL)
Guantánamo partnersJohn Chandler; Eugene Fidell; Eric Freedman; 
Stephen Vladeck; Ramzi Kassem of CUNY Law 
School; Office of the Federal Public Defender, 
District of Oregon; Military Commissions Defense 
Organization; David Remes; Jenner & Block LLP; 
Covington & Burling LLP; Debevoise & Plimpton 
LLP; Robert Kirsch; Sabin Willett; Dr. Katherine 
Porterfield; Martha Rayner; Witness Against 
Torture; Amnesty International USA; Constitution 
Project; American Civil Liberties Union; Reprieve; 
National Coalition to Protect Civil Freedoms; 
HOOD36CASE/PROJECT NAME CASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
LGBTQI Rights
Sexual Minorities Uganda v. Scott LivelyFederal lawsuit against a U.S.-based anti-gay 
extremist for his active role in the conspiracy to 
strip away fundamental rights from LGBTI people 
in Uganda, which constitutes persecution under 
international law.Jeena Shah of Constitutional & International 
Human Rights Clinics at Rutgers School of 
Law-Newark; Judith Chomsky; Mark Sullivan, 
Josh Colangelo-Bryan, Kaleb McNeely, and Dan 
Beebe of Dorsey & Whitney LLP; Luke Ryan of the 
Law Offices of Sasson Turnbull Ryan and Hoose; 
Christopher Betke of Coughlin-Betke, LLP
State of Missouri v. Michael L. Johnson 
(Amicus)Amicus brief on behalf of Michael Johnson, 
a former Missouri college student sentenced 
to more than 30 years in prison for violating 
Missouri’s draconian HIV transmission and 
exposure statute.Center for HIV Law & Policy; ACLU of Missouri 
Foundation; Gibbons P .C.
Doe v. HoodFederal lawsuit challenging Mississippi’s ongoing 
enforcement of its sodomy statute, over a 
decade after such statutes were struck down by 
the Supreme Court.Jacob W. Howard; Robert B. McDuff; Matthew 
Strugar
Mass Incarceration
Ashker v. Governor of CaliforniaClass action lawsuit that succesfully challenged 
prolonged solitary confinement as cruel and 
unusual punishment, and that is implementing 
substantial reforms to California prisons.Jules Lobel; Weil, Gotshal & Manges LLP; Law 
Offices of Charles Carbone; Legal Services For 
Prisoners With Children; California Prison Focus; 
Siegel & Yee; Ellenberg & Hull; Bremer Law Group 
PLLC; Samuel R. Miller; Eva DeLair
37CASE/PROJECT NAME CASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
Aref v. SessionsFederal lawsuit challenging the Communications 
Management Units (CMUs), two highly restrictive 
federal prison units that segregate certain 
prisoners and severely limit and control their 
communications.Gregory Silbert, Eileen Citron, John Gerba, Lara 
Trager, and Nathaniel West of Weil, Gotshal & 
Manges LLP; Kenneth A. Kreuscher
Zogorski v. Tennessee (Amicus)Amicus brief urging the Supreme Court to 
hear the appeal of Edmund Zagorski, a man 
imprisoned on death row in Tennessee. 
CCR argued that the death penalty, in all 
circumstances, is unconstitutional as it deprives 
people of their fundamental right to life in 
violation of the 14th amendment.Kevin Barry, Quinnipiac University
Racial Justice
Phillips v. SnyderFederal lawsuit challenging constitutionality 
of state-appointed “Emergency Managers” in 
predominantly Black and brown communities of 
Michigan.John Philo, Anthony Paris, and Stephanie Vaught 
of Sugar Law Center; Bill Goodman and Julie 
Hurwitz of Goodman & Hurwitz, P .C.; Herbert 
Sanders of The Sanders Law Firm; Keith Flynn 
of Miller Cohen PLC; Cynthia Heenan and Alec 
Gibbs of Constitutional Litigation Associates; 
Mark P . Fancher, Michael J. Steinberg and Kary L. 
Moss of the ACLU Fund of Michigan
Gulino v. Board of Education of the City of 
New York and the New York State Education 
DepartmentA class action lawsuit challenging the racially 
discriminatory impact of several standardized 
tests New York City used in a re-certification 
process for city public school teachers.Rachel Stevens, Anthony Gill, Lane Earnest, Kate 
Green, Joshua Kane, and Valerie Ruppert of DLA 
Piper; Josh Sohn, Shauneida Navarrete, Robert 
Mantel, Mark Lee, Joe Parilla, and Elizabeth 
Wanunu of Watson Farley & Williams LLP; Joel 
Hellman; Samuel R. Miller
38CASE/PROJECT NAME CASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
United States of America and Vulcan Society, 
Inc. v. City of New YorkA federal class action lawsuit on behalf of 
the Vulcan Society and individual firefighters 
and firefighter applicants that successfully 
challenged the New York City Fire Department’s 
racially discriminatory hiring practices.Richard Levy, Dana Lossia, Robert Stroup, and 
Rebekah Cook-Mack of Levy Ratner, P .C.; Judy 
Scolnick of Scott + Scott LLP; The Vulcan 
Society
Puerto Rico Freedom of Information Act 
(FOIA) RequestsA series of FOIA requests for information about 
the controversial and anti-democratic fiscal 
control board established in 2016 to address the 
concerns of the controversial fiscal control board 
established under the Puerto Rico Oversight, 
Management, and Economic Stability Act 
(PROMESA).Natasha Lycia Ora Bannan, LatinoJustice 
PRLDEF; Carla Minet, Centro de Periodismo 
Investigativo (Center for Investigative 
Journalism)
International Human Rights
Survivors Network of those Abused by 
Priests (SNAP) v. the PopeLegal submissions before international human 
rights bodies and advocacy on behalf of the 
Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests 
(SNAP) charging Vatican officials with enabling 
and concealing widespread and systematic 
sexual violence against children and vulnerable 
adults by Catholic clergy.Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests 
(SNAP); Bishop Accountability
Accountability for U.S. Torture: FranceSupporting action seeking accountability for U.S. 
torture brought in France under the principle of 
universal jurisdiction.European Center for Constitutional and Human 
Rights (ECCHR)
Accountability for U.S. Torture: GermanySupporting action seeking accountability for U.S. 
torture brought in Germany under the principle of 
universal jurisdiction.European Center for Constitutional and Human 
Rights (ECCHR)
Accountability for U.S. Torture: SpainActions seeking accountability for U.S. torture 
brought in Spain under the principle of universal 
jurisdiction.European Center for Constitutional and Human 
Rights (ECCHR); Gonzalo Boye of Boye-Elbal y 
Asociados
International Criminal Court: Palestine 
Preliminary ExaminationSubmission on the closure of Gaza as a crime 
against humanity – persecution. Palestinian Center for Human Rights; Al-Haq; Al 
Mezan
Mamani v. Sánchez de Lozada / Mamani v. 
Sánchez BerzaínFederal lawsuit challenging government-ordered, 
extrajudicial killings in Bolivia.”Judith Chomsky; Beth Stephens; Steven 
Schulman, Edward Woods, Jonathan Slowik, and 
Mariya Hutson of Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & 
Feld LLP; Susan Farbstein, Thomas Becker, and 
Tyler Giannini of the International Human Rights 
Clinic at Harvard Law School; Jeremy Bollinger 
of Moss Bollinger LLP; Claret Vargas of the 
Center for Law, Justice and Society (Dejusticia); 
David Rudovsky of Kairys, Rudovsky, Messing 
& Feinberg, LLP; Paul Hoffman of Schonbrun, 
Seplow, Harris and Hoffman LLP; Ira Kurzban 
and Celso Perez of Kurzban, Kurzban, Weinger & 
Tetzoli39CASE/PROJECT NAME CASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
Honduras: True Commission and CCR 
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) RequestsFOIA requests to various U.S. government 
agencies regarding the 2009 military coup in 
Honduras.
Jesner v. Arab Bank (Amicus)Amicus brief with the International Federation for 
Human Rights in the U.S. Supreme Court, arguing 
that the Alien Tort Statute applies to corporations 
to remedy violations of international law, 
and that it must be applied broadly and in 
compliance with international human rights law, 
including the principle of non-discrimination, 
rather than limited to cases involving terrorism.
Advocacy before the UN Treaty Bodies and 
Special Procedures (includes treaty review 
advocacy around ICCPR, CAT, CERD, as 
well as engagement with Working Group 
of Experts on People of African Descent, 
Special Rapporteurs, etc.)”Follow-up advocacy related to several CCR 
issues regarding the completion of treaty reviews 
by independent bodies, as well as before two 
special procedures – the Working Group of 
Experts on People of African Descent and the 
Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of 
peaceful assembly and of association – both 
of which issued findings and shared concerns 
related to policing practices, police violence, 
surveillance of activists, and other findings.US Human Rights Network; National Economic 
and Social Rights Initiative (NESRI); American 
Civil Liberties Union (ACLU); New York Civil 
Liberties Union (NYCLU); Malcolm X Grassroots 
Movement (MXGM)40#NotMyPresident Reception
Left to Right: Lumumba Akinwole-Bandele 
(CCR Board member), Linda Sarsour, Peter 
Weiss, Vince Warren (CCR Executive Director)
On June 8, 2017, our annual President’s Reception 
became the #NotMyPresident Reception.  We paid 
tribute to our dear friend and tireless human rights 
fighter Peter Weiss with the CCR Founders Award 
as well as the courageous and fiercely committed 
activist Linda Sarsour with the CCR Radical 
Leadership Award.  
Thanks to our wonderful community of supporters 
who give us the strength to continue the fight every 
day!
Daniel Weiss & 
Jenni Wolfson
Cora WeissMaria LaHood, 
CCR Deputy 
Legal Director41
50th anniversary 
celebration
Thank you for making it a night to remember!
On October 6, 2016 in New York City, we celebrated 50 years of fighting 
for social justice with a special tribute to CCR visionary Michael Ratner. 
In the words of CCR Legal Director Baher Azmy that night, “Michael 
was the most visionary, principled, strategic, fearless, passionate – 
and deeply humane and humble – advocate I have ever come across 
and likely ever will. I almost cannot understand how someone can be 
so vigorous in his challenge to power and yet so sweet, generous, and 
unassuming – except to say that in his private life he modeled the 
broader world he wanted to see – one driven by love, kindness and 
respect for human dignity.”
We were honored to be joined by so many of you who make our work 
possible – clients, supporters, partners, co-counsel, staff and board, 
and family and friends.
Katherine Franke, CCR Board ChairAna Ratner, Karen Ranucci, Bruce Ratner
L to R: Joshua Paulson, 
former Ella Baker intern, 
Vincent Warren, CCR 
Executive Director, Michelle 
DePass, CCR Board Member42
Esperanza SpauldingDolly Filartiga, former CCR client
Baher Azmy, CCR Legal Director
Former CCR President Jules Lobel 
and Family
Anne Hess & Craig Kaplan43in memoriam
HUBERT R. MARSHALL
It is with sadness that we say goodbye to a generous friend of CCR.
Hubert Marshall dedicated his life to teaching human rights and 
nonviolence. A professor for 37 years, he was a mentor to generations 
of students.  Hugh was a conscientious objector who refused to serve in 
World War II and was assigned to serve in work camps during the war.  
While pursuing his doctorate degree at the University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill in 1947, Hugh and his wife Rachelle became close friends 
with a number of civil rights leaders, including Bayard Rustin. 
Hugh’s passion for civil rights and anti-violence spilled over into his 
curriculum at Stanford, where he taught a popular course on American 
public policy for three decades. Teaching was Hugh’s greatest passion, 
and his students adored him.
Hugh will be deeply missed by all of us at CCR. EMILY MARKS SKOLNICK
In January, we lost a longtime CCR supporter and an extraordinary 
champion for justice. 
Emily Marks Skolnick was a lifelong activist who was inspired by her 
parents’ and grandparents’ social justice values. While studying labor 
economics at Wellesley College in the late 1930s, Emily organized labor 
union strikes on behalf of garment workers. In the 1940s and 50s, she 
fought for desegregation in schools and movie theatres and helped 
organize protests. 
Throughout her lifetime, Emily was also a passionate advocate for 
women’s rights and a fervent anti-war activist. She opened her home to 
political refugees, including a family fleeing political violence in Central 
America who lived on her land for 20 years.
Emily’s fierce commitment to social justice will be deeply missed.
It is always sad to lose a member of our community, but their ideals will 
live on in our work.
Judith C. Friedman
Barbara Harlow
Charles S. Hey-Maestre
Hubert Marshall
Teresa C. Panepinto
Michael Ratner
Theodore Shapin Jr.
Emily Marks Skolnick
Robert Smith
Jean Stein44FINANCIAL REPORT  JULY 1, 2016 – JUNE 30, 2017
TOTAL EXPENSES
$10,564,152TOTAL REVENUE, GAINS AND OTHER SUPPORT
$22,773,694
PROGRAM SERVICES
Litigation  $6,895,077
Advocacy  $1,744,214GRANTS AND CONTRIBUTIONS
$10,399,421
COURT AWARDS AND ATTORNEY FEES
 $12,167,218
NET INVESTMENT INCOME
$67,501
SUPPORTING SERVICES
Administrative & General  $827,874
Fundraising  $1,096,987NET REALIZED GAINS ON INVESTMENT TRANSACTIONS
$78,403
OTHER INCOME
$61,151*
GOVERNMENT AND CORPORATE DONATIONS
$0**
EXPENSES NET ASSETS
Program Services = $8,639,291 Net Assets as of June 30, 2016 = $9,040,952
Supporting Services = $1,924,861 Change in Net Assets = $12,418,499
Total Expenses = $10,564,152 Net Assets as of June 30, 2017 = $21,459,451
** CCR is a nonprofit charity that relies on individual and foundation support.  
Your dedication and generosity is indispensable in the fight for justice.
THANK YOU!*Other income = Miscellaneous,Publications Income, Events, and Speaker Feesfinancial report45welcome to new board members
LISA A. CROOMS-ROBINSON  is an 
Associate Dean for Academic Affairs 
and Professor of Law at Howard 
University. She teaches Constitutional 
Law, Gender and the Law, International 
Human Rights Law, and Supreme Court 
Jurisprudence. 
A human rights activist since 1984, 
Crooms-Robinson previously worked 
with the Washington Office on Africa 
and the American Committee on Africa. 
In addition to the Center for Constitutional 
Rights, Crooms-Robinson is a founder 
and board member of the U.S. Human 
Rights Network. She has also served 
as either an advisor to or a member 
of The Urban Justice Center, UNIFEM, 
the Sentencing Project, the International Human Rights Law Group (Global 
Rights), Amnesty International - U.S.A., the Human Rights at Home 
Campaign, the Women’s Rights Division of Human Rights Watch, the 
Women’s Institute for Leadership Development for Human Rights, the Pauli 
Murray Project, the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Violence Against Women, 
Its Causes and Consequences, and the Project for the Advancement of Our 
Common Humanity.  
Crooms-Robinson was a Fulbright Scholar at the Norman Manley Law 
School – University of the West Indies, Mona Campus in Jamaica where she 
conducted research on the relationship between gender, violence, and law in 
the construction of Jamaican post-independence national identity. 
Crooms-Robinson’s research and activist interests include identity and 
rights under international human rights law, economic justice, poverty, and 
violence. Some of her publications include “All man come together and 
said boys mus’ dead” : Hyper-heterosexuality, Afro-Jamaican Culture , 
and the 1997 Condom Riots,  in S ex, Power and Taboo: Gender and HIV 
in the Caribbean and Beyond  (Ian Randle 2008); and Henry Louis Gates 
Jr., Claude Steele, Lawrence D. Bobo, Michael Dawson, Gerald Jaynes, Lisa 
Crooms-Robinson, & Linda Darling-Hammond, The Oxford Handbook of 
African American Citizenship, 1865 – Present (Oxford University Press, 
2012).
Crooms-Robinson received her bachelor’s degree in Economics from Howard 
University and her Juris Doctor degree from the University of Michigan.MICHELLE DEPASS  is 
the Dean and Tishman 
Professor for Environment 
and Sustainability, Milano 
School of International 
Affairs, Management and 
Urban Policy. In this role, she 
is responsible for leading the 
institution and cultivating the 
next generation of leaders 
in urban policy, global 
development, sustainability, 
and management.
Before joining Milano in 
2013, DePass was the 
Assistant Administrator 
for International and Tribal 
Affairs at the Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA), 
where she was responsible for all dimensions of environmental 
policy between the EPA and other nations, federally recognized 
tribal nations, multilateral institutions, and donors.
Prior to joining the EPA, DePass was a Program Officer at the 
Ford Foundation, with a portfolio focused on the environment 
and community development, most notably green economy and 
climate change, environmental health and justice, and indigenous 
environmental rights. In her two-decade career in sustainability 
and public service, DePass has also served as founding Executive 
Director of the New York Environmental Justice Alliance, Senior 
Policy Advisor to the commissioner of the New Jersey Department 
of Environmental Protection, and environmental manager for the 
City of San Jose. 
A former staff attorney at CCR, DePass is a sought-after civil 
society leader and has served on dozens of boards and advisory 
committees to government, non-governmental, and international 
organizations. 
DePass holds a bachelor’s degree from Tufts University, a 
Juris Doctor from Fordham Law School, and a Master of Public 
Administration from Baruch College, where she was a National 
Urban Fellow.
46MONAMI MAULIK  is the founder of Desis Rising Up & Moving (DRUM), one of the first South Asian immigrant 
workers’ membership-based organizations for social justice in the U.S. She currently serves as the executive 
director and is responsible for developing campaigns and leading national and global alliance work.
Maulik, who was born in the refugee colonies of Kolkata, India and grew up in the Bronx, New York, is also an 
international advocate on gender and migration. She has been a leader and grassroots organizer in the fields of 
immigrant, racial justice, youth, and global justice for more than 18 years and speaks to audiences across the U.S. 
and internationally about these issues. 
Prior to founding DRUM in 2000, Maulik was an Organizing Committee member of the NY Taxi Workers’ Alliance and 
Interim Executive Director of TICO (Training Institute for Careers in Organizing).
Maulik also serves as a board member of the National Network for Immigrant and Refugee Rights, the national 
Dignity in Schools Campaign, the Civil Society Steering Committee for the UN High Level Dialogue on Migration, 
Immigrant Communities in Action (ICA) in NYC, the NGO Coordinating Committee on Migration, and the United 
National Anti-War Committee, and as an advisory board member of the North Star Fund. In 2012, Maulik launched 
and now coordinates the Global South Asian Migrant Workers Alliance.
Maulik has received various awards including the Asian American Heritage Award from NYC Comptroller John C. Liu (2013); the Community Leadership 
Award from New York City Council Member Daniel Dromm (2012); the Jane Bagely Lehman Award of the Tides Foundation “Honoring Post 9/11 
Organizing for Immigrant Rights and Civil Liberties” (2002); the Union Square Award as the founder of DRUM; and the Open Society Institute NYC 
Community Fellowship of the George Soros Foundation (2001).
Maulik is published in Howard Zinn’s book, “Voices of a People’s History,” the Journal on Race and Ethnicity , and Left Turn  magazine.  
She holds a bachelor’s degree in International Development, Women’s Studies, and South Asian Studies from Cornell University.
welcome to new board members47BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Katherine Franke, Chair
Katherine Acey, Treasurer
Lumumba Akinwole-Bandele
Laila Al-Arian
Colette Pichon Battle
Judith Butler
Elizabeth Castelli
Rosemary Corbett, Secretary
Lisa Crooms-Robinson
Michelle DePass
Jean Entine
Leila Hessini, Vice Chair
Nsombi Lambright
Monami Maulik
Gay J. McDougall
MANAGEMENT TEAM
Vincent Warren
Executive Director
Baher Azmy
Legal Director 
Maria LaHood
Deputy Legal Director 
Dorothee Benz
Communications Director (through March 2017) 
Kevi Brannelly
Director of Development (through October 2016) 
Carolyn Chambers
Associate Executive Director (through May 2017)
Theda Jackson-Mau
Director of Development (as of February 2017) 
Grace Lile
Director of Operations (as of June 2017)
Jeffrey Weinrich
Finance DirectorADMINISTRATIVE STAFF
Amnah Almukhtar
IT and Administrative Associate (through July 2016)
Gregory Butterfield
Finance Manager
Orlando Gudino
 IT Manager
Nabilah Islam
Part-Time Administrative Assistant
Sasha Jamieson
Operations Associate (as of September 2016)
Lisa Levy
Human Resources Manager
Jahmall Weekes
IT Associate (as of October 2016)
Alberto White
Office Manager
COMMUNICATIONS
Lauren Gazzola
Communications Associate for Publications 
Charles Greene
Web Communications and Multimedia Manager (as of November 2016) 
Jesse Harold
Web Communications and Multimedia Manager (through November 2016) 
Jen Nessel
Communications Coordinator
Dana Rasso
Digital Engagement Manager (as of July 2016)board   staff   ella bakers   interns   volunteers48DEVELOPMENT
Pam Bradshaw Fujii
Grant Writer (through April 2017)
Doug Edelson
Foundation Relations Officer 
Kevin Gay
Database and Online Giving Manager (through August 2016) 
Jasmine Jacobs
Donor Relations Associate (as of May 2017)
José Monzon
Development Associate (through February 2017)
Rob Santiago
Senior Major Gifts Officer (as of November 2016)
Daniel Strum
Database and Online Giving Manager (as of August 2016)
LEGAL AND ADVOCACY DEPARTMENT 
Alexis Agathocleous
Senior Staff Attorney;Deputy Legal Director (through July 2017)
Darius Charney
Senior Staff Attorney
Claire Dailey
Legal Worker
J. Wells Dixon
Senior Staff Attorney
Omar Farah
Senior Staff Attorney
Katherine Gallagher
Senior Staff Attorney
Angelo Guisado
Staff Attorney (as of March 2017)Ian Head
Senior Legal Worker
Aliya Hussain
Advocacy Program Manager 
Shayana Kadidal
Senior Managing Attorney
Pardiss Kebriaei
Senior Staff Attorney
Stephanie Llanes
Bertha Justice Fellow at CCR (as of September 2016)
Rachel Meeropol
Senior Staff Attorney
Zachery Morris
Bertha Justice Institute Fellow (through September 2016)
Ruhan Nagra
Bertha Justice Fellow (as of September 2016)
Ibraham Qatabi
Legal Worker
Dominic Renfrey
Advocacy Program Manager (as of February 2017)
Meejin Richart
Advocacy and Events Associate (through May 2017)
Somalia Samuel
Bertha Justice Institute Fellow (through September 2016)
Ghita Schwarz
Senior Staff Attorney
Purvi Shah
Bertha Justice Institute Director (through August 2016)
Omar Shakir
Bertha Justice Institute Fellow (through September 2016)
Pamela Spees
Senior Staff Attorney49Leah Todd
Senior Legal Worker 
Azure Wheeler
Temporary Attorney
An-Tuan Williams
Bertha Justice Institute Program Associate (through May 2017)
Britney Wilson
Bertha Justice Fellow at CCR (as of September 2016)
Noor Zafar
Bertha Justice Fellow at CCR (as of September 2016)
Nahal Zamani
Advocacy Program Manager
2016-2017 ELLA BAKERS 
Ifrah Ahmed
John Bruning
Ruby-Beth Buitekant (Elizabeth Melamid Fellow)
Marquita Christy
Mary Georgevich
Cristian Gonzalez
Anjana Joshi (Doris and Don Shaffer Intern)
Liam Lowery
Richard Montgomery II
Patrick Murphree
Mohammed Nabulsi
Ivanley Noisette
Ranit Patel
Collin Poirot
Carli Raben
Danica Rodarmel
Jordan Shannon
Astha Sharma-Pokharel
Erian Stirrup
Alaina J. Thomas (Gregory H. Finger Racial Justice Fellow)INTERNS
Anna Chiara Amato
Anastasia Eriksson
Anna Rahel Fischer
Jenny Fleischer
Nathan Goldwag
Nick Gumas
Zeenat Islam (Pegasus Fellow)
Ayana Jihad
Angie Jimenez
Amy Myers
Asma Peracha
Jamshid Saloor
Zarka Shabir
Sowjhanya Shankaran
Nomalanga Shields (Grinnell College Intern)
Eunice Bautista
Morgane Garnier
Brie McLemore (Segal Brandeis Fellow)
Zoe Pratt
Sima Aljallad
Margaret Tobin
VOLUNTEER
Merry E. Neisner
50ways to support CCR
MAKE AN ONLINE GIFT AT 
WWW.CCRJUSTICE.ORG/DONATE.  
It’s fast, easy and secure, and your gift will go to work right 
away. Online gifts are a quicker and greener way to give.
JOIN CCR RECURRING GIFT PARTNERS
These gifts provide CCR with a reliable, steady source of 
income support, making it possible for us to plan better 
and take on more cases. Sign up online for a monthly or 
quarterly recurring gift at our website: www.CCRjustice.
org/Donate. 
INCLUDE CCR IN YOUR WILL.  
Including CCR as a beneficiary in your will is an excellent 
way to make a statement about the values you held during 
your lifetime. You may choose to make a bequest to CCR 
of a specific dollar amount or a percentage of your estate.
MAKE CCR YOUR BIRTHDAY GIFT! 
Ask friends and family to make gifts to CCR in your honor 
as your holiday/ birthday/ anniversary/no-reason-at-all 
gift OR make gifts to CCR in honor of the folks on your 
shopping list. These gifts will pay tribute to our shared 
social justice values, while fueling CCR’s efforts to restore 
the Constitution and protect and extend human rights. DONATE STOCK. 
If you sell depreciated stock and give the proceeds to CCR, 
you may be able to claim the loss on your taxes, as well 
as the charitable deduction. If you donate appreciated 
securities to CCR, you may avoid capital gains taxes and 
receive a charitable deduction. Please contact CCR for stock 
transfer information.
HOST A HOUSE PARTY TO INTRODUCE 
FRIENDS AND ALLIES TO CCR’S WORK. 
Now more than ever, we need your help in expanding our 
reach to those who care about freedom and justice.
ATTEND A LOCAL EVENT IF CCR IS IN YOUR 
NEIGHBORHOOD—AND BRING A FRIEND! 
If you are on our email list you will receive invitations. 
Public events are listed on our calendar: www.CCRjustice.
org/calendar.
STAY UP-TO-DATE AND SHARE OUR NEWS! 
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional 
Rights” on Facebook and bookmark CCR’s website: 
www.CCRjustice.org. Forward our newsletters, action alerts, 
and appeals to your friends.
s
For more information on any of the above, please contact
Theda Jackson-Mau, CCR’s Director of Development
at 212-614-6448 or tjackson-mau@ccrjustice.org51Research and writing: Sharon Adarlo, sharonadarlo@gmail.com • Design: Kathryn Bowser Graphic Design, kathrynbowser@gmail.com
Photo credits:
P . 4: Liz Lemon and used under CC0 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0) Public Domain Dedication
P . 5: Hernán Piñera and used under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 Generic (CC BY-SA 2.0)
P . 9:  Jean Cassella
P . 11: Ted Eytan and used under CC Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 Generic (CC BY-SA 2.0)
P . 12: Alisdare Hickson and used under CC Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 Generic (CC BY-SA 2.0)
P . 12: Molly Adams and used under CC Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC BY 2.0)
P . 11: Ted Eytan and used under CC Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 Generic (CC BY-SA 2.0)
P . 14: The National Guard and used under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 Generic (CC BY-SA 2.0)
P . 15: Camp X-ray photo: Shane T. McCoy, U.S. Navy
P . 17: Marco Verch and used under Creative Commons Attribution- Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC BY 2.0)
P . 18: TheNational Guard and used under Creative Commons Attribution-2.0 Generic (CC BY 2.0)
P . 19: Ed Uthman and used under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 Generic (CC BY-SA 2.0)
P . 20: warschauer brücke and used under Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC BY 2.0) 
P . 21: Used under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-SA 3.0)
P . 22: gap gaza and used under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 2.0 Generic (CC BY-NC-SA 2.0)
P . 23: Joe Catron and used under Creative Commons Attribution -NonCommercial 2.0 Generic (CC BY-NC 2.0)
 
P . 24: Anthony Crider and used under Creative Commons Attribution- 2.0 Generic (CC BY 2.0)
P . 25: Louise Palanker and used under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 Generic (CC BY-SA 2.0)
P . 26: Victoria Pickering and used under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 Generic (CC BY-SA 2.0)
P . 27: Lorie Shaull and used under Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC BY 2.0)
P . 34: Steve Parkinson and used under Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 2.0 Generic (CC BY-NC-ND 2.0)
P . 36: Eric Wagner and used under Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 2.0 Generic (CC BY-NC-SA 2.0) 
P . 36: Muhammad Ashiq and used under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 Generic (CC BY-SA 2.0)
P . 37: Felton Davis and used under Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC BY 2.0)
P . 37: Daniel Arauz and used under Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 Generic (CC BY-SA 2.0)
P . 69: Eytan and used under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 Generic (CC BY-SA 2.0)attributions52No social change has ever happened 
without taking a risk
and we appreciate your standing with us
and staring the future in the face.
By doing that
you are making a real difference
in the lives of the clients and communities we serve.
  Thank you!
www. CCRjustice.org
53THANK YOU.
The Center for Constitutional Rights has been a part of virtually every 
movement for civil and human rights over the last five decades. Through 
litigation, public education, and advocacy, we work to transform the key 
social, cultural, legal, economic, and political systems that support and 
maintain institutional racism, patriarchy, oppressive economic structures, 
and abusive state power. 
The human impact of our work—the lives saved, the lives changed—is 
extraordinary and heartening. CCR gives voice to the people and ideas 
that make positive change. In and outside the courtroom, we fight for the 
most vulnerable while educating and mobilizing national and international 
citizens to address serious and unconscionable challenges.
Thank you for your support! Together, we are fighting the power of 
oppressive systems and building the power of movements and people. As 
we embark on the next 50 years, we are grateful to have you by our side.