Annual Report 2007
40th AnniversaryOur Mission
The Center for Constitutional Rights is dedicated to advancing and 
protecting the rights guaranteed by the United States Constitution and 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Founded in 1966 by  
attorneys who represented civil rights movements in the South,  
CCR is a non-profit legal and educational organization committed to 
the creative use of law as a positive force for social change.1Table of Contents
Letter from the President  2
Letter from the Executive Director  3
40 Years on the Frontlines for Social Justice  4
Guantánamo Global Justice Initiative  8
Rendition & Ghost Detentions  12
Racial, Gender and Economic Justice  14
Corporate Human Rights Abuse  16
International Law and Accountability  18
Prison Justice  20
Attacks on Immigrants  22
Surveillance & Material Support  24
Attacks on Dissent  26
Internships and Fellowships  28
CCR in the News  30
Youth Outreach  31
40th Anniversary Celebration  32
Case Index  34
Friends & Allies  38
Guantánamo Habeas Counsel  41
Financial Report  45
Our Donors  46
Speaking Engagements  58
Board of Directors and Staff  59
In Memoriam  602“These are the times that try men’s [and women’s] souls.” Our democracy is in  
peril. Rights that we thought were fundamental, the prohibition on torture, disap -
pearances and indefinite detention are considered dispensable. We are living in a 
plutocracy and under a government engaged in permanent war. There is no clear 
way ahead and certainly no assurance that a more just society is within reach or will be achieved.
At times like this we must go back to our history and get strength from the struggles won and the 
words of one of our founders, Ben Smith. When the Vietnam War was raging, destroying countless lives and its ending appeared unachievable, he admonished us:
“Do not despair! Revitalizing the Fourteenth Amendment looked as distant in 1959 and 1960 as do the problems of the Vietnam peace movement today…. We shall prevail.”
Yes, we shall prevail, and change is emerging, although more slowly then we desire. Almost six years after the first incarcera -
tions at Guantánamo, we are again in front of the Supreme Court, and will hopefully restore the right of habeas corpus to 
the detainees and to all of us. Torture by our government continues, but the military, although not the CIA, has renounced its use. The unconscionable and illegal war in Iraq is our decade’s albatross; we will not be rid of it easily. The majority of the American people understand its horror; but they need to enter actively into ending it. So, we are not without hope because we understand that there is struggle. 
Recently, someone who obviously did not understand the Center, snidely remarked to me that we “lucked” into represent -
ing the Guantánamo detainees. Yes, I thought to myself, we lucked into those cases the same way we lucked into working 
early on in the Southern civil rights struggles, or the Chicago 8 case, or the Supreme Court challenge to denial of Medicaid for abortions, or in establishing that foreign torturers could be sued in the United States, or in closing down the Haitian HIV camp at Guantánamo, or in holding unconstitutional warrantless wiretapping in the 70’s or in challenging almost every war this country has engaged in.
Of course, luck or accident had absolutely nothing to do with CCR engaging in the struggles, political issues and passions 
of its times. We have since our founding some 40 years ago demonstrated an unswerving commitment to progressive social change and the protections of fundamental rights that protect the dignity of every person. We have a vision of what this country and world should be; we are uncompromising and immovable in struggling for that vision. We understand the need to take political, legal and personal risks in our work— we did so when we represented Guantánamo detainees shortly after 9/11. We did so in challenging the onerous prison telephone system and winning that struggle this year. We did do in repre -
senting Maher Arar who had been rendered to Syria for torture. And we will do so again and again.
We understand that a better society is not and cannot be won only in the courts, particularly in the courts that have been 
foisted on this county over the last twenty-five years. Social movements and struggles in the streets are necessary to create a just society. The Center was born out of the belief that we could be partners with movements for social change. We still adhere to that belief. 
We thank all of you who recognize the important role CCR has played over the last 40 years and will continue to play in the 
many struggles ahead.
Michael Ratner
Letter from the President3
“We must hear the voices and have the dreams of those who came 
before us, and we must keep them with us in a very real sense.  This will keep us centered.  This will help us to maintain our understanding of the job we must do.”   – Sonia Sanchez
The job we must do is clear one.  The varied paths we will take to do that job are less so.   History has repeatedly taught us that the hard-won victories of yesterday can never be taken for granted because the American memory is woefully short and right-wing ideology is durable. Moreover, as our society and administrations change, new threats to our rights arise, even as we defeat the old ones.  Thus our “job” – CCR’ s mission to advance and defend our constitutional and human rights – is unending.
As we move into the future together, we must first start from where we are.  We live in a 
United States that once condemned torture, military disappearances, indefinite detention, and military trials.  Now, the United States vigorously fights us in the courts – and the courts of public opinion – to justify its use of those and many other illegal practices.  We live in a United States where the government: has consolidated unprecedented power in the offices of the president and attorney general; refuses to protect its most vulnerable citizens from natural disasters and man-made ones created by its own agents; outsources its human rights violations to corporations, religious groups, para-military groups and even other countries; and continues to equate political activism and dissent with terrorism.  This is not the United States that we will tolerate.  Our history and our future demand more from us.
True to our history and hearing the voices of those who have fought many of these same battles before us, CCR  
and our brave allies will continue to fight in the courts, the streets and wherever and however the battle needs to be  waged until we can all say that our fundamental constitutional and human rights are being respected and afforded.   And we will continue that fight without fear, for as Bayard Rustin once said, “to be afraid is to behave as if the truth  were not true.”
CCR will continue working with and defending progressive movements for social change.  We will continue our long  
history of devising innovative strategies to undo the erosions of basic liberties and hold those who commit abuses  accountable for their actions.  Whatever the political landscape may be in the near future, we have decades of work  ahead of us repairing the harm done to our people, our fundamental democratic systems, and our reputation as a nation which strives to respect human rights and the Rule of Law.  
We will continue to count on you to work with us as we move forward with our work and tackle the upcoming  
challenges.  Please take an opportunity to check out our re-vamped website to stay updated on the progress of our  cases and to become more involved in our important education and outreach initiatives. 
Sincerely,
Vincent Warren
Letter from the Executive Director41965
Mississippi ChallengeChallenged the seating of members of Congress who had won in racially discriminatory elections. Helped convince Congress to pass the Voting Rights Act.1965Dombrowski v. PfisterWon Supreme Court decision recognizing federal jurisdiction to stop states from using criminal law to intimidate civil rights workers. Established that such intimidation had a “chilling effect” on First Amendment rights and was unconstitutional.1967Dombrowski v. EastlandHeld members of Congress and their counsel responsible for violations of civil rights.40 Years on the Frontlines  
for Social Justice
Since 1966 the Center for 
Constitutional Rights has used the law to defend and advance the rights guaranteed by the United 
States Constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Our work began on behalf of civil rights activists, and over the last four decades CCR has lent its expertise and support to virtually every popular movement for social justice.
At the bottom of this page begins a 
timeline describing some of the major cases that CCR has worked on over our 40-year history. As you look through the decades, you will see an unwavering commitment to progressive principles, people’s movements and human rights. In many of these cases, CCR worked tenaciously for decades before success was achieved.
Founded out of the Southern civil rights 
struggle, CCR was formed in order to practice law while working hand in hand with social justice movements. The Center’s first major case, Dombrowski v. Pfister (1965) successfully sued the Chair 
of the Louisiana Un-American Activities Committee, Representative Pfister, to invalidate the state anti-subversion laws that were being used in an attempt to intimidate civil rights organizer Jim Dombrowski, CCR founder Ben Smith and his law partner Bruce Waltzer. The Supreme Court victory in that case created an important new legal tool: the use of federal courts to invalidate unconstitutional state acts. CCR founders Arthur Kinoy, Ben Smith, Bill Kunstler and Morton Stavis developed pioneering legal strategies and used them to help strengthen the work of the civil rights movement. 
Racial Justice  
One important early struggle was the challenge to the seats of five Mississippi Congressmen by the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP). (Mississippi Challenge, 1965) At the request of MFDP, 
CCR founders initiated federal litigation challenging Mississippi’s discriminatory voter registration practices, resulting in the Court of Appeals setting the election aside and scheduling a new one. (Hamer v. Campbell, 1966) The victory in this case helped convince Congress to pass the V oting Rights Act.
CCR continued its deep commitment to 
addressing the legacy of slavery in the United States. In the late 1970’s, when the Ku Klux Klan began to rise up again, CCR worked with activists around the country and organized a national Anti-Klan Network. Our 1982 victory in Crumsey v. Justice Knights of the Ku Klux Klan was the first time that the Ku Klux Klan Act of 1871 was utilized to obtain damages for Klan victims. The case won over $500,000 in damages and secured a sweeping injunction against the KKK and associated individuals, prohibiting their campaign of assault, intimidation and harassment. 
CCR Case timeline listed by decision dateCCR founder Morton Stavis at a Freedom 
Democratic Party Meeting in Alabama, 1966 James Dombrowski CCR founder Ben Smith51966
Hamer v. CampbellRepresented Fannie Lou Hamer in a lawsuit to overturn elections based on discriminatory voter registration practices.1968Hobson v. HansenLed one of the first challenges to de facto school segregation. Resulted in a landmark decision holding the State responsible for affirmative duty to take corrective action ensuring equality in schools.1969DuVernay v. United StatesChallenged discrimination in the racial composition of draft boards.Continuing in its tradition of Southern 
civil rights work, CCR opened an office in Greenville, Mississippi in 1984. CCR South worked closely with activists to fight school segregation, workplace discrimination and a racist criminal justice system through litigation, education and organizing work.
Women’s Rights  
CCR filed its first major women’s rights case in l969, when women’s rights litiga-tion was still largely uncharted terri-tory. That case, Abramowicz v. Lefkowitz  
(1972), was the first challenge to New York’s criminal abortion law that focused on women’s rights as opposed to doctors’ rights. It became the model for similar cases that invalidated abortion laws in other states, several of which were cited in Roe v. Wade when the Court decided that laws restricting the right to abortion are unconstitutional. These ground-breaking feminist theories were also cited in CCR’s amicus brief in Roe v. Wade. In 1988 our victory in NOW v. Terry created a prec-edent for establishing buffer zones around abortion clinics to protect women seeking medical services from being harassed by members of “Operation Rescue.”
In 1975 CCR won the first ever appeal 
of a murder conviction based on what is now called “women’s self-defense law”. State of Washington v. Wanrow (1977) recognized the degree to which criminal law was shaped by male experience, ruling that the jury should consider the defendant’s personal experience, including a history of sex discrimination and abuse. CCR’s challenge to the constitutionality of New York City’s forced maternity leave policies for teachers, which effectively penalized women for bearing children, resulted in the landmark 1978 Supreme Court decision in Monell v. Department of Social Services, which created the right to sue municipalities for damages in civil rights cases. 
International Law  
& Accountability  
CCR has several major victories that have defined the scope of international law across the world. Filártiga v. Peña Irala  
(1980) was the breakthrough that led to the development of “universal jurisdiction”: the idea that some acts are so heinous that they travel with you anywhere in the world. CCR has extended this concept to create liability for human rights viola-tions committed by corporations or other non-government entities, no matter where the violations occur. (See page 17 for a description of our Alien Tort Statue cases). 
The Center has also integrated its 
commitment to advancing women’s rights  to international law, working 
vigilantly for over a decade towards the establishment of women’s rights as human rights, and specifically to highlight rape and other forms of sexual violence as war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. The Center’s case Doe v. Karadzic (2000), in addition to establishing in a U.S. court that non-state actors can be liable for human rights violations and war crimes, also was the first time a U.S. court defined rape as a form of torture.  Doe v. Unocal (2004) was the first time a multinational corporation was charged with complicity in rape as torture.
Attacks on Immigrants
To fight discrimination against political refugees and to support the Sanctuary movement of the 1980’s, ABC v. Thorn-berg (1991) challenged the denial of asylum applications despite evidence  
of government sponsored persecutions  
and human rights violations, where the denials were based on U.S. support for the repressive regimes of the immigrants’ home countries.
In 1987 CCR defended two activists 
who were in deportation proceedings for exercising their First Amendment rights by organizing on behalf of a Palestinian group. After over twenty years of work, deportation proceedings were finally ended this year. (See page 23) This case is only one example of CCR’s long-term commitment to these issues and to our clients. 
Fannie Lou Hamer61969
National Student Association v. HersheyProtected First Amendment rights of anti-war protesters and successfully challenged, in the D.C. Circuit Court, the punitive induction of anti-war students into the armed services.1969Powell v. McCormackFought in the Supreme Court to preserve voters’ choice of Adam Clayton Powell Jr. as their representative in Congress. Prevented Speaker of the House McCormack from un -
seating Rep. Powell.1969Soglin v. KaufmanProtected university students from expulsion for their lawful participa -
tion in anti-war activities.Attacks on Dissent
Beginning with the historic 1965 march 
from Selma to Montgomery ( Wright v. 
Montgomery, 1975), CCR attorneys have worked tirelessly to defend activists  
and organize legal support for political movements. Over the years, CCR has represented anti-war protestors ( National 
Student Association v. Hershey, 1969; Soglin v. Kaufman, 1969; Jeanette  
Rankin Brigade v. Capitol Police, 1972), 
members of the Chicago 8 ( U.S. v.  
Dellinger, 1972) and members of the American Indian Movement after a  
stand-off with the FBI at Wounded  Knee (U.S. v. Banks and Means, 1974).  In these cases and others, CCR employed innovative legal tactics that have served  
as the foundation for defense strategies  
in subsequent prosecutions of activists  
and protestors.From its beginning, CCR has also been involved in challenges to the targeting of political activists. In 1969, we obtained a ruling allowing a witness subpoenaed by the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) to challenge the constitutionality of the subpoena ( Stamler 
v. Willis , 1970). Later, our grand jury cases 
defended against the use of the grand jury process to persecute those speaking out against government policies and protected the confidentiality of attorney-client conversations. ( In re: Kinoy  and In re: 
Rodberg, 1971) CCR’s innovative work in this area developed techniques that are still used to combat grand jury abuse.
Illegal Government  
Surveillance  
CCR has a long history of fighting  
illegal domestic surveillance of unpopular groups. In U.S. v. U.S. District Court the government wanted to bypass the courts to wiretap domestic activists in the name of national security. In 1972 CCR won this unanimous Supreme Court decision invalidating such wiretapping and declar -
ing that domestic electronic surveillance without a warrant is unconstitutional. This decision rejected the government’s attempt to legitimize its use of the power of the ex-ecutive branch to invade people’s privacy and monitor their political activity.
Again in 1979, CCR successfully sued the 
FBI for illegal surveillance and break-ins. (Clavir v. U.S.) Building directly upon the 
work of our Movement Support Network campaigns and Freedom of Information Act requests, CISPES v. FBI (1985) exposed massive spying on activists in the El Salvador solidarity movement. In 1986, Kinoy v. Mitchell uncovered over 400 volumes of more than 200 instances of wiretapping, many involving Arthur Kinoy’s and CCR’s representation of “controversial” causes.
40 Years on the Frontlines for Social Justice (continued)
Three of the clients in Crumsey on the day they filed their lawsuitCCR founder Bill Kunstler (right) with  
his client, Judge Bruce Wright71970
Stamler v. WillisChallenged the constitutionality of the House Un-American Activities Com -
mittee. Obtained a ruling in federal court that allowed those served with subpoenas from HUAC to challenge them on constitutional grounds.1971Wright v. MontgomeryCCR attorneys defended numerous  participants and organized legal support  for marchers who were arrested and harassed in connection with the historic Selma-to-Montgomery March in 1965.1971Grand Jury CasesDefended the rights of witnesses against grand jury abuse; protected the confidential -
ity of attorney-client conversations (In re: Kinoy) and defended congressional aide from being jailed for contempt in the “Pentagon Papers Grand Jury” case (In re: Rodberg).The Center is again fighting this type of 
over-reaching by the executive branch with our case: CCR v. Bush. See page 24 for a description of this case and our ongoing work to end warrantless surveillance and the targeting of organizations based on political affiliation.
Executive Detentions
In November 2001, President Bush issued “Military Order Number One” claiming that he could capture, arrest or kidnap and then hold forever, without trial and without the right to challenge their detention in court, any non-citizen that he declared was a “terrorist.” CCR immediately understood the threat to our democracy that such claims of unfettered executive power rep-resent. We understood in part because of our long history of taking on these issues and sticking with the cases and our clients, even when doing so is unpopular.
The habeas petition that led to CCR’s 
2004 Supreme Court decision in Rasul v. Bush was filed within weeks of the first detainees arriving at Guantánamo Bay Naval Station in Cuba. This important precedent, that opened the door to U.S. courts for the detainees, was possible because CCR was able to recognize the Bush administration’s actions for what they were, and was unafraid to step up to the challenge in defense of the fundamental principle of fairness and against secrecy.
Looking Forward–  
Repairing the Damage  
Since our founding, we have provided le-gal skills in a unique and effective manner and always with a progressive perspective. CCR is often “ahead of the curve” both in identifying problems and in suggest-ing novel or radical legal responses. We use daring and innovative legal strategies which have produced many important precedents that have become an estab-lished part of our law and legal culture, and we broaden the impact of our litigation through creative and effective education and advocacy work. Our stunning victories in many of these cases demonstrate the true value of the Center.
The descriptions of our work over the 
past year that are contained in this report demonstrate the tremendous impact of combining the unique political perspective and historical understanding of the Center, with the courage and tenacity to take up the most difficult challenges and to keep up the struggle over the long haul. That is exactly the formula we will need in order to face the challenges ahead and begin the work of repairing the damage done to our legal system over the past ten years. 
n
CCR founder Arthur Kinoy being  
removed from a HUAC hearing by  federal marshalls, 1966Selma to Montgomery march across the  
Edmond Pettus bridge, Alabama 196581971
Palmer v. ThompsonFought racial segregation in public swimming pools.  Argued that the State should act affirmatively to end racial discrimination; lost in the Supreme Court. Public swimming pools were allowed to close rather than integrate.1972Jeanette Rankin Brigade v. Capitol PoliceProtected anti-war demonstrators’ right to demonstrate on  Capitol Hill and struck down a statute that prohibited demon -
strating, walking, or standing in groups on Capitol grounds.
91972
Abramowicz v. LefkowitzChallenged New York State law that restricted abortion; served as a model for lawsuits throughout the country challenging restrictive abortion laws. Ultimately, New York’s law was changed through legislation while statutes in Rhode Island, Connecticut, New Jersey and other states were directly struck down through litigation.1972U.S. v. U.S. District CourtWon a unanimous U.S.  Supreme Court decision inval -
idating warrantless “national security” wiretapping against domestic activists.Over five years ago, on January 11, 2002, the first  prisoners were brought from Afghanistan to  
Guantánamo Bay Naval Station in Cuba. They were quickly labeled as terrorists and the “worst of 
the worst,” with no access to the courts to determine their legal rights. One month after these first twenty men arrived, the Center for Constitutional Rights filed the first case on behalf of detainees at Guantánamo, seeking a habeas corpus hearing in which the 
legitimacy of their detention would be reviewed by an impartial federal judge. 
Since that time, we have learned that the vast majority of these 
men are innocent of any crimes against the United States and have been brutally tortured and abused, both physically and psycho-logically. We have seen Guantánamo become an international symbol of lawlessness and U.S. arrogance abroad, condemned by international human rights organizations, the United Nations and leaders of countries including Germany and England. And yet Guantánamo is still open and housing, at last count, approxi-mately 340 detainees. 
CCR continues to train and coordinate the efforts of over 500 
pro bono attorneys who represent Guantánamo detainees. We are deeply committed to ensuring that the detainees are either charged and given fair trials or released; that safe countries are found for those slated for release to countries where they are likely to face torture and continued detention; and that the prison camp be shut down. 
In the Courts
Three years after our historic Supreme Court victory in Rasul v. Bush and just months after Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, each of which affirmed the detainees’ right of access to the federal courts, Presi-dent Bush signed into law the Military Commissions Act of 2006  
(MCA). The MCA, among other provisions, attempts to strip detainees of their right to habeas corpus; drastically broadens the definition of “enemy combatant”; and allows the use of evidence obtained under torture and coercion in some instances. The Act has had the effect of stalling all pending detainee habeas cases, with judges ruling that until the question of how the MCA applies is addressed, these cases cannot move forward.
Two cases became the first to challenge the constitutionality  
of the MCA. Al Odah v. United States, filed jointly by CCR  
and co-counsel law firms, consists of eleven habeas petitions 
including many of the first ones filed after the Supreme Court’s Rasul decision. Boumediene v. Bush was filed on behalf of six Bosnian-Algerian humanitarian workers seized by the U.S.  
military in Sarajevo and transferred to Guantánamo.
In April, the Supreme Court declined to review these cases. 
However, in a highly unusual move, the Court reversed itself and announced in June that it would in fact hear them in the coming court term. CCR will be before the Supreme Court for the second time on behalf of the detainees.
In Congress
CCR was engaged in extensive legislative efforts to prevent  
the MCA’s passage and is currently working to repeal the worst aspects of it, and to reinstate habeas corpus for the detainees. Aided by growing disenchantment with the Administration,  
members of Congress on both sides of the aisle introduced  
several pieces of legislation this year that would have given  
detainees meaningful access to the courts. CCR worked with  
other organizations to push for the passage of the Habeas Corpus Restoration Act and the more comprehensive Restoring the  
Constitution Act. We continue our legislative advocacy and  
are hopeful that, coupled with our legal work, we will bring  
about the twin goals of safely closing Guantánamo and ensuring that everyone detained there has their day in court.
Detainee Transfers
In October 2006, we filed a habeas petition on behalf of Majid Khan, one of the “ghost detainees” held in secret CIA detention, who President Bush had transferred to Guantánamo in September 2006. Majid is a U.S. resident who was granted asylum here and attended high school in Baltimore, Maryland. He was kidnapped along with his brother, his brother’s wife and their infant child, 
1972
United States v. DellingerDefended charges against the “Chicago 8” and won reversal of the conviction on appeal.Guantánamo Global Justice Initiative10
1972
U.S. ex rel. Goodman v. KehlProtected WBAI against a subpoena for tapes based on reporter’s privilege and due process.1973In re: WBAI v. FMDefended WBAI against grand jury subpoena for a note received from the Weather Underground.1973Hess v. SchlesingerDefended women’s autonomy within marriage. Struck down a Marine Corps rule which in effect treated women merely as exten -
sions of their husbands.1974Aikens v. AbelRepresented steelworkers against their union leadership and man -
agement when an “Experimental Negotiating Agreement” was signed, that prohibited the rank-and-file from striking.
Demonstration outside the Supreme Court on  
January 11, 2007 marking the fifth anniversary of the arrival of the first detainees at Guantánamo Bay11from their residence during a visit to Pakistan in March 2003. His 
relatives were eventually released, but Majid was not heard from again for more than three years until a news reporter knocked on his family’s door in Baltimore and told them President Bush had announced in a nationally-televised speech that Majid was one  
of 14 “high-value” detainees who had been transferred to  
Guantánamo. 
The government claims that the secret detention program and 
the “enhanced interrogation techniques” used on Majid are top secret and are using this as the basis to deny CCR attorneys access to him. As CCR attorneys fought with the government to gain access to Majid, his interrogations continued. In May 2007, the U.S. government released his Combatant Status Review Tribunal (CSRT) transcript. The transcript was a revelation – it showed that no reliable evidence was presented against him during his CSRT hearing and that government-produced witnesses refuted all the claims that Majid had links to terrorism. All of Majid’s statements describing his torture while held in CIA secret prisons and at Guantánamo were completely redacted. We continue to press the U.S. government to give us access to Majid. 
CCR also fought the government’s attempts to send our client 
Abdul Ra’ouf al Qassim to Libya, where he feared facing torture. Every court up to and including the Supreme Court denied our attempts to block the transfer, but the ensuing publicity con-vinced the government to remove him from the list of detainees scheduled for transfer, and CCR is working through a variety of channels to have him sent to a safe third country where his wife and child live.
On the Base 
Conditions at Guantánamo have evolved from medieval-style brutality to subtle but more insidious forms of psychological  
torment. While the previous years have been marked by shocking stories of brutal torture – severe beatings, sexual humiliation,  
and short-shackling – the abuse is now directed at the mind rather than the body. A large number of detainees are now held in Camps 5 and 6, two maximum-security solitary confinement prisons  explicitly modeled after domestic Supermax prisons of the sort CCR challenged in Wilkinson v. Austin (2004). Detainees first began to be moved to Camp 6 in December 2006; shortly after -
wards, CCR attorneys who visited Guantánamo began reporting rapid physical and psychological deterioration of our clients due to their protracted isolation from human contact. 
Prolonged solitary confinement is an extreme form of abuse  
that has been condemned by many international bodies. Detainees 
in Camps 5 and 6 are alone in their cells for at least 22 hours of each day, have no social contact with other inmates and little  
communication with the outside world or even with prison staff. The psychological torture of isolation, while less likely to scan-dalize the public than Abu Ghraib-style physical and sexual abuse, leaves longer-lasting scars and is harder to cure, and bringing it to the attention of the public and the courts is a major goal for the coming months.
Fifth Anniversary 
January 11, 2007 was the fifth anniversary of Guantánamo’s use as an off-shore prison. CCR marked this sad date by coordinating, along with numerous other organizations, an international day of protests that called for the safe closure of the prison camp and ac-cess to courts for the detainees. Throughout the year, we planned events, provided speakers, traveled to Cuba with activist groups such as Code Pink, sent out numerous action alerts and organized “Restore Habeas Corpus Day,” with the goal of increasing public pressure on the U.S. government to finally close Guantánamo and end this administration’s extrajudicial detention program. Our an-niversary report, Justice Delayed is Justice Denied: Guantánamo Bay Five Years Later, is available on our website. CCR continues to be at the forefront of the battle for justice for Guantánamo detainees. With the support of our allies and donors, we will continue to work on many fronts until we achieve our goals of ensuring that detainees have their day in court, that those who are released are repatriated safely, and ultimately closing Guantánamo Bay and ending the use of off-shore prisons outside of the reach of the law.  
n
1974Kentucky Bar Association v. Taylor; Taylor v. HayesProtected the independence of the Bar. Defended Louisville attorney Dan Taylor, who was held in contempt during a criminal trial, denied a lawyer and a hearing, not told the charges against him and thrown in jail without bail. 1974U.S. v. Banks and MeansDefended American Indian sovereignty at Wounded Knee; represented leaders in the American Indian Movement charged with conspiracy and assault in a standoff with the FBI. All charges were dropped against defendants while the trial revealed massive illegal spying by the government, suppression of evidence and illegal use of material supplied by the Pentagon.Guantánamo Global Justice Initiative12
1975
Douglas v. HollomanBanned forced sterilization and drafted guide -
lines to ensure that women had adequate and full information, in comprehensible language, about the effects of sterilization.1975Drinan v. FordAttempted to halt U.S. attacks on Cambodia through a challenge to presidential assertion of unilateral right to expand the war in Southeast Asia without congressional authorization.1975In re: Union Nacional de  TrabajadoresDefended UNT’s right to a legally constituted trial by jury. CCR client Maher Arar and  
his wife Monia Mazigh13Extraordinary Rendition
CCR was the first organization to challenge an  
“extraordinary rendition,” in which terror suspects are 
secretly transferred from U.S. custody to the custody of notorious human rights-abusing regimes in order  
to have those countries do what the law forbids – torture the  
suspects to extract information. In 2004, we filed a case on behalf of Canadian citizen Maher Arar against then-Attorney General John Ashcroft and other U.S. officials. Mr. Arar was detained at John F. Kennedy Airport in September 2002 and falsely labeled  
a member of al Qaeda. After nearly two weeks of intensive inter -
rogation, he was sent to Syria where he was kept underground in a dark 3 x 6 x 7 foot cell for over ten months and beaten with elec -
tric cables. He was released and returned to Canada a year later. This past year has seen an incredible wave of public sentiment in Mr. Arar’s favor. In September 2006, the Canadian Commission of Inquiry, established by the Canadian government to investi -
gate what happened to Mr. Arar, released a report that exonerated him and showed that the information Canada passed to the U.S. before he was detained was inaccurate and inflammatory. In Janu-ary 2007, Canada formally apologized for its role in Mr. Arar’s treatment and awarded him a settlement of approximately $10 million. In May 2007, Time Magazine recognized Maher Arar as 
one of its Time 100, a “list of 100 men and women whose power, talent, or moral example is transforming our world.” In December 2006, CCR appealed the dismissal of our case,  
Arar v. Ashcroft , which was dismissed on national security and 
foreign policy grounds. Briefing in the Second Circuit was com -
pleted in April 2007, and Mr. Arar awaits his case being heard. 
CIA Ghost Detentions
As more details come to light about the CIA secret prisons and black sites that were, and likely continue to be, used to house prisoners in the so-called “war on terror,” CCR continues to vigorously challenge those unlawful detentions and press the government for full disclosure. In June 2007, CCR and five other leading human rights organiza -
tions released a report that published the names and details of 39 people who are believed to have been held in secret U.S. custody and whose current whereabouts remain unknown. The report,  
Off the Record: U.S. Responsibility for Enforced Disappearance in the “War on Terror,” includes people from African, Middle Eastern, and European countries and highlights aspects of the CIA detention program that the U.S. government has actively tried to conceal, such as the locations of secret prisons, the  
mistreatment detainees endured, and the countries to which they may have been transferred. It constitutes the most comprehensive list of people who may still be detained in U.S. secret prisons. At the same time, CCR, along with Amnesty International and the International Human Rights Clinic of NYU Law School, filed a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit seeking information about “disappeared” detainees, including ghost detainees and unregis -
tered prisoners. Our 2004 lawsuit, ACLU, CCR, et al. v. DOD et 
al., seeks records concerning the abuse of detainees in American 
detention centers and charges the Department of Defense and other agencies with illegally withholding records. Some of our clients currently detained at Guantánamo were  
victims of ghost detention and rendition prior to arriving at  
the base. A recent Executive Order was established as authoriza -
tion for the program to continue after what was described as a temporary hiatus in response to the Supreme Court’s decision in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld , which held in part that detainees held 
in U.S. custody anywhere in the world could not be subjected to cruel and inhumane treatment. There is no way to know how widespread these practices  
currently are, but CCR is committed to shining a light on  
these clandestine abuses and ending the govern ment’s practice  
of secret detentions wherever it occurs. 
n
1975Joanne Little CaseAssisted in the defense of Joanne Little, a prisoner who had killed her white jailer after he had tried to rape her, by documenting overwhelming racial prejudice on the part of the jury in her case. Ultimately, Little was acquitted.1975State of New York v. Danny WhiteFought New York State’s attempts to evict Mohawk  Indians from their land and challenged the jurisdic -
tion of U.S. courts over American Indian land claims. Resulted in a settlement with the State.Rendition & Ghost Detentions
CCR client Maher Arar and  
his wife Monia Mazigh141976
Andrews v. Drew Municipal School District (amicus)Protected the right of unwed mothers to teach in schools.1976NLRB v. Union Nacional de TrabajadoresDefended independentista union from NLRB enforcement orders.1977State of Washington v. WanrowRepresenting Yvonne Wanrow, CCR won the first ever appeal of a murder conviction on the grounds of a woman’s right to self-defense against harm to self or child.
CCR Executive Director Vincent Warren with our  
FDNY clients, members of the Vulcan Society151977
Horman v. KissingerExposed U.S. involvement in a coup by the Chilean junta in a lawsuit against U.S. officials present during the overthrow of Salvador Allende’s government in 1973; asserted their involve -
ment in the disappearance, torture and murder of Charles  Horman, who observed U.S. naval support for the coup.CCR was born out of the civil rights movement of the 
1960’s and remains dedicated to fighting racism in all its forms. Since our founding, we have broadened our work to include gender rights and economic justice as 
well as continuing the struggle for racial justice. 
Our new Government Misconduct attorney, Andrea Costello, has 
brought with her an exciting case representing several feminist activists from the “Morning-After Pill Conspiracy.” Tummino, et al. v. V on Eschenbach challenges the Federal Drug Administra -
tion’s failure to approve the Morning-After Pill (also known as “emergency contraception” or “Plan B”) as an over-the-counter medication for women of all ages. This case is part of the MAP 
Conspiracy organizing campaign, which is exposing how the FDA’s decision-making process was prejudiced by anti-birth control sentiments within the government. Motions for summary judgment from both sides are pending. 
We continue to work with a teachers group – Committee for a 
Fair Licensing Procedure – to win a class action lawsuit on behalf of public school teachers of color who have challenged the use of discriminatory tests that have deprived them of equal sala -
ries, pensions, benefits and seniority while still keeping them in the classroom. The Center argues that the Board of Education’s reliance on the National Teachers Examination to terminate the licenses of experienced teachers is discriminatory because the test has an adverse disparate impact on people of color, especially Black and Latino teachers. In August 2006, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals agreed with CCR and sent the case, Gulino v. 
Board of Education, back to the lower court to be reconsidered.
Another key CCR case also focuses on discriminatory testing: 
Vulcan Society v. City of New York. For years we have partnered with the Vulcan Society, the organization of Black firefighters in New York City, to challenge racial discrimination in recruitment and the entrance exam that determines who will be hired. New York has the least racially diverse fire department of any major city in the United States—2.9 percent black in a city that is 27 percent Black. CCR filed two Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) charges that resulted in rulings that the test was discriminatory. After the FDNY ignored repeated invitations to negotiate a solution, the U.S. Department of Justice reviewed the matter and decided to file a lawsuit against the city in May 2007, charging that the test weeds out Black and Latino appli -
cants and has no relationship to job skills. CCR has now formally intervened in the DOJ suit and will continue our efforts to put an end to the racial disparities within the FDNY and create equal ac -
cess to employment for more people of color in New York City.
There was also significant movement in our landmark case 
Daniels v. City of New York that challenged the racial profiling practices of the New York City Police Department and led to the shuttering of the Street Crimes Unit. The SCU was a commando unit of over 300 police officers that patrolled the streets at night in unmarked cars and in plain clothes. It was four SCU officers who killed Amadou Diallo by firing 41 bullets at him as he was standing in the vestibule of his apartment building in 1999. Shortly after this horrific shooting, NYPD statistics revealed that the SCU routinely invades the privacy of tens of thousands of city residents, especially young men of color.
The SCU was disbanded following a settlement in December 
2003 and CCR has continued to monitor compliance and engage in enforcement of the agreement, which includes safeguards against unlawful racial profiling. However, the recent dramatic increase in stop-and-frisks shows that the NYPD is once again in violation of the new policy. We will continue our efforts to end racial profiling by the NYPD. 
.   
Racial, Gender and Economic Justice 
1978
Monell v. Department of Social ServicesOriginating as a successful challenge to forced  maternity leave policies, this case forced local  government accountability for unconstitutional acts  for the first time and created the right to obtain  damages from municipalities in such cases. 
n
CCR Executive Director Vincent Warren with our  
FDNY clients, members of the Vulcan Society30 Years of Monell 
In the 30 years since CCR won this landmark case,  
Monell claims have become a powerful tool for holding  municipalities responsible for civil rights violations. Initi-ated as a women’s rights case, these claims are now most often used to challenge patterns of police misconduct, such as CCR’s Street Crimes Unit case described above. 
Monell is an example of how CCR’s pioneering efforts to 
apply creative legal strategies to the struggle for social and economic justice opens doors and carves out whole new avenues for progressive lawyers and community activists to pursue into the future. 161979
Clavir v. U.S.Filed suit on behalf of political activists against the FBI for illegal surveillance and surreptitious break-ins of their home.1979Bruno v. CoddCompelled the NYPD to respond to domestic violence.1979U.S. v. BerkanWon criminal case on behalf of Judy  Berkan, lawyer for protestors of the U.S. Navy bombing of Vieques, Puerto Rico.Some of the most exciting and innovative litigation in CCR’s docket are our cases that challenge human rights abuses committed by multinational corporations. With issues that range from the horrifying torture and abuse 
at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq, to illegal home demolitions in the Palestinian Territories, to the murder of activists in Nigeria, these cases seek to bring accountability for human rights violations into the board rooms of major corporations. 
In 1996, CCR filed a lawsuit against Royal Dutch Shell for its 
role in environmental degradation and human rights violations in the Ogoni region of Nigeria. At the center of the case is the 1995 executions of the Ogoni 9, peaceful activists led by Ken Saro-  
Wiwa. CCR contends that the oil company colluded with  Nigeria's military government to bring about the arrest and  
execution of the Ogoni 9 by giving money and weapons to the Nigerian government to crush the protest movement and by  
bribing witnesses to give false testimony. CCR fought off multiple motions to dismiss and the case has now progressed to discovery. CCR filed amicus briefs in the appeal on a related case pending before the Second Circuit Court of Appeals on the issues of substantive norms as well as secondary liability. 
In a related case, CCR is working with a team of human rights 
organizations and public interest law firms on Bowoto v. Chevron, 
an ATS case charging Chevron with involvement in three attacks on unarmed environmental protesters and people in their homes in Nigeria in 1998 and 1999. Important rulings in August 2007 on 
171980
Local 1330, U.S. Steelworkers of America v. U.S. Steel (amicus)Fought to keep steel plants open in Youngstown, Ohio.Chevron’s summary judgment motions allowed the case to move forward to trial. 
In June 2004, just weeks after the photographs of abuse and 
sexual humiliation at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq were made public, CCR filed a lawsuit against Titan Corporation and CACI International, charging both with torture and other human rights abuses. CACI and Titan are publicly traded corporations that provide interrogation and translation services to U.S. government agencies. The suit charges that employees of these companies directed or participated in illegal interrogation tactics, including: forced nakedness; hooding; being forced to watch family mem -
bers be tortured to death; severe beatings with chains, boots, and other objects; and rape. 
Motions filed by the corporations for summary judgment, and 
CCR’s response, are pending before the court.
In 2005, CCR filed suit against Caterpillar, Inc., alleging that it 
sold D9 bulldozers to the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) knowing that they would be used to unlawfully demolish homes and  
endanger civilians. CCR represents four Palestinian families whose family members were killed or injured when the  
bulldozers were used to demolish their homes while they were  
inside, and the parents of American activist Rachel Corrie,  
who was killed by a D9 bulldozer while protecting a Palestinian family’s home from demolition. In July 2007, CCR argued Corrie v. Caterpillar before the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals.
CCR also continues to support the work of other organizations 
and individuals who are fighting corporate human rights abuses.
For almost 40 years, Vietnamese civilians and U.S. veterans 
have suffered from the severe health effects of being sprayed with Agent Orange and from it remaining in the soil and natural environment of Vietnam. In June 2007, a lawsuit initiated by the Vietnam Association for Victims of Agent Orange/Dioxin was  
argued before the U.S. Second Circuit Court of Appeals. CCR filed an amicus brief in the case when it was before the District Court, helped organize a Day of Action around the  
country and coordinated protest activities outside the court  
room on oral argument day. 
n
1980
Filártiga v. Peña-IralaRevived Alien Tort Statute (ATS) for lawsuits by non-citizens in U.S. courts challenging violations of international human rights. Won a suit on behalf of the family of Joelito Filártiga, son of a prominent opponent of the right-wing Paraguayan regime, who was tortured and killed by Paraguayan police.Alien Tort Statute 
It has been over 25 years since CCR pioneered the use of 
the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) to allow foreign victims of human rights abuses to seek remedies in U.S. courts. Since our groundbreaking victory in Filártiga, CCR has successfully expanded the application of the ATS, also known as the  
Alien Tort Claims Act (ATCA), to cases involving human rights violations by multinational corporations.
In 1994 CCR filed Doe v. Karadzic against Bosnian Serb 
leader Radovan Karadzic. A 1995 decision in that case laid the groundwork for ATS cases against non-state actors, by establishing for the first time that individuals not working  
for any government can be liable under human rights law. The case concluded in 2000 with an historic $4.5 billion judgment against Karadzic for genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
In 1996 we brought an ATS case against the Unocal oil  
corporation, alleging that it was aware of and supported 
slave labor, murder, rape and forced displacement of  
thousands of villagers during the construction of a gas pipeline in Burma. A 1997 decision in Doe v. Unocal, relying heavily on our 1995 victory in Karadzic, established that multinational corporations may be liable for human rights violations when they are complicit in abuses committed by partner states. The parties reached a settlement in 2004. A humanitarian fund resulting from the settlement will be launched in September 2007.
CCR continues to use its expertise in this area of law to  
expand the use of the Alien Tort Statute. We maintain a 
listserv for attorneys litigating these cases and organize Continuing Legal Education courses and conferences on  
the subject. Whether human rights violations are committed by corporations or by governments, CCR will continue to use innovative legal strategies to hold violators accountable.Corporate Human Rights Abuse 181981
Dotson v. City of Indianola, Miss.Compelled the city to comply with the Voting Rights Act.1980Harris v. McRaeChallenged the Hyde Amendment restricting poor women’s right to federal Medicaid funding for abortion, lost 5-4 in the Supreme Court.1982Crumsey v. Justice Knights of the Ku Klux KlanRevived a 19th century statute to win the first  damages case against the KKK and secured an  injunction against their campaign of assault,  intimidation and harassment.
1919
1983
Briggs v. GoodwinLed a team of lawyers in successfully defending leaders of the Vietnam Veterans Against the War and the Gainesville 8, who were prosecuted in Florida for conspir -
ing to disrupt the 1972 Republican National Convention. CCR’s jury challenge on the inclusion of women in juries in this case also formed the basis for a subsequent Supreme Court challenge on this issue. 1983Crockett v. ReaganChallenged U.S. military involvement in El Salvador in the first suit under the War Powers Resolution.It has been more than three years since the revelations of 
torture and abuse at Abu Ghraib prison, yet aside from a few prosecutions of low-level officials, there has been no accountability up the chain of command. Last fall, CCR filed 
a renewed complaint in Germany charging Donald Rumsfeld, Alberto Gonzales, and 12 other high-ranking U.S. officials with responsibility for war crimes under the doctrine of universal  
jurisdiction, which allows suspected war criminals to be pros-ecuted regardless of where they are located or where the violations took place. The complaint was brought on behalf of 13 torture victims – 12 who were held at Abu Ghraib prison and one detainee at Guantánamo. In April 2007, the German Federal Prosecutor,  
under political pressure to end the complaint, announced she would not move forward with an investigation. We are exploring other international venues for the case in order to keep the  
spotlight on this issue and keep open the possibility of holding these officials accountable. CCR includes international law claims in many of our cases,  
seeking to have U.S. courts recognize these norms and thus strengthen protections and increase the remedies available to our clients. We also file amicus  briefs in cases brought by other 
organizations. For example, this year we filed an amicus  arguing 
that international law places limits on the government’s power to deport individuals when it breaks up families – and to broaden the legal context for holding all officials accountable for human rights abuses, no matter where they occur. In 2004, CCR, together with the Center for Justice and Account -
ability, filed a civil suit against Emmanuel “Toto” Constant, the former leader of the Haitian paramilitary organization FRAPH. Two of our clients were gang-raped in front of their families and a third was attacked by FRAPH operatives and left for dead. The lawsuit accused Constant of crimes against humanity, attempted summary execution and rape and other torture. In August 2006, Constant was found liable and in October, our clients were  
awarded $19 million in damages. We also played a crucial role this past year in ensuring that Constant, who fled to New York in 1994, was prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law for mortgage fraud he committed while living in the United States.In late 2005, CCR brought a class action lawsuit against Lt. Gen. Moshe Ya’alon, who was head of the Intelligence Branch of the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) in April 1996 when the IDF shelled a UN compound in Qana, Lebanon, killing more than 100 civilians, almost half of whom were children. The case was dismissed in December 2006, with the judge stating that General Ya’alon  
cannot be sued for the bombing of the UN compound because  
he was acting in his official capacity in the IDF and has immunity under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act. CCR filed a similar lawsuit in December 2005 against Avi  
Dichter, former director of Israel’s General Security Service,  
on behalf of Palestinians who were killed or injured in a 2002  
air strike in Gaza. Mr. Dichter participated in the decision to drop a one-ton bomb on a densely populated residential neighborhood. The attack, which killed seven adults and eight children, injured more than 150 people and destroyed or damaged almost 40 homes, was widely condemned by the international community, including the United States government. This case was dismissed in May 2007, when the judge ruled that Mr. Dichter was acting in the course of his official duties and has immunity. CCR plans to appeal both decisions. As in other areas of CCR’s work, our international law and  
accountability work is not limited to the courtroom. We are also deeply involved in public education and grassroots outreach work around these issues. For example, on January 25, 2007, we sponsored an event, “ From Pinochet to Rumsfeld ,” which focused 
on holding U.S. officials accountable for torture using the mecha -
nisms of universal jurisdiction and international law. Featuring attorneys from CCR and our partners in the complaint against Rumsfeld in Germany, the event linked CCR’s international legal work with the grassroots anti-torture movement. CCR often takes cases other organizations will not. We continue to find creative ways to ensure that no one, no matter how power -
ful, is above the law and that victims have access to justice.  
nInternational Law and Accountability 201983
Soto v. Romero-BarceloBrought suit to uncover FBI involvement in the killing of young pro-independence activists at Cerro Maravilla, Puerto Rico. Led to sub -
stantial awards to plaintiffs, televised Puerto Rican Senate hearings and several convictions of police officers for obstruction of justice and perjury.1983Conyers v. ReaganChallenged the U.S. invasion of Grenada.1983Nation v. HaigDefended the right of Americans to receive Cuban publications.Prison Telephone Victory
This was an incredible year for the New York Campaign for Telephone Justice, CCR’s campaign to end the illegal and exploitative contract between MCI – now Verizon/MCI – and the New York State Department of 
Correctional Services (NYSDOCS).
In order for families to stay in touch with their loved ones in New 
York State prisons by phone, they must accept collect calls from a monopoly provider that until recently cost 630 percent more than regular consumer rates and provided a nearly 60 percent kickback commission to the State.
Since 1999, CCR has been fighting in the courts and on the 
ground to end the contract. Family members repeatedly reported to CCR that they were being forced to choose between paying for basic needs like rent, utilities and food and speaking to their loved ones in prison. With funding from the JEHT foundation, 
Ivey Walton, plaintiff in Walton v. New York 
State Department of Correctional Services,  
one of our prison telephone cases21Prison Justice 
1984
Reagan v. WaldSought, with Leonard Boudin and the NECLC, to enjoin restrictions on travel to Cuba on the basis that such restrictions deprived people of the constitutional right to travel; lost 5-4 in the Supreme Court.1984Sanchez v. ReaganChallenged U.S. officials’ support for torture, murder and rape in Nicaragua.1985CISPES v. FBIBrought suit after CCR’s Movement Support Network campaign and Freedom of Information Act requests revealed massive spying on the El Salvador solidarity movement.the Center launched the New York Campaign for Telephone Justice in late 2004, mobilizing prison families across the state in a strategic effort that combined grassroots organizing, innova -
tive media and marketing techniques, and aggressive legislative advocacy. 
The culmination of this Campaign occurred in January 2007 
when New York State Governor Eliot Spitzer, a mere eight days into his new administration, announced the elimination of the kickback commissions which immediately reduced the prison telephone rates by half with additional savings anticipated. In response to our efforts, the New York State Legislature passed our Family Connections Bill, which bars New York State from profiting from any future prison telephone contracts and must “prioritize the lowest cost to the consumer” rather than providing the highest commission for the State.
We continue the fight in court with Walton v. NYSDOCS and 
MCI, which seeks a judgment that the State’s commission is  
an illegal and unconstitutional tax and would compensate  
affected families for the years that they have overpaid for calls from loved ones. 
Studies almost universally find that maintaining close and  
consistent ties with one’s family and community is the single most important factor in a prisoner’s success when released  and re-entering society. Yet, more than 40 states have similar policies, gouging prison families for profit and keeping families disconnected. 
After our amazing success this year in New York, we will be 
working with local grassroots groups and activists in other states to end the practice across the country. We seek to bring family members, policy makers and criminal justice advocates together to examine this issue and to strategize around making the Cam -
paign for Telephone Justice a national effort so that all families and inmates receive fair rates and can remain in touch with their loved ones. 
nIn addition to our Prison Telephone Campaign, CCR has  
continued to keep a spotlight on issues of mass incarceration 
and access to justice for prisoners.
 
Jailhouse Lawyers’ Handbook
In response to an overwhelming demand, this year we pro-duced and mailed over 3,000 copies of the Jailhouse Lawyer’s 
Handbook: How to Bring a Federal Lawsuit to Challenge Viola-
tions of your Rights in Prison, to inmates across the country. 
Co-authored in 2003 by CCR and the National Lawyers Guild, 
the handbook is a free resource for prisoners and their family 
members who wish to learn about legal options for challenging 
mistreatment in prison. 
‘Supermax’ Prison Case
CCR continues work on our Ohio ‘supermax’ prison case: Wilkinson v. Austin. Since our 2004 Court of Appeals victory, 
the case was remanded to District Court where CCR continues 
the struggle to enforce the Court’s ruling that prisoners cannot 
be held in prolonged solitary confinement without due process. 
In addition, there has been a suicide and a number of suicide 
attempts at the prison, and we are seeking a hearing to  
re-impose psychiatric care requirements. 
Jail Expansion Report
In May 2007, we issued Impacts of Jail Expansion in New York State: A Hidden Burden, authored by Dana Kaplan, CCR’s Open 
Society Institute Soros Justice Fellow. The report finds that the 
recent increase in jail expansion is driven by a little-known 
state agency – the State Commission of Corrections (SCOC)  
– rather than the needs and wishes of local municipalities,  
despite the fact that the overall need for space is decreas-
ing. Ms. Kaplan also completed a six month residency in New 
Orleans assessing post-Katrina detention issues.221985
Greenham Women Against Cruise Missiles v. ReaganFought nuclear weapons proliferation; sought to use the U.S. legal system to enjoin the United States from deploying first use nuclear missiles in Great Britain.1985McSurely v. McClellanWon damages from the U.S. government on behalf of Al and Margaret McSurely, two voting rights activists, for gross violation of their privacy and Fourth Amendment rights.
231985
U.S. v. Maria del Scorro Pardo de AguilarDefended sanctuary workers, members of church groups who provided shelter, medical care and protection for refugees from  El Salvador and Guatemala, from government prosecution.1986Republic of the Philippines v. MarcosRecovered New York real estate bought with illicit funds by Philippine dictator.Since 9/11, the United States has ramped up its global 
detention and rendition policies in an irrational calculus that claims security requires putting severe limits on civil and human rights. Secret trials, arbitrary deten -
tion, inhumane conditions of detention and chilling of political expression are all being employed domestically as well, primarily targeting immigrant communities. CCR has several cases that challenge the U.S. government’s attacks on immigrants in the name of national security. In response to the racial profiling and detention of more  
than 1,200 Arab, South Asian, and Muslim men in the months following September 11, 2001, CCR filed Turkmen v. Ashcroft  in 2002 on behalf of a class of non-citizens from Arab and South Asian countries who were detained at the Metropolitan Detention Center (MDC) in Brooklyn, NY . Even though most of these  
men were being held for minor visa or immigration violations, some were held without charge for as long as nine months and subjected to severe verbal and physical abuse. In June 2006, we won an important victory when the court ruled that senior government officials would not be excluded from the case under the theory of governmental immunity. Government officials, including FBI Director Robert Mueller and former  
Attorney General John Ashcroft, remain on the complaint and may be held accountable in the courts. Unfortunately, the court also dismissed CCR’s racial profiling and prolonged detention claims. Both sides are appealing. In April 2007, three amicus briefs solicited by CCR were filed. 
The first is by descendants of Japanese Americans interned during World War II, outlining the parallels between what was done to Japanese Americans in the 1940’s and the profiling of Muslim, Arab, and South Asian men today. Said one of the descendants, Jay Hirabayashi, “I joined the amicus brief because I believe  
that the U.S. Constitution and the Bill of Rights should be  
inviolable in time of war as much as they are in times of peace. That’s what my father always said and he went to prison holding those beliefs.”The second amicus brief is from former prison wardens and  
explains the dangers of segregating prisoners on the basis of race  
or religion. The third was submitted by immigration scholars  
and explains how settled immigration law was misapplied by  
the lower court when it held that the government did not violate the law by keeping these men for weeks and months beyond when their immigration issues had been resolved. Briefing was completed over the summer, and we expect arguments to be scheduled for this fall. In the meantime, CCR has completed over 40 depositions of defendants and witnesses and traveled to Egypt and Turkey to conduct investigations. In January 2007, CCR won a major victory for members of the “Los Angeles 8” when an immigration judge ordered an end to deportation proceedings against Khader Hamide and Michel  
Shehadeh. The judge terminated the proceedings because of  
the government’s refusal to disclose evidence favorable to the  
immigrants in compliance with his orders, calling the govern -
ment’s actions in the twenty-year-long case “an embarrassment  
to the rule of law.” The government had been seeking to deport Hamide and  
Shehadeh since January 1987 based on their alleged support  
for the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP),  
a group within the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO). This ‘support’ consisted entirely of lawful First Amendment activities, includ ing distributing newspapers, participating in 
demonstrations and organizing humanitarian aid fundraisers  
for Palestinians. Throughout the year, we continued our coalition work with immigrants’ rights groups including Detention Watch Network and Rights Working Group. In January, CCR and a host of other national organizations filed a petition with the Department of Homeland Security to create enforceable regulations governing detention centers.  CCR remains dedicated to defending every -
one’s right to fair and open trials and to ending the targeting of people based on religion, ethnicity or political activity.  
n Attacks on Immigrants241986
People v. Liberta (amicus)Struck down New York State’s marital rape exemp -
tion in its entirety.1986Kinoy v. MitchellChallenged warrantless wiretapping and massive surveillance of Arthur Kinoy in his role as lawyer for the United Electrical Workers.
1987
United States v. TurnerSecured the acquittal of voting rights activists charged with voter fraud and revealed a Justice Department campaign to intimidate activists who sought to ensure compliance with the 1965 Voting Rights Act.Warrantless Surveillance 
For decades, the U.S. government has used unlawful 
surveillance to monitor and intimidate activists: from the Black Panthers and the anti-war movement in the 1960’s and 70’s, to the Central America Solidarity Movement 
in the 80’s, to administration critics today. For decades CCR has been there to challenge these programs.Almost two years ago The New York Times revealed that since 
2001, the National Security Agency (NSA) had engaged in  warrantless electronic surveillance in violation of the U.S. Consti-tution and the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) with the express approval of President Bush. Enacted in 1978, FISA sought to prevent abuses of power by the Executive like those under the Nixon Administration. CCR won a landmark decision in 1972 (U.S. v U.S. District Court (Keith)) that struck down President Nixon’s warrantless surveillance of domestic activists. 251988
Haase v. WebsterChallenged Customs Service spying, seizure and copying of address books of travelers to Nicaragua.1988Martinez-Baca v. Suarez-MasonSought justice for victims of Argentine death squads under Alien Tort Statute.Within weeks of learning about the NSA program, we filed CCR 
v. Bush in early 2006—arguing that the program violates FISA, 
the First and Fourth Amendments and the separation of powers. 
In December, a judicial panel ordered CCR v. Bush transferred to 
a court in San Francisco where related cases are being argued. In 
January 2007, Attorney General Alberto Gonzales announced that the President had decided to let the existing warrantless NSA  program expire because the administration had convinced a single judge of the secret FISA court to issue orders that, accord -
ing to Gonzales, would allow the same sort of surveillance to occur—thus allowing the government to claim our case was now moot. CCR fought that argument saying there was no assurance that the administration had indeed stopped the spying or that the FISA oversight complied with the spirit or the letter of the law. This past summer, it was revealed that two other FISA judges found that those surveillance orders were invalid when they came up for renewal in April and May. 
The government claims the orders—like everything else relating 
to the NSA Program—are secret. Because of this, they have not been made public, nor have they even been released to Congress. Four days before we were to argue our case, the Democratic Con -
gress passed a Bush administration bill effectively gutting FISA’s protections for phone calls and emails with people overseas.  
The day after the argument, CCR attorneys filed the first papers challenging the new statute on Fourth Amendment grounds.
In a related case filed this year, Wilner v. NSA, CCR went to court 
to force compliance with Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests we made in January 2006 requesting all records of NSA warrantless wiretapping of attorneys who represent men detained at Guantánamo. The plaintiffs, who include CCR attorneys as well as co-counsel, believe that conversations between themselves and family members and foreign attorneys of clients at Guantánamo were illegally monitored by the government. 
Last year, we also filed an amicus brief in Hepting v. AT&T,  
arguing for the release of documents that disclose AT&T’s  involvement with NSA data mining and the warrantless surveil-
lance program. We will continue to press the administration for  
a full accounting of its domestic spying and work to expose more aspects of the program to the public. 
n
1987Jackson v. AllainFiled a federal class action lawsuit challenging racially discriminatory runoff elections in Mississippi.Surveillance & Material Support
Material Support:  
Guilt by Association  
CCR has a series of cases that challenge statutes 
making it illegal to provide support, including  
humanitarian aid, expert advice or political advocacy, to any foreign entity that the execu-
tive branch decides to designate as a “terrorist” group. The lead plaintiff in the cases is the Humanitarian Law Project (HLP), a Los Angeles-based non-profit that advocates for the peaceful resolution of armed conflicts and wanted to assist the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) by providing them with training in nonviolent conflict resolution and human rights monitoring in Turkey. Several Tamil-American organizations who are seeking to provide medical assistance to tsunami victims and expertise to improve healthcare in war-ravaged northeast Sri Lanka—which would require working in areas controlled by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE)—are also represented in the cases. Because both the PKK and LTTE are on the State Department’s blacklist of “foreign  
terrorist organizations,” providing such humanitarian  
assistance could result in long jail terms.
CCR argues that the material support provisions in the  
material support statute and related prohibitions created  
by President Bush’s executive order, violate the First  
Amendment and create guilt by association by criminalizing 
support solely intended to promote the lawful and non-violent activities of a designated organization. The court has ruled multiple times that the provisions are unconstitutionally vague. Both sides have appealed from parts of the district judges’ latest rulings, and we are currently awaiting a  
decision from the Court of Appeals.261988
NOW v. TerryEstablished precedent for a buffer zone around abortion clinics, where anti-abortion “Operation Rescue” campaigners could not harass or intimi -
date women seeking medical services.1988Veterans Peace Convoy v. SchultzRepresented veterans’ group stopped at border when it tried to leave U.S. with humanitarian aid for Nicaragua, and won.1988Palestine Information Office v. Schultz (amicus)Defended PIO’s right to disseminate information freely as guaranteed by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Free Trade of the Americas (FTAA)  
protest in Miami, November 2003271989
In the Matter of RandallWon right of poet Margaret Randall to regain her U.S. citizenship in the face of attacks by U.S. that she was ineligible because she was a Communist.1990County Redistricting CasesEnsured that electoral redistricting complied with federal standards set by the Voting Rights Act in more than a dozen cases brought in the South.CCR continues to vigorously defend the right to protest 
government practices as one of the most fundamental and necessary liberties for a society that considers itself a democracy.
In April 2007, CCR filed a case on behalf of three Black activists who were arrested while filming members of the New York City Police Department as part of a CopWatch program.
The three plaintiffs are all members of the Malcolm X Grassroots 
Movement (MXGM), a community-based organization that seeks to defend the human rights of the Black community. The MXGM CopWatch program is modeled after the police accountability activities of the Black Panthers and seeks to expose, document, and deter abuse in the Black community by observing police activities in neighborhoods where police misconduct and violence are rampant. 
The suit charges that their constitutional rights were violated when 
they were falsely arrested for exercising their First Amendment right to videotape police activity. With this case, Bandele v. City of New York, CCR continues our proud history of legal work that supports political movements on the ground, in the streets and in court.
CCR’s work protecting the right to dissent further expanded  
by taking on new cases that challenge the mass arrests of  
protesters during the first U.S. meeting of the Free Trade Area  
of the Americas (FTAA) in Miami, Florida in November 2003. 
During the demonstration, more than 280 people were arrested; not one was convicted.
This year, CCR joined with the National Lawyers Guild’s Mass 
Defense Committee on Killmon, et al. v. City of Miami, et al.,  a class action on behalf of 21 activists that challenges the govern-ment’s deliberate disruption of lawful political protests during the FTAA proceedings. Pursuant to a joint operational plan, over 40 state, local and federal agencies created the so-called “Miami Model” of policing mass demonstrations in the U.S. using politi-cal profiling, mass false arrests and so called “less-lethal” weap-ons. The case also takes on the illegal actions of the Department of Homeland Security and FBI in conducting unlawful surveillance and intelligence gathering on activists. This case is currently in discovery and is scheduled for trial in 2008. The Center’s staff attorneys also assisted in the settlement of a lawsuit brought in June 2006 on behalf of the Florida Alliance for Retired Americans, the Broward Anti-War Coalition, the Broward County Green Party, the Green Party of Florida, Haiti Solidarity and Lake Worth for Global Justice. Florida Alliance for Retired Americans v. City of Fort Lauderdale was filed to protect consti-tutional rights in anticipation of human rights protests at the first U.S. meeting of the Organization of American States (OAS). After tactics used by the City of Miami in 2003 to curtail protests at the FTAA meetings, the groups sought to have the court uphold their constitutional rights in order to deter police misconduct, preempt unlawful arrests and prevent infringement on their con-stitutional right to freedom of speech and assembly. A settlement was reached in May 2007 that prohibits the City of Ft. Lauderdale from enforcing ordinances which allowed government officials to restrict political demonstrations on public sidewalks and streets in violation of the First Amendment.
CCR continues to fight the 2003 wrongful arrests of 53  
peaceful anti-war protesters in our case Kunstler v. City of New 
York. Along with co-counsel at Emory, Celli, Brinkerhoff & 
Abady, we recently succeeded in fighting off the City’s attempt  
to force the protesters to produce all of their past psychological files, and we are currently involved in a dispute over the City’s refusal to state whether undercover police officers were present at the demonstration, and the extent of the police infiltration and surveillance of the group’s organizing coalition. We expect the case to go to trial in 2008. 
nAttacks on Dissent 
1989
Texas v. JohnsonWon decision in the Supreme Court and defended freedom of expression in flag burning case.Freedom of Expression  
& the Right to Dissent
From its very beginnings in the Southern civil rights movement, 
CCR has always been at the forefront of defending political move-ments and activists, and in particular our right to criticize the government. Texas v. Johnson is an example of the role CCR has played in defending the right to political expression and dissent.281990
Municipal At-Large CasesRid municipalities throughout the southern United States of this particular type of racially discriminatory voting system.1990Dellums v. BushChallenged George H. W. Bush’s attempt to declare war unilaterally, without congressional authorization, during the first Gulf War.1990U.S. v. EichmanDefended freedom of expression and won deci -
sion in the Supreme Court for the second time in flag burning case.This year, the Center proudly 
commemorates the 20th anniver -
sary of our renowned Ella Baker Fellowship Program, created 
in 1987 to fulfill part of CCR’s mission: to train the next generation of people’s lawyers. Named after Ella Baker to honor the memory and legacy of a great and often unheralded leader of the civil rights movement, the program strives to embody Ella Baker’s firm commitment to mentor -
ing and developing young leaders to carry the mantle of the struggle for social justice through the generations.
Ella Baker
Born in Virginia in 1903, Ella Baker gradu-ated from Shaw University and shortly after moved to Harlem, where she found a community that shared her interest in social justice. After serving in several posts with the NAACP, Ms. Baker turned her  
attention to grassroots organizing, finding the emphasis on legal strategies alone in-sufficient. As a woman in a male dominat-ed movement, Ella Baker pushed beyond long-established norms and distinguished herself as a leader in her own right.
She played a several key roles with the 
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) and then turned her attention to organizing students through the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee (SNCC). Her commitment to the concept of group-centered leadership evolved into a defining element of her approach to movement work. She was also instrumen-tal in the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party effort that would bring the founders of CCR to the South in 1964 and lay the foundation for the Center’s work over the next 40 years.
The Ella Baker  
Fellowship Program
The Ella Baker Fellowship Program was established in 1987 by Marilyn Clement, CCR’s then Executive Director. When Ella Baker passed away in December 1986, Marilyn attended her funeral and was struck by how many groups within the civil rights movement were represented, in spite of differences that existed among them. “They all came together to honor Miss Baker,” Marilyn recalls, “and I saw the ef-fect that one tiny powerful figure, a woman no less, could have in changing history.” Marilyn immediately decided to create an Ella Baker Student Center to help students develop their political education. The goal has always been to cultivate and nurture dedicated political lawyers and activists.
The Ella Baker Fellowship has trained hun-
dreds of students over the past 20 years. Most have gone on to careers dedicated to public service: from indigent defense to prison reform litigation; international human rights law and social and economic rights to racial justice and police miscon-duct work. Others lead organizations that are dedicated to the principles espoused by Ella Baker. The Center is proud of the Ella Baker Fellowship Program, a powerful immersion in legal and political educa-tion, and is equally proud of the legions of Fellows who have continued the tradition of political lawyering created by CCR four decades ago.  
n
The Ella Baker Fellowship Program
Internships and  
Fellowships
In addition to the Ella Baker Program, 
CCR offers undergraduate students the opportunity to work on cases as well as campaigns throughout the year. At any given time, there are several col-lege students assisting attorneys and organizers with intake, responding to requests for information, and providing much-needed help with event planning and outreach. We are also very proud of our International Scholars program, which brings law students and lawyers from around the globe to spend time at CCR, examining the American system of jurisprudence and working with CCR attorneys to develop knowledge about international law and human rights litigation. We have hosted scholars from England, Germany, East Timor, Trinidad, People’s Republic of China, and many other countries.291991
American Baptist Churches v. Thornburgh With the National Lawyers Guild and Marc Van der Hout, won asylum for Salvadoran and Guatemalan nationals fleeing persecu -
tion by U.S.-supported regimes.1991The Nation Magazine v. U.S. Department of DefenseChallenged government press restrictions during first Gulf War.
1992Weinbaum v. CuomoChallenged New York State’s disparate funding of senior college programs in its two public university systems; where the overwhelmingly white SUNY system is funded at higher levels than the minority CUNY system. First public higher education fiscal equity case outside the Deep South.Yasmin Davis, Ella Baker Class of 2007
Yasmin Davis was born and raised in the Bronx; both of her parents are from the Dominican Republic.  
Her parents’ commitment to Yasmin and her siblings’ success taught her that struggling communities need 
strong advocates who can identify with the obstacles and challenges facing that community. Her goal in  
attending law school was simple: “I wanted to work for my community. Armed with a solid legal education, an insider’s perspective into the culture, and a background in public interest, I knew I could provide a sense of familiarity and understanding to my clients as a public defense lawyer.”
Yasmin is entering her final year of law school at CUNY School of Law in New York. While at CCR, she 
became very involved in the New York Campaign for Telephone Justice. “I knew what MCI was doing was wrong. Coming from 
a direct services background, I wanted to enhance my knowledge of how impact litigation can be used as a tool to create social change. I learned how a wide range of strategies are used to move claims forward”.LaShawn Warren, Ella Baker Class of 1995 
Raised in Savannah, Georgia, LaShawn Warren experienced the harsh realities of growing up without  material wealth in a racially charged city, but she credits these experiences with helping her bring  understanding and passion to her civil rights advocacy work. She applied to the Ella Baker program “to better understand the practical application of the law, particularly as it relates to minority voting rights in the South.” Since graduating from Howard University School of Law in 1996, LaShawn has held several public  
interest legal positions, including serving as Legislative Counsel at the American Civil Liberties Union in their Washington National Office. Currently, she serves as Oversight Counsel for the House Judiciary  
Committee. “During my time at CCR, I met so many inspiring people who dedicated their lives to securing justice and equality  
for minorities throughout the South.  I learned a great deal about voting rights law and got a real sense of how the law, if applied properly, can transform the lives of everyday people.” 
Sunita Patel, Ella Baker Class of 2004 
Sunita Patel became an Ella Baker Fellow following her second year at American University School of Law. The daughter of South Asian immigrants and raised in South Carolina, Sunita developed her interest in social justice early on, based on her personal experiences. Educated at predominantly Black schools, Sunita witnessed blatant racism firsthand, and as a teen became involved in organizations dedicated to human rights and the struggle for racial justice. She was greatly influenced by Ajamu Baraka, a new member of the CCR Board. “Ajamu inspired in me the concept that social change is shaped by the people – in an ethical way that recognizes racial justice as a human rights issue,” Sunita says. 
Sunita is now an OSI Fellow at the Legal Aid Society of New York where she works on immigrant detention issues. She also  
continues to work with CCR on a pro se manual for immigrant detainees. “Being an Ella Baker really prepared and trained me  
to work with community groups as a member of the community. I was exposed to a broad range of experiences – human rights, international law, and prisoners’ rights.”
The Ella Baker Fellowship Program Celebrating 20 Years301992
Linder v. CaleroExposed U.S. support for the Contras in Nicaragua as responsible for the 1987 murder of Benjamin Linder, an American community worker. 1992 decision won the right to sue for personal injury for war crimes.1992AFSC v. BradyWon right to group travel to Vietnam and Cambodia.1993Haitian Centers Council Inc. v. SaleSecured an order in federal court that closed detention camp at Guantánamo Bay for HIV-positive Haitian refugees.A key aspect of CCR’s mission is to provide support to grassroots movements. That support comes in many forms, from legal to material. We provide space for meetings and phone banking, help with press outreach, and bring organizations working on similar issues together to brainstorm and build coalitions. In the last year, CCR has extended movement support to groups ranging from the Domestic Workers Union, a growing grassroots movement orga-nizing childcare workers, home aides and housecleaners to fight for their rights, to People’s Justice, a coalition formed to fight police brutality in the wake of the shooting of Sean Bell, to a host of criminal justice reform advocates organizing to oppose restric -
tive revisions to the standards governing New York City prisons. Strengthening the progressive movement crosses organizational lines, and CCR is proud to offer help.
Movement Support
The Center’s web based organizing and eductional efforts have grown exponentially in the last year. The number of our on-line supporters has more than doubled to nearly 50,000 and together we have sent tens of thousands of letters to Congress and other targets. We alerted activists to looming threats and provided links to toolkits and resources they could use. The flood of letters to a New York State Supreme Court judge about the war crimes  
committed by Emanuel “Toto” Constant in Haiti so impressed him that he revoked the plea bargain he had accepted in the  
paramilitary leader’s mortgage fraud case. Together we demand -
ed that Congress restore habeas corpus and close Guantánamo, 
that the German federal prosecutor take up our case against Don -
ald Rumsfeld and Alberto Gonzales and that Condoleezza Rice prevent one of our clients from being sent home to Libya to be tortured. Together we target important issues, mobilize activists and add a unique voice to the political dialogue and legal debate. CCR in ActionCCR in the News 
The Center’s work continues to 
recieve wide coverage in the news. Our staff and board members have been called upon to provide their expertise; to comment on cases and our campaigns; and to represent the progressive view in the media.  
CCR appeared in a Ted Koppel Dis-covery program on Guantánamo, in a BBC documentary on rendition, in a Dan Rather Reports special on the “Green Scare,” on the evening news, and in a feature on MTV News. We have been repeatedly interviewed in major newspapers, had two editori -
als run in The New York Times in support of our prison telephone work, contributed to and been cited in countless blogs, and made myriad appearances on NPR, Pacifica, and Democracy Now! and many local and national radio shows running the gamut from left to right. All of our media work helps raise the Center’s profile and is critical to changing  
the public discourse around the  
issues most important to us and  
our supporters.
311994
Helen Todd v. Sintong PanjaitanHeld Indonesian military official respon -
sible for massacre in East Timor.1994Paul v. AvrilWon $41 million judgment against Haitian military dictator responsible for torturing political dissidents.1995Lebron v. AmtrakWon Supreme Court decision that struck down federal restriction of political artwork in New York’s Penn Station.Youth Outreach 
This past year CCR has ventured into  
new areas and put renewed energy into reaching out to students and other young people through partnerships with high schools and universities, utilizing media directed at young people, supporting student organizing on college campuses, and expanding our presence on social networking sites. 
As part of our broadened education and 
outreach efforts, we partnered with the Institute for Urban Education at the New School for Social Research in New York City to develop a high school curriculum on torture and rendition. In addition, we established a relationship with the High School for Human Rights and sponsored one of their students as an intern. This in -
tern assisted our Education and Outreach Department with the New York Campaign for Telephone Justice and helped orga -
nize the Haitian Support Network protest during the sentencing of former Haitian paramilitary leader Emmanuel “Toto” Constant.
CCR partnered with MTV to produce 
a news segment on Guantánamo that focused on one of our young Guantánamo Project staff members as she prepared to visit our clients at the offshore prison camp. The five-minute-long segment aired several times over the course of a week on the station’s news program. A longer video segment was also available on the MTV website, where it was accompanied by  
a lengthy article highlighting why  
Guantánamo is a relevant issue to youth  
in the U.S.As new media and new forms of online social interaction continue to grow in  importance, we have begun exploring how to best use these technologies to  engage a broader audience. As part of those efforts, we created new social  networking pages on MySpace and  Facebook and posted video clips on  YouTube featuring interviews of many  of our clients, such as Canadian rendition victim Maher Arar.
On Law Day, May 1, 2007, CCR orga -
nized law students across the country to 
fight the Military Commissions Act, in particular the provision that attempts to strip the right of habeas corpus from the detainees. Re-naming the day “Restore Habeas Corpus Day,” law students from Harvard University, American Univer -
sity, the UC Berkeley, and several other schools participated in demonstrations, signature drives, letter-writing campaigns, and other forms of advocacy to call on the government to restore habeas corpus and close down Guantánamo. In the coming year, we hope to build on these relation -
ships and continue to work with students and other young people on many of our issues.  
n
Susan Hu, a recent Colum-
bia graduate, talks about the “hopelessness” she discovered at Guantánamo Bay, where 380 so-called “enemy combatants” are being held.
Now Playing Clip 1 of 1
Guantánamo Bay:  ‘No End In Sight’
A young activist talks about her experience visiting the detention center, where 380 men who have not stood trial are being held. (5.15.07)
Guantánamo Bay: ‘No End In Sight’ 
A young activist talks about her experience visiting the deten-tion center, where 380 men who have not stood trial are being held. (5.15.07)
To view this video, go to www.mtv.com and search ‘young activist’Young Activist Fights For Detainee Rights321995
StreetWatch v. National Railroad Passenger Corp.Won an injunction in federal court preventing Amtrak police from evicting or arresting those they suspected of being homeless where no criminal behavior was suspected.1998Salas v. United StatesRequired the U.S. to respond to an interna -
tional tribunal for the first time with respect to allegations by ordinary citizens of gross human rights violations committed during U.S. invasion of Panama.1995Xuncax v. Gramajo; Ortiz v. GramajoHeld Guatemalan Minister of  Defense responsible for torture,  assault and false imprisonment.40th Anniversary Celebration
Our May 2007 President’ s Reception honored the work and the people who make the Center what it is: our staff, board members, supporters, clients and allies. Thank you to everyone who made it possible for CCR to be on the frontlines for social justice for over 40 years. We wish everyone could have joined us. Here are a few photos from that evening. 
Michelle DePass
Herbert Kurz
 Vincent Warren
Dolly Filártiga
 Nancy Meyer Ann Cammett
Kim Kerkley
 Allison Barlow33
Frank Deale
Edith Ziefert and Rachel Meeropol
 Cassim and Chung-Ja Jadwat
1998
Finley v. NEAChallenged the decency provision in government grants to artists; lost in an 8-1 Supreme Court decision.1999Campaign To Save Our Hospitals v. GiulianiWon case in the New York State Court of Appeals to prevent the takeover of public hospitals in New York City by for-profit private companies.1999Reno v. American-Arab  Anti-Discrimination CommitteeChallenged selective enforcement of immigration laws in defense of Palestin -
ian activists singled out for deportation because of their political beliefs.
Shayana Kadidal and Jaykumar Menon
 Karen Ranucci and Michael RatnerKaren Ranucci and Michael Ratner
 Wayne Roberts and Annie HessWayne Roberts and Annie Hess341999
Goosby v. Town of HempsteadContested Hempstead NY’s at-large  voting system, which was racially  discriminatory; forced a transformation  of the voting system.2000Doe v. KaradzicWon a $4.5 billion judgment against Bosnian-Serb leader Radovan Karadzic for genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.  The 1995 Second Circuit decision in this case rec -
ognized that rape and sexual violence constitute torture and genocide and laid the groundwork for cases against non-state actors, including multinational corporations.2001Kiareldeen v. RenoChallenged the use of secret evidence in deportation trials.Al Odah v. United StatesLead case, with Boumediene v. Bush, in a group of consolidated 
habeas corpus petitions on behalf of Guantánamo detainees. These cases will be heard by the Supreme Court in the coming term, and the outcome will determine the rights of the detainees to challenge their detention in U.S. federal courts
Al-Qahtani v. Bush
Habeas corpus and DTA petition for Mohammed Al Qahtani, who suffered physical and psychological torture when he was subjected to the extraordinarily abusive “First Special Interroga -
tion Plan” authorized by Donald Rumsfeld
John Does 1-570 v. Bush
Habeas corpus petition filed on behalf of the hundreds of  
unknown and unrepresented detainees in Guantánamo Bay  
in 2005
Khan v. Bush
Habeas corpus petition for Majid Khan, who was held in  
CIA secret detention for several years prior to his transfer to Guantánamo
Ayoub Haji Mamet v. Bush and Razakah v. Bush 
Habeas corpus petitions for five Uighurs mistakenly captured by bounty hunters and sold to the U.S. military. Three have been released to a refugee center in Albania, while two remain in Guantánamo five years later, despite being told that their capture was a mistake
Rasul v. Rumsfeld and Celikgogus v. Rumsfeld
Civil suits against Donald Rumsfeld and others responsible for the detention, torture and mistreatment of, in total, nine men illegally detained in Guantánamo for years, including two men detained for more than four years and released years after being classified as non-enemy combatants
Zalita v. Bush
The first legal challenge brought by a Guantánamo detainee to an intended transfer to his native country, Libya, where he would likely face torture or executionCase Index
The Center for Constitutional Rights was the first human 
rights organization to fight for the rights of detainees at Guantánamo Bay Naval Station and has been at the 
forefront of the battle to end the use of offshore prisons 
outside the reach of law. After winning a landmark Supreme Court decision establishing that Guantánamo detainees can challenge their detention in federal courts, CCR organized a 
network of over 500 pro bono lawyers to file habeas corpus 
petitions and founded the Guantanamo Global Justice 
Initiative to coordinate this work. The U.S. government has made every effort to evade 
judicial review of its detention and interrogation practices 
at Guantánamo Bay and consistently claims that detainees need not ever be charged with a crime and tried, or given  
an opportunity to challenge their detention in court. During 
the past five years, CCR has compiled evidence that many of 
the detainees have been tortured, abused, and humiliated while in U.S. custody. We continue to call for humane treatment of detainees and for the closing of the prison at Guantánamo Bay.
 
More than five years after the first prisoners were sent to Guantánamo, CCR continues to be a leader in the movement to recognize habeas rights for detainees, regardless of 
where they are held. We are working to ban torture and to improve detention conditions at Guantanamo, at Bagram Airbase in Afghanistan, at Abu Ghraib and elsewhere in Iraq, and at secret CIA prisons around the world. As U.S. proxy detention expands to the Horn of Africa and beyond, CCR’s 
Guantánamo Global Justice Initiative remains dedicated to 
the fight against secrecy and torture; to holding the U.S. government accountable for its illegal actions; and to obtaining justice for the victims.352003
Daniels v. City of New YorkChallenged racial profiling and forced the notorious NYPD Street Crime Unit to disband and estab -
lished ongoing montioring by CCR and the courts.2004Hamdi v. Rumsfeld (amicus)Challenged the denial of habeas corpus to an American citizen, Yaser Hamdi, in the Supreme Court; won a decision restoring Hamdi’s right to contest his detention. He was subsequently released.
2004Rasul v. BushWon a Supreme Court decision establishing  U.S. courts’ jurisdiction over Guantánamo Bay detainees and affirming detainees’ right to habeas corpus review.Abdallah El-Marqodi v. Bush 
Abdessalam v. Bush Abdullah v. Bush Aboassy v. Bush Ahmed “Doe” v. Bush Ahmed v. Bush Akhouzada v. Bush Akhtiar v. Bush Al Bahooth v. Bush Al Darby v. Bush Al Halmandy v. BushAl Hawary v. Bush Al Nakheelan v. Bush Al Rashaidan v. Bush Al Salami v. Bush Al Sharbi v. Bush Al Subaie v. Bush Al Wirghi v. Bush Al Yafie v. Bush Al-Asadi v. Bush Al-Badah v. Bush Al-Baidany v. Bush Albkri v. Bush Al-Delebany v. Bush Al-Gatele v. Bush Alghatani v. Bush Al-Ghizzawi v. Bush Alhag v. Bush Alhami v. Bush Al-Harbi, Ghanim-Abdulrah-man v. Bush Al-Harbi, Mazin Salih v. BushAl-Hela v. BushAli Ahmed v. Bush Ali Al Jayf v. Bush Alkhemisi v. Bush Al-Maliki v. Bush Almerfedi v. Bush Al-Mithali v. Bush Almjrd v. Bush Al-Mudafari v. Bush Almurbati v. Bush Al-Oshan v. Bush Al-Rubaish v. Bush Al-Rubaish v. Bush Al-Shabany v. Rumsfeld Al-Shimrani v. Bush Al-Sopai v. Bush Al-Zarnouqi v. Bush Amin v. Bush Anam v. Bush Attash v. Bush Awad v. Bush Aweda v. Bush Aziz, Abu Abdul v. Bush Aziz, Ahamed Abdul v. Bush Bacha v. Bush Batarfi v. Bush Battayav v. BushBegg v. Bush Bin Amir v. Bush Dhiab v. Bush Edries v. Bush El-Banna v. Bush Elisher v. Bush Gamil v. Bush Gerab Alsaaei v. Bush Ghanem v. Bush Ghazy v. Bush Gul v. Bush Habib v. Bush Hakmat v. Bush Haleem v. Bush Hamoodah v. Bush Hamoud v. Bush Hatim v. Bush Hentif v. Bush Hussein v. Bush Isamattulah v. Bush Kabir v. Bush Khalid v. Bush Khalifh v. Bush Khan, Bulbas v. Bush Khandan v. Bush Kiyemba v. Bush Lal v. Bush Magram v. Bush Mamet, Edham v. Bush Mammar v. Bush Maqaleh v. Rumsfeld Mohammed v. Bush Mohammon v. Bush Mokit v. Bush Moosa v. Bush Muhammed v. Bush Mustaph v. Bush Nabil v. Bush Naseem v. Bush Naseer v. Bush Odah v. Bush Othman v. Bush Qasim v. Bush Qassim v. Bush Qayed v. Bush Rabbani v. Bush Rahmattullah v. Bush Rammi v. Bush Rasul v. Rumsfeld Rasul v. Bush Razak  v. Bush  Razakah  v. Bush Rimi  v. Bush Ruzatullah v. RumsfeldSaib  v. Bush Said  v. Bush Salahi al. v. Bush Saleh  v. Bush Shafiq  v. Bush Suliman  v. Bush Taher v. Bush Thabid  v. Bush Toukh  v. Bush Wasim  v. Bush 
Guantánamo  Habeas Cases
Since CCR’s Supreme Court victory in Rasul v. Bush in 2004, over 200 habeas corpus petitions have been filed on behalf of  
Guantánamo detainees by well over a hundred private law firms, law school clinics, and other legal or ganizations. CCR has been 
a key coordinator of this tremendous effort and is co-counsel on the majority of cases filed. Below and on the facing page are the 
Guantánamo cases that CCR is co-counsel on this year.
Rasul v . Bush
In February 2002, shortly after the first detainees were  
sent to Guantánamo, CCR filed this habeas corpus petition challenging the U.S. government’s practice of holding foreign nationals in indefinite detention; without charges, trials or counsel. Over the Bush administration’s objections, the  Supreme Court heard the case and in June 2004 ruled  that detainees have access to U.S. courts to challenge the detention and treatment in U.S. custody. Following the ruling, CCR quickly organized a network of  attorneys to represent other Guantánamo detainees in  habeas proceedings. On August 30, 2004, CCR attorney Gitanjali Gutierrez became the first civilian lawyer allowed  into Guantánamo.362004
Wilkinson v. AustinRuled the prisoners cannot be placed or indefinite -
ly detained in solitary confinement, at a maximum security prison in Ohio, without due process.2004Doe v. UnocalHistoric settlement reached with Unocal in case that alleged corporate complicity in human rights violations in Burma. Previous landmark rulings in this case established that com -
panies can be sued in U.S. courts for human rights violations such as forced labor and rape.Rendition & Ghost  
Detention
Arar v. Ashcroft
Suing Ashcroft, Mueller and other U.S.  
officials for sending Canadian citizen  
Maher Arar to Syria to be tortured under  
a policy of “extraordinary rendition”
Amnesty International, CCR, et al. v. CIA, 
Department of Defense, et al.Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) lawsuit seeking information about ‘disap -
peared’ detainees, including those at CIA ‘ghost’ sites and unregistered prisoners 
ACLU, CCR, et al. v. Department  
of DefenseFOIA lawsuit charging that government agencies illegally withheld records sought by CCR concerning the abuse of detainees in American military custody
Cuba Travel Embargo
Sanders v. Snow, et al.  Challenging the Treasury Department’s violation of Fifth Amendment rights  
by penalizing individuals for not filling  
out a questionnaire regarding travel  
to Cuba when doing so could result in self-incriminating statements
U.S. v. Harrell
U.S. v. HeslopU.S. v. KennellyU.S. v. Rawson Legal defense of people in penalty  
proceedings due to alleged violation of  
the Cuba travel embargo (23 additional cases were terminated in our clients’ favor this year) International Law & 
Accountability
Complaint to German Federal Prosecu-
tor re: Culpability of U.S. Officials in Abu Ghraib & Guantánamo TorturePetition submitted to the German Prosecu -
tor requesting an investigation into the responsibility of civilian and military U.S. officials for war crimes and torture under the principle of “universal jurisdiction”
Doe v. Constant
Won a $19 million judgment against Emmanuel ‘Toto’ Constant, leader of the right-wing organization FRAPH in Haiti for gross human rights violations
Matar, et al. v. Dichter
Suing Israeli official for a “targeted assas-sination” in Gaza that killed eight children and seven adults, and injured more than 150 civilians
Belhas, et al. v. Ya’alon
Class action against former Israeli official responsible for the 1996 shelling of a UN compound in Qana, Lebanon that killed over 100 civilians most of whom were women and children
Blake v. Carbone (amicus)
Second Circuit amicus brief arguing  
international law places limits on govern -
ment’s power to deport individuals when doing so would break up familiesCorporate Human  
Rights Abuse
Vietnam Association for Victims of Agent 
Orange/Dioxin, et al. v. Dow Chemical,  et al. (amicus) Lawsuit charging chemical companies with knowingly providing the U.S.  
government with a poisonous agent to  
be sprayed on civilians
Corrie, et al. v. Caterpillar, Inc.
Suing Caterpillar, Inc. for selling D9  bulldozers to the Israel Defense Forces, knowing they would be used to destroy homes and injure or kill the inhabitants
Wiwa v. Royal Dutch Petroleum
Wiwa v. AndersonWiwa v. Shell Petroleum Development CompanyRelatives of murdered leaders and activists in Nigeria suing for human rights abuses against the Ogoni people in Nigeria
Bowoto v. Chevron
Suing Chevron for its involvement in  
three machine-gun attacks on unarmed environmental protestors in Nigeria in 1998 and 1999
Saleh v. Titan
Suing Titan Corporation and CACI Inter -
national for conspiring with U.S. officials to humiliate, torture and abuse people in U.S. custody in Iraq
The Presbyterian Church of Sudan, et al. 
v. Talisman Energy, Inc. (amicus)Suing a Canadian company for aiding  
and abetting human rights violations, including war crimes, while engaged in  
oil operations in southern SudanThe Center for Constitutional Rights has many ongoing cases before state, federal and international courts every year.  
Below is a list of cases and amicus briefs that we litigated or filed during the past year. In addition to these, we have been 
developing numerous new cases as well as working closely with progressive attorneys and other or ganizations on a host  
of constitutional and human rights issues. Case Index (continued)372006
Hamdan v. Rumsfeld (amicus)Challenged Military Commissions; resulted in the Supreme Court decision affirming the appli -
cation of Geneva Convention protocols to trials of terrorism suspects.OngoingThe CCR cases throughout this timeline and on our current case list above, illustrate that we can never take for granted the hard-won victories of the past. We have decades of work ahead of us to repair the harm done to our democratic and legal systems over the past few years. CCR will continue to be on the forefront of legal thinking as we look towards the future. Racial, Gender  
and Economic Justice
Vulcan Society v. City of New York
Challenging discriminatory hiring practic -
es of the NYC Fire Department on behalf of an association of Black firefighters and individual class representatives
Gulino v. The Board of Education of the 
City of New York and the New York State Education DepartmentClass action on behalf of public school teachers of color who are challenging the use of discriminatory tests and licensing rules
Daniels, et al. v. City of New York
Class action challenged racial profiling and the ‘stop-and-frisk’ practices of the notorious NYPD Street Crimes Unit
Tummino, et al. v. von Eschenbach
Representing feminist activists suing the FDA for failure to approve the morning-after pill as an over-the-counter drug  
available to women of all ages
Harrington v. NY Metropolitan  
Transit AuthorityDefending the religious rights of Sikh transit workers to wear turbans at work
Attacks on Immigrants
Turkmen v. AshcroftFighting unlawful post 9/11 arrest, mass detention and abusive treatment of South Asian, Arab and Muslim non-citizens
In the Matters of Hamide and Shehadeh
Ended 20-year-long deportation proceed -
ings against, members of the “LA8”,  
political activists who were lawfully  
engaged in protected First Amendment advocacy on behalf of Palestinians.Prison Justice 
Walton v. New York State Department of Correctional Services and MCI/V erizonChallenging NYSDOCS’ monopoly  telephone contract with MCI/Verizon, which forces family members to pay exorbitant phone rates to speak with their loved ones in prison 
Byrd v. Goord
Fighting against exploitative telephone rates and monopoly contracts that  
adversely affect the ability of prisoners’ families to remain in contact
FCC Rule Making Petition
Petitioning the FCC to regulate interstate prison telephone calls to ensure fair and reasonable rates for prisoners and their families
Wilkinson v. Austin
Working to enforce minimum due  process requirements for prisoners held  in extended solitary confinement at a maximum security prison in Ohio.
Surveillance
CCR v. BushChallenging NSA warrantless domestic electronic surveillance, asserting that it violates FISA and the First and Fourth Amendments
Wilner, et al. v. NSA, et al. 
FOIA requests to determine if the  
government has engaged in warrantless wiretapping of CCR attorneys and  
Guantánamo habeas counsel 
Hepting v. AT&T (amicus)Amicus brief arguing for release of alleg -
edly trade secret whistleblower documents disclosing AT&T’s involvement with NSA data mining and surveillance programMaterial Support
Humanitarian Law Project v. GonzalesHumanitarian Law Project v. Department of the TreasuryFirst and Fifth Amendment challenges to the “material support” statute and related schemes that punish association with foreign organizations placed on terrorism lists 
Attacks on Dissent
Bandele v. City of New YorkRepresenting members of the Malcolm X Grassroots Movement who were arrested while filming NYPD officers as part of a CopWatch program 
Killmon, et al. v. City of Miami
Challenge to mass arrests and police misconduct during the Free Trade of the Americas meeting in Miami, FL 
Kunstler v. NY
Suing the NYPD on behalf of protestors who were illegally arrested during an  
anti-war rally on April 7, 2003 and  detained for excessively long periods  
of time 
Florida Alliance for Retired Americans,  
et al. v. City of Fort LauderdaleSuccessful challenge to laws restricting  
the First Amendment rights of political activists in Florida38100 Blacks in Law  
Enforcement Who Care
William J. Aceves
ACLU National Legal DeptACLU of FloridaACLU of Southern California
Craig Acorn
Fahd AhmedShereef Hadi AkeelAkeel & Valentine P.C.Prof. Susan AkramIyad AlamiAl-Awda NY Ashlee AlbiesBarbara AllanKarima AminAmnesty InternationalArts for Peace (New Paltz) Ahilan ArulananthamAssemble 4 RightsHon. Jeffrion AubryAudre Lorde ProjectMichael AveryMôjgone AzemunBaach Robinson &  
Lewis PLLC
Rosemary BachvarovaBailey HouseDavid BaluarteDenise BarnesRaquel BatistaBAYAN USAAnn BeesonMyron BeldockBeldock, Levine &  
Hoffman LLP
Bellevue/NYU Program for 
Survivors of Torture
Medea BenjaminPhyllis BennisAlmudena BernabeuAntoine BernardFrida BerriganChandra BhatnagarCaroline Bettinger-LópezMamoni BhattacharyyaRathen BlauRobert BloomDouglas BloomCarolyn Patty BlumBoston Univ Sch of LawLocke BowmanBill BowringBob Boyle
Brecht Forum
Bridge Street AWME ChurchMatt BrinckerhoffJudith BrinkBen BrofmanBronx DefendersBronx HIV Care NetworkBrotherhood/Sister SolTamir Z. BrownJessica BuchananAllan BuchmanSusan BurkeBurke O’Neil LLCBush is Over! CampaignButler Rubin Saltarelli &  
Boyd LLP
CAAA V: Organizing  
Asian Communities
Socrates CabaGemma CalvetSusan CameronCampaign to Promote  
Equitable Telephone Charges (ETC)
Prof Arturo CarilloJuan CartagenaKarl CarterMichael CatesCatholic Worker MovementCenter for Community  
Alternatives
Center for Justice &  
Accountability (CJA)
Center for Law &  
Social Justice
Center for Reproductive RightsProf. Erwin ChemerinskyMiya ChenPaul ChevignyJudith Brown ChomskyCindy ChupackTink Chupack-WallachCitizens United for Rehabilita-
tion of Errants - New York Chapter (CURE-NY)
Melanca D. ClarkRosa ClementeCoalition for Parole  
Restoration (CPR)
Coalition for Women PrisonersKendrick CobbCode PinkTim CoffeyDavid ColeAlison ColemanColumbia Univ Sch of Law 
Human Rights Institute
Marie-Agnes CombesqueCommunity Service SocietyConey Island Ave. ProjectKaitlin CordesJesse CorradiCorrectional AssociationCouncil on American-Islamic 
Relations New York Chapter (CAIR-NY)
Courtney CountsCovington & BurlingJeremy CowanJennifer CowanCritical ResistanceRosalina CrottyCatherine CrumpCulture ProjectLauren CumbiaElizabeth CummingCurtis Mallet-Prevost, Colt & 
Mosle
Rudy and Betty CypserJamil DakwarMatt DaloisioErin DarlingNeena DasRev. Dr. Herbert DaughtryBen DavisYasmin DavisRosalba DavisAdam DayVanessa Stich De SimoneKyle De YoungDebevoise & Plimpton, LLPSharon DelshadDesis Rising Up and Moving 
(DRUM)
Detention Watch NetworkWanda Best Deveaux
Anthony DiCaprio
Karen DippoldDLA Piper U.S. LLPDomestic Workers UnitedRichard DornDrop the RockDrug Policy AllianceDrum Major InstituteBani DuggalDolina DuzantEarthRights International 
(ERI)
Edge of JusticeMatt EisenbrandtEdward J. ElderEddie EllisSally El-SadekEmery, Celli, Brinckerhoff & 
Abady LLP
Eve EnslerExodus Transitional  
Community
Fabulous Independent  
Educated Radicals for Community Empowerment (FIERCE!)
Richard FalkFamilies for FreedomFamilies United for Racial  
and Economic Equality  
(FUREE)
Daphne FarganisMuhammad FaridiRosemary FaulknerSusan FeathersMoira FeeneyMaria FerrinWalter FieldsRobert F. FinkCindy FlowersAnthony FonsecaTina Monshipour FosterOver the past year, the Center for Constitutional Rights has worked with hundreds of attorneys, legal organizations, private law firms 
and activists on our cases and campaigns. CCR extends its deepest appreciation for all they have done as volunteer attorneys, cooper -
ating attorneys, co-counsel and colleagues in the struggle for justice. 
Friends & Allies 
French League for  
Human Rights
Jose Louis Fuentes
Elizabeth GainesRobert GangiTheresa GheenGibbons P.C.Joan GibbsAlex GibneyCathe GiffuniJohn GilmoreLeah GitterCurt GoeringLisa GonzalezMelissa GoodmanWilliam GoodmanGoodman & HurwitzAmanda GourdineMichael GramerAshley GrantKate GreenwoodLucy GreerColin GreerCarmine GrimaldiTheo GrzegorczykGuerilla Tactics Media Haiti Support NetworkHarlem Tenants CouncilHastings International  
and Comparative  
Law Review 
Mona HayatJoseph HaydenAnne K. HeidelRebecca HeineggSimon HellerRick HerzNellie Hester BaileyRev. Diane HodgesPaul HoffmanSarah HogarthRue HogarthJeff HogueTedd HopeLeah HorowitzRebekah HorowitzScott HortonJane HuckerbyBetsy IgerArthur IgerInstitute for the Black World 
21st Century 
Institute for Urban Education 
at the New School
Interfaith Coalition of  
Advocates for Reentry  
and Employment (ICARE)
International Action CenterInternational Federation for 
Human Rights (FIDH)
International Justice NetworkInternational Solidarity  
Movement
Renee IselyIslamic Circle of North 
America (ICNA)
Kim IvesAbdeen JabaraJameel JafferAvi JaisinghaniJericho MovementMona JimenezKenn JohnCantrell JonesJudson Memorial ChurchJustice CommitteeJustice Works CommunityWolfgang KaleckNicholas KapustinskySubhash KateelCheryl KatesEliot KatzTamara KempfDima KhalidiBobby KhanYvonne and Jasmine KillebrewJane KimJames KlimaskiKlimaski & AssociatesDan KlotzTamar Kraft-StolarRuth KreinikFrank KroghPatricia KruegerKunstler Fund for  
Racial JusticeVivien LabatonRay LaForrestLAS Prisoners Rights ProjectJanet LeeDavid LernerRichard LevyLevy Ratner, LPLevy, Phillips &  
Konigsberg, LLP
Elizabeth LewisMegan LewisThomas LindsayJules LobelJovita LopezDana LossiaErrol LouisLawrence S. LustbergLyrics To GoMacArthur Justice Center, 
Univ of Chicago Law Sch
Antoine MadelinSara MaderJoan MagoolaghanMoshe S. MaimonMalcolm X Grassroots  
Movement (MXGM)
Arthur MalkinJoseph MarguliesRandall MarshallGlenn MartinEd MastMonami Maulik
Judith Chomsky  has been a donor to CCR and a cooperating attorney on international  
human rights cases since the early 1990s when she was introduced to the Center by her friend, 
CCR Board member Abdeen Jabara. In particular, Judith was an integral part of the Doe v. Unocal 
case that reinforced the use of international law and the ATS, pioneered by CCR, to hold multina-
tional corporations responsible for human rights violations.
“My work with CCR is about as intellectually interesting as 
something can be. I feel personally committed to the politics of these cases, particularly the corporate responsibility cases. If only the surrogates are held responsible there’ll always be another petit dictator there to take their place. It’s only when you tie the bad behavior in the developing world back to board rooms in the United States that it puts pressure on the political system. CCR’s work is especially important to me because the clients are amazing, courageous, generous and fun to meet. One of the great gifts of doing CCR work is getting to know these people.”
CCR Spotlight
39Deepinder Mayell
Judith McDanielStanley McDermott IIIDemi McGuireShannon McNultyPinky MehtaCarl MessineoHope MetcalfScott MichelmanJeanne MirerJenny Montoya-TanseyJonathan MooreMajor Dan MoriMorning-After Pill Conspiracy C. Zawadi MorrisMorrison & FoersterEric MullerRafael MutisKotaro NakaiNational Hip Hop Political 
Convention
National HIRE NetworkNational Lawyers GuildNational Lawyers Guild - 
Mass Defense Committee
National Lawyers Guild - 
NYC Chapter
Neighborhood Defender  
Service of Harlem (NDSH)
Merry NeisnerAlice NelsonSarah NetburnNew York City AIDS Housing 
Network (NYCAHN)
New York Coalition to Expand 
V oting Rights
New York Immigration  
Coalition
New York Society for Ethical 
Culture
NJ Peace ActionNJ Solidarity - Activists for the 
Liberation of Palestine
NodutdolGerald NorlanderNY Metro Religious  
Campaign Against Torture
NY Taskforce on Political 
Prisoners
NYS Defenders AssociationNYU Center for Human 
Rights & Global Justice
Alexandra Pomeon O’NeillRicky and Cheri O’DonoghueMichael O’LoughlinBarbara OlshanskyYoko OnoTom PachecoSailaja PaidipatyPalestine Solidarity  
Committee - Seattle Chapter
Palestinian Center for  
Human Rights
Constantina PapageorgiouKathy ParkerPartnership for Civil JusticeJordan Paust Peoples’ JusticeFrancesca PerkinsKay PerryC. William PhillipsSteven J. PhillipsPicture the HomelessEileen PlattMiriam PolletDeborah PopowskiMichael PoulshockPrison Families AnonymousPrison Families Community 
Forum (PFCF)
Prison Families of  
New York, Inc.
Prison Moratorium ProjectPrisoner Re-Entry InstitutePuffin FoundationJonathan H. PyleQueers for Economic JusticeNadia QurashiRachel Corrie FoundationEllen RangeMerle Ratner Ratner, DiCaprio &  
Chomsky LLP
Redstockings of the Women’s 
Liberation Movement 
Alex ReinertRepublican Attorney’s Asso-
ciation (RA V – Germany)
Resistance in BrooklynKate RheeAnn RichardsonRights for Imprisoned People 
with Psychiatric Disabilities (RIPPD) 
Rights Working GroupRiptide CommunicationsRiverside ChurchWayne RobertsMarion RodriguezRonald A. Peterson Law ClinicRossana RosadoAlan RosenthalRobert RossShannon RoznerKate RubinJames RubinVisuvananathan  
Rudrakumaran
Safe Streets/Strong  
Communities
Radhika SainathRahul SaksenaZeina SalamRomeo SanchezSusan SarandonMeg SatterthwaiteKatie SavinSadat SayeedGabriel SayeghScheurer & Hardy P.C.Schomburg Center for  
Research in Black Culture
Seattle Univ Sch of LawSeven Neighborhood Action 
Partnership (SNAP)
Katie SchwartzmanNaureen ShahAarti ShahaniJulie SheltonMara ShlackmanReggie ShufordSikh CoalitionEsmeralda SimmonsMarco SimonsAyana SimusAmardeep SinghAmrit SinghLee, Joanne & Jessica SinovoiGwynne L. SkinnerClaudia SlovinskyProf. Ronald C. SlyeAlexandra Houston SmithCarol SobelJoshua A. SohnJennifer SokolerSonnenschein, Nath &  
Rosenthal
Cynthia SoohooRaji SouraniSouthern Legal CounselElizabeth SperberClive Stafford-SmithNancy StearnsIrene SteinerBeth StephensSarah J. SterkenJonathan StonbelyDavid StovallNan StraussStreet Smart MovementJeanne SulzerDavid SwansonKeiko TakayamaVicky TartterMateo TaussigRJ ThompsonMargaret TobinKatherine ToomeyGabriel Torres RiveraTorture Abolition and  
Survivors Support Coalition (TASSC)
Christine TramantanoCarmen TrottaUnited for Peace & JusticeUniv of Pennsylvania Law SchUrban Justice CenterTheo Van BovenMarc Van Der HoutKarla VargasMara Verheyden-HilliardRima Vesely-FladVietnam Agent Orange Relief 
& Responsibility Campaign
Teresa VitelloVulcan SocietyCarole WagnerIan WallachRae WaltonMariann Meier WangWar Resisters LeagueSean WardEvelyn WarrenMichael WarrenEd WassermanBrian WeeksLen WeinglassPeter WeissMaggie WilliamsAn-Tuan WilliamsWilmerHaleJohn WilsonMichael WingerWitness Against TortureWomen’s Liberation Birth 
Control Project 
Devyn Wray-ScrivenRon YerxaHaeyoung YoonMilton ZelermeyerDorothy M. ZellnerKimberly Zelnick
Friends & Allies (continued)
40Guantánamo Habeas Counsel 
Douglas Abbott
Leslie AbramsKaren AbravanelMuneer AhmadShireen AhmedElizabeth K. AinslieRafik AldinaAllen & Overy LLPIsmail AlsheikAlston & BirdEmmanuel AltitSarah AltschullerAmerican Univ. Washington 
College of Law International Human Rights Clinic
Keri AndersonJohn P. AndersonZerai ArayaBridget ArimondEnrique ArmijoElizabeth AroraJehan AslamMuneeza AumirBaher AzmyBaach Robinson, &  
Lewis, PLLC
Matthew BabcockRick D. BaileyHissan BajwaBaker & McKenzie LLPSusan Baker ManningDavid BaluarteScott S. BarkerJames W. Beane Jr.Reagan BeckDouglas J. BehrJonathan S. BenderJeff BergerRyan T. BergsiekerJoseph BermanMark BermanBerman & DowellCatherine BernardDavid BerzBingham McCutchen LLPBirnberg Pierce & PartnersJonathan BlackmanKeith BlackmanRonald BlumSteven M. BocknekEmmet BondurantBondurant, Mixson & ElmoreLouis BonillaGuly K. BositovaDwight BostwickDavid BradfordElizabeth BravermanBrennan Center for Justice at 
NYU School of Law
Thomas BrettPatricia BronteBrooklyn Law SchoolKarma BrownCarol Elder BruceLauren BrunswickBryan K. BullockEdmund BurkeBurke, McPheeters, Bordner, 
& Estes
Burns & Levinson, LLPAntony S. BurtMona L. BurtonG. Brian BuseyChristine BustanyKelly A. CameronAngela CampbellCharles CarpenterBernard J. CaseyDoug CasselAnne J. CastleD. Mark CaveAnna Cayton-HollandCenter for International  
Human Rights
Center for Justice and Inter -
national Law, Northwestern University School of Law
Christopher ChangErwin ChemerinskyPamela ChepigaJennifer ChingAdam ChissJudith ChomskyLouise ChristianAnthony M. ClarkGeorge M. ClarkeCleary Gottlieb Steen &  
Hamilton LLP
Clifford Chance, LLPRachel G. ClinghamLinford CoatesJerry CohenJames CohenCohen, Milstein, Hausfeld & 
Toll, PLLC
Joshua Colangelo-BryanJeffrey ColmanColumbia UniversityJenna ColvinTimothy ConeJohn J. ConnollyAnupama ConnorLynne CooperBenjamin CooperMichael CooperStephanie CosteCovington & Burling LLPJennifer CowanDouglas CoxRandy CoyneCramer and Minock, PLCCori A. CriderWilliam CrowNicole M. CrumAudrey CummingPaul CurninDouglas CurtisDavid CynamonRichard L. CysChristine DahlRonald DaignaultGeorge DalyJeffrey J. DavisDavis Wright Tremaine LLPDebevoise & Plimpton LLPDechert LLPDon DegnanAmbreen DelawallaJoshua W. DenbeauxMark DenbeauxDenbeaux & DenbeauxDenver LawyersMatthew DevineRebecca P. DickDavid G. DickmanDickstein Shapiro LLPClare DiegelJames DillonKimberly DiLorenzoW. Matthew DodgeRonan DohertySkye DonaldJames DorseyDorsey & Whitney LLPDowns Rachlin Martin PLLCBrendan DriscollMichael W. DrumkeDuke University School  
of Law
Theresa M. DuncanSarah DunnMelissa DurkeeThomas Anthony DurkinDurkin & RobertsChris DysardDavid East Armin EberhardEdwards Angell Palmer & 
Dodge LLP
Buz EisenbergDavid ElbaumRobert M. ElliotElliot Pishko Morgan P.A.David L. EngerhardtConnie EricsonJeffrey L. ErtelEsdaile, Barrett & EsdaileMarc FalkoffJames M. FalveyGeorge FarahFarschad FarzanFederal Defender Office  
of South Florida
Federal Defender Program  
for the Northern District  
of Georgia
Jon FeeWarren FeldmanSarah FelsBenjamin H. FieldMark FlemingMartin FlumenbaumThis year, CCR’s Guantánamo Global Justice Initiative worked with over 500 lawyers and legal workers at over 100 law firms, law 
school clinics and other legal organizations who have filed  habeas corpus petitions on behalf of Guantánamo detainees. (see pages 
34-35 of this report for a list of cases and a description of the project) We thank each and every one of these brave individuals and 
organizations for their unflagging commitment to representing their clients at Guantánamo Bay. 
4142Guantánamo Habeas Counsel (continued)
Murray Fogler
Foley Hoag LLPFoliart, Huff, Ottaway &  
Bottom
Fordham University School of 
Law, International Justice Clinic
Paul T. FortinoTina Monshipour FosterBrian S. FraserFredrikson & Byron PAEric M. FreedmanFreedman Boyd Daniels  
Hollander Goldberg  
& Ives PA
Matthew FreimuthScott H. FrewingJill FriedmanAgnieszka FryszmanFulbright & Jaworski LLPRobert GalantucciReena GambhirAvi GarbowAllen GarrettGarvey Schubert BarerZachary GelberRobert A. GensburgGensburg, Atwell & BroderickJohn J. GibbonsGibbons, P.C.Gilroy, Kammen & HillElizabeth P. GilsonJeffrey GleasonEmily GoldbergJared GoldsteinGeorge G. GordonH. Candace GormanKC GoyerRobert GrahamJason GreenEldon V .C. GreenbergAyo GriffinRichard A. GriggNienke GrossmanDavid GrossmanDavid GunnHarold GurewitzGurewitz & Raben PLCAbigail GustafsonDinh HaJonathan HafetzOrdesse HamadSuhana S. HanMatthew HandleyOsman HandooHangley Aronchick Segal & 
Pudlin
Daniel HanifinElizabeth HardyJ. Wells HarrellHartmann Doherty Rosa & 
Berman, LLC
Harvard Law SchoolMarcellene E. HearnHeller Ehrman LLPRene HerzogDavid HickersonClark Hodgson Jr.Melissa HofferHofstra Law SchoolJohn R. HollandHolland & Hart LLPNancy HollanderSteven HopperHopper and Company LawyersYuri HorwitzJames HoskingCraig HosterErica L. HovaniChristopher HuberGaillard T. HuntHunton & Williams LLPKristine A. HuskeyVarda HussainAlex IliffGary IsaacSarah JackelKetanji JacksonJessica JacobBeth D. JacobJeffrey S. JacobovitzMichael JacobsMeetali JainJames W. Beane Jr.Jenner & Block LLPTom R. Johnson Jr.Emily JollyPaula JonesGlenn JonesLisa Marie KaasRick KammenSteve KaneMatthew B. KaplanChristopher G. KaragheuzoffJason KarasikDavid KarpRamzi KassemRene KathawalaZachary KatznelsonSamuel C. KauffmanKeller & Heckman LLPTara R. KellyPatti KempKimberly Anne KesslerChristian KhanHamid KhanMahvish KhanDarold W. KillmerKillmer, Lane & Newman, LLPKilpatrick Stockton LLPRob KirschDaniel KirschnerJan KitchelSarah KleeDonald A. KleinJessica KleinSarah KnappJason KnottNeil KosloweKramer Levin Naftails &  
Frankel LLP
David KronenbergCorwin KruseWilliam KueblerPhilip LacovaraDavid J. Laing
Marc Falkoff has been co-counsel with CCR representing 17 Yemeni detainees at  
Guantánamo Bay prison camp for several years, both as an associate at a major national firm and 
now as a law professor. Beyond his valuable service to his clients and to the concept of justice, what makes his story unique is his latest project: a just-released collection of poems written by some of the men held at the camp. Poems from Guantánamo: The Detainees Speak gives voice to those whose 
voices had been silenced. In one of the more creative ways that people have supported the Center, Marc designated the proceeds from the book to go to support CCR’s Guantánamo Global Justice Initiative.
“Make no mistake about it – our government is engaging in 
a form of ‘lawfare’ in the courts. In the Guantánamo cases, 
which CCR has spearheaded for nearly six years, the Bush 
administration has sought to undermine the writ of habeas corpus solely to advance its 
military goals in our so-called ‘war on terror.’ We can all be thankful that CCR remains 
unbowed in its fight to preserve human rights and the rule of law.”
CCR Spotlight 
Sapna Lalmalani
Joseph LandauJeffrey LangDarren LaVerneLavin, O’Neil, Ricci, Cedrone 
& DiSipio
Erika C. LazarPaul A. LederKaren LeeAllison LefrakLegal Aid of New YorkMatthew LeonardLinda LernerWalter LesnevichLesnevich &  
Marzano-Lesnevich
Lesser, Newman, Souweine & 
Nasser
Jason LevitonEric L. LewisAmber LewisHeather LewisBrian LewisEmma LindsayGreg LipperNikki LivolsiElaina LoizouRachel LopezEllen LubellCathy LuiJohn LundquistLawrence S. LustbergJ. Triplett MackintoshMatthew J. MacLeanHanna MadbakBrian D. MaddoxNauman MalikDaniel C. MaloneManatt, Phelps & Phillips LLPHoward ManchelManchel, Wiggins &  
Kaye LLP
Henry Lee MannShant ManoukianDeborah MantellJohnathan MargolisJoe MarguliesLou MarjonDavid S. MarshallLarry MartinAlexandria MarzanoJulia Tarver MasonTanisha MassieEdwin S. MatthewsJonisha MatthewsMayer Brown LLPMcCarter & English LLPBridget McCormackMcDermott, Will & EmeryTracey McDonald Stephen P. McFateNeil McGaraghanReginald B. McKnightAmy J. McMasterJoseph M. McMillanBrian MeadorsBrian MendelsohnSemra A. MesulamFrancesca MiceliScott MichelmanGeorge Brent Mickum IVIssa MikelJohn R. MinockJohn B. MissingNicholas MitchellShams MithaNicole MoenLia MonahonMichael E. MoneMichael E. Mone Jr.Christopher MooreDan MoriMorrison & Foerster LLPDaniel P. MoylanWilliam E. MuraneWilliam J. MurphyRichard G. MurphyMurphy & Shaffer LLCArnold NataliMaya NathBrian J. NeffJoseph NeguseMari NewmanWilliam C. NewmanJill NickersonNixon Peabody LLPNorthern Illinois University 
College of Law
Northwestern University 
School of Law
Notre Dame Law School, 
Center for Civil and Human Rights
Sophia NuonSiham NurhusseinScarlett ObadiaSean O’BrienW. Scott O’ConnellMatthew O’HaraStephen OleskeyBarbara OlshanskyJoseph O’NeilOrrick, Herrington &  
Sutcliffe LLP
Larry OttawayCarolyn PagliocchiniAndrew PakJonathan PalmerChintan PanchalCharles PattersonPaul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton 
& Garrison LLP
Pepper Hamilton LLPPerkins Coie LLPDavid PetersCharles H.R. PetersGareth PierceKit PiersonPillsbury Winthrop Shaw  
Pittman LLP
Jason PinneySarah PojanowskiElizabeth PopolisCristina PosaMichael PoulshockWesley PowellKevin PowersAdrian Bleifuss PradosPryor, Robertwon, Beasley, 
Smith & Karber PLLC
Donald PugileseE. Theresa PurgasonRobert D. RachlinJana RamseyMichael RapkinPaul M. RashkindNoah RashkindUzma RasoolJack RatliffAnant RautMartha RaynerFrank C. RazzanoBina ReddyReed Smith LLPPaul ReichlerElizabeth ReidyNathan ReillyDavid RemesReprieveSara J. RichRichards Kibbe & Orbe LLPPaula Rietzel Janis D. RobertsRichard RobertsMichael W. RobinsonElizabeth RodgersRodgers, Powers &  
Schwartz, LLP
Marcus RodriguezRoger Williams University 
School of Law
Philip RohlikJohn C. RothermichSamuel RowleySylvia RoyceLouis RuprechtRuprecht, Hart & Weeks LLPBrent RushforthRheba RutkowskiDiana RutowskiPeter M. RyanLowell SachnoffSeema SaifeeGlenn SalvoDouglas B. SandersJuliet SarkessianMark SayreAndrew J. SchaeferSchiff Hardin LLPJames SchmitzSchnader, Harrison, Segal & 
Lewis LLP
Debra SchneiderHarry H. SchneiderPaul SchoemanJames SchroederDavid SchurSchwabe, Williamson & WyattHarvey SchwartzAlison L. SclaterKristina ScotoRandolph S. SergentSeton Hall Law School Center 
for Social Justice
Amanda ShaferBenjamin S. SharpShearman & Sterling LLPPatrick SheldonSheri ShepherdDeming E. ShermanJessica ShermanLaura Shiltz
4344Guantánamo Habeas Counsel (continued)
Lennon Ono Grant for Peace
Presented by Yoko Ono
Letelier-Moffitt Human Rights Award
Presented by the Institute for Policy Studies
Raphael Lemkin Human Rights Award
Presented by Rabbis for Human Rights – North America
Hans Litten Prize
Presented by Democratic Lawyers of Germany
To CCR President Michael Ratner for his work with CCR
Special Recognition for Continuous Dedication  
to the Advancement of Human Rights
Presented by the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights  Awards
Shook, Hardy & Bacon LLP
Eric W. SieversCary SilvermanGia SimonValerie SimonsSimpson Thacher &  
Bartlett LLP
Charles C. SiposMichael SiudzinskiDavid SleighSleigh & WilliamsMarjorie M. SmithJulia SmithSara SmolikThomas SniderJohn SnodgrassBen SnowdenRichard A. SobleSoble Rowe Krichbaum LLPDoug SondgerothLynne Campbell SoutterBrian C. SpahnDouglas SpauldingMary SpearsSpears & Imes LLPSpivey & Grigg LLPKent SpriggsSpriggs Law FirmSprigs & HollingsworthClive A. Stafford-SmithBrent StarksRebecca StarrAdrian Lee SteelTara SteeleyMichael J. SternhellStradley Ronon Stevens & 
Young, LLP
Jeffrey M. StraussMark S. SullivanPatricia A. SullivanThomas SullivanSullivan & Cromwell LLPAlan SussmanSutherland Asbill &  
Brennan LLP
Julia SymonElizabeth V . TanisAsmah TareenAlexis TeicherDoris TennantTennant Lubell, LLCFleming TerrellGary ThompsonWade ThomsonA. Katherine ToomeyMarina TradCharles M. TravisMichael W. TrinhStephen M. TruittSozi TulanteSuzanne E. TurnerUniversity of Michigan  
Law School Clinical  
Law Program
University of Oklahoma  
College of Law Center
University of Texas School  
of Law
University of Texas School  
of Law, Rule of Law in Wartime Clinic
Andrew VailJill van BergVeronica VelaVenable LLPAngela C. VigilDanielle R. V oorheesEliot J. WalkerTerry WalshJames (Bud) WalshSally WalterMichael WardSteve WassermanHadassa WaxmanRobert C. Weaver, Jr.Weil, Gotshal & Manges LLPWeinberg & Garber, P.C.Robert WeinerJamie WeitzelJason C. WelchGregory WeliksonCarolyn M. WelshhansWilliam Wertheimer Jr.Terry WestCody M. WestonMichael WhitlockKristin B. WilhelmPeter Sabin WillettJill M. WilliamsonWilmerHaleThomas WilnerRichard J. WilsonElizabeth A. WilsonPaul WinkeMeghan N. WinokurJulie WithersJo-Anne WolfsonAbiel K WongElton WongGordon S. WoodwardJenny WorkmanColin WrableyJeffrey WuYale Law SchoolJon R. ZulaufZulauf & ChamblissLisa B. Zycherman45 
Planned Gifts      $149,102
Foundations      $3,116,804
Indivdiduals      $1,270,471
Court Awards and Attorney Fees      $70,303
Rent      $1,010
Interest      $174,701
Other      $56,494
Total Revenue, Gains and Other Support      $4,838,885Revenue, Gains & Other Support
Litigation      $2,421,869
Education & Outreach      $1,317,626
Administrative & General      $656,581
Fundraising      $518,358
Total Expenses      $4,914,434ExpensesAudited Financial Report July 1 2006 – June 30 2007
Net Assets as of June 30, 2006      $5,029,974
Change in net assets      $(75,549)
Net assets as of June 30, 2007      $4,954,425Net Assets
For an independent evaluation of our financial health  
visit Charity Navigator who gave us a perfect four star rating 
at www.charitynavigator.org 46Our planned giving program forms the bedrock of our efforts to build an endowment. By including CCR in your estate  
plan, you can create an institutional legacy to defend the hard-won victories of your lifetime. Thelma Newman Society 
members ensure that CCR will be there for the long haul, working to undo the constitutional damage done in the last  
10 years and to fight for the rights of the next generation. Please contact us if you have any questions about making a 
bequest, endowment, gift annuity or other form of estate gift.
Vicki Alexander
Evelyn Alloy
Ruth Andrews
Carol Ascher
Ruth Bardach
Philip Bereano
Harvey Blend
Robert Boehm†
Frederick and Betty Briehl
Mary Carr
Marial Delo
Jeffrey Dickemann
George and Minna Doskow
Norman Dreyfuss† and Cathy Dreyfuss
Kay Duffy
Leona Feyer
Albert and Anne Filardo
Curt Firestone
Sol FisherCecily Fox
Mary Geissman
Raymond† and Lise Giraud
Frances Goldin
Ed Goldman and Judith Riven
Ellen and Ellis Harris
John Hayward
Martin and Mildred Hird
Leo Hurvich
Martin and Carolyn Karcher
Gordon Kent
Alfred Knobler
Hilda Knobloch
Elizabeth Landis
Helen Lane
Joan Lewis
Evelyn Lundstrom
Hilda Mason 
Alice McGrathBarbara Michael
Joe Morton
James Odling
William Parsons
Mahlon and Lovel Perkins
Dolores Priem
David Rich
Jack Rihn
Doris Shaffer
Rosalie Stahl
Margot Steigman
Joe Stern
Clio Tarazi
Ethel Tobach
Florence Wagner
Peter Weiss
Ginia Wexler
John WilsonThelma Newman Planned Giving Society MembersPlanned Giving
John Wilson  studied American history at Philips Exeter Academy in the 1950s with an in-
spiring teacher, Henry Bragdon, who sparked Mr. Wilson’s fascination with history, current events, 
and helped shape Wilson’s liberal perspective. While there, Wilson acquired great respect for the U.S. Constitution, and he saw the Civil Rights Movement as the further realization of the principles enshrined in it.  As a long time social justice activist, John Wilson became alarmed with the attack on constitutional liberties after September 11, 2001, and was particularly impressed when CCR took up the cases of the Guantánamo Bay prisoners. 
“I was first drawn to CCR because it had the courage to take a 
stand and represent the Guantánamo Bay prisoners. Making a 
legacy gift to CCR is one way that I can participate in the long 
struggle to reclaim what the U.S. government has taken away 
in the name of the ‘war on terror.”
—John Wilson, CCR donor and Thelma Newman Planned Giving Society Member
CCR Spotlight† These gifts were made by donors who passed away this year or made a bequest to CCR which was received this year..We have come a long way since our founders created the Center for Constitutional Rights to provide legal support to 
organizations and individuals engaged in the civil rights struggles in the South.  But no vision, certainly not one as ambitious as CCR’s, is realized alone; our donors are the heart of this organization.  Without the individuals listed  
below, and many many more, our work would have neither the reach nor impact that it does. The cases, projects and  
efforts you have read about in this report are made possible because you have joined with us in the fight. It is with great appreciation that we recognize our partners and supporters. 
Founders Circle g i f t s  o f $1000 a n d a b o v eOur Donors July 1 2006 – June 30 2007
$500,000 and above
The Atlantic Philanthropies (USA)
$100,000 and above
Anonymous
The CS Fund/Warsh-Mott Legacy
The Ford Foundation
The HKH Foundation
The Oak Foundation
The Vanguard Charitable  
Endowment Program
$50,000 – $99,999
AnonymousThe Arca Foundation
Vita Barsky
 †
George and Minna Doskow
The Funding Exchange National  
Community Funds
The JEHT Foundation
Elizabeth S. Landis
The Lennon Ono Grant for Peace
Madison Community Foundation
Richard and Marilyn Mazess
Katherine and David Moore
Yoko Ono
The Open Society Institute
The Ratner Family
The Ritter Foundation
The Tides Foundation
The Wallace Global Fund
$25,000 – $49,999
AnonymousHisham Altalib
The Angelina Fund
George and Beverly August
Jamal Barzinji
The Charles Evans Hughes  
Memorial FoundationThe Common Counsel Foundation
Victor and Lorraine Honig
International Institute of  
Islamic Thought
Jingo FoundationThe Libra Foundation
The David and Katherine Moore  
Family Foundation, Inc. 
Zella Luria
Nancy Meyer and Marc Weiss
Rotonda Foundation
The Samuel Rubin Foundation
The Scherman Foundation, Inc.Robert Schwartz
 †
Shrewsbury FoundationSamuel Wiener Jr.
Working Assets Funding Service
$10,000 – $24,999
Anonymous 
The Jewish Communal Fund
The Alfred and Jane Ross Foundation
Eric and Cindy Arbanovella
Laurie Arbeiter and Jennifer Hobbs
Carol Ascher and Robert Pittenger
Lois Baker † 
The Bardon-Cole FoundationJohn Bernstein
The Blue Oak Foundation
The Charitable Gift Fund
The Christopher Reynolds Foundation
Sandra Coliver
Norman Dreyfuss
† and Cathy Dreyfuss
Thomas Durst
The Epstein PhilanthropiesFidelity Charitable Gift Fund
The Firedoll Foundation
The Fritz Pappenheim Fund  
of the Tides Foundation
Leo and Sherry FrumkinRichard and Carolyn GlicksteinJohn and Kathryn Greenberg
The Grodzins FundScott D. Handleman
George Harrison
† 
The Helena Rubinstein FoundationJohn B. Henry
Emily Honig
Iara Lee and George Gund III  
Foundation
Institute of International Education
Cassim and Chung Ja Jadwat
The Jewish Communal Fund
Gordon D. KentThe Liberty Hill Foundation
The Max and Anna  
Levinson Foundation
The Meijer & Klaber Families  
Memorial Fund
Holly Myers and Kirk Neely
The New York Community Trust
The New-Land Foundation
Abigail Norman
The Normandie Foundation
Alfred Ross
Albert Ruben
Louis Slesin
The Spingold Foundation
Jean Stein, JKW Foundation 
The Taub Family Foundation
The Vital Projects Fund, Inc.
Ian Wallach and Cindy Chupack
The William B. Wiener, Jr. Foundation
John H. Wilson
Irving and Evelyn Wolfe
Howard Zucker
$5,000 – $9,999
Anonymous 
Franz and Marcia Allina
47† These gifts were made by donors who passed away this year  
or made a bequest to CCR which was received this year..48Joan Antonucci †
Benjamin Berg Family Trust †
Benjamin and Hazel Mae Berg † 
The Bernard F. and Alva B.  
Gimbel Foundation
Jean-David Beyer
David and Ellen Block
Ida G. Braun
Bernie J. Casey
Charles Crane and Wendy Breuer
The Elizabeth M. Gitt Foundation
James and Louise Frankel
The Friendship Fund
Mary J. Geissman
Gould Family Foundation
Marion Greene
Evelyn Yee and Randall D. Holmberg
Lisa Honig
The Jeannette and H. Peter Kriendler  
Charitable Trust
John Carroll University
Joseph & Sally Handleman Foundation
William D. Kirby
Frederick and Emily Kunreuther
Barry and Paula Litt
Jules Lobel
Louis Lowenstein
Tom W. Lyons
Vincent McGee
Rachel Mustin
Max and Nicole Newman
Henry Norr
The Overbrook Foundation
The Philanthropic Collaborative
Claudette Piper
Steve and Carolyn Purcell
Ralph E. Ogden Foundation, Inc.
Amelie L. Ratliff
Mark and Nancy Ratner
Ronald and Deborah B. Ratner
Reed Smith LLP
Margaret and Henry Reuss
Stuart A. Rockefeller
Eric and Fiona Rudin
The San Francisco 
 Foundation
Schwab Fund for  
Charitable Giving
Alfred H. SchwendtnerSeymour & Sylvia Rothchild Family 
2004 Charitable Foundation
Donald and Doris Shaffer
Silicon Valley Community Foundation
Douglas Spaulding
Clive A. Stafford-Smith
Adam and Jane Stein
Lynn S. Stern
Beatrice Stern
Josephine A. Willard†
Chic Wolk
Edith and Marjorie Ziefert
$2,500 – $4,999
Anonymous
Daniel Alterman and Li Wah Lai
Rita and William Bender
Ara Bernardi
Gene C. Bernardi
Maryalice Bigham-Hughes
Miriam Buhl
The Chicago Community Foundation
Timothy Coffey
Community Foundation of New Jersey
Kathryn Dowling
Shiva Eftekhari
Norman Eisner and Zelda Aronstein
Evan Fales
Rosemary Faulkner
Louis Fisher
Ronald Force†
Franklin E. and Alice Fried
The Fund for Southern Communities
James and Bettie Hannan
Lynne Henderson
William and Virginia Hildebrand
John Hoffmeyer and Janet M. Corpus
Jewish Community Federation  
of Cleveland
The John D. and Catherine T.  
MacArthur Foundation
The Key Foundation
Rochelle Korman
Seymour Krauth† 
William Lankford
Eileen and Paul Le Fort
Timothy J. Lee and Eleanor McBride
Joan Lewis
Eric L. LewisRamsay MacMullen
John and Martha Marks
Rob McConnell and Maria DeCastro
Patricia F. Mullahy
Mary and Benjamin Page
Richard L. Pearlstone
Lawrence and Janet Rivkin
Alex and Carole Rosenberg
Kyla and Ethan Ryman
Edwin E. Salpeter and  
Antonia L. Shouse
Wallace M. Shawn
Charles Sikorovsky
Morton Sobell and Nancy Gruber
Richard A. Soble and Barbara L. Kessler
Swann Galleries, Inc.
Merry Tucker
George Wallerstein
Walter & Elise Haas Fund
Weil, Gotshal & Manges LLP
The Wyss Family Foundation
Ellen Yaroshefsky
Barbara A. Zeluck
Michael Zweig and Kathy Chamberlain
$1,000 – $2,499
Anonymous
Adriana Alberghetti
Halima Al-Hassan
Salam Al-Rawi
Theresa F. Alt
Alan and Donna Altschuler
Nabil and Ann Amer
Janet S. Arnold and Michael H. Rubin
The Arthur & Henrietta A. Sorin  
Charitable Trust
Emily S. Attwell, Attwell Foundation
Judy Austermiller and Warren Betty
James A. and Beate K. Becker
Charles and Leslie Berger
Matthew A. Berlin and Simone Liebman
Bernard Stern Family Trust
Jose F. and Francella W. Betancourt
Raghu K. and Sushma Bhardwaj
Alexis Bleich
Emmet J. Bondurant
Laura J. Borst
The Boston Foundation
Martin BrodCCR Donors
† These gifts were made by donors who passed away this year  
or made a bequest to CCR which was received this year..Judith and Don Broder
Peter and Alice Broner
Allan and Muriel Brotsky
Tara A. Caffrey and Jeffrey J. Vroom
Steve Callas
John Caruso
Peter and Lucia Case
Waifun B. Chan and Kurt Breuninger
John A. Chandler and Elizabeth V . Tanis
Laura and Richard Chasin
Victor H. Chechanover
The Columbus Foundation
The Community Foundation  
of Santa Cruz
Community Foundation of Western  
Massachusetts
David B. Cone and Kellie Stoddart
Rhonda Copelon
Michael Cowing
Robert A. Cunningham
E. Patrick Curry and Susan B. Campbell
Norman DannerThe David and Sylvia Teitelbaum  
Fund, Inc.
Emily Deferrari and Mel Packer
Madeline deLone and Bobby Cohen 
Michelle J. DePass
Roger Dittmann
Michael Donkis
James Donnell
Kevin DonovanDaniel and Lee DrakeMark Drake
Martin J. Dreyfuss
Rodney and Carole Driver
Robert Dubrow
Paul and Susan Durrant
Diane Early and Daniel Gigone
Margaret L. Eberbach
The Edward W. Hazen Foundation
Elsberg Family Foundation
Ari Emanuel
Endeavor Agency
Wallace and Heike Eubanks
Robert M. Factor
Fein Foundation
Frederic J. Feingold
Gena Feist
Robert Fenichel
Robert Fertik
Daniel and Anita Fine
Robert Fodor and Thurid Clark
Mike ForterRobert A. Friedman
Amanda H. Frost
Kit and Steven Gage
Lola and Isaiah Gellman
General Board of Global Ministries, 
Women’s Division
The George Lichter Family Foundation
Daniel Gillmor
Sherna and Marvin GluckFrances GoldinJanice Goodman
Jane Gould
Holly B. Gray
Arrel T. Gray
Frank and Judith Greenberg
Lynn Greiner and John Midgley
Paul Haas
Collier Hands
Hildegarde K. Hannum
Lisa Harrison
The Helen Keeler Burke Charitable  
Foundation
Nathan Hershey
Greg Hodes
Christopher W. Hornig and  
Nancy J. Garruba
David and Susan Horowitz
Ruth Hubbard
Human and Civil Rights Organizations 
of America
Renate D. HunterSteven Hyman
Abdeen M. Jabara and Holly Maguigan
Kenneth M. Jones
Joseph Rosen Foundation
William H. Josephson
Morton C. and Merle R. Kane
Terry Karl
Ira G. Kawaller
Ernest and Nancy KeetIan Michael Wallach and Cindy Chupack  are proud supporters of the Cen-
ter. Cindy is an award-winning writer and executive producer, best known for her work on HBO’s Sex 
and the City. Ian is currently an L.A. County Deputy Public Defender, but prior to starting that job, he represented three Guantánamo Bay detainees in connection with CCR’s Guantánamo Global Justice Initiative. In 2006 in New York, Cindy and Ian hosted their first fundraiser for CCR, “Cheese, Chocolate and Chipping In, ” and later hosted an elaborate party this summer in Los Angeles. Thanks to Ian and Cindy, CCR now has 80 new friends in the entertainment industry as well as public interest lawyers and other people who care about social change.
Cindy says, “Writing, for me, has always been a way to get 
people’s attention and make a difference, and I love that 
Center for Constitutional Rights does the same thing with the 
law. I’m fed up with this administration and happy to support 
an organization that is using the law creatively to get America back on track.  
These are challenging times for our country, and CCR is up for the challenge.”
CCR Spotlight
Ian, Cindy and their  
St. Bernard rescue, Tink
49Martin Kenner and Camilla Smith
Jerry Kickenson
Joyce Kirschner and Richard S. Aronson 
Joanne Kliejunas and Irving Lubliner
Marily Knieriemen
Joanna Knobler
Alfie Kohn
Melodee Kornacker
Merle and Phyllis Krause
Michael Krinsky
Edward M. Krishok and Peggy K. Hong
Mary and Ulrich Kruse
Joseph B. Kruskal
Roger and Belle Kuhn
James Kwak
Mitch Lau
Judy Lerner
Mark L. Levine and Stephanie  
von Hirschberg
George and Ann Levinger
Judith Lichtenberg and David J. Luban
Mark LopezMatthew J. MacLean
Susan E. Manuel
Hubert and Rachelle Marshall
William G. Mascioli
Robert and Ellen Meeropol
Juliet A. Melamid
Carson A. Miller
Mahmoud and Laila Mohamed
Helen R. Moore
Richard and Barbara Moore
Richard A. Moran
Scott Morgan
Richard and Kathe Morse
Brian J. Neff
Jill W. Nelson and Thomas R. Bidell
The New Prospect Foundation
Colette Newman
Nancy J. Newman and Mark Walstrom
Louie D. Nikolaidis and  
Rachel Horowitz
Michael O. NimkoffThe O Live Fund
Eve Pell
Mahlon and Lovel Perkins
Barbara B. Perkins
Hanna PitkinMiriam PolletAnne Posel
Frances R. Posel
Florence B. Prescott
Priscilla J. McMillan Revocable Trust
Frances Rachel
Robert and Patricia Ralph
Brian J. Ratner
Doris E. Reed
Kenneth Reiner
Jennie Rhine and Tom Meyer
Jim Roberts and Patricia Calberson
Wayne Roberts
John and Fredelle Robinson
William L. and Sandra L. Rosenfeld
Joseph L. Ruby
Gladys Rustay
Jack Sawyer
Daniel P. Scharlin
Julie Schecter
Robert E. Schoen and Nancy Bernstein
William and Katherine SchrenkEdwin and Joan Brodsky Schur
Susan Scott
William Seaman
Steve Seltzer
Elizabeth and Stephen Shafer
Peter and Elizabeth Shepherd
Albert D. Shuldiner and Emily B. Myers
Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher,  
& Flom LLP
Emily Spieler and Gregory Wagner
Kent Spriggs
Barbara Starfield and Neil A. Holtzman
Nancy Stearns
Mildred B. Stout
Clayton A. Struve
Susan Susman
Alan Sussman
Clio Tarazi
Richard Teitelbaum
Hugh R. Tobin
Melvin and Marjorie TraylorJames S. Tyre
Robert Vitarelli
Terry L. Wade
Barbara Webster
Daniel Weiss and Anne StewartMuriel M. WeissmanStanley S. Weithorn
Richard Weitz
The Wheelchair Project
Sabin and Martha Willet
The Winky Foundation
Sherri Wolf
Darryl M. Wood and Helene T. Wollin
Deandrea Woods
Workable Alternatives Foundation
Michael D. Yokell
Patrick Young and Junko M. Kunitake
Susan Zawel
$500 – $999
Anonymous
A & J Saks Foundation, Inc.
Leslie Abbey
Stephen and Virginia Abrams
Ethel G. Ackley
Alice K. Ada
Victor Aguiler
Arun Alagappan
Cathy Albisa
Ethan D. and Sandra D. Alyea
Thomas E. and Donna Ambrogi
Grace B. Anderson
Stuart H. Anderson
Bert and Barbara Aubrey
Shane Baggs
Baker & McKenzie LLP
Baltimore Community Foundation
James M. Bergin and Ellen Lukens
Andrew J. and Nancy C. Scerbo  
Berlinger
Peggy Billings
Craig D. Blackmon and Tiffany  
McDermott
Robert Boehm† 
George and Eleanor Bollag
Beth Marie Bonora and Michael Laine
Kevi P. Brannelly 
Martin D. Branning
Belinda B. Breese
Evelyn J. Bromet
Richard J. Brown
John Callas
Tim CaroCCR Donors
50† These gifts were made by donors who passed away this year  
or made a bequest to CCR which was received this year..Ira Carp
CAUSE
Hope Cobb
Asho I. Craine
Carlyle and Grace Crecelius
Mohammed and Marcia F. Daoudi
Dayton Foundation Depository
Peter De Rege and Alison Hyslop
Lindsay Dearborn
Arthur W. Douville, Jr.
Lewis and Edith Drabkin
Alan and Susan S. Dranitzke
Kingston and Liz Schwerer Duffie
Carol J. Eagle
Norman C. Eddy and  
Rebecca Feuerstein
Susan L. Einbinder
Steven and Deborah Elkinton
Simon J. Klein and Lenore Feigenbaum
Ed and Ann A. Ferguson
Joan M. Ferrante
Gregory Finger and Joan HollisterJon Finkel
Paul D. Fogel and Ventura Y . Chalom
Donald K. Larkin and Maria C. Freeman
Joshua Frost
Ronald E. Garrett
General Board of Global Ministries
Maxine S. Goad
Waleed K. and Hannah Gosaynie
Claire Gottfried
Margaret M. and Patrick P. Grace
The Gravestar Foundation
Daniel Greenberg and Karen Nelson
Allen and Nancy GreenleafSimon Greer and Sharna G. GoldsekerDwight Hahn
Guy M. Harris
Rachel J. Harris
Julester S. Haste
Marjorie Heins
Peter N. Heller
Robert and Claire Heron
Joseph Herron and Patricia Baird
Charles Hey-Maestre
Martin and Mildred Hird
Honeybee Foundation
Richard R. Howe
Caedmon Irias
Harold M. Isbell
Per R. Jacobson and Elizabeth L. Wilson
Omar C. Jadwat
Roberta Jaffe
Klaus W. Jentschura
Jewish Community Endowment Fund
Marc E. Johnson
Lisa JohnstonJessica Jones
Henry S. Kahn and Mary Gillmor-Kahn
James M. and Andrea M. Kane
Steven Kanig
Martin and Carolyn Karcher
Patrice Kaska
Barbara and John Kennedy
Charles and Anna Kerstein
Nobal E. and Martha E. King
Donald and Margaret Kioseff
David Klem
Robert L. Kort
Philip KramerFred P. and Beverly P. KrasnerFayette F. Krause
Neal and Karin Kunstler Goldman
Greg Kuykendall
Barb Lee
Tom Lehrer
Phillip and Elsa Lichtenberg
Richard and Rita Lipsitz
Robin Lloyd
George F. Loewenstein and  
Donna Harsch
Sivia W. Loria
M. Brinton Lykes and Catherine M. 
Mooney
Shirley Magidson
Maine Community Foundation
Mamlouk Trading Corp.
Elena S. Manitzas
Robert C. Mashman
Warren and Joyce Mathews
Alice McGrath
Barbara J. MeislinMichael and Heli Meltsner
Clotilde P. de Ramos Mimoso and  
Maricarmen Ramos de Szendrey
Albert Mishan
Katherine Navarrete
Gloria Newman
Sala Nolan
John Crow and Wendy R. Olesker
Lisa Oppenheim and  
Steven K. Rothschild
Eric Orlin
Martin Orner
Isabelle C. OsborneMiriam Pollet: A long-time financial supporter of CCR, Miriam Pollet became an integral part 
of CCR’s work this year when she starting volunteering 15 hours each week to help fill requests from 
incarcerated individuals for legal support and copies of CCR’s Jailhouse Lawyer’s Handbook: How to 
Bring a Federal Lawsuit to Challenge Violations of Your Rights in Prison. A retired librarian, Miriam has brought her sharp eye for detail and patience to the project, allowing CCR to more fully respond to the hundreds of letters received each month from those incarcerated individuals around the country—whose rights are violated on a daily basis. 
“I myself have profited from volunteering at CCR and have the 
satisfaction of helping, in whatever small way, those who are 
desperately crying out for help.”
CCR Spotlight
51Stuart Ozer and Sumi Hoshiko
Caroline M. B. Paul
Alexandra Paul
Perforce Foundation
Gloria C. Phares and Richard Dannay
Stephen C. and Sharon I. Plumeri
Suzanne Polen
Nancy R. Posel
Marshall and Rosie Potamkin
The Presbyterian Foundation
Roger Pugh
Shankar Ramamoorthy
Tina L. Rasnow
Charles and Ilana Horowitz-Ratner
James and Susan Ratner
Julie B. Rauch
Shaheen Rehman and Janice C. Rehman
The Richard R. Howe Foundation
Justine Roberts
John H. Rodgers
Jill and Ronald Rohde
Barbara and Oren RootEve S. Rosahn and Marion Banzhaf
Lynn Rosen
Rolf and Elizabeth Rosenthal
Sybil Sage
Naomi Sager
Arnold S. Saks
Brian Sandlin
Alan Schiffmann
Leon F. Seltzer
Evan D. and Janet Shaad
Beth Shamrock
Alix K. Shulman and Scott York
Aaron M. Shure
Dorothy Slater-Brown
Daniel Sleator
Michelle D. Smith
James M. Sober
Rebecca Solnit
John Spragens, Jr.
Norton and Irene Starr
The Stonbely Family FoundationAlice Sturm Sutter
Lucy Suchman
Ronald J. Tabak
Murray Tobak
Jean TocheCharles F. TurnerRichard and Gail Ullman
Victor and Barbara Ulmer
University of Redlands
Marc and Jodie LeWitter Van der Hout
Steven V ogel and Jane Henderson
Colton P. Wagner
Julia and James Wallace
Daniel F. Wallowitz
Barry J. and Abby Wark
Cecille Wasserman
Michael S. and Susan F. Weiner
Alan Weiner and Nancy Maizels
Dolores Welty
Jeffrey and Lucinda Wilner
Anne C. Wilson
Judith Wilson and Alec Wysoker
Barbara J. Winne
Ernest and Roswitha Winsor
James K. Wolford, Jr.
Robert and Blaikie Worth
Frank O. WyseAnn Yasuhara
Mitchell H. and Jane Zimmerman
$250 – $499
Anonymous
120 W. 70th Owners Corp.
Milton Abelson
Robert and Miriam Abramovitz
Merritt and Barbara Abrash
The ADCO Foundation 
Michelle and Bernard Aisenberg
Salah and Catherine Al-Askari 
Jane Alexander
Nicholas Allen and  
Stacie Hammersberg
Teresa Amott
Mark L. Amsterdam
Ruth Andrews
The Ankner Family Charitable  
Foundation
Barbra Apfelbaum and Michael Reuveni
Barbara Armento
George S. and Jill S. Avrunin
Rebecca Bakunin
John Barth
Myron Beldock and Karen DippoldMary BelenkyDouglas J. Bender and Emma B. Trejo
Ruth G. and Carl S. Benson
William Bernell
Murray and Elena J. Berrie
Bethesda Friends Meeting:  
Religious Society of Friends
Bani BhattacharyaHelga K. Bilik
Constance and David C. Borde
Eric Boucher
Robert J. Boyle
Jacqueline Boynton
Lila Braine
Brad and Liana Brooks-Rubin
Robert E. L. and Sylvie M. Brown
Carole R. Brown
Alison Buck
Pearl Buckland
Stefan Budac
Terry Bunker
James A. Burger and Jennifer L. Klein
Renee Cafiero
Wes Callender
Calvert Social Investment Foundation
Ken and Peg Champney
Ellen P. Chapnick and Bill Schleicher Ava Cheloff
Renee D. Chotiner and  
Stuart W. Gardner
Douglas and Ann Christensen
Church Of The Epiphany
Johnson H. Clark
Wallace B. Cleland
Myron and Nancy Cohn
Avern Cohn
Virginia and Douglas Cole
The Community Church of New York 
Unitarian Universalist
Community Service Society  
of New York
Farok J. Contractor
Mary Ellen Copeland and  
Edward Anthes
Jason M. Cox
Barbara Cuneo and Alan Kesselhaut
John and Diane Dalsimer
Ron D. DanielsCCR Donors
52Jeffrey J. Davis
Sidney and Selma Davis
Donald A. and Mary Jane Dean
Will Denham
Bindu Desai
Stuart Desser
Matt M. Diaz
J. K. Donnelly and Catherine M. Bishop
Larry D. Doores and Janet R. Wolfe
Sean C. Doyle
Anne Draper
Barry and Ismartilah Drummond
Ronald and Ellen Duncan
Gary Dunn
H. Stewart Dunn, Jr.
David B. Dunning
Aris N. Economides
Camille Ehrenberg
Michael Ehrlich
Michael Tanzer and Hester Eisenstein
Laurel Eisner and Eugene Eisner
Fanita EnglishWarren H. Esanu
Samuel Eskenazi
Traci L. Ext
Samer A. and Lisa D. Bevilacqua Faraj
Diane Farsetta
A. B. Fields
Belden Fields
Dolly Filartiga and Diego Calles
Erica G. Foldy
Connie Foote and David Mitchell
Nancy E. FrankJudith and Louis FriedmanDavid F. Funkhouser
Cynthia Gallagher and Shaun Manchand
Maggie A. Geddes
Edward I. Geffner
Sheila Geist
Martin Gellert
Margo R. George and Catherine Karrass
Patricia A. German
Arleen Glenn
Kayla E. Gluck
Jeffrey Gold
Harriet S. Goldberg and  
Gregory C. Johnson
Robert and Irene Goldman
Jean R. Goldman
James E. Gonzales, II
Emily J. Goodman
Suzanne E. Goodman
Edmund W. and Susan G. Gordon
Marcelle Greenfield
Leonard L. GrossmanKathy Gruber and Fred Levy
Karen W. Guzak
Hans C. and Linda Haacke
Kathleen Hager and  
Arthur A. Wasserman
David Harbater
Sheldon and Margery Harnick
Wat Stearns J. Harris
Jed Hartman
Paul Hathaway and Lynda Dailey
Joseph J. HeathDick S. HeiserRussell K. Henly and Martha L. Turner
Edward and Mary Herman
Betty and Jackson Herring
Steven C. Hill and Jonathan Herz
Hans Himelein
Zach and Sadie Honey Hochstadt
Robert and Charlene Hornick
Allen M. Howard
Stephen J. Hrinya
Raymond A. Hrycko
Jason Husgen
J. Leon Israel, Jr.
Jewish Fund for Justice
Norman I. Johnson
Warren Jones and Marian Gee
Jeffrey A. Jones
Lee Joseph
Mark S. Kamlet and Charlee M. Kamlet
Jay M. Kappraff
Aslam Karachiwala
Caryn B. KauffmanMark Kempson
Judy K. Kern
Alka Khushalani
Hilda Knobloch
Max and Joyce Kozloff
George and Carla S. Krupanski
Robert E. and Francoise Kulp
Robert P. Kunreuther
Steve P. LaBash
Matthew D. LaHaye 
John W. and Claudia LampertiIvey Walton:  A member of Prison Families Community Forum, Ivey first came to CCR several 
years ago when she attended one of the first organizing meetings for CCR’s New York Campaign for 
Telephone Justice. Living on a fixed income, Ivey has been unable to speak with her incarcerated son on a regular basis for twelve years. Ivey eventually became the named plaintiff in CCR’s class action lawsuit challenging these egregious overcharges, Walton v. NYSDOCS and MCI. Since the filing of the lawsuit in 2004 and the launch of the New York Campaign for Telephone Justice, Ivey has been an integral part of CCR and a tireless advocate for her son and for other family members who face high phone bills and the unenviable choice of choosing between financial debt and speaking with their loved one—all as a result of the prison telephone contract. This year, Ivey traveled to the New York Supreme Court and New York Court of Appeals to see CCR Staff Attorney Rachel Meeropol make oral arguments on her behalf.
“CCR has been very supportive of me in my struggle against MCI. In fact,  
they are like family to me.” 
CCR Spotlight
53Sidney Landau
Chuck Lapine and Rae Lapine
Meredith Le GoffLinda Lee and Charles Lamb
John and Sue Leonard
Daniel K. K. Leong
Judy Lessing
Ida J. Lewenstein
David R. Lewis
Emily M. LindellJohn R. Long
Mary W. LuntLisa Magarrell
Jerome H. ManheimRichard E. Manning, Jr.
James A. Margolis
William and Judith Matchett
Marc and Barbara Mauer
Peter J. MayerJennifer Meeropol
Martin and Margaret Melkonian
Pamela M. Merchant and  
Kirby Sack
Messing, Rudavsky & Weliky
Michael Messinger
Edee and Jack Mezirow
Sara Miles
Marvin and Marline Miller
Rod Miller-Boyer
Millsaps CollegeMae K. Millstone
Elliot G. Mishler and Victoria A. Steinitz
Janice L. MitchellJerilyn Montgomery
Stephen Morris
Ann M. and Donald M. Morrison
Thomas V . Muller
Georgiana E. Foster and  
Robert C. Murphy
Mariel Nanasi and Jeffrey H. Haas
Reece E. Newman
NY Charities.OrgKevin L. Oberdorfer
Craig Oettinger
Olaf S. and Sondra S. Olsen
Gail Pakalns
David Perk
Dorothy Z. Peters
Charlotte Phillips and Oliver Fein Sandra Polishuk
John G. and Barbara Polk
Stephen PomeranceIsabel R. Potter
Alan Rabinowitz
Margaret J. Randall and Barbara ByersMarcus Rediker and Wendy Z. Goldman
Jeffrey C. and Bettiann Reese
The RMF Foundation
Roberta Roban
Steven D. Robinson
R. A. Rock
George S. Rothbart and Ingrid  
Scheib-Rothbart
Richard and Melissa Salten Rothman
Mary C. Rower
Howard D. SacksThe Saint Paul Foundation
Robert Schaibly and Steven Sorla
Gordon Schiff and Marge Cohen
Deborah Schifter and  
Alan Schiffmann
Steven A. and Janet H. SchneiderRuth and Charles Schultz
Keith Schwab
Robert Schwab
Karen Shatzkin and Michael E. Breecher
Anthony Shih
Donald A. Shipley
Ann and Ahmad Shirazi
Victor W. Sidel and Ruth Sidel
Franklin Siegel
Andrea SimonSimpson Thacher & Bartlett LLP
Beth J. Singer
Carl and Jane SmithStephen S. Smith
Lindsay R. Smith
Russell Smith
Carol Smith and Joe Esposito
Carolyn Sonfield
Anthony Spillane
Erwin and Pearl Staller
Peter D. Stansky
Ben Stavis and Marjatta LyyraDavid Steichen
Elliot G. Mishler and Victoria A. Steinitz
Ian E. Stockdale
Andrew M. Stone
Elizabeth Strout
Gita Sud and Rob Aitken
Richard P. SutterDevon K. Svarda
Rosalie Swedlin
Harold TaggartDavid Tanzer
Thomson West
Joseph and Cornelia TierneyKenneth E. Tilsen
Randall H. Trigg and Caitlin Stanton
Barbara and Franklin Turner
David B. Turner
Tamara Saimons and  
Kathryn Turnipseed
Robert TwomblyScott L. Tyler and Marilyn Imura
Stephen F. Vause and Carlyn SyvanenThe Vermont Community Foundation
Susan von ArxCarolyn Walker
Francis M. Walters
Jennifer Warburg
Joan M. Warburg
Bernhard WeimerEdmund and Mary Weingart
Adam N. Weinstein
Henry Werner and Holly Thau
Sue and Philip Wheaton
Brian White
Richard Wiebe
Sarah S. Willie
Barbara Winslow
Stephen and Bettina Winter
Lincoln and Wilma  
Wolfenstein
Neville WoodruffRichard K. Worthington
Eitan K. YanichHarry S. Hochheiser and  
Judith Yanowitz
Steven J. Yellin
Sandra A. Zagarell
Thomas Zaslavsky
George and Sondra Zeidenstein
Robert J. Zelnick
Over $100 – $249
AnonymousEmily Achtenberg
Emory and Marilyn Ackley
The Agape Foundation 
Harold Ahrens
Greg J. Albertson and  
Melissa Frumin
Jess L. AlfordPaul J. Allen
Deborah AllenCCR DonorsCCR Donors
54Carol Allen
William C. Altham
Norman Altstedter
The American Baptist Churches  
of Massachusetts 
Stephen C. and Betty A. Anderson
Andrew M. Ansorge and  
Laura S. Koopman
R. S. AnthonySona Aronian
Bob BammanMichael H. Bancroft and  
Victoria A. Curry
Rainer C. BaumWill BeattyMichael Beer
Marvin L. Bellin 
Howard A. and Estelle Bern
Arthur and Anne Berndt
Stephanie G. and Jacob G. Birnberg
Robert L. Black, Jr.
Alison BlackduckCarol Bloom
Joan and Jack Botwinick
Robert and Jeanne R. Boynton
John A. and Geraldine M. Brittain
Jeanne BronsteinGregory P. Brown
Thomas W. Browne
Dorelen F. and Emily Bunting
Arthur and Alice Burks
Harry A. Caddow, Jr.
Desmond Callan and  
Georgene A. GardnerBlair and Josephine Campbell
Penelope J. Campbell
Roseann and Robert A. Campbell
Michael Cavanaugh
Hilary Caws-Elwitt
Mortimer H. Chambers, Jr.
Gordon A. Chapman
Judith ChomskyNina W. Chong
James and Roshan Christensen
Damon A. ClarkSerena Clayton
Marilyn B. Clement Court Cline
John E. and Penelope D. CluteJoanne M. Collier
Matthew T. Colvard
Janet M. Conn
Juliette R. and Micaela S. Corazon
Wiliam C. Cromwick
Joanne and Eli Curi
Claire S. DavidsonRichard A. Denison
Robert and Susan Deutsch
Gerald Dickinson
Jane E. Donaldson
Shelby DrescherBarbara L. Dudley
Lloyd Duren
Charles and Lois B. Edwards
Colin Eisler
Brad P. Engdahl and Patricia L. Layton
Margie R. Eucalyptus and  
M. A. McFaddenHossam E. and S. H. Fadel
Jeffrey A. Fagan and  
Connie S. Fishman
Harriet A. Feinberg
Solomon Fisher
Stuart M. Flashman 
Anne E. Flynn
Steve FrankelJane and Howard Franklin
Barbara Friedberg
Florence FriedmanTom Friend
Derek T. FrostMichiko Fukuda
Sheryl P. GardnerDavid G. and Elisabeth Gelzer
Albert Giang
John Gibson
Ayesha E. Gill
Nancy Gilliam
Mimi Gilpin
Ellen R. GoldmanFred and Naomi Goldstein
Richard A. and Jill Gollub
George M. Goodburn
Robert E. Goodrich
Debbie GordonBernard H. Gordon
Michael Gorman
Margaret R. Gottlieb
Spencer B. Graves and  
Betsy Wolf-Graves
Corwin Greenberg and  
Parvati GraisSadat Sayeed:  “Long before the documented abuses at Guantánamo began to sway Ameri-
can opinion, many Europeans were looking on in displeasure, ” says Sadat Sayeed, a visiting attorney 
at CCR in 2006. Sadat received Britain’s prestigious Pegasus Fellowship to work at CCR for three months. Shockingly, he was detained at the airport for several hours by the Department of Homeland Security before he was grudgingly released. After he arrived at our offices, he was involved in draft-ing the Center’s submissions to the United Nations’ Committee Against Torture and Human Rights  
Committee on the USA’s compliance with international conventions. Sadat is a barrister at Gar-den Court Chambers in London, one of the leading human rights barrister’s chambers in the U.K.  
He remains involved in efforts to close Guantánamo. 
“My time at CCR was an unforgettable experience, and I 
continue to draw great inspiration and strength from the work 
of my colleagues there. In the context of the post 9/11 world in which we live,  
CCR’s ongoing presence as a champion of fundamental human rights is essential.”
CCR Spotlight
55CCR DonorsCCR Donors
Lee Greer
William and Sharon Gross
Ruthe and Arnold Grubin
Albert and Virginia Hale
H. K. Hall, Jr.
Michael A. Hardy
Leora T. Harris
Keith Hefner and Diana Autin
Horace Heitman
Louis R. HellwigChristopher L. Henley
David G. HermannMichael and M. E. Herwood
John and Rachel HeumanLisa M. Hinely
David K. and Judith A.  
Hoffman
Carole R. Horowitz and  
Richard L. Last
Katherine HoulihanKevin M. Hunt and  
Margaret Downing
Kristine A. Huskey
Stanley T. Hutter
Joel and Helen Isaacson
William and Harriet Isecke
Maria L. Jacquard
Roman JamiesonMarie I. Jordon and  
Joseph P. Lyons
Ruth G. Kahn
Alfred E. and Mary S. Kahn
Will KailHerschel and Margrit Kaminsky
Anne Kastor
Joanna B. Katz
Margaret Kelly
Peter and Donna Kirchheimer
Bernard C. and  
Tilman L. Kirchhoff
Sarah Roberts and  
Lawrence Koplik
Diane Palladino and Ellen KoteenKanan Krishnan
Jane Kristof
Cathryn H. Kurtagh
Katherine and Margareta  
La Rocco
Betty B. LanhamPhyllis Lanham
David J. Lansner
Ernest T. LarsonAnnette LeckartBarbara D. Leckie
Susan L. Lee
Edward A. and Mary Lefrak
Martin and Gita Lefstein
William J. and Ellen S. Leibold
Albert and Lulu Levy
Rosalind Lichter
Evelyn C. Lundstrom
Susan LuraschiSophie P. Lutzker
Lorraine LymanJohn R. MacArthur and  
Renee Khatami
Joan and Wally MacDonaldA. Kent and Kathleen MacDougall
Jeanette and Daniel Macero
Wendy Macklin
Deepak MalhotraMargaret A. Malloy
Susan B. Manning
Stephen E. Marston
Clara and Bernard Maslow
Anna Marie Mattson
Alan Maximuk
Delbert McCombs
Gary E. McDole
William F. and Nancy McLoughlinLynn McWhood
Joseph R. Miller
Bruce and Jane O. Miller
Andrew C. and Helen S. Mills
Arthur R. and Lynn MinkThomas C. Mitchell
David B. Mitchell
Lisa A. Mitchell
Charles Moore
Cornelius G. Moore
Madelyn F. Morales
Gilbert E. Morris
Joseph Morton
Denis Mosgofian and  
Lori Liederman
Peter and Gail MottKathryn L. Mulvey
Dan M. Myers
John S. Nichols
William K. Nisbet
Jay M. and Marie B. NovelloRobert and Frances Nye
Joyce K. OQuinn and  
Steven SelbyHelen M. Ortmann
Norman Oslik and  
Madeleine Golde
Sean L. Patrick
Lowell C. Paul
Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton  
& Garrison LLP
Robert and Ruth Peck
Creighton Peet
Robert J. and Suzanne D. PetrucciEd and Pauline Petry
Lynette B. PhillipsAnthony and Lizbeth H. Piel
Howardena D. PindellCharles R. Piper, Jr.
Barbara B. Polk
Evelyn G. Polk
John A. Pollack
James Porter, Jr.Joan Posner
Cathy J. Potter
Brian Pridham
Bennett M. Pudlin and  
Margaret A. Judd
Robert J. Quartell
Susan G. Radner
M. Carmen Ramirez
Deborah RandPaul F. Randel
Joanna M. Rankin and  
Mary Fillmore
Andrew S. Rasmussen
Kenneth C. Regal and  
Judith A. Ruszkowski
Robert A. and Mary J. ResnikMarsha L. Respess
Valerie L. Reuther and  
Linda D. Bartlett
Julie Rivchin
Anne E. Rodman
Harriet Rosenfeld
Anton B. RosenthalFrank Rosin
Karen Rothman
Dwight N. and Robin Rousu
Marcie A. Rubel
Dean Graham Ruby
Jane P. Rundell
Laura and John SaadeBert Sacks
Nancy and Stefan Sage
Louis R. Salazar
56Joseph Salerno
Sigrid Salo
Franz and Phoebe J. Samelson
Marc Sapir
Irving Saraf
Charles J. Scardino and  
Mary Lynn K. Corwin
Martin Schoenhals Manuel and Bonnie Schonhorn
Jeffrey Scuba
Rupa Shah
Amy Shipman
Mary and Henry Shoiket
Brenna L. Silberstein
Victor Skorapa, Jr.William and Ursula Slavick
Marc A. Snyder
Stanley Sorscher and Judith M. Arms
John D. Spence and W. Katherine Yih
Sandra M. Squire Fluck
Robert and Elaine Stein
Henry and Pamela SteinerJohn A. Stevenson
Richard and Judith StillingerBert Stover and Teresa Holder
Susan M. Strasser
Christopher Strawn
Bertram and Lynne Y . Strieb
Myles Sussman
Daniel B. Szyld
Ilene Tannenbaum and David Goren
Billy G. TaylorAnne Teicher and Sy Rutkin
Jonathan Teller-Elsberg
C. G. Thomas and E. J. Cameron
Susan V . Tipograph
Joseph and Minette Tolciss
Howard and Nina Tolley
Betsy Towle OrdlMichael H. Traison
Elizabeth Tuccillo
Bernard Tuchman
William and Selma Tucker
Connie W. Tyler
Christine A. Vassallo
Reed L. and Jennifer J. VickermanJoachim V osgerau
Mary K. V ossJohn K. Wade
Ruth Warshauer
Janet B. Warzyn
John Weeks
Marvin J. Weinberger
Maurice and Gloria Weisberg
Leland and June Welsh
Lawrence WeschlerDavid A. White
Wendy W. Williams
James Williamson
Patricia Winer
Karen Winkler
Carol A. Wood
Melvyn WrightSarah R. Wunsch
Rachel Wysoker
Lewis Yelin
Marvin J. Yust
Michael A. Zagone
Bart Ziegler 
Lore A. Zutraun
This list includes gifts over $100 made between July 1, 2006 and June 30, 2007. Gifts of $100 and under are greatly  appreciated and go a 
long way toward enabling CCR to continue its work. Unfortunately, because of the large number of these gifts space does not allow us to 
print an exhaustive list of donors. All gifts are recognized in our on-line version of this report which is at www.ccr-ny.org.
If you made a gift during this period and your name is not on this list, or if there is a problem with your listing, please contact us so we may 
correct our files and acknowledge you in our next newsletter. Frequently, stock gifts are not traceable to the donor and we often do not know 
whom to acknowledge for these gifts. To remedy this situation for future gifts, please let us know to expect the stock transfer and we will be sure to credit it to the correct donor and note it in the donor list.Cathy Albisa  spent her childhood in Miami during the 1970s, where a cadre of young  
idealistic teachers in the public school system provided a reprieve from her conservative neighbor-
hood. In this city of racial and ethnic de facto segregation, and growing economic inequality, she 
watched images of race riots twenty minutes from her home, on-going abuse of Haitian refugees and other serious human rights violations. These experiences inspired her to make a career of fighting for social justice. Through one of her most important mentors, fellow CCR Board member Rhonda Copelon, Cathy first became involved with the Center, in the mid-1990s, as co-counsel on one of the Center’s many Alien Tort Claims Act cases.
In 2004, Cathy co-founded the National Economic and Social Rights Initiative, an organization that 
works with the social justice community to effectively use human rights standards in U.S. advocacy efforts, and joined the Board of CCR in 2006.
“I’m committed to the Center for Constitutional Rights because of its deep progressive  
vision and the strong conscious ties to social movements. I’m also drawn to CCR  
because of its creativity and ability to turn even legal losses into movement victories. 
I’m particularly proud that together we have created new areas of law.”
CCR Spotlight
5758CCR Speaks Out
In addition to organizing and hosting events, CCR is regularly called upon to provide speakers and expertise for a range of 
events. CCR staff participated in numerous international advocacy activities, including meeting with European representa-tives in London and Geneva, and presenting arguments on behalf of detainees before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. Some highlights from this year include: 
•	 Andrea	Costello: testified at the Tri-Level Joint Legisla -
tive Task Force Representing the New York City Council, 
New York State Legislature and the U.S. Congress to discuss the NYPD’s failure to comply with the settlement in CCR’s landmark Street Crimes Unit case. She presented recommendations on police accountability in the wake of the 2006 shootings of Sean Bell, Joseph Guzman and Trent Benefield in Southeast Queens by undercover New York City police officers.
•	 Annette	Dickerson: at the National Network for  
Grantmakers conference in Chicago on U.S. practices  
of extraordinary rendition and torture.
•	 Wells	Dixon: Oregon Law Institute’s CLE course, “From 
Guantánamo to Gresham: Permissible and Impermissible Representation in High Profile Cases and Everyday Life” on his representation of Guantánamo detainees.
•	 Katherine	Gallagher: at the Hague Joint Conference  
on Contemporary Issues of International Law on judicial review of U.S. “anti-terror” policies and practices, includ -
ing extraordinary rendition, and the extent to which U.S. courts invoke or reject international.
•	 Bill	Goodman: at the Congressional Black Caucus’ 
Annual Legislative Conference about “ The New COIN-
TELPRO;” and at West Virginia State University on “ The 
People, the Constitution, and the Bush Administration.”
•	 Jennie	Green: on “Confronting Gender-Based Violence in 
Iraq” at the release of MADRE’s 2007 report Promising Democracy, Imposing Theocracy: Gender-Based Violence in the U.S. War on Iraq.
•	 Gitanjali	Gutierrez: community forum and fundraiser for 
the San Francisco 8, who are charged with conspiracy due to evidence based on statements which resulted from police torture of Black activists in the 1970s; at a national teach-in at Seton Hall Law School and videocast to over 200 colleges and universities on the subject of “ Guantánamo: 
How do we respond?”; and at “ Whitewashing the Panthers: 
Can the Government Prosecute Black History?” connect -
ing the torture tactics used against the Black Panthers with those used at Guantánamo and Abu Ghraib. •	 Shayana	Kadidal: testified at the New York City Council, 
Committee on Fire and Criminal Justice Services; spoke on 
a panel entitled: “ Against Terrorism – For Human Rights” 
at the UN Palais des Nations in Geneva, Switzerland; and on a panel before UN Special Rapporteur on Human Rights of Migrants at Cooper Union in New York City on post-9/11 legal standards affecting immigrants.
•	 Rachel	Meeropol: at the International Day of Solidarity 
with Green Scare Indictees in support of Daniel McGowan, who was arrested in 2005 in the FBI’s “Operation Back -
fire,” a multi-state sweep targeting alleged Earth Liberation 
and Animal Liberation Front activists on charges which 
could lead to sentences of life in prison.
•	 Michael	Ratner: American University of Paris about 
CCR’s work and appeared with Lynne Stewart on the 
“Fighting Back Tour” throughout Northern California  
covering CCR’s work fighting the use of torture in  
Guantánamo and the “war on terror”.
•	 Michael	Ratner	and	Gitanjali	Gutierrez: press confer -
ence and rally outside the U.S. Supreme Court in Washing-
ton, DC, marking the fifth anniversary of the first twenty prisoners being sent to Guantánamo Bay. 
•	 Claire	 Tixeire: 2007 Arizona State Bar conference on 
CCR’s petition to the German Prosecutor regarding the culpability of U.S. officials in Abu Ghraib torture.
•	 Vincent	 Warren,	Michael	Ratner, 	Maria	LaHood, 	
Gitanjali	Gutierrez	and	 Annette	Dickerson: appeared 
with other leading attorneys and experts in New York City to discuss detention and the so-called “war on terror” at “From Pinochet to Rumsfeld,” an event hosted by CCR and focusing on CCR’s work in holding U.S. officials account -
able for torture.
•	 Vincent	 Warren: traveled to D.C. as part of a national day 
of political action by the legal community dedicated to the restoration of habeas corpus, which included dozens 
of visits to congressional offices as well as Internet-based campaigns, campus-based activities, and educational events. Robert Boehm (through 12/06), Chairperson
Catherine Albisa
Karima Bennoune
Ann Cammett
Marilyn Clement
David Cole
Rhonda Copelon
Michelle DePass
Gregory H. Finger, Treasurer
Charles Hey-Maestre, Secretary
Derrick A. Humphries
Abdeen JabaraWilhelm Joseph, Jr.
Judy Lerner
Eric L. Lewis
Robin Lloyd
Jules Lobel, Vice President
Michael Ratner, President
Alex Rosenberg, Vice President
Franklin Siegel
Michael Smith
Richard A. Soble
Peter Weiss, Vice President 
Ellen YaroshefskyBoard of Directors and Staff July 1 2006 – June 30 2007
Directors
Vincent Warren, Executive Director
Rosalba Messina, Interim Executive Director (2/06 - 8/06)*
Kevi Brannelly, Development Director
Carolyn Chambers, Associate Executive Director
Annette Warren Dickerson, Director of Education and Outreach
William Goodman, Legal Director (through 4/07)
Legal Department
Jessica Baen, Legal Worker
Andrea Costello, Staff Attorney
Claire Dailey, Legal Worker 
J. Wells Dixon, Staff Attorney
Kamau Franklin, Racial Justice Fellow
Katherine Gallagher, Staff Attorney
Jennifer Green, Senior Staff Attorney
Gitanjali Gutierrez, Staff Attorney
Susan Hu, Legal Worker
Shayana Kadidal, Senior Managing Attorney
Marc Krupanski, Legal Worker
Maria LaHood, Senior Staff Attorney
Emi MacLean, Staff Attorney
Rachel Meeropol, Staff Attorney
Barbara Olshansky, Deputy Legal Director (through 12/06)
Ellen Range, Legal Worker*
Nandini Rao, Asst. to Legal Director*
Matthew Strugar, Attorney*
Claire Tixeire, Legal Research Associate
Maureen Tracey-Mooney, Asst. to Legal Director (through 3/07)Education & Outreach Department
Dana Kaplan, OSI Fellow
C. Lynne Kates, Organizer
Lauren Melodia, E&O Associate
Joshua Rahtz, Intern*
Marion Rodriguez, Organizer (through 12/06)
Development Department
Bani Duggal, Intern
Kevin Gay, Database Administrator
Emily Harting, Foundations Relations Officer
Jeremy Rye, Development Associate
Sue Lee Troutman, Major Gifts Officer (through 11/06)
Communications Department
Owen Henkel, Multimedia and Web Communication Manager
Ari Melber, writer (through 8/06)*
Jen Nessel, Communications Coordinator
Sean Sullivan, Communications Associate (through 7/06) 
Esther Wang, Communications Assistant
Administrative Staff
Orlando Gudino, Network Administrator
Jose Monzon, Administrative Assistant
Jeffrey Weinrich, Finance Manager
Alberto White, Office Manager
* Temporary StaffBoard of Directors
Staff
5960Remembering Bob Boehm
Bob Boehm was a sustaining force for CCR. He was a sweet and caring man 
who was generous to a fault and who helped shape and support CCR for almost four decades. Not only did he and his adored wife, Fran, contribute significant sums to CCR but, more than once, but they helped countless other progressive organizations to get started or to survive in lean times. “A grant from Boehm” was often an imprimatur for others to jump in. Their financial contributions were matched by the ideas they offered to their grantees, but never as a condi -
tion, never as a way of promoting themselves.
Bob Believed—with a capital B. He believed in progress (how old-fashioned!); 
in the power of the word over the sword; in the ultimate triumph of the people over the establishment. Hence Bob’s many letters to the editor, of which he was justly proud when they were published. Nowhere was Bob prouder of the Center than in its early work in the South supporting civil rights movements or when CCR decided to take up the cause of those being held in Guantánamo at a time when they were vilified and abandoned by all others.
Many organizations felt the imprint of their loyalty and their generosity, but none more than CCR, whose board Bob chaired for many 
years and about which Bob was truly passionate. CCR’s achievements will forever be linked with his name.
We lost Fran last year and Bob this year. They will be greatly missed. But it is a comfort to know they lived the good life, one in which 
they believed – not naively, but from unshakable conviction – a life they believed every human being is entitled to and did so much to make that a reality for others.
Joan Antonucci
Lois Baker
Vita Barsky
Benjamin Berg
Hank Corwin
Geraldine Dimondstein
Frank Durkan
Dorothy Epstein
Ronald ForceRichard Friedman
Del Greenfield
Louis Greenfield
Sonya H. Guidry
George Harrison
Seymour Krauth
Janet Loeb
G. Ross McKee, Jr.
Richardson B. OkieRobert E. Ross
Robert Schwartz
Bernard Stern
Sol L. Warren
Paula Weiss
Josephine A. Willard
Theodore Williams
Sam Zaslavsky
Howard ZuckerIn Memoriam
The following is a list of CCR supporters who either passed away this year or who honored  
CCR with a bequest. It is always sad to lose a family member, but fortunately these people’s  
ideals will live on in the work they supported at CCR.  61
Project Manager: Sarah Hogarth. Design: Nicholas Coster, nicholas@modino.com. Photo credits: Cover: Owen Henkel, p.7, 8: © Getty  
Images, p.12: © Jim Young/Reuters/Corbis, p.16: © Greenpeace/Corbis/Sygma, p.20: Tamir Z. Brown, p.22: © JP Laffont/Sygma/Corbis, 
p.24: © Brooks Kraft/Corbis, p, 32-33: Robin Martin Ginsburg and Owen Henkel, back cover: © Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images.www.ccr-ny.org
The Center for Constitutional Rights is a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization. On request, a copy of CCR’s audited financial statements may be  
obtained from us or from the Office of the Attorney General of the State of New York, Charities Bureau, 120 Broadway, New York, NY 10271.Center for Constitutional Rights
666 Broadway, New York, NY 10012
212.614.6464 • info@ccr-ny.org • www.ccr-ny.org
