Our Impact on Human Rights:
A Year in Review 2008Planting Hope
in a Hurting WorldThis past year, Heartland Alliance for Human Needs & Human Rights 
planted hope in a hurting world, supporting thousands of people in need:
16,334 
 Men, women, and children moved from
 homelessness into housing  or assisted  
 with homeless-prevention funds
20,085  
 Persons, who may not otherwise have 
 gotten care, received primary, mental, or 
 oral health care  services
4,359  
 Individuals moved towards economic  
 security  through job training, financial  
 education, and other workforce programs
9,814  
 Individuals provided with legal 
 protections  ranging from asylum 
 cases to domestic violence advocacy0            Our Impact on Human Rights: A Year in Review
1Our Impact on Human Rights: A Year in Review 2008
Sid Mohn
PresidentHeartland Alliance for Human Needs & Human RightsDear friends and champions of human rights ,
This past year, leaders on both the national and international stage held up
a human rights lens to enlighten, educate, and mobilize the world.  Pope Benedict XVI, in his first papal visit to the United States, remarked 
that “Every state has the primary duty to protect its own population from grave and sustained violations of human rights.”  And while Beijing captured the Olympics limelight, activists demanded 
that a nation’s economic performance not supersede and overshadow its attention to human rights. Presidential candidates, in differing ways, framed global concerns in terms of human rights. These are important reminders in a world where human rights often 
seem to trail behind in the pecking order of priorities. But at Heartland Alliance for Human Needs & Human Rights, addressing and championing human rights has been at the top of our agenda for 120 years.  We hold the belief that human rights are not only about issues in other 
countries, but also about issues in our own backyard—including freedom from poverty, access to health care, having a roof over your head, and being treated fairly in the justice system.  Especially important in these times of economic turmoil and uncertainty, 
we have brought hope, justice, opportunity, wholeness, and life for people threatened by poverty and danger in the Midwest—and throughout the world.  This report provides a snapshot of our front-line impact on human rights 
over the past year. From launching a culinary training school and job skills and readiness programs in Benton Harbor, Michigan, to opening a new    torture treatment center in Iraqi Kurdistan, we have helped thousands of people often forgotten by the world build a better future.  We couldn’t do it without your important investment in us—your 
contribution has helped bring hope to a hurting world. Thank you for your support. 
Sincerely,
Paul Zucker
Chairman of the BoardHeartland Alliance for Human Needs & Human Rights
President
City Real Estate, Incorporated
2The Human Right to Housing 
 Having a roof over your head is not just a   
 fundamental need, but also a basic human   
 right, one threatened by a lack of housing
 affordable for people living and working
 in poverty. Heartland Alliance champions   
 the human right to housing by providing and  
 advocating for safe, high-quality housing for  
 those that are hardest to reach—people
 experiencing homelessness, poverty, or
 mental illness. This past year, Heartland
 Alliance advanced the human right to
 housing through a variety of efforts...  3Our Impact on Human Rights: A Year in Review 2008
A New Beginning 
Vincent summarizes his old life with 
a simple, chilling explanation: “I was 
damaged goods.” Feeling abandoned 
by his family, he turned first to alco-
hol, then heroin as he lived on the 
streets. Through a supportive hous-
ing program at Heartland Alliance, 
Vincent was provided a place to live 
and supportive services to help him 
in his quest to change his life. 
With an apartment lease in his name, 
a part-time job and a budget, he has 
worked hard to build a stable future. 
“I can’t believe it,” he says with pride. 
“Sometimes I come home and I just 
want to cry because, this is mine.” 
Experiences from these successful sup-
portive housing programs have helped 
inform other supportive housing ser -
vices this past year to assist homeless 
women and their young children. 
View Vincent’s story at: http://www.heartlandalliance.org/vincent. Heartland Alliance provides hope,
stability, and home through our affordableand supportive housing efforts
.
4Heartland Alliance broke ground 
on an innovative supportive 
housing initiative in Milwaukee 
that addresses the city’s dearth of  
high-quality housing  for 
low-income people with mental 
illness or other life challenges. Heartland Alliance, in total, 
broke ground on more than 
200 units  of affordable and 
supportive housing in Chicago 
and Milwaukee. Groundbreaking ceremony at our supportive housing project in Milwaukee.
5Our Impact on Human Rights: A Year in Review 2008
Heartland Alliance reduced envi-
ronmental impact and preserved 
the affordability of existing 
housing by going “green”
at many of its affordable housing 
properties this past year, secur -
ing critical resources to retrofit 
mechanical systems and acquire 
lighting and appliances that 
reduce energy consumption.    We expanded our effective 
supportive housing  model 
to homeless and at-risk young 
mothers and children. This unique 
pilot program integrates services 
that help the emotional develop-
ment of homeless children and en-
sure their mothers remain housed 
in the community and access 
services to address mental health, 
substance use, parenting issues, life skills, and employment.
Detail of one of Heartland Alliance’s supportive housing buildings.The Human Right to
 Health Care 
 Health care is a human right that should not  
 be only for those who can afford it. Heartland  
 Alliance works to ensure that comprehensive  
 health care—medical, dental, mental health,  
 and substance use treatment—is fully available 
 to people experiencing poverty or trauma. 
 We have helped realize the human right to   
 health care this past year through the 
 following efforts... 
 
67Our Impact on Human Rights: A Year in Review 2008
Bringing Up Baby 
Angela lost her health insurance 
when she lost her job. So when 
she found out she was unexpect-
edly pregnant soon after, her excite-
ment was tempered by panic. At the 
recommendation of a friend, she 
visited the Heartland Health Center 
– Rogers Park, which provides care 
for little or no cost. “As soon as I sat 
down, I was like, “Oh my goodness, 
this is want I want to experience… 
I want to have this feeling of calm 
and peace and trust and security,” 
Angela says. The team answered her 
questions about prenatal diet and 
nutrition, listened to her requests for 
childbirth, and have continued to 
provide pediatric care for her daugh-
ter. “Every person deserves that,” she 
says. “Every child deserves to walk 
into a place that is clean and friendly, 
where they take care of them, and 
they get to know the doctor and trust 
the doctor.” Heartland Alliance and 
its affiliate, Heartland International 
Health Center, have expanded health 
care services over the past year, 
including the grand opening of the 
Heartland Health Center – Rogers Park.
View Angela’s story at: http://www.heartlandalliance.org/angela.Heartland Alliance provides
health care with dignity and compassion for thousands of people in need. 
Heartland Alliance led an im-
pressive expansion of its health 
care for the homeless program, 
doubling services  to 120 
sites throughout metropolitan 
Chicago, including DuPage, Lake, 
and southern Cook counties. As 
a result, 8,600 people experienc-
ing homelessness were provided 
medical care with dignity and 
compassion. Heartland Alliance’s affiliate, 
Heartland International Health 
Center, celebrated the grand open-
ing of its newest health center, the 
Heartland Health Center – 
Rogers Park, expanding access to 
quality, affordable health 
care  to hundreds of people liv-
ing in the medically underserved 
community of Rogers Park. Heartland Alliance provides medical care for homeless participants at our 
Uptown health center.
Applicants for asylum and survi-
vors of torture, as of July 2007, 
became eligible for health care 
coverage under the Medicaid 
program in Illinois, a policy 
change resulting from Heartland 
Alliance’s advocacy efforts .
89Our new ArtWorks program in 
the Uptown neighborhood brings 
together community residents, 
including program participants, 
through arts and cultural activi-ties, helping transcend the 
boundaries  associated with 
race, class, physical or mental 
disabilities, and other challenges 
people in the community may face. Survivors of torture and trauma 
across devastated regions of 
Iraq now have access to psycho-
logical and social services from 
Heartland Alliance’s new torture 
treatment center in Iraqi Kurd-
istan. The center addresses the 
long-term impact of torture in 
Iraq, having already trained 200 
community mental health work-
ers and 100 physicians to 
provide critical services .Our Impact on Human Rights: A Year in Review 2008
One thousand Chicago Police 
Department officers are being 
trained by Heartland Alliance to 
manage crisis situations  
involving people experiencing 
homelessness, a serious mental ill-
ness, and an addiction. Instead of 
being channeled into the criminal 
justice system, where they may 
otherwise languish, more people 
will receive appropriate treatment 
in the mental health care system.Heartland Alliance staff trains community mental health workers 
at its new torture treatment center in Iraqi Kurdistan.
The Human Right to
 Legal Protections 
 Being treated fairly in the justice system is a 
 human right, one often jeopardized by a person’s  
 economic circumstance or immigration status.  
 Heartland Alliance helps ensure the right to
 legal protection for individuals in danger,
 particularly low-income migrants, refugees,
 and others fleeing violence. Highlights from
 the past year include...  
1011Our Impact on Human Rights: A Year in Review 2008
Healing the Harm 
When Andrea’s husband was kid-
napped by Guatemalan soldiers in 
1984, she fled the country in fear 
of her own life, leaving behind two 
young sons. She never saw him again, 
and the experience haunted her. 
At the Heartland Alliance Marjorie 
Kovler Center, Andrea—and her 
sons who followed her years later—
accessed counseling for the anxiety, 
fear, and depression that the experi-
ence caused. Like many of the clients 
of this special facility for the survivors 
of torture, Andrea also received legal 
services from the Heartland Alliance 
National Immigrant Justice Center—
and today she is pursuing justice for 
her husband’s legacy, one of more 
than 45,000 Guatemalans who have 
become “disappeared.” 
View Andrea’s story at: http://www.heartlandalliance.org/andrea.We launched the Global Equality 
Network to advance the 
human rights  of sexual 
minorities in dangerous environ-
ments across the globe. Heartland 
Alliance is helping several lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, and transgender 
persons (LGBT) organizations in 
Guatemala, Lebanon, Sri Lanka, 
and Nigeria build capacity and develop into human rights re-
source hubs in their respective 
regions of the world. Heartland Alliance’s legal services help families in need stay together.
Our successful residential pro-
grams for foreign children enter -
ing the U.S. unaccompanied by 
an adult were recognized as a 
national model  by the fed-
eral government. This past year, 
Heartland Alliance expanded 
services in this arena to include 
a secure site for children with 
behavioral issues and another site 
for children with mental health 
issues.
12Thousands of people, ranging from those 
targeted for abuse or killing in their home countries to victims of trafficking, are living free from fear.13The Heartland Alliance National 
Immigrant Justice Center worked 
on behalf of thousands of de-
tained immigrants, serving as a 
lead national advocate  
on their legal rights. Program 
staff testified in Congress on 
improving health care and other 
rights in detention centers and 
pursued impact litigation that 
expanded the rights and relief 
for detainees and asylum-seek-
ers, including a favorably settled 
Supreme Court case that provid-
ed protection to a refugee from 
Somalia. Almost 7,500 individuals received 
immigration status through the 
legal services and advocacy of the 
Heartland Alliance National Im-
migrant Justice Center and nearly 
1,000 pro bono attorneys. 
Today, thousands of people, rang-
ing from those targeted for abuse 
or killing in their home coun-
tries to victims of trafficking, are 
living free from fear  as a 
result of our efforts. Our Impact on Human Rights: A Year in Review 2008
Refugees, immigrants, asylum-seekers, and detainees benefit from our legal 
protections efforts.The Human Right to
 Economic Security 
 The ability to meet basic needs and live free   
 from poverty is a human right often threatened   
 by limited opportunities, inadequate skills or
 education, low wages, or an emergency like a   
 serious illness or job loss. Heartland Alliance   
 champions the right to economic security so   
 people in poverty can build the skills and gain   
 the tools to improve their well-being and 
 standard of living. We helped thousands move 
 towards economic opportunity in the past year   
 through our efforts.
 
1415Our Impact on Human Rights: A Year in Review 2008
Saving Grace 
For someone who hasn’t ever had 
much money, it can be difficult to 
begin the simple mechanics of saving. 
“It was a little overwhelming at first,” 
says Yolanda. “I was used to taking 
my money and doing with it what I 
needed to do that day.” Yolanda has 
had it tough. She was “semi-home-
less” for a while and spent time in 
prison. Determined to turn her life 
around when she was released, she 
found a job at a Chicago museum. 
And she participated in one of Heart-
land Alliance’s asset-building courses, 
helping her set goals and adopt good 
financial habits to protect her new life 
from hard times. She says, “It put the 
confidence in me to say, ‘Hey, if other 
people can do this—work hard and 
make their money work for them—
then I should be able to do this also.”
View Y olanda’s story at: http://www.heartlandalliance.org/yolanda.Heartland Alliance’s comprehensive range 
of programs helps individuals break free from the cycle of poverty and move toward greater stability and economic opportunity.
Heartland Alliance became the 
lead provider  of housing 
and employment services with 
the Chicago Housing Authority’s 
Plan for Transformation, helping 
more than 6,800 residents break 
free from the cycle of poverty and 
move toward greater stability and 
economic opportunity through 
counseling, financial education, 
housing, employment, and other 
services. Illinois’ governor signed the 
Children’s Savings Account Task 
Force bill into law, a result of 
advocacy efforts spearheaded by 
Heartland Alliance. Heartland 
Alliance will serve as an appointed 
member of the task force, charged 
with developing a plan to increase 
financial education  and 
savings among children in Illinois. Heartland Alliance participants build a stable foundation for their future through
our financial education programs.
1617Heartland Alliance opened the 
doors of the Opportunity Cen-
ter to address extreme poverty 
in Benton Harbor, Michigan. 
More than 570 adults struggling 
with long-term unemployment 
received literacy and vocational 
training in areas ranging from 
culinary arts to the construction 
trade. Participants’ reading 
levels jumped  an average 
of nearly two grade levels, and 
more than 60 residents were 
placed into jobs. 
As a result of Heartland Alliance’s 
From Poverty to Opportunity  
campaign, legislation to create 
an Illinois Commission on the 
Elimination of Poverty was signed 
into law this year, seeding the 
development of a strategy to cut 
extreme poverty  in half in 
Illinois by 2015. A chef trains participants in our culinary arts 
program in Benton Harbor.Our Impact on Human Rights: A Year in Review 2008
Heartland Alliance helped the 
first group of Burundian refugees, 
many whom have lived in refu-
gee camps for nearly 30 years, 
resettle to the U.S. We resettled 
nearly 350 refugees  from 
Burma, Iraq, Burundi, Somalia, 
Bhutan, Ivory Coast, and Cuba, 
and more than half of the adults 
have entered and maintained em-
ployment to date. 
Who we are
Heartland Alliance for Human Needs 
& Human Rights helps people who are threatened the most by poverty or dan-ger improve their lives and realize their human rights. For more than 100 years we have been providing solutions—both through services and advocacy—creating paths from crisis to stability and on to success.
Our work in housing, health care, legal 
protections, and economic security sup-ports more than 200,000 people annually, helping them build a better future.
We perform much of our work through  
our three wholly owned subsidiary 
companies—Heartland Housing, Inc.; Heartland Health Outreach, Inc.; Heart-land Human Care Services, Inc.—and one affiliate, Heartland International Health Center.
Mission
Heartland Alliance advances the human rights and responds to the human needs of endangered populations—particularly the poor, the isolated, and the displaced—through the provision of comprehensive and respectful services and the promotion of permanent solutions leading to a more just global society.Our comprehensive programming includes:
Housing
We build and advocate for safe, high-quality housing and supportive services for people experiencing homelessness, poverty, or chronic illness.
Health Care  
We work to ensure comprehensive health care—medical, dental, mental health, and substance use treatment-- is fully available to people experiencing poverty or trauma.
Legal Protections
We provide legal protection for people in danger, including refugees, vulnerable migrants, and others fleeing violent situa-tions at home and abroad.
Economic Security
We help people threatened by poverty build the skills and gain the tools to improve their well-being and enjoy the success of reaching their goals.
Staff
Nearly 800 staff provide services 365 days a year.
Volunteers
More than 1,420 volunteers provided 82,229 hours of service during the past fiscal year, equivalent to $11.2 million.
18¹ For a copy of our most recent audited financial statement,
 please send your written request to: Heartland Alliance for Human  
 Needs & Human Rights, Attention: Chief Financial Officer,
 208 South LaSalle Street, Suite 1818, Chicago, IL 60604.2008 Financial Report
unaudited
19Our Impact on Human Rights: A Year in Review 2008
Total Income
  $57,389,607
 6 8 . 2 %  Grants and contracts
17.5%  Contributions
 7.2%  Program service fees and third-party revenue
 4.9%  Rental and related revenue
 1.3%  United Way
 0.9%  Miscellaneous income
Total Expenses
   $57,389,607
 27.0 %   Social services for impoverished individuals and families
 27.6%   Health care for homeless and low-income individuals and families
 19.0%   Housing services
 7.0 %   Human resources, information technology, and financial services
 2.5%   Public policy programs
 4.0%   Future program commitments
 2.3%   International projects
 7.5%   Services to immigrants and refugees
 1.7%   Fundraising
 1.4%   Planning and communications20Investors
$100,000+  
 
Anonymous Advancing human rights through support of national networks to address unmet needs of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individu-als in danger.
Arcus Foundation
Advancing human rights through support of international networks to address unmet needs of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals in danger. The Atlantic Philanthropies (USA) Inc.Advancing human rights through the Heartland Alliance National Immigrant Justice Center.
The Annie E. Casey Foundation, Inc.
Advancing human rights through the National Transitional Jobs Network and a three-year demonstration project to assist hard-to-house residents of public housing. Chicago Bar FoundationAdvancing human rights through the Heartland Alliance National Immigrant Justice Center.
Chicago Tribune Charities - 
Holiday, a fund of the McCormick Tribune FoundationAdvancing human rights through support of workforce development initiatives, services for individuals who are homeless, and literacy programs for immigrants.
Eleanor Foundation 
Advancing human rights through support of a three-year initiative to improve the economic stability of working women.
The Ford Foundation
Advancing human rights through affordable and supportive housing and through the Illinois Asset Building Group.
Lloyd A. Fry Foundation 
Advancing human rights through support of vocational training for refugees, oral health care services for low-income Chicago high school students, and the Mama Meta Fund.
Grand Victoria Foundation 
Advancing human rights through the Heartland Alliance Mid-America Institute on Poverty.
Holthues Trust 
Advancing human rights through support of health care and housing in Guatemala.
Illinois Children’s Healthcare Foundation
Advancing human rights through support of oral health care services for low-income Chicago high school students.
JEHT Foundation
Advancing human rights through the Heartland Alliance National Immigrant Justice Center.
The Joyce Foundation
Advancing human rights through the National Transitional Jobs Network, the Heartland Al-liance National Immigrant Justice Center, and the Heartland Alliance Mid-America Institute on Poverty. Marjorie Kovler FundAdvancing human rights through the Heartland Alliance Marjorie Kovler Center.
Lawyers Trust Fund of Illinois
Advancing human rights through the Heartland Alliance National Immigrant Justice Center. 
The John D. and Catherine T. 
MacArthur FoundationAdvancing human rights through support of a three-year demonstration project to assist hard-to-house residents of public housing, and through leadership development of international networks to address unmet needs of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals in danger. 
Marineau Family Foundation
Advancing human rights through support of comprehensive services for families experienc-ing domestic violence and sexual assault.
Open Society Institute 
Advancing human rights through the Heartland Alliance National Immigrant Justice Center.
The Otho S.A. Sprague Memorial Institute 
Advancing human rights through the Chicago Community Oral Health Forum.
The Partnership for New 
CommunitiesAdvancing human rights through support of workforce development initiatives for hard-to-employ individuals. 
Polk Bros. Foundation
Advancing human rights through support of comprehensive health care services for low-income Chicago high school students, and the Heartland Alliance National Immigrant Justice Center. 
Searle Funds at The Chicago 
Community TrustAdvancing human rights through support of health care facility renovations.
Jeanne M. Sullivan
Advancing human rights through the Jeanne and Joseph Sullivan Midwest Program for Refu-gee, Asylee, and Human Rights, and support of the Midwest Light of Human Rights Awards. Woods Fund of ChicagoAdvancing human rights through the Illinois As-set Building Group and the Heartland Alliance Mid-America Institute on Poverty.
$50,000 - 99,999
 Bank of America FoundationAdvancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger. 
David Berten
Advancing human rights through support of national networks to address unmet needs of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals in danger, and the Midwest Light of Human Rights Awards. Grant Healthcare FoundationAdvancing human rights through support of comprehensive health care services for low-income Chicago high school students. Leo S. Guthman FundAdvancing human rights through support of design services that create interior spaces reflecting dignity, hope, and comfort.
Hugh F. Halverstadt and R. Craig Endicott, 
and The Hugh F. Halverstadt Advised Fund of The Community Foundation of Middle TennesseeAdvancing human rights through the Mama Meta Fund. Illinois Equal Justice FoundationAdvancing human rights through the Heartland Alliance National Immigrant Justice Center.
JPMorgan Chase Foundation
Advancing human rights through support of resi-dent services for families moving into mixed-income affordable housing communities.  The Libra FoundationAdvancing human rights through the Heartland Alliance Mid-America Institute on Poverty. MAC Global Foundation, MAC AIDS FundAdvancing human rights through support of treatment for HIV+ women in Rwanda.
Mertz Gilmore Foundation
Advancing human rights through the Heartland Alliance Mid-America Institute on Poverty. Charles Stewart Mott FoundationAdvancing human rights through the National Transitional Jobs Network. Prince Charitable TrustsAdvancing human rights through support of harm reduction practices. Sara Lee FoundationSara Lee Foundation was the Lead Corporate Sponsor of Heartland Alliance’s workforce development initiatives. United Way of Metropolitan ChicagoAdvancing human rights through support of refugee youth leadership, sexual assault services for youth, therapeutic child care services, employment training services, and the Heartland Alliance National Immigrant Justice Center. 
$25,000 - 49,999
 Adams Street Partners, LLCAdvancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger. Baker & McKenzieAdvancing human rights through support of the Midwest Light of Human Rights Awards. Helen Brach FoundationAdvancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger.21Our Impact on Human Rights: A Year in Review 2008
The Chicago Community Trust
Advancing human rights through the Heartland Alliance Mid-America Institute on Poverty. The Chicago Foundation for WomenAdvancing human rights through support of spe-cial initiatives to end violence against women. Circle of Service FoundationAdvancing human rights through support of homeless prevention services.
Diane and Rod Dammeyer
Advancing human rights through the Dammeyer Family Fund. Richard H. Driehaus FoundationAdvancing human rights through support of design services that create interior spaces reflecting dignity, hope, and comfort. Leonard C. GoodmanAdvancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger. Lynne and Lee HillmanAdvancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger. Mr. and Mrs. Michael L. KeiserAdvancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger. Jeanne and Desmond LaPlaceAdvancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger, and through support of emergency and educational services for immigrant and refugees. Legacy FundAdvancing human rights through support of green housing initiatives in Guatemala. Kay and Jim MabieAdvancing human rights through Bridge to Success.
Mayer Brown LLP 
Advancing human rights through the Heartland Alliance National Immigrant Justice Center and support of the Midwest Light of Human Rights Awards.
Patty and Rob Moore 
Advancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger.
Northminster Presbyterian Church
Advancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger in Kenya. Frank F. Quinn Advancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger. Ravenswood Health Care FoundationAdvancing human rights through support of primary health care services for low-income individuals.
Michael Reese Health Trust
Advancing human rights through the Heartland Alliance Marjorie Kovler Center. The Rhoades FoundationAdvancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger. Sidley Austin LLPAdvancing human rights through the Heartland Alliance National Immigrant Justice Center and support of the Midwest Light of Human Rights Awards. 
Paul Snyder
Advancing human rights through Bridge to Success.
$10,000 - 24,999
 Anonymous (3)Advancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger.
Ellen S. Alberding and Kelly R. Welsh
Advancing human rights through the Heartland Alliance National Immigrant Justice Center.
Suzanne and David Arch
Advancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger, and home essentials for individuals and families moving into new homes. Boeing CompanyAdvancing human rights through support of the Midwest Light of Human Rights Awards. Deborah and Alan R. BraxtonAdvancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger. Bridgeview Bank GroupAdvancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger, and through support of the Midwest Light of Human Rights Awards and A Celebration of Home & Garden. Ellen E. BushAdvancing human rights through support of national networks to address unmet needs of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals in danger. Margaret C. and Jack E. CaveneyAdvancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger. Chicago Area Foundation for Legal Ser-vices Advancing human rights through the Heartland Alliance National Immigrant Justice Center.
The Chicago Community Foundation
Advancing human rights through the Heartland Alliance Mid-America Institute on Poverty. Citizens For Progressive Change, Inc.Advancing human rights through support of adult education and vocational training services in Benton Harbor, Michigan. ComEd, An Exelon CompanyAdvancing human rights through support of The Candlelight Ball and the Midwest Light of Human Rights Awards.A.G. Cox Charitable TrustAdvancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger. 
The Field Foundation of Illinois, Inc.
Advancing human rights through support of a project to study health disparities. 
Frechette Family Foundation
Advancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger.
Morris L. Goldberg Charitable Trust
Advancing human rights through the Heartland Alliance Marjorie Kovler Center. Scott L. GoodmanAdvancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger, and through support of The Candlelight Ball and the Midwest Light of Human Rights Awards.
Harris Bank
Advancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger. N. Lynn HiestandAdvancing human rights through the Christian Hiestand McClellan Fund. Institute of International EducationAdvancing human rights through Enlaces América.
Jenner & Block, LLC
Advancing human rights through support of the Midwest Light of Human Rights Awards. 
Jones Day
Advancing human rights through support of the Midwest Light of Human Rights Awards. Kirkland & Ellis FoundationAdvancing human rights through support of the Midwest Light of Human Rights Awards. Kohler CompanyAdvancing human rights through support of the Spirit Awards. Latham & Watkins LLPAdvancing human rights through support of the Midwest Light of Human Rights Awards. Levy Family Charitable FundAdvancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger. Suellen and Chip LongAdvancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger, and through support of A Celebration of Home & Garden.
National Equity Fund, Inc.
Advancing human rights through affordable and supportive housing.
Karen E. Otto
Advancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger, support of the Heartland Alliance Marjorie Kovler Center, and through support of The Candlelight Ball and Midwest Light of Human Rights Awards. 22St. Luke’s Episcopal Church 
Advancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger in Kenya.
The Estate of Deborah H. Scott
Advancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger. Seyfarth Shaw LLPAdvancing human rights through support of the Midwest Light of Human Rights Awards.
Sonnenschein Nath & Rosenthal LLP
Advancing human rights through support of the Midwest Light of Human Rights Awards.
Gretchen L. Starks
Advancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger.Irvin Stern FoundationAdvancing human rights through the Heartland Alliance National Immigrant Justice Center. TCF National Bank IllinoisAdvancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger, and through support of the Midwest Light of Human Rights Awards. Thomas Thorne-ThomsenAdvancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger, and through support of A Celebration of Home & Garden. Washington MutualAdvancing human rights through support of housing initiatives for immigrants.
Kristen U. and Barclay C. Welch
Advancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger, and through the the Heartland Alliance Marjorie Kovler Center.Western Union FoundationAdvancing human rights through support of literacy programs for immigrants. The Willow Springs FoundationAdvancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger. 
Winston & Strawn LLP
Advancing human rights through support of Art Against AIDS® and the Midwest Light of Human Rights Awards. Susan and Paul ZuckerAdvancing human rights for those threatened by poverty and danger, and through support of The Candlelight Ball.
For a full listing of all our donors, volunteers, and staff, please visit http://www.heartlandalliance.org/annualreport.Local, State, and
Federal Funders
Chicago Department of Aging
Chicago Department of AviationChicago Department of HousingChicago Department of Human ServicesChicago Department of Public HealthChicago Department of Public Health through the 
AIDS Foundation of Chicago
Chicago Housing AuthorityChicago Housing Authority CorporationCircuit Court of Cook CountyCity of Chicago Empowerment ZoneCity of Chicago Mayor’s Office of Workforce 
Development
Federal Emergency Management AgencyIllinois Bureau of Homeless Services and Support -
ive Housing, Division of  Community Health and Prevention
Illinois Children’s Health Care FoundationIllinois Community College BoardIllinois Criminal Justice Information AuthorityIllinois Department of Children and Family ServicesIllinois Department of CorrectionsIllinois Department of Human ServicesIllinois Department of Human Services, Bureau of 
Employability Development Services
Illinois Department of Human Services, Division of 
Alcoholism and Substance Abuse
Illinois Department of Human Services, Division of 
Mental Health
Illinois Department of Public AidIllinois Department of Public HealthIllinois Housing Development AuthorityIllinois Office of Alcoholism and Substance AbuseIllinois Office of the Attorney GeneralIllinois Office of Rehabilitation Services through 
the AIDS Foundation of ChicagoIllinois Office of the Secretary of StateIllinois State Board of EducationIllinois Violence Prevention AuthorityJewish Federation of Metropolitan ChicagoUnited Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims   of Torture
University of Illinois at ChicagoU.S. Committee for Refugees and ImmigrantsU.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesU.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
through the Chicago Department of 
  Public Health
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, 
Community Health Grant 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
through the Cook County Bureau of 
  Health Services
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, 
Healthcare for the Homeless
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
Health Resources and Services 
  Administration
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
Office of Refugee Resettlement
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
Office of Refugee Resettlement through the Illinois Department of Human Services and administered through the Jewish Federation of Metropolitan Chicago
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
Office of Refugee Resettlement through the Immigration and Refugee Services of America
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
Office of Refugee Resettlement with a col -
laborative grant to the Illinois State Board of Education and the Illinois Department of Human Services Bureau of Refugee and Immigrant ServicesU.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Ser -
vices Administration, Center for Substance Abuse Treatment
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban   Development
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Develop -
ment through the Chicago Department of Human Services
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban 
Development through the Chicago Housing Authority Corporation
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Develop -
ment through the Illinois Housing 
  Development Authority 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban   Development, Community Development Block Grant
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban   Development, Community Services 
  Block Grant
U.S. Department of JusticeU.S. Department of Justice, Office for Victims 
of Crime
U.S. Department of StateU.S. Department of State through Immigration 
and Refugee Services of America23Our Impact on Human Rights: A Year in Review 2008
Executive Leadership Team
Joseph A. Antolin
Vice President and Executive Director, Heartland Human Care Services, Inc. Mary H. BartonActing Vice President, Heartland Alliance Donor & Community Relations  Bechara ChoucairVice President of Community Health Partnerships and Executive Director, Heartland International Health Center Andrew E. GeerVice President and Executive Director, Heartland Housing, Inc. Richard GrossiChief Financial Officer and Vice President, Financial Accountability Services Sid L. MohnPresident Heidi R. NelsonVice President and Executive Director, Heartland Health Outreach, Inc. Lizabeth G. SodeExecutive Director, Heartland Alliance Strategic Services
Board of Directors
Heartland Alliance
ChairPaul A. ZuckerCity Real Estate Incorporated
Vice Chair 
Alan R. BraxtonPresidio Partners LLC
Treasurer
Ruth A. Colby Silver Cross Hospital
Secretary
Lynn C. TodmanAdler School of Professional Psychology
Susan M. Benton
Winston & Strawn LLP
Debra R. Bernard
Perkins Coie LLP
Keek L. Bielby
Anna William
Warren J. Brodine
Chicago Family Health Center
Mark B. DillonRoss D. Emmerman
Neal, Gerber & Eisenberg LLP
Araceli Esquivel
Health Care Service Corporation
Ardena L. Flippin
Provident Hospital of Cook County
Barbara J. Goff
The Warranty Group
Elaine H. KlemenRay J. Koenig III
Peck, Bloom, Austriaco & Mitchell, LLC
Suellen G. Long
Bridgeview Bank Uptown
Fawn Lopez
Modern Healthcare, Modern Physician
Hossam M. Mahmoud
McGaw Medical Center of Northwestern University
Wendy Manning
Blue Cross Blue Shield Association
Eric T. McKissack
Channing Capital Management LLC
Peggy McTigue
CB Richard Ellis
Theodore W. Michalke
NeuStrategy, Inc.
Judith M. MuntzGlenn D. Newman
Exelon Corporation
Philip W. Palmer
Grubb & Ellis
Nancy Kim Phillips
NKP Consulting, LLC
Frank F. Quinn
Citigroup Global Markets, Inc
Marita Rhea
Bank of America
Jesse H. Ruiz
Drinker Biddle & Reath LLP
Steve E. Scholl
Allstate Insurance Company
Beth Sullivan
St. James Hospital and Health Centers
Jeanne M. SullivanGuy F. Summers
Farrell Group, LLCHarlan R. TellerFinancial Dynamics
Robert H. TuckerFidelis N. Umeh
Versay Solutions, LLC
Andrew T. Ward
The Boeing Company
Barclay C. Welch
Ansonia Properties, LLC
Board Liaisons
Robert C. AndersonHeartland Human Care Services representative
Daniel V. Lezotte
APT, Inc.Heartland Housing representative
Karen E. Otto
Witt/KiefferHeartland Health Outreach representative
Auxiliary Board and 
Leadership Council LiaisonsShawn-Laree de St. AubinWomen’s Board representative
Liesel S. Fischer
American Hospital AssociationJunior Board representative
Susan R. Fortino-Brown
Law Offices of Susan Fortino-BrownNIJC Leadership Council representative
Daniel H. Frailey II
Junior Board representative
Jennifer Gong-Gershowitz
NIJC Leadership Council representative
Lee S. Hillman
Liberation Investment Advisory GroupPresident’s Council representative
Nancy A. Simonson
Women’s Board representative
Heartland Housing
ChairRobert S. GrossingerBank of America
Vice Chair
Robert P . GriffithsAmerican Chartered Bank24Treasurer
Judy AmianoRiverside Healthcare
Secretary
Benjamin J. WeprinLevy Family Partners, LLC
Deborah S. Burkart
National Equity Fund, Inc.
Robert G. Byron
Blue Vista Capital Partners
Kelly Epstein
Bear Stearns/a JP Morgan Company
James G. Essex
Jones Lang LaSalle
Scott L. Goodman
Sterling Bay Companies
Carl A. Jenkins
Harris N.A.
Afiya H. Kumar
AHA designs
Daniel V. Lezotte
APT, Inc.
Juju LienArthur Moore
Moore Investment Properties LLC
Roberto Requejo
The Chicago Community Trust
Gregg Seiler
Seiler Consulting, Ltd.
Kevin A. Sterling
The Sterling Law Office LLC
Barbara J. Taylor
City of Chicago, Department of Housing
Paul A. Zucker
City Real Estate Incorporated
Heartland Health Outreach
ChairMary G. WilsonSonnenschein Nath & Rosenthal LLP
Vice Chair
Kim M. CysewskiW.W. Grainger, Inc.
Secretary
Sandy J. Rebitzer
Funmi Adeboje
Crowe Chizek & Company LLCDina BirmanUniversity of Illinois at Chicago
Brian Paul Dickover
Loyola University Medical Center
Barbara E. Giloth
Advocate Charitable Foundation
Elizabeth M. Higashi
Sard Verbinnen & Co.
Thomas R. KleinKaren A. O’Heath
Northwestern Memorial Hospital
Karen E. Otto
Witt/Kieffer
David J. Rebey
Virco Lab, Inc., Division of Johnson & Johnson
Michael H. Shapiro
Baxter International Inc.
Stephen S. StabileMark J. Sullivan
Sullivan Publishing
Heartland Human Care Services
ChairJohn C. McCarthyContinental Airport Express
Vice Chair
Kathe A. Pate
Treasurer
Gregory J. PortoFour Star Hospitality Group LLC
Secretary
Anne F. TiesengaDMX
Mary L. AhernRobert C. AndersonRobin P . Armour
AMD Capital, LLC
Steven L. Baron
Mandell Menkes LLC
Michael A. Broaster
Habilitative Systems, Inc.
Donald B. Chae
Chicago Symphony Orchestra
Eileen J. ConaghanJ.F. Frawley
Frawley Ltd.
Ted Grady
J & L Catering
Lisa M. Haufschild
Haufschild Associates, Inc.
Andrea J. Ingram
Museum of Science and Industry
José Javier López
Illinois Department of Children & Family Services
Therese M. McGuire
The Northern Trust Company
Harith A. Razaa
Chicago Minority Business Opportunity Center
Gregory D. Skirving
New Trier Partners, LLC
Stephen W. Spencer
DiMeo Schneider & Associates, LLC
Gregory A. Thompson
UnitedHealthcare
Molly Vanderloo
RSM McGladrey FPO 
Joseph A. Vasquez, Jr.
Schiff, Hardin & Waite
Heartland International Health Center
An Affiliate of Heartland Alliance
Chair 
Elizabeth Tarlov
Vice Chair
Sheri Cohen
Treasurer
Elizabeth Houston
Secretary
Doris Gray
Angela Assad
Karen ChaversJon LamalKathy McGroarty-TorresRandy MimsSteve RosemurgyKathy SprattlingSteven S. StabileCopyright © 2008 Heartland Alliance for Human Needs & Human RightsPrinted with soy ink.
 Printed on recycled paper.Annual Report 2008
Heartland Alliance StaffBindu Batchu
Director of Marketing & Communications
Amy Carlton
Manager of Internal Communications
Photography
All photographs by Josh Hawkins Photography except:
p. 4 Teig Whaley-Smith, p. 9 courtesy of Mary Fabri, p. 12 istock, p. 17 Gregg Rizzo
Printing
Graphix Products, Inc.Heartland Alliance for Human Needs & Human Rights
208 South LaSalle Street, Suite 1818 
Chicago, IL 60604 
312.660.1300
www.heartlandalliance.org