Statement of Members of the Human Rights and Security Coalition   
on 
“Closing Guant ánamo: Ending 20 Years of Injustice ” 
 
Before the Senate Judiciary Committee  
December 7, 2021  
 
The undersigned members of the Human Rights and Security Coalition are pleased to submit this 
statement for the Committee’s December 7, 2021 hearing: Closing Gu antánamo: Ending 20 
Years of Injustice . 
 
Our coalition seeks to ensure that the United States’ national security policies abide by its human 
rights obligations. It does so by promoting transparency, accountability, and oversight in 
furtherance of our collective human security.  
 
Currently, our coalition is  working to dismantle the war -based policy and legal architecture that 
has led to endless war, unlawful killing, unlawful detention, torture, conflict, mass displacement, 
and other abuses particularly against Muslim, Brown and Black communities abroad. We 
recognize these policies also harmfully impact communities in the United States, and seek to 
highlight those connections.  
 
Guantánamo : 20 Years of Injustice  
 
On January 11, 202 2, the detention facility at the U.S. Naval Base in Guantánamo  Bay, Cuba 
will mark  its 20th year. Nearly eight hundred Muslim men and boys have been held 
at Guantánamo since 2002, all but a handful without charge or trial. Thirty -nine remain , at the 
astronomical cost of $540 million per year, making  Guantánamo the most expensive prison in 
the world.  Thirteen of them have been recommended for resettlement or repatriation by the 
administrative review process known as the Periodic Review Board (“PRB”).   
 
Many of the remaining men  are torture survivors, some formerly disappeared at “black s ites” 
before being sent to Guantánamo . All of them have been exposed to the  physical and 
psychological trauma  associated with prolonged indefinite detention. They are also aging rapidly 
and increasingly exhibiting  complex medical conditions that staff at Guantánamo  are not 
equipped to manage . 
 
Among a broad range of human rights violations perpetrated against predominantly Muslim 
communities, Guantánamo  – which was  designed specifically to evade legal constraints, and 
where Bush administration officials incubated torture – is the iconic example of the post -9/11 
abandonment of the rule of law . Guantánamo  embodies the fact that, for nearly two decades 
following the September 11, 2001 attacks, the United States government has viewed 
communities of color – citizens and non -citizens alike – through a security threat lens, to 
devastating consequenc es. This is not a problem of the past.  Guantánamo continues to cause 
escalating and profound damage to the men who still languish there, and the approach it 
exemplifies continues to fuel and justify bigotry, stereotyping, and stigma.  Guantánamo entrenches racial divisions and racism more broadly, and risks facilitating additional rights 
violations.  
 
The illegitimate and fundamentally broken  military commission system , which operates almost 
entirely outside of public view, is one of Guant ánamo’s core features.  This system  was 
established  out of whole cloth  purportedly to bring justice for 9/11 , but it has produced the 
opposite . For example, as Georgetown University Law professor David Luban has correctly 
observed:  
 
It is hardly news that Military Commissions have been dogged by  one scandal after 
another, beginning as early as 2004 when  a veteran Marine Corps prosecutor 
withdrew  because he became convinced that he would have to present evidence obtained 
through tor ture. There was  the hearing blacked out to observers  by someone unknown to 
the judge, the moment the CIA black sites were mentioned; there was the interpreter 
detailed to th e defense team who had  previously worked for the CIA at a black site ; there 
were the  microphones disguised as smoke detectors  installed in attorney -client interview 
rooms; and the prohibition on defense counsel doing independent investigations of the 
torture program; and so  many more.  
It is not surprising, then, that the commissions ’ eight  convictions  have mostly been overturned  in 
whole or in part on appeal. Those results have cost,  according to government auditors , $679.6 
million from 2012 to 2018  alone . The Defense Department has said it plans to spend $1 billion 
more through at least 2023.   
 
The Department of Justice  is Obstructing Guant ánamo’s Closure  
 
It is appropriate for the Senate Judiciary Committee to be holding this hearing because t he 
Department  of Justice (“DOJ”  or “the Depa rtment” ) has an important role to play in closing 
Guantánamo  – including ending indefinite detention without charge or trial  – and the military 
commissions. We are dismayed that instead  the Department continues to obstruct  that goal  – 
both directly and through its participation in unjust military commissions proceedings – and 
otherwise to undermine President  Biden’s  stated commitments to human rights  and human 
dignity . 
 
For example, notwithstanding nearly two decades of imprisonment,  DOJ continues to refuse to 
acknowledge that due process  under the Constitution  applies to the men at  Guantánamo , a 
position that many Committee Member s, led by Chairman  Durbin, have right ly criticized. And it 
has done so in a case where it is opposing re lease of a man  – Abdulsalam Ali Abdulrahman Al -
Hela – who the PRB (on which the Justice Department sits, and which operates by consensus) 
has already recommended for transfer . Mr. Al-Hela’s case is not the only such case that DOJ 
continues to fight , and in  so doing make s these men’s transfers more difficult . 
 
Nothing prevents the Department from instead standing down in these  cases, as it has before , in 
order to facilitate transfers.  
 
Justice Department lawyers detailed to the military commissions have acted particularly 
egregiously , participating in efforts  to use torture -derived evidence in a capital prosecution.  Use of torture -derived evidence violate s black letter law, and also flatly contradict s public 
declarations that both the Biden administration and previous administrations have made  
affirming the government’s unequivocal commitment to exclu de torture -derived statements from 
military commissions.  
 
Rather than expendin g time and resources on violating the prohibition of torture, t he Justice 
Department could be working with the Office of the Convening Authority (which is responsible 
for the overall management of the military commissions process ), and the military commiss ions’ 
chief prosecutor, to bring the commissions swiftly to a close in a way that is least unjust for all 
involved.   
 
Conclusion  
 
Putting an end to the  extralegal, abhorrent, and wasteful  policies and practices with which 
Guantánamo  will forever be synonymous is a human rights obligation, a moral responsibility, 
and a national security imperative. That  is why calls for Guantánamo’s  closure have ranged from  
the military  to medical professionals ; international jurists  to local activists ; organizations  
with focusses on human  rights , civil liberties,  immigrant s’ rights, racial justice,  anti-Muslim 
discriminatio n, and more ; to the late Senator John McCain . 
 
We commend the Committee for its attention to the U.S military prison at Guantánamo  Bay, and 
urge continued overs ight. It is important to note that the overwhelming majority of work 
necessary to close Guantánamo  – especially the steps that are most pressing – can and should be 
done by the Biden administration using its current authorit ies. Specifically, Congress does  not 
need to act either for the administration to transfer men out, or for it to change course in the 
military commissions. It is clear, however, given the minimal progress the administration has 
made toward clos ing Guantánamo , that Members must hold the a dministration accountable for 
fulfilling President Biden’s pledge  to do so . 
 
 
American Civil Liberties Union  
Amnesty International USA  
Center for Constitutional Rights  
Center for Victims of Torture  
Defending Rights & Dissent  
Friends Committee on National Legislation  
Government Information Watch  
Human Rights First  
National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers  
National Religious Campaign Against Torture  
Reprieve US  
September 11th Families for Peaceful Tomorrows  
Win Without War  
 
 