 
 
Conversation About Crime Survivors and Justice Reforms  
July 21, 2021  
  
Summary of the Conversation’s Points of Consensus  
  
 Introduction  
  
The Sentencing Project works to promote effective and humane responses to crime that 
minimize imprisonment and criminalization by promoting racial/ethnic, economic and 
gender justice. Increasingly, crime survivors and those who assist them are critical 
partners in efforts to promote meaningful justice reforms, equitable access to services 
for survivors, crime preve ntion strategies including access to mental health care and 
community -based violence interruption initiatives, and restorative justice.  
  
The Sentencing Project and national victim/survivor advocate Anne Seymour, with 
support from Open Philanthropy, sponso red a virtual conversation to address these and 
other critical issues. The goal of the conversation was to identify strategies that can 
more wholly identify and address the needs of survivors, those who harm them, and the 
communities in which they reside.  
  
Participants were provided with an agenda in advance of the conversation, which is 
included in Appendix A . Seventeen participants – including survivors and advocates at 
the local, state and national levels – joined the conversation. A roster of participa nts is 
included in Appendix B . 
  
Conversation participants agreed to join in future conversations to expand upon and 
fine-tune the points of consensus developed at this inaugural meeting, with a focus on 
their potential impact on policy, protocols and serv ice provision.  
  
  
Points of Consensus  
 
1.    Representation and Relationships  
 
● Elevate the voices of victims / survivors themselves, particularly people of color 
(especially Black men) and including LGBTQ+ people, youth, those with 
disabilities, and incarcerated people. Note that many of these individuals do not 
trust the criminal justice system and may not have reported their crime. 
Compensate these victims and survivors for their time, and bring them on staff 
and/or train and mentor them for leaders hip roles.  
   
● Build relationships between justice reform and victim/survivor advocacy groups; 
invite those with opposing views to internally discuss commonalities and 
perceived differences; and provide opportunities to find “common ground.”  
 
 
2.             Services and Policies  
 
● Ensure that victim assistance organizations and funding accept and effectively 
serve people with a criminal record / substance use disorder problem, not just 
“innocent victims.”  
  
● Offer services to crime survivors who d id not report their crime and/or seek 
criminal prosecution (today, this constitutes the majority of people harmed by 
crime).  
 
● Expand choices for people who were harmed by increasing access to non -
punitive responses such as by expanding restorative justice . In particular, work 
with prosecutors and police to better serve victims outside of the punitive 
framework, and to proactively involve crime survivors and those who serve them 
in violence interruption initiatives.  
   
● Work to transform the context in which  harm occurs: the socio -historical 
conditions and institutions. Expand the social safety net — including mental and 
behavioral health services, housing, and income economic security.  
 
 
3.             Advocacy and Public Education  
 
● Help survivors who suppo rt justice reform be heard to ensure that the public and 
policymakers do not get a false impression that victims are a monolith who only 
want the person who caused them harm to be imprisoned for as long as possible.  
 
● Challenge the “false dichotomy” of vict ims/survivors and those who harm them by 
increasing recognition that many incarcerated people have significant histories 
and lived experiences of victimization and trauma, and are likely to be further 
harmed by incarceration.  
  
● Connect decision makers wit h survivors of color and those from marginalized 
communities with. Do not rely only on quantitative data.  
 
● Make a better case for how restorative justice programs, although not 
inexpensive, bring eventual cost savings, versus the high cost of traditional 
justice processes.  
 
● Elevate the voices of police and prosecutors who champion non -punitive 
approaches.   
 
● Demonstrate support from trusted local leaders, not just national figures. 
Similarly, when using quantitative data, present local / state data when possible.  
 
● Develop and demonstrate cohesion among reform advocates.  
 
● Educate victims, survivors and the pub lic about the reality of how the criminal 
justice system works, with respect to sentencing, recidivism, and costs.  
 
 
4.             Funding  
 
● Break down silos in governm ent funding streams for reentry and victim service 
providers, working creatively with private philanthropy, and increasing funding for 
restorative justice programs without taking funding away from other non -punitive 
programs.   
 
● Fund projects that provide both victim and offender services in the community — 
both ongoing and new.   
 
  
  Appendix A  
  
The Sentencing Project  
Virtual Conversation About Crime Survivors and Justice Reform 
Issues  
July 21, 2021  
3:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m.  
  
A G E N D A  
  
Overview of The Sentencing Project               Amy Fettig, Executive Director  
  
Icebreaker                                                    All Participants  
 
“What is your personal goal  for today’s conversation?”  
  
Conversation Questions                           All Participants  
1.    Who needs to be proactively engaged in further conversations and activities 
related to crime survivors’ issues and concerns, and justice reforms?  
  
2.    What strategies can you recommend to address the “false  dichotomy” of 
victims/survivors and those who harm them, that can help recognize the whole 
individual across justice and social response systems?  
  
3.    What effective strategies can improve outreach to victims and survivors of 
color and access to victim  services in communities that are often marginalized? 
(please offer any specific examples)  
  
4.    What would it look like if crime survivors, victim advocates and justice reform 
professionals work together for meaningful justice reforms, and to address 
current crises (i.e., the VOCA Fix in Congress; rising homicide rates)?  
  
5.    What are concrete ways that advocates and researchers can support crime 
survivors, crime prevention initiatives, and efforts to reduce unnecessary 
incarceration?  
   
Closing and N ext Steps                          Anne Seymour, National Victim/Survivor   
      Advocate  
                                                                 Amy Fetting, Executive Director  
  Appendix B  
The Sentencing Project  
  
Conversation Participants  
 
  
Alexandra Bailey, End Life Imprisonment Strategist  
The Sentencing Project  
Washington, DC  
 
Aurelia Sands Belle, Research Instructor  
National Crime Victims Research and Treatment Center  
Medical University of South Carolina  
Charleston, SC  
  
Jennifer Brinkman, Director  
Tennessee Department of Finance and Administration  
Office of Criminal Justice Programs  
Nashville, TN  
  
Kristin Eliason, Director of Legal & Strategic Advocacy  
Network of Victim Recovery of DC  
Washington, DC  
  
Michelle Garcia, Director  
Office of Victim Services and Justice Grants  
Executive Office of the Mayor  
Washington, DC  
  
Nazgol Ghandnoosh, Senior Research Analyst  
The Sentencing Project  
Washington, DC  
 
Jim Jones, Executive Director  
Community Justice Center  
Lincoln, NE  
 
Nancy Lewis, Executive Director  
Colorado Organization for Victim Assistance  
Denver, CO  
  
Kimiko Lighty, Coordinator  Restorative Arlington  
Arlington, VA  
 
Marcy Mistrett, Senior Fellow  
The Sentencing Project  
Washington, DC  
 
Katie Monroe, Executive Director  
Healing Justic e 
Washington, DC  
 
Joel Junior Morales, Director of Operations  
LGBT+ Center Orlando  
Orlando, FL  
  
Andrew Page, Vice -President  
Council on Criminal Justice  
Washington, DC  
  
Nicole Porter, Director of Advocacy  
The Sentencing Project  
Washington, DC  
 
Sarah Taylor, RISE Project & Advocacy Coordinator  
Network of Victim Recovery of DC  
Washington, DC  
  
Amy Fettig, Executive Director  
The Sentencing Project  
Washington, DC  
  
Anne Seymour  
National Crime Victim/Survivor Advocate  
Washington, DC  
  
 
 
  
  