Loitering for the Purposes of Prostitution  
New York  State  
 
 
 
 
  In New York S tate, 240.37 is the charge of loitering for the purposes of prostitution, a law which criminalizes 
constitutionally protected behav ior and is often used to target:  
 
 women of color , 
 transgender women, and  
 individuals who have been previously arrested for these crimes.  
 
The statute allows police to interpret  behaviors such as repeatedly attempting to stop a vehicle or repeatedly waving to 
a vehicle, or attempting to talk to other ind ividuals on the street, as  having a  purpose of engaging in prostitution.1 This 
means it is the bias of the arresting officer which turns legal behavior illegal, and turn s citizens into criminals.  
 
We know from police records that evidence used to indicate to an arresting officer that someone is about to engage in 
prostitution include s their manner of dress, being in an area of the city known for prostitution, the possessi on of 
condoms, or that they have been arrested before und er this charge. This crime is a  violation  for those arrested who have 
no previous arrests, and becomes a B -level misdemeanor after the first arrest. This is often part of the cycl e of 
involvement in the criminal justice system which contributes to poverty and instability.  
 
Harms Created by Loitering Statutes  
 
The impact of policing and criminalization for these communities leads to dire effects. The impact of policing for 
prostitution laws has long been shown to increase vulnerability to violence, exploitation and other forms of 
victimization. Policing areas  known for sex work  forces peopl e into more isolated locations. This isolation  means 
breaking down communities who can offer safety and harm reduction, no longer being able to connect with outreach 
workers who can offer resources and forcing people into  locations more conducive to vio lence and victimization.  
 
Involvement in the criminal justice for a prostitution -related crime can also lead to the loss of formal employment, 
housing, custody, services, access to schooling, stigma and discrimination – all of which only further undermine  
someone’s ability to access formal employment and stable circumstances. This is also compounded by the associated 
fines, penalties, and court costs – which now become another debt to pay off with the same survival techniques that got 
you arrested in the f irst place. Prostitution statutes such as 240.37 actively bar people who are trading sex from leaving 
sex work.  
Overwhelmingly, 240.37 target s communities,  and 
specifically women, of color. The study “Criminal, 
Victim or Worker? ” from the Red Umbrella Project  
looked at the Human Trafficking Intervention  Courts 
in Brooklyn and Queens, the system through which 
those arrested for prostitution charges are 
processed, and found that the courts are 
disproportionately seeing women of color come 
through on prostitution -related charges, including 
loitering.  
People of color accounted for 89% of 
defendants in Brooklyn and 87% of defendants 
in Queens.  
240.37 Targets Women  of Color 
 
Red Umbrella Project, Criminal, Victim or Worker?  Page 15 Loitering for the Purposes of Prostitution  
New York  State  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Resources  
 
Make the Road , Transgressive Policing  (2012 ) 
Available at: http://www.maketheroad.org/pix_reports/MRNY_Transgressive_Policing_Full_Report_10.23.12B.pdf  
 
Red Umbrella Project , Criminal, Victim or Worker?  (2014 ) 
Available at: http://www.nswp.org/sites/nswp.org/files/RedUP -NYHTIC -FINALweb.pdf  
 
Sex Workers Project & PROS Network , Public Health Crisis  (2012 ) 
Available  at: http://sexworkersproject.org/publications/reports/public -health -crisis/  
 
Human Rights Watch , Sex Workers at Risk  (2012 ) 
Available  at: https://www.hrw.org/report/2012/07/19/sex -workers -risk/condoms -evidence -prosti tution -four -us-cities  
 
Amnesty International , Policy on State Obligations to Respect, Protect & Fulfil the Hu man Rights of Sex Workers  (2016)  
Available  at: https://www.amnesty.org/e n/documents/pol30/4062/2016/en/  
 
Alliance for a Safe & Diverse DC , Move Along: Policing Sex Work in Washington, DC  (2008)  
Available  at: https://dctranscoalition.files. wordpress.com/2010/05/movealongreport.pdf   240. 37 Targets Trans W omen  
 
The specific focus on transgender women, and the impact of these laws, has long been documented in New York City, and 
across the country. While a staff attorney at the Sylvia Rivera Law Project , Dean Spade reported that 80% percent of 
transgender women of color he worked with had experienced police harassment or false arrest based on suspicion of 
prostitution.2 This frequent experience has been termed “walking while trans,” to note the overwhelming profiling, arrest 
and charging for simply engaging in behav iors that would go unnoticed, save for gender identity.3 Said one transgender 
woman who had previo usly been arrested in Queens, “Being transgender is hard enough," she says. "It is very hard getting 
arrested for nothing … I am afraid to walk outside, because they will think I am a prostitute and arrest me. ”4 
 240.37 Targets Those P reviously Arrested Under  the Statute  
 
The police a lso use  a previous arrest for the crime of loitering to profile someone’s intent to engage in prostitution is – 
contributing to the revolving door of involvement in the criminal justice system. As noted by the Human Rights Watch 
Study, Sex Workers at Risk ,  
 
According to the New York Police Department Patrol Guide, police officers are permit ted to include the suspect’s 
location, conversations, clothing, conduct, associates, and status as a “known prostitute” in order to establish that 
someone is loitering for the purp ose of engaging in prostitution … Such laws enable arbitrary and preemptive arrests 
on the basis of profile or status, ra ther than criminal conduct.”5 
 
For too many, this profiling for a low -level crime is not simply a misdemeanor to be ignored, but quickly turns into a life 
sentence of involvement in the criminal justice system.  
1 http://codes.findlaw.com/ny/penal -law/pen -sect-240-37.html  
2 Transgressiv e Policing, Make the Road, 2012  
3 Sex Workers at  Risk, Human Rights Watch, 2012  
4 Gogolak, “Profiled by the NYPD, Transgender People in New York Fear 
Carryin g Condoms. ” Village  Voice News.  
5  Sex Workers at Risk, Human Rights Watch, 2012   
