Urban Justice Center  
666 Broadway, 10th floor, New York, NY 10012  
Tel:  (646) 602 -5600 • Fax:  (212) 533 -4598  
 
Unfriendly  Encounter s: Street -Based Sex Workers and Police in Manhattan, 2005  
 
Street -based sex workers are often  targete d for unlawful arrest and harassment by police , and experience 
high levels of violence that go unaddressed. Outreach to street -based sex workers is critical to providing links 
between them and service providers in order to ensure access to condoms and info rmation about legal rights. 
The Sex Workers Project (SWP) at the Urban Justice Center, which protects the rights and safety  of sex 
workers through legal assistance, human rights documentation, and policy advocacy, sent two outreach 
workers to meet street -based sex workers at two sites in Manhattan.  
 
Outreach workers went out every two weeks for three months (July, August and September) in 2005 
between the hours of 2 AM and 7 AM . Both sites, which we named “Midtown” and “Downtown,” were 
chosen because the S WP received information from sex workers and advocates about heavy policing in these 
areas. They approached people on the street and engaged them in conversation,  offering condoms and 
“Know Your Rights” cards printed with legal information. People self -identified as sex workers. Outreach 
workers also asked sex workers about their needs and  working conditions, especially relating to police 
interactions and safety.  
 
This fact sheet builds on the SWP’s 2003 report on street -based sex workers in New York City , Revolving 
Door, and reports the outreach workers’ findings: New York City still aggressively polices sex workers and 
those who are wrongly profiled or arrested even though they are not committing a crime . The City still  fails 
to provide long -term or prod uctive solutions for helping those who want to leave the streets . 
 
FINDINGS:    
 
Demographics :  
• Midtown : SWP outreach workers encountered only female sex workers  in this area . They appeared 
to be between the ages of 21-35 and were of African -American, Cauc asian  and Asian  descent . 
Outreach workers encountered 2 -7 sex workers during each outreach session.  
 
• Downtown : Sex workers were transgender women and non -transgender men . They appeared to be 
predominantly between the ages of 19 -25, with a few who appeared to be to be younger or older 
than this rang e. Sex workers were primarily  of African -American and Latino /a descent . Outreach 
workers encountered 20 -35 sex workers during each outreach session.  
 
Receptiveness:   
• Midtown: Sex workers in this area appeared more  suspicious and cautious about speaking with 
outreach workers, although they were receptive to receiving condoms. Because policing occurs  
frequently,  sex workers did not appear to have the time or desire to talk with outreach workers and 
did not want to br ing attention to themselves.  
 
• Downtown : Sex workers in Downtown were more accessible to outreach workers. Transgender 
female workers were generally very receptive to condoms and information and were generous with 
divulging personal or neighborhood experie nces regarding police. Non-transgender male sex 
workers in this area were somewhat receptive to receiving condoms and legal rights cards, but 
refused to talk about the police.   
 
Police Interactions :  
• Midtown:  Sex workers appeared on the streets after 3 AM, which the  SWP suspects is due to the 
frequent police sweeps . Sex workers r eported that most police officers did not harass them,  and any 
abuse experienced was generally verbal. Although outreach workers s aw police undercover in cabs 
and private car s, mos t officers were uniformed and in clearly marked blue and white police cars.   
• Downtown : On every outreach session, sex workers reported heavy verbal and physical harassment 
by police , including  rude, intimidating and intensely derogatory behavior .  
 
One we ek, sex workers reported that on a single night, police arrested approximately 25 -30 people 
whom they assumed were sex workers. They also reported that the next day , police arrested 5 -6 
alleged sex workers. The next week, sex workers stated that police con ducted a massive sweep early 
Saturday morning at 5 AM, possibly locking up as many as  10 transgender women.  
 
One sex worker mentioned a police officer who routinely threatened workers with violence by 
stating: “You are not going to jail tonight, you are g oing to the hospital.” She also noted that this 
same officer pushed another person against a wall and held a nightstick to her throat.  
 
One male sex worker reported police sweeps in early August. He said he was picked up by the police 
even though he was n ot working, and was later released since he was not engaging in any unlawful 
activity. However, the police told him to stay off the street.   
 
In early September, another sex worker stated that police officers in a black car drove up on the 
curb in front o f her, shouted, “Run, bitch, run ,” and told her to leave the area. On that same day, a 
sex worker described how she saw two people with baseball bats beating up a transgender person . 
The police came by, slowed down, noticed the victim was transgender and d rove past, offering no 
assistance.  
 
Pimps:   
• Midtown:  Outreach workers encountered 2 self -identifying pimps  over the course of outreach . These 
young men generally seemed curious  and open to conversation with outreach workers . They also 
seemed  receptive to outreach workers giving legal rights cards and condoms to the sex workers.  
 
• Downtown : Outreach workers did not meet any pimps in this area.  
      
Other Outreach Organizations Present:    
• Midtown: SWP did not see any other organizations in Midtown.    
 
• Down town : There are a few other organizations which conduct outreach Downtown. Streetworks 
notified people of free HIV testing in a nearby van and Tranzition gave information on transitional 
housing for HIV+ transgender people. FIERCE provided free condoms.   
 
RECOMMENDATIONS   
 
• The New York Police Department (NYPD) must hold police officers accountable for harassment of 
sex workers. All officers must be trained on issues relating to sex workers and to gender identity. 
The NYPD must aggressively investigate and punish police officers who engage in harassment or 
violence of any kind against sex workers.   
  
• Police must stop arresting people who are not engaging in unlawful activity.  
 
• Government funds should be directed at preventive services that affect the root causes of sex work, 
such as substance dependence and the shortage of living wage jobs, rather than arrests and 
prosecution. The cycle of arrest does nothing to assist sex workers who want to leave prostitution.  
 
For more information, please contact the SWP  at www.sexworkersproject.org .  
 
© Sex Workers Project at the Urban Justice Center  2006  