SEX WORKERS PROJECT AT THE URBAN JUSTICE CENTER  
 
 
Report on Sex Workers Rights in the U.S. Under CEDAW for the 39th Session of the 
Committee  
 
Sex workers the world over, regardless of the legality or illegality of their profession, maintain 
their status as human beings possessed with inalienable rights that must be acknowledged and 
maintained.  
 
As the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) 
―defines what constitutes discrimination against women and sets a framework for national action to end 
such discrimination, ‖1 it is imperative that th is existing human rights instrument be unconditionally applied 
to sex workers to ensure that the dignity and safety of women and transgender women working in the sex 
sector is upheld.2  Due to political, social and cultural norms  around the globe , sex workers endure harsh 
discrimination and ―lack of e quality before the law‖ as mandated for all persons  in article 15(1)  of 
CEDAW.  These violations of the Convention manifest in violence and misconduct from state actors and 
citizens wi th impunity, a criminalized and/or stigmatized status that keeps s ex workers contained in an 
isolated sub -group of society , and discrimina tory funding restrictions that hinder access to health and other 
services . 
 
Sex workers  are often not welcome in conve rsation s around violations of their own civil, political  and 
social rights. The discrimination directed  at women and transgender persons  who work in the wide array 
of sexual services by both st ate and non -state officials goes on unabated . In fact, many sex  worker activists 
have over the de cades expressed their concern regarding  the global condition of violence and 
discrimination against sex workers, which includes police harassment, lack of access to life -saving 
information about their health, particularly reproductive and sexual health, and the general criminalization 
and stigmatization of sex workers which continues to keep women and transgender women who engage in 
sexual services under ground.  
 
Sex Workers Project  
 
The Sex Workers Project (SWP ) is a projec t based  at the Urban Justice Center  (UJC).  UJC is  an 
independent no ngovernmental organization (NGO) with ECOSOC consultative status . The SWP has 
prepared this report3 to provide independent information that identifies violations of sex workers‘ rights 
unde r numerous articles outlined by CEDAW and the duties of government s, including local, state, and 
federal, in preventing and addressing these violations.4 While the U.S.  has not ratified CEDAW,  we 
                  
1 Human Rights Watch, CEDAW: The Women‟s Treaty , (last modified on Oct. 1, 2003) 
<http://www .hrw.org/campaigns/cedaw/>. It also is important to note that discrimination against women under the CEDAW 
includes discriminatory impact without intent, which runs counter to the current legal treatment of discrimination against 
women in the United States .   
2 We recognize and reiterate that men are also involved in the sex sector and experience many of the same abuses as women and 
transgender women. However, as CEDAW addresses the rights of women, in this report , we focus on female and transgender 
female sex workers .   
3 Throughout this document, case studies are used to highlight the real -life relevance of  human rights for sex workers. Some 
specific details and all names in these case studies have been changed to protect the privacy of the people involved . 
4 In looking for international law applicable to sex workers‘ rights, it is helpful to keep in mind that sex workers are not de fined 
by one single trait —there is no U.N. Convention on the Rights of Sex Workers.  Instead, a more appropriate framework is t o 
understand a sex worker as an intersection of many different traits; his or her rights are more effectively and holistically 
addressed at this intersection. For example, sex workers are not simply ―women,‖ or ―trafficking victims,‖ or ―a minority rac e‖, 
but often possess several such variables that simultaneously implicate different international laws and standards. A useful      
 
 2 strongly  believe that the Convention con tains standards of h uman rights to which  all states must be 
beholden.  
 
The SWP created two substantial reports based on interviews with diverse groups of sex workers  and 
outreach conducted in the New York City area, Behind Closed Doors  and Revolving Door . Behind Closed Doors  
reports on the circumstances o f sex workers who work indoors , while Revolving Door  provides information 
on the lives of street -based sex workers.5   
 
Spectrum of Sex Work  
 
The Sex Workers Project conducts direct services for all sex workers regardless of t he manner of entry 
into the industry. The SWP takes a non -judgmental  approach and uses a harm reduction and human right 
model.  We recognize that sex workers can exist anywhere on the spectrum from trafficked persons, to 
those who practice sex work by circ umstance due to financial or social impetus, to those who do it for 
personal choice. The SWP routinely emphasizes the diverse conditions under which individuals  become 
involved in sex work  and refuses to group all sex workers as one holistic body with the same needs and 
wants.   
 
The following sections  list the rights of sex workers being violated in the U.S. The abuses described in 
sections I – IV demonstrate the absence of rule of law for sex workers in the U.S. We urge the Committee 
to stress these point s when engaged in informal dialogue with the U.S. Delegation to the United Nations:   
 
I. Right to Livable Wage/Right to Livelihood  
 
As stated in article  11(a)  of the Convention , state parties shall ensure the right to work  as an inalienable 
right of all h uman beings6.  In the U.S. , many persons, especially undocumented workers, cannot earn a 
livable wage within  mainstream job sectors. Thus, many women are forced by circumstance to turn to sex 
work in order to provide financial sustenance for themselves and  family members. In addition, consenting 
adults must be allowed to earn a livelihood by means they deem appropriate for themselves without States 
interfering through criminalization and harassment  and thus violating the rights of sex workers. For sex 
worke rs who continue in the work by either choice or circumstance, the current U.S. economic and 
criminalization policies and laws violate the right to work and earn a livelihood  as mandated by 
CEDAW.     
   
Overall, entry into sex work is largely marked by a l ack of access to living wage jobs and/or dissatisfaction 
with wages and working conditions i n other industries and sectors. As reported in Behind Closed Doors , 7 
67% of respondents reported not making enough money to survive in the jobs that they held prio r to their 
involvement in sex work, which included waitressing, food service, retail work and domestic work. 
Respondents expressed a willingness at this point in their lives to do anything that might improve their 
economic situation.  
 
Many SWP clients tha t were trafficked return to sex work after their escape because it is the only option 
for a livable wage.  Even though they earn more money in sex work than they would in other jobs that are 
                                                         
discussion of a ―framework of intersectionality‖ is found in Margaret L. Satterthwaite, Crossing Borders, Claiming Rights: Using 
Human Rights Law to Empower Women Migrant Workers , 8 Yale Human Rights and Development Law Journal 1 (2005).  
5 Both reports can be found on the Sex Workers Project website at www.sexworkersproject.org .   
6 CEDA W, Article 11(a)  
7 Behind Closed Doors: An Analysis of Indoor Sex Work in New York City , Sex Workers Project at the Urban Justice Center. 2005. pg. 
10      
 
 3 available to them, m ost of these sex workers  still cannot afford h ealth insurance, childcare and basic 
necessities in order to maintain financial viability.   
 
In this way, the U.S. violates the inalienable right to work  for many by providing a minimum wage 
standard that is significantly below the wage needed in order to  maintain a life above poverty  - in effect, 
causing persons to work in sex work by circumstance.   
 
In addition, in the U.S., sex workers right to a livable wage and livelihood is being undermined by the 
criminalization and harassment of consenting adults in the commercial sex industry. For example, for sex 
workers who choose the profession out of no pressing  financial need [for example those sex workers who 
have a high educational status , marketable skills  and alternative means of income , yet continue to w ork in 
sex work], the criminalization of sex work violates article 11(a)  in ceasing the right of consenting adults 
to work and earn a livelihood .   
 
II. Harassment  and Abuse by State Officials  
Violence against sex workers stems from severe levels of discri mination at the local, state and national 
levels against this population. In the U.S., sex workers, regardless of the reasons for their entry into the 
industry, are seen as less than  human and without any rights or protections from violence.  This distorte d 
and stigmatized view by certain members of law enforcement is in direct violation of CEDAW article 
2(d) which mandates  that State parties ensure that public authorities and institutions act in 
conformity with the obligation to refrain from engaging in an y act or practice of discrimination .    
 
Both Behind Closed Doors  and Revolving Door8, reporting on indoor and outdoor sex work respectively, found 
disproportionate amount s of violence from state actors, in particular city police, both as direct  actors  and 
as officials who should be investigating crimes against sex workers. The criminalization of prostitution , the 
social stigma of all sex workers  and subsequent law enforcement responses in the United States fosters a 
climate in which discrimination and thus violence thrives , often with impunity. The harassment and 
hostility endured by sex workers signals disinterest by State parties in refrain[ing ] from en gaging in any act 
or practice of dis crimination against women and ensuring  that public au thorities and i nstitutions  act in 
conformity with this obligatio n.9   
 
In Behind Closed Doors  and Revolving Door , indoor and street -based sex workers commented on high rates of 
violence:  
 
14% of indoor sex work respondents in experienced incidents of police violence, and  victims of such 
violence felt they had no recourse.10 Angie11 described her encounters with police violence:   
 
I got beat up twice, both times by a cop. Both of th em wanted me to suck their [xx]12 for free, 
right in the car. I said no, because I really don‟ t like being in the cop cars. But, they said  I had to 
and pulled their [xx]  out and just grabbed my head and pushed me down there. The firs t time I 
bit the guy on his [xx] . He just screamed and started beating me with his stick.  I passed out. I 
don‟t know  for how long. I was just laying there and when I woke up it was almost morning. I 
                  
8 Behind Closed Door:  An Analysis of Indoor Sex Work in New York City , 2005, pgs. 11, 49, and 70 and Revolving Door: An Analysis of 
Street - Based Prostitution in New York City , 2003, pgs. 8, 11 and 34 -47.  Sex Workers Project at the Urban Justice Center.   
9 CEDAW  Article 2 (d)  
10 Behind Closed Doors , 48 
11 All names in this report are aliases, used to protect t he identity of sex workers who shared their information with the SWP.  
12 In our reports , SWP does not censor informants ‘ language . However, for the purpose  of this document , we replaced all 
strong sexual language with ― [xx]‖.        
 
 4 told my momma I got robbed. She was at home with my kids.  She didn‟t believe me because I 
said I didn‟t want to call the cops. But, I know that if we went down [to the station], we would see 
the guy .13 
 
16% of respondents have been involved in sexual situations with the police.14 One sex worker, Jessica, 
experienced two sexual encounters  with police  on their encouragement in order to avoid arrest .  
 
Once, the police offered no t to ar rest me if I gave them a [xx] . A cop drove me to an alley and 
said, „What will you do not to get arrested?‟ I offered a [xx]. He said, „No, I want to [xx] you.‟ 
So I did, I let him [xx]  me and he let me go. I told all of my friends. I saw him later as an 
undercover and he reminded me [of what he did.] He let me out of the car and nothing 
happened.”15  
 
Celeste worried about violence from the police:   
 
I would be most worried about being abused by the police, being raped or hurt or just treated badly is my worst fear. I 
feel like the legal consequences I could probably deal with or manage.  I‟ve definitely heard plenty of stories about 
police having sex with girls and arresting them or arresting them and forcing them to have sex, even in the car .16 
 
Another sex worker, Leticia , said that the police threaten her approximatel y once every 
three months:  
 
Police officers around here sometimes spit on y ou, harass you, call you a [xx] . One likes to beat 
me now and then, or he wants me to suck his [xx] . I mean, its crazy. He hits me with his gun 
and gives me these marks on my legs and my back. I can‟t call the other cops. I did once and they 
asked this guy to stop beating me. But, he got so mad that he came around and beat me up even 
worse. So, I really have to g et out of here.  Now he wants me to give him 25% of what I make! 
There ain‟t nothing I can really do because he is a police officer and I can‟t do nothing about it.   
 
Leticia  later commented, ― I had to go to the hospital because I got beat [by the police]  so bad.”17 
 
Leticia  explained the need to find alternatives to working with the police:  
 
Just find a way to help us with the police. You have lots of women that have nobody to help them. 
We don‟t need lawyers; we need somebody to protect us when we get bea t up, when police mess with 
us. Around here, they don‟t arrest you, they just mess with you like they own you.  
 
Transgender Women:  On numerous SWP street outreach sessions, transgender women 
in particular tell of harsh and consistent verbal harassment from  police officers and lack of 
action on their complaints of violence. One person stated that she had seen a police car 
drive by a transgender woman who was being beaten with a baseball bat, and the officers 
offered no assistance.18 
                  
13 Id. 48  
14 Id. 48  
15 Id. 48 -49 
16 Id. 46  
17 Id. 48  
18 Unfriendly Encounters: Street -Based Sex Workers and Police in Manhattan,  Factsheet. Available on the SWP website at 
http://www.sexworkersproject.org/downl oads/SWPOutreach2005FS.pdf , 2005       
 
 5 Extensive t raining that wo uld address the issues surrounding sex work  by taking all appropriate measures 
to eliminate discrimination against women by any person, organization or enterprise19 is not a priority for 
the New York City Police Department ( NYPD ), despite  attempts by the SW P to engage the NYPD in 
concret e discussions of these concerns. Therefore , officers who routinely engage in misconduct against 
predominantly female and transgender female sex workers are not held accountable for  engag ing in such 
acts.  
III.  False Arrests  
False arrests of sex workers violates article 2(d)  of the Convention which states that State parties 
undertake to refrain from engaging in any act or practice of discrimination against women and to 
ensure that public authorities and institution shall act i n conformity with this obligation . Sex 
workers are routinely arrested as individuals and in sweeps , often to appease the surrounding community 
members who enjoy the public service of law enforcement as ―protectors ‖ from non -violent sex workers . 
Almost a qu arter of respondents20 from Revolving Door reported being falsely arrested  while not engag ed in 
sexual services at the time b ut rather going about their daily lives , such as grocery shopping . These sex 
workers  were arrested for being ―known prostitutes‖  without conducting any immediate criminal activity , 
despite the fact that prostitution is not a status crime in the U.S .   
Charlotte attributed her false arrests to her transgender identity:  
There are times I could be coming out of the subway, and they just s natch you coming out of the subway, just because 
you‟re a [transexual] . 
Charlotte added that she always pleads guilty in order to be released as quickly as possible.21 
Avery felt it was difficult to counter false arrests because:  
The judge is always, „well,  the police is here to tell the truth and that‟s what they‟re hired for, to abide by the law and 
to make sure that the laws are enforced.‟ It‟s just not true.22 
 
At an April 2007 legal training that the SWP conducted at a Queens -based NGO , numerous transgen der 
female sex workers complained of being stopped on the street by police for no reason. They were not 
engaging in any unlawful activity —they were  simply walking down the street to a particular destination. 
These individuals believed they were being stopp ed by police and discriminated against for being 
transgender and Latina.  Such incidents cause much distress in their lives and inhibit their ability to enjoy 
their human rights.  
 
In addition to arrests, 29% of respondents23 in the report, Behind Closed Door s, stated that they had at times 
been taken into police custody, but then released instead of being arrested. For some, this meant  that they 
were ordered to appear in court at a later date , and in some cases, they were completely free to go. While 
being ta ken into custody without being arrested was clearly seen as preferable to arrest, the lack of police 
follow -up implies that there was no real basis for these people to be taken into custody  in the first place .  
 
                  
19 CEDAW  Article 2 (e)  
20 Revolving Door , 40 
21 Id. 41  
22 Id. 41  
23 Behind Closed Doors , 47      
 
 6 The U.S. violates article 2(d)  of the Conven tion by allowing local police, particularly in the New York 
area but likely all over the U.S., to use their authority to harass and falsely arrest sex workers with 
impunity. Again, the U.S. must ensure that their public officers refrain from engaging in an y act or practice 
of discrimination against all women , and in fact, use their positions of authority to protect the rights of 
women .   
 
IV.  Discriminatory State Protection for Victims of Violence/State Inaction  
 
Existing laws against rape, assault, robber y and harassment are often made not applicable to sex workers,  
signifying a lack of adherence to standards out lined by CEDAW  articles 1, 2 , 3, 15(2) . These articles in 
which States parties prohibit all discrimination against women24, establish legal protect ions of the 
rights of women on an equal basis with men25 and ensure the effective protection of women 
against any act of discrimination26 are violated by the U.S.‘s refusal to take crimes against sex workers 
seriously.    
 
Local law enforcement routinely ass erts that sex workers have  put themselves into dangerous  situations  by 
the mere nature of their work  and therefore  no recourse is necessary  against violence perpetrated against 
them . In no other profession is the blame taken away from the aggressor in a gi ven situation to this same 
degree.27 The criminalized and/or stigmatized identity of sex workers serves to strip them of their human 
rights and in seeking protection of such.  
 
The most egregious example is  the Rape Shield Law in New York State .28 Generally , this is a well -meaning  
statute that aims to provide a certain measure of confidentiality to victims of sexual assaults  and is an 
effort to  keep their  sexual histories from public and legal scrutiny . However,  the New York state law 
condones discrimination a gainst those with a record of prostitution convictions  or of presum ed 
commercial sex acts  in the previous three years before an alleged assault , by allowing such information to 
be offered as evidence  to eliminate credibility of the victims of sexual assaul t.29 This exception plays into 
the prevailing  myth  of women , especially women involved in sex work , as sexually available at all times and 
the impossibility of rape. The exception contained in this law is particularly damaging to sex workers 
coming forward with complaints of assault and should be repealed as State parties should modify or 
abolish existing laws, regulations, customs and practices which constitute discrimination against all 
women.30 
 
An increasing pattern of violence directed against sex worker s with impunity has most recently been 
revealed with the found bodies of four women in Atlantic City, New Jersey on November 20, 2006. That 
three of the four murder victims  had past prostitution arrests  is indicative of a larger pattern of violence 
against  people working in the sex industry. In fact,  serial killers have often targeted those working in the 
sex industry as a vulnerable population . In pleading guilty in 2003 to the murders of 48 prostitutes, Gary 
                  
24 CEDAW , Article 2(b)  
25 Id. Article 15(2)  
26 Id. Article 2(c)  
27 Revolving Door , 11. Behind Closed Doors , 13 
28 New York Criminal Procedu re Law Section 60.42(2).  
29 Id.  ―Evidence of a victim‘s sexual conduct shall not be admissible in a prosecution for an offense or an attempt to commit a n 
offense defined in article one hundred thirty  of the penal law unless such evidence: 1.proves or tends  to prove specific instances 
of the victim‘s prior sexual conduct with the accused; or 2. proves or tends to prove that the victim has been convicted of a n 
offense under section 230.00 of the penal law within three years prior to the sex offense which is t he subject of the 
prosecution.‖   
30 CEDAW , Article 2 (f)       
 
 7 Leon Ridgway, from the U.S. Pacific Northwest, told a judge he targeted streetwalkers ―because I thought 
I could kill as many as I wanted to without getting caught. ‖31 
 
This chilling statement is all too indicative of the pervasive discrimination against sex workers, in which 
they are literally perceive d by many, including State actors, as inhuman.  
 
V.  Effects of Criminalization of Sex Work  
 
The cycle of arrests that corresponds to the criminalization of sex work makes it extremely difficult for 
those wishing to begin or return to work in legal sectors and, in violation of CEDAW article 3 , hinder s 
their ability to enjoy their fundamental freedoms in the political, socia l, economic and cultural 
fields .32 A criminal record of prostitution compounds issues of economic survival , making it far more 
difficult t o find work in the mainstream economy. This is particularly dangerous  for transgender persons , 
who routinely face discrimination when applying for work.  
 
In the U.S., there is a prevalent assumption  that arrests for prostitution are a gateway  to services for sex 
workers . However, the experiences of the SWP‘s clients and of those sex workers whom we have 
interviewed in our reports  clearly show the opposite —that the criminal justice system inadeq uately 
address es their needs, and  instead offers only moral jud gment and a criminal record.   
 
Despite the fact that they experience less police interference and a lower rate of arrest than street -based 
sex worke rs, indoor sex workers  whom we have  interviewed33 were extremely concerned with and vigilant 
about the issue of criminal justice contacts. They were fearful of the consequences of arrest, such as having 
a criminal record, stigma, impact on housing and family members, and immigration consequences, such as 
possible removal from the country. Many indoor sex workers also found their treatment by police during 
the arrest process to be disrespectful and sometimes dangerous.  
 
Louise felt that an arrest would affect her ab ility to find mainstream work:  
 
I see all this stuff about job training and this arrest would elimi nate all the jobs you could want if you ever do want 
to leave [sex work.]34 
 
Participants in both SWP reports were arrested on various charges relating to prostitution, including: 
soliciting prostitution; prostitution; maintaining a house of prostitution; l oitering; and false arrest.  
 
In the vast majority of cases where a respondent had been arrested, 88% were offered neither services nor  
alternative sentencing by the criminal court.35 Of the three people who had been offered services, only 
one, Jessica, rece ived any services that were remotely substantive. She received five days of job training 
instead of 15 days in jail. While she thought that the job training ―would be good,‖ Jessica found that ―the 
help was not professional, there were no proper tools give n, and the organization was not prepared.‖36  
 
                  
31 Barnes, Edward and George Kindel,  'Ipswich Ripper' Prostitute Murder Investigators Eye Atlantic City Cases for Possible Link , 
foxnews.com, Dec ember  14, 2006.   
32 CEDAW , Article 3  
33 Behind Closed Do ors, 11 
34 Id. 47  
35 Id. 11  
36 Id. 46       
 
 8 Connie‘s alternative sentencing entailed watching a two -hour health film, while another sex worker was 
given a piece of paper with references for jobs, ―but the first 5 numbers were no longer in service.‖37  
 
Renee, an SWP client,  has been arrested multiple times for different offenses relating to sex work. Most 
recently, she was arrested in a raid on the strip club in which she worked. Renee appeared before the New 
York Midtown Community Court, which aims to  use arrest as a gateway to services fo r sex workers . She 
suffers from homelessness, racial discrimination, and a lack of education and marketable job skills. Renee  
has been funneled through the Midtown court several times and released back onto the streets  where she 
is often arrested shortly thereafter for another sex work -related offense. The only service Renee has ever 
been offered by the Midtown Court system was a two -hour health class focusing on sexual health and 
STD prevention.  
 
Trafficked Persons in Cri minal System:  The criminalization of sex work causes severe consequences 
for those persons who have been trafficked. Many trafficked persons are arrested on average 4 -5 times for 
prostitution without anyone in the criminal justice system identifying them a s being trafficked. This causes 
trafficked persons to be even more afraid of law enforcement and reduces likelihood of them coming forth 
to seek help.   
 
For example, undocumented sex workers Kristina, Pilar, Belinda and Raquel , working with the SWP,  have 
been designated as victims of trafficking in persons by the federal government and have received 
assistance with housing, attaining temporary legal status, finding legal work, and receiving public benefits. 
Belinda and Raquel had been arrested in an immigr ation raid and were initially detained .  However, they 
ultimately received this assistance as a result of the government‘s decision that they were trafficked 
persons . These services did not come through the usual arrest processes in the criminal justice sy stem. 
Even in this case, b oth women  expressed dismay that they had to be arrested and detained before the 
authorities realized that they needed help, and were more distrustful of law enforcement as a result.38 
 
The arrest of sex workers is counter -productiv e to identifying, helping and rehabilitating trafficked persons 
in clear violation of article 6  of the Convention , which mandates that State parties take measures to 
suppress all forms of traffic in women . The criminalization of sex work, leads the industr y to go 
underground making persons more vulnerable and exploitable to being trafficked. [Further discussion of 
the violation of rights of trafficked sex workers is described under roman numeral VII.]  
 
Finally, t he criminalization of sex work and subsequent  stigmatization, discrimination and mistreatment is 
firmly rooted in the U.S. government‘s insistence on the policing of morality . This is in clear opposition to 
article 5  of the Convention,  which requires States to modify the social and cultural patterns of 
conduct of men and women with a view to achieving the elimination of prejudices and all other 
practices based on the idea of inferiority or on stereotyped roles for men and women.39 Sex workers 
are seen as persons who step far outside the proposed margin s of gender and sexuality and as such are 
relegated to a second class citizenship. For persons of color, transgender and/or immigrant populations, 
this discrimination is compounded . 
 
VI.  Discrimination Against Sex Workers Seeking Access Social Services  
 
                  
37 Id. 47  
38 Behind Closed Doors , 47 
39 CEDAW , Article 5       
 
 9 Precisely because of the criminalization and stigma involved in sex work, sex workers face great danger, 
discrimination and backlash when they try to seek or accept help from social service agencies required to 
condemn and reject them as a condition of cont inued funding.  
 
In the United States, police harassment has limited the rights of sex workers f rom achieving their rights to 
health  in violation of article 12.  Police violence against sex workers exacerbate the risks for suffering 
violence as well as sexu ally transmitted infections, including HIV/AIDS.  
 
Outreach to street -based sex workers is critical to providing links between them and service providers in 
order to ensure access to condoms and information about legal rights . However, police harassment of  
outreach workers as well as sex workers prevent these relationships to develop.40 The increased policing on 
the streets drives sex workers to work later at night and in more remote areas, isolating them from crucial 
services.  
 
The confiscation of condoms from suspected sex workers as evidence  in criminal cases41 is not only 
unnecessary and insufficient, but sends an odd message to the community. Historically, sex workers have 
been wrongfully seen as vectors of disease, but in such instances, the very tools for HIV/STI prevention 
are taken away.    
 
Sex workers have a variety of health concerns , not strictly sexual health. There are very few health service 
providers that cater directly to the sensitive and holistic needs of this population. St. James Infirmary , a 
non-judgmental, occupational health and safety clinic for sex workers and their partners, located in San 
Francisco, California, should be looked upon as a model for such services.  
 
Anti-Prostitution Pledge:  The Anti Prostitution Pledge contained in th e requirements for U.S. Agency 
for International Development (USAID) funding requires condemnation of the very population 
organizations are trying to empower and serve, rather than eliminating discrimination against women to 
ensure equal access to health c are services.42 When sex workers are empowered and their rights are 
protected, sex workers are able to insist on condom use and take on the role of health educ ators and 
prevention advocates. It is difficult, if not impossible, for sex workers to mobilize wh en they are being 
demonized. The real human impact of this pledge is that at the hands of the United States, people around 
the world are being denied the healthcare, rights and services they deserve .   
 
 Brazil was forced to rejected approximately $40 milli on in USAID money because signing the 
Pledge would interfere with its highly successful anti -AIDS program43; 
 A class that taught English to sex workers in Thailand in order for them to enter the mainstream 
tourism industry had to seek other funding as a res ult of this policy44; 
 In Bangladesh, 16 drop -in centers for sex workers lost funding when the agency that supported 
them signed the Pledge —the sex workers affected by this describe it as having lost their home, 
their family, and their sense of community and  safety;45 and 
                  
40 Revolving Door , 73 
41 As experienced by sex workers who reported to SWP that condoms were being used by police officers as incriminating 
evidence against them in pros titution c ases.   
42 CEDAW , Article 12 (1)  
43 Reel, Monte. Where Prostitutes Also Fight AIDS: Brazil‟s Sex Workers Hand Out Condoms, Crossing U.S. Ideological Line.  Washington 
Post, March 2, 2006.  
44 Empower Foundation HomePage, http://www.empowerfoundation.o rg/ (last visited Mar. 28, 2007); See also, Video: Taking 
the Pledge, http://sexworkerspresent.blip.tv (The video discusses the current situation in Thailand and the work of Empower).  
45 Taking the Pledge,  Panel presentation of Hazera Bagum, Director of Ban gladesh 's Durjoy Nari Shangho,       
 
 10  Organizations in India that work to empower and organize sex workers have been falsely accused 
of trafficking the very women that they are helping .46 
 
International o rganizatio ns working on HIV/AIDS and anti -trafficking are so fearful  of the p olitical 
backlash  and potential loss of U.S. funding for all their programs, even those not specifically aimed at  
working with  sex workers,  that many organizations are going further than the Pledge may require  because 
they do not understand what kinds of p rograms are banned. For example, some groups have dismissed sex 
workers, claiming that they can no longer keep them on staff, and other groups have distanced themselves 
from sex workers‘ groups with whom they had previously worked and supported.  
 
VII.  Persons Trafficked into Sex Work  
 
The SWP  raises particular concern for undocumented, migrant and trafficked sex workers who not only 
face police harassment and violence based on their gender, economic and social identities but also because 
of their lack of citizenship or trafficked statuses.  
 
The United States , in the last seven years , vigorously initiated national legislation to combat trafficking .  
The main legislation, the Trafficking Victims Protect Act (TVPA) of 2000, offers strong, but flawed 
protectio ns for trafficked persons, including the possibility of obtaining a nonimmigrant visa , access to 
healthcare , and services such as mental health counseling, job training, and English as a Second Language 
classes.   
 
While this legislation has helped a numbe r of formerly trafficked prostitutes, it is still very difficult for 
many people who have been trafficked into the sex industry to benefit from the new law.  In order to be in 
compliance with article 6  of the Convention, t he U.S. needs a more productive an d effective national law 
against trafficking that does not further exacerbate the rights of trafficked persons .  
 
Cooperation:  Problematically, the T VPA requires that trafficked persons over the age of 18 who seek 
legal status o r government -sponsored benef its must cooperate with federal law enforcement in the 
investigation or prosecution of acts of trafficking .47 The difficulty stems from the fact that this cooperation 
requirement includes mandatory contact with law enforcement and questioning by police and immigration 
authorities.  
 
Immigrant sex workers are often afraid to come forward and do not trust law enforcement to assist them. 
Many people who have been trafficked are afraid of police and immigration agencies because they have 
engaged in unlawful beha vior (for example, they may be in the U.S. unlawfully  or been forced to work in 
prostitution ), arrested in the past , or told that they will be deported if they come forward with their 
complaints.  
 
Most trafficked persons who fall under the radar of the po lice live in constant fear that they will not only 
be arrested but be deported back to their home countries and face immeasurable discrimination and high 
risk of violence based on their status as deported sex workers  and escaped trafficked persons .  
 
                                                         
2007.  Available at http://www.sexworkersproject.org/  
46 Taking the Pledge,  Interview with Meena Seshu , activist working with sex workers in Sangli, India ,  
2007.  Available at http://www.sexworkersproject.org/  
47 Trafficking Vi ctims Protection Act of 2000, Pub. L. No. 106 -386 Division A, 114 Stat. 1464 (2000) (codified as amended in 
scattered sections of the U.S.C.) [ hereinafter TVPA].   
      
 
 11 Alicia came to the United States from Mexico two years ago. Through her boyfriend, Carlos, she found work in a 
brothel, where she earns $30 for every customer. However, instead of keeping her half of these earnings, Carlos takes 
all of the money and “holds it” for her. Whenever Alicia demands her share of the money or threatens to leave him 
and go off on her own, Carlos reminds her that if she disobeys him, she will not be allowed to see her son, who lives 
with Carlos‟ mother in Mexico. One day, the brothel is r aided by immigration agents, and Alicia is held in an 
immigration detention center while the government interviews her to decide whether she has been trafficked, or whether 
she is working on a voluntary basis. This detention center houses people who have b een convicted of violent crimes and 
Alicia is scared. Alicia is afraid to tell the immigration agents that she may never see her son again if she gives them 
any information. She is held in the federal detention center for a month before she is deported by the government 
because she is not a cooperative witness and will not admit to being trafficke d. 
 
Sara came to the United States from Russia on a student visa ten years ago, which has long since expired. Because 
she is now here illegally and lacks proper wo rking papers, Sara took an under -the-table housecleaning job, where she 
is subject to long hours and consistent under -payment. One of her bosses recently threatened to fire her and report her 
to immigration authorities  if she did not begin providing entert ainment at his parties for a little extra cash; this has 
included sex acts. Sara feels that she cannot risk deportation by reporting or refusing his demands.  
 
In addition , trafficked persons in the New York City area are willing to cooperate once they real ize they 
can apply for a visa , but now federal agents are not cooperating with trafficked persons.  For example, 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement Agents in New York are requiring more stringent standards, such 
as the known location of the trafficker , and incidents must occur within the last five years, in order for 
them to certify trafficked persons for immigration purposes. This denial and the lack of interest in  
investigating and  prosecuting particular traffickers causes a huge barrier to securing cruc ial legal rights and 
benefits for survivors of human trafficking  and promotes mistrust and frustration against law enforcement.  
In some instances, trafficked persons feel re -victimized by this forced cooperation especially when no 
benefits are produced fr om this interaction.  
 
Inaccurate Conflation  of Prostitution and Trafficking :  In the last seven years, the U.S. focused solely 
on trafficking into sex work largely ignoring the large numbers of people entering the country due to being 
trafficked into the general labor sector – agriculture, domestic work, restaurants, etc. This skewed analysis 
of trafficking minimizes the debate around migrant workers‘ human rights.  
 
In a July 2006 study, the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) found that estimates  of the 
number of people trafficked into any kind of work, including sex work, were questionable: ―The accuracy 
of the estimates is in doubt because of methodological weaknesses, gaps in data, and numerical 
discrepancies. For example, the U.S. government‘s  estimate was developed by one person who did not 
document all his work…‖48 Some policymakers and advocates have been misled by these unreliable 
estimates into the belief that human trafficking and sex work are inextricably linked and that all sex work is 
coerced. The reality is very different. We urge the U.S. to suppress all forms of traffic in women as article 
6 of the Convention mandates.49  
 
Given the hysteria around trafficking, there is still a lack of providing appropriate services, particularly in 
the initial and  essential step of issuing T -Visas for trafficked persons. The U.S. allows 5,000 per year to be 
issued, yet has only issued 729 visas to human trafficking survivors , and another 645 T -visas to members 
                  
48 United States Government Accountability Office  (USGAO) , ―Human Trafficking: Better Data, Strategy, and Reporting 
Needed to Enhance U.S. Anti -trafficking Efforts Abroad,‖ (Washington, D.C.: 2006), pg. 2.    
49 CEDAW , Article 6       
 
 12 of their family to date.50 The GAO report s tates that ―more than five years after the passage of the 
landmark anti -trafficking law [Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000], the U.S. government has not 
developed a coordinated strategy to combat trafficking in persons abroad…or evaluated its prog rams to 
determine whether projects are achieving the desired outcomes.‖51  
 
Many of the trafficked clients at SWP have escaped from trafficking through their own means and with 
assistance of others , often others who work in a brothel, or  their clients throu gh sex work . In this instance, 
the survivor has empowered herself to be ready to leave the situation and acquire needed services. As they 
are escaping from the most oppressive of situations, it is imperative that survivors are able to implement 
action base d on their own decisions. The government‘s insistence on raids and rescues is problematic due 
to law enforcement misconduct during the raids as well as improper training on how to identify and be 
sensitive to the needs of trafficked persons. Trafficked per sons are often traumatized repeatedly by being 
held in immigration detention or hotel rooms for interrogation. Law enforcement changes roles from that 
of ‗protector‘ and ‗rescuer‘ to that of yet another oppressor.  
 
New York State Anti -Trafficking Legislat ion:  For the last two years, t he New York State government 
has been  deliberating over Anti -Trafficking Legislation to address the lack of conformity and efficiency 
among local, state and federal authorities in trafficking cases. After more than two years of advocacy  by 
members of the N ew York Anti-Trafficking Network , New York State agreed  on legislation that addresses 
the problem of trafficking in persons. The bill include s provisions regarding: forced labor into industries 
such as agriculture, constructi on, and domestic work; services and benefits that will assist trafficked 
persons by creating stability in their lives; and ensuring that state and local law enforcement provide 
necessary documentation for immigration relief.  
 
However , the current legislat ion calls for greater penalties for trafficking involving prostitution,  minimizing 
the prevalence of labor servitude. This difference in the treatment of trafficked persons is unacceptable . 
 
Moreover, the New York Anti -Trafficking Legislation  fails in a cr ucial manner, in that it does not take the 
importan t step of offering survivors of trafficking access to civil remedies that would allow them to pursue 
justice on their own. It is our experience that civil litigation brought by trafficking survivors is an 
important tool to combat these abuses. It is also the only tool that allows the survivor to take direct action 
against those responsible for the trafficking, and therefore it can be a critical tool in the  empowerment and 
healing of the survivor.  
 
Recommend ations to Ensure the Protection of Rights for Sex Workers  
To secure the human rights of sex workers and ensure their  equality before the law, th e SWP provides the 
following recommendations  to the U.S. government : 
 Informed  and fact -based public discussion t o erase the social and cultural norms that perpetuate 
the idea of prostitution as a criminal justice issue . Instead, the U.S. must focus on the real 
economic needs of sex workers and to find ways for police and other state actors to be productive 
in ensuri ng the safety of sex workers as stated in article 2 .  
 Complaints by sex workers should we be met with the same respect and regard that would be 
given to any other crime victim. Complaints must be addressed and investigated by law 
                  
50 Trafficking in Persons Report . Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons  
http://www.state.gov/g/tip/rls/tipr pt/2007/82811.htm  
51 USGAO Report, pg. 3.         
 
 13 enforcement agencies witho ut penalty to these victims, even if they were subjected to such acts 
while committing prostitution. It is critical that police assure prostitutes that they will not be 
investigated or arrested for illegal behavior if they come forward to report a crime of  violence  
against them .  
 Police who commit violence or other crimes against sex workers must be held accountable for 
their abusive acts. Police leadership must make it known that they take such exploitation seriously. 
In addition, p olice and the courts mus t aggressively investigate and punish police officers who 
engage in sexual harassment or violence of any kind against sex workers.  
 Law enforcement must be trained and willing to identify trafficked and other sex workers who are 
in violent or coercive situ ations and refer them to agencies that can assist them.  
 Trafficked sex workers should not be arrested or held in detention. Instead, they should be directly 
referred to safe housing, service providers, and attorneys who can assist them.  
 Trafficked person s should not be compelled to cooperate with law enforcement in order to access 
services and legal immigration status. Many trafficked persons are willing to cooperate in 
investigations and prosecutions. However, they should not be expected to do so until t hey are 
emotionally and financially stable, physically well, and safe. Even those trafficked persons who 
never feel able to cooperate with law enforcement deserve necessary services and legal protections.  
 Funding streams for anti -trafficking and HIV/AIDS efforts should not restrict recipients‘ 
advocacy on behalf of people in the sex industry.  Sex workers and other person s should be 
recognized as potential allies in the ongoing struggle against human trafficking  and the stem of 
HIV/AIDS . Workers and clients in the sex industry have assisted trafficked sex workers in 
escaping coercive situations, and some trafficked persons return to the sex industry for economic 
reasons. Therefore, organizations should be able to continue to assist them.  
 Create and expand des perately needed services for sex workers which include mental health and 
counselin g, appropriate and sustainable job training; language classes , financial management 
training and healthcare.  
 Service providers in all sectors must train their staff to be sen sitive and ope n to sex workers and to 
understand the stigma and discrimination to which this population is exposed. A negative climate 
maintains  a fear of seeking help.  
 Funding should be re -directed from arrests and incarceration to appropriate and realis tic service  
provisions  to ensure equal access to the enjoyment of sex workers‘ human rights and freedoms and 
be free of undue discrimination as outlined in CEDAW.  
 