 1 Urban Justice Center 
123 William Street, 16th floor, New York, NY 10038 
Tel:  (646) 602­5600 • Fax:  (212) 533­4598 
 
 
 
Friday October 16, 2007 
 
Director, Regulatory Management Division 
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services 
Department of Homeland Security 
111 Massachusetts Avenue, NW, 3rd Floor 
Washington, DC 20529 
 
 RE: DHS Docket No. USCIS-2006-0069 
 
Dear Director, 
 
We write to share our comments on the interim regulations governing U visa applications and to 
support the comments submitted by the National Network to End Violence Against Immigrant 
Women.  
 
The Sex Workers Project of the Urban Justice Center is a legal services organization for sex 
workers and victims of trafficking. Using a harm reduction and human rights model, we protect 
the rights and safety of these vulnerable and marginalized populations through legal 
representation and policy advocacy. We also provide critical information to policymakers, 
activists, and the media on the human rights abuses faced by victims of trafficking. Through our 
work and membership in local and national networks we have become recognized source of 
information for how best to combat human trafficking into prostitution and other sectors while 
safeguarding the rights of the victims of this horrendous crime. Some of our ongoing clients have 
interim relief based on their potential eligibility for a U-Visa and we will be filing full 
applications for these clients in the coming months. Many more are eligible and we anticipate 
filing many new U-Visa applications over the years, now that the regulations are written. We are 
uniquely situated to provide a first-hand perspective on how the regulations as written will affect 
victims of trafficking and other forms of violence as well as their legal service providers.  
 
We thank you for the obvious consideration you put into the content of the interim regulations 
and the accompanying explanation (“the Preamble”).  We are particularly grateful that you 
considered the suggestions submitted concerning the earlier, proposed form, made by the 
National Network to End Violence Against Immigrant Women and others who work with 
immigrant survivors of domestic violence, sexual assault, trafficking and other crimes. 
 
We applaud your construction of many aspects of the U interim regulations. In particular, we 
appreciate the clarity and understanding provided in regard to immigrant victims of domestic 
violence, and the many forms this can take.  For instance, we support the broad definition of 
 2 domestic violence encompassed in the phrase “battery and extreme cruelty”1 which includes both 
physical and mental abuse.  In addition, we support an interpretation of the phrase “substantial 
harm”2 to enable victims who suffer from longer patterns of abuse comprised of individual 
incidents that do not at first glance seem substantial but over time equal substantial harm, to 
apply for U nonimmigrant status.  Also, we were pleased to see that there was a differentiation 
between the crime prosecuted and the crimes experienced by immigrant victims of violence.3  
Finally, we support the recognition about the ways in which criminals try to use the legal system 
and law enforcement to control immigrant victims, barring their access to our help.4  
 
However, we do believe there are several problems that will undermine victim access to the 
process and local law enforcement efforts to encourage victims of crimes to access justice. We 
are particularly concerned about the imposition of limits on who can sign certifications and the 
inaccessibility of waivers of inadmissibility. 
 
I. Law Enforcement Certification Processes Must be Flexible 
 
Law enforcement certification is a necessary element of a U-Visa application, both by statute and 
by regulation.5  The INA provides that a U-Visa petition “shall contain a certification from a 
Federal, State, or local law enforcement official, prosecutor, judge, or other Federal, State, or 
local authority investigation criminal activity.” 6  The proposed regulations state that the 
certification must be signed by “the head of the certifying agency, or any person(s) in a 
supervisory role who has been specifically designated by the head of the certifying agency.”7  
Thus, the regulations dramatically narrow the range of which law enforcement personnel can 
sign certifications. This provision in the regulations violates both the statute and the policy 
concerns originally supporting U non-immigrant status: 
Requiring That Signing Officials Be Vested with Specific Titles Violates the Statute 
 
o Congress specifically designated a comprehensive list of law enforcement officials 
designated to sign certificates. If Congress had wished to limit valid certifications only to 
those provided by “supervisors” or “heads of agencies,” it would have done so in INA § 
214(p). 
o It is a principle of administrative law that regulations should not narrow the rights granted 
by the statute on which the regulations are based. These regulations narrow the 
accessibility of law enforcement certifications from the broad grant in the statute.  
o Imposing the particular signatory requirements in the regulations is not a reasonable 
interpretation of this law, given that it will not work for many law enforcement agencies.  
                                                    1 “New Classification for Victims of Criminal Activity; Eligibility for “U” Nonimmigrant Status; Interim Rule,” 72 
Fed. Reg. 53014, 53018 ( 2007)  (to be codified at 8 CFR pts. 103, 212 , 214, 248,  274a , and 299) (propos ed Sept. 17, 
2007)  .  2 Id. 3 Id.  4 Id.  5 INA § 214(p)(1); 72 Fed. Reg. 53014, 53023 ( 2007) . 6 INA § 214(p)(1). 7 72 Fed. Reg. 53014, 53023 ( 2007).  3 Requiring That Signing Officials Be Vested with Specific Titles is a Radical Departure 
from Past Policy 
o A sensible policy on law enforcement certifications was issued by William Yates, 
Associate Director of Operations of USCIS, and has been relied upon by U-Visa 
petitioners since 2003. His memo stated that the certification “must in all cases be signed 
by the law enforcement official investigating or prosecuting the criminal activity.”8   
o This policy encouraged U-Visa petitioners to seek certifications from the law 
enforcement officers they knew and had been helpful to, ensuring that these certifications 
were completed correctly and promptly by someone with actual knowledge of the case.  
o This policy is also followed in the regulations regarding the law enforcement attestation 
(LEA) that is submitted with T visa applications.9   
o Requiring certifications to now be signed by “supervisors” or “heads of agencies” is a 
radical departure from this past policy with no basis or rationale offered in the 
regulations.   
 
Requiring That Signing Officials Be Vested with Specific Titles Makes The Process 
Inaccessible to Victims 
 
o The U visa was created to “strengthen the ability of law enforcement to detect, 
investigate and prosecute cases…while offering protection to victims.”10 When the 
process for gaining certification is overly burdensome, both of these goals are thwarted.  
o The regulations imply that only one person at each agency will have the authority to sign 
certifications. Under the current policy, it is still often difficult to get a certification 
signed by a law enforcement officer, even one with direct contact with the victim, 
because of the many responsibilities they have. If there is only one certifying official in a 
relatively high position, it is even more likely that this person will not have the time to 
deal with the many requests, and that some victims will slip through the cracks. 
o The new regulation imposes a heavy burden on victims to get certifications from the right 
official, but nowhere requires law enforcement agencies to establish a system to make 
these officials available to victims. There is a distinct possibility that many victims would 
not be able to obtain certifications merely because the law enforcement agency they are 
helping lacks the structure they are “encouraged” to develop by the regulations.  
o There is a great diversity in local law enforcement structures and in many cases it may be 
more appropriate for people who lack the “supervisor” title to be evaluate and sign 
certifications. In many prosecutors’ offices, for example, only the head District Attorney 
or County Attorney is a “supervisor.”  This person may not be the best person to evaluate 
and sign certifications, however, and may wish other attorneys and victim advocates in 
their offices to be responsible for signing U certifications.  
o If the immigrant community is aware that U-Visas are difficult to obtain, fewer victims 
will come forward. This new requirement will hamper law enforcement’s efficacy, and 
deny those victims protection.                                                     8 William R. Yates, Assoc. Dir. Oper., U.S.CIS, re: Centralization of  Interim Relief for U Nonimmigrant Status 
Applicants (October 8, 2003)  9  8 CFR section 21 4.11( f)(1) 10 Victims of Trafficking and V iolence Protection A ct of 2000 ( VTVPA), Pul L. No. 106 -386 ( Oct. 28, 2000)   4  
Our Recommendation 
We suggest that the regulations remove the requirement that “supervisors” sign certifications.  
Instead, the form should only require that the signer attest that he or she is a person assigned to 
evaluate and sign certifications for the agency (regardless of title).   
 
II. Fee Waivers Must Be Available for Inadmissibility 
 
Nearly all of our U visa petitioning clients must overcome inadmissibility. The vast majority are 
inadmissible because they are presently out of status or entered without inspection. Additionally, 
many of our clients have been victims of trafficking or similar situations and have arrests and 
convictions for prostitution on their records, making them inadmissible under criminal and 
related grounds.11  Currently, all of these clients would have to apply for a waiver of 
inadmissibility under INA §212(d)(14) using form I-192, which includes a fee of $545. There is 
no waiver for this fee. For these clients, the lack of a fee waiver for the waiver of inadmissibility 
will prohibit them from even applying for a U-Visa.  
 
The Majority of Immigrants Applying for a U Visa Need a Waiver of Inadmissibility 
 
o The U-Visa was created with the pragmatic understanding that undocumented victims of 
crime are reluctant to expose themselves to law enforcement, even to report a crime, and 
thus offers them the U-Visa protection to encourage that cooperation. Many of these 
victims entered without inspection and are present unlawfully for that reason. 
o The new regulations acknowledge this intent: “Alien victims may not have legal status 
and, therefore may be reluctant to help in the investigation or prosecution of criminal 
activity for fear of removal from the United States.”12 
o It is established immigration law that aliens present without being admitted or paroled are 
inadmissible,13 thus the majority of U Visa applicants will need a waiver of 
inadmissibility. 
 
The Financial Burden Imposed is in Contradiction to the Policy behind the U-Visa 
 
o The I-192 includes a fee of $545, an insurmountable burden for most applicants. 
o The USCIS acknowledges the importance of limiting fees for the U-Visa when it decided 
that no fee would be charged for the U-Visa application or for derivative status.14 The 
USCIS states that this decision “reflects the humanitarian purposes of the authorizing 
statutes.”15 The new regulations even provide a fee waiver option for the biometric 
services fee, as the USCIS “recognizes that many petitioners of U nonimmigrant status 
may be unable to pay the biometric services fee,” a fee of $70.16                                                     11 INA §212( a)(2)(A); INA §212( a)(2)(D) 12 72 Fed. Reg. 53014, 53014 ( 2007). 13 INA §212( a)(6)(A).  14 72 Fed. Reg. 53014, 53031( 2007). 15 Id. 16 Id.  5 o It is therefore difficult to understand why the much larger fee of $545 for the 
inadmissibility waiver, which affects virtually all applicants, is not also waivable. The 
regulations do not even acknowledge it as a likely cost in their calculation of costs for 
filing.17  
 
Our Recommendation 
Correct this oversight and include a fee waiver option for U-Visa petitioners applying for a 
waiver of inadmissibility. Ensure that no U-Visa petitioners are denied status merely because 
they lack financial resources. In addition, we would like to take this opportunity to encourage 
policies that promote liberal granting of INA §212(d)(14) waivers of inadmissibility, even for 
criminal grounds, as this is likely to be an issue for many U-Visa petitioners.  
 
Conclusion 
Thank you for your attention to our concerns.  We hope you will respond to them by fixing these 
problems with U implementation and bring them into line with the rest of the regulations, which 
otherwise do a good job of furthering the goals of the law.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Juhu Thukral, Esq. 
Sex Workers Project 
Urban Justice Center 
 
 
  
 
 
 
                                                   17 See page 72 F ed. Reg. 53014, 53055 (2007) . 