Justice for Indigenous PeoplesCENTRO DE RECURSOS JURÍDICOS PARA LOS PUEBL OS IN DÍGENA S2011 annual reportThe Indian Law Resource 
Center provides legal assistance to 
indigenous peoples of the Americas 
to combat racism and oppression, to protect their lands and environment, 
to protect their cultures and ways of 
life, to achieve sustainable economic development and genuine self-
government, and to realize their other 
human rights.
The Indian Law Resource 
Center seeks to overcome the grave problems that threaten Native peoples by advancing the rule of law, by 
establishing national and international 
legal standards that preserve their human rights and dignity, and by 
challenging the governments of the 
world to accord justice and equality before the law to all indigenous 
peoples of the Americas.Indian nations and tribes and other indigenous communities 
throughout the world are afflicted by poverty, poor health, and 
discrimination. Many Native communities are subjected to grave 
human rights abuses. Indian land and natural resources are often 
expropriated or degraded. When indigenous peoples are deprived of their ways of life and their ties to the earth, they suffer. Many have 
disappeared completely. Profoundly aware that when any culture 
ceases to exist, the whole world is diminished irrevocably, the Indian Law Resource Center’s principal goal is the preservation and well-
being of Indian and other Native nations and tribes.
The Center provides legal assistance to Indian nations and 
other indigenous peoples in the United States and throughout the Americas at no cost to our clients.
The Center has an international Board of Directors, and it is 
a Non-Governmental Organization in consultative status with the 
United Nations Economic and Social Council. The Indian Law Resource Center is a tax-exempt organization under section 501(c)
(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. We are funded entirely by grants 
and contributions from Indian nations, foundations, and individuals. The Center accepts no government support.our
missionour
purpose& goalsUntitled   2012   ©Tony Abeyta   courtesy www.blueraingallery.com
Cover Art: The Day Between the Nights   2011   ©Tony Abeyta   courtesy www.blueraingallery.compresident’s message 
he Indian Law Resource Center has been hard at work in this country and in Central and South America putting into 
action the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Across the United States, we see tribal governments 
seizing the Declaration and using it creatively to protect their lands and resources, and especially their rights to cultural 
and sacred sites. Indian peoples in other countries are doing even more to make the Declaration part of the law of their countries. We celebrate these efforts while understanding there is more work to be done. 
After more than 30 years of seeking recognition and support for the Declaration, our efforts are now focused 
on implementation. The Center has launched a series of training events across the United States to help Native leaders and advocates learn more about using the Declaration to correct injustices in present law. We are also 
working to build partnerships and support to transform the principles articulated in the Declaration into law. 
The promises described in the Declaration will only become a reality when Native leaders come together and offer proposals for what should replace unjust laws. The Center is advising leaders and sharing our proposals as a 
starting point for discussion about reforming federal Indian law.
In addition, the Center has had a strong year in our efforts to protect Native women. In October, 2011, 
the Center and partner organizations testified in the first-ever thematic hearing before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights about violence against Native women in the United States. We also launched a 
video series to create awareness about this epidemic of violence. More than 20,000 people have viewed the videos, and advocates across the country are sharing the resources during presentations and training events. 
Beyond the United States, we made major strides in our efforts to help Maya Q’eqchi’ indigenous 
communities in Guatemala. They have been fighting for their land rights for more than 40 years. In February, 2011, Guatemala’s highest court issued a precedent-setting decision in our favor. When Guatemala did not 
comply with the ruling, we filed a petition with the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights to protect 
the Maya land and to assure the safety of the community members, leaders, and local counsel. We will continue to press this human rights case to stop the destruction and theft of Indian lands and resources. 
As you will read in our annual report, there is great momentum and tangible change in the area of human 
rights. I am grateful for your individual donations and for the generosity and support of partners such as the 
Ford Foundation, Lannan Foundation, The Libra Foundation, U.S. Human Rights Fund, Charles Stewart Mott 
Foundation, The Atlantic Philanthropies, and Overbrook Foundation. We also thank Indian nations such as the Tonawanda Seneca Nation and others who have been very generous with financial support.
The momentum continues to build and we are doing our best to leverage the rare opportunities before us. 
Please join us in this journey. Your donations make it possible for us to do this important work. 
We are grateful to you all.  “the momentum 
continues to build 
and we are doing our 
best to leverage the 
rare opportunities 
before us. please join 
us in this journey. Your 
donations make it 
possible for us to do 
this important work.” 
—robert t . Coulter,
president & executive director
 
robert t . Coultertwo threeYei Creating   2010   ©Tony Abeyta   courtesy www.blueraingallery.comlaw reform
implementing the un deClaration and rewriting federal law
ederal law concerning Indian and Alaska Native nations is terribly unjust and out of keeping 
with the Constitution and basic American values.  We are seeking to change this sad 
reality by creating a fair and principled framework of law concerning the rights of Native 
Americans. This framework would be consistent with the United States Constitution and Indian treaties, and with American concepts of fairness and modern principles of 
international human rights law. Our long-term goal is to reform—through political, judicial, 
and administrative processes—the present discriminatory laws affecting Natives in the United States.
In December, 2010, President Barack Obama announced the United States' support 
for the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. The decision opened up a rare opportunity for Native nations to correct injustices in present law such as the taking 
of Indian lands and property without compensation; the violation of treaty obligations; the 
stripping of inherent tribal governmental powers; the elimination of long-standing hunting and fishing rights; the mismanagement of tribal trust funds by the federal government; and 
the unjustifiable level of federal control over tribal lands and resources. 
We conferred with tribal leaders and colleagues across the country to create a plan 
for implementing the Declaration. We developed a plan for holding briefing sessions for tribal leaders, for informing tribal leaders about possibilities for legal and policy change, 
for informing lawyers and government officials about the Declaration and about the need for legal change, and for developing a national campaign for legal and policy change led 
by Native tribes. The Center held a series of briefings in 2011 to help tribal leaders and 
advocates understand how the Declaration can help reform federal Indian law. 
We have completed a final round of edits to our law reform book, General Principles 
of Law and Commentaries Concerning Native Lands. The Indian Land Tenure Foundation is taking steps to publish the work. These General Principles cover the topics of self-determination, the doctrine of discovery, aboriginal title, the power of the federal government 
to take Native lands, the plenary power doctrine, and the taxation of tribally held lands. 
These draft principles form a consistent framework of legal rules that would overcome the truly unfair and discriminatory rules that now are applied to Native nations. 
four five
Land Rights“the un declaration 
on the rights of 
indigenous p eoples 
will help us to protect our lands and rights for future generations. it will help us in our efforts for reconciliation and to bring justice, peace, and respect to all the people living within our homeland.”
—darwin hill,
Board member, Basom, nYUntitled   2012   ©Tony Abeyta   courtesy www.blueraingallery.comtimBisha shoshone
Challenging plenar Y power 
his complex federal litigation, Timbisha Shoshone Tribe v. Salazar, challenges the plenary power rule, 
which is one of the fundamental barriers to equal treatment under the law for indigenous nations 
and individuals in the United States. The Center filed the lawsuit on behalf of the Timbisha 
Shoshone Tribe in June, 2010. The suit seeks to invalidate an act of Congress that confiscates millions of dollars from Western Shoshone tribes and calls for it to be distributed to individuals 
who are not necessarily members of the tribes. The tribes would receive no compensation at all. 
The question is whether property owned by tribes is protected by the Fifth Amendment. We have devoted much time to this litigation, because it is test litigation intended to establish for the first 
time that Indian nations have a constitutional right to their property and money protected by the 
Fifth Amendment, just as other people in this country do.
A successful lawsuit could prevent Congress from freely taking or controlling Indian property 
and funds. Tribes could have much greater ability to manage their affairs if they could stop unjustified government control and confiscation of their property. 
In February of 2011, our request for an injunction to halt government action was denied, and 
in March the Court dismissed the case. We appealed, and an expedited appeal was granted, but the government managed to get arguments delayed until mid-November. We expect to continue pressing this case for months or years to come. 
mohawK nation
six
Land Rightsome of our most important legal work is to help Indian and Alaska Native nations protect—and sometimes regain—their homelands. 
The Mohawk Nation and other nations of the Haudenosaunee, or Six Nations Confederacy, have 
been fighting for many generations to recover a part of their homelands in New York State that were taken from them in violation of federal law. Our work on behalf of the Mohawk Nation includes a 
major law suit to recover lands and compensation. In 2011, we briefed and argued against a renewed 
motion to dismiss by the State of New York and other defendants. The case had been stayed while the federal district court waited for the court of appeals to decide other cases that were expected 
to set controlling precedent. The court of appeals made its decisions, and we are arguing that those 
adverse decisions do not apply because of the factual differences of the Mohawk claim. We are awaiting a decision on that motion. The Mohawk Nation continues to collaborate with the other 
Mohawk governments in the hope that an agreed-upon resolution of the claims can be achieved. We 
remain willing and ready to revive settlement negotiations if that becomes an option. rapa nui 
n February, 2011, the Center sought and won international help to protect the Native people of Rapa Nui, commonly known as Easter Island, a colony of Chile. 
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights issued an order to protect 32 
Rapa Nui clans who are trying to recover their ancestral lands. 
Clan members had begun reoccupying their illegally taken lands in 2010 to 
call attention to the need for serious and constructive dialogue on issues of self-government and protection of their sacred sites. Clashes between Chilean police and clan members became increasingly violent and life threatening. Several Rapa 
Nui people were seriously injured during attempts to evict the Rapa Nui from their 
lands; clan members were shot with pellets and beaten with rifles. 
The Rapa Nui people have had a hostile relationship with Chile dating back 
to 1888, when they signed a “treaty” with Chile resulting in the island and its inhabitants being treated as the property of Chile. The Rapa Nui people were unlawfully confined to a small area; the remainder of the island was leased out to 
private enterprises. During the years the Rapa Nui were interned, which lasted 
until 1966, Chile ignored the clans’ land ownership and sold their lands to private companies and developers. 
The island of Rapa Nui attracts tens of thousands of visitors each year who 
come to see the iconic stone figures that have made the island famous. Rather than harmonize development with the local Native culture, Chilean policies disregard 
harm to the environment and ignore the rights of the Rapa Nui people. Some of 
the island's archeological sites, which have deep cultural and spiritual significance for the Rapa Nui, have been disrupted to make way for projects such as parking 
lots and restrooms. 
In August, the Center sent a team of lawyers to meet with Rapa Nui leaders 
about their land rights and right of self-determination. We continue to advise 
them, and we are conducting research on important issues raised by the Rapa Nui people.
sevenRobert Coulter and Leonardo Crippa lead a discussion on protecting 
Rapa Nui rights.Robert Coulter and Erity Teave, Executive Director on Human Rights 
for the Rapa Nui Parliament, visit the moai on Rapa Nui Island.  
Clem Chartier photo Clem Chartier photoHuman RigHtshe right to be safe from violence is a human right many take for granted—but not Native 
women, who are more than twice as likely to be sexually assaulted and stalked than other 
women in this country. One in three will be raped, six in ten will be physically assaulted in 
her lifetime, and the murder rate for Native women on some reservations is ten times the national average. 
United States law has unjustly limited the ability of tribes to protect Native women 
from violence and to provide them with meaningful remedies. This violence is linked to the removal of tribal criminal authority over non-Indians, who commit 88% of all 
violent crimes against Native women, and to other systemic legal barriers, which create 
jurisdictional confusion about which government—federal, tribal, or state—has authority to respond to, investigate, and prosecute crimes. Shamefully, such crimes often go 
unprosecuted by federal or state authorities charged with doing so. Studies show that 
U.S. attorneys declined to prosecute 50% of all Indian country matters referred to them, 67% of which involved sexual abuse and related matters. U.S. law also generally limits the 
sentencing authority of tribal courts to no more than a year of jail, no matter the crime.
Our project seeks to end these epidemic rates of violence by raising awareness—
domestically and internationally—to gain strong federal action; by providing legal advice to Native women’s organizations and Native nations on ways to restore and strengthen tribal 
authority; and by increasing the capacity of tribes to prevent crimes and punish violent offenders on their lands.  
Our staff has written and spoken widely to raise awareness about this human rights 
crisis. We also worked with Native filmmaker Ryan Red Corn to produce hard-hitting videos about violence against Native women that educate and urge people to take action. 
Our video, “To the Indigenous Woman,” is being used by Native and other women’s 
advocacy groups to raise awareness throughout the country, on Capitol Hill, and in Canada. 
Our work to raise international awareness about domestic and sexual violence in 
Indian country and Alaska Native villages adds world pressure on the United States to fulfill its human rights obligations. Such awareness also adds support to our work with the 
National Congress of American Indians Task Force on Violence Against Native Women, 
the National Indigenous Women’s Resource Center, and others to reform federal law and policies to restore safety to Native women and communities and strengthen Native nations.The Center has had three key successes in our 
work to end violence against Native women.
First, along with the National Congress of 
American Indians Task Force on Violence Against Native Women, we helped organize a visit by Rashida 
Manjoo, UN Special Rapporteur on Violence Against 
Women, to the Eastern Band of the Cherokee Nation during her visit to the United States. We are pleased 
that Ms. Manjoo’s report to the UN Human Rights 
Council and UN General Assembly recommended that, to protect Native women from violence and 
ensure their access to justice, the United States 
reconsider legal barriers, including limitations on the criminal authority of tribes.  
Second, we requested and organized a thematic 
hearing on violence against Native women before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights—a 
first of its kind with the Organization of American 
States. We hope the hearing puts added pressure on the United States to take action and results in further 
study by the Commission’s Special Rapporteur on the 
Rights of Women. 
Third, the United States’ Fourth Periodic Report 
to the UN Human Rights Committee regarding its obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights included matters suggested by 
the Center and expressly makes combating violence 
against Native women a high priority. 
For more information please visit our website,
www.indianlaw.org/safewomen . safe w omen, s trong nations
eight
Untitled   2009   ©Tony Abeyta   courtesy www.blueraingallery.comUN Special Rapporteur on Violence Against Women Rashida Manjoo 
speaks to an audience at the Qualla Boundary of the Eastern Band of the Cherokee Nation.
The Center, along with partner organizations, held a thematic hearing 
before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.Human RigHtsor more than 30 years, we have helped Indian and Alaska Native peoples win 
recognition of their human rights, including the right to exist as distinct peoples and 
cultures; the right to be free from discrimination and forced assimilation; the right of 
self-determination, and other essential rights.
Much of our work has focused on the creation of international human rights 
standards for indigenous peoples through the United Nations and the Organization of American States (OAS). We spent more than 30 years working for the adoption of the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, which was adopted by the 
UN General Assembly in 2007. In 2010, New Zealand, Canada and the United States 
added their endorsement of the UN Declaration. This means there is now worldwide recognition that indigenous peoples have a permanent right to exist as peoples, nations, 
cultures and societies. 
We are also working for the adoption of the American Declaration on the 
Rights of Indigenous Peoples by the OAS. We believe an American Declaration can strengthen and help to encourage actual implementation of the rights in the UN 
Declaration. The American Declaration would affirm the right of self-determination and rights to education, health, self-government, culture, lands, territories, and 
natural resources, and would include provisions that address the particular situation of 
indigenous peoples in the Americas. 
This work is more important than ever as global initiatives are threatening 
indigenous rights on a massive scale. The World Bank and United Nations have funded several projects designed to provide climate change solutions, but these projects raise the threat of violations of indigenous peoples’ land and natural resources rights. The 
UN and American Declarations could be used to address these threats and establish a 
framework to protect indigenous rights from potential violations. 
The Vice President of the Navajo Nation is working to host an OAS negotiation 
session on the draft American Declaration in Navajo territory, and we are helping him to do that. We continue to campaign to win United States support for the American 
Declaration and we are pressing federal officials to re-engage and take a leadership role  
in the OAS negotiations on the American Declaration. winning human rights
ten“we see widespread 
violations of indigenous 
rights in the americas, 
making the need for 
a strong american 
declaration more 
pressing than ever. 
it would protect 
human rights as well 
as the right of self-
determination, treaty 
rights, and the right to 
lands and resources.”
—armstrong w iggins
director, w ashington, d .C. office
Sanctuary  2010   ©Tony Abeyta   courtesy www.blueraingallery.comhe Center has a long history of environmental advocacy in Alaska. The 
Center works with the Yukon River Inter-Tribal Watershed Council 
(YRITWC), an international organization with nonprofit status in the 
United States and Societal Status in Canada. YRITWC is a coalition of 70 sovereign Alaska Native and Canadian First Nation governments, 
all of which share an interest in restoring and protecting the Yukon 
River watershed from pollution. The Yukon River is over 2,200 miles 
long and drains an area twice the size of California. Activities and 
discharges in the watershed are believed to be contributing to the 
declining quality of the river and the health of the Native people in the region. To support monitoring of the river, we are working with 
YRITWC on a report examining how Alaska Native and Canadian 
First Nations fit within the overall environmental jurisdictional scheme, the challenges created by this scheme, and the primary entities within 
each government—federal, state, territorial, or Native nations—that 
address environmental protection and conservation issues in the watershed. The paper is intended to offer preliminary recommendations 
that these Native nations might consider to ensure that environmental 
emergencies and legal violations in the watershed are addressed promptly and effectively by the appropriate governmental entities. 
The Center has also worked with the Kuskokwim River Watershed 
Council (KRWC), a coalition of Native villages from throughout that region. We look forward to continuing our work with KRWC to 
protect the Kuskokwim River watershed in the coming year.
 
EnvironmEntal protEctionndian tribes own and manage 95 million acres of land in the 
United States. For the 566 federally recognized Indian tribes 
and Alaska Native villages that steward these lands, few issues 
are more important than protecting and maintaining the quality and integrity of these ecosystems. Native communities and 
the conservation community are natural allies in protecting 
the environment. Yet most conservationists have little or no knowledge about Indian or Alaska Native tribes and 
communities and their lands, resources, and legal rights. 
Environmental conservation programs have historically ignored this extremely important area. 
We are working to close this knowledge gap by creating a 
written resource that will provide a useful summary of legal, political, and practical information about Indian and Alaska 
Native peoples for conservationists working where Indian and 
Alaska Native interests may be involved. Our Conservationists’ Handbook will provide general guidance to conservation 
professionals, lawyers, funders, students, and others on how to 
work effectively with tribes or on Native lands. It will include practical information on federal Indian law and summarize 
complex legal issues such as land ownership in Indian country.proteCting alasKa’s rivers  handBooK for Conservationists 
twelve thirteen“protecting the 
watersheds is one of 
the most critical issues 
for northern indigenous 
peoples. t he waterways 
are the lifeline of 
alaska natives and 
Canadian first nations. 
the Center's work is 
instrumental in this 
effort.”
—dacho alexander,
Board member, f ort Yukon, aK
Better collaboration between Indian nations and the conservationist 
community can improve conservation efforts.
EnvironmEntal protEctionhe Center continues to provide legal representation to the Assiniboine 
and Gros Ventre Tribes in Montana to address the environmental 
devastation caused by two cyanide heap-leach gold mines adjacent 
to the Fort Belknap Indian Reservation. In the 16 years we’ve been working with the Tribes, we helped them shut down the Zortman and 
Landusky mines and demand the complete reclamation of the open-pit 
mines. Although the mines have been closed and most reclamation is done, the work continues. 
Our strategy has shifted from litigation to cooperation. The Center 
is providing legal assistance and helping the Tribes coordinate with state and federal agencies to monitor the progress of the reclamation 
efforts and resolve the remaining water quality issues. While we 
continue to realize significant progress with regard to the water quality issues, pollution often exceeds state water-quality standards. We are 
committed to working with the Tribes not only to help clean up past 
contamination, but also to ensure their ability to protect their lands from future environmental threats.fort BelKnap reservation
proteCting w ater QualitY
fourteen
Untitled  2012   ©Tony Abeyta   courtesy www.blueraingallery.commultilateral development BanK s
indigenous peoples and the environmentredd+
ensuring Climate poliCies respeCt indigenous rights
sixteenn 2011, the Center expanded its work to address climate change policies that may have 
unintended consequences for indigenous communities. As part of global climate negotiations, 
the world’s leaders recognized that deforestation is one of the leading causes of climate change, 
and launched a program to protect forests in developing countries. REDD+, which stands for Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation, allows developed countries, 
like the United States or France, to get credits toward reducing their greenhouse gas emissions by 
paying developing countries, like Mexico and Indonesia, to conserve their forests. 
A large percentage of REDD+ projects, however, are targeting indigenous peoples’ lands due 
to the fact that indigenous peoples own or live within much of the world’s remaining forests. 
Because indigenous peoples often lack legal land titles, their lands are vulnerable to takeover by governments, conservation groups, or private investors who wish to receive money through 
a REDD+ program. We’ve already seen indigenous communities violently expelled from their 
lands, or swindled by land speculators into signing away access to their forest resources through REDD+ projects. If REDD+ initiatives do not have strong policies preventing this type of abuse, 
violations will only get worse as more money is invested in REDD+. 
The World Bank and the United Nations’ UN-REDD Programme are two of the key 
institutions implementing REDD+ projects. Both institutions are currently in the process of developing their internal policies and regulations to govern REDD+ projects. Unfortunately, draft 
policy proposals have not contained effective protections for the rights of indigenous peoples. For this reason, the Center has been pushing both institutions to adopt safeguards that are consistent 
with the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. In our advocacy, we have made 
it clear that the World Bank and UN-REDD must ensure that no REDD+ project violates the rights of indigenous peoples, including their full ownership rights to land and natural resources 
and their right to self-determination.
To make sure that institutions implementing REDD+ initiatives respect the rights of 
indigenous peoples, and to help communities fight for their rights, the Center is preparing a guide on REDD+ and indigenous peoples. The guide suggests policies and rules that the World 
Bank and UN-REDD should adopt to prevent the violation of indigenous peoples’ rights. It will also help prepare communities facing REDD+ projects to more successfully advocate for their 
rights.ndigenous communities, lands, and environments often are affected adversely by projects financed by multilateral development banks 
(MDBs), such as the World Bank, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the Inter-American Development Bank. 
These MDB projects are often developed and implemented without 
the participation or consent of the local community that will be impacted. This is particularly true for Indian peoples in Mexico 
and Central and South America. The Center continues to play a 
leadership role in advocating for the creation of legal rules to control unsustainable and environmentally damaging development financed 
by MDBs. 
We believe that MDBs are obligated to respect international law 
and particularly to promote and respect human rights. For example, 
we participated in the IFC process for reviewing and revising its policies relating to human rights. We successfully argued that the 
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 
should be reflected in IFC policies. The Center's recommendations were confirmed and are now a part of policy requirements. This is a 
critical step in protecting the well-being of indigenous peoples. 
The World Bank has created a new line of lending that doesn’t 
have to comply with environmental and human rights safeguards. If this policy becomes a larger trend it would be devastating for 
the human rights of indigenous peoples and other communities. We submitted written objections to this proposal and alerted our 
indigenous colleagues throughout the Americas and allies worldwide. 
Through our efforts, over 200 letters of concern were sent to Bank officials from indigenous leaders and activists. 
central and south america
seventeen
“all w orld Bank 
lending must 
respect the rights of 
indigenous peoples 
as recognized in 
the united nations 
declaration on the 
rights of indigenous 
peoples.”
—efren diego domingo,
maya Q’anjob’al people, 
guatemalaREDD+ initiatives pose significant risks for indigenous peoples’ 
livelihoods and rights. Kaieteur Falls, Potaro-Siparuni, Guyana (above); Wapichan village of Isherton, South Rupununi, Guyana (below).eighteenmaYa Q’eQChi’
land and resourCe rights
he Indian Law Resource Center is providing legal support to Maya 
Q’eqchi’ communities in Guatemala that have been fighting for their 
lands and rights to subsurface resources for more than 40 years. 
Because of rich deposits of nickel in the Maya Q’eqchi’ territory, the communities have faced efforts by government agencies and nickel 
mine security forces to evict them from their lands. The Maya Q’eqchi’ 
cultural and spiritual beliefs are deeply rooted to the land they have 
traditionally possessed, and the lands are critical for their physical, 
economic, and cultural survival. 
In February, 2011, the Constitutional Court of Guatemala, 
the country’s highest court, issued a precedent-setting decision by siding with our client, the Agua Caliente community, recognizing its 
property rights and questioning the legality of nickel mining permits and activities on its traditional lands. According to the Court, the 
government’s failure to register and title indigenous lands violates Agua 
Caliente’s land rights and rights to equality before the law, as well as the right of self-determination.
Unfortunately, the government did not comply with the 
Constitutional Court’s decision. Having exhausted Guatemala’s domestic remedies, the Agua Caliente community decided to file an 
international case. In August, 2011, the Center filed a petition with 
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights concerning the violation of the Agua Caliente community’s rights to property, self-
government, due process of law, and judicial protection by the state of 
Guatemala.
We remain concerned about the safety of the community members, 
community leaders, and local counsel. We are working with the Inter-American Commission to keep protective measures in place to safeguard our clients.
central and south america“all community 
member—elders, 
youth, women, men—
are fighting for our 
rights to our lands, 
and we will continue 
to do so.”
—rodrigo t ot,
agua Caliente president
Pueblo Labrynth  2009   ©Tony Abeyta   courtesy www.blueraingallery.comRobeR t t. CoulteR, exeCutive direCtor
robert, a member of the Citizen p otawatomi nation, 
is an attorney with more than 40 years of experience 
in the field of indian law. he founded the Center in 1978 with the goal of assisting indian and alaska native nations in protecting their lands, resources and human rights. he is an author of many articles in the field of indian law and human rights. he received his bachelor’s degree from w illiams College and a law 
degree from Columbia university. 
ARmstRong A. Wiggins,
direCtor of the w ashington, d .C. offiCe
armstrong is a miskito indian from nicaragua and has been with the Center since 1981. he was a political prisoner during the somoza and sandinista regimes because of his leadership in promoting human rights in nicaragua. he has more than 30 years experience working in the field of human rights. he directs the 
washington, d .C. office and much of the international 
human rights work of the Center, managing the mexico 
and Central and south america program.
bARbARA Anthony, direCtor of development
Barbara joined the staff in June, 2009. she was a 
graduate of the university of missouri and of the College of w illiam and mary planned giving institute. 
Barbara left the Center in september, 2011 to work with the Yellowstone park foundation. she passed 
away recently, and her death is a profound loss for us and all those who knew Barbara and her work.  PhilomenA KebeC, attorneY
philomena, a member of the Bad river Band of Chippewa indians, joined the Center in 2010. she received her J.d . from the university of minnesota 
in 2008. philomena resigned in september, 2011 to work for the Bad river Band where she fights against proposed mines that would pollute the tribe’s land and water.
lisA my AyA,
CommuniCations & development a ssistant
lisa joined the Center’s montana office in 2007. she 
works on communications and development projects and assists with office administration. she has more than 15 years of experience in the non-profit sector, 
primarily with resource conservation, education and 
arts organizations.
FRAn oWens,
direCtor of finanCe & administration
fran joined the Center in January, 2012 and is 
responsible for the Center's administrative and financial matters. she received her a.s. in Computer science and accounting from Keystone College, her 
B.s. in a ccounting from w ilkes university, and her 
m.B.a. in finance from the university of scranton.ethel billie bRAnCh, attorneY  
ethel joined the w ashington, d .C. office in 2011. prior 
to joining the Center, she served as a tribal finance associate in p ortland, oregon. ethel is a graduate of 
harvard, earning her a.B. in 2001 and her J.d . and a 
master of public p olicy degree in 2008. she was born 
and raised on the navajo nation, where she is an enrolled member.
KiRsten mA toy CARlson, attorneY
Kirsten, of Cherokee descent, joined the Center’s 
montana office in 2007. she received her law degree 
in 2003 and her ph.d . in political science in 2007, both 
from the university of michigan. Kirsten resigned in 
June, 2011 to join the faculty at w ayne s tate university 
law school. 
leonARdo CRiPPA, senior a ttorneY
leonardo, a Kolla indian from Jujuy, argentina, joined 
the Center’s w ashington, d .C. office in 2005. he 
received his law degree from universidad nacional de 
tucumán in argentina and a master’s of law degree 
from american university w ashington College of 
law in 2008. he previously worked at the Center for 
Justice and international law on human rights cases 
within the inter- american system.mARilyn RiChARdson, 
assistant to the direCtor  
marilyn, a member of the Chippewa t ribe, joined the 
Center’s montana office in 1996. she works closely with the development staff, serves as the assistant to the Board of directors and coordinates direct mail and special events.
bo sC ott,
direCtor of finanCe & administration
Bo served from october, 2010 to may, 2011. he received his B.s. in a ccounting from the university of great 
falls. he is currently pursuing a master’s in Business 
administration from the university of montana.
luCy RAin simPson, senior a ttorneY
lucy, a member of the navajo nation, joined the 
Center’s montana office in 2004. she received her J.d . 
from the university of Colorado in 1998. lucy resigned 
in april, 2011 to become the executive director of the national indigenous w omen's r esource Center.ginny undeRW ood, 
direCtor of CommuniCations
ginny, a member of the Comanche nation, joined the Center in 2009. she has more than 19 years of experience in the field of communications and most recently served as executive director of programs and strategic initiatives for the communication arm of t he 
united methodist Church. she received her B.a. in mass Communications from oklahoma City university.
loRenA V ACA, program a ssistant
lorena, originally from e cuador, joined the w ashington, 
d.C. staff in november, 2010. she has worked 
extensively with indigenous peoples in south america, gaining strong field experience working on climate issues in guyana. she holds a B.a. in government and international p olitics from george mason university.
JAnA l. W AlKeR, senior a ttorneY  
Jana, a citizen of the Cherokee nation (Cherokee/l oyal 
shawnee/delaware), joined the Center's montana office in april, 2011. prior to joining the Center, she 
spent more than 24 years in private practice working 
with tribes and tribal enties in the field of indian law. 
Jana received her bachelor's degree in nursing from the university of oklahoma and J.d . cum laude from 
the university of new mexico school of law.
.IndIan Law ResouRce centeR s taffstaff
hesteR m. dillon, direCtor of development
hester, a member of the Cherokee nation, joined the Center in april, 2012. she received bachelors’ degrees in native american s tudies and english from 
the university of montana, and a law degree from the university of arizona. since graduating from law school in 2005, she has worked for and with tribal governments and individuals on fund raising to strengthen native communities and as an attorney for the Keepseagle settlement.
KARlA geneRAl, attorneY
Karla (Kawenniiostha) joined the Center in october, 2010 and works in the w ashington, d .C. office. Karla 
is deer clan and a citizen of the mohawk nation from northern new York. she earned her J.d . and master’s 
degree in sociology from s yracuse university College 
of law and the maxwell school in may, 2010.
gRet Chen goRdon, poliCY anal Yst 
gretchen joined the Center's w ashington, d .C. office 
in 2012. she has extensive experience in policy advocacy, especially relating to international social and environmental justice issues. more recently her work has focused on energy, development and climate policy and its impacts on the human rights of indigenous peoples in the americas. she has a J.d . 
and a master’s in latin american s tudies from the 
university of California, Berkeley.
twentY -onetwentY -two twentY -threesusAn m. mA sten, Chairperson   
Yurok t ribe—hoopa, Ca 
RobeR t t. CoulteR, president 
Citizen p otawatomi nation—helena, mt 
dACho Alex AndeR
gwich’in t ribe—f ort Yukon, aK  miChelle Allenalbany, Ca 
mAR tin A VeRy
navajo nation—Coyote Canyon, nm   melAnie benJAminmille lacs Band of ojibwe—onamia, mn     noRmA bixby, treasurernorthern Cheyenne—lame deer, mt   CARmelA CuRuP ChAJonmaya Kaqchikel—san Juan sacatepéquez, guatemala  
gAiA shKibos
lac Courte oreilles Chippewa—hayward, wi 
teRRi henR y, seCretar Y
eastern Band of Cherokee indians—Cherokee, nC 
dARWin hilltonawanda seneca nation—Basom, nYBoardniColle Allen
KAyleigh bRo Wn
JuAnit A CAbReRA -loPez
JohAnnA FonseCA
gRet Chen goRdon
Ashley hoeFlingdARRen modzeleW sKi, John d .B. lewis fellow
mARiel muRRA y
lindsey tRAinoR, terrenCe a. sidleY fellowlAuRen WinKleR
interns“Your donation to the indian 
law r esource Center is not 
simply a donation—it’s your role in helping the Center realize it’s mission to provide legal assistance to indigenous peoples of the americas.”
—susan m. masten, Chairperson
Trio in Song  2010   ©Tony Abeyta   courtesy www.blueraingallery.com
The Center is committed to fostering interest in the fields of Indian 
law and human rights through our internship program.
Susan MastentwentY -four twentY -fiveFound Ations
pauline allen endowment
the atlantic philanthropies
Baker Brook f oundation
the Bay & p aul f oundations
fanwood f oundation / w est
ford f oundation
goerlich f amily f oundation
lannan f oundation
the libra f oundation
mitsubishi Corporation f oundation for 
the americas
montana Community f oundation
Charles s tewart mott f oundation 
onef amily f oundation
overbrook f oundation
moving mountains fund of the p eace 
development fund
stillwaters fund of t ides f oundation 
(penny Cabot)
swift f oundation
winky f oundation
u.s. human rights fund
indiAn nA tions
ak-Chin indian Community
Barona Band of mission indiansCow Creek Band of the umpqua t ribe of indians
gwichyaa Zhee gwich'in t ribal government
lenape indian t ribe of delaware in 
memory of alonzo ‘t wo feathers’ Coker
sherwood v alley rancheria
sisseton- wahpeton oyate
swinomish indian t ribal Community
tonawanda seneca nation
Yavapai-prescott indian t ribeoRgAnizA tions
Combined f ederal Campaign 
human & Civil rights organizations of america
Justgive.orgmaryland Charity Campaignmontana s tate employees Combined 
giving Campaign
national indian g aming association
network for goodnew York City t ransit a uthority
partners f or a Better w orld
pg&e Corporationunited airlinesunited w ay of Central new York
united w ay of new York City
united w ay of the national Capital area
wells f argo Community support 
Campaign
mAJoR donoRsanonymous (5)laura l. a va & f oimai r. t esimale
hans & Jutta Bertram-nothnagelnorma Bixbymarlyne gentry in memory of mary gentry w auneka
laurie goldsteinmichael hirschhorn & Jimena martineznion mce voy
donal & diana mullineauxralph naderandrea & Christina r eams
 in honor of the rapa nui people
nicholas & shelley r obinson
Charles l. r ohrbaugh
 in memory of Catherine h. Yates
aliza i. shapiroJean sidley in memory of t erry sidley
 indiVidu Als
anonymous (28)Janis alcorn dacho alexandermichelle, Clayton & nicolle allenChristopher amato & diana hernandezBob andersonalfred a. & e dwina Beaver 
randi Beckervertis Clinton Belcher
John Bell & Jomarie meademelanie Benjaminhenry Bilenchistan & glenda Bradshaw
Bob & debbie Brownraymond & Joyce Brownleslie Brownrigg
Clifton J. Buck-Kauffman in honor of rapa nui people
dan & Jane Buckssidney Burgessmitchell l. Bush, Jr.william Calloway
lois m. Chalmers & w alter w . hill, Jr. 
david Chambers & sigrid gentile-ChambersJulius Chambersroger Clark & amelia Boss
murray Cohen & myrna moran david CollinsCatherine Coulter & r.J. BootzinJohn Crawford & Cindy Coulter martha h. Cremerscott Crichtonshellee davislucy dayton & mark o'Keefegary deason in memory of v ine deloria, Jr.
Kenneth deerBarbara deloria in memory of v ine deloria, Jr.
paul destler 
Jewel & v irendra dhuru 
gary divis & Catherine l ott divis
richard donahue Karen denham downen in memory of 
Katheryn miley & frederic Charles denham
gladwyn d’souzawendy eaton in memory of Black Cloud
marcia eidelmary f elegy in honor of rapa nui people
Carol f erguson in honor of santiago 
ventura morales
rev. arturo max f ernandez & irene f ernandez
Joel freedman, Cinnamon productions, 
inc. in memory of Bruce Kessler
paul frye
gaiashkibos in memory of w asaygishig
 (mr. l ouis t . Barber)
gary g arriott & v alerie lamont
duff & marion gerrishleila goldes in memory of Joseph goldes
mary Clare gubbins in memory of 
shelton davis
hurst & ann hannumlouis r. hellwig
marina henriquez in honor of nahuat pipilterri henry
darwin & Janet hillKrys holmes & the Bad girls Book Club 
and philanthropic society
Jane-sue huff in memory & honor of 
grandmother ollie napyne
Barbara hunterscott itoadam Jacobs in honor of rapa nui people
inge & marge Jacobsontony Jewett & Joan miles 
Connie & gregory JohnsonJames Johnsonroderic Johnson & Carol w illiams
david Kairys & antje mattheusstan & holly Kaleczyc in memory of ray p eck
arlene Kato in honor of rapa nui peopleChristine Kaufmann & p at Kemp
philomena matus KebecKim Kennedy w hite
pat Kohler, sr.
ira Kurzban in honor of t im Coulter
lois Kuter 
Celinda lakeeric largeJodi lasseter in honor of Chief Kokoipolly laurelchild-hertigrichard m. l eventhal
gordon l evin
ronald & Judith libertus
Kalen lipelucy lippardrobert l ow, Jr. & linda l ow in honor of 
tim Coulter
dick ludingtonmelody Kapilaloah macKenzieCatharine macKinnon in honor of t im Coulter
Beverly magleyKen margolishoeroa r obert marumaru
 in honor of rapa nui people
susan mastenCarole mcallisteredwin r. mcCullough
linda Jansen mcw illiams in memory of 
dorothy J. Burke
timothy & elizabeth moore
Colin h. w . morgan in support of the 
hitorangi Clan
mark munger & Katherine Bourneshayda e dwards naficy
Bob nichol & phyllis Bock in memory of 
John Bock
nancy & alan nicholsonaliza organick in memory of ida g ail organick
rebecca s. oyer meyers in memory of 
John oyer
david & Katheryn p adilla 
melissane p arm schrems
eva & John p etosky
Christopher p ezzola
Bernard p omerance
michael & Christine p ope
tagi Qolouvaki
Quintana g alleries
alan rabinowitzdeborah randCatherine Betty ransomvictor & Joan r eiman in memory of 
Charles r eiman
paul richards
mark rifkinBarnaby rintzroger & olive r obison
Kirk r osenbaum
Jon r oush & Joyce Chinn
david rubinsteinarnold saiki & otto in honor of rapa nui peoplegayle sandholm
galit sarfaty & a dam saunders
deborah schaafgeraldine schaafmichael schechtman & holly Banderlisa schmidtJames w . schmitt
elisabeth schneebergermartha scottmark sethreellen shatterJennifer sidley in memory of t erry sidley
leonard & elaine simon
tim speyer
Bob & anne s taffanson
nancy s tearns
doug a. s ternberg
milton t akei
Jane p oitras t chilekwiyusse
thomas t rauger in honor of t im Coulter
stephen t rimble
ginny & John underwoodangelos & elizabeth v amvakas
Jana w alker in memory of
 eddy l evi ‘t ehi’ secondine
rosemary w altzer in honor of
 rapa nui peopledavid w eissbrodt & p atricia schaffer
tisa w enger
susan w hite
Bonnie & Barry w illdorf
Clifton & doris w oest in memory & honor 
of louis Charlo, iwo Jima hero
margaret w oo
shannon w ork
forrest w ade Young in memory of huke 
atan hua’ai & in honor of rapa nui people
hugh & Karen Zackheimlisa Zellinger
ContriButors
2011 contributorsUntitled  2009   ©Tony Abeyta   courtesy www.blueraingallery.comtwentY -sixstatements of finanCial position 
for the year ended December 31, 2011
  
 assets
 2011 2010
CuRRent A ssets
Cash and cash equivalents  $790,178  $730,880
Certificates of deposit 49,995  149,995
Current grants receivable (net) 850,000 299,311
other receivables 2,485 1,425
prepaid expenses 6,549 15,907
    total current assets       1,699,207 1,197,518
long- teRm gRAnts reCeivaBle (net) 173,182 -
PRoPeR ty And eQuiPment— at C ost 
net depreciable assets 30,309 37,388
otheR A ssets
deposits 1,325 1,325 
gar Creek seminole land purchase 420,269 420,269
investments, restricted 34,626 33,180
restricted cash       20,543 22,762
    total other assets       476,763  477,536
    tot Al A ssets $2,379,461 $1,712,442
 liaBilities and net assets
CuRRent liAbilities
accounts payable $32,991 $18,787
accrued salaries and vacation payable 27,740  32,619
payroll taxes payable 4,691 13,566
other accrued expenses 248  -
    total current liabilities 65,670 64,972
net A ssets
unrestricted 682,262 707,116
temporarily restricted 1,580,568 889,633
permanently restricted 50,961 50,721
    tot Al net A ssets 2,313,791 1,647,470
    tot Al liAbilities And net A ssets $2,379,461 $1,712,442
2011 financialsstatement of a Ctivities for the year ended December 31, 2011  
     
  temporaril Y permanentl Y
 unrestriCted restriCted restriCted totAl 2011        
suPPoR t And ReVenue        
Contributions $76,022 $9,045 $240 $85,307  
grants 393,500   1,716,678   -   2,110,178  
Bequests and trusts 6,382   -   -  6,382  
Conract services 50   -   -   50 
interest 2,606   1,022   -   3,628 
other 2,767   -   -   2,767  
realized and unrealized gains on investments  -  693   -  693 
released from restrictions 1,036,503   (1,036,503)  -   - 
    total support and revenue  1,517,830  690,935   240  2,209,005            
exPenses      
program services  935,201   -   -   935,201   
management and general  412,596   -   -   412,596  
fund raising 194,887   -   -   194,887 
    total expenses 1,542,684   -   -   1,542,684     
    increase (decrease) in net assets (24,854)  690,935   240   666,321     
      
net A ssets A t beginning oF yeAR 707,116   889,633   50,721   1,647,470  
net A ssets A t end oF yeAR  $682,262   $1,580,568   $50,961   $2,313,791     
        
     
statement of a Ctivities for the year ended December 31, 2010
     
  temporaril Y permanentl Y
 unrestriCted restriCted restriCted totAl 2010            
suPPoR t And ReVenue        
Contributions $78,357   $5,026   $2,482   $85,865  
grants  783,432  532,285   -   1,315,717
Bequests and trusts 6,690   -   -  6,690
Contract services  -   13,500   -   13,500  
interest 4,094  1,679   -   5,773  
other 30,404   -   -   30,404 
realized and unrealized gains on investments  -   1,483   -   1,483  
released from restrictions 875,358   (875,358)  -   -
    total support and revenue  1,778,335   (321,385)  2,482   1,459,432            
exPenses        
program services  960,544   -   -   960,544  
management and general   225,747   -   -   225,747
fund raising  239,216   -   -   239,216 
    total expenses  1,425,507   -   -   1,425,507  
    increase in net assets 352,828   (321,385)  2,482   33,925      
      
net A ssets A t beginning oF yeAR 354,288   1,211,018  48,239   1,613,545  
net A ssets A t end oF yeAR  $707,116   $889,633   $50,721   $1,647,470    
     twentY -sevenThe Climb  2011   ©Tony Abeyta   courtesy www.blueraingallery.comFeatured artisttonY aBeYta
“i consider myself a 
regionalist, accepting 
that much of what i  
do is tied to a native 
culture and place. i find 
that art is constantly 
moving, reinventing, 
and affected by the 
changes in our culture. 
it’s great to feel part of 
that in some way.”
—tony abeyta
twentY -eight twentY -nine
Tony Abeyta was raised in Gallup, New Mexico, of Navajo and Anglo
descent. He creates a powerful range of contemporary paintings.
He explores different mediums such as oil and sand paintings, and
abstract mixed media pieces incorporating encaustic wax, copper, andprintmaking. His individual style incorporates bold colors, rich textures,
and representations of Navajo deities.
“I was raised in a small town surrounded by the Navajo and Zuni
reservations, with Acoma and Laguna in my backyard. Route 66 and the railroad both ran through town. There was always a sense that there
were other places to be, and I left Gallup at 16 to study art in SantaFe, New Mexico, at The Institute of American Indian Art.
School was important, as was a license to travel to many great
places. A few of the places Tony’s travels have taken him are: TheMaryland Institute of Art in Baltimore; Lacoste School of Art in 
southern France; SACI in Florence, Italy; Chicago Art Institute; 
Haystack School in Bangor, Maine; and NYU in New York City. Currently, Tony works and keeps a studio in both Santa Fe and 
Chicago, where he lives with his son Gabriel.
“Living in an urban place adds an element of progressive cultural
experience. In a city there is the whole discourse of cultures, thinking,music, and international art. I consider myself a regionalist, accepting
that much of what I do is tied to a Native culture and place. I find thatart is constantly moving, reinventing, and affected by the changes in our
culture. It’s great to feel part of that in some way.”
Tony works in both oil paintings and large scale drawings, and is
creating a new series of large three-dimensional sculptures as well.
“I try to diversify as an artist. There are certainly many directionsI take as a painter. I am concurrently working on large new modernist
landscapes, abstract biomechanical charcoal and ink wash drawings, 
colorful deity paintings with abrupt textures and paint, as well as sculpture.”
Untitled  2009   ©Tony Abeyta   courtesy www.blueraingallery.commain offiCe
602 n. e wing s treet
helena, mt 59601
406.449.2006mt@indianlaw.orgwashington, dC offiCe
601 e s treet, s.e.
washington, dC 20003
202.547.2800dcoffice @indianlaw.org
www.indianlaw.org
find us on
Justice for Indigenous PeoplesCENTRO DE RECURSOS JURÍDICOS PARA LOS PUEBL OS IN DÍGENA S