Annual Report 2009
Justice for Indigenous PeoplesWho we are
Our purposes  and goalsOur mission  statement 
The Indian Law Resource Center 
provides legal assistance to 
indigenous peoples of the Americas to combat racism and oppression, to protect their lands and environ-ment, to protect their cultures and ways of life, to achieve sustainable 
economic development and genuine 
self-government, and to realize their other human rights.
The Center provides legal assis -
tance to Indian nations and other 
indigenous peoples in the United States and throughout the Americas. All of our work is done at no cost to our clients.
Indian nations and tribes and other 
indigenous communities throughout the world are afflicted by poverty, poor health and discrimination. Many Native communities are sub -
jected to grave human rights abuses. Indian land and natural resources are often expropriated or degraded. When indigenous peoples are depri -
ved of their ways of life and their ties to the earth, they suffer. Many have disappeared completely. Profoundly aware that when any culture ceases to exist, the whole world is diminished irrevocably, the Indian Law Resource Center’s principal goal is the preser -
vation and well-being of Indian and other Native nations and tribes.The Center has an international Board of Directors, and it is a Non-Governmental Organization in consultative status with the United Nations Economic and Social Co -
uncil. The Indian Law Resource Center is a tax-exempt organization under section 501(c)(3) of the Inter -
nal Revenue Code. We are funded entirely by grants and contributions 
from Indian nations, foundations 
and individuals. The Center accepts no government support.We are an American Indian legal organization founded 
in 1978. We are lawyers and human rights experts who are working to protect the legal rights, cultures and environments of Indian nations and other indigenous peoples of the Americas. 
The Indian Law Resource Center seeks to overcome the grave pro-blems that threaten Native peoples by advancing the rule of law, by establishing national and interna-tional legal standards that preserve their human rights and dignity, and by challenging the governments of the world to accord justice and equality before the law to all indi-genous peoples of the Americas.
Blackfeet Holy Couple   © Terrance GuardipeeCover: Leader of the Crazy Dog Society   © Terrance Guardipee3We are excited to be sending you 
this report and to be engaged 
in so many crucial legal battles for the futures of Indian and Alaska Native nations. The economic recession made 2009 a very hard year for us, as it was for so many other people and organizations. Indian and Alaska Native communities have been hard hit. We were forced to cut back our 
legal assistance, reduce our staff 
and reduce our pay. But we have remained healthy, thanks to all of the Indian nations, foundations and individuals who have contributed, helping us to remain active and fi -
nancially sound in a tough economic environment.
We are especially grateful to The 
Ford Foundation for a special grant that enabled us to strengthen our work. Yet, we still face tremendous challenges to keep up the legal work that Native nations need so much. 
The stock market woes forced many 
foundations to reduce grant-making. This means we must rely increas -
ingly on individuals to join with us and support us in this work. We thank those who already have helped with contributions and hope others are able to aid us in our mission.It never has been more urgent for us to carry on the legal battles to stop violence against Native women and to change unfair laws that disad -
vantage Native peoples and deprive them of their constitutional rights and their treaty rights. We are deter -
mined to continue providing the legal representation Native nations need to protect their land rights and their 
very existence as sovereign Indian 
and Alaska Native nations.
Our fights go beyond North 
America. We also must provide legal advice and assistance in Central and South America, where Indian peo -
ples battle to save their homes and the ecosystems where they live. In Guatemala, for example, we will not relent in our legal work for the Maya Q’eqchi’ people, who are fighting to protect their land and resources and the environment from a planned nickel mine. 
It’s not simply the environment that 
is being threatened. Lives are threat -
ened as well. In Guatemala and in other countries, Indian leaders are being killed for simply asserting their rights. Indian leaders report that entire communities are being wiped out in Colombia. We can help them defend themselves. 
But we need your help.
We already receive much-needed support from many 
wonderful people and organiza -
tions. For example, some aid us with donated legal work and other assistance. Indian nations such as the Onondaga Nation, the Tonawanda Seneca Nation and others have been very generous with financial sup -
port. The Ford Foundation, Lannan 
Foundation, Oak Foundation, Libra 
Foundation, and the Charles Stewart Mott Foundation have also provided major support and have been tre -
mendous partners in our work. All of our financial contributors are listed in this report. We are endlessly grateful to all, because that generos -
ity makes our work possible. 
Robert T. Coulter‘‘It never has been 
more urgent for us 
to carry on the legal 
battles to stop 
violence against 
Native women  
and to change 
unfair laws  that 
disadvantage 
Native peoples and 
deprive them of their 
constitutional rights 
and treaty rights. ’’
Robert T. Coulter, Executive Director  Message from the President
Our purposes  and goals‘‘We have made 
tremendous 
progress . We 
need to keep the 
momentum going. ’’ 
Rex Lee Jim, Navajo Nation  designed to provide climate change 
solutions, but these projects could lead to violations of indigenous peoples’ land and natural-resources rights. The UN and American Dec -
larations could be used to address these threats and establish a frame -
work to protect indigenous rights from potential violations. 
In partnership with the Navajo Na -
tion, the Six Nations Confederacy 
and others, we are campaigning to win the United States’ support for the UN Declaration and the negotia -
tion of the American Declaration.Winning Human Rights 
For more than 30 years, we have worked to build a legal frame -
work to help Indian and Alaska Native peoples win recognition of their human rights, including: 
Right to exist  as distinct 
peoples and cultures; 
Right to be free  from 
discrimination and forced 
assimilation;
Right of self-determination ;
and other essential rights. 
Much of our work has focused 
on the creation of international 
human rights standards for indig -
enous peoples through the United Nations and the Organization of American States. In the United Na -
tions, we spent more than 30 years working for the adoption of the UN 
Declaration on the Rights of Indige -
nous Peoples, which was adopted by 
the UN General Assembly in 2007. The UN Declaration recognizes indigenous peoples as part of the world community and recognizes 
indigenous peoples’ rights of self-de -
termination and rights to their land, 
resources, cultures and languages and many other human rights. 
We are working toward a strong American Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples by the Orga -
nization of American States. The American Declaration would af -
firm the right of self-determination, rights to education, health, self-gov -
ernment, culture, lands, territories and natural resources, and it would include provisions that address the particular situation of indigenous peoples in the Americas.
This work is more important than 
ever as global initiatives are threaten -
ing indigenous rights on a massive scale. The World Bank and United Nations have funded several projects 
4Human RightsThe American Declaration on the Rights
of Indigenous Peoples
Indigenous leaders from 29 
countries met in Washington, D.C., 
in December 2009, seeking consensus on a proposed legal framework to protect economic, cultural and political rights of indigenous peoples. 
This was the 12th meeting of the 
Working Group hosted by the Organization of American States (OAS) to negotiate an American Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples that can be 
supported by OAS-member 
countries and indigenous peoples. The Working Group is made up of all OAS-member countries and indigenous representatives from throughout the Americas. 
Center staff participated in the 
sessions. Staff members were on hand to provide legal advice to the Indigenous Peoples Caucus and the Working Group. Consensus was reached on four of the articles and portions of two more articles of the draft Declaration. Participants 
agreed to continue the dialogue. Human Rights Training
The Center provides training 
and legal information in order 
to expand the number of Indian leaders and community members who participate in international human rights procedures. We help indigenous leaders to promote and defend their human rights, to use human rights law to change domestic law and to use their political power 
to change the United States’ policies 
concerning international human rights law.
During the OAS negotiation session, the Center coordinated 
meetings between the Navajo Nation, the Six Nations Confederacy, the National Congress of American Indians, the Native American Rights Fund and the United States State Department. The meetings were to encourage the State Department to take an active role in the negotiations. In 2009, we conducted three major training sessions and several smaller sessions to prepare Indian leaders 
to use human rights law. We also 
encouraged Indian leaders to participate in the United Nations and the Organization of American States human rights processes to defend their lands and other rights. We have had particular success working with and training Indian leaders from South and Central America. Several of those Indian leaders went on to testify at hearings before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and 
also participated in meetings with 
United States government officials to discuss how United States policies affect indigenous peoples in Central and South America.
5
Armstrong Wiggins (far left) at the Inter-American Commission
© Juan Manuel Herrera
Raúl Ilaquiche, Quechua lawyer, Ecuador  © Juan Manuel Herrera
Negotiating the American Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
© Juan Manuel HerreraSafe Women, Strong Nations
Native women—more than any 
other population in the United 
States—are being denied one of the most basic human rights: the right to be safe from violence. 
Native women are more than twice 
as likely as other women to be vic -
tims of sexual violence. One in three will be raped in her lifetime; more than three in five will be victims of violent assaults. 
The Center is training and providing 
legal assistance to tribes and Native 
women’s advocates to help bring an end to the epidemic of violence against women. Our work is aimed at eliminating the legal barriers that obstruct the reporting, investigation and prosecution of these crimes. We have already provided training on the basics of criminal jurisdiction in Indian country to domestic vio -
lence advocates from the Blackfeet Nation, the Fort Belknap Indian Community and a shelter in Great Falls, Montana.  
The Center considers this an inter -
national human rights crisis and 
has, with that in mind, worked hard to raise awareness of this problem on that level. During the past year, 
we conducted trainings and con -
sultations with Native women’s 
organizations and tribal government officials and employees, including the National Congress of American Indians Task Force on Violence Against Women, Clan Star and the Montana Native Women’s Coalition. We have launched a campaign to educate the Special Rapporteur on the Rights of Women at the Organization of American States on the epidemic of violence against Native women in the United States.
We have created a new website, indianlaw.org/en/safewomen, 
as a resource for information on how to use international human rights advocacy to prevent violence against Native women. ‘‘We are honored 
to advocate for 
the safety of 
Native women  
in the international arena. These efforts 
enhance safety  
and promote 
tribal sovereignty  
at the local level.’’
Terri Henry
Principal Director, Clan Star, Inc.Tribal Councilwoman, Eastern Band of Cherokee
6
Keeper of the Medicine Flowers   © Terrance Guardipee
Keeper of the Medicine Flowers   © Terrance Guardipee
‘‘The interest we 
have at heart is the 
people at home .
We want to
re-empower  
them rather than 
imprison them.’’
Harrison Tsosie, Navajo NationLand Rights
Native Land Law
Today federal law concerning In -
dian and Alaska Native land  —
and concerning Native nations gen -
erally—is terribly unjust and out of 
keeping with the Constitution and basic American values. Our Na -
tive Land Law project is focused on creating a fair and principled frame -
work of law concerning the rights of Native Americans to their lands and 
resources—a framework of law con -
sistent with the United States Con -
stitution and Indian treaties, with 
American concepts of fairness and with modern principles of interna -
tional human-rights law. Our long-term goal is to reform—through political, judicial and administrative processes—the present discrimina -
tory laws affecting Native lands and resources in the United States.We have drafted 17 General Legal Principles and support -
ing Commentaries, stating what we believe federal law really is or what it ought to be. These General Principles include principles on self-determination, the doctrine of discovery, aboriginal title, the power of the federal government to take Native lands, the plenary power 
doctrine and the taxation of tribally 
held lands. These draft principles form a consistent framework of legal rules that would overcome the truly unfair and discriminatory rules that now are applied to Native nations. We wrote two versions of these Principles and Commentaries—a General Edition and a Lawyers Edition for those interested in de -
tailed analysis of the law. Over the past two years, with the collaboration and support of the Indian Land Tenure Foundation, we have drawn together a distin-guished group of more than 30 le-gal experts, Indian law scholars, and Indian leaders to join in cre-ating this new framework of law. In July 2009, Indian government leaders from Isleta Pueblo, the 
Confederated Salish and Kootenai 
Tribes, the Timbisha Shoshone Tribe, the San Manuel Band, the Navajo Nation, the Onondaga Nation, the Tonawanda Seneca Nation and the Oneida Nation of Wisconsin attended a meeting to re-view the Draft General Principles. Regional discussions are taking place to get comments, criticism and suggestions from leaders of Indian and Alaska Nation governments.
We hope that debate and dis -
cussion will in time lead to 
consensus among Native leaders about the changes they wish to seek in federal law.
89Timbisha Shoshone Tribe
A lawsuit we expect to file in 2010 
could overturn the most dis -
criminatory and unconstitutional legal doctrine affecting Indian and Alaska Native tribes. 
We are working with the Timbisha 
Shoshone Tribal Council to file a fed -
eral lawsuit to challenge Congress’ power to take Indian property and funds without compensation. 
We believe this suit—which presents 
a historic legal challenge unlike any 
other case in federal Indian law—will be precedent-setting.  
The suit will ask the federal court 
to invalidate an act of Congress that confiscates a fund belonging to the Tribe and to other Western Sho -shone tribes. The case arises out of the astonishing injustices the federal government has meted out to the Western Shoshone tribes, including the Timbisha, in order to divest them of rights to their lands in Nevada and California. These tribes, nine of them, live on tiny remnants of their lands, while the federal government controls nearly all their homelands. 
Gold is mined extensively through -
out much of the area.  
For more than a century, Congress 
has done practically whatever it wished with Indian property and Indian monies held by the federal government. Such congressional acts have almost never been challenged, never successfully. A successful lawsuit could mean that Congress could not in the 
future freely take or control Indian property and funds. Tribes could have much greater ability to man -
age their affairs, if they could stop unjustified government control and confiscation of their property. We believe we can win such a case and rid federal law of a very harmful 
and unjustifiable legal doctrine that 
has deprived tribes of their rights for generations.‘‘We love the 
desert, we love our 
mountains, we love 
everything that 
is here . That is the 
reason we stay. ’’
Grace Goad, Timbisha Shoshone Tribal Elder
Timbisha Shoshone homelands Grace Goad
10Mohawk and Onondaga Land Rights
Some of our most important le -
gal work is to help Indian and 
Alaska Native nations protect—and 
sometimes regain—their homelands. 
Our work on behalf of the Mohawk 
and Onondaga Nations in their land-right cases has made some progress as we await decisions from the judg -
es in each case. These two nations of the Haudenosaunee or Six Nations Confederacy have been fighting for many generations to recover a part of 
their homelands in New York state 
that was taken from them, in viola -
tion of federal law. We are represent -
ing them in separate federal suits. Our greatest challenge in these cases is to assure that the federal courts ac -
cord these Indian nations true equal -
ity before the law.In both cases, our briefs have all been filed, and we are awaiting decisions from the federal District Court in New York. We expect appeals will follow in both cases regardless of the decisions, and those appeals could take from one to three years. 
Nevertheless, the Onondaga lawsuit 
has provided a strong basis for the Nation leaders to participate in the planning for clean-up of Onondaga Lake and Onondaga Creek. In 2009, 
a federal judge gave the go-ahead for 
a new plan to use green technology to protect the creek and lake from sew -
age and other pollution. The plan calls for reducing sewage overflows by using trees, vegetated roofs, rain gardens and permeable pavement. This has been a great success and is a first concrete achievement in the land-rights effort. It shows how Indian nations can use their politi -
cal power and their legal rights to achieve important goals that benefit everyone in the region and protect the Earth itself. 
We continue to press the federal gov -
ernment to file a supporting lawsuit 
in the Onondaga case, but have yet to receive a final decision. 
The Mohawk Nation continues to collaborate with the other Mo -
hawk governments in the hope that an agreed-upon resolution of the Mohawk claims can be achieved.‘‘The Onondaga 
Nation brings this 
action on behalf 
of its people in the hope that it may 
hasten the process 
of reconciliation and bring 
lasting 
justice , peace , 
and respect  
among all who 
inhabit this area. ’’
Onondaga Land Rights Complaint
Paragraph 1, Docket # 505-cv-314
The Blackfoot Papers   © Terrance Guardipee11The Blackfoot Papers   © Terrance Guardipee
‘‘The river is 
alive  and it helps 
me to survive. I 
drink the water, 
and everything that is 
connected 
to the land  is 
connected to 
the water .’’ 
Annie Lou Williams, elder from Upper Kalskag in the 
Kuskokwim region of AlaskaEnvironmental Protection
Protecting Alaska’s Rivers
The Center has a long history 
of environmental advocacy in 
Alaska. Over the past year, we have focused much of our work on the Kuskokwim region. We have provided free legal assistance to the newly developed Kuskokwim River Watershed Council. The primary goal of our work on behalf of the Council is to enable the 29 Alaska 
Native villages of the Kuskokwim 
River watershed to protect the envi -
ronmental integrity of the river and to maintain their traditional, subsis -
tence fishing and hunting lifestyle. 
The Kuskokwim is an enormous 
river drainage, roughly the size of the state of Washington. It is popu -
lated mostly by Native people who fish, hunt and gather to supply most of their food. Threats to the river also jeopardize the physical and cultural survival of these Native peoples.  We have helped the Kuskokwim River Watershed Council to draft organizational documents needed to achieve non-profit status. With the legal structure of the Council now in place, we will help expand the legal and technical capacity of the tribal governments to regulate and man -
age their traditional territories and resources. This year, we organized 
meetings with residents of the wa -
tershed to begin identifying shared 
concerns regarding their relation -
ships with the river and surrounding lands. 
We are developing a legal and com -
munications strategy as a follow-up 
step to the meetings. We are working with the Council staff and a broad coalition of environmental organi -
zations in Alaska to determine the best methods to get this information across. This work is crucial in build -
ing the capacity of the tribal govern -
ments of the Kuskokwim to better participate in the regulation of their traditional territories and resources in the face of future threats.
In addition to the Kuskokwim region, the Center has assisted the 
Yukon River Inter-Tribal Watershed Council, now consisting of more than 66 Alaska Native villages and First Nations. For the past decade, and continuing today, the Center 
has worked with the Yukon River 
Inter-Tribal Watershed Council as it formulates plans and strategies to ad -
dress clean-up and protection issues throughout the Yukon watershed.
Protecting the Fort Belknap Indian Reservation
12Winter on Alaska’s Kuskokwim River Annie Lou WilliamsProtecting the Fort Belknap Indian Reservation
For more than 15 years, the Center 
has provided legal representation 
to the Assiniboine and Gros Ventre Tribes of the Fort Belknap Indian Reservation in their fight for envi -
ronmental justice and clean-up of the contamination caused by the Zortman-Landusky gold mines.
The reclamation of the mines is ongo -
ing, and we are seeing continued im -
provement in the water quality in King 
Creek, Alder Gulch and Swift Gulch. 
Even so, the pollution often continues 
to exceed state water-quality standards, particularly for cyanide. A T echnical Working Group is monitoring the progress, and we continue to provide the Working Group with the legal advice needed to further its work. We are co -
ordinating with the State of Montana to continue using the T echnical Working Group for an additional two years, in the hope that water-quality standards will come into compliance. 
Earlier this year the Center conducted 
a general environmental-training ses -
sion for Tribal Council members and employees to help them gain a better understanding of the laws and legal tools they can draw on to protect their 
environment and their citizens. We 
also will provide additional training on environmental regulations regarding oil and gas development that is under way on and near the Fort Belknap Indian Reservation. If unchecked, natural resource devel -
opment on the Fort Belknap Indian 
Reservation could undo decades of work the Assiniboine and Gros Ventre Tribes have invested in cleaning up lands and waters already damaged by mining. Still recovering from the environmental contamination of the Zortman-Landusky mines, the tribes are determined not to become victims 
of environmental assaults in the future. 
We are committed to working with the tribes not only to help clean up past contamination, but also to ensure their abilities to protect their lands from future contamination.Handbook for Conservationists 
The Indian Law Resource Center is writing a one-of-a-kind hand -
book that will help build collaboration between conservationists and Indian and Alaska Native nations. The goal of the Conservationists’ Handbook  is 
to facilitate better alliances in order to improve the effectiveness of con -
servation efforts. Protection of the environment is enormously impor -
tant among Native communities. Yet collaboration between Native peoples and conservation organizations often is impeded, because professional conservationists often lack informa -
tion about Native nations and their resources. Today there is no ready resource to provide conservationists with practical information about Indian and Alaska Native peoples, their lands, histories, cultures and legal rights. Our Conservationists’ 
Handbook  will expand understand -
ing of Indian and Alaska Native tribes and will help foster positive relationships between conservation -
ists and Native communities. The Handbook  will be distributed widely 
among universities and conservation programs. We expect this resource to be a building block for powerful alliances that will protect the rights of Native peoples, while also protect -
ing threatened lands and ecosystems 
throughout the United States. 
‘‘Conservation 
thinkers and actors 
simply cannot 
afford ignorance 
where Native 
land , water , and 
resource issues  
are concerned.’’
Prof. Don Snow, Whitman College
13Protecting Sacred Sites  
‘‘The Quechan are 
a relentless people.  
We will not go 
away , and we 
will not lose this 
battle  to protect 
the Quechan Indian 
Pass area.’’
Mike Jackson, Sr., Quechan Nation PresidentQuechan
Indian peoples constantly are en -
gaged in a battle to maintain and 
protect traditional and cultural be -
liefs. They must have access to sacred 
sites and be allowed to practice their spiritual beliefs in peace. These are not merely cultural and spiritual concerns, but human rights that are identified and protected by interna -
tional law. The Indian Law Resource 
Center helps Indian peoples to pro -
tect these rights and these sacred sites.
In 2009, the counsel we provided 
to the Quechan Tribe and its legal team to help protect their sacred sites from gold mining claims yielded positive results. That June, the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) Tribunal released its long-awaited decision in the Glamis Gold dispute against the United States. The international tribunal recognized state and local govern -
ment obligations to respect indig -
enous cultural rights. We hope this 
result will pave the way for increased 
participation by other indigenous peoples in international economic law disputes. We will continue to assist the Quechan Nation as needed.
14We will continue efforts to pro -
vide communication training 
and assistance to Indian nations on protecting sacred sites. For example, we have been a part of the campaign to protect the sanctity of Bear Butte—a site near Sturgis, South Dakota that is held sacred by numerous tribes—from potential destruction that could be caused by the granting of hard 
liquor licenses and the development 
of huge outdoor amphitheaters. We will continue to support this effort as requested by Indian nations. 
Mountain Chief   © Terrance GuardipeeQuechan
15Mountain Chief   © Terrance GuardipeeMaya Q’eqchi’ Land and Resource RightsCentral and South America
The Maya Q’eqchi’ communities 
in Guatemala have been fighting 
for their lands and rights to subsur -
face resources for more than 40 years, and the Indian Law Resource Center is supporting their efforts.
Plans to reopen and expand a nickel-
mining operation on traditional Maya lands have already forced some Q’eqchi’ from their homes and threaten to cause permanent dam -
age to their environment. We are 
preparing to bring a major case to 
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights to protect the rights of the Maya Q’eqchi’ and shut down the nickel mine. Working with our local partner, Defensoría Q’eqchi’, we have completed a number of studies and legal analyses to prepare the case, and we have taken steps to exhaust domestic legal remedies. We have asked a Civil Court of Appeals in Guatemala for a remedy, but no decision has been made. We expect to file a case in the Inter-American Commission this year. 
The creation of “protected ar -
eas” poses a second threat to 
the Maya Q’eqchi’s rights of self-determination and rights to their lands and natural resources. These protected areas—some proposed and some already established—transfer the control and management of lands from the Q’eqchi’ to private/public institutions. We presented this information at a hearing before the Inter-American Commission in March 2008. We have since de -
veloped legal arguments to support indigenous control of such protected areas, drawing upon environmental law and human rights law and, most importantly, maintaining an indig -
enous point of view. We continue to work with the indigenous leaders of these communities to monitor the situation and develop a plan of 
action. ‘‘The life and territory
of indigenous 
peoples cannot be 
commercialized. Our plan is based on 
life; this life plan is to 
care for nature .’’  
 
Miguel Palacín’ Quispe, CoordinatorAndean Coordinator of Indigenous Organizations (CAOI)
16Lake Izabal and Maya Q’eqchi’ lands in Guatemala
 Biofuel plantation in Peru  © Ben Powless Guatemalan worker  © Ben PowlessHuman Rights and Multilateral Development Banks Maya Q’eqchi’ Land and Resource Rights
Indigenous communities, lands and 
environments often are affected ad -
versely by projects financed by mul -
tilateral development banks (MDBs), such as the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank. This is particularly true for Indian peoples in Mexico and Central and South America. 
The Indian Law Resource Center 
is working to influence and create awareness among MDBs about their 
obligations to respect international 
law and human rights when funding development projects. That’s why we continue to distribute our paper, Principles of International 
Law for Multilateral Development Banks: the Obligation to Respect Human Rights , composed in 2009. 
The paper calls for the creation of binding legal rules to compel MDBs to respect and promote human rights. The paper has been presented in several arenas, as well as directly 
to multilateral development bank 
officials. 
We have encouraged engagement on 
this issue from all sectors—   including 
civil society, states, and indigenous 
peoples’ organizations—in order to create constructive dialogue about the human rights obligations of MDBs. We hope this discourse will create further dialogue, strengthen grassroots communities’ struggles against unsustainable development practices and provide a seed from which a larger movement can grow around issues of MDB accountabil -
ity, transparency and responsibility under the law.
We continue to provide legal as -
sistance and training to Indian 
communities and organizations so they can protect their environments and communities from harmful MDB-funded projects. 
17
Families grieve after conflict over development projects in the Peruvian Amazon turn deadly.  © Ben Powless
 Peruvian indigenous leaders demand justice.  © Ben PowlessStaff
Robert T. Coulter
Executive Director
Robert, a member 
of the Citizen Po -
tawatomi Nation, is an attorney with more than 30 years of experience in the 
field of Indian law. He founded the Center in 1978 with the goal of assist -
ing Indian and Alaska Native nations in protecting their lands, resources 
and human rights. He is an author 
of many articles in the field of Indian law and human rights. He received his bachelor’s degree from Williams College in Williamstown, Mass., and a law degree from Columbia University. 
Armstrong A. Wiggins
Director, Washington, D.C.
Armstrong is a Miskito Indian from Nicaragua and has been with the Center since 1981. He was a 
political prisoner during the Somoza 
and Sandinista regimes because of 
his leadership in promoting human rights in Nicaragua. He has more than 30 years experience working in the field of human rights. He directs much of the international human rights work of the Center, managing the Mexico and Central and South America Program.Barbara Anthony 
Director of Development
Barbara joined the staff in June of 2009.She is a graduate of the University of Missouri and of the College of William 
and Mary Planned Giving Institute. Her professional development work has been in the areas of higher educa -
tion and social services. 
Juanita Cabrera-Lopez
Program Assistant
Juanita is Maya Mam Indian from Gua -
temala. She joined the Center in June of 2009. She assists with administration, 
development, communications and project support. She received her B.A. in psychology from Beloit College.Leonardo Crippa
Attorney
Leonardo, a Kolla Indian from Jujuy, Argentina, joined the Center’s Wash -
ington, D.C., office in April 2005. He 
received his law degree from Uni -
versidad Nacional de Tucumán in Argentina and a Master’s of Law degree from American University 
Washington College of Law in May 
2008. He previously worked at the Center for Justice and International Law on human rights cases within the Inter-American system.
Kirsten Matoy Carlson
Attorney
Kirsten, of Cherokee descent, joined the Center’s Montana office in September 2007. She received her law degree 
in 2003 and her Ph.D. in Political 
Science in 2007. Prior to joining the 
Center, Kirsten taught law at the University of Minnesota Law School. 
Philomena Kebec
Attorney
Philomena is a mem -
ber of the Bad River Band of Chippewa Indians. She received her J.D. from the University of Minne -
sota in 2008 and served as the judicial law clerk to the Honorable Kathleen Mottl before joining the Center in April of 2010.
Curt Klotz
Director of Finance & Administration
Curt joined the Center in 1994. He is a Certified Public Accountant and is responsible for the Center’s 
administrative and financial mat -
ters. He also manages our computer network.
18
Marilyn Richardson
Assistant to the Director 
Marilyn, a member 
of the Chippewa Nation, joined the Center in 1996. She works closely with 
the development staff, serves as the assistant to the Board of Directors and coordinates direct mail and spe -
cial events. 
Lucy Rain Simpson
Senior Attorney
Lucy, a member of the Navajo Nation, joined the Center’s Montana office in October 2004. She 
has previous experience working on behalf of the Northern Cheyenne and Crow tribes and the Navajo Nation. Lucy received her J.D. from the University of Colorado in 1998. 
Valerie Taliman
Director of Communications
Valerie, a member of the Navajo Nation, is a widely published, award-winning jour -
nalist, editor, radio 
producer and publisher. Valerie resigned in 2009 after serving the Center for four years. Ginny Underwood
Director of Communications
Ginny, a member of the Comanche Nation, joined the Center in October of 2009. She has more than 15 years 
of experience in the field of commu -
nications and most recently served as Executive Director of Programs and Strategic Initiatives for the 
communication arm of The United 
Methodist Church. She received her B.A. in Mass Communications from Oklahoma City University.
2009 Interns & Volunteers
Ignacio BarrenecheaNeesha BapatMelissa Dempsey John D.B. Lewis Fellow
Erin Farris Terrence A. Sidley Fellow
Ashley Fry
Maureen Keffer
Susie KimAutumn KnowltonRafael Medina Maria Renshaw Rosie WorthenBoard
Susan M. Masten
Chairperson of the Board
Yurok   – Hoopa, CA 
Robert T. Coulter
President 
Potawatomi   – Helena, MT
Peter C. John
Treasurer
Chicago, IL
G. Jon Roush
Secretary
Portland, OR
Dacho Alexander
Gwich’in   – Fort Yukon, AK 
Michelle Allen
Albany, CA
Martin Avery
Navajo   – Coyote Canyon, NM 
Melanie Benjamin
Ojibwe   – Onamia, MN 
Norma Bixby
Northern Cheyenne   – Lame Deer, MT 
Viviana E. Figueroa
Kolla   – Montreal, Quebec, Canada
gaiashkibos
Lac Courte Oreilles Chippewa   – 
Hayward, WI
Terri Henry
Cherokee   – Cherokee, NC
Darwin Hill
Tonawanda Seneca   – Basom, NY
Lisa Myaya
Communications & 
Development Assistant
Lisa joined the 
Center’s Montana office in November of 2007. Lisa works on communications and development 
projects. She also assists with office administration. She has more than 15 years of experience in the non-profit sector, primarily with resource 
conservation, education and arts 
organizations.
Shayda Edwards Naficy
Human Rights & Policy Specialist
Shayda joined the Center’s Washington, D.C., office in Feb -
ruary of 2006 after graduating from Rice University in 2005 
with a B.S. in Geology. She has stud -
ied sustainable development in Ecua -
dor. Shayda left the Center in 2009 to pursue a Master’s degree in political science at the University of Chicago. 
19
Foundations and Major Donors
Akonadi Foundation
Barbara AnthonyBaker Brook FoundationThe Bay & Paul FoundationsHans & Jutta Bertram-NothnagelPenny Cabot Linda Carlson in honor of Barbara Hunter
Chickasaw NationCinnabar Foundation
Combined Federal Campaign 
Eastern Band of Cherokee IndiansFanwood Foundation / WestFord FoundationFund for NonviolenceGoldman Environmental FoundationLaurie GoldsteinHuman & Civil Rights Organizations of America
Indian Land T enure FoundationEric Janz, Jr. Peter & Sherry JohnJustGive.orgKenney Brothers FoundationLannan FoundationLibra FoundationRowan & Nancy McQuarrieMax Milton & Joan BirdMontana State Employees
 Combined Giving Campaign
Charles Stewart Mott Foundation
Donal & Diana Mullineaux, in honor 
of Chief Light Foot T alking EagleLaura Jane Musser FundRalph NaderNational Lawyers GuildNavajo NationOak FoundationGeoffrey & Leslie OelsnerOneFamily FoundationOnondaga NationOverbrook FoundationPauline Allen Endowment
Christopher Pezzola
Philadelphia Yearly MeetingJon Roush & Joyce ChinnSaginaw Chippewa Indian T ribeAliza I. ShapiroJean SidleyArthur W . Simon T rustAlexander C. & Tillie S. Speyer 
Foundation
John & Barbara SweeneyTides FoundationT onawanda Seneca NationUnited Way of the National Capital Area
United Way Special DistributionUS Human Rights FundVirginia Wellington Cabot FoundationKen & Stephanie WallaceWinky Foundation
World Resources Institute
AnonymousAlchemy FoundationDacho AlexanderChristopher Amato & Diana Hernandez
Sarah B. AndersonSidney ArmstrongWendy BartonVertis Belcher in honor of President Barack Obama
Bethany Berger
Jefferson Bishop
Phyllis Bock & Robert NicholBarbara BonifasAnn BrackeRaymond & Joyce BrownMitchell L. Bush, Jr.Lynn & Justin CapuanoT ruman CarterDavid Chambers & Sigrid Gentile-Chambers
Carol A. ChapmanRuby ChavezT eresa Olcott CoheaMurray Cohen & Myrna MoranSusan CottinghamJohn Crawford & Cindy CoulterMartha H. Cremer in memory of 
Katherine Kelley CremerScott CrichtonBarbara Deloria in memory of Vine Deloria, Jr.
Paul DestlerJewel DhuruGary Divis & Catherine Lott DivisJudith DixonRichard DonahueWendy Eaton in honor of Black Cloud
Kelly EdwardsAnne & Harrison FrahnPaul Fryegaiashkibos in memory of Elizabeth Barber
Matthew Gardella
Lee & T eresa Gault
 in honor of Curt Klotz
Gordon & Marion GerrishJoseph & Leila GoldesHurst HannumPatrice M. HaydenHelena Indian Alliance in honor of Cree Chief Broken Arm
Louis R. HellwigMarina A. HenriquezLydia Hill
20ContributorsEric Hirschhorn & Leah Wortham
 in memory of John D.B. Lewis
Jay & Luanne HormelJohn HughesInge R. & Marge JacobsonAnne JohnsonJames JohnsonRoderic JohnsonCarol & W . Stanley JuneauDavid Kairys & Antje Mattheus
Judge Bentley Kassal & Barbara Kassal
 in memory of John D.B. Lewis
Magdalyn King in memory of Darrell O’Rourke
Pat KohlerAlbert Kurki in memory of Bertho Kurki
Ira KurzbanHazel Landa in memory of Irving A. Landa
Richard M. LeventhalRonald & Judith LibertusJazelle C. LieskeKalen Lipe in honor of Mary Jane Fairbanks
Lucy LippardRenee Llanusa-CesteroInga LourdesRobert & Linda Low in honor of Tim Coulter &
 Samantha Sanchez
Thomas E. Luebben
Catharine MacKinnon
Beverly MagleyKaren L. Mallicoat-RodriguezKen MargolisRuth McArdleCheryl McKayLinda Jansen McWilliams in memory of Waldemar Jansen & Dorothy J. Burke
Geoffrey MeninRebecca Oyer Meyers in memory of John Oyer
Claudia MontagneMontana SharesPaul Moss & Craig MillerLynn Mostoller & Kathryn McKnight
Mark Munger & Katherine Bourne
 in memory of Petra Shattuck
Dolly Naranjo NeikrugNetwork for GoodNew York City T ransit AuthorityAlan & Nancy NicholsonAustin Nunez in tribute to the Timbisha Shoshone ProjectOntelaunne Powwow CommitteeDouglas PayneJohn & Eva PetoskeyStephen & Annette Pickard
Steve & Roberta Pieczenik
Bernard PomeranceMichael & Christine PopeAlan RabinowitzDeborah RandVictor & Joan Reiman in memory of Charles Reiman
Angela RileyKirk RosenbaumDavid RubinsteinHarry SachseJulia M. SaylorGeraldine SchaafJames W . SchmittSarah ScottVictoria A. Serrano in honor of
 the Timbisha Shoshone T ribe
Ellen Shatter
John Shattuck in memory of Petra Shattuck
Leonard & Elaine Simon in memory of Arthur W . Simon
Nancy StearnsDoug Sternberg
21Hope StevensDavid B. StewartMilton T akeiRusty T aylorThomas T rauger in honor of Tim Coulter
Stephen T rimble in memory of Michael Kabotie
United Airlines Employee GivingUnited Way of Central New York
United Way of New York City
United Way of Stanislaus CountyJana WalkerMatilda H. WalkerAnthony & Betty WallaceDavid Weissbrodt & M. Patricia Schaffer
Wells Fargo Community Support Campaign
Tisa J. WengerP . C. WheelerBarry & Bonnie WilldorfJane WilsonClifton & Doris Woest in honor of Navajo Code T alkers
Danielle WolfMargaret WooShannon WorkAnonymous (8)
 Statements of Financial Position    
as of December 31, 2009 and 2008    
Assets    
Current Assets  2009  2008
Cash & cash equivalents   529,472   296,880 
Certificates of deposit    160,000  50,000 
Grants receivable (net)   483,776  457,038 
Contributions receivable    - 6,517 
Other receivables   600 6,070 
Prepaid expenses   7,968  8,488 
    Total current assets       1,181,816         824,993 
Property and Equipment    
Net depreciable assets    44,120  15,757 
Other Assets    
Deposits    1,325  1,325 
Seminole & Gar Creek land purchase   420,269  420,269 
Investments   30,657  9,562 
    Total other assets           452,251          431,156 
    Total assets    $1,678,187   $1,271,906 
Liabilities and Net Assets    
Current Liabilities    
Accounts payable    11,842   17,566 
Accrued salaries & vacation payable    49,922  45,201 
Payroll taxes payable    2,878  2,671 
    Total current liabilities            64,642            65,438   
Net Assets    
Unrestricted   357,683  (23,466)
Temporarily restricted    1,207,623  1,184,172 
Permanently restricted    48,239  45,762 
    Total net assets         1,613,545       1,206,468 
    Total liabilities & net assets   $1,678,187   $1,271,906 
   
  Each year the Center engages an independent accounting firm to audit its financial statements. 
The financial information presented here is an excerpt of the audited statements for the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008. To review the Independent Auditors’ Report and full audited statements, please visit our website at www.indianlaw.org and follow the “About Us” link to “Financial 
Statements.” Alternatively, you may contact our Helena, Montana office to request that a print copy of the full statements be mailed to you.Statement of Activities 2009    
for the year ended December 31
   Temporarily  Permanently
  Unrestricted  Restricted  Restricted  Total
Support and Revenue
Contributions   52,275  6,000  2,477   60,752
Grants   486,168  1,103,584  - 1,589,752
Bequests & trusts   7,190  - - 7,190
Contract services   - - - -
Interest   3,711  773 -  4,484 
Other   7,440  266 - 7,706 
Realized & unrealized gains on investments  141 942 - 1,083
Released from restrictions   1,088,114  (1,088,114)  - - 
    Total support & revenue       1,645,039           23,451              2,477    1,670,967
Expenses
Program services   862,622  - - 862,622
Management & general   177,182   - - 177,182
Fundraising   224,086  - - 224,086 
    Total expenses      1,263,890                      -                      -     1,263,890 
     change in net assets         381,149            23,451            2,477       407,077 
Net assets at beginning of year         (23,466)      1,184,172              45,762     1,206,468 
Net assets at end of year       $357,683   $1,207,623        $48,239  $1,613,545 
Statement of Activities   2008
for the year ended December 31
   Temporarily  Permanently
  Unrestricted  Restricted  Restricted  Total
Support and Revenue
Contributions   64,095  250 8,669  73,014 
Grants   695,252  1,118,690  - 1,813,942
Bequests & trusts   18,903  - - 18,903
Contract services   2,645  10,000  - 12,645
Interest   5,643  1,963  - 7,606
Other   2,020  - - 2,020
Realized & unrealized gains on investments  (6,474)  422 - (6,052)
Released from restrictions   565,440  (565,440)  - - 
    Total support & revenue       1,347,524        565,885              8,669      1,922,078
Expenses
Program services   1,056,498  - -  1,056,498 
Management & general   240,218  - - 240,218 
Fundraising   116,406  - - 116,406 
    Total expenses         1,413,122                      -                      -       1,413,122 
     change in net assets             (65,598)        565,885              8,669        508,956     
Net assets at beginning of year   42,132  618,287  37,093  697,512 
Net assets at end of year        $(23,466)   $1,184,172        $45,762   $1,206,468 
      
 22Terrance 
Guardipee
Our featured artist, Terrance Guardipee 
is an internationally acclaimed artist 
and is renowned for his authentic Blackfeet images that he originally translates into his own contemporary form of ledger art. He has evolved the ledger art form from the traditional single page style by incorporat -
ing other antique documents such as maps, war rations, checks, receipts and most notably, historical Blackfeet Nation papers. 
His art is featured in many permanent 
collections and museums locally and inter -
nationally from the C.M. Russell Museum,  the Museum of Indian Arts & Culture, National Museum of the American Indian of the Smithsonian Institute and the Museum of Natural History in Hanover, Germany, in addition to many others. 
Along with many awards and recognitions, 
Terrance’s most recent accomplishments include Best of Division at the Santa Fe Indian Art Market 2009 and first for ledger art in 2009 and being selected to design the poster image for the 2009 and 2010 American Indian Film Institute Festival in San Francisco. 
Terrance was born on the Blackfeet 
Reservation in northern Montana and lived there until he was accepted into the Institute of American Indian Arts in Santa Fe, New Mexico. Presently, Terrance works out of his studio in the Seattle area.  Contact Terrance or view more of his artwork at 
terranceguardipee.com .
Okan Woman   © Terrance Guardipee
Justice for Indigenous Peoples
Centro De reCursos Jurí DiCos Para Los Pueb Los inDígenasJustice for Indigenous Peoples
Main Office
602 N Ewing St.  • Helena, MT 59601  • 406.449.2006  • mt@indianlaw.org
Washington, DC Office
601 E St. SE  • Washington, DC 20003  • 202.547.2800  • dcoffice@indianlaw.orgwww.indianlaw.org
find us on
Medicine Lodges   © Terrance Guardipee