After  a decade -long  struggle , 
the effort to stop prisoner rape 
reached a historic milestone on 
May 17, 2012, when the De -
partment of Justice released the first-ever 
national standards aimed at ending sexual 
abuse in detention. These new regulations, 
mandated by the Prison Rape Elimina -
tion Act (PREA) of 2003, pave the way 
for ending one of the worst human rights 
crises of our time. 
Binding on prisons, jails, youth detention 
facilities, police lock-ups, and halfway 
houses nationwide, the standards incorpo -
rate many, though not all, of the reforms 
championed by JDI since its founding by a prisoner rape survivor in 1980. “We have 
fought long and hard for the PREA stan -
dards,” said Lovisa Stannow, JDI’s Execu -
tive Director. “If implemented fully, they will 
spare hundreds of thousands of adults and 
children the devastation of sexual assault.”
Among many groundbreaking measures, the 
standards require much-needed protections 
for vulnerable inmates, including lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, and transgender people, as well 
as youth, who can no longer be placed in the 
same housing units as adults. They also call 
for stronger procedures for detecting and 
preventing sexual assaults by staff, who com -
mit at least half of all such abuse. Crucially, Finally! National Standards to 
Stop Prisoner Rape in the U.S.
New Federal Regulations Have the Potential to End  
the Crisis of Sexual Abuse Behind Barsaction update                                                                                       september 2012
just detention international  september 2012  | action  updateJan Lastocy, JDI Survivor Council member, celebrates the release of landmark national standards 
with her husband, John.See National Standards, continued on page 3We did it! For almost a decade, JDI 
has been advocating for national 
standards to end prisoner rape. Now, 
thanks to your efforts — signing petitions, sub -
mitting public comments, donating your time 
and money — these life-saving regulations 
are, at last, a reality. 
On the day the 
Department of 
Justice’s stan -
dards were re -
leased, I called 
Tom Cahill to 
congratulate 
him. Tom, one 
of JDI’s former 
presidents and 
one of our Sur -
vivor Council 
members, has 
spent the better 
part of the past four decades fighting to end 
sexual abuse in detention. 
As Tom recounts in this Action Update , JDI 
was formed at a time when the crisis of rape 
behind bars barely registered in the national 
consciousness. In a sign of just how much 
our culture has shifted since then, President 
Obama himself, in a memo released with the 
standards, called sexual violence against any 
victim “an affront to American values.”
Our fight is not yet over, of course. Now we 
have to make sure that the standards are used 
to transform detention facilities nationwide. 
Right now, though, I hope you will join us in 
celebrating this triumph and everything that 
you did to help make it happen. On behalf of 
everyone at JDI, and the countless survivors 
who have led this fight, thank you.
Lovisa Stannow  
Executive Director 
AW
A recent  department  of Justice  
study provides the most dramatic 
evidence yet of a nationwide crisis 
of sexual victimization in U.S. 
detention facilities. The study — published 
on May 17, 2012, the same day that the 
new Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA) 
standards were finalized — found that 
almost one in ten (9.6 percent) former state 
prisoners had been sexually abused during 
their most recent period of incarceration. 
Gay, lesbian, and bisexual prisoners were 
disproportionately targeted in both men’s 
and women’s prisons, according to “Sexual 
Victimization Reported by Former State 
Prisoners, 2008.”
The study confirms the systemic problem of 
staff retaliation against inmates who report 
abuse. Shockingly, almost half (46.3 percent) 
of prisoners who reported to a corrections 
officer that they had been abused by a staff 
member were themselves written up for an 
infraction. Inmates reporting sexual abuse at 
the hands of other inmates were just as likely 
to be punished themselves (28.5 percent) as 
to get to speak with an investigator (28.3 
percent). More than a third (37 percent) of 
New Government Study:action update                      
One in Ten Former State  
Prisoners Report Sexual Abuse  
just detention international  prisoners who filed a complaint after being 
abused by another inmate said that facility 
staff did not respond at all. 
“With such blatant retaliation for reporting 
abuse, it’s no wonder the vast majority of 
prisoner rape survivors choose to remain 
silent,” said JDI’s Executive Director Lovisa 
Stannow.
About half of all prisoners reporting abuse 
were victimized by corrections staff. Contrary 
to common stereotypes, female staff were by 
far the most likely perpetrators. Among sur -
vivors of staff sexual misconduct, 79 percent 
were males reporting sexual abuse by female 
staff. Additionally, female inmates were sexu -
ally assaulted by other inmates at a rate three 
times higher than male inmates (13.7 percent 
versus 4.2 percent). 
“This study shows clearly the need for a mas -
sive culture change, and an end to impunity, 
inside our prisons and jails,” said Stannow. 
“The new PREA standards, by requiring 
greater accountability and oversight, have the 
potential to achieve just that.”Solitary  confinement  can cause 
any inmate significant emotional 
distress. For prisoner rape sur -
vivors, who are traumatized and 
often in dire need of medical care and 
counseling, the dangers posed by this prac -
tice are particularly acute. Yet survivors 
are routinely placed in extreme isolation, 
ostensibly for their own protection — and 
frequently against their will. 
On June 19, 2012, the Senate Judiciary 
Subcommittee on the Constitution, Civil 
Rights, and Human Rights — chaired by 
Senator Dick Durbin (D-IL) — held the 
first-ever Congressional hearing on solitary 
confinement. In its statement to the sub -
committee, JDI highlighted the plight of 
survivors who were subjected to such puni -
tive conditions. One survivor who was raped 
in a Colorado facility wrote to JDI, “I was 
treated like the perpetrator. I was thrown in 
segregation. I felt so humiliated.” 
Many survivors, out of fear of “the hole,” 
keep quiet about their abuse. “Report -
ing sexual abuse is difficult enough for 
survivors, who so often face retaliation or 
punishment if they speak out,” said Linda 
McFarlane, Deputy Executive Director at 
JDI. “The prospect of being isolated in a 
cramped cell, sometimes for months at a 
time, adds yet another obstacle.” 
JDI believes that involuntary solitary con -
finement should be used only as a last resort 
— a view echoed by Senator Durbin at the 
hearing. Unfortunately, the new standards 
developed under the Prison Rape Elimina -
tion Act allow facilities to hold survivors in 
involuntary solitary confinement for up to 
30 days, a dangerously long period of time. 
JDI will continue to press for reforms to 
limit the use of this abusive practice. Time to Stop the  
Overuse of Solitary 
Confinement
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sexual Victimization 
Reported by Former State Prisoners, 2008 , May 2012
Photo: Aapo Haapanen
SA3violence behind bars, these men and women 
did more than just put a human face to this 
crisis; they served as advocates, spokespeople, 
and policy experts, helping to shed light on a 
problem that for too long was neglected or ig -
nored. One such survivor is Frank Mendoza, 
a member of JDI’s Survivor Council who in 
2011 testified at a Congressional briefing on 
the need for strong standards. Reflecting on 
their passage, Mendoza said: “Prisoner rape 
is not just a statistic for those of us who have 
lived through it — it is a life-shattering ex -
perience. The violence has to stop. The stan -
dards have filled me with the hope that no 
one ever will have to experience what I went 
through.”
In the coming months, JDI will shift its at -
tention toward ensuring that the standards 
are meaningfully implemented. “The pas -
sage of such strong standards — and they 
are strong — is a cause for celebration,” said 
Stannow. “But rules alone won’t end this cri -
sis. Working together, advocates and correc -
tions officials must ensure that all detention 
facilities use this tool to eliminate, finally, 
prisoner rape.”National Standards   
continued from page 1action update                      
No matter  where  or why a person 
is detained, the right to be free 
from sexual abuse is absolute. 
This fundamental principle was 
affirmed by President Obama in a landmark 
Presidential Memorandum issued on May 
17, alongside the Department of Justice’s 
national standards to stop prisoner rape. 
The memo confirms that all federal agen -
cies with confinement facilities — not just 
the Department of Justice — are bound 
by PREA and must create their own stan -
dards within one year. This step will mean 
better protections for people held in immi -
gration detention facilities – facilities that, 
despite being plagued by sexual abuse, were 
exempted from the Department of Justice’s 
standards. 
The Department of Homeland Security, 
which detains more than 400,000 immi -
grants annually, has already announced 
that it will issue draft standards for public 
comment. Other agencies that must also 
develop their own standards include the 
Bureau of Indian Affairs, the Department 
of Health and Human Services, and the 
Department of Defense. 
JDI led the push to have the federal 
standards apply to immigration detention 
facilities, in keeping with the explicit 
intent of Congress when it passed PREA. 
Now, JDI will work to ensure that the 
Department of Homeland Security, and 
other federal agencies, adopt standards that 
are at least as strong as the Department of 
Justice’s. All Detainees Deserve 
Protection, Says  
President Obama   
september 2012  | action  updatethe standards remove unreasonable time 
limits for traumatized survivors to report 
abuse, while ensuring that they can speak to 
trained counselors. To strengthen oversight, 
the standards mandate that facilities undergo 
independent audits every three years and that 
each audit report be made public. 
JDI was instrumental in securing the final -
ization of strong standards. In the years after 
the passage of PREA, JDI worked closely 
with the National Prison Rape Elimination 
Commission on developing proposed stan -
dards for the Department of Justice. After 
the Department released significantly weaker 
draft regulations, in February 2011, JDI mo -
bilized a coalition of supporters, survivors, 
and allied organizations to demand more ro -
bust reforms. It is largely due to these efforts 
— in particular the submission of numerous 
public comments on the Department’s draft 
— that the final standards include life-saving, 
unprecedented reforms. 
Ultimately, the most significant contribution 
was made by prisoner rape survivors them -
selves. Throughout the struggle to end sexual In a new short film by JDI, prisoner rape 
survivors reflect on the significance of 
the PREA standards — and on their role 
in getting them passed.
Watch online:  
www.justdetention.org/en/FPREA.aspxVOICES FOR JUSTICEKimberly Yates (left) and Troy Isaac, JDI Survivor Council members and leaders in the fight for the 
PREA standards.
Photo: Tamela Kemp
Njust detention international  
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast Office
1900 L Street NW,  Suite 601
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: (202) 506-3333
Fax: (202) 506-7971
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.org
4just detention international  september 2012  | action  updateBy Tom Cahill  
Iknow  first -hand  the devastating impact 
prisoner rape can have on a human being. 
In 1968, following my arrest for civil 
disobedience, I was gang-raped in a San 
Antonio jail over a period of 24 hours. Before 
placing me in an overcrowded cell, my jailers 
set me up by spreading a false rumor that I 
was a child molester. After I was released, 
the assaults haunted me, causing flashbacks, 
nightmares, and an overwhelming feeling of 
shame. 
Back then no one seemed to care about the 
countless people who were being brutalized in 
this way, every year. Sexual abuse in detention 
was a hidden crisis, dismissed as irrelevant by 
the press and ignored by the government. By 
the early 1980s, even as incarceration rates 
were skyrocketing, prisoner rape remained 
the ugliest secret in America. 
It was against this backdrop that a small 
group of us — all survivors of prisoner rape 
— set out to build a movement to end this 
heinous crime. Our organization, Stop 
Prisoner Rape, had no permanent home 
— our early “offices” included a camper van 
and a barn — and operated on a shoe-string budget. But we had a devoted team and a 
dynamic president in Stephen Donaldson 
(aka Donny), who, through the force of his 
writing and strength of his leadership, helped 
elevate the issue of prisoner rape onto the 
national stage. By the mid 1990s, we had a 
website and had placed our first op-ed in the 
New York Times . In 2001, we moved into our 
first office. In 2008, we changed our name to 
Just Detention International. 
As our influence grew, a few elected leaders 
began to take notice of our cause. One such 
politician was the late Senator Edward Ken -
nedy. In 2003, Senator Kennedy, along with 
Senator Jeff Sessions and Representatives 
Frank Wolf and Bobby Scott, sponsored and 
helped push the Prison Rape Elimination 
Act (PREA) through Congress. In Septem -
ber of that year, I found myself standing be -
side President George W. Bush as he signed 
the bill, which called for “national standards 
for the detection, prevention, reduction, and 
punishment of prison rape.” Nine years later, 
following a shameful series of delays and 
missed deadlines, the standards promised by 
PREA were finalized and became the law of 
the land. 
Lately I’ve been thinking a lot about Donny, 
who died of AIDS in 1996, having contracted 
HIV from being raped repeatedly while in jail. 
Although he wasn’t alive when PREA passed, 
the law and the new standards are his legacy, 
as is the vibrant movement that fought for 
them. To honor that legacy, we will continue 
to fight for, and win, the human rights of all 
inmates. JDI and PREA: A Personal History 
JDI’s first “office,” 1983-1987.“I have dreamed of this day for years. 
The PREA standards aren’t perfect, 
but they are an amazing tool for 
making prisons safer. Now we need 
to use the standards and stop prisoner 
rape once and for all.”  
—  Jan Lastocy 
JDI Survivor Council member
“If strong national standards had been 
in place when I was in prison, my 
abuse may have never happened. Now 
that the standards have been released, 
we can make sure it never happens 
again.” 
— Garrett Cunningham 
JDI Survivor Council member
“We finally did it. It took many 
years of hard work, but, at long last, 
we have strong standards to protect 
people behind bars. There’s still work 
left to be done, but I’m celebrating 
because I know that my government is 
committed to stopping prisoner rape.” 
— Troy Isaac  
JDI Survivor Council member
Tom Cahill, prisoner rape survivor and former 
JDI President.
Photo: James StensonI