So far in 2009 , JDi has received 
nearly 1,000 letters from survivors of 
sexual violence in U.S. prisons and 
jails. inmates write of the unconscionable 
abuses they have suffered from guards and 
other detainees, of their pain, of their hopes 
for better times ahead, and of their determi -
nation to help put an end to prisoner rape. 
JDi takes all survivor accounts seriously. 
research shows clearly that the first responses 
rape survivors receive when disclosing their 
abuse have the most profound impact on 
their healing. Many who write JDi have 
never told anyone  else about the violence they 
have endured — not their families, not other 
inmates, and not prison officials.
Every survivor receives a personalized packet 
of information, including a list of local 
rape crisis centers that have agreed to assist 
inmates, self-help publications, and a letter 
of hope from a fellow survivor. These simple 
materials have helped countless prisoners turn their lives around. after receiving his packet, 
Phillip, who was raped by another inmate, 
wrote:  
You have been my anchor to sanity through this 
entire ordeal. If there is anything, at any time, 
I can do for you and your organization, if it is 
within my power to do it, it will be done without 
question. I can only hope that someday I will be 
afforded the opportunity to reach out to a complete 
stranger, as you have done, and offer an ounce of 
assistance. Thank you, JDI, from the bottom of 
my heart.
This Action Update  is about the people who 
have survived sexual abuse behind bars, and 
who have refused to be silenced by their 
anguish. They are the reason we do the work 
we do.
Lovisa Stannow 
Executive DirectorPriSonE r raPE  survivors 
are more than just the faces of 
a human rights crisis; they are 
also an essential part of the so -
lution to the sexual violence that plagues 
prisons and jails. Through its Survivor Council and Survivor Speakers List, JDi 
makes sure that men and women who were 
sexually assaulted while in detention play vital roles in the effort to end prisoner rape. in recent years, JDi survivor advocates have 
offered public testimony before federal and 
state commissions and legislatures, spoken 
with journalists, trained corrections officials, 
and participated in the crafting of new na -
tional standards addressing prisoner rape. Survivors of prisoner rape also serve on JDi ’s 
Board of Directors. We Are Survivors,  
Not Silent Victims
Prisoner Rape Survivors Key Players in JDI’s Workaction update                                                                                       november 2009
“As a prisoner rape survivor, I know first-hand that ignorance and indifference are devastating 
obstacles to change. To this day, many Americans consider inmates to be ‘disposable’… I used 
to feel shame and humiliation about what happened to me in that Texas jail. Eventually, I 
came to realize that it was not my shame — it was my country’s shame.”  — Tom Cahill
just detention international  november 2009  | action  update
Clockwise from left: Garrett Cunningham, Esmeralda Soto, and Joseph Galloway. 
Photos: James StensonMy LifE Chang ED forever 
when i was 29 years old. i was 
serving time at the Luther 
Unit, a men’s prison in Texas. 
i was working in the facility laundry, su -
pervised by a prison officer.  after spending 
just a few weeks with this officer, he began 
to harass me sexually — touching me and 
making crude comments.
  at first, i was afraid to tell anyone about 
what was going on. it got so bad, though, 
that i spoke with the unit psychologist, and 
then prison administrators, including the 
assistant warden. first they told me to stay 
away from him. Then they told me i was 
exaggerating. The last time i tried to get 
help from prison staff, i was told to keep my 
mouth shut.
one day soon after that, after i had finished 
my work for the day and was heading for 
the shower, the officer slammed me from 
behind, knocking the wind out of me. he 
handcuffed me, shoving my face into a pile of laundry. i can still remember the feeling of 
struggling to breathe. i screamed and fought 
to get him off of me, but he was twice my size. Then he raped me.
as he took the handcuffs off, he told me that 
if i snitched, i’d end up dead. none of the 
officers would do anything to help me anyway, he said, because they were all his friends. for 
years, i was plagued by thoughts about what 
i could have done differently. after plenty of 
soul-searching, i realized that the assault was 
not my fault, and i was able to start healing, 
to move on to a healthy and productive life. Today, i have a beautiful family.
Justice comes in many shapes and forms. in 
my case, the officer got away with his crime. But i decided i was not going to let him ruin 
my life. i had to seek a different kind of justice, 
by speaking the truth and doing everything i 
can to prevent the rape of others. 
Garrett Cunningham is a member of JDI’s 
Board of Directors. He lives in Texas.
just detention international  november 2009  | action  updateBryson Martel:  
When Prisoner Rape Means AIDSGarrett Cunningham:  
Justice Comes in Many 
Shapes and Formsaction update                      
WhEn i wEnT To PriSon, 
i was 28 years old, i weighed 
123 pounds, and i was scared 
to death.
i was right to be afraid. i am bisexual, but 
that doesn’t mean i want to have sex with 
just anyone. as soon as i got there, inmates 
started acting like they were my friends so they could take advantage of me. i told 
them i wasn’t going to put up with that. But 
they jumped on me. They beat me. within 
two weeks, i was raped at knifepoint. 
i reported the rape, and was sent into protective 
custody. But i wasn’t safe there either. They 
put all kinds of people in protective custody, 
including sexual predators. i was put in a cell 
with a rapist who had aiDS. within two 
days, he raped me. i yelled for the guard, but it 
was so loud in there, no one came to help me. 
Because i was raped, i got labeled as a 
“faggot.” Everywhere i walked, everyone 
looked at me like i was a target. it opened 
the door for a lot of other predators. Even 
the administrators thought it was okay for 
a “faggot” to be raped. They said, “oh, you must like it.” i’m here to tell you that no 
one wants to be raped. no one likes being 
violently attacked. 
i documented the abuse, i filed grievances, i 
followed all of the procedures to report what 
was happening to me, but no one cared. i 
went through nine months of torture – nine 
months of hell. Everything that happened to 
me could have been avoided if the prison was 
accountable for inmates’ safety. 
i started bleeding from the rectum. i didn’t 
want to go to the infirmary because i was 
still so ashamed about what had happened 
to me, but i had to. They gave me a test, and 
that’s when i got the devastating news. i 
was hiV-positive.
i felt suicidal. i felt like my world had come 
to an end. i cried and cried. i felt ashamed, 
embarrassed, degraded, and humiliated. i 
haven’t forgotten those feelings. you never 
forget. you never heal emotionally. There isn’t a 
day that goes by that i don’t think about this.
Eventually, i was interviewed by an 
investigator from the State Police, and i 
made a report of every assault i survived 
in prison. i had to list all the inmates who 
sexually assaulted me, and i came up with 27 
names. Sometimes just one inmate assaulted 
me, and sometimes they attacked me in groups. it went on almost every day for the 
nine months i spent in that facility.
i’m not able to work. i collect disability. 
fighting for my life is my full-time job. They 
took my life, but they didn’t take my ability 
to live my life. 
i know i had to pay the price for what i did, 
but i’ve paid double price. Every day i wake 
up and i’m just grateful that i’m still here. 
i’ve already accepted that i’m going to die, 
but before i do, i want to see justice in the 
prison system. The only way to help me now 
is to put an end to rape in prison. 
Bryson Martel lives in Michigan.
Photo: James Stenson
Bryson Marteljust detention international  november 2009  | action  updateLoretta Mitchell:  
I’ve Only Recentl y Learned to Cope 
SURVIVOR FACES AND VOICES
Most of the photos in this Action Update  were 
taken by photographer James Stenson. He is 
working with JDI to take portraits and at-home 
pictures of prisoner rape survivors who have de -
cided to speak out about the abuses they have 
endured. JDI is also in the process of document -
ing the stories of survivors in audio recordings. 
Additional photos by Stenson, as well as survi -
vor interviews, are available on JDI’s website, 
at http://www.justdetention.org/en/survivor_
testimony.asp x.
If you are a survivor of sexual abuse in deten -
tion and you would like to participate in this 
documentation project, please feel free to 
contact Darby Hickey, JDI’s Senior Communi -
cations Associate, at dhickey@justdetention.
org or 202-580-6935. You can also write JDI at: 
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340, Los Angeles, CA 
90010.I waS SExUaLL y aSSa ULTED  by 
officer Zacofsky at rappahannock 
regional Jail in Virginia over a period 
of months. he was stationed inside the 
female housing pod and began to approach 
me with unwanted attention. Later, due 
to complaints, he was removed from our housing unit. he started sending me messages 
through other inmates and began stalking me when i went to visitation, classes, or to 
the medical department. i got ‘promoted’ to 
become a trustee in the officer’s Lounge and 
that day would later become the beginning of 
something that will haunt me the rest of my life.  
 
while i was preparing food for the staff 
members, officer Zacofsky would stare at 
me, telling me how beautiful he thought i was. Later, he would approach me and 
state specific personal information about 
my child, my home, my vehicles, and my dogs, only to threaten that if i reported any 
of his actions he’d go back to my home.  
 
i tried telling my family and friends during 
phone conversations, but i’d be approached 
about the conversations by officer Zacofsky 
and threatened more. i attempted to alert my 
husband during visitation, only to be blocked 
in and cornered by the officer later. other 
inmates and staff noticed his behavior. Staff joked and encouraged him. i was trapped 
and scared. i didn’t know what to do or 
where to turn. i documented everything.
 
 
in october 2007, officer Zacofsky pushed me 
against the wall and forcibly kissed me. i was 
so scared. he then threatened physical harm 
to myself and to my family. it only got worse. 
from november 2007 through January 2008, 
officer Zacofsky forced me to perform oral 
sodomy and raped me. i was helpless. i had no 
one inside or out that was safe for me to go to.  
 
on february 15, 2008, i was suspended from 
my trustee job because the jail officials finally 
decided to investigate the complaints. i was 
transferred to another jail. i was questioned 
over a series of weeks by internal affairs and 
investigators. not once was i asked if i was okay. i was forced to give recorded interviews without an attorney present, even though i 
requested one, and i was not allowed to speak 
with a woman counselor. i was not offered 
any medical care or mental health counseling. 
Both jails were extremely concerned about the possibility of a pregnancy, so i was later 
given a pregnancy test. i have not been tested 
for all STDs. 
on March 4, 2008, a detective with the 
Stafford County Sheriff ’s office visited me 
for the last time. he informed me that all 
of my statements had been verified and that officer Zacofsky had confessed and would be 
arrested. he was charged with two felonies: 
carnal knowledge of an inmate and sodomy 
by force, threat, or intimidation. in october 
2008, officer Zacofsky pleaded guilty in 
Stafford Circuit Court to a single felony count of carnal knowledge of an inmate. as part of 
a plea agreement, he was sentenced to two 
years in prison, all of which was suspended. 
i felt completely left out of the process 
and was never called to court to testify. My 
attorneys and i were never informed of the 
plea agreement, and it was a shock when we 
read in the paper that the prosecutor had 
dropped the sodomy charge.
i’ve only recently learned to cope with my 
situation. The reason i’ve stood up is because 
of JDi and your support. i’d lay my life down 
to fight with JDi against prison rape. The 
prison system took my life and the only reason 
i finally have it back is because of you. words 
can never explain my appreciation for all of you. i’m driven by a determination and hope 
that JDi has embedded deep in my soul and i’m going to fight for anyone and everyone 
who’s ever suffered at the hands of corrections 
officials.
Loretta Mitchell is currently incarcerated at a 
Virginia state prison.
Loretta Mitchelljust detention international  november 2009  | action  updateaction update                      
Many of ThE LETTE rS JDi 
receives from prisoner rape sur -
vivors describe appalling acts of 
cruelty. as professionals work -
ing to end sexual abuse in detention, JDi 
staff expect such accounts, and are prepared to handle them. indeed, the wisdom and 
experiences that individual survivors share 
with the organization are key reasons why JDi has been so successful in fighting sexual 
abuse in detention. nevertheless, staff agree 
that it is deeply moving to open a survivor 
letter — expecting another tragedy — and 
find an unprompted note of gratitude. 
Johanna, raped by prison staff
“if i worked the rest of my life, i could 
never repay JD i for what you’ve done for 
me and so many people like me. when JD i 
came into my life, i was able to give my 
feelings a voice. you literally saved my life. 
i am one of the lucky ones. i had a place i 
could turn to when i was lost. So many lose 
themselves.”
Jairo, sexually assaulted by prison staff 
“JDi has helped me to grow strong and move 
on! it’s been rough, but with JD i i’ve stepped 
over some stepping stones to pursue happiness 
and rehabilitation. Thank you JD i!!! May god 
bless all victims of this type of tragedy!!!”Gregory, raped by prison staff
“you have proven to me that i am not alone and 
that there are people who actually care. it is a 
grand thing to know that someone will listen.”
David, raped by cellmate
“i was just sitting here thinking about all the 
love and caring you’ve shown me in your kind letters. you’ve given me hope for tomorrow. i 
appreciate your letters more than words can say.”
Beverly, subjected to abusive pat searches by an 
officer
“i really would like to express my gratitude 
and appreciation because your organization 
has opened my eyes to so much and made me know there are people who care. you did not 
consider my cry for help a small, insignificant situation. i feel you truly understood that 
even though i was never raped in the same 
way some are, i was violated all the same, and 
the humiliation, anger, and degrading feelings 
of helplessness are the same.”
Lori,  raped by prison staff
“as i read through JDi ’s information, it gave 
me hope. i don’t feel alone anymore. Even 
though i’m an inmate, i realize now that i 
still have rights. i can’t stress enough how 
important the information from JDi is to me. 
it gives me encouragement. Thank you!”“Thank You JDI!!!”
jUSt DEtENtION  INtERNA tIONA l  
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast Office
1025 Vermont Ave., NW,  Third Floor
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: (202) 580-6971
Fax: (202) 638-6056
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.orgAbout Just Detention  
International (JDI)
just Detention international ( JDi) is a 
human rights organization that seeks to 
end sexual abuse in all forms of detention. 
all of JDi ’s work takes place within the 
framework of international human rights 
laws and norms. The sexual assault of detain -
ees, whether committed by corrections staff 
or by inmates, is a crime and is recognized 
internationally as a form of torture.
JDi has three core goals for its work: to en -
sure government accountability for prisoner 
rape; to transform ill-informed public atti -
tudes about sexual violence in detention; and 
to promote access to resources for those who 
have survived this form of abuse.
 
JDi is concerned about the safety and well-
being of all detainees. They include those 
held in adult prisons and jails, juvenile fa -
cilities, immigration detention centers, and 
police lock-ups, whether run by government 
agencies or by private corporations on behalf 
of the government. when the government takes away someone’s 
freedom, it incurs a responsibility to pro -
tect that person’s safety. all inmates have 
the right be treated with dignity. no matter 
what crime someone has committed, sexual 
violence must never be part of the penalty.
Michelle Branch
Frank Mendoza
Photo: James StensonPhoto: James Stenson