ast month, one of my colleagues 
showed me a piece of art that made my jaw drop. It’s made up of eight dazzling panels, separated by bor-
ders of fingerprints (see photo on this page) . 
The piece was created by prisoners at the 
California Institution for Women, as part 
of JDI’s new art program.  
The vast majority of prisoners 
have 
endured serious 
trauma — before they were locked up, while inside, or both. JDI’s art workshops are a safe place for them to work through that trauma, of-
ten for the first time. Take Je’Anna, who 
was able to release the pain she had kept 
bottled up for decades. “The art became a 
window for me,” she said. “I was able to 
look at the outside world without feeling like a failure, to believe that I will be able to return to society and succeed.”
 
Too often, the window referred to by 
Je’Anna is a one-way mirror. Prisoners 
look to the outside for support, for affir-
mation, but get nothing in return. They 
feel invisible.  
At a time like this, when seemingly insur-
mountable political divisions occupy so 
much of our attention, we must make an 
effort to see and honor those who are the 
most easily forgotten.
At JDI, we will never stop fighting for the 
right of prisoners to be safe. And I know 
that you won’t either. Thank you!
Lovisa Stannow
Executive Director 
prisoner at the California Institution for Women (CIW), 
Je’Anna sometimes feels as if her life runs on a loop. Wake up at 
6:00. Head to the chow hall. Watch a bit of 
TV. Go to work. Stand for count. Dinner. 
Count again. Lights out.  
Je’Anna’s day has followed this same routine 
since she arrived at CIW in 2015. Except 
today. On this particular afternoon prison 
does not seem at all dull or monotonous 
to Je’Anna. She’s seated around a table 
with eight other prisoners; the table is a 
colorful mess, with assorted art supplies everywhere. One of the women takes an orange glob of clay, rolling it into several A Moment to Heal While  Inside 
Thanks to JDI, women at CIW are processing trauma by  creating art — like the above canvas, made 
collaboratively by eight prisoners.See A Moment to Heal While Inside, continued on page 2
1action  update                                                                                      april 2017
just detention international  april 2017  | action  updateL
Athin strands, which she applies to the top of a 
mask that has eyes, a nose, and mouth. 
“Check out my new haircut,” she says. The 
woman next to her cracks up, and the laughter 
becomes contagious, drowning out the music 
in the background. But for their prison-issued 
denims, you might think they were at a party 
in someone’s home.  
The mask-making activity is part of a new 
JDI program that brings art into CIW, thanks 
to a partnership with A Window Between 
Worlds (AWBW). AWBW is a nonprofit 
organization that uses art workshops to help 
people who have been affected by trauma. 
After participating in AWBW’s leadership A JDI Project Helps Prisoners Find Peace
and Build Community through Art
just detention international  continued from page 1
2action  update                     
training, JDI staff are adapting the  
art workshops, for the first time, to a 
prison setting. 
Je’Anna and her peers gather for a 
workshop where they draw, sculpt, and 
make collages. These art workshops offer more than a respite from the grind of prison life; they give participants a gentle way to process painful feelings, develop a sense of self-worth, and build hope for 
the future — even while incarcerated. This 
type of space is sorely needed at CIW, 
where, as in most women’s prisons, the vast 
majority of inmates are survivors of abuse in the community. 
“The amazing thing about art is that it 
lets people express emotions that they 
might not feel safe talking about with 
one another,” said Desiree Magsombol, 
a JDI Program Director and one of the 
workshop facilitators. “It can be dangerous 
to appear vulnerable and to open yourself 
up to others in prison. Our aim is to give 
people a safe place to work through some 
of their pain and to connect with each 
other, in an environment that is relaxed 
and free of judgement.”   
At the end of the day’s workshop, Je’Anna 
has finished two masks. She explained, “All 
my life I’ve been forced to wear a mask to hide my abuse and the shame and guilt the abuse induced.” Her first mask represents 
the negative thoughts she still struggles 
with as a result of the abuse she has endured in her life — but the second one represents a vision of her inner self 
as strong, resilient, and nurturing. She’s 
proud of her handiwork. She said, “The 
workshops bring about clearer awareness 
that I am not alone in my feelings and that 
I can feel safe releasing them.”hen we established a sister  
organization in Johannesburg 
— Just Detention International-
South Africa ( JDI-SA) — the 
goal was to build upon our long history of 
successful advocacy there. 
That’s exactly what has happened. Since 
opening its doors in 2011, JDI-SA has trained scores of corrections officials on keep ing pris-
oners safe, published a paradigm-shifting re-
port on violence behind bars, and, with other civil society partners, launched an online sto-rytelling platform to share survivor accounts. 
Last month, JDI-SA racked up its most im-
pressive win to date when the Department of 
Correctional Services (DCS) — which runs 
South Africa’s prisons — finally committed 
to rolling out a nationwide policy to address 
prisoner rape. 
Drafted almost a decade ago by JDI, senior 
DCS officials, and Sasha Gear — then with the Centre for the Study of Violence and Reconciliation and now JDI-SA’s Program Director — the Policy to Address Sexual Abuse 
in DCS Facilities is rooted in human rights 
principles and recognizes DCS' duty to pro-tect prisoners. While having a policy won’t in itself end prisoner rape, it provides a roadmap for doing so. For example, it calls for quality  
rape crisis services and increased protections 
for LGBT prisoners.
Isak knows better than anyone that these 
safety measures are sorely needed. He was 
raped over and over again while awaiting 
trial in a prison in the Western Cape. The 
staff knew that Isak, who had never been 
locked up before, was in danger. Yet no one 
— not even the medical staff — lifted a finger  
in support.
JDI had survivors like Isak in mind when 
we first floated the idea of developing a na-
tional sexual abuse policy. DCS’ top brass was 
open to it, and worked closely with us on a 
draft. But when several key officials left DCS,  
our momentum ground to a halt. 
Instead of giving up, we did what  
committed advocates do when confront-Making South Africa's Prisons Safe
A Moment to Heal While  Inside
ed with a seem ingly intractable chal-
lenge. We kept fighting. With our efforts 
stalled at the national level, JDI-SA em-
barked on a project to test the policy at  
one prison: Leeuwkop Correctional Facility, 
in Johannesburg. 
The strategy worked. Using the national 
policy as a template, JDI-SA is helping to 
create a sea change at Leeuwkop. Previously, 
staff lacked a basic awareness of sexual abuse; 
many felt uncomfortable even discussing it. 
Now, thanks to JDA-SA’s on-site workshops, 
Leeuwkop has a team of officials who are 
deeply committed to keeping prisoners safe. 
They have increased their confidence in talk-
ing about sensitive issues — among them-
selves and with prisoners — and built skills 
in preventing sexual abuse, and responding 
when it occurs.
Because of the progress at Leeuwkop, DCS 
finally felt ready to start implementing the 
policy nationally — with JDI-SA’s help. DCS’ embrace of the policy comes too late for Isak. But Isak is celebrating this vic-
tory. His priority now is ensuring that no 
one else ever has to live through that pain.
As Isak told JDI-SA, “The greatest trag-
edy is not what happened to me in prison.  
The greatest tragedy will be for me and us 
to fail to stop this from happening to others 
and to forget about those who are still at risk 
of violence.”WJ
Our aim is to give peo-
ple a safe place to work through some of their pain and to connect with each other.Isak, prisoner rape survivor and advocate.here is no doubt that, since its 
passage more than a decade ago, 
the Prison Rape Elimination 
Act (PREA) has had a profound 
impact on our prison system. Thanks to PREA, we have a set of groundbreaking national standards for preventing and re-sponding to sexual abuse, which prison 
and jail staff nationwide are working to 
put in place in their facilities.
But for all the good PREA has done, it 
also contained a few glaring flaws. For 
one, there was no firm deadline for states 
to comply with the PREA standards. 
Further, annual reporting requirements 
for states were minimal; governors sim-ply had to sign a form indicating whether 
they were in compliance with PREA or 
not, but not share a full update on their 
progress. JDI recognized these problems, 
and we went back to Capitol Hill to fix 
them. In December 2016 we helped pass 
a law, the Justice for All Act ( JFAA), which will do just that. 
JFAA requires states to adopt the PREA 
standards within six years or forfeit rele-
vant federal funds, patching the loophole 
that allowed states to put off compliance 
indefinitely. It also calls for greater trans-
parency into how well PREA is working, 
requiring states to provide the Depart-
ment of Justice with annual updates on 
their implementation efforts. JFAA also 
creates a one-stop federal clearinghouse 
for all audit reports — making it easier for advocates to monitor the progress of prisons and jails across the country. 
Similar to our efforts to pass PREA, 
we worked closely with dozens of allied organizations and a bipartisan group of elected officials on JFAA. In particu-
lar, JDI applauds the commitment of 
JFAA’s sponsors in Congress — Senators 
John Cornyn (R-TX) and Patrick Leahy 
(D-VT) and Representatives Ted Poe (R-TX) and Jim Costa (D-CA) — and President Barack Obama, who signed it into law. And we applaud you, our sup-porters, without whom this victory would not have been possible. 
3action  update                     
april 2017  | action  updateBringing Holiday Hope Behind BarsVictory on The Hill!
JDI staff and volunteers writing heartfelt greetings to incarcerated survivors at our holiday gathering, 
held annually in Los Angeles. This year, we deli vered more than 13,000 messages to survivors nation-
wide — a JDI record.TEddie knows how hard it is to spend 
the holidays behind bars. Serving time 
in a Florida prison, Eddie has been locked up for more than a decade. He 
has endured ongoing sexual harassment from 
officers and other prisoners; fearful of being 
attacked, he spends most of his days by him-
self. “I’m afraid to open up to people because 
the motive behind most of their kindness is 
linked to a sexual favor,” he told us. “So I stay 
away and pray for help.”
In previous years, Eddie could rely on care 
packages from his mother to get him through 
the holidays. But last May, she passed away. 
With the New Year looming, Eddie’s loneli-ness intensified. Every day the call for mail would serve as a painful reminder that he no 
longer had his mother — or anyone at all — 
who cared about him. 
But then, one day in December, something 
unexpected happened: Eddie’s name made it 
into the mail call. When he opened his pack-
age, a flood of holiday cards spilled out, each one containing a powerful message of hope. “If you only knew what I just went through, and how I was feeling before I got your pack-
age of love,” he wrote. “I cried tears of joy. You 
made me very happy today. I got mail and some genuine love. Thank you so much — 
it’s nice to smile.”
Because of you, hundreds of survivors, like 
Eddie, were reminded that they aren’t alone. Through our Words of Hope  campaign, we de-
livered more than 13,000 holiday greetings 
from our supporters to survivors nationwide. 
That’s a JDI record, by a wide margin. 
This surge of support also made a difference 
to Christopher, a survivor of rape in a Loui-
siana prison. In a letter to JDI, Christopher 
marveled at the outpouring of compassion. 
“Those handwritten messages from people 
around the country are the ultimate proof of 
support. I can't believe that I was just sitting 
in my cell by myself and received something 
like this.”  
Christopher’s appreciation for your heartfelt 
greetings was echoed by Gregory, a survivor in Illinois. He wrote, “Those words of en-
couragement brought a smile to my whole 
heart and soul, which is something I could really use at this time in my life.”
Thank you, JDI supporters, for sharing your 
compassion with Eddie, Christopher, Greg-
ory, and so many others. In a Record-Breaking Effort, JDI Supporters Wrote More Than 
13,000 Holiday Messages to Prisoner Rape SurvivorsNot free to leave: When a person is stopped by a la w enforcement officer, even illegally, it can be virtually 
impossible to get away.
4 just detention international  april 2017  | action  updateaction  update                     
Stop Rape by Police
longstanding mission to end sexual abuse in 
detention. But it isn’t. Fighting police abuse 
fits squarely within our core goals. People de-
tained by a law enforcement officer may not 
be inside a jail cell, but they are not free to 
leave. This holds true even when an arrest is 
illegal, but the person does not feel safe to 
walk away — or does not know they have the right to do so. 
Jayde certainly didn’t feel she could leave. The 
cop wielded a badge and a gun, and it was 
late at night, with no one else around. Even 
if someone saw them, who would believe her 
word over a cop’s? After handcuffing her, the 
officer drove Jayde to an abandoned area. He 
then raped and beat her, before leaving her 
by the side of the road. He told Jayde that he 
would hurt her if she ever told anyone about 
the abuse. 
Jayde is far from alone in having suffered sex-
ual assault at the hands of police — though 
no one knows just how prevalent this abuse is. 
Unlike prisoner rape, which the government 
has studied in great depth, there has been no 
nationwide federal research into sexual mis-
conduct by law enforcement. One of JDI’s ad-
vocacy strategies will be to push for such data 
collection. In the meantime, we will continue 
to amplify the voices of people who have sur-
vived this violence, like Jayde.rom the moment the cop stopped her, 
Jayde knew something was wrong. The 
officer insisted that she was jaywalk-
ing, even though she plainly was not. 
Then he ordered her to submit to a pat search — and that’s when Jayde really got scared. A transgender woman of color, Jayde was aware 
that just walking at night could be dangerous, 
and that sometimes it was law enforcement 
— the people who were supposed to protect 
her — who posed the biggest threat. 
Sadly, what happened next showed why Jayde 
had every reason to be afraid. The cop groped 
her repeatedly during the search, all the while 
denigrating her for not being “a real woman.” 
Then he told Jayde he was taking her to jail for jaywalking. Terrified, Jayde got in his car. 
Over the last few months, JDI has gathered 
testimony from dozens of survivors of sexual 
abuse by law enforcement. This effort is part 
of our new initiative to highlight abuse by of-
ficers who have arrest powers — whether an 
FBI agent, a parole officer, or a cop walking 
the beat. Right now, our focus is listening to 
survivors and sharing their stories; our broad-
er aim is to end this violence, and make sure 
survivors get the help they need. 
Launching a project on law enforcement 
abuse may seem like a departure from JDI’s With Help from Survivors, JDI Seeks to Shine a 
Light on Sexual Abuse By Law EnforcementSurvivors of Police 
Abuse Speak Out
JDI has long relied on first-hand ac-
counts from survivors to guide our efforts 
to stop sexual abuse in detention. A new 
JDI initiative to combat sexual abuse by 
law enforcement will be no different. 
Over the past few months, we have gath-
ered testimony from dozens of people 
about abuse they suffered at the hands 
of officials who are armed and have the 
authority to arrest. It is a courageous act 
to speak out against any sexual abuse, and 
especially so when the perpetrator wields 
such power.  
You can read some of their stories by visit-
ing our website:
www.justdetention.org/rapebypolice
just detention international
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010Tel:  (213) 384-1400Fax: (213) 384-1411
(DVW&RDVW2IïFH
1900 L Street NW,  Suite 601Washington, DC 20036Tel: (202) 506-3333
Fax: (202) 506-7971
JDI-South Africa
Norwood Place, 2nd Floor 66 Grant AvenueNorwood, Johannesburg 2192South AfricaTel: +27 (11) 483 0989
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.orgF
