 
 
 
The Story of Maher Arar 
RENDITION TO TORTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
666 broadway  new york ny 10012  
t 212 614 6481  f 212 614 6499  www.ccrjustice.org  
 
In September 2002, as he was on his way home to Can ada, Center for Constitutional Rights (CCR) client Maher 
Arar was sent by U.S. officials to be detained and interrogated under torture in Syria under a program  known as 
“extraordinary rendition.” Maher, a Canadian citize n of Syrian descent, was never charged with a crime , but he lost a 
year of his life and carries the mental scars of hi s detention and torture around with him to this day . This is the story 
of his nightmarish year of rendition, detention, an d torture – and of Maher’s fight to achieve justice .  
 
 Maher Arar: Rendition to Torture 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
 1 Table of Contents Table of Contents Table of Contents Table of Contents    
 
Who is Maher Arar?         2 
 
Mr. Arar’s Detention in the United States      2 
    
Mr. Arar’s Rendition to Syria        3 
 
Mr. Arar’s Detention & Torture in Syria      4 
 
What is Rendition?           5 
 
U.S. Legal Obligations Regarding Rendition      5 
 
Arar v. Ashcroft           6 
 
Legal Timeline          7 
 
Canadian Inquiry Findings Related to Maher Arar     10 
 
Recommendations to the United States       11 
 Maher Arar: Rendition to Torture 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
 2 Who is Maher Arar? 
 
Maher Arar is a Syrian-born Canadian citizen who mo ved to Canada with his parents when he was 
17 years old.  Because he left Syria at 17, he avoi ded doing mandatory military service there. After 
attending McGill University and obtaining a Master’ s degree in telecommunications, he moved to 
Ottawa with his wife, Dr. Monia Mazigh, and young d aughter Barâa.  
 
In 1999, he started working for The MathWorks, Inc,  a high-tech firm based in Boston, and then 
returned to Ottawa in 2001 to start his own consult ing company, while still working as a consultant 
for The MathWorks, Inc. Maher and his wife had thei r second child, Houd, in February 2002.  
 
Mr. Arar’s Detention in the United States 
 
In 2002, Maher was living in Canada, where he had b een a citizen since 1991, and worked as a 
consultant with The MathWorks, Inc.  
 
While in Tunisia with his wife and children, visiti ng his wife’s family in September 2002, Maher 
received an email from The MathWorks saying they ne eded him to do some consulting work.  
Leaving his family in Tunis, he returned to Canada on a flight that transited through New York.  
 
On September 26, 2002, Maher’s flight arrived in Ne w York at JFK airport at 2:00 p.m., where he 
was supposed to catch his connecting flight to Mont real.  At immigration, Maher gave his valid 
Canadian passport to the immigration officer. After  his name was entered into the computer, he was 
pulled aside and taken to another area. This is whe n his nightmare began. Two hours later, he was 
fingerprinted, photographed and his bags were searc hed. At this point, immigration officials told 
Maher that this was regular procedure, but refused to answer his increasingly anxious questions 
about what was happening.  They did not let him mak e a phone call.  
 
Officials from the New York Police Department and t he Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI) 
arrived and began questioning him.  Maher repeatedl y asked for a lawyer, but was told that he had 
no right to a lawyer because he was not a U.S. citi zen.  The officials promised that they would let 
him catch the next flight to Montreal once he answe red their questions.  Maher had nothing to hide, This is who I am. I am a 
father and a husband. I 
am a telecommunications 
engineer and 
entrepreneur. I have never 
had trouble with the 
police, and have always 
been a good citizen. So I 
still cannot believe what 
has happened to me, and 
how my life and career 
have been destroyed.  
 — Maher Arar  
Maher Arar: Rendition to Torture 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
 3 so he cooperated with them.  The officials interrog ated Maher about everything - his work, his 
salary, his travel in the U.S., as well as about an  acquaintance of his, Abdullah Almalki. They swore 
at him and insulted him. Maher told them everything  he knew. He was then questioned by an INS 
officer. 
 
After these grueling interrogations that lasted unt il midnight, they chained Maher’s wrists and ankles , 
and took him to a cell in a nearby building at JFK Airport. He was not provided with any food and 
could not sleep as the lights were kept on all nigh t.  The next day, he was taken to the Metropolitan 
Detention Center (MDC) in Brooklyn, where he was ke pt in solitary confinement.  During his 
detention at the MDC, he was shackled and interroga ted. During one interrogation, an INS official 
informed him that they would like him to “voluntari ly” return to Syria, a country known for torture 
and abuse of its prisoners; Maher repeatedly stated  that he wanted to go home to Canada and that 
he would be tortured if he were sent to Syria.  He became increasingly worried that the U.S. 
government planned to send him to Syria regardless of his concerns.  
 
On October 1, 2002, Maher was given an INS-issued d ocument stating that he was inadmissible into 
the United States because he belonged to an organiz ation designated as a “Foreign Terrorist 
Organization,” namely, al Qaeda.  
 
Two days later, on October 3, 2002, Maureen Girvan of the Canadian Consulate visited Maher at the 
MDC. Maher expressed to her his fear that he might be removed to Syria, and Ms. Girvan assured 
Maher that removal to Syria was not an option, as h e was a Canadian citizen. The Canadian 
government expected that the U.S. would return him to Canada. They did not.  
 
It fact, it would be more than a year before Maher would set foot in Canada again. 
 
Maher repeatedly asked for counsel, but his request s were denied. Finally, on October 5 he had a 
short visit with a lawyer — nearly one week after h e was detained.  Even after his visit with an 
attorney, he was interrogated without a lawyer bein g present, despite his repeated requests.  
 
Mr. Arar’s Rendition to Syria 
 
After Maher met with the Canadian official and his lawyer, several federal officers interrogated him 
regarding his opposition to removal to Syria. He pr otested that he wanted his lawyer and was told 
that his lawyer refused to come. This interrogation  lasted from 9pm on a Sunday night until 3am 
Monday morning. Throughout the interrogation, Maher  expressed grave concern that he would be 
tortured if he were sent to Syria. Maher had not fu lfilled his obligatory military service before he 
emigrated from Syria. Based on both Syria’s well-kn own history of human rights abuses as well as 
Maher’s own personal situation, he pled with U.S. o fficials not to send him to Syria. They ignored 
his concerns. 
 
At 4am on October 8, 2002, Maher was given his Fina l Notice of Inadmissibility informing him that, 
based in part on classified information, INS Region al Director Defendant J. Scott Blackman had 
ordered that he be removed, and the Commissioner of  the INS had determined that his removal to 
Syria was consistent with Article 3 of the United N ations Convention Against Torture. Maher was 
taken from his cell to a private airport in New Jer sey and was flown by private jet to Amman, Jordan 
via Rome, Italy. He heard flight crew identify them selves as members of the “Special Removal Maher Arar: Rendition to Torture 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
 4 Unit.” He was beaten in Amman and hours after arriv al, was taken to Syria, where he spent the next 
year in unspeakably horrific conditions.   
 
Mr. Arar’s Detention & Torture in Syria  
 
In Syria, Maher spent more than 10 months in a grav e-
like underground cell. During the first two weeks o f 
detention, he was subject to intense beating and 
interrogated, and whipped with an electrical cable.   He 
was regularly threatened with more torture, and for ced to 
hear others being tortured.  He was forced to “conf ess” 
to having trained in Afghanistan, although he has n ever 
been to Afghanistan. It is believed his interrogati ons were 
coordinated with U.S. officials, who supplied infor mation 
and questions and received reports from the Syrians  on 
Maher’s responses. 
 
On October 5, 2003, Syria released Maher without fi ling 
any charges. After a year of torture and investigat ion, the 
Syrian Ambassador to the U.S., Imad Moustapha, said , 
“We did our investigations. We traced links. We tra ced 
relations. We tried to find anything. We couldn’t.”   
 
The Syrian security officials released Maher into t he 
custody of Canadian Embassy officials in Damascus, 
Syria. That night, the Canadian Consulate flew Mahe r to 
Ottawa where, after being held for a year at the re quest of 
U.S. authorities in a grave-like cell, and tortured  without 
access to an attorney or any recourse to challenge his 
detention, Maher was finally free and reunited with  his 
wife and children. 
 
Since his release, Maher and his wife Monia, who wo rked 
tirelessly on his behalf during the time Maher was 
imprisoned to get him released, have fought to clea r his 
name and hold those who rendered him to Syria 
accountable.  
 
Numerous major revelations have since come to light . 
According to testimony at Canadian hearings, Maher was 
never wanted for any crime in Canada, nor was he ev er 
even a suspect in a crime. Indeed, Maher has never been 
charged with any crime in any country. 
 
The Center for Constitutional Rights, which began w orking with 
Maher’s family before his release, brought his case  after he arrived 
home. CCR, together with the law-firm DLA Piper, co ntinues to 
represent Maher in his civil case against the U.S. government – Arar v. Ashcroft – so that Maher may f inally receive 
some small measure of justice for his rendition to torture at the hands of the U.S. I describe my cell in Syria as a 
grave because it was just three-
feet wide, six-feet long, seven-
feet high and unlit. While I was 
there I sometimes felt on the 
verge of death after beatings with 
a black electrical cable about two 
inches thick. They mostly aimed 
for my palms but sometimes 
missed and hit my wrists. Other 
times, I was left alone in a special 
“waiting room” within earshot of 
others' screams. At the end of the 
day, they would tell me that 
tomorrow would be worse. In 
those ten-and-a-half months I lost 
about 40 pounds. I never saw, but 
only heard, the agony of my 
fellow prisoners. I was so scared I 
urinated on myself twice. 
I agreed to sign any document 
they put before me, even those I 
wasn't allowed to read. And 
eventually I would say anything at 
all to avoid more torture. “Do you 
want me to use that?” someone 
would ask when I didn't answer 
soon enough, pointing to a steel 
chair in the corner of the 
interrogation room.  
No, I told them, I did not want 
them to use that. And yes, I told 
them, I had been to Afghanistan. 
It wasn't true, but it seemed 
important enough to my jailers. 
After a month, broken physically 
and mentally, I was also 
instructed to write these things 
down on a piece of paper next to 
other answers to other questions 
that they had gone ahead and 
penned on my behalf. 
 Maher Arar: Rendition to Torture 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
 5 What is Rendition?  
 
Extraordinary rendition is the forced transfer of a  person 
from one country to another for arbitrary detention  and 
interrogation under torture.  Since September 11, 2 001, the 
Bush administration has used extraordinary renditio n to 
covertly transport an estimated 150 persons—and pos sibly 
more—for detention and interrogation without judici al 
oversight as part of the so-called “war on terror.”   Victims of 
extraordinary rendition are sent to countries where  torture is 
routinely practiced on detainees. 
 
 
U.S. legal obligations regarding rendition 
 
/square4 United Nations Convention against Torture (ratified by the U.S. in 1994),  Article 3: 
 
1.  No State Party shall expel, return (“ refouler ”) or extradite a person to another State where 
there are substantial grounds for believing that he  would be in danger of being subjected to 
torture.  
 
2.  For the purpose of determining whether there are su ch grounds, the competent authorities 
shall take into account all relevant considerations  including, where applicable, the existence 
in the State concerned of a consistent pattern of g ross, flagrant or mass violations of human 
rights.  
 
/square4 The Foreign Affairs Reform and Restructuring Act of 19 98  is domestic legislations which 
requires that the U.S. to comply with CAT Article 3  and take extra measures to prevent the 
involuntary return, removal or extradition of a per son to a country where he or she fears torture. 
 
/square4 International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights ( ratified by the US in 1992) Article 7:  
 
No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, i nhuman or degrading treatment or 
punishment.   In particular, no one shall be subjec ted without his free consent to medical or 
scientific experimentation. 
 
/square4 Torture Act 2000, 18 U.S.C. §§ 2340, 2340A 
 
2340. Definitions 
As used in this chapter— 
 
(1) ``torture'' means an act committed by a person acting under the color of law specifically 
intended to inflict severe physical or mental pain or suffering (other than pain or suffering 
incidental to lawful sanctions) upon another person  within his custody or physical control; 
         
(2) ``severe mental pain or suffering'' means the p rolonged mental harm caused by or resulting from—   
 
 (A) the intentional infliction or threatened infli ction of severe physical pain or suffering; 
(B) the administration or application, or threatene d administration or application, of mind-
altering substances or other procedures calculated to disrupt profoundly the senses or the 
personality; 
(C) the threat of imminent death; or “Rendition, as currently 
practiced, is undermining our 
moral credibility and standing 
abroad and weakening the 
coalitions with foreign 
governments that we need to 
effectively combat 
international terrorism.”  
-Senator Joe Biden.  
July 26, 2007 
 Maher Arar: Rendition to Torture 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
 6  (D) the threat that another person will imminently  be subjected to death, severe physical 
pain or suffering, or the administration or applica tion of mind-altering substances or other 
procedures calculated to disrupt profoundly the sen ses or personality; […] 
 
2340A. Torture  
(a) Offense.— Whoever outside the United States com mits or attempts to commit torture shall 
be fined under this title or imprisoned not more th an 20 years, or both, and if death results to 
any person from conduct prohibited by this subsecti on, shall be punished by death or 
imprisoned for any term of years or for life. […] 
 
(c) Conspiracy.— A person who conspires to commit a n offense under this section shall be 
subject to the same penalties (other than the penal ty of death) as the penalties prescribed for the 
offense, the commission of which was the object of the conspiracy.  
 
 
Arar v Ashcroft  
 
CCR, with the law-firm DLA Piper, represents Maher Arar in a case against the U.S. officials 
responsible for sending him to Syria to be interrog ated under torture, including former Attorney 
General John Ashcroft, former Deputy Attorney Gener al Larry Thompson, FBI Director Robert 
Mueller, and other U.S. immigration officials. 
 
Maher brought claims under the Fifth Amendment of t he U.S. Constitution for being sent to Syria 
for arbitrary detention and torture, as well as for  being denied access to counsel and the courts and 
his inhumane conditions of confinement in the U.S.   He also brought a claim under the Torture 
Victim Protection Act (TVPA) for being subjected to  torture under color of law of Syria. He seeks a 
jury trial, damages and declaratory relief.  The fi rst count alleges that by sending Arar to Syria to be 
tortured, Defendants are liable under the TVPA for conspiring with Syrian officials to subject him to 
torture under color of foreign law.  The second cou nt alleges that Defendants violated Mr. Arar’s 
substantive due process rights under the Fifth Amen dment by transporting him to Syria so that he 
would be tortured and coercively interrogated there .  The third count alleges that Defendants 
violated Mr. Arar’s substantive due process rights by transporting him to Syria to be arbitrarily 
detained there.  The fourth count alleges that Defe ndants’ inhumane treatment of Mr. Arar while he 
was detained in the United States, as well as their  preventing his access to counsel and the courts, 
including by lying to him and his attorney, further  violated his substantive due process rights. 
 
On February 16, 2006, Judge David G. Trager of the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of 
New York dismissed Maher’s claims.  The District Co urt dismissed Mr. Arar’s TVPA count on the 
ground that the Act does not protect non-U.S. citiz ens, and because it found that the U.S. officials, 
even though alleged to have conspired with Syrians officials to have Mr. Arar tortured in Syria, were 
not acting under color of foreign law unless they w ere acting at the behest of Syrian officials, and 
therefore the Act was not applicable. The District Court found that even assuming that Mr. Arar “There are international covenants against torture.  The submission of 
rendition is something that is going to have to com e under some judicial 
supervision…. I believe [Arar] is a very compelling  case that there needs 
to be judicial intervention or needs to be a lot mo re oversight than there 
has been on these matters.”  
-Senator Arlen Specter, March 7, 2007  Maher Arar: Rendition to Torture 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
 7 was entitled to Fifth Amendment substantive due pro cess protection under the U.S. Constitution, 
the Defendants could not be liable for sending him to Syria to be tortured and arbitrarily detained 
because national-security and foreign policy concer ns foreclose a damages remedy.  After rejecting 
Defendants’ argument that Mr. Arar was not entitled  to Constitutional protection because he had 
not “entered” the United States, the District Court  required Mr. Arar to re-plead his Fifth 
Amendment substantive due process claims to better allege that he was subjected to gross physical 
abuse in the U.S., what injury the denial of access  to counsel prevented him from grieving, and that 
Defendants were personally involved.  Finally, the District Court found that Maher did no t have 
standing to seek declaratory relief against the U.S . officials because he does not continue to suffer an 
ongoing harm which such relief would redress. 
 
Mr. Arar appealed this decision to a three judge pa nel of the Second Circuit Court of Appeals, 
which affirmed the dismissal 2-1 in June 2008, agre eing with the lower court that Mr. Arar’s 
claims would interfere with national security. Howe ver, in an extremely rare move, the Court of 
Appeals decided that Mr. Arar’s appeal would be reh eard by twelve judges.  The rehearing 
occurred on December 9, 2008 in New York. 
 
 
Case Timeline 
 
January 22, 2004 The Center for Constitutional Right s filed suit, on behalf of Mr. Arar, in the U.S. 
District Court for the Eastern District of New York  against Attorney General 
John Ashcroft, former Deputy Attorney General Larry D. Thompson, and FBI 
Director Robert Mueller, as well as numerous direct ors of the U.S. immigration 
officials. 
  
September 27-   Defendants file motions to dismiss the case. 
October 4, 2004 
 
January 14, 2005 Mr. Arar’s opposition to the motion  to dismiss motions is filed. 
 
January 18, 2005  The U.S. government moved to dismi ss the case by asserting the “state secrets” 
privilege, claiming that the reason Mr. Arar was de emed a member of al-Qaeda 
and sent to Syria, instead of Canada, are ”state se crets.” The government argued 
that litigating the would reveal intelligence gathe ring methods and harm national 
security and foreign relations.  
 
March 15, 2005 CCR filed a response to the US gover nment’s “state secrets” motion, arguing 
that Mr. Arar could prove his case without privileg ed information, and even if “Maher Arar was the victim of the Bush Administrati on's program of 
'extraordinary rendition.'  This is a disgusting pr actice that brings dishonor 
to the United States of America, and ultimately end angers our troops in the 
field by validating the use of torture all over the  world.  We must know the 
truth of what happened to Maher Arar, why it happen ed, upon whose 
orders, and upon what justification.”  
-Representative Edward Markey, September 20, 2006   
                                                                                                   Maher Arar: Rendition to Torture 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
 8 such information were necessary to establish a defe nse, procedural safeguards 
could protect such information.  
 
February 16, 2006  Judge David G. Trager of the U.S.  District Court for the Eastern District of 
New York dismissed Mr. Arar's claims against U.S. g overnment officials for 
“rendering” him to Syria to be tortured and arbitra rily detained. In so doing, 
Judge Trager found, inter alia , that national security and foreign policy 
considerations prevented him from holding the offic ials liable for carrying out 
an extraordinary rendition even if such conduct vio lates our treaty obligations or 
customary international law. He declined to rule on  the “state secrets” motion at 
that time. 
 
August 17, 2006 Final judgment was entered, after M r. Arar declined to re-plead his domestic 
detention claim, opting instead to proceed with the  allegations contained in the 
complaint.  
 
September 12, 2006 Mr. Arar's notice of appeal was filed in the Second Circuit.  
 
September 18, 2006 The Canadian Commission of Inqui ry established by the Canadian Government 
to Investigate the Actions of Canadian Officials in  Relation to Mr. Arar issued 
its report. The Commissioner concluded "categorical ly that there is no evidence 
to indicate that Mr. Arar has committed any offence  or that his activities 
constitute a threat to the security of Canada." Can adian investigators, with U.S. 
cooperation, exhaustively investigated Mr. Arar, an d found no information that 
could implicate Mr. Arar in terrorist activities. T he Commission also found no 
evidence that Canadian officials acquiesced in the U.S. decision to detain and 
remove Mr. Arar to Syria, but that it is very likel y that the U.S. relied on 
inaccurate and unfair information about Mr. Arar th at was provided by Canadian 
officials.  
 
December 12, 2006 Mr. Arar’s opening appeal brief i s filed in the Second Circuit. 
 
December 21, 2006 U.S. Secretary of State Condoleez za Rice said that the U.S. would re-examine 
Mr. Arar’s placement on the U.S. government’s watch  list. 
 
January 22, 2007 The Department of Justice publicly r eleased a week-old letter to Canda’s 
Minister of Public Safety, Stockwell Day, claiming that the U.S. still had reason 
to keep Mr. Arar on the government watch list. The letter, signed by Attorney 
General Alberto Gonzales and Secretary of Homeland Security Michael Chertoff 
also offered to share “U.S. derived” information wi th the Canadians in a 
confidential meeting. The release of the letter cam e four days after Minister Day 
had examined all the U.S.-held information and decl ared that such information 
“has not altered our opinion on this at all.” 
 
January 26, 2007 Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Har per and the RCMP Commissioner 
apologized to Mr. Arar and his family.  Prime Minis ter Harper also announced 
that the government had agreed to compensate Mr. Ar ar in the amount of 
approximately $10 million. 
 
February 22, 2007 Defendants file their response to  Mr. Arar’s opening appellate brief. 
 
April 19, 2007  Mr. Arar's reply brief is filed bef ore the Second Circuit.  
 Maher Arar: Rendition to Torture 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
 9 August 9, 2007 The Canadian government released new  information regarding Mr. Arar’s 
rendition. In response to a court order, the govern ment released some portions 
of a report that it had previously redacted due to “national security” concerns. 
The unredacted portions showed that the CIA was inv olved in Mr. Arar's 
detention starting at least when he was detained in  New York and had been in 
contact with Canadian officials during that time. T hey also revealed that in mid-
2002, Canadian investigators were not able to convi nce the FBI to institute a 
criminal investigation of the subjects of their inv estigation, much less Mr. Arar, 
who had been identified as a potential witness.  
 
October 18, 2007 Mr. Arar testified via video-link before a House Joint Committee Hearing 
convened to discuss his rendition by the U.S. to Sy ria for interrogation under 
torture. During the hearing, members of Congress pu blicly apologized to him. 
The next week, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice admitted during a House 
Foreign Affairs Committee Hearing that the U.S. gov ernment mishandled the 
case of Mr. Arar. 
 
November 9, 2007:   The appeal was argued before a three-judge panel of the Second Circuit Court of 
Appeals. 
 
June 5, 2008   The Office of the Inspector General ( OIG) of the Department of Homeland 
Security issued its Report on the actions of U.S. i mmigration officials 
surrounding the decision to send Maher Arar to Syri a. The same day, Inspector 
General (IG) Richard Skinner testified before Subco mmittees of the House 
Foreign Affairs and Judiciary Committees to answer q uestions about the Report. 
The Report found that the "operations order" to rem ove Mr. Arar was prepared 
and flight clearances were sent to Rome and Amman b efore Maher's 
Convention Against Torture (CAT) interview or asses sment took place, and 
before INS received so-called "assurances" to prote ct him. In fact, the INS 
determined that if Maher were sent to Syria he woul d likely be tortured, but that 
decision was later overridden. The IG testified tha t he could not get a 
satisfactory answer as to why Maher was sent to Syr ia, and he could not rule out 
the possibility that it was for the purpose of inte rrogation under unlawful 
conditions.  
 
June 30, 2008 The three-judge panel of the Second Ci rcuit Court of Appeals issued its 
decision. The majority opinion found that adjudicat ing Mr. Arar’s claims would 
interfere with national security and foreign policy , a decision that the dissenting 
judge found gives federal officials the license to “violate constitutional rights 
with virtual impunity.”  The majority also found th at, as a foreigner who had not 
been formally admitted to the U.S., Mr. Arar had no  constitutional due process 
rights with respect to the government’s interferenc e with his access to a lawyer. 
The Court dismissed Mr. Arar’s TVPA claims by findi ng that the federal officials 
would have had to have acted under the control of t he Syrian officials to be held 
liable.    
 
July 10, 2008  Members of Congress wrote to Attorney  General Michael Mukasey requesting 
that he appoint an outside special counsel to inves tigate and prosecute any 
crimes committed by United States officials in send ing Maher to Syria.  On July 
23rd, Mr. Mukasey testified before Congress that DO J would not be appointing 
special counsel “at this time.”  Maher Arar: Rendition to Torture 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
 10  
August 12, 2008  The Second Circuit sua sponte  issued an order that the case will be reheard en 
banc.   
 
September 23, 2008 Mr. Arar’s replacement opening b rief is filed in the Second Circuit. 
 
October 2008  Six amicus briefs in support of Mr. A rar are filed in the Second Circuit. 
 
November 4, 2008 Defendants’ replacement briefs are  filed in the Second Circuit. 
 
November 14, 2008 Mr. Arar’s replacement reply brie f is filed in the Second Circuit. 
 
December 9, 2008 Oral arguments heard by Second Cir cuit Court of Appeals en banc.   
 
 
 
 
Canadian Inquiry Findings Related to Maher Arar 
    
Upon Mr. Arar’s release and in response to public p ressure, the Canadian government launched an 
extensive public Commission of Inquiry to investiga te the responsibility of Canadian officials in his 
rendition to Syria.  After reviewing over 20,000 go vernment documents and taking testimony from 
over 70 government witnesses, the Commission releas ed a 1,200 page report in September 2006.  
The Commission concluded: 
 
1.  There is “no evidence” indicating the Mr. Arar comm itted any offense or implicating him in 
terrorist activity. 
2.  There is no evidence that Canadian officials partic ipated in the U.S. decision to detain Mr. 
Arar and send him to Syria. 
3.  The U.S. decision to detain Mr. Arar very likely re lied on inaccurate and unfair information 
about Mr. Arar that had been provided by Canadian o fficials. 
4.  Canadian officials had not acted quickly enough to get Mr. Arar out of Syria and leaked false 
information which tarnished Mr. Arar’s reputation u pon his return. 
 
Justice O’Connor, who headed the Commission, stated : “Canadian investigators made extensive efforts to 
find any information that could implicate Mr. Arar in terrorist activities. They did so over a lengthy  period of time, 
even after Mr. Arar’s case became a cause célèbre . The results speak for themselves: they found none. ”  
 
In January 2007, the Canadian government settled Mr . Arar’s civil case in Canada, apologizing to 
him and paying him nearly $10 million.  Prime Minis ter Harper of Canada and the Commissioner of 
the Royal Canadian Mounted Police apologized to Mah er Arar and his family for the "terrible 
ordeal" they suffered.  He has also called on the U S to “come clean” and acknowledge “the 
deficiencies and inappropriate conduct that occurre d in this case.”     
 Maher Arar: Rendition to Torture 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
 11 “The Bush Administration refuses to acknowledge any  responsibility, 
instead offering tepid explanation that Syrian offi cials assured the U.S. that 
Arar would not be tortured. These are the same Syri an officials with whom 
our government now says it will not negotiate becau se they are not 
trustworthy. Mr. Arar’s cases stands as a sad symbo l of the of how we 
have been too willing to sacrifice our core princip les to overarching 
government power in the name of security, when doin g so only 
undermines the principles we stand for and makes us  less safe.”  
- Senator Patrick Leahy , Time Magazine  
 Recommendations to the United States 
 
While the Canadian government has found that Mr. Ar ar is indeed innocent and cleared his name, 
and determined that his civil and human rights were  grossly violated, the Bush Administration 
refused to cooperate with the Canadian Inquiry, and  continues to insist that Mr. Arar belongs on the 
“no-fly” watch list,  while fighting to have Mr. Ar ar’s lawsuit dismissed.   
 
Recommendations: 
 
1.  Make an official, public apology to Maher Arar. 
2.  Launch an independent commission to investigate Mah er Arar’s rendition.  
3.  Demand that the Administration disclose what it did  to Maher Arar and why, including 
releasing all documents. 
4.  Demand that Maher Arar be removed from the Watch Li st immediately.  
 
  
 
 