T H E   C E N T E R   F O R   J U S T I C E  &  A C C O U N T A B I L I T Y  
870   M A R K E T  S T R E E T ,  S U I T E  684  • S A N  F R A N C I S C O ,  CA  • 9 4 1 0 2 
PHONE : 415.544.0444  •  F AX : 415.544.0456 
E-MAIL : CENTER 4JUSTICE @CJA .ORG   •  W EB : WWW .CJA .ORG  
 
 
PRESS RELEASE 
 
 
CONTACTS:  
Joshua Sondheimer , Director, Civil Litigation 
 cell: (415) 385-8511, in West Palm Beach 
James K. Green , Trial Counsel 
(561) 659-2029 
Sandra Coliver , Executive Director 
phone: (415) 544-0444, x305 
Prof. Patty Blum , trial team 
cell: (510) 384-7450, in West Palm Beach 
 
 
Florida Jury Finds Salvadoran Generals Liable for 
Torture, Awards $54.6 to Victims 
 
     West Palm Beach, FL, -- July 23, 2002 -- A Flo rida jury in a federal civil trial today 
awarded $ 54.6 million to three Salvadorans who pro ved they were brutally tortured by 
Salvadoran security forces between 1979-83.  
 
Juan Romagoza, Neriz Gonzalez and Carlos Mauricio s ued two Salvadoran generals who 
retired to south Florida in 1989. The suit is based  on two federal laws that allow torture 
victims to seek redress in U.S. courts, even if the  offenses occurred elsewhere.  
 
The two retired generals are José Guillermo Garcia,  Salvadoran Minister of Defense and 
Public Security from 1979-1983, and Carlos Eugenio Vides Casanova, the Director-
General of the Salvadoran National Guard from 1979- 1983, and subsequently Minister of 
Defense and Public Security.  
 
The 10-person jury awarded $14.6 million in compens atory damages and $40 million in 
punitive damages, as follows. For compensatory dama ges, $5 million to Juan Romagoza, 
$6.5 million to Neris Gonzalez, and $3.1 million to  Carlos Mauricio. For punitive 
damages: $10 million against Garcia and $5 million against Vides Casanova to 
Romagoza; $10 million against Garcia and $5 million  against Vides to Gonzalez; and $10 
million against Vides to Mauricio. 
 
Mauricio’s case was only against Vides because Garc ia had retired by the time Mauricio 
was detained and tortured in June 1983. 
  – 2 – July 15, 2009  
 During a four-week trial that began on June 24 the plaintiffs told of being detained and 
tortured by Salvadoran national guardsmen and polic e under the command of the two 
generals. The jury began deliberations on Thursday afternoon, and deliberated for a total 
of some 20hours. 
 
In addition to receiving electric shocks and other forms of brutal torture, Romagoza had 
been shot in the arm and suspended from his fingers  so as to damage his hands and thus 
ensure that he would never be able to perform surge ry again.  
 
Gonzalez, who was eight months pregnant at the time  she was tortured, was raped and 
stomped on. Her son died two months after birth as a result of the injuries. She was 
forced to watch the torture and execution of anothe r prisoner and drink his blood, and was 
left for dead by the national guardsmen.   
 
Mauricio was subjected to horrific beatings and was  strung up with his hands over his 
head for long periods of time. 
 
The case is one of the few cases since the Tokyo tr ials following World War II in which a 
foreign commander has been held liable under the do ctrine of command responsibility for 
war crimes committed by his troops.  
  
“This case sets an important precedent that command ers can be held responsible when 
they should know that their subordinates are tortur ing and killing civilians, and they give 
a green light for such abuses to continue by doing nothing to stop it,” said Joshua 
Sondheimer, Litigation Director of the Center for J ustice & Accountability, a San 
Francisco-based group that initiated the lawsuit in  1999. 
 
Plaintiff Neris Gonzalez said:  “I am pleased that justice has been done.  I joined this case 
to send a message of hope and to motivate  people e verywhere to continue the struggle for 
justice.  This verdict provides an example of what can be done.” 
 
Another plaintiff, Carlos Mauricio, said:  “This is  a great victory.  In order to prevent 
torture, we must fight impunity, and I hope this al lows other accusations to be brought 
against those responsible for torture.” 
 
The award may be difficult to collect. Sandra Coliv er, Executive Director of the Center 
for Justice and Accountability, stated that the Cen ter will make every effort to enforce the 
judgment, but that locating the generals’ assets ma y prove difficult.  
 
Carlos Mauricio, speaking for all of the plaintiffs , said, “We seek justice, not money. We 
hope that the assets of the generals can be taken a way from them in order to fulfill the 
punishment determined by the jury.” 
 
 “We also hope that the generals will be deported,”  stated Coliver. “Florida should not be 
a retirement community for human rights abusers. De portation is not a penalty that fits  – 3 – July 15, 2009  
 the crime, but it is a penalty. These men have enjo yed the benefits the U.S. has to offer for 
13 years. It would be a substantial hardship for th em to be forced to return to Salvador.”  
 
The lawyers for the plaintiffs, all of whom volunte ered their services, are James K. Green 
of West Palm Beach and Peter Stern and Beth van Sch aack of the international law firm 
Morrison & Foerster. They were assisted by Professo r Carolyn Patty Blum, Director of 
the International Human Rights Law Clinic, Boalt Ha ll School of Law, University of 
California at Berkeley. 
 
The suit was brought under the Torture Victim Prote ction Act and the Alien Tort Claims 
Act. The latter Act, adopted in 1789, gives survivo rs of egregious human rights abuses, 
wherever committed, the right to sue responsible pe rsons in U.S. federal court.  The 
Torture Victim Protection Act, signed into law by P resident Bush in 1992, gives similar 
rights to U.S. citizens and non-citizens alike to b ring claims for torture and extrajudicial 
killing. Under both laws, the perpetrator must be p hysically served with the lawsuit in the 
United States in order for the court to have jurisd iction.  
 
For more information about the case, including summ aries of trial testimony and 
information about the plaintiffs, please see the Ce nter’ s website: www.cja.org . 
- end - 