 
 
  
 Asociación Pro Derechos Humanos de España  
 
 
For Immediate Release  
February 5, 2008       
 
Contact:   U.S.:  Moira Feeney, Esq., Media Coordinator, 415-544-0444 x302, mfeeney@cja.org
     Spain: Almudena Bernabeu, CJA International Attorney, abernabeu@cja.org   
     Spain:  Manuel Ollé Sesé, APDHE President, 91 402 23 12, apdhe@telefonica.net
 
 
SPANISH JUDGE HEARS TESTIMONY FROM EXPERT WITNESSES AND SURVIVORS IN 
THE GUATEMALAN GENOCIDE CASE 
 
JUDGE PEDRAZ TAKES TESTIMONY OF CJA CL IENTS DESPITE REFUSAL OF GUATEMALAN 
COURT TO EXTRADITE DEFENDANTS 
 
Madrid, Spain, February 5, 2008:  Judge Santiago Pedraz took tes timony today from courageous 
survivors of genocide on crimes against humanity  and other abuses committed by the Guatemalan 
military during their campaign of terror perpetrated against the Mayan population of Guatemala in the 
1980s.  The witnesses, represented by the Center fo r Justice & Accountability (CJA) and the Spanish 
Association for Human Rights (APDHE), traveled from Guatemala to Madrid at great personal risk after 
the Guatemalan courts’ recent refusal to grant Spai n’s extradition request for the named defendants, all 
former Guatemalan officials, in what has b ecome known as the Guatemalan Genocide Case.  
 
This week’s testimony underscores Judge Pedraz’s re solve to move forward with this important case.  
 
Jesus Tecú Osorio, survivor of the Rio Negro m assacre and winner of the Reebok Human Rights Award, 
had this to say, “This is an exceptional, historic and unexpected opportunity and I am grateful to my 
attorneys and Judge Pedraz for making this possible.   My people and I feel heard, understood, and 
relieved to have the truth matter. This opportunity represents justice for all Guatemalans and honors the 
memory of my family and all the people that we have lost.”   
 
Also testifying this week is award winning intern ational journalist Allan Nairn who will describe the 
evidence that he uncovered while reporting on the abuses committed by the Guatemalan Army in the 
Guatemalan Quiche region in 1982, particularly those perpetrated in the Ixil Triangle.    
 
CJA International Attorney Almudena Bernabeu st ates: “Many have worked tirelessly and at great 
personal sacrifice to make this testimony possible.  I realize this is the result of a long journey for many 
people.  I am honored to be part of this historic moment.”   
 
The Guatemalan Genocide Case began in 1999 when Nobel laureate Rigoberta Menchú Tum and other victims filed a criminal complaint in Spain against senior Guatemalan government officials charging them with terrorism, genocide and systematic torture.  In  2004, CJA joined the case as partie civil (or civil 
representation) for Mayan survivors of the genocid e.  The case is modeled on the Pinochet case which 
was also brought in Spain.  APDHE, through its Pr esident Manuel Ollé Sesé, joined the case in 2007 on 
behalf of certain plaintiffs.  Professor Naomi Roht-A rriaza, Hastings College of the Law, San Francisco 
and Susie Kemp of the Netherlands are also part of the international legal team. 
 
CJA is a San Francisco-based human rights organiza tion dedicated to ending torture and other severe 
human rights abuses around the world and advancing the rights of survivors to seek truth, justice and 
redress.  CJA pursues litigation in the U.S. and Spain to hold perpetrators individually accountable for 
         
 CJA 870 Market Street Suite 688, San Francisco, CA 94102 tel 415 544 0444 fax 415 544 0456   info@cja.org;  cja.org 
 
APDHE Calle José Ortega y Gasset, 77, 2º A  28006 Madrid, Es paña t: 91 402 32 04; f: 91 402 84 99 apdhe@telefonica.net  
  2 of 2 
 
human rights abuses, develop human rights law and a dvance the rule of law in countries transitioning 
from abuses. 
 
APDHE, founded clandestinely in 1976 soon after the death of dictator Francisco Franco, is the oldest 
human rights association in Spain.  APDHE advocates among government agencies and civil society for the protection of human rights.  APDHE has a long tradition of working for the promotion of human rights in Latin America.  
 
For more information see www.cja.org .   
 
### 
 
 