   T H E   C E N T E R   F O R   J U S T I C E   &   A C C O U N T A B I L I T Y  
 
“Bringing human rights abusers to justice. Represen ting torture survivors in U.S. courts.” 
 
 
8 7 0  M A R K E T   S T R E E T ,  S U I T E  6 8 4 • S A N  F R A N C I S C O ,  CA  • 9 4 1 0 2 
   P H O N E :  4 1 5 . 5 4 4 . 0 4 4 4   •   F A X:  4 1 5 . 5 4 4 . 0 4 5 6  
E -M A I L : C E N T E R 4J U S T I C E @C J A.O R G   •   W E B:  W W W .C J A.O R G 
  
Top Salvadoran Military Officer, Now a U.S. 
Citizen, Faces Suit for Torture, Murder 
 
Evidence ties him to infamous murders of six opposi tion leaders 
 
Contacts: 
Center for Justice & Accountability  
Matthew Eisenbrandt, staff attorney – 415.544.0444 x304, cell 415.225.0028, meisenbrandt@cja.org 
Almudena Bernabeu, international attorney – 415.544.0 444 x306, cell 415.305.2097, awentzel@cja.org 
Carolyn Patty Blum, Senior Legal Advisor – 212.673.388 7, cpblum@mail.law.berkeley.edu 
 
Bass, Berry, & Sims  
David Esquivel, attorney – 615.742.6285, desquivel@b rassberry.com 
 
MEMPHIS, Dec. 10 – Several Salvadorans filed a laws uit in U.S. District Court here today against a for mer 
Salvadoran military commander for the torture they endured and for the murder of their family members.    
 
Nicolas Carranza, now a U.S. citizen living in Memp his, was Vice-Minister of Defense of El Salvador fr om 
1979-1981, a period marked by rampant human rights abuses, forced disappearances, arbitrary detention and 
murder.  The Security Forces, with assistance from “death squads,” carried out widespread atrocities a gainst 
suspected political “subversives,” including opposi tion political figures, members of labor unions, an d people 
who provided care and education to the public, such  as teachers, doctors, rescue workers and priests. Experts 
estimate that 10,000 to 12,000 unarmed civilians we re killed in 1980 alone. 
 
As Vice-Minister of Defense, Carranza exercised com mand and control over the three units of the securi ty 
forces – the National Guard, National Police and Tr easury Police – responsible for most of the attacks  on 
civilians.  The lawsuit also alleges that Carranza conspired with, or aided and abetted, subordinates in the 
security forces and others who carried out these ab uses. 
 
There are seven plaintiffs in this case: 
• Ana Patricia Chavez, Oscar Chavez, & Haydee Duran  – all children of Humberto & Guillermina Chavez, 
members of the teachers union Andes 21 de Junio , who were killed by the security forces in July 19 80 in the 
family’s home in Ahuachapan, El Salvador.  Ana Patr icia is also bringing a torture claim for being for ced 
to witness the torture and execution of her mother.   All three children now reside in California   
• Cecilia Santos – a student at the National University and employee o f the Salvadoran Ministry of Education 
when she was arrested in a shopping center in San S alvador in September 1980.  Cecilia was held in 
National Police Headquarters for eight days, tortur ed repeatedly with acid and electric shocks.  She w as 
then moved to a women’s prison where she was charge d with being a “subversive.”  She was never given 
adequate legal representation or a fair hearing, an d remained in the prison for three years where she 
suffered a stroke as a direct result of her torture .  She fled to the U.S. in 1983 after being release d under a 
general amnesty and now lives in New York.      T H E   C E N T E R   F O R   J U S T I C E   &   A C C O U N T A B I L I T Y  
 
“Bringing human rights abusers to justice. Represen ting torture survivors in U.S. courts.” 
 
 
8 7 0  M A R K E T   S T R E E T ,  S U I T E  6 8 4 • S A N  F R A N C I S C O ,  CA  • 9 4 1 0 2 
   P H O N E :  4 1 5 . 5 4 4 . 0 4 4 4   •   F A X:  4 1 5 . 5 4 4 . 0 4 5 6  
E -M A I L : C E N T E R 4J U S T I C E @C J A.O R G   •   W E B:  W W W .C J A.O R G 
 • Francisco Calderon and Anonymous plaintiff  – Francisco was a worker at a cigarette factory in  September 1980 
when, late one night, members of the National Polic e came to his family’s home near San Salvador.  As he 
opened the door, uniformed men grabbed him and forc ed him to the floor at gunpoint.  Francisco’s 
father, Paco Calderon, a school principal and leade r of the Andes 21 de Junio  union in Ahuachapan, came 
to the door and told the men to let his son go.  Pa co Calderon was then seized and, after a brief stru ggle, 
shot directly in front of his son.  Francisco now l ives in San Francisco, California.  He also brings a 
torture claim for being forced to witness the execu tion of his father.  The anonymous plaintiff is als o a 
relative of Paco Calderon whose name has been withh eld for security reasons.   
• Anonymous plaintiff  – Among the most gruesome and shocking incidents c arried out by the security forces 
during 1980, and one which led directly to the comm encement of the Salvadoran civil war, was the 
assassination of six of the leaders of the Frente Democrático Revolucionario  (Democratic Revolutionary Front, 
“FDR”), the main political coalition of pro-democra cy forces in opposition to the ruling junta.  The 
Commission on the Truth for El Salvador found that the FDR murders “outraged national and 
international public opinion and closed the door to  any possibility of a negotiated solution to the po litical 
crisis at the end of 1980.”  The anonymous plaintif f is the widow of one of the six leaders.          
 
Carranza’s liability in this case is based on his r esponsibility as a commander for abuses committed b y forces 
under his command. Under the internationally recogn ized doctrine of "command responsibility," a milita ry 
commander may be held responsible for abuses commit ted by subordinates if the commander knew, or 
should have known, about the abuses and failed to t ake all reasonable measures to prevent the abuses o r 
punish the offenders.  
 
The case is being filed jointly by the Center for J ustice & Accountability (CJA) and the Tennessee law  firm of 
Bass, Berry, & Sims.  Last year, CJA won a major vi ctory against two former Salvadoran Defense Ministe rs, 
General José Garcia and General Carlos Vides Casano va. A Miami jury ordered them to pay $54 million 
dollars to three Salvadoran torture survivors.  
 
Sandra Coliver, CJA’s Executive Director, stated: “ We are bringing this case to hammer home the messag e 
that the U.S. is not a safe haven for torturers. Th e survivors have waited 23 years for a chance to pu rsue 
justice. It’s outrageous that such a man was able t o become a U.S. citizen.  We hope that the case wil l result in 
his being denaturalized and deported.”  Plaintiff C ecilia Santos said that  “he [Carranza] was one of the 
intellectual authors and knows and knew that his su bordinates were doing these things…  I lift up my 
voice so that the world can see and know what we li ved through.” 
 
The legal team includes David Esquivel of Bass, Ber ry & Sims, Matthew Eisenbrandt and Almudena 
Bernabeu of CJA, and Carolyn Patty Blum, Professor Emeritus, Boalt Hall School of Law, University of 
California, Berkeley.   
 
The suit was brought under the Torture Victim Prote ction Act and the Alien Tort Claims Act. The latter  Act, 
adopted in 1789, gives survivors of egregious human  rights abuses, wherever committed, the right to su e 
responsible persons in U.S. federal court.  The Tor ture Victim Protection Act, signed into law by form er 
President Bush in 1992, extends the right to U.S. c itizens to bring claims against individuals acting under 
“actual or apparent authority, or color of law,” fo r torture and extrajudicial killing. Under both law s, the court 
has jurisdiction when the perpetrator is served wit h the lawsuit while physically present in the Unite d States.  
 
For more information about the case, please see CJA ’s website: www.cja.org .  