 
 
 
Contact: David Lerner, Riptide Communications, 212. 260.5000 
  
$19 Million Judgment Upheld Against Former Haitian Death Squad Leader 
 
Toto Constant Liable for Rape, Other Torture, Attem pted Killing 
 
(NEW YORK, December 1, 2009). Today, the Second Cir cuit Court of Appeals upheld a $19 million judgment  against 
Emmanuel “Toto” Constant, the former leader of Hait i’s notorious death squad known as FRAPH, concludin g “there is no 
basis on which to challenge the judgment of the dis trict court,” which awarded $15 million in punitive  and $4 million in 
compensatory damages to three women who survived ra pe, other torture and attempted killing committed b y Haitian 
paramilitary forces under Constant’s command.  The appeal was based on the judgment of U.S. District C ourt Judge 
Sidney H. Stein of the Southern District of New Yor k finding Constant liable for torture, including ra pe, attempted 
extrajudicial killing and crimes against humanity c arried out as part of FRAPH’s reign of terror durin g the period of 
military rule in Haiti from 1991 to 1994.   
The Second Circuit  ruled that plaintiffs had prese nted sufficient allegations that Constant had “work ed in concert with the 
Haitian military to terrorize and repress the civil ian population,”  relying on the legal standard the  Circuit set forth in its 
prior ruling in Kadic v. Karadzic (against Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic, now on trial in the Hague).  The Court 
also rejected Constant’s attempt to argue that he c ould not defend himself because of his incarceratio n in New York prison 
for mortgage fraud, holding that he was not even in  prison at the time he was served with the lawsuit.  
The Center for Justice and Accountability’s lead at torney on the case, Natasha Fain, commented, “Today ’s ruling is a 
momentous step for accountability for the state-spo nsored campaign of rape that destroyed so many fami lies in Haiti.”  
 Added Jennie Green, former Senior Attorney at Cent er for Constitutional Rights (CCR) who litigated bo th the cases 
against Constant and Karadzic, “We are pleased that  the Second Circuit followed the important ruling i n the case against 
Radovan Karadzic that human rights violators acting  with a brutal regime must be held accountable.” 
 
Constant first came to the U.S. in 1994 to avoid a Haitian arrest warrant for murder and torture. Desp ite the outcry from 
the Haitian community and human rights organization s, he lived and worked freely in New York. The U.S.  government 
moved to deport Constant in 1995. However, after he  disclosed on 60 Minutes that he had been on the CI A payroll during 
the period when FRAPH was formed, he was released f rom detention and was allowed to remain in the U.S.    He moved 
to Queens where he changed professions from death s quad leader to mortgage broker.  Constant began eng aging in fraud 
and was eventually indicted in 2006 on criminal mor tgage fraud charges by the New York Attorney Genera l.  In October 
of 2008, Constant was sentenced to 12 to 37 years i n prison for his role in a criminal mortgage fraud scheme in New 
York.   
 
The ATS lawsuit was filed in December 2004 by the C enter for Justice & Accountability (CJA) and the Ce nter for 
Constitutional Rights (CCR) on behalf of the three women, all survivors of torture at the hands of FRA PH. Sonnenschein 
Nath & Rosenthal LLP acted as pro bono co-counsel i n this matter.  
 
For additional information about the case, please s ee CJA’s website: www.cja.org .  
CJA is a San Francisco-based human rights organizat ion dedicated to deterring torture and other severe  human rights 
abuses around the world and advancing the rights of  survivors to seek truth, justice and redress.  CJA  uses litigation to 
hold perpetrators individually accountable for huma n rights abuses, develop human rights law, and adva nce the rule of 
law in countries transitioning from periods of abus e. 
The Center for Constitutional Rights is dedicated t o advancing and protecting the rights guaranteed by  the United States 
Constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human  Rights. Founded in 1966 by attorneys who represent ed civil rights 
movements in the South, CCR is a non-profit legal a nd educational organization committed to the creati ve use of law as a 
positive force for social change. Visit www.ccrjustice.org .  