FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE    
 
 
 
 
FORMER PINOCHET LIEUTENANT SUED IN FLORIDA FOR TORTURE AND DEATH  
OF VÍCTOR JARA  
 
Defendant Currently Residing in Florida; Wanted in Chile for Torture and Murder of  
Legendary Singer and Political Activist  
 
JACKSONVILLE , Florida, September 4, 2013  -- The Center for Justice and Accountability ( “CJA”) and pro-
bono counsel Chadbourne & Parke, LLP ( “Chadbourne ”) today announced that they have filed a lawsuit 
on behalf of the surviving family members of Chilean folk singer and social icon Víctor Jara, w ho was 
imprisoned, tortured and executed in Chile during the early days of the brutal military coup led by 
General Augusto Pinochet on September 11, 1973.  The lawsuit was filed in the U.S. District Court for the 
Middle District of Florida against Pedro Pa blo Barrientos Nuñez (“Barrientos”), a current resident of 
Deltona, Florida and a former officer in the Chilean Army under Pinochet.  The  complaint alleges that 
Barrientos personally tortured and executed Mr. Jara during the mass detention of thousands of 
intellectuals, political leaders and perceived political supporters of the Allende government at Chile 
Stadium immediately after the coup.  The case against Barrientos  includes claims of torture; extrajudicial 
killing; cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment ; crimes against humanity and arbitrary detention.  
   
Víctor Jara was a popular Chilean singer, songwriter, university professor and political activist who 
advocated for social and economic equality in Chile.  Mr. Jara was detained immediately following th e 
coup on September 11, 1973, during the Chilean Army’s siege of the State Technical University, where 
he was a faculty member.  From there, he and nearly 1,000 students, professors and other civilians were 
transferred from the University and imprisoned in  Chile Stadium, one of the first mass detention centers 
in the Pinochet military dictatorship.  Many of these civilians were brutally tortured and subsequently 
murdered  for suspicion of opposition to  the new military regime.  According to the complaint, Mr . Jara 
was repeatedly tortured by soldiers under Barrientos’ command.  The complaint further alleges that 
Barrientos ultimately shot Mr. Jara point blank in the head and then ordered soldiers under his 
command to repeatedly shoot Mr. Jara’s corpse.  An aut opsy later revealed that Mr. Jara was shot at 
least forty times.  
 
Barrientos was Lieutenant and Section Commander in the “Tejas Verdes,” a particularly notorious group 
within the Chilean Army responsible for torturing and killing perceived politi cal oppone nts of the 
military dictatorship.  He fled Chile and was discovered in the United States in 2012.   
 
Mr. Jara’s widow and her two daughters, Manuela and Amanda, have sought justice since 1978 when 
they requested Chilean authorities investigate and prosecute  those responsible for his torture and 
murder.  Their tireless pursuit of justice led the Chilean Supreme Court to indict Barrientos and seven 
other officers last December for the torture and murder of Mr. Jara and led to the discovery that 
Barrientos was living in the United States.  Joan Jara and her daughters have turned their efforts for 
justice this time to the U.S. courts.   
 
“Víctor’s pursuit of democracy and human rights remains an inspiration to people around the world and 
his memory is ever present  as we mark the 40th anniversary of the military coup and of Víctor’s murder,” 
said Joan Jara.  “But we are only one of many families still affected by the brutality of Pinochet’s rule and FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE    
the deplorable crimes committed by Barrientos and others in the regime.  We want to shine a light on 
the severe human rights abuses from this era and bring those responsible to justice, so that victims who 
continue to silently suffer their losses may find some sense of peace.”  
 
The military coup that installed Pinochet as Commander -in-Chief and President of Chile forty years ago 
sparked nearly two decades of violent repression targeted at civilian artists, physicians, university 
professors, students and ot her intellectuals.  According to Chile’s estimates, from 1973 to 1990:  
 Over 3,000 individuals were killed by state agents or “disappeared;”  
 At least 50,000 people were arrested and interrogated as suspected political opponents of the 
new government; and  
 Approximately 27,255 people were tortured.   
 
“The fact that the man responsible for the torture and death of Victor Jara has been living freely in the 
United States  shocks the conscience.  Human rights abusers should not be able to enjoy safe haven here 
without consequence,”  said Pamela Merchant , CJA’s Executive Director .  “The Jara family is taking an 
important stand against impunity for human rights abusers everywh ere and both CJA and Chadbourne & 
Park are honored to assist with their tireless search for justice.”  
 
For more information about the case, visit www.cja.org . 
 
About the Center for Justice and Accountability  
CJA is a San Francisco -based human rights organization dedicated to deterring torture and other severe 
human rights abuses around the world and advancing the rights of survivors to seek truth, justice and 
redress. CJA uses litigation to hold perpetrators individually a ccountable for human rights abuses, 
develop human rights law, and advance the rule of law in countries transitioning from periods of abuse.  
 
About Chadbourne & Parke  
Chadbourne & Parke is an award -winning international law firm, which includes a globally recognized 
team of Public International Law & International Dispute Resolution lawyers who have extensive 
experience in advising and litigating in relation to all aspects of public international law and related 
domestic court proceedings. For additional in formation on Chadbourne & Parke, please visit 
http://www.chadbourne.com/pil/ .  
 
Media Contacts  
For CJA  
Lisa Cohen  
+1 (310) 395-2544  
lisa@lisacohen.org  
 
For Chadbourne & Parke  
David Schaefer  
+1 (212) 728 -4519  
dschaefer@chadbourne.com  
 
Note: The criminal charges against Barrientos in Chile are allegations and Barrientos is presumed innocent until and unless p roven guilty.  
 
# # # 