 
 
 
870 Market Street, Suite 688  San Francisco, CA 94102  tel 415 544 0444  fax 415 544 0456  info@cja.org  cja.org  
 For Immediate Release  
July 18, 2007       
 
Contact: Moira Feeney, Esq., Media Coordinator 
415-544-0444 x302; mfeeney@cja.org 
 
CJA FILES LAWSUITS AGAINST FORMER PERUVIAN 
OFFICERS FOR WAR CRIMES AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY  
 
SURVIVORS SEEK ACCOUNTABILITY FOR CIVILIANS KILLED DURING THE 
ACCOMARCA MASSACRE  
 
Miami, Florida and Greenbelt,  Maryland; July 18, 2007:  The Center for Justice and 
Accountability (CJA) filed two human  rights lawsuits on behalf of  plaintiffs who survived the 
infamous Accomarca Massacre in Peru.  The defendants, Telmo Hurtado Hurtado and Juan 
Rivera Rondón, are former Peruvian military offi cers who reside in the United States. Hurtado 
and Rivera Rondón commanded the military units responsible for the massacre of 69 innocent 
civilians in 1985.     
 
These are the first human rights cases to be file d in the U.S. for atrocities committed against the 
civilian population in Peru during its civil war from 1980 th rough 2000.  The defendants are 
charged with extrajudicial killing, torture, war crimes and crimes against humanity. 
 
According to the complaint, while Rivera R ondón’s troops blocked a nearby escape route, 
Hurtado and his soldiers went house to house forcib ly removing villagers from their homes.  The 
soldiers attacked and raped many of the women in  the community.  The troops forced scores of 
people, including several pregnant women and elde rly residents, into tw o buildings.  Hurtado 
ordered his troops to open fire on the buildings.   
 
At the end of the day, 69 civilians were killed by the military. 
 
The plaintiffs, Teófila Ochoa and Cirila Pulido, were 12 years old at th e time and survived by 
hiding from the soldiers.  Despite  her own escape, Teófila Ochoa’s  mother, four brothers and a 
sister were killed.  Soldiers murdered Cirila Pulido’s mother and brother.   
 
The Accomarca Massacre was committed during the civil war between the government of Peru and insurgent groups, including Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path).  Throughout that time, the 
Peruvian Army and other government forces were  responsible for widespread and systematic 
human rights abuses against the civilian population.  According to  Peru’s Commission for Truth 
and Reconciliation, 26,259 civilia ns died or disappeared in  the area surrounding Accomarca 
during the civil war.  Captain Rivera Rondón came to the U.S. in the early 1990s and owns a home in Montgomery 
County, Maryland.  He is currently detained on immigration charges at the Dorchester County 
Detention Center in Cambridge, Maryland.   
 
Major Hurtado came to the U.S. in 2002 after an amnesty law protecting him from prosecution in 
Peru was nullified.  He is currently incarcerated at the Federal Detention Center in Miami after 
pleading guilty to two count s of immigration fraud.  
 
The immigration charges against the defendant s do not directly conc ern the killings in 
Accomarca or the defendants' role in human rights abuses in Peru. 
 
CJA Executive Director Pamela Merchant ex plains, “Hurtado and Rivera Rondón have both 
evaded justice for too long and must be held to  account for the atrocities that they committed 
against the civilian population in Peru. CJA's cas es against Hurtado and Rivera Rondón seek to 
hold them accountable for the Accomarca massacr e and to give a voice to the victims.”  
 
The plaintiffs are both members of the Association of Relatives of the Victims of Political Violence in Accomarca (AFAVPDA) which was fo rmed by the survivors of the massacre.  
AFAVPDA has been unsuccessful in its effort s to hold Rivera Rondón and Hurtado accountable 
in Peru.  
 
Plaintiff Teófila Ochoa says, “My husband says that I am a fight er...that I am always fighting, 
and I say, of course, we need to fight, what else  we can do?  I want to  make sure that nobody, no 
other child suffers what I had to suffer.  I want a better life for my children, something that I believe is possible as long as the truth is told ab out what happened to our family and that justice 
is finally achieved.” 
 
The claims are brought under two U.S. federal statutes, the Alien Tort Statute and the Torture 
Victim Protection Act, which permit victims of se vere human rights abuses to seek redress in 
U.S. courts.   
 
The cases, which are nearly identical, have been filed in two different federal courts based on the 
residency of the defendants.  The case against Hurt ado was filed in the U.S. District Court for the 
Southern District of Florida in Miami. The case against Rivera Rondón was filed in the U.S. 
District Court for the District  of Maryland, Greenbelt Division. 
 
CJA is a San Francisco-based human rights orga nization dedicated to ending torture and other 
severe human rights abuses around the world and adva ncing the rights of survivors to seek truth, 
justice and redress.  CJA uses litigation to hold perpetrators individua lly accountable for human 
rights abuses, develop human rights law, and adva nce the rule of law in countries transitioning 
from periods of abuse. 
 
For more information on the lawsuits against Hurtado and Rivera Rondón, see www.cja.org .   
 
### 
 
 