 
 
870 Market Street, Suite 688  San Francisco, CA 941 02  tel 415 544 0444  fax 415 544 0456  info@cja.or g  cja.org 
  
 
CONTACT:  
In New York: Riptide Communications, Inc. 212-260-5 000;  
In San Francisco, Elizabeth Chertoff, Media Coordin ator, 415-544-0444, ext. 303 
 
 Salvadoran Minister of Defense Indicted on Immigra tion Fraud Charges 
 
Rights Group and Torture Victims Laud Obama for Qui ck Action  
 
Miami February 23, 2009  – Today, the U.S. Department of Justice charged Ge neral Jose   
Guillermo García, the former Minister of Defense of  El Salvador, with two counts of immigration 
fraud.  If convicted, García faces up to ten years in prison for using a passport procured illegally 
and up to five years for making a materially false statement to a federal officer.  According to the 
indictment, the defendant used a falsely obtained S alvadoran passport at Miami International 
Airport in an attempt to enter the United States, a nd later lied to federal officials regarding the 
passport. 
“This indictment must be viewed in the context of th e struggle to hold General Garc ía 
accountable as a war criminal ,” said CJA Executive Director Pamela Merchant.  “ To our 
knowledge, General García is the highest ranking fo reign human rights abuser that the U.S. 
government has thus far pursued on its soil.  We ap plaud the Obama administration for such a 
great start on its human rights enforcement efforts .” 
 
General García was a defendant in CJA’s U.S. civil human rights case Romagoza v. Garcia .  
After a four week trial in July 2002, General Garcí a, along with another Salvadoran commander, 
General Vides Casanova, was found responsible for t he torture of three Salvadoran plaintiffs: Dr. 
Juan Romagoza Arce, Neris Gonzalez and Carlos Mauri cio.  The generals were ordered to pay 
$54.6 million in damages.  The verdict was upheld b y the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals in 
January 2006. 
 
In November 2007, Dr. Romagoza Arce and CJA Executi ve Director Pamela Merchant testified 
before the U.S. Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Hu man Rights & the Law about García’s 
continued presence in the U.S. despite being found liable as a human rights abuser.  In response 
to the testimony, Senators Richard Durbin (D-IL) an d Tom Coburn (R-OK) sent a request to then 
Attorney General Mukasey and Department of Homeland  Security Secretary Michael Chertoff 
and asked them to review prosecution and/or deporta tion of Generals García and Vides Casanova. 
 
“While the charges do not match the severity of the atrocities García presided over in El 
Salvador, the indictment is a concrete step forward  toward accountability ,” said Neris Gonzalez, 
a Salvadoran torture survivor and plaintiff in CJA’ s successful case against General García.  
“Tens of thousands of civilians were murdered, tortu red and disappeared under García’s watch - 
he should not be allowed to continue to live with i mpunity in the United States .” 
 
General García was Minister of Defense of El Salvad or from 1979-1983.  In 1980 alone over 
10,000 civilians were killed by government and para military forces in El Salvador.  In the twelve 
year civil war that followed it has been estimated that 65,000 more civilians were killed.    
CJA is a San Francisco-based human rights organizat ion dedicated to deterring torture and other severe  
human rights abuses around the world and advancing the rights of survivors to seek truth, justice and 
redress.  CJA uses litigation to hold perpetrators individually accountable for human rights abuses, d evelop 
human rights law, and advance the rule of law in co untries transitioning from periods of abuse.   
 
More information on CJA’s case against García can b e viewed on the CJA website at www.cja.org . 
 