 
 
870 Market Street, Suite 680  San Francisco, CA 94102  tel 415 544 0444  fax 415 544 0456  info@cja.org  cja.org  
CONTACT: Lisa Cohen, 310 -395-2544   
 
 
FEDERAL COURT AWARDS $ 15 MILLION IN DAMAGES TO CJA CLIENT FOR TORTURE  
COLUMBUS, OHIO, August 20 , 2013  – Today in Columbus, Ohio , U.S. Federal Judge Mark Abel  
awarded $5 million in compensatory and $ 10 million in punitive damages (for a total award of $15 
million) against former Somali Colonel Abdi Aden Magan .  In 1988, Professor Abukar Hassan Ahmed 
was arbitrarily detained by Colonel Magan’s subordinates.  On Colonel Magan’s orders, Professor Ahmed 
was shackled in a n excruciating position  in a squalid prison cell for nearly 24-hours per day for three 
months.  There, h e was brutally tortured and subjected to cruel treatment on Colonel Magan’s orders by 
lieutenants under his command.  Nearly 25 years afte r his torture, Professor Ahmed  has finally found 
justice in a U.S. court.  
After discovering that his torturer resided in Columbus Ohio, in April  2010, Professor Ahmed, a former 
constitutional law professor and human rights advocate in Somalia, contacted the Center for Justice and 
Accountability (CJA) and filed a case against Colonel Magan for torture, cruel treatment, and arbitrary 
detention.   
On November 20, 2012, the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Ohio found the former 
National Security Service (“NSS”) investigations chief liable for torture, cruel treatment, and arbitrary 
detention.  This judgment wa s historic in that it was the first judgment ever in a court of law to hold a 
member of the notorious and widely feared So mali NSS accountable for human rights violations 
committed under the brutal military dictatorship that ruled Somalia for 20 years, the Siad Barré regime. 
Attorneys from CJA and pro bono  co-counsel Chadbourne & Parke, LLP and Latham & Watkins , LLP  
presented evidence at t he hearing on May 30 , 2013  to assess damages.  
 
At the hearing, Professor Ahmed told the court: “ I knew that justice was not only national, justice is 
universal.  If you are black, you need justice.  If you are white, you need justice.  If you are yellow, you 
need justice.  So everybody need s justice.  It is universal. ”  He elaborated , “Maybe for other people it 
doesn ’t seem so simpl e, but for me it is very simple:   Because, first of all, I am a man who always seeks 
justice.  But this time, I don ’t seek only my justice, but I seek justice for other people also :  Because I 
call them the silent victims of torture - in Somalia or in other countries.  And those people a lso must 
have justice, but I also want justice for myself.  That ’s why I want to come to the United States to have 
the justice that I couldn’t have in my country .” 
 
Christina Hioureas, Senior Associate with Chadbourne & Parke ’s Public International Law pra ctice 
group, said, “Professor Ahmed ’s case against Colonel Magan has brought to light a dark chapter of 
Somalia ’s history , but his life story also r eveals a new chapter of Somalia’ s bright future.  As the Legal 
Adviser to President of Somalia, Professor Ahmed is continuing to promote freedom and human rights, 
drafting the new constitution and human rights bill and training young lawyers and judges to build this 
emerging democracy fr om the ground up after the collapse of a brutal military dictatorship. ”  
 
In fact, on October 11, 2013 , in recognition of his persistence in promoting human rights and the rule of 
law, Professor Ahmed will receiv e the International Bar Association’s Annua l Human Rights Award .  
It is awarded to one individual each year,  who, through personal endeavor in the course of legal practice, 
has made an outstanding contribution to the promotion, protection and advancement of the human rights, 
particularly with respec t to the right to live in a fair and just society under the rule of law.   
CJA Staff Attorney Nushin Sarkarati said, “Professor Ahmed is  a true human rights advocate, a man who 
even after being tortured, refused to remain silent.  He continued to teach constitutional law and human 
rights law in a country whose constitution was decimated by the military dictatorship.  His testimony not 
only taught us about the brutality of the Siad Barr é regime, but the relentless will of a man who believes 
in rule of law and justice.”   
 
“By standing up to his torturer and bravely recounting in open court the horrors he lived through, Prof. 
Ahmed yet again d emonstrated his undying courage,” said Katya Cronin, an associate at Latham & 
Watkins.  
 
CJA is a San Francisco -based human rights organization dedicated to deterring torture and other severe 
human rights abuses around the world and advancing the rights of survivors to seek truth, justice and 
redress.   CJA uses litigation to hold perpetrators individually accountable for human rights abuses, 
develop human rights law, and advance the rule of law in countries in transition from periods of abuse.   
 
Chadbourne &  Parke is an award -winning international law firm, which includes a globally recognized 
team of Public International Law & International Dispute Resolution lawyers who have extensive 
experience in advising and litigating in relation to all aspects of publi c international law and related 
domestic court proceedings.   For additional information on Chadbourne & Parke, please visit 
http://www.chadbourne.com/pil/ .  
 
Latham &  Watkins is a global law firm with more than 2,000 attorneys in its offices located in Asia, 
Europe, the Middle East and the United States, including: Abu Dhabi, Barcelona, Beijing, Boston, 
Brussels, Chicago, Doha, Dubai, Düsseldorf, Frankfurt, Hamburg, Ho ng Kong, Houston, London, Los 
Angeles, Madrid, Milan, Moscow, Munich, New Jersey, New York, Orange County, Paris, Riyadh, 
Rome, San Diego, San Francisco, Shanghai, Silicon Valley, Singapore, Tokyo and Washington, D.C. For 
more information on Latham & Watki ns, please visit the website at www.lw.com . 
 
For additional information about the case, please see CJA’s website: www.cja.org .  
## 