 	  Submission on Mexico to the General Discussion of Rural Women to the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW)  September 2013 
Introduction	   1. Instituto	  para	  las	  Mujeres	  en	  la	  Migracion	  (IMUMI)	  is	  an	  NGO	  that	  advocates	  for	  women	  in	  the	  migration	  process	  in	  the	  Mexican	  context,	  whether	  they	  are	  women	  living	  in	  communities	  of	  origin,	  in	  transit	  through	  Mexico,	  immigrants	  residing	  in	  Mexico	  or	  Mexican	  migrants	  in	  the	  United	  States.	  IMUMI	  works	  from	  a	  rights-­‐based	  perspective	  to	  ensure	  that	  women	  have	  the	  resources	  to	  take	  advantage	  of	  the	  positive	  aspects	  of	  migration,	  avoid	  the	  negative	  consequences,	  and	  remain	  in	  their	  communities	  of	  origin	  should	  they	  choose.	  IMUMI	  provides	  direct	  legal	  services	  to	  women	  affected	  by	  migration	  with	  a	  focus	  on	  cases	  that	  involve	  the	  right	  to	  lead	  lives	  free	  of	  violence,	  the	  right	  to	  identity,	  and	  the	  right	  to	  family	  unity.	  Based	  on	  case	  studies,	  documentary	  and	  field	  research,	  IMUMI	  also	  prepares	  reports	  and	  policy	  briefs	  to	  advocate	  for	  broader	  change	  in	  policies	  that	  affect	  women	  in	  migration.	  IMUMI	  helps	  to	  facilitate	  cross-­‐border	  cases	  through	  professionals	  who	  are	  bi-­‐lingual,	  bi-­‐cultural	  and	  combine	  their	  knowledge	  of	  Mexican	  and	  US	  law.	  For	  more	  information	  about	  IMUMI,	  please	  visit	  http://www.imumi.org.	  	  2. The	  Sex	  Workers	  Project	  provides	  client-­‐centered	  legal	  and	  social	  services	  to	  individuals	  who	  engage	  in	  sex	  work,	  regardless	  of	  whether	  they	  do	  so	  by	  choice,	  circumstance,	  or	  coercion.	  One	  of	  the	  first	  programs	  in	  the	  nation	  to	  assist	  survivors	  of	  human	  trafficking,	  the	  Sex	  Workers	  Project	  has	  pioneered	  an	  approach	  to	  service	  grounded	  in	  human	  rights,	  harm	  reduction	  and	  in	  the	  real	  life	  experiences	  of	  our	  clients.	  Our	  professional	  service	  providers	  are	  multi-­‐lingual,	  non-­‐judgmental	  and	  bring	  more	  than	  ten	  years	  of	  experience.	  3. As	  the	  only	  US	  organization	  meeting	  the	  needs	  of	  both	  sex	  workers	  and	  trafficking	  victims,	  the	  Sex	  Workers	  Project	  serves	  a	  marginalized	  community	  that	  few	  others	  reach.	  We	  engage	  in	  policy	  and	  media	  advocacy,	  community	  education	  and	  human	  rights	  documentation,	  working	  to	  create	  a	  world	  that	  is	  safe	  for	  sex	  workers	  and	  where	  human	  trafficking	  does	  not	  exist.	  4. The	  Sex	  Workers	  Project	  is	  a	  project	  at	  the	  Urban	  Justice	  Center.	  The	  Urban	  Justice	  Center	  serves	  low-­‐income	  and	  marginalized	  New	  Yorkers	  through	  a	  unique	  combination	  of	  direct	  legal	  services,	  systemic	  advocacy,	  community	  education,	  and	  organizing.	  For	  information	  about	  the	  Urban	  Justice	  Center,	  please	  visit	  http://www.urbanjustice.org.	  5. (IMUMI)	  and	  the	  Sex	  Workers	  Project	  at	  the	  Urban	  justice	  Center	  (SWP)	  submit	  the	  following	  information	  to	  the	  Committee	  on	  the	  Elimination	  of	  Discrimination	  against	  Women	  (the	  Committee).	  This	  briefing	  reflects	  the	  research	  of	  SWP,	  in	  cooperation	  with	  IMUMI,	  on	  human	  trafficking	  from	  Mexico	  to	  the	  United	  States,	  in	  particular	  with	  regard	  to	  rural	  women,	  including	  violence	  against	  women,	  economic	  impoverishment,	  lack	  of	  education,	  and	  sex	  role	  stereotyping	  and	  cultural	  prejudice,	  in	  addition	  to	  human	  trafficking.	  6. IMUMI	  and	  SWP	  collaborated	  on	  a	  report	  about	  human	  trafficking	  from	  Mexico	  to	  the	  United	  States	  for	  the	  purpose	  of	  forced	  prostitution.	  This	  briefing	  is	  based	  upon	  our	  report.	  The	  full	  report	  is	  available	  from	  http://sexworkersproject.org/publications/reports/the-­‐road-­‐north/.	  	  Human	  Trafficking	  7. Trafficking	  in	  persons	  refers	  to	  the	  transportation	  and	  compulsion	  of	  an	  individual	  into	  any	  form	  of	  labor	  through	  use	  of	  force,	  threats	  of	  force,	  fraud,	  or	  coercion,	  or	  debt	  bondage.	  (United	  Nations	  Optional	  Protocol	  to	  Prevent	  Suppress	  and	  Punish	  Trafficking	  in	  Persons,	  Especially	  Women	  and	  Children,	  2000).	  Human	  trafficking	  occurs	  in	  many	  industries	  and	  is	  not	  equivalent	  to	  prostitution;	  although	  this	  conflation	  is	  common.	  8. This	  brief	  is	  based	  on	  our	  research	  about	  the	  experiences	  of	  Mexican	  women	  from	  rural	  areas	  who	  have	  been	  trafficked	  to	  the	  United	  States.	  Victims	  of	  human	  trafficking	  in	  the	  United	  States	  can	  apply	  for	  T-­‐visas,	  created	  for	  victims	  of	  trafficking.	  Certified	  victims	  receive	  the	  same	  package	  of	  assistance	  as	  refugees.	  	  9. An	  affidavit	  is	  a	  written	  account	  about	  an	  event	  or	  experience	  that	  is	  sworn	  to	  be	  true	  under	  oath.	  The	  affidavits	  used	  for	  this	  report	  describe	  trafficking	  experiences	  and	  events	  surrounding	  those	  experiences.	  These	  affidavits	  were	  written	  by	  clients	  of	  SWP	  and	  Safe	  Horizon,	  an	  NGO	  that	  serves	  victims	  of	  trafficking	  in	  New	  York	  City,	  in	  collaboration	  with	  their	  attorneys,	  to	  fulfill	  part	  of	  the	  T-­‐nonimmigrant	  status	  (T-­‐visa1)	  application	  requirements.	  The	  T-­‐visa	  allows	  trafficked	  persons	  to	  legally	  remain	  in	  the	  United	  States.	  The	  goal	  of	  writing	  these	  affidavits	  was	  to	  show	  that	  the	  clients	  met	  the	  standard	  of	  eligibility	  for	  the	  T-­‐visa,	  thus,	  the	  affidavits	  include	  facts	  that	  prove	  the	  client	  was	  a	  victim	  of	  a	  severe	  form	  of	  human	  trafficking,	  complied	  with	  requests	  for	  assistance	  from	  law	  enforcement,	  and	  would	  suffer	  extreme	  hardship	  if	  returned	  to	  their	  home	  country.	  Some	  affidavits	  offer	  additional	  information	  about	  the	  pre-­‐trafficking	  life	  of	  the	  client,	  some	  focus	  solely	  on	  the	  trafficking	  experience.	  	  10. The	  report	  was	  based	  on	  affidavits	  made	  in	  support	  of	  applications	  for	  T-­‐visas	  for	  trafficked	  persons	  in	  the	  United	  States	  from	  36	  men,	  women	  and	  transgender	  women	  brought	  to	  the	  United	  States,	  with	  supplementary	  information	  from	  interviews	  with	  6	  of	  the	  affiants.	  All	  but	  one	  person	  in	  our	  sample,	  a	  woman	  not	  from	  Mexico,	  experienced	  forced	  prostitution.	  This	  submission	  to	  the	  Committee	  includes	  only	  data	  from	  Mexican	  women	  in	  cases	  involving	  forced	  prostitution.	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  1The	  T	  Non-­‐immigrant	  status	  (T	  Visa)	  is	  issued	  to	  persons	  who	  have	  been	  trafficked	  into	  the	  US.	  Read	  more	  about	  this	  type	  of	  Visa	  on	  the	  US	  Citizenship	  and	  Immigration	  Services	  website,	  link	  below.	  http://www.uscis.gov/portal/site/uscis/menuitem.eb1d4c2a3e5b9ac89243c6a7543f6d1a/?vgnextoid=02ed3e4d77d73210VgnVCM100000082ca60aRCRD&vgnextchannel=02ed3e4d77d73210VgnVCM100000082ca60aRCRD	  11. While	  all	  participants	  were	  forced	  into	  prostitution,	  some	  worked	  alongside	  women	  who	  were	  not	  forced	  into	  prostitution	  but	  were	  participating	  voluntarily.	  These	  individuals	  were	  free	  and	  able	  in	  some	  cases	  to	  offer	  assistance,	  highlighting	  the	  importance	  not	  to	  conflate	  prostitution	  with	  trafficking.	  Some	  described	  working	  in	  sex	  work	  after	  trafficking	  in	  order	  to	  be	  able	  to	  support	  their	  families,	  in	  situations	  that	  are	  not	  coercive	  and	  highlight	  the	  difference	  between	  sex	  work	  and	  trafficking.	  The	  confusion	  between	  trafficking	  and	  prostitution	  often	  leads	  law	  enforcement	  to	  conduct	  raids	  to	  identify	  trafficking	  victims	  that	  end	  up	  placing	  women	  in	  long	  legal	  procedures	  with	  little	  psychological	  or	  social	  services	  to	  support	  them.	  In	  Mexico,	  as	  prostitution	  is	  legal,	  the	  best	  approach	  would	  be	  to	  work	  from	  a	  rights	  based	  perspective,	  providing	  social	  and	  legal	  assistance	  to	  sex-­‐workers	  so	  that	  they	  have	  better	  working	  conditions,	  access	  to	  education	  and	  health	  care,	  and	  are	  able	  to	  make	  decisions	  about	  where,	  how	  and	  when	  to	  work.	  Informed	  sex-­‐workers	  are	  often	  able	  to	  identify	  and	  assist	  trafficking	  victims	  and	  are	  important	  allies	  in	  the	  fight	  against	  human	  trafficking.	  Furthermore,	  the	  experiences	  of	  IMUMI	  highlight	  the	  need	  to	  recognize	  trafficking	  and	  abuses	  in	  other	  sectors	  such	  as	  agricultural	  work,	  domestic	  work	  and	  organized	  begging.	  In	  addition,	  a	  special	  concern	  is	  the	  high	  number	  of	  kidnapping	  cases	  of	  migrant	  women	  who	  end	  up	  being	  trafficked	  while	  held	  in	  safe	  houses.	  12. The	  data	  from	  the	  affidavits	  was	  supplemented	  by	  interviews.	  Interview	  participation	  was	  limited	  to	  SWP	  clients	  whose	  affidavit	  was	  already	  included	  in	  the	  study.	  SWP’s	  human	  rights	  and	  harm	  reduction	  model	  contributed	  to	  the	  relationships	  with	  victims	  of	  crime	  that	  led	  to	  their	  participating	  in	  this	  project.	  In	  order	  to	  recruit	  interviewees,	  SWP	  service	  providers	  (i.e.	  client’s	  lawyers	  and	  social	  workers)	  were	  asked	  to	  use	  their	  professional	  judgment	  and	  to	  approach	  people	  who	  were	  least	  likely	  to	  feel	  distress	  during	  the	  interview.	  These	  individuals	  were	  asked	  whether	  they	  would	  be	  interested	  in	  participating	  in	  this	  study	  by	  being	  interviewed	  about	  their	  experiences.	  Out	  of	  25	  potential	  interviewees,	  6	  were	  interviewed.	  	  13. The	  interview	  questions	  were	  centered	  on	  three	  main	  subject	  areas:	  the	  client’s	  childhood,	  the	  trafficking	  situation,	  and	  recommendations	  for	  service	  providers,	  policy	  makers,	  and	  community	  members.	  The	  interviews	  were	  conducted	  using	  a	  specific	  interview	  protocol	  as	  a	  guide.	  A	  copy	  of	  the	  protocol	  can	  be	  found	  in	  the	  appendix	  of	  the	  full	  report.	  Generally,	  respondents	  were	  asked	  questions	  about	  violence	  in	  their	  childhood	  home,	  their	  families’	  financial	  situation,	  what	  their	  life	  was	  like	  with	  the	  trafficker,	  and	  what	  advice	  they	  would	  give	  a	  young	  girl	  in	  Mexico	  today	  that	  may	  help	  them	  avoid	  this	  type	  of	  situation.	  Places	  of	  Origin	  14. For	  this	  submission	  on	  rural	  women,	  we	  have	  used	  only	  the	  information	  from	  the	  women	  originating	  from	  rural	  areas,	  including	  30	  affidavits	  and	  5	  interviews	  with	  affiants.	  	  Summary	  of	  findings	  	  	  15. The	  abuses	  that	  comprise	  trafficking,	  namely	  force,	  fraud	  and	  coercion,	  are	  greatly	  affected	  by	  structural,	  economic	  and	  social	  situations	  that	  are	  far	  larger	  than	  the	  interpersonal	  interactions.	  Without	  the	  social	  and	  structural	  factors	  we	  identified,	  the	  interpersonal	  abuses	  reported	  would	  not	  be	  as	  prevalent	  and	  trafficking	  situations	  would	  diminish	  greatly.	  	  16. There	  were	  three	  key	  findings	  that	  deepen	  our	  understanding	  of	  how	  people	  become	  trafficked	  in	  Mexico.	  The	  first	  was	  that	  poverty	  and	  violence	  experienced	  before	  trafficking	  appears	  to	  have	  contributed	  to	  affiants’	  vulnerability	  to	  trafficking.	  Secondly	  the	  majority,	  67.5	  percent,	  of	  affiants	  met	  the	  traffickers	  through	  a	  family	  member,	  friend	  or	  neighbor.	  Thirdly,	  traffickers	  often	  exploited	  cultural	  norms	  and	  expectations	  about	  gender	  roles	  to	  manipulate	  affiants	  into	  the	  trafficking	  situation.	  This	  relates	  not	  only	  to	  Article	  14	  but	  also	  to	  Article	  5.	  17. These	  findings	  demonstrate	  that	  Mexico	  has	  not	  lived	  up	  to	  the	  obligations	  of	  Article	  14,	  including	  recognizing	  the	  contributions	  of	  rural	  women	  to	  the	  economic	  survival	  of	  their	  families,	  and	  rights	  to	  education	  and	  participation	  in	  community	  and	  adequate	  living	  conditions.	  These	  failures	  have	  led	  rural	  women	  to	  be	  more	  vulnerable	  to	  human	  trafficking.	  Furthermore,	  Mexico	  has	  not	  lived	  up	  to	  other	  articles	  of	  the	  Protocol	  as	  they	  affect	  rural	  women.	  	  The	  Role	  of	  Poverty	  18. Poverty	  appears	  to	  be	  a	  contributing	  factor	  to	  affiants’	  vulnerability	  to	  trafficking.	  Poverty	  is	  accessed	  in	  this	  study	  by	  educational	  attainment	  and	  examples	  of	  fiscal	  hardship.	  	  19. 75%	  of	  people	  in	  the	  study	  mentioned	  experiencing	  financial	  hardship	  during	  childhood.	  Within	  the	  group	  who	  did	  mention	  examples	  of	  poverty,	  they	  generally	  describe	  extreme	  poverty	  situations.	  	  20. Poverty	  contributes	  to	  vulnerability	  to	  abuse,	  including	  in	  human	  trafficking.	  Often	  traffickers	  would	  manipulate	  affiants	  by	  convincing	  them	  that	  they	  could	  have	  a	  better	  life	  if	  they	  went	  with	  them.	  The	  traffickers	  would	  tell	  the	  affiants	  they	  would	  be	  taken	  care	  of	  and	  be	  able	  to	  take	  care	  of	  their	  own	  families.	  Many	  affiants	  believed	  that	  they	  had	  finally	  found	  a	  way	  out	  of	  poverty	  and	  that	  going	  with	  the	  trafficker	  to	  the	  US	  or	  marrying	  the	  trafficker	  would	  help	  them	  fulfill	  their	  dreams.	  	  21. Poverty	  cut	  short	  the	  education	  of	  rural	  women	  in	  the	  study.	  Childhood	  poverty	  often	  made	  it	  necessary	  for	  them	  to	  work	  in	  order	  to	  support	  the	  family.	  This	  relates	  not	  only	  to	  Article	  14	  but	  also	  to	  Article	  10.	  22. For	  example,	  one	  person	  in	  the	  study	  explained,	  “My	  family	  was	  very	  poor,	  even	  compared	  to	  other	  families	  in	  the	  village.	  My	  parents	  worked	  as	  farmers	  on	  other	  people’s	  lands.	  They	  traveled	  to	  other	  states	  to	  find	  work,	  and	  they	  took	  us	  with	  them.	  I	  worked	  alongside	  my	  parents	  starting	  when	  I	  was	  8	  years	  old.	  I	  tried	  to	  also	  go	  to	  school,	  but	  had	  to	  stop	  after	  6th	  grade	  because	  I	  missed	  so	  much	  school	  in	  order	  to	  work.	  The	  work	  I	  generally	  did	  was	  harvesting	  vegetables.”	  23. This	  map	  of	  Mexican	  states	  includes	  state	  poverty	  levels	  and	  the	  number	  of	  affiants	  from	  each	  state.	  This	  demonstrates	  that	  the	  people	  in	  the	  study	  primarily	  came	  from	  the	  poorest	  states.	  Many	  described	  living	  in	  rural	  areas,	  in	  small	  villages	  dependent	  on	  subsistence	  farming	  and	  remissions	  from	  people	  who	  had	  moved	  to	  larger	  towns	  and	  cities.	  24. Migrating	  to	  find	  work	  was	  a	  common	  theme	  throughout	  the	  stories	  shared	  by	  trafficking	  survivors.	  Some	  of	  the	  people	  in	  the	  study	  ended	  up	  migrating	  while	  they	  were	  still	  under	  18	  from	  a	  small	  rural	  community	  to	  a	  large	  city	  in	  order	  to	  find	  work.	  Migration	  at	  such	  an	  early	  age,	  often	  alone	  seemed	  to	  increase	  vulnerability	  to	  manipulation	  by	  a	  trafficker.	  	  	  	  	  The	  Role	  of	  Violence	  25. In	  addition	  to	  poverty,	  affiants’	  vulnerability	  to	  trafficking	  appears	  to	  be	  compounded	  by	  experiences	  of	  violence	  prior	  to	  being	  trafficked,	  including	  experiencing	  direct	  physical	  and	  sexual	  violence	  as	  well	  as	  witnessing	  violence	  or	  otherwise	  being	  affected	  by	  violence.	  20	  affiants,	  54	  percent	  of	  the	  sample,	  mention	  a	  violent	  experience	  prior	  to	  trafficking	  in	  their	  affidavit.	  Within	  that	  group,	  12	  affiants	  also	  mentioned	  fiscal	  hardship	  during	  childhood.	  The	  violent	  experiences	  included:	  witnessing	  domestic	  violence,	  being	  a	  victim	  of	  physical	  or	  sexual	  abuse,	  being	  a	  victim	  of	  intimate	  partner	  violence,	  witnessing	  a	  murder,	  and	  being	  harassed	  and	  beaten	  in	  school.	  For	  many	  affiants,	  the	  experience	  of	  violence	  caused	  them	  to	  leave	  home	  at	  an	  early	  age	  or	  divorce	  their	  spouse.	  Additionally,	  many	  affiants	  experienced	  multiple	  forms	  of	  violence,	  often	  severe	  and	  traumatic.	  	  26. Importantly,	  the	  highest	  levels	  of	  violence	  were	  perpetrated	  against	  the	  two	  transgender	  women	  in	  this	  sample.	  In	  addition	  to	  facing	  violence	  from	  their	  families	  they	  also	  faced	  violence	  and	  discrimination	  from	  their	  community,	  which	  appears	  to	  have	  directly	  contributed	  to	  their	  vulnerability	  to	  trafficking.	  This	  relates	  not	  only	  to	  Article	  14	  but	  also	  to	  Article	  3,	  as	  violence	  is	  a	  human	  rights	  violation.	  
27. One	  of	  the	  effects	  of	  suffering	  violence	  is	  to	  normalize	  violence:	  family	  violence	  was	  accepted	  by	  many,	  with	  partner	  violence	  particularly	  accepted	  by	  their	  families	  and	  communities.	  The	  experience	  of	  family	  violence	  disrupts	  norms	  and	  expectations	  associated	  with	  love.	  This	  relates	  to	  the	  acceptance	  of	  violence	  against	  women	  and	  domestic	  violence.	  While	  Mexico	  has	  passed	  a	  law	  against	  domestic	  violence,	  it	  is	  not	  evenly	  enforced	  throughout	  the	  country.	  In	  some	  communities,	  girls	  and	  women	  are	  still	  afraid	  to	  reach	  out	  to	  local	  authorities	  because	  they	  do	  not	  want	  to	  harm	  the	  reputation	  of	  their	  family	  and	  they	  also	  know	  that	  the	  authorities	  may	  not	  assist	  them	  or	  may	  even	  blame	  them	  for	  the	  violence.	  It	  is	  common	  for	  authorities	  to	  stress	  the	  economic	  impact	  on	  a	  family	  should	  the	  principle	  economic	  provider	  be	  arrested	  and	  question	  the	  victims´	  decision	  to	  denounce	  the	  violence.	  This	  relates	  not	  only	  to	  Article	  14	  and	  Article	  3	  but	  also	  Articles	  1	  and	  5,	  addressing	  gender	  and	  discrimination.	  28. In	  addition	  to	  high	  numbers	  of	  people	  in	  the	  study	  reporting	  having	  experienced	  violence,	  they	  also	  reported	  that	  they	  feared	  police	  and	  would	  not	  turn	  to	  them,	  based	  on	  experiences	  of	  abuse	  and	  violence	  and	  bribery	  from	  police.	  The	  impunity	  rate	  for	  criminal	  cases	  in	  Mexico	  is	  99%.	  This	  fact,	  combined	  with	  the	  cultural	  stigma	  of	  denouncing	  crimes	  that	  occur	  within	  the	  family	  often	  means	  that	  filing	  a	  complaint	  may	  be	  more	  dangerous	  than	  other	  solutions	  such	  as	  escaping	  from	  the	  family	  home.	  This	  relates	  not	  only	  to	  Article	  14	  and	  Article	  2	  but	  also	  Articles	  1	  and	  5,	  addressing	  gender	  and	  discrimination.	  	  The	  Role	  of	  Gender	  Roles	  29. Another	  key	  finding	  was	  that	  traffickers	  often	  exploited	  cultural	  norms	  in	  order	  to	  manipulate	  the	  affiants.	  This	  was	  especially	  true	  in	  situations	  where	  traffickers	  feigned	  or	  began	  romantic	  relationships	  with	  affiants	  while	  appearing	  to	  follow	  traditional	  courting	  customs.	  Traffickers	  consistently	  distorted	  traditional	  marriage	  rituals,	  such	  as	  robo	  de	  la	  novia	  (“theft	  of	  the	  bride”),	  and	  exploited	  gendered	  cultural	  expectations.	  The	  pressure	  to	  conform	  to	  gender	  norms	  and	  cultural	  expectations	  often	  led	  affiants	  to	  enter	  into	  a	  relationship	  with	  the	  trafficker,	  and	  kept	  them	  from	  being	  able	  to	  turn	  to	  their	  families	  for	  help	  after	  they	  realized	  the	  danger	  of	  their	  situation.	  This	  relates	  not	  only	  to	  Article	  14	  but	  also	  Article	  5.	  	  Geographic	  Locus	  30. Some	  women	  were	  recruited	  from	  small	  rural	  villages	  where	  they	  lived	  with	  their	  families.	  Some	  women	  came	  from	  small	  rural	  villages	  and	  travelled	  to	  larger	  cities	  for	  work,	  where	  they	  were	  recruited.	  Many	  were	  then	  taken	  to	  the	  family	  home	  of	  the	  trafficker,	  whom	  they	  initially	  viewed	  as	  a	  husband,	  before	  travel	  to	  other	  places	  where	  the	  young	  women	  were	  forced	  to	  sell	  sex.	  31. People	  in	  the	  study	  described	  Tenancingo	  in	  the	  state	  of	  Tlaxcala	  as	  a	  hub	  of	  human	  trafficking	  into	  the	  sex	  industry.	  Anthropologist	  O.	  M.	  Torres	  has	  documented	  this	  as	  well,	  and	  says	  that	  this	  has	  occurred	  for	  at	  least	  three	  generations.	  This	  phenomenon	  has	  lead	  to	  a	  few	  particularly	  high-­‐profile	  cases	  in	  the	  United	  States	  involving	  particular	  families	  from	  Tlaxcala.	  Victim-­‐witnesses	  in	  these	  cases	  described	  trafficking	  by	  multiple	  generations	  in	  numerous	  US	  locations.	  Torres	  and	  the	  cases	  document	  that	  young	  men	  from	  Tenancingo	  travel	  to	  other	  places,	  including	  rural	  villages,	  to	  woo	  young	  women	  whom	  they	  later	  force	  into	  prostitution.	  	  	  Mexican	  government’s	  response	  to	  trafficking	  32. IMUMI	  has	  noted	  that	  police	  raids	  of	  sex	  work	  venues	  have	  been	  undertaken	  even	  though	  prostitution	  is	  legal.	  Theoretically,	  while	  raids	  could	  be	  helpful	  to	  identify	  trafficked	  women,	  they	  are	  not	  a	  long-­‐term	  solution	  as	  criminal	  procedures	  are	  often	  unsuccessful,	  the	  women	  do	  not	  receive	  proper	  legal,	  emotional	  and	  economic	  support,	  and	  they	  may	  be	  vulnerable	  to	  re-­‐trafficking	  in	  worse	  conditions.	  Rural	  women	  who	  have	  often	  migrated	  to	  urban	  areas	  are	  particularly	  vulnerable	  because	  they	  do	  not	  have	  social	  networks	  to	  turn	  to,	  they	  cannot	  return	  to	  their	  communities	  because	  they	  fear	  being	  reproached,	  and	  they	  often	  have	  few	  alternative	  employment	  opportunities.	  	  33. The	  Committee	  has	  made	  recommendations	  to	  the	  Mexican	  government	  specific	  to	  trafficking	  in	  its	  2012	  review	  (CEDAW/C/MEX/CO/7-­‐8).	  These	  recommendations	  include	  implementing	  the	  General	  Law	  on	  the	  Prevention,	  Punishment	  and	  Eradication	  of	  Crimes	  in	  Trafficking	  and	  the	  Protection	  and	  Assistance	  of	  Victims	  with	  the	  view	  to	  standardize	  the	  criminalization	  of	  trafficking	  in	  persons	  at	  the	  federal	  and	  state	  level	  and	  ensure	  adequate	  allocation	  of	  resources	  for	  its	  implementation;	  as	  well	  as	  data	  collection	  about	  trafficking	  including	  scope	  and	  sectors,	  investigating	  any	  link	  to	  disappearances	  of	  women,	  and	  nationwide	  awareness-­‐raising	  campaigns.	  We	  support	  these	  recommendations	  and	  propose	  further	  specific	  recommendations	  below.	  	  In	  relation	  to	  rural	  women	  IMUMI	  and	  UJCSWP	  recommend:	  • Government	  should	  support	  service	  organizations	  to	  provide	  services	  for	  trafficked	  persons	  in	  Mexico,	  including	  migrants	  and	  women	  and	  children	  who	  are	  alienated	  from	  their	  marital	  families	  and	  families	  of	  origin	  in	  rural	  areas.	  • Government	  should	  support	  organizations	  to	  develop	  campaigns	  for	  awareness	  and	  communication	  within	  families	  about	  trafficking	  and	  domestic	  violence,	  including	  child	  abuse	  and	  child	  sexual	  abuse,	  particularly	  in	  impoverished	  and	  isolated	  rural	  communities.	  • Government	  should	  adopt	  economic	  policies	  that	  address	  rural	  poverty,	  particularly	  of	  women	  and	  single	  parent	  households.	  • Government	  should	  implement	  policies	  that	  distinguish	  between	  trafficking	  and	  sex	  work,	  and	  address	  trafficking	  into	  the	  wide	  variety	  of	  labor	  sectors	  including	  agriculture,	  domestic	  work	  and	  organized	  begging.	  	  • Government	  should	  rely	  on	  prevention	  through	  information,	  employment	  rights	  and	  access	  to	  education	  and	  health	  care	  rather	  than	  raids,	  which	  perpetuate	  police	  abuse,	  often	  do	  not	  help	  people	  leave	  trafficking	  situations,	  and	  rarely	  end	  with	  prosecution	  of	  traffickers	  and	  restitution	  for	  victims.	  	  • Government	  should	  improve	  investigation	  procedures	  to	  prosecute	  people	  involved	  in	  human	  trafficking.	  Few	  prosecutions	  have	  been	  undertaken	  against	  traffickers	  in	  Mexico	  using	  pre-­‐existing	  statutes	  or	  the	  new	  anti-­‐trafficking	  law	  enacted.	  • Government	  policy	  should	  promote	  economic	  initiatives	  and	  poverty	  reduction	  in	  rural	  areas,	  especially	  for	  female-­‐headed	  families.	  • Government	  should	  ensure	  the	  enforcement	  of	  anti-­‐violence	  laws	  including	  the	  2007	  law	  against	  domestic	  violence,	  including	  domestic	  violence	  involving	  children.	  • Government	  policy	  on	  migration	  should	  address	  the	  specific	  needs	  of	  young	  women	  who	  leave	  home,	  with	  respect	  to	  their	  autonomy.	  • Government	  should	  facilitate	  immigration	  documentation	  to	  rural	  migrant	  women	  living	  in	  southern	  Mexico	  to	  decrease	  their	  vulnerability	  to	  human	  trafficking.	  	  	  	  For	  more	  details	  please	  contact:	  Lorena	  Morrow	  Celis	  IMUMI	  –	  Instituto	  para	  las	  Mujeres	  en	  la	  Migración	  lorenam@imumi.org	  Tel.	  +52	  (55)	  5211-­‐4153	  Tel.	  +1	  (208)	  753-­‐7041	  	  Melissa	  Ditmore	  Urban	  Justice	  Center	  Sex	  Workers	  Project	  123	  William	  Street	  16thfloor	  New	  York,	  NY	  10038	  USA	  mhd12@cornell.edu	  Tel.	  +1	  646	  602	  5695	  www.sexworkersproject.org	  