 Sex Workers Project, Urban Justice Center 
Network of Sex Work Projects  
 
Urban Justice Center 
   666 Broadway, 10th floor, New York, NY 10012 
Tel: (646) 602-5600 • Fax: (212) 533-4598  
Statement on Trafficking in Persons for the 51st Session of the Commission for the 
Status of Women on the “elimination of al l forms of discrimina tion and violence 
against the girl child.”  
 
The Sex Workers Project of the Urban Ju stice Center and the global Network of Sex Work Projects welcome this 
year’s theme on an under-examined key topic of human rights: The violations experienced by the girl child. Girl 
children worldwide face copious challenges preventing them from achieving their full human rights, including 
unequal treatment and increased violence in many sett ings, at home, schools, pl aces of employment, and 
health care institutions. 
 
One issue that affects the girl child, as well as boys and adults, is the problem of trafficking in 
persons.  The Sex Workers Project at the Ur ban Justice Center and the global  Network of Sex Work Projects 
oppose human trafficking in any form and champion confronting the force, de ception and coercion inherent in all 
forms of human trafficking.  
 
In furtherance of this, we wish to underline a fundamental principle that the trafficking of the girl child is not 
exclusive to force into sexual services, but also includes trafficking into domestic, factory, and agricultural 
services.  
 
As advocates who work directly with trafficked  persons, we are concerned by the conflation 
between human trafficking and prostitu tion, in both dialogue and policy.  Trafficking and prostitution are 
not identical and cannot be conflated. Conflation encourages harmful policies in the fight against trafficking, 
because efforts are no longer targeted and thus ineffective. Conflation also directly violates the human rights of 
sex workers who are wrongly affected by the implementation of these ineffective anti-trafficking policies. 
 
In order to empower all women and girl s to achieve their fundamental human rights, it is critical to endorse 
policies that differentiate between human  trafficking and prostitution. This allows for the respect, protection, 
and fulfillment of the rights of all persons who are trafficked and/or engage in sexual services.  
 
• In order to combat human  trafficking, we need to highlight that the majority of human trafficking situations 
do not lead into prostitution, but includes many ot her types of labor, includ ing factory, domestic and 
agricultural work.  
 
• Confusing sex workers with trafficked  persons erases the voices of pe rsons engaged in sexual services, 
worsens their working conditions, adds to their gene ral stigmatization and warp s discussions on effective 
methods for ending human trafficking. 
  
In addition, we are concerned by the recent attention on curbing the “demand” for prostitution in 
order to “solve” the problem of women and girls trafficked into sexual services.  
 
• “Demand” for sex work is not a predominant driving factor for trafficking, which is driven by poverty, race, 
and gender inequities. The term “dem and” also refers to the legitimate concerns raised by migrants and 
labor rights advocates who address the issues relating to the need in th e global north for exploitable labor 
and services. However, this narrow fo cus of the term in the context of  sex work represents a dangerous 
move towards policies which, under the guise of protec ting sex workers, is another way of undermining sex 
workers’ autonomy and causing more harm to them.  
 
• Policies criminalizing the purchase of sexual services have been enacted in Sweden, and are pursued by 
other nations. Based on research an d our experience working with sex wo rkers and persons trafficked into 
sex work, it is clear that  such policies do nothing to protect pe rsons trafficked into sex work, while 
simultaneously violating th e rights of sex workers. 
    
  
 
2 • Focusing on “demand” is clearly counter-productive: Criminalizing and stigmatizing transactional sex drives 
the practice into the shadows where violence, extortion and coercion are more likely to thrive, making 
persons more vulnerable to traffick ing; discourages sex workers, their clients, and brothel managers from 
responding to groups offering information or services on preventing the spread of  HIV/AIDS; and ultimately 
does not address the basic human needs for education, equal opportunity and a realistic array of economic 
options which empower women an d girls to make informed ch oices about their employment.1 In fact, the 
cause of most violence dire cted at persons engaged in sexual services  are not from their clients or pimps but 
from law enforcement officers, who routinely harass, denigrate and rape  sex workers rather than protecting 
their human rights.2 
 
Finally, “rescue” missions for the alleged purpose of saving persons who are trafficked do more 
harm than good. 
 
• Safe, appropriate, and targeted law enforcement interv entions are important when children are involved, but 
“rescuing” people who do not wish to leave can endanger their physical safety and economic survival.   
 
• Most “rescues” are large-scale police raids that sw eep up everyone present for arrest, interrogation, 
detention and deportation, ignoring the difference between those who are there under coercion or are 
under-age, and those who are not. As a result, trafficked persons are afraid to come forward for fear of such 
arrests, or of triggering an over-reaching raid.  
 
Policies aimed at assisting trafficked persons must be properly targeted so as to effectively help 
them while simultaneously avoiding harm to sex workers.   
• Sex workers generally need what all people need to build better lives for themselves an d their families: 
Access to education, language and literacy programs ; programs that help them build businesses and 
manage their money; and peer support to end their isolation.  
 
• Addressing the root causes of human trafficking—pove rty or the right to earn a living wage as well as 
fighting gender and racial discrimination—will further empower every person to make informed choices. 
 
We recommend a realistic and effective policy mo del on human trafficking and prostitution, which 
would include: 
 
• Training people who work in all industries where trafficking occurs to identify and aid trafficked 
persons;  
• Enforcement of laws against assault, extortion and other human rights abuses committed against 
trafficked persons and sex workers; 
• Access to comprehensive health care, education, and opportunities to seek a living wage in adulthood 
for all girl children; 
• Removal of harsh immigration policies that exacerbate the vulnerabilities of those who are 
susceptible to being trafficked; 
• Reform the criminal justice respon se to prostitution, as harsh sy stems increase vulnerability for 
trafficking and other abuses; 
• Training in business and money management;  
• Reductions in social stigmas that often prohibit sex workers from moving into other forms of labor if 
they want to do so; and 
• Education and empowerment for sex workers on  ways to prevent the spread of HIV. 
                                                 
1 As documented in Report by a Working Group on the Legal Regulation of the Pu rchase of Sexual Services, Norwegian Ministry of Justice 
and Police Affairs, Purchasing Sexual Services in Sweden and the Netherlands: Legal Regu lation and Experiences  1-59  (Oct. 8, 2004), 
available at: http://odin.dep.no/jd/english/012101-990578/dok-bn.html ; Don Kulick, Four Hundred Thousand Swedish Perverts , GLQ, 11:2, 
205-235 (2005); Elizabeth Bernstein, The Meaning of the Purchase , ETHNOGRAPHY 2(3), 389-420 (2001). 
2 Bridget Anderson and Ju lia O’Connell Davidson, “Is  Trafficking in Human Beings Demand-Dri ven?,” International Organization for 
Migration, December 2003.  