annual report 2012 
40 
years Celebrating The title of Cultural Survival Quarterly Vol 37. Issue 2, Cultural Survival: 40 Years of 
Advocacy from Brazil 1972 to Brazil 2012 symbolically marked forty years of Cultural 
Survival’s advocacy work to partner with Indigenous Peoples in defending their land, lan -
guages, and cultures. The founding of Cultural Survival inspired by David and Pia Maybury- 
Lewis’s early work in Brazil with the Xavante people has now in a way come full circle with 
the Rio+20 world conference being held in Brazil.  In 1972 Cultural Survival was founded to 
“bear witness to a genocidal threat, to make the world aware of this process of destruc -
tion, and to try to stop it,” according to the late David Maybury-Lewis. Cultural Survival’s 
work over the last four decades has remained rooted in this mission while the organiza -
tion has evolved its programs and methodologies for achieving the mission over time. 
Most significantly today we align our mission with the UN Declaration on the Rights of 
Indigenous Peoples and seek to support the implementation of the Declaration through 
our programmatic efforts. 
Cultural Survival’s advocacy work is reflected today in the Guatemala Community Radio 
Program which strengthens Indigenous community radio service and programming 
throughout regions of Guatemala and supports activism demanding legislation in support 
of Indigenous community radio. Community radio is a crucial mechanism for information 
and education about local social, educational and health issues. It is also serves as a an 
important mechanism for asserting Indigenous rights as Indigenous Peoples in Guatemala 
continue to fight against forced relocation from traditional lands, militarized communities, 
abuses of transnational companies, discrimination, and marginalization.  
Our Global Response Program campaigns with the Samburu in Kenya and the Kuy in 
Cambodia to bring international attention to the human rights abuses and lands rights vio -
lations against these Indigenous Peoples.  The recent visit of US observers attending legal 
proceedings in the Samburu case report ongoing violence against rural Samburu villages, 
but much of the violence has been stemmed due to Cultural Survival’s advocacy. Cultural 
Survival and other NGO’s like Survival International and First Peoples Worldwide continue 
to support the Samburu in their resilience, courage, and actions to resist relocation and 
fight for their land. Indigenous people like the Kuy in Cambodia also struggle against land 
loss and relocation as their traditional lands are being remapped as economic land conces -
sions and leased to a transnational corporation. Cultural Survival advocates strongly for 
the rights of Free, Prior, and Informed Consent to be honored and exercised. 
CULTURAL SURVIVAL Celebrating 40 Years of Cultural Survival                                              
2ANNUAL REPORT 2012 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
2-3 MESSAgE FROM ThE 
ExECUTivE diRECTOR 
4-5       O UR MiSSiON 
6-13 PROgRAMS 
14-17    N Ew iNiTATivES 
18-20 BOARd OF diRECTORS & S TAFF 
21        iNTERN PROgRAM 
22-25 SUPPORTERS 
26 FiNANCiAL REPORT 
27 40 Y EARS OF PUBLiCATiONS 
COvER PhOTO :
in guatemala, Barillas community membersclimb 
on to a hydro Santa Cruz construction vehicle 
looking onto the ceremony dedicating a cross to 
Miguel,a Barillas resident who was shot and killed 
by hydro Santa Cruz employees on May 1, 2012.
This report covers the period from January 1, 2012 
to december 31, 2012 and financial information for 
September 1, 2011 to August 31, 2012.
Copyright © 2012 Cultural Survival
Cultural Survival 
Main Office: 
PO BOX 381569 
Cambridge, MA 02238 USA    
t: 617.441.5400    
f: 617.441.5417 
culturalsurvival@cs.org 
www.cs.org Forty years after Cultural Survival began its work in Brazil, we celebrate with the Xavante who after decades of strug -
gle are gaining the recognition and return of their land by the Brazilian government. As Indigenous Peoples and allies, 
we return to Brazil to attend the Rio+20 conference with new voices. Our voices proclaim our struggles and environ -
mental and climate concerns through the discourse and framework of “rights” represented in the UN Declaration on 
the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Our voices articulate the same issues that were occurring 40 and 20 years ago of 
environmental destruction, ecosystem loss, land loss, sacred sites loss, cultural and language loss in the face of devel -
opment and globalization. We hope that the discourse of “green economies and sustainable development” truly rec -
ognizes Indigenous voices and participation in shaping state policies that assure Indigenous Peoples’ survival and self- 
determination. 
Cultural Survival’s work is not done, as evidenced by the articles in our magazine, our website, and the many conver -
sations we have with Indigenous Peoples around the world.  Looking forward, our vision is to live in a world in which 
Indigenous Peoples speak their languages, live on their land, control their resources, maintain thriving cultures, and 
participate in broader society on equal footing with other peoples.  We count on your generous support to realize 
that vision. 
In spirit we work together for the benefit of the people and Mother Earth, 
Suzanne Benally 
(Navajo and Santa Clara Tewa) 
ANNUAL REPORT 2012                                               A Message From the Executive director 
3
ANNUAL REPORT 2012 Our Mission 
Called Tribal Peoples, First Peoples, and Native Peoples, Indigenous Peoples constitute 
over five percent of the world’s population. There are over 370 million Indigenous peo -
ple, belonging to 5,000 different groups, living in 70 countries worldwide. 
Cultural Survival partners with Indigenous Peoples to defend their lands, languages, 
and cultures. 
Our vision:
Cultural Survival envisions a future where all Indigenous Peoples live by their inherent 
rights deeply and richly interwoven in their aboriginal lands, native languages, spiritual 
traditions, and dynamic cultures; and whose Indigenous rights are honored through 
self-determination.  
Our Mission:
Cultural Survival supports Indigenous Peoples’ actions to secure their rights to their 
lands, languages, cultures, and environments. The majority of Indigenous Peoples live 
in the world’s last biodiverse regions and speak the majority of the world’s endangered 
languages. Indigenous communities continue to stand up for their rights in the face of 
endless and grave human rights violations from governments and corporations. We 
provide advocacy and capacity-building to make sure their voices are heard and sup -
port their efforts to strengthen their communities. Our work is predicated on the UN 
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. 
5samburu community members in northern Kenya give tes -
timony about a year-long pattern of brutal police assaults 
to an investigative team from Cultural survival’s Global 
response program in January, 2010. Community members of Barillas, Indigenous grassroots organizations, and members of surrounding communities 
gatherin the central park of Barillas on April 18, 2012 in solidarity against foreign exploitation. . “We want an army 
that serves the people, not international corporations! No to the Dam!” Photo by Danielle DeLuca. “Supporting this work is incredibly necessary. When 
things are going fine, we don't realize it, but when some -
thing grave happens, that is the moment when we realize 
that organizations like Cultural Survival are necessary." 
— Lorenzo Mateo, Q'anjobal Maya speaks to Cultural Survival's response after the assasination of community 
leaders in Barillas, Huehuetenango Ethiopia: 
The Ethiopian government has put the traditional 
grazing lands of Indigenous Anuak people for sale.  
As big agricultural firms from around the world have 
moved in, the government has kicked Indigenous 
Peoples out, forcing them into villages in a supposed 
“development” scheme that has received funding 
from the World Bank, the US, and the UK.  We 
launched a campaign to pressure these donor nations 
to withdraw funding for these programs that allow 
land grabbing and forced eviction of Indigenous 
Peoples.  Since the launch of our campaign, one of the 
main investors, Karaturi Global, has seen a 90 percent 
plunge in their stock value, and the World Bank initiat -
ed an independent investigation into human rights 
violations. 
Cameroon: 
Claiming to be a environmentally and socially respon -
sible corporation, Herakles Farms, a US based palm oil 
company, is bulldozing over 300 square miles of rain -
forest and farmland of rural Indigenous Cameroonians 
who have demonstrated their firm opposition to the 
project.  In coalition with 11 other organizations local -
ly and internationally, Cultural Survival inundated 
Herakles’ inboxes in opposition, and we hand-deliv -
ered petitions signed by 600 affected Indigenous vil -
lagers in Cameroon to their headquarters in New York City.  At the date of publication, the project was sus -
pended by order from the Ministry of Environment. 
Guatemala: 
Due to their persistent and outspoken opposition to a 
Spanish hydro project in their community, the 
Q’anjobal people of Santa Cruz Barillas, 
Huehuetenango, had tanks roll into their peaceful 
town and military line their streets in May of 2012, 
which led to the assassination, kidnapping, and 
imprisonment of their leaders. Through on-the-ground 
research and the launch of a campaign in June of 
2012, Global Response has been a key player in bring -
ing these series of atrocities to international attention, 
demanding accountability from the government and 
the company and respect for the community’s deci -
sion to oppose the project. 
In 2012 we launched our new “Endorsement 
Campaigns.” In places where we can’t be on the 
ground ourselves, we also launch campaigns through 
partnerships with like-minded organizations to help 
spread the word about important issues that haven't 
gotten enough international attention.  One of these 
campaigns included a partnership with Grassroots 
International, to stop the forced eviction of Garifuna 
peoples from their titled lands in Honduras. 
ANNUAL REPORT 2012 7The Global Response Program partners with Indigenous communities to advocate directly with companies and 
governments urging respect of Indigenous People’s right to Free, Prior and Informed Consent.  We launch 
informed and targeted campaigns within three categories: land grabbing, dams, and extractive industries. 
In 2012, we carried out these campaigns: defending indigenous Peoples’ Rights, Lands, and Resources 
"Cultural Survival is giving us the courage to go on"  —Edimo Andrew, Oroko of Cameroon CULTURAL SURVIVAL “Thanks to Cultural Survival and the equipment you provided 
us with,  our local media is able to reach our community,  for 
our own development.   We want the right to a frequency,  but 
we are not afraid.  We know we are doing honorable work" 
— Fermin Perez, of La X Musical, Cajola Quetzaltenango 
Maya women of the community radio movement in Guatemala present their demands at the October 12, 2012 March of 
Resistance in Guatemala City. Photo by Danielle DeLuca. Seeking Policy Change 
In the fall of 2011, Cultural Survival’s sister organization 
in Guatemala, Sobrevivencia Cultural, had submitted an 
action of unconstitutionality to the Constitutional Court, 
declaring economic and ethnic discrimination in the state’s 
mechanism for distribution of radio frequencies. The action 
argued that by auctioning off frequency licenses to the 
highest bidder, Indigenous communities, who are among 
the most economically disadvantaged in the country, lack 
fair access to state-owned media.  In March, the 
Constitutional Court of Guatemala ruled against our action 
of unconstitutionality, upholding the telecommunications 
law as is, but also recommending that the congress legis -
late in favor of Indigenous People’s access to radio – a rec -
ommendation to which Congress has yet to respond. 
Protests in Guatemala City by a coalition of grassroots 
organizations of which Cultural Survival is a member forced 
11 different political parties in Congress to sign a resolution 
to act on pending legislation, including a bill regarding 
community media and four other bills relating to 
Indigenous rights that have been bookshelved by a disin -
terested congress. 
In April, after a nine-day Indigenous and Campesino 
March from Coban, Alta Verapaz to Guatemala City, the 
president of Guatemala agreed to meet with march partici -
pants and leaders of the community radio movement to 
address their demands. A series of dialogues were initiated 
but eventually abandoned. 
A visit from the UN High Commissioner for Human 
Rights, Navi Pillay, to the highland town of Totonicapan 
gave an audience to the grievances of the Indigenous 
Peoples in Guatemala.  Community Radio leaders present -
ed formal complaints and 10 community radio stations 
were present, broadcasting the event nationally. 
Building Capacity and Networks 
Cultural Survival’s partner network of pilot radio stations 
gathered together every other month in San Mateo, 
Quetzaltenango to participate in a workshops attended by 
representatives from 20 community radio stations to learn about topics of interest and necessity to their communities 
and produce radio content on these topics. 
We held a total of six workshops in 2012, training 167 
people, covering topics such as Indigenous spirituality and 
the Mayan Calendar, Fair Trade, the Environment, and 
Community Radio Policy, producing programs about these 
topics in Spanish, Quiché, Mam, Tzutuj’il, Q’anjobal, 
Pocomam, and Kakchiquel. 
In June and July, we held a series of workshops on the 
historical memory of Guatemala’s bloody 36-year armed 
conflict. With the guide of a facilitator, participants wrote 
and recorded poetry in Spanish and five Indigenous languages .
In July and August, Cultural Survival joined forces with 
the Recovering Voices Initiative at the Smithsonian 
Institution to facilitate endangered language revitalization 
by producing “Our Voices on the Air: Reaching New 
Audiences through Indigenous Radio,” a conference on 
radio programming in Indigenous languages, bringing 
together radio producers from around the globe to share 
resources and knowledge from experiences in their com -
munities. In Guatemala, Cultural Survival’s partners in com -
munity radio embarked upon a new initiative of local 
exchanges among radio stations, getting to know each 
other’s work models. 
In September, Cultural Survival submitted a petition to 
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights to appeal 
the decision of Guatemala’s Constitutional Court which vio -
lates Indigenous Peoples’ rights through the country’s 
telecommunications law that excludes Indigenous Peoples 
from operating community radio stations. 
In October, we co-hosted the Second Annual National 
Conference of Community Radio Stations in Guatemala, 
with the participation of over 30 community radio stations 
from around the country, aimed to strengthen the identity 
of the movement of community radio stations in 
Guatemala as agents of social change in the face of an 
increasingly oppressive political regime.  The event culmi -
nated with participation in the annual Columbus Day march 
in Guatemala City, known as the Day of Indigenous 
Resistance. 
9ANNUAL REPORT 2012 Promoting indigenous voices in guatemala Six Innu tribal members from Sheshatshiu, Labrador, Canada visited Cultural Survival offices to discuss Native American language 
revitalization programs in the U.S., and the status of the Innu language in Newfoundland, Labrador and Quebec.  “The current vibrant tribal languages movement embodies the 
indomitable spirits and love of our Indigenous ancestors and 
the power of our ancient languages to continue to shape our 
contemporary lives and cultural survival as Native peoples. ” 
— Jennifer Weston, Endangered Language Program Manager January 2012 marked four years since Cultural Survival 
launched Endangered Languages Program partner -
ships with critically endangered Native American lan -
guage communities. Since Spring 2008, Cultural 
Survival’s grassroots collaborative of four local lan -
guage program directors and administrators has raised 
nearly three quarters of a million dollars in direct sup -
port for five partner programs, while leveraging nearly 
$2 million in total new investments in language revi -
talization efforts. Over the course of 2012, a variety of 
events, workshops, screenings, and marches worked 
to further revitalize Indigenous languages and develop 
the Endangered Languages Program. 
Panel discussions and screenings of We Still Live 
Here: Âs Nutayuneân, Anne Makepeace's award-win -
ning documentary about the reawakening of the 
Wampanoag language in southeastern Massachusetts, 
continued throughout the year. Produced in collabora -
tion with Cultural Survival’s Endangered Languages 
Program, the film continued to engage and move 
diverse audiences nationally and internationally, while 
bringing hope and inspiration to Indigenous communi -
ties struggling with language loss and the challenges 
of revitalization. 
In February, Cultural Survival’s Endangered 
Languages Program Manager Jennifer Weston and 
Tracy Kelley, Wôpanâak Language Reclamation Project 
apprentice hosted a day-long workshop on Indigenous 
language revitalization projects with more than 70 
tribal youth at the Montagnyard Pinecroft Learning 
Center and Church in Greensboro, North Carolina. 
The high school students are part of an active refugee 
community numbering more than 4,000, and all speak 
one or more Indigenous languages originating in the 
central highlands of Vietnam, and are learning or 
already speak English. Cultural Survival was invited by 
the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization 
based (UNPO) in Amsterdam to meet with the 
Greensboro tribal youth group about film, web, and language revitalization projects they can implement 
locally through their youth and community associa -
tions.  
In May, participants from Cambodia, Russia, 
Thailand, the United States, and Uruguay gathered at 
the United Nations Forum  on Indigenous Issues in 
New York City for Cultural Survival’s workshop 
“Indigenous Language Survival and Revitalization: 
Film, Radio, Web, and Growing Speakers from the 
Grassroots” to discuss methods of educating and 
inspiring youth to learn ancient heritage languages 
and learn about a variety of web and radio-based proj -
ects. The following summer months also marked excit -
ing new events. Endangered Languages Program man -
ager Jennifer Weston met with elder fluent speakers, 
tribal leaders, educators, and youth on the 3.2 million 
acre Wind River Reservation in central Wyoming 
(Shoshone and Northern Arapaho). Cultural Survival’s 
new Indigenous languages web platform 
(LanguageGathering.org) went live in August, and fea -
tures language revitalization program profiles, videos, 
news, events, and resources. 
Endangered languages also gained attention on 
the national scale in September, when seven co-spon -
sors in the U.S. House and Senate introduced bills 
reauthorizing the funding of the Esther Martinez 
Native American Language Act, first authorized by 
Congress in 2006, in order to provide support for 
Native language immersion and restoration programs 
in tribal communities. The program's funding authori -
zation, which expires at the end of 2012, has distrib -
uted nearly $50 million in 39 competitive grants to 
tribal language programs since its passage.  
In October, the Endangered Languages Program 
hosted Innu tribal members to discuss Native 
American language revitalization programs in the U.S. 
and the status of the Innu language in Canada. 
11 ANNUAL REPORT 2012 Revitalizing Native Languages 
                
                  “Our art is hardly seen in the Northeast, the Bazaars 
allow us to share our heritage.  I am able to sell my art 
and the art of two different coops that support over 40 
Wixarika-Huichol families who don't have a market in 
Mexico. There are only a few events that significantly 
have a positive impact in our lives, we deeply thank 
Cultural Survival for this opportunity.” 
—Cilau Valadez, Wixarika-Huichol yarn painter from Mexico,  doing a demonstration at Cultural Survival Bazaar in 
Cambridge, MA The Cultural Survival Bazaars are a series of cultural 
festivals that work to strengthen Indigenous cultures 
by providing a venue for the sale of art and crafts 
made by Indigenous artisans throughout the world. 
The sale of crafts perpetuates the artistic traditions 
that are culturally significant to many Indigenous com -
munities, provides capital to Indigenous communities, 
and provides sustainable income to individual artisans 
and their families.   
In 2012, we hosted seven bazaars in Cambridge, 
Boston, Falmouth, and Amherst, Massachusetts, and 
one in Tiverton, Rhode Island. Indigenous artists dis -
played their work as part of an educational campaign 
to promote an understanding of the relationship 
between art, land, and culture. 
We hosted 56 vendors and artisans, and attracted 
over 30,000 people. The sales at the eight bazaars 
totaled $477,348 for Native artisans and cooperatives, 
as well as fair trade companies and nonprofit organi -
zations working with Indigenous artisans. 
A Few Examples of the Bazaars’ Impact 
“Thank you for hosting us. We raised $6,500 from the 
sale of jewelry at Bazaars and from school honoraria. 
The money was used to support educational funds 
and women's projects in the community. We support -
ed 20 elementary school kids for the whole of this 
year. It costs $150 per year per kid to get the needed 
supplies and school related expenses for a year. Such supplies include books, school bags, uniforms and 
shoes. For next year, we hope to support high school 
students as well. Also, two women groups have bene -
fited from the funds, using them to expand their jew -
elry-making business, ” writes Simba Maasai Outreach 
Organization from Kenya. 
Abenaki artist Lenny Novak says, “Cultural Survival 
brings together artisans like us who are living our her -
itage through the production of our art. At the same 
time, we educate the public about the danger we face 
of losing our cultures through mass production in a 
global marketplace. We have met so many great peo -
ple who understand the daily struggle we endure try -
ing to earn a living as Native American artists. At 
Cultural Survival’s bazaars, we sell our art along side 
other Indigenous artisans from around the world. 
Cultural Survival provides the venues and marketing 
necessary for successful shows, especially in the cur -
rent economy. Offering shopping in a global market -
place to knowledgeable people has proven not only 
beneficial for us, but essential in allowing us the 
opportunity to earn the income needed to continue 
focusing on creating original art that is true to our 
ancestry.” 
13 ANNUAL REPORT 2012 “As an Indigenous woman, I have witnessed and benefitted from the important support 
that Cultural Survival has provided for the strengthening of the Mayan culture.” 
—Alma T emaj Promoting indigenous Arts and Cultures “Before this conference, I thought that only Indigenous 
people in Guatemala were struggling to maintain our 
cultures and languages. Here, I am surrounded by 
Indigenous brothers and sisters from many places who 
are facing the same challenges that we do back 
home—and many are succeeding. It is very inspiring 
and I will take these lessons back to my people.” 
— Olga Mercedes Ajcalon, Our Voices on the Air participant Researchers predict that the vast majority of the 
world’s estimated 6,000 to 7,000 languages may 
disappear by the end of the 21st century. Saving and 
revitalizing languages means teaching them to the 
next generations. Radio is an ideal educational 
medium, because for many Indigenous communities 
around the world it is the most accessible form of 
information sharing. It is also relatively easy to create 
the necessary infrastructure for a community-based, 
volunteer-run radio station. 
Indigenous Radio Producers’ Language Revitalization 
Conference 
On July 31- August 2, 2012, Cultural Survival joined 
forces with the Recovering Voices Initiative at the 
Smithsonian Institution to facilitate endangered 
language revitalization by producing a conference on 
radio programming in Indigenous languages. “Our 
Voices on the Air: Reaching New Audiences Through 
Indigenous Radio” involved three Smithsonian 
partners - the National Museum of Natural History 
(NMNH), the National Museum of the American 
Indian (NMAI) and the Center for Folklife and Cultural 
Heritage (CFCH).This project is supported with internal 
Smithsonian funds from the Consortium for World 
Cultures and the Consortium for Understanding the 
American Experience. 
The conference brought together Indigenous radio 
producers from Canada, Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, and the 
United States to share resources and knowledge from 
experiences in their communities. Radio producers, 
linguists, and advocates from many tribal and 
mainstream communities shared examples of specific 
resources, legal challenges, and other wide-ranging 
experiences gained from broadcasting, teaching, and 
organizing in their communities. Media professionals 
from around the world also brought their expertise to 
the discussion. Through workshops, presentations, 
screenings, and comparative discussion sessions, 
producers developed new material—and inspiration— 
to enrich their community radio programming at 
home. 
Cultural Survival is using ideas and materials from the 
conference to develop a national radio series that will 
be broadcast to a wide community and public radio 
audience. The series will tell the story of the 
endangerment of the world’s languages, the 
importance of revitalizing these languages, and the 
crucial role that community radio programming can 
play in revitalizing Indigenous languages as a catalyst 
for social justice. 
To learn more about the “Our Voices on the Air” 
conference, to join the conversation on our blog, and 
to listen to programs produced by participants, visit: 
www.cs.org/our-voices-on-the-air. Our voices on the Air 
ANNUAL REPORT 2012 15 
“When it comes to revitalizing Indigenous languages, if not us, then who? If not now, 
then when? If not on our Indigenous lands, then where? We are here for the same rea -
son, the life of our language and the life of our people. If we can band together, there is 
nothing that we cannot accomplish.”  —Kaimana Barcarse, Hawaiian language advocate  “The most important element of Indigenous Peoples’ ability 
to claim the right of Free, Prior and Informed Consent is to 
have informed and organized communities.” 
— UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues Delegate Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) is the 
principle that a community has the right to give its 
consent to proposed projects that may affect their 
lands, resources, livelihoods, and communities. This 
principle is protected by international human rights 
law as “all peoples have the right to self- 
determination” and “all peoples have the right to 
freely pursue their economic, social and cultural 
development.” It is enshrined in the International 
Labour Organization Convention 169 and the UN 
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. 
Cultural Survival’s Free, Prior and Informed Consent 
Initiative is strengthening Indigenous Peoples’ capacity 
to implement free, prior and informed consent by 
increasing awareness and understanding of this right 
through community media and community exchanges. 
Building on Cultural Survival’s successful community 
radio program in Guatemala, we are producing and 
distributing a series of radio programs on topics 
related to free, prior and informed consent to inform 
Indigenous listeners about their rights, and we are 
working with communities to develop their own 
guidelines, based on their unique experiences and 
cultural perspectives, to build capacity, reinforce self- 
determination, and assist communities to organize to 
defend their rights. Developing appropriate context- 
based FPIC guidelines will further strengthen 
community awareness and understanding of those rights.  Thanks to the generous support from The 
Christensen Fund to spread the word about this 
important right of Indigenous Peoples, Cultural 
Survival is producing an innovative new radio series 
available first in English and Spanish, ready for 
broadcast across radio stations worldwide. These 
programs will also be translated and available for 
download in a variety of Indigenous languages. 
This initiative got started in September of 2012 and 
brought many new developments to Cultural Survival. 
We hired three new staff members as radio producers, 
including Kaimana Barcarse (Native Hawaiian), Rosy 
Gonzalez (Kakchiquel Maya of Guatemala), and 
Aurelio Sho (Mopan Maya of Belize). By the end of 
2012 we made headway into planning scripts and 
recording audio for the production of 20 short radio 
spots on Free, Prior and Informed Consent. 
We began research and contact with community radio 
stations that broadcast to Indigenous audiences, not 
just in Guatemala, but now on the global scale. 
Read our December 2012 edition of the Cultural 
Survival Quarterly, which was devoted to the topic of 
Free, Prior and Informed Consent. Free, Prior and informed Consent 
ANNUAL REPORT 2012 17 
"This is an excellent way in demystifying global commitments and 
legal concepts. Keep it up and bring out more!" 
—Kimbowa Richard, Kampala, Uganda 
(left) the community of santa Cruz Barillas in Guatemala makes 
their voice heard by saying, "no" to a hydroelectric dam to be built 
by spanish company Hidralia energia. photo by Danielle Deluca. Cultural Survival is governed by a board of directors that serves as the organization's legal accountability mechanism and bears all the 
responsibilities of boards of directors in the United States and in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. The board works through 
committees, including an Executive Committee, a Finance Committee, a Fundraising Committee, and a Nominating Committee. 
A unique feature of our board is our Program Council, a committee predominantly made up of Indigenous board members who possess 
the knowledge, experience, and skills to assist the organization to evaluate current programs, set policy on complex program-related 
issues, and identify potential new programs and opportunities for growth. gOvERNANCE 
BOARd OF diRECTORS 
PRESIDENT AND CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD 
Sarah Fuller is the executive chairman of Millennium Prevention Inc., which combines serious science with web-enabled platforms and 
apps that link consumers and providers to improve health and wellness outcomes. She is also president emeritus of Decision Resources 
Inc., a leading research and advisory firm focusing in health care. Previously, she was a Vice President at Arthur D. Little, Inc. She is a 
member of the Board of Trustees and of the Board of Overseers at the School of Arts and Sciences at the University of Pennsylvania. In 
addition, she participates in the Huntsman and the Life Sciences Management Advisory Boards. She is also on the board of Cytel 
Corporation and the Forbes Consulting Group. Ms. Fuller holds a B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania and an A.M. from Harvard 
University. 
VICE CHAIR 
Vincent O. Nmehielle, Ikwerre from the Niger Delta region of Nigeria, is an associate professor of law at the University of the 
Witwatersrand Law School in Johannesburg, South Africa. He was the former principal defender for Liberian president Charles Taylor at 
the Special Court for Sierra Leone in The Hague. He holds a doctorate in international and comparative law from George Washington 
University. 
TREASURER 
Nicole Friederichs is a practitioner-in-residence at Suffolk University Law School in Boston, where she teaches the Indian Law and 
Indigenous Peoples Clinic. Prior to joining Suffolk, she practiced federal Indian law and international human rights law, working on a range 
of cases, including jurisdictional cases between Native American tribes and New England states, and Indigenous Peoples’ land rights cases 
before international and regional human rights bodies. She holds a master of laws degree in Indigenous Peoples Law and Policy from the 
University of Arizona, a law degree from Suffolk University Law School, and is a graduate of Mount Holyoke College and the London 
School of Economics. 
CLERK 
Jean Jackson is a professor of anthropology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Her books, articles, and teaching focus on med -
ical anthropology, social and ethnic identity, gender issues, and Indigenous mobilization in Colombia. She received her doctorate in 
anthropology from Stanford University. 
Karmen Ramírez Boscán, Wayuu, is an international Indigenous Peoples’ rights activist with a lifetime of experience working with Wayuu 
communities in Colombia as well as national organizations such as Sütsüin Jiyeyu Wayuu—Strength of Women Wayuu, the National 
Indigenous Organization of Colombia, and the Andean Coordinator of Indigenous Organizations. She has advocated for Indigenous issues 
internationally as a consultant for the International Labor Organization, the Indigenous Peoples and Minorities Unit at the Office of the 
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Organization of American States, and the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. She 
has a background in social communication and journalism. 
18 CULTURAL SURVIVAL BOARd OF diRECTORS (CONTiNUEd )
Duane Champagne of Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa from North Dakota is professor of sociology, law, and American Indian 
studies, a member of the Faculty Advisory Committee for the UCLA Native Nations Law and Policy Center, a former senior editor 
for Indian Country Today, a past acting director of the Tribal Learning Community and Educational Exchange Working Group, and 
contributor of the education chapter to the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues’ State of the World's Indigenous Peoples 
Report. He was director of the UCLA American Indian Studies Center from 1991 to 2002 and editor of the American Indian Culture 
and Research Journal from 1986 to 2003, and again in 2011 to 2014. He has written or edited over 125 publications. 
Laura R. Graham is a professor of anthropology at the University of Iowa. Her work focuses on lowland South American Indigenous 
Peoples’ activities in national and international arenas, especially the Xavante of central Brazil (Ge) and the Wayúu (Arawak, also 
known as Guajiro) of Venezuela and Colombia. She is past chair of the American Anthropological Association’s Committee for 
Human Rights and chairs their Task Group on Language and Social Justice. From 1994 to 2005 she directed the Xavante Education 
Fund, a Cultural Survival special project. She now coordinates the Xavante Warã Association's projects with Cultural Survival.   
Steve Heim is director of social research for Boston Common Asset Management. He is primarily responsible for social investment 
research on domestic and international companies and for its shareholder advocacy work. He has over 15 years experience in this 
field. Steven brings a wealth of understanding of food and sustainable agriculture issues. He led shareholder proposals with 
ConAgra, Kroger, Yum Brands, and Dean Foods, worked over seven years for Rural Vermont, a family farm advocacy group, and 
served 16 years total on the boards of consumer co-op stores. Steven received two Bachelor of Science degrees from the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
James Howe is a professor of anthropology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. A specialist on the Kuna of Panama, his 
research focuses on political and historical anthropology, Indigenous-state relations, and the impact of missionaries. He received 
his doctorate in anthropology from the University of Pennsylvania. 
Edward John, Tl’azt’en, is a prominent First Nations political leader in Canada. He has served as an elected councilor and chief of 
the Tl'azt'en Nation. He also served as chief of the Carrier Sekani Tribal Council. For his service to Tl'azt'en Nation, he was awarded 
the title of Grand Chief of Tl'azt'en Nation. A fluent speaker of Carrier and one of the few people considered eloquent public 
speakers in Carrier, John was the founding president of the Yinka Dene Language Institute. He helped to create the First Nations 
Summit, the organization representing the British Columbia First Nations involved in treaty negotiations with Canada and British 
Columbia. In June 2010, John was elected to his ninth term on the Task Group of the First Nations Summit. He is also Chief Treaty 
Negotiator for the Carrier Sekani Tribal Council. In January 2011, he began a three year term as the North American 
Representative to the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. 
Cecilia Lenk , is town councilor in Watertown, Massachusetts. She consults on technology, health care, and education, and is a 
member of Launchpad, an investment group. She has developed numerous national and international internet initiatives in the 
areas of science, health, and science education. She received her doctorate in biology at Harvard University and her undergraduate 
degree from Johns Hopkins. She is currently chair of the Society of Engineering Alumni at Johns Hopkins. 
Pia Maybury-Lewis is co-founder of Cultural Survival. She was a member of the staff until 2009, managing the intern and bazaar 
programs. 
Les Malezer, Aboriginal Australian of the Gabi Gabi Community, is co-chair elect of National Congress of Australia’s First Peoples 
and the general manager for the Foundation for Aboriginal and Islander Research Action (FAIRA) based in Woolloongabba, 
Australia. He is also currently serving as Chairperson for the international Indigenous Peoples’ Caucus, and is a member of Cultural 
Survival's Program Council. Les was instrumental in lobbying governments to support the United Nations Declaration on the Rights 
of Indigenous Peoples with the Caucus. 
19 ANNUAL REPORT 2012 BOARD OF DIRECTORS (continued) 
P. Ranganath Nayak is the chief executive officer of Cytel Inc.. He has more than 24 years of senior-level management experience in 
technology and management consulting, and holds a doctorate in mechanical engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. 
Stella Tamang, Tamang tribe from Nepal, was chairman of the International Indigenous Womens Caucus at the third session of the UN 
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues and is currently the chairman of the South Asia Indigenous Women’s Forum and an advisor to 
the Nepal Tamang Women Ghedung. She founded Bikalpa Gyan Kendra, an organization in Nepal that contributes to students’ educa -
tion and livelihoods by combining academic learning with practical training. 
Jeff Wallace is founder of North Star Management, a firm that manages and develops commercial buildings in Boston. He holds a 
degree from Huxley College of Environmental Studies in Bellingham, WA and an MBA. His past experience includes working for a ven -
ture capital firm and for an architect/developer before founding his company. 
Che Philip Wilson, Ngāti Rangi from the North Island of Aotearoa-New Zealand, is a managing director of a consultancy, Intugen Ltd., 
focusing in Māori community and cultural development. He possesses formal experience in policy and community development and has 
worked in the public sector in New Zealand and the United Kingdom. He was the chair of his tribe from 2008-2011 where he stepped 
down to become the Chief Executive. 
20 CULTURAL SURVIVAL Suzanne Benally (Navajo and Santa Clara Tewa) , Executive Director 
Kaimana Barcarse (Native Hawaiian) , FPIC Radio Series Producer 
Mark Camp, Deputy Executive Director 
Danielle DeLuca, Global Response Program Manager 
David Michael Favreau, Bazaar Program Manager 
Sofia Flynn, Accounting & Office Manager 
Cesar Gomez (Pocomam) , Content Production & Training Coordinator, Community Radio Program 
Rosy Gonzalez (Kakchiquel Maya), FPIC Radio Series Producer 
Jamie Malcolm-Brown, Communications & Information Technology Manager 
Agnes Portalewska, Communications Manager 
Rosendo Pablo Ramirez (Mam) , Program Associate, Community Radio Program (no longer on staff) 
Alberto ‘Tino’ Recinos (Mam) , Citizen Participation Coordinator, Community Radio Program 
Aurelio Sho (Mopan Maya), FPIC Radio Series Producer  
Patrick Schaefer, Director of Development (no longer on staff) 
Miranda Vitello, Development Assistant 
Jennifer Weston (Hunkpapa Lakota) , Endangered Languages Program Manager (no longer on staff) 
Ancelmo Xunic (Kachikel) , Community Radio Program Manager STAFF 21 “The CS internship program is great! I joined because of the mis -
sion to protect Indigenous languages and cultures, but never imag -
ined the care taken by the staff and my supervisors during the past 
year to ensure that I was engaging with the mission and doing work 
actually related to the organization's tenets. It is not a typical, 
‘grabbing coffees and making copies’ type of internship, and I will 
take the experience with me as I move on.” 
—Laura Garbes,  summer 2012 intern (right) 
“In September 2011, I had joined the dedicated team of social advocates at CS and was immediately tasked 
with writing a piece for the magazine.  While internship programs are often first and foremost a means of 
supporting a preexisting staff, it was clear that the staff was most concerned with our individual development 
and growth.  My work on the magazine provided me with an incredible opportunity to deepen my under -
standing of how Indigenous Peoples experience the world.  A year later, I find myself carrying their stories 
with me into the classroom and less formal settings.  I am indebted to Cultural Survival for giving me the 
means to enhance my awareness of and share these perspectives.” 
— Erica Jaffe Redner ,   fall 2012 intern iNTERN PROgRAM 
Cultural Survival’s work could not be accomplished without our 
interns. Interns are involved in all areas of the organization’s work and 
play a vital role in day-to-day operations at Cultural Survival. Cultural 
Survival's internship program is an integral component to the organiza -
tion. We ask interns to commit no less than 16 hours per week at our 
office in Cambridge, MA for a minimum of six weeks.  The average 
internship lasts for the duration of one school semester or three to 
four months in the summer . This year we hosted 26 interns from uni -
versities around the country. 
Guatemala Radio Project: Interns assisted in evaluating all the radio 
program episodes, helped write quarterly reports and grant applica -
tions, and set up speaking engagements about the project for station 
representatives. 
Endangered Languages : Interns helped organize materials for hun -
dreds of Native American language advocates attending the National 
Native Language Revitalization Summit. Interns also assisted with 
fundraising, researching foundations , and developing donor files for 
potential funders for Native American language programs. Interns and 
graduate volunteers helped organize outreach calls and interviews 
with dozens of tribal language programs across the United States. Fundraising and Events : Interns contributed to the success of 
our expanded bazaars program by educating the public about 
Indigenous issues and fair trade, setting up and breaking down 
the bazaars, maintaining security, encouraging attendees to join 
Cultural Survival, assisting vendors and performers, selling rugs 
and crafts, handing out flyers, and directing traffic. 
Publications and Research: Interns wrote or contributed to arti -
cles that were published in the Cultural Survival Quarterly and 
wrote features and urgent appeals for the website. 
Thank you to our wonderful 2012 Interns and Volunteers! 
Erica Adelson, Ava Berinstein, Elissa Bolt, Jennifer Bucolo, Don 
Butler, Michelle Choi, Matthew Chuckran, Ana Lucía Fariña, 
Laura Garbes, Meg Holladay, Daniel Horgan, Curtis Kline, 
Kelsey Klug, Danielle Kost, Yunmee Kyong, Natalie Magnetta, 
William Morrison, Katie Moseby, Luisa Oliveira, Erica Redner, 
Isidoro Rodriguez-Hazbun, Hope Ross, Elizabeth Rani Segran, 
Paula Svaton, Maggie Tallmadge, and Serena Zhao 
ANNUAL REPORT 2012 22 giviNg TO CULTURAL SURvivAL 
CULTURAL SURVIVAL Supporters of Cultural Survival continue to make all our work possible by volunteering, writing letters to govern -
ments and corporations, offering ideas, and providing the financial resources needed to carry out our mission. 
Thank you for your support of our work. 
Why I Support Cultural Survival 
“For four decades, Cultural Survival has stayed true to its mission of standing 
with Indigenous Peoples in defense of their human rights. Its many partner -
ships and projects with Indigenous groups, its global interventions in a variety 
of human rights debates, its dedicated work on the Declaration on the Rights 
of Indigenous Peoples, and its programs point to an organization that has 
worked assiduously to promote the empowerment efforts of Indigenous 
Peoples for self-determination. Cultural Survival has never given up, truly walks 
the talk, and is more incisive in its work today than ever.” 
—Tim Sieber, Professor of Anthropology, UMass Boston 
“Indigenous communities are made up of human beings who have the right 
to self-determination and ought not to be run over by ‘mainstream’ societies 
and economies. They represent a diversity that humanity, like any species, 
would be well advised to maintain for purposes of adaptation. They are well -
springs of knowledge about the environment and the universe. Cultural 
Survival is one of the few organizations I know of that tries to help 
Indigenous people grapple with the impacts of modernity on their traditional 
values and ways of life and to stand up to government and industry.” 
— T om King, PhD., Silver Spring, MD 
T o learn how you can support CS, visit: www.cs.org/get-involved. 
BENEFACTOR 
Administration for Native Americans 
Todd and Renee Anderson 
Tom Bird 
Elizabeth Cabot 
Cambridge College 
Mary Ann Camp 
Chicago Community Trust 
Chickasaw Nation 
The Christensen Fund 
William E. and Francine Crawford 
The Crawford Foundation 
Bharat Das 
Wendy Emrich 
Sarah and William Fuller 
Google 
Grace Jones Richardson Trust 
Laura R. Graham and T.M. Scruggs 
Lisa Graustein 
William and Jeanie Graustein 
Karin Holser 
James and June Howe 
Institute of International Education 
Jean E. Jackson 
Charles M. and Angeliki V. Keil 
Richard F. Leman and Donna L. Ching 
Cecilia Lenk 
Larry Lewarton 
Hal Litoff 
Patricia J. Lyon 
Elsebet Maybury-Lewis 
Mildred M. Simmons Charitable Lead Annuity Trust 
P . Ranganath and Sandra Nayak 
Thomas J. Nerger 
New England Biolabs Foundation 
Next Step Living Inc. 
Nancy S. Nordhoff 
Paul & Virginia Cabot Charitable Trust 
Diva Indian Bistro 
Susanna B. Place 
Quitiplas Foundation 
Jerome C. and Janet Regier 
Runa Tea 
Scola Seventh Generation Fund for Indian Development 
Peter L. Sheldon 
Kristina L. Simmons and Michael J. Sheridan 
Thomas Sneed 
Mary Gay Sprague and William T. Hassler 
Nancy Stetson 
Swift Foundation 
Theo Chocolate 
Tides Foundation 
Tietz Family Foundation 
Martha Claire Tompkins 
Town of Arlington 
Tulsa Community Foundation 
Unitarian Universalist Church of Vancouver 
Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization 
Whole Foods 
Winky Foundation 
Worcester Polytechnic Institute 
Philip D. Young 
Roy Young and Rosa Venezia 
PATRON 
Janet K. Amighi 
Barbara Appel Irrevocable Living Trust 
Hanne T. Beck 
Bollywood Cafe 
Boston Area Spanish Exchange 
The Boston Foundation 
Boulder Meeting of the Religious Society of Friends 
Jerry D. Busch 
Jerry S. and Barbara Buttrey 
Victoria J. Carter 
Duane Champagne 
Martin and June Cobin 
Clemency Coggins 
Jean-Marc Emden 
Equal Exchange 
John Fries 
Kevin J. Healy 
Gerald and Nina Holton 
Jantz Morgan LLC 
Jack and Sara A. Keller 
Thomas F. King and Patricia L. Parker 
Malcolm Kottler Marilyn Krysl 
David Lockard 
Makepeace LLC 
Karim Malamoud 
Jesse W. Markow 
George Martin 
Matthew London and Sylvia Wen 
Barbara D. Miller 
Denise Peine 
Penelope Rich 
Santa Fe Community Foundation 
Raymond and Mary Sell 
Susan Sherman 
Chris Simpson 
Teresa M. and Anthony Smith 
Jessica E. Straus 
Thai Link 
Ezio Vailati 
Florence Wagner 
Jeff Wallace 
Richard Wilk 
SUSTAINER 
Sharon Albecht 
Rosamond W. Allen and Paul Landry 
Louise T. Ambler 
ARC Thrift Stores 
Rebecca Arnoldi 
Jeri Bayer 
Whitney Beals and Pamela Esty 
Robert Bernthal 
Shirley and Tim Blancke 
Louise M. Burkhart 
Carolyn Byerly and Kay McGraw 
Cambridge Trust Company 
Cameron Middle School 
John P . Camp 
Britt and Dan Ryan Cavalletto 
Cavossa Disposal Corporation 
Fay M. and Alfred Chandler 
Ann Christensen 
Jeff Cook 
J. B. Culver 
Culver Family Foundation 
Ana C. Deutsch 
Lorraine Diaz Donald and Martha Dick 
Christopher Donahue 
Max and Ann Drake 
William and Katy Durham 
Gene and Ruth Fax 
Nancy E. Fleischer 
Anne Forsyth 
Nicole B. Friederichs 
Gabriel P . and Sara L. Frommer 
Fuller Middle School 
Helen W. Gjessing 
Helen S. Halperin 
Susan J. Herlin 
Michael and Cornelia Herzfeld 
Sue Hilton 
Donald Hindley 
Michael J. Hirschhorn and Jimena P . Martinez 
Embry Howell 
Siri Karm Singh Khalsa 
Seena and Danny Kohl 
Catherine and Colleen Kunkel 
Olga K. Kurowski 
Melody Lambert 
Richard B. Lee 
Wilma Leinonen and Richard Hogue 
Dana Lepofsky 
Sherman L. and Alison Lewis 
Leslie Lomas 
Herbert A. Masters 
Roma Mayur 
Mariana M. McClanahan 
Rachelle McKenzie 
Nathanael Miksis 
Rosemary Mudd 
Connie and Robert Mutel 
Randy Muth 
Gilbert G. Nichols 
Sandy Noborikawa 
Elaine Nonneman 
Felicia Oldfather 
Michael Perloff 
Chanda Prescod-Weinstein 
Katharine M. Preston and John Bingham 
Xavid W. Pretzer 
William B. Radcliffe 
Edna Roberts 
John P . Rogers 
Sara Blair Winter Foundation Lou Scharpf 
Peggy Schear 
Sharon G. Seim 
Matthew Simonson 
St Paul's Church Nursery School 
Jane M. Starkey 
David M. Stoll 
George and Helene E. Strauss 
Kathryn S. Tholin 
Joe Toyoshima 
Terry and Mary Vogt 
Ann von Mehren 
John F. Walker 
Walsh Middle School 
Catherine M. Williams 
Steven Zuckerman and Paula Gorlitz 
SPONSOR 
Benjamin Abrams 
David Ader 
Douglas L. Adkins 
Shuaib Ahmad 
Hilary M. Ainger 
Alchemy Foundation 
Graham and Jean D. Alvord 
Ann Anderson 
Neal Anderson and Janice Stutts 
Frederique Apffel-Marglin 
Michael Appel and Ruth Kraut 
Susan Arnott and David Dobrin 
Arntz Family Foundation 
Gary and Kathleen Bahlkow 
Julene Bair 
Javier Balloffet 
Ofer and Daniella Bar-Yosef 
Mark Baranowski 
Gale Batchelder 
Jeffrey Bedrick 
Evelyn Beeter 
Charlotte Belezos 
Richard and Made Berg 
Susana Raquel Berger 
Ruth J. Berkheiser 
Jerry Bernhard 
Howard B. and Deborah J. Bernstein 
Dorsey Bethune 
Lynn Biddle ThANk YOU FOR YOUR gENEROSiTY 
*  Benefactor - ($1,000.00 + )     Patron - ($500-$999)    Sustainer ($250-$499)    Sponsor ($100-$249) 
23 ANNUAL REPORT 2012 CULTURAL SURVIVAL Johanna Biebesheimer 
Bruce and Judith Billings 
Peter Bingham 
Susan Bomalaski 
Erika E. Bourguignon 
Helen Bourne 
Markley H. Boyer and Barbara Millen 
Laurie Bozzi 
Susan L. Bradford 
Ann L. Bragdon 
Arik and Sally Brissenden 
Alan R. Bromberg 
Lisa D. Brooks 
Judith K. Brown 
William Brundage 
Mary Bull 
Jane Bunin 
John Burke 
Elizabeth W. Cady 
Gordon G. Campbell 
Paul J. Campbell and Melanie Schneider 
Jim Campen and Phyllis Ewen 
Jim Carlstedt 
John B. Carman 
Kyle Carney 
Andrew Chambers 
Murray and Linley Chapman 
Blair Clifford 
Nicholas Clinch 
Elizabeth H. Coker 
Barbara Collier 
David R. Conna 
Cynthia C. Cook 
Susan Cooper Cronyn 
William J. Coughlin and Ronald Bedard 
Lee D. Cranberg and Sherry Flashman 
Sean Cronin 
Mark E. Crosby 
Malcolm A. Cross 
Cathy D'Andrea 
Gislin Dagnelie 
Renata Davidson 
Alison E. Davis 
Deidre Dawson 
Marta De La Torre 
Joseph De Rivera 
Joseph Difillippo 
Estelle Disch 
Sharon Doll Katherine Domoto 
Mary Ann Donegan and Timothy Gray 
Theodore and Carmen G. Downing 
David Eck 
Regina M. Edmonds 
Stanford Edwards 
Risa S. Ellovich 
Kirk and Karen Endicott 
Naomi and Alan Epstein 
Sigo Falk 
James Fall 
Merrill Farmer 
David M. Favreau 
J Paulo Ferraz 
Flowers and Bones 
John and Diane Forsdale 
Ron and Mary Forthofer 
Jeremy and Angela Foster 
Erich Fox Tree 
Charles Frantz 
Beebe Frazer 
Marianne Freidberg 
Samuel Freilich 
Michael Frome 
Lydia Garvey 
Julia Gaspar-Bates 
Ronald Geatz 
George Gibson 
Kenneth T. Gibson 
Julia Gies 
Arthur and Deirdre Gillen 
Richard Gnaedinger 
Peter D. Goldberg 
Byron and Mary J. Good 
John Goodman 
Lion Goodman 
James H. Goulder 
Doug and Diane Graham 
Marian and Roger Gray 
Russell D. Greaves 
Linda Greenhouse 
Stanley N. Griffith and Ann Schauffler 
David J. Groenfeldt 
Steinthor V. Gudmundsson 
Andreas Halbach 
Morris and Rosamond Halle 
Laura Halvorson 
Francie Lynne Hansen 
Martha S. Hansen 
Sean J. Hartzell Carol Hayman 
Suzanne Helburn 
Eva Hersh 
Joshua D. Hinson 
Martyn J. Hitchcock 
Dennis L. Holeman and Jeanette Sill-Holeman 
Jean Holmblad 
Ariel Hoover 
Michael H. Horn 
Richard A. Horvitz 
Lucy H. Horwitz 
John Hosken 
Philip and Holiday Houck 
Robert C. Howell 
Luanne and Greg Hudson 
Roger Hunka 
Barbara L. Hunt 
John Hunt 
Joan A. Hyra 
Judith T. Irvine 
Margaret Jackson 
Karin A. Jacobson and Robert Seeman 
Cheri and Keith Jameson 
Christine Jantz 
Carolyn E. Jerard 
Sherry and Ralph Jones 
Brian Joseph 
Sarah Joyce 
Kate Judd and Robert Miller 
Andy Judkis 
Louis Kampf 
Gregory Kanhai 
Lawrence and Lucille N. Kaplan 
Ann R. Karnovsky 
Mary Keller 
Gary W. King 
Samuel C. Kinser 
Rita and Richard Dean Kipp 
Max C. Kirkeberg 
Eric Koenig 
Lawrence Koplik 
Elliott Krefetz 
Nancy Kricorian and James Schamus 
Atsushi Kurokawa 
Kurt Kutay 
Onawa Lacy 
Marie-Chantal Laforge 
Mireille Lapointe 
Gail A. Lauzzana 
Mary Lellouche John Lennie 
Jim Leonard 
Joan Lester 
Laraine Lewis 
Mark and Helena Licalzi 
The Lifshutz Foundation 
Christopher Lish 
Wiley and Christie Long 
Christine A. Loveland 
Jeff Lowe 
Nancy Lurie 
John Maher and Ellen Sarkisian 
Charles S. and Pauline Maier 
Eda Malenky 
Alan Mallach 
Ellen H. Maloney 
Chris and Carolynn Maltas 
Sarojam K. Mankau 
Alice E. Manning 
Sarah Manno 
Sylvia March 
Concepcion Martinez-Maske 
Peter Masters 
Lisa Matthews 
Margaret S. Maurin 
Nelson Max 
Raymond A. Mayer 
Marcella Mazzarelli 
David H. McAlpin 
Alan McCann-Sayles 
Sandra McCarthy 
Bonnie McCay Merritt 
Julia McGinn-Rodriguez 
Beth Ellen McKinney 
Richard and Deyne Meadow 
Jane Meyerding 
Melva L. Mills 
Stefania Minervino 
Helaine Minkus 
William P . Mitchell 
Michael and Lillian S. Moats 
Laura M. Montgomery and Karl Sandin 
Jim Moore 
Ellen G. Moot 
Nicola Moscufo and Kristin K. Leader 
Christopher Muller 
Jan Nespor 
Sarah Neusius 
Harry B. and Jean Newell 
Janice E. Newman Laura Nielson 
Philip Noel 
Barbara P . Norfleet 
Israel Noto Garcia 
Joan K. O'Donnell 
Rollin Odell 
Charles Oliver 
Sandra K. Orange 
Sutti Ortiz Koch 
Yasuyuki Owada 
Chris Papaianni 
Angus Parker 
Augustin H. Parker 
Lori Renn Parker 
Harry Parsekian 
Henry Paulus 
Aaron Pedroni 
Brady Peeks 
Pauline E. and Mark Peters 
Barbara Peterson 
Kristina Peterson 
Richard Peterson and Debra Rothenberg 
Anne S. Posel 
James H. and Karla Powell 
Junius Powell 
Lawrence Powell 
Anayansi Prado 
Joseph M. Prince 
Marianda Quadakkers 
Polly M. Quick 
Pat Rabby 
Peter Redfield 
Elsbeth Reisen 
Joel Resnick 
Eric Reynolds 
Rhode Island Council for the Humanities 
Dave G. Rich 
The Richard R. Howe Foundation 
Rachel Z. Ritvo 
Caralee and Fred Roberts 
Drucilla Roberts 
Steven D. Robinson 
Jo Raine Rodgers 
Abby Rosenberg 
Edward H. Rosenthal 
Herbert and Deborah M. Rothschild 
Barbara Rottier 
Geoffrey H. Rowley 
Martha A. and Robert Rubin 
Sandra Rubin 
24 *  Benefactor - ($1,000.00 + )     Patron - ($500-$999)    Sustainer ($250-$499)    Sponsor ($100-$249) ANNUAL REPORT 2012 Maria Rubino 
Russell's Garden Center Charitable Foundation 
Jane and Morley Safer 
Sonya and Myron Salamon 
Joanna Sandland 
Manojkumar Saranathan 
Howard and Inge Sargent 
Carl Schachter 
Michael and Barbara Schaefer 
Norry Schneider 
Thayer and Mary Scudder 
Bob and Char Seeley 
Contee Seely 
Annette Seidenglanz 
Thomas K. Seligman 
Judith Shapiro 
John Sherry 
Parker Shipton and Polly Steele 
Daniel B. and Sybil M. Silver 
David Silver and Darlene Lorrain 
Dean A. Silvers 
Evan Sloan 
D. N. Snarr 
John M. Snead 
Mike Sowerby 
Margaret Sperry 
Pauline Spiegel and Peter Z. Grossman 
Miriam Stampfer 
Peter Stark-Tenny 
Burton Steck 
Jeri Steele 
Polly and Parker Steele 
Charlie and Merrin Stein 
Lynn Stephen 
David Stephenson and Lynn Musgraves 
Nathan Stephenson 
Dan and Ella Stewart 
William T. Stewart 
Andrew Stone 
John R. and Jeanne B. Stratford 
Donald D. Stull 
Daniel Suman 
Susan Sweeney 
Mary Jane and Goerge W. Taylor 
The Paros Family 
Barbara Thomas 
Richmond H. and Sarah Thomason Kris K. Thompson 
Amy Thomson 
Linda Tiemens 
Steve Trimble 
Paul Tripathi 
John and Suzanne Trostle 
Tamalpais Trust 
Gisela Tscheke 
Sue Vachon 
Detlev and Dorothy Vagts 
Cornelia H. van der Ziel 
Laurie Van Loon 
Charles C. Verharen 
Michi Vojta 
Eddie Wadda 
Charles Wagner 
Margaret Wallace 
Wesley T. Ward 
L.F. and Carole Warneke 
Robert H Weir 
Susan Weir 
Dolores Welty 
Alex and Margaret Wertheimer 
Howard Wheatley 
Gretchen Whisenand 
Warner and Janet White 
Dan S. and Beth Whittemore 
Norman and Dorothea Whitten 
Kathy Widmer and Michael Zimmerman 
Steve Wiley 
Richard Wilshusen 
Marsha Winsryg 
John Wipfler and Valerie Libby 
Edward Wolpow 
Ronald B. Wong 
Graham S. Wood 
William Wood 
Alison Work 
Yoshiko Yamamoto 
Louise Young 
Suzan D. Zacharski 
Susan E. Zarutskie 
David Ziemann 
Martin Zitnansky 
*  Benefactor - ($1,000.00 + )     Patron - ($500-$999)    Sustainer ($250-$499)    Sponsor ($100-$249) 
25 SUPPORTiNg FUTURE gENERATiONS 
Leave a lasting legacy with a 
Planned Gift 
Planned gifts build the foundation of Cultural 
Survival and leave an important legacy for future 
generations.  A gift from your estate, through 
estate planning vehicles such as wills, trusts, life 
insurance, and retirement assets, supports our 
mission while offering tax advantages to you. 
The Maybury-Lewis Legacy Society recognizes 
those members who have included Cultural 
Survival in their estate plans. 
For more information, 
go to cs.org/plannedgiving, or call 617-441-5400. 
Maybury-Lewis Legacy Society 
Members 
Joelle Adlerblum 
James A. Baldwin 
Sharon Doll 
Louis Gecenok 
Dennis L. Holeman and Jeanette Sill-Holeman 
Stephen R. Judge 
Joan Lester 
Joseph M. O'Neal 
Jerome C. and Janet Regier 26 Fisca Year 2012 
expenses Fisca Year 2012 
income 
General Contributions  
& Subscriptions 
Investment 
Grant Revenue 
Bazaar Program  
Communications   
& Publications 
Other Income 
Transfers from cash reserves 
Total $805,614 
$1,995 
$128,129 
$477,348 
$6,188 
$23,418 
$136,566 
$1,579,730 55.8% 
.1% 
8.9% 
33.1% 
.4% 
1.6% 
Communications & Publications .4% 
General Contributions  
& Subscriptions 
55.8% Bazaar Program  
33.1% 
Audited  Grant Revenue 
8.9% Other Income  
1.6% 
Fundraising 
General Administration 
Endangered Languages  
Program 
Community Radio  
Program 
Bazaar Program 
Global Response Program 
Program Development 
Communications   
& Public Education 
Total $184,672 
$110,206 
$231,678 
$109,185 
$470,948 
$133,271 
$138,864 
$200,906 
1,579,730 12% 
7% 
15% 
7% 
31% 
6% 
9% 
13% 
Fundraising 
12% 
Bazaar Program 
31% Communications  
& Public 
Education  
13% 
Audited Global 
Response 
Program 
6% 
Endangered 
Languages 
Program 
15% Community 
Radio 
Program 
7% 
General 
Administration 
7% FiNANCiAL iNFORMATiON This report covers financial information for 
September 1, 2011 to August 31, 2012. 
Program 
Development 
9% 27 Since 1972, Cultural Survival, through our award 
winning publications, has shared with the world the 
dignity and resilience of Indigenous Peoples as they 
struggle against human rights violations and 
marginalization, and assert their inherent rights. 
Public education, getting the message out about 
Indigenous Peoples’ rights, struggles, and 
achievements, and initiating a dialogue around these 
issues continues to be an essential part of Cultural 
Survival’s work. 
All of our communications vehicles continue to 
provide timely information about Indigenous Peoples' 
struggles and achievements, highlighting the 
implementation of the UN Declaration on the Rights 
of Indigenous Peoples and showcasing Cultural 
Survival’s programmatic work and the work of our 
partners. 
Website 
Our website (www.cs.org) continues to be a major 
focus of our communications efforts. Over the past 
year it has seen constant revision and improvement, 
with a new home page design and new structural 
changes to make navigation easier for site visitors. We also have added much more video and multimedia to 
the site as well as the ability to share content via 
social networking. The website continues to receive 
over 1.5 million visitors per year. 
Social Networking 
We regularly share insider information about our 
campaigns and programs. Please follow us on 
Facebook and Twitter (facebook.com/culturalsurvival 
and @CSORG) to learn about current international 
Indigenous stories and trends. 
E-newsletter 
Our monthly e-newsletter now reaches about 24,000 
readers, carrying updates on our various advocacy 
campaigns, news from the wider world of Indigenous 
rights, and information about Cultural Survival 
programs and events. 
Cultual Suvival Quately Magazine 
The Cultural Survival Quarterly shares information 
about the people we are working with and showcases 
how our supporters' donations impact the daily lives 
of Indigenous partners. 40 YEARS OF PUBLiCATiONS dEvOTEd TO iNdigENOUS PEOPLES 
“Cultual Suvival Quately , it is more than a magazine, it is a mission.” 
—David Maybury-Lewis, founder of Cultural Survival Cultural Survival 
Main Office: 
PO BOX 381569 
Cambridge, MA 02238 USA    
t: 617.441.5400    
f: 617.441.5417 
culturalsurvival@cs.org 
www.cs.org 
Cultural Survival is a 501(c)(3) 
federal tax-exempt organization. 