Cultural     Survival
ANNUAL REPORT 2010
In August 2010, Ellen Lutz stepped down as executive director of Cultural Survival because
of serious health issues (see the tribute to her on page 22), having transformed the organi-zation in her six years of service. The board of directors immediately initiated an interna-tional search for a new director, receiving applications from around the world, and inter-viewing dozens of highly qualified candidates. In December, the board announced it hadchosen Suzanne Benally as the next director of the organization. She is Navajo and SantaClara Tewa from New Mexico. 
Suzanne comes to Cultural Survival from Naropa University in Boulder, Colorado, where
she was the associate provost for institutional planning and assessment and associate vicepresident for academic affairs.  She was a core faculty member in environmental studies anda member of the president’s cabinet. 
Before starting at Naropa in 1999, she was deputy director and director of education pro-
grams at the American Indian Science and Engineering Society and director of the Instituteon Ethnic Diversity at the Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education.  She hasbeen a teacher at the university level and has served as a consultant to philanthropic foun-dations, nonprofit organizations, and many higher education institutions. Additionally, shehas worked extensively with American Indian communities. Her interests, teaching, andpassions are focused on the relationship between land, spirituality, and people as reflected instories, and in environmental issues and Indigenous rights. “I think Suzanne is a great choiceto lead the combined Cultural Survival and Global Response organization and expand itsadvocacy into the critical environmental issues facing Indigenous Peoples, ” said Sarah Fuller,chair of the Cultural Survival board, on announcing the decision. 
“Suzanne Benally has been at the heart of the university's transformation since my arrival, ”
said Naropa University president Stuart Lord. “Her clarity, compassion, and wisdom havemade her a cherished member of the entire university community and a vital member of thecabinet.  We are delighted for this amazing opportunity for her to lead the Cultural Survivalorganization and to further her lifelong commitment to Indigenous Peoples and the issuesfacing them.  We will miss Suzanne but fully support her mission to create change in theworld. ” 
CULTURAL SURVIVALChanging of the Guard ANNUAL REPORT 2010
TABLE OF CONTENTS
4-5 M ESSAGE FROM THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
6-21 P ROGRAMS & A CTIVITIES
22-23   I NMEMORIAM
24-26 B OARD OF DIRECTORS & S TAFF
27        I NTERN PROGRAM
28-31 S UPPORTERS
32-33 F INANCIAL REPORT
34 I NDIGENOUS RIGHTS IN ACTION
COVER PHOTO :
Kauinurie and her son on the annual pilgrimage to
Wirikuta in Mexico. Read about our campaign to stopa Canadian mine from threatening a fragile desertand the Wixárika culture on page 9. Photo by YvonneNegrin. 
This report covers the period from January 1, 2010 to
December 31, 2010 and financial information forSeptember 1, 2009 to August 31, 2010.
Copyright © 2010 Cultural Survival
www.cs.org
2Suzanne grew up in New Mexico. Her mother is Navajo
and her father Santa Clara Tewa. She was raised on theNavajo Nation and at Santa Clara Pueblo. Growing upNative, she is deeply aware of the issues and concernsthat face Native peoples and their environments.  Herinterests in Indigenous Peoples all over the world haveled her to expand her thinking and work towards aglobal framework for environmental justice andIndigenous rights.  “Development and the environmen-tal issues affect Indigenous peoples all over the world, ”she says. “ At one time we understood and engaged theissues specific to our own homelands; now, with global-ization and climate change, we have to understand andengage these issues from a global framework more sothan in the past.
“ I  a m  i n c r e d i b l y  h o n o r e d  t o  b e  a b l e  t o  l e a d  a  g l o b a l
organization such as Cultural Survival and use my skillsand heart to help address Indigenous human rights andenvironmental concerns in the world, which I am pas-sionate about. The work speaks to who I am as anIndigenous person and to all of our cultural survival. ” 
Suzanne started her new position on January 31, 2011
and is splitting her time between the Boulder andCambridge offices of Cultural Survival. 
ANNUAL REPORT 20103
Suzanne BenallyCULTURAL SURVIVALA MESSAGE FROM THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
4For Cultural Survival, 2010 represents a year of transition and change, while holding the course on our mission
and programs. We were all deeply saddened by the death of Ellen Lutz, former executive director (see page 22),in November.  Her legacy resides in the work that Cultural Survival achieved over the past six years as reflected in the reportthat follows.  
This past year, the work of Cultural Survival with Indigenous partnerships and other nongoverment organizations
took on direct actions with governments in conducting an on-the-ground human rights investigation in Kenya;coordinating congressional hearings on Indigenous issues in the United States; introducing a bill to theGuatemalan Congress to secure legal protections for Indigenous community radio stations; taking the govern-ment of Panama to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights on behalf of the  of the Ngöbe people; sub-mitting reports on Indigenous rights to the United Nations Human Rights Council; and campaigning for theUnited States to endorse the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.  
In addition to these unprecedented efforts, our existing programs moved forward with Indigenous environmen-
tal and human rights advocacy campaigns and support for Indigenous communities’ efforts to protect theirendangered languages and cultures.
At the urgent request of Indigenous communities, Cultural Survival's Global Response program developed advo-
cacy campaigns in Kenya urging the government to stop human rights abuses of Samburu villagers by Kenyanpolice; in Papua New Guinea, calling on the government to halt mining permits that would allow dumping oftoxic wastes into the marine ecosystem and destroying the livelihoods of Indigenous people; in Panama, urgingthe president to overturn new pro-industry laws that would make protest illegal and further deny basic human
rights to Indigenous Peoples; and, in Mexico, answering the call of the Wixárika (Huichol) people seeking to pro-tect their sacred cultural and ecological reserve from a Canadian mining company.
Cultural Survival’s Guatemala Radio Project has grown to include 205 community-owned, volunteer-run stations
broadcasting to over 1.5 million listeners on topics of vital importance to Mayan communities. In January aCommunity Radio Bill was cleared for debate in Congress, representing a significant step towards recognition andsupport of Indigenous community radio. Cultural Survival's Guatemala staff and deputy executive director MarkCamp are currently identifying next steps to strengthen the community radio movement in Guatemala, enablingIndigenous Maya to promote their human and environmental rights, health and education, fair trade and sustain-able development, and to sustain their languages and cultures.
The Endangered Languages Program supports the work of our Native American language partners: the Euchee,
Northern Arapaho, Wampanoag, Sac and Fox, and Alutiiq, in their community-based language revitalization pro-grams. Cultural Survival continues to work with these programs’ most critical need: ongoing funding to supportmaster-apprentice programs in developing new fluent speakers. This year, Cultural Survival, together with a coali-tion of Native organizations, successfully advocated for increased federal funding for Native language programs,
and proposed a presidential executive order to mandate improved federal support for Native language revitaliza-tion within the next five years.ANNUAL REPORT 20105The Panama Dam case is emblematic of the serious challenges facing Indigenous Peoples. In 2007, the Ngöbe peo-
ple of western Panama requested Cultural Survival's help in stopping a government-sponsored hydroelectric damthat threatened their lands, communities, and cultural life. Despite successfully obtaining an injunction to stopthe dam through the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, the Panamanian government and AESCorporation persisted in employing strategies that div ided the communities and fractured their unified resist-
ance. Our legal partners in the case, the Harvard International Human Rights Clinic, in consultation with Ngöbecommunities, determined that the most beneficial action now is to negotiate for economic compensation for com-munity members and protection of their land above the projected reservoir line. While a disappointing outcomefor this case, Ngöbe people across Panama are actively defending their environmental and cultural rights againstother logging, mining, and dam-building projects on their lands. In the past few weeks, Panama has retracted tworepressive laws following massive protests by Ngöbe communities. Our Global Response program continues togenerate international awareness and public support for their efforts.  
The Cultural Survival Quarterly celebrates its 35th year of publication, featuring articles by and about Indigenous
Peoples, and highlighting current issues. Our website serves as a resource for activists, policy makers, scholars,the public, and, most importantly, for Indigenous communities defending their environments, languages, and cul-tures. Our bazaars showcase the work of dozens of Indigenous artisans, assisting communities to earn a fair wagefor selling their goods, and encouraging the U.S. public to become informed about and involved in Indigenousrights issues. This year, for the first time, we held a bazaar in New Y ork City, generously hosted by the NationalMuseum of the American Indian.
In 2010, foundation funding, income from bazaars, and in dividual giving to Cultural Survival all increased com-
pared to the prior year. Buoyed by that success, we made the decision to invest in significant programmatic activ-ities such as the human rights investigation in Kenya, which we felt was an immediate and critical need, and whichultimately resulted in lives saved and policies changed. We enter 2011 with cautious optimism, planning tostrengthen our cash reserves and seek funding to meet the urgent requests from Indigenous communities. 
As farewells for Ellen were given, I was appointed the new executive director and began walking in the footsteps
of a very dedicated international human rights leader. While that alone is a significant challenge, as CulturalSurvival's new leader, I will seek to identify and implem ent strategies for continue d financial sustainability,
strengthening and expanding our current programs, and developing new advocacy projects to address the impactof climate change and environmental issues on Indigenous Peoples worldwide. 
I want to thank all of you who contribute your voices, your passion, and your financial support to make Cultural
Survival’s work possible. I hope to hear from you: what you care about and how you can help fulfill our missionof partnering with Indigenous communities to defend their endangered lands, languages, and cultures.
With spirit I look forward to the work ahead together, 
Suzanne Benally
CULTURAL SURVIVAL“If Cultural Survival had not
stepped in to investigate, stand upfor us and our rights, and continueto fight for us, we would not beable to still exist. Cultural Survivalis like our warrior for our entiretribe.”
— John Lenanyangerra, Samburu 
community leader, Kenya
Samburu women testify about police abuses. 
Photo by Tina Ramme.The Global Response program conducts international
letter-writing campaigns on behalf of Indigenous com-munities that are facing environmental threats frommining, dams, logging, and other extractive industriesoperating without consent on their territory. The pro-gram also conducts on-the-ground investigations tosupport communities’ efforts to protect their resourcesand environments. 
In January, program director Paula Palmer and human
rights expert Chris Allan traveled to Kenya to investigatereports of police atrocities and attacks on many pas-toralist Samburu communities. They spent two weeksinterviewing Indigenous people in five communities, aswell as politicians, nonprofit organizations, clergy, andothers involved in the situation. They documented grosshuman rights violations and crimes by the police,including murder, rape, arson, and theft. Their reportwas delivered to the United Nations, the president andattorney general of Kenya, and news agencies aroundthe world. It got the attention of British documentaryfilmmakers, who went to Kenya and filmed police abuseof Samburu people firsthand for a documentary that willair on PBS and BBC in 2011.  
The Global Response program also conducted a letter-
writing campaign urging the Kenyan government totake action to protect Indigenous rights and curb policeb r u t a l i t y .  I t  i s  h e a r t e n i n g  t o  n o t e  t h a t ,  a l t h o u g h  t h e r ehave been isolated attacks on Samburu men by individ-ual police officers, no further full-scale police assaultson Samburu communities have occurred since publica-tion of our report. On Cultural Survival’s recommenda-tion, Samburu people created a network of human rightsmonitors who are now reporting such crimes and abus-es to Kenyan human rights organizations and lawyers. A
Global Response program intern spent two months withthe Samburu helping them establish this network andengaging the Nairobi law firms. 
The second Global Response campaign of the year was
initiated at the request of Indigenous communities onPapua New Guinea’s Rai Coast. A Chinese mining com-pany had wrangled a government permit to dump mil-lions of tons of toxic waste from its Ramu nickel mineand refinery into the ocean off the Rai Coast, in spite ofscientific studies that warned of massive damage to themarine ecosystem. The legislature quickly passedamendments to the environmental law, denyinglandowners the right to sue the company for any dam-ages to their property or their economy from the miningproject. When Indigenous people, whose lives and liveli-hoods depend on the sea, took to the streets in protest,t h e  a t t o r n e y  g e n e r a l  t h r e a t e n e d  t o  a r r e s t  a n y o n e  w h ospoke out against the new law. Coastal residents won atemporary injunction to prevent the company fromdumping its waste into the sea, but when they went tocourt seeking a permanent injunction, they were threat-ened, harassed, and intimidated. 
The Global Response campaign called on the Papua
New Guinea government to repeal the amendments,curtail government repression, and revoke the Chinesecompany’s permit to dump mining waste into the sea.We also helped secure funding so that scientists couldtravel to Papua New Guinea to testify about the environ-mental dangers of ocean dumping. After a number ofdelays, the trial began as this annual report was beingwritten in February 2011.  
PROGRAMS : GLOBAL RESPONSE
ANNUAL REPORT 20107DEFENDING INDIGENOUS PEOPLES ’ RIGHTS , LANDS , AND NATURAL RESOURCESCULTURAL SURVIVAL
Papua New Guinea fishermen like this one provide
food for thousands of coastal families. Plans to dumptoxic waste into the sea threaten their food supply.Photo by Johnny Shaw.“What used to be a local 
campaign in Madang is now anation-wide issue, and this couldlead to the downfall of the rulingparty: the National Alliance, headed by the current primeminister. We did not think itwould come this far, but thelandowners have done it withsupport from their lawyer andCultural Survival.”
— John Chitoa, Bismarck Ramu Group,
Papua New Guinea, on the Cultural
Survival campaign to stop a nickel mine
from dumping waste in the ocean.PROGRAMS : GLOBAL RESPONSE (CONTINUED )
ANNUAL REPORT 2010“Thank you for the support and solidarity of your organization in the case of 
mining concessions in our sacred site called Wirikuta . . . The prestige of yourorganization helped us make the case to members of the media . . . .  We alsohope that Cultural Survival’s members respond with enough letters to affect the attitude of our government officials, increasing the pressure needed to stop themine in Wirikuta.” 
— The Wixárika Communities of the Wixárika People 
The third Global Response campaign sought to overturn
repressive laws passed by Panama’s national assembly inMay and June. The laws were intended to attract multi-national corporations to invest in Panama, at theexpense of the environment and the Indigenous Peoples.They eliminated the requirement for conducting envi-ronmental impact studies for industrial developmentprojects approved by the government, restricted laborunions’ right to strike, authorized two-year jail terms forstreet protesters, and protected police from prosecutionor punishment for human rights abuses they commit onthe job. In early July, banana workers—mainlyIndigenous Ngöbe—called for a strike in protest, andwithin a few days thousands of Ngöbe men, women, andchildren were creating road blocks and marching. Thepolice cracked down hard, killing at least three men andwounding and blinding hundreds more with birdshot.The unprecedented police violence shocked the nationand roused widespread protest from students, environ-mentalists, and human rights organizations.  
We quickly issued action alerts by email, and our mem-
bers sent letters to Panama’s president and the legislatureurging them to revoke the repressive laws and to inves-tigate the police violence and punish those found guiltyof using excessive force. After a 90-day negotiation peri-od, the worst of the laws were revoked.  
Global Response continues to press the president to also
revoke an executive decree that interferes with theNgöbe people’s electoral process. By controlling theNgöbe elections, the government hopes to undermine
the leadership’s opposition to open-pit mining in Ngöbeterritory. With the world’s second largest copperreserves on their lands, the Ngöbe people are undertremendous pressure to sacrifice the tropical rainforests,rivers, and resources of their homeland.  
In September, Global Response answered the call of
Mexico’s Wixárika (Huichol) people to help them pro-tect their sacred cultural and ecological reserve,Wirikuta. On the edge of the high Chihuahua Desert,Wirikuta is the destination of the Wixárika people’sannual 300-mile pilgrimage to the place where the sunfirst rose. For thousands of years, Wixárika pilgrimshave retraced the steps of their ancestors to Wirikuta’ssacred mountain, praying ancient prayers to maintainthe earth’s equilibrium and keep their culture alive. Nowa Canadian mining company wants to mine silver on thesacred mountain. If allowed to move forward, the minewould not only desecrate the sacred site, it would reduceand pollute the water supply for the region’s peasantfarmers, mar the landscape and spoil the tourist econo-my, and threaten a fragile high-desert ecosystem thatsustains the world’s greatest diversity of cactus speciesand many endangered birds.  
The Wixárika traditional authorities appealed for help,
and Global Response initiated a campaign urgingMexico’s president to deny the mining permit anduphold the protected status of the Wirikuta Cultural andEcological Reserve.  
9“I didn’t have the privilege of attend-
ing university, but my work withradio has given me an education.” 
— Angelica Cubul Sul (Kakchiquel), 23, of
Sumpango, explaining her experience
attending Cultural Survival workshops.
“Never did we think an internation-
al organization would take an inter-est in us. But Cultural Survival helpsus with getting the law approved,holding workshops with women andyoung people, and carrying out dif-ferent activities. Cultural Survivalhas brought harmony to the com-munity radios in Guatemala, by unit-ing them.”
— Anselmo Xunic (Kakchiquel), of Radio
Ixchel, Sumpango Sacatepequez.  
CULTURAL SURVIVALIn a country where a majority of people live in rural areas,
speak one of 24 different languages, have only a third-grade education, and do not have regular Internet access,getting news and information across the hilly countrysideis a difficult task, and one that Cultural Survival is suc-cessfully taking on. The Community Radio Project part-ners with a network of 205 community radio stationsacross the country, to provide training and support tolocal volunteers who run each station.  Small-scale radiois a technology that is inexpensive to operate, easy to run,and highly effective as a means for communication in therural areas where these stations are located. 
This year, Pocomam Mayan staff member Cesar Gomez,
along with our Content Production Team, produced 154programs in 6 Mayan languages, Spanish, and, for thefirst time, in Garifuna, an Indigenous Caribbean lan-guage native to the eastern coast of Guatemala. Theseprograms were broadcast across 205 stations, reaching1.5 million listeners across rural Guatemala.  Productionsranged from 30-second spots on HIV awareness to 4-minute programs on fair-trade agriculture, from inter-views on Indigenous women’s political participation to aradionovella series on conserving fresh water sources
using traditional Mayan knowledge. Using a train-the-trainers system, we conducted multiple workshops thateducated 365 community radio leaders on topics such ascitizen journalism, technology, human rights, politicalparticipation, radio production, and others, which theybrought back to their own communities to share.  
Despite all of community radio’s benefits, it is not fully
legalized in Guatemala. The right to radio is guaranteedin the country’s Peace Accords and Constitution, but isnot accounted for in the old telecommunications law,which covers licensing and bandwidth distribution. As aresult, stations can be—and routinely are—shut down bythe police. Part of Cultural Survival’s work in Guatemalais advocating for a reform to the current telecommunica-tions law that would fully recognize and support commu-
nity radio. In January the Community Radio Bill 4087gained a favorable recommendation from theCongressional Committee on Indigenous Issues. Thisimportant step cleared the way for Congress to schedulethe bill for debate.  In February, Cultural Survival hosteda press conference in support of the bill where Indigenousactivist and Nobel laureate Rigoberta Menchu Tum, UNSpecial Rapporteur on the Promotion and Protection ofthe Right to Freedom of Opinion and Expression FrankLa Rue, and three Guatemalan congressmen participatedas panelists. Menchu explained, “I would like to givehomage to the struggle of community radio stations,which, with the strength of their communities behindthem, have struggled for many years for the right ofIndigenous Peoples to have their own media . . . I wouldlike to congratulate you on the Bill 4087; I believe there isa historic act taking place. ” She encouraged legislators tocontinue their support for the bill until it can be madelaw. Despite promises from many, 2010 closed without adate scheduled for debate on the Congress floor. Radiovolunteers now trained in political participation, alongwith seasoned Indigenous activists inside the country andout, continue building pressure for a vote on democratiz-ing the media in Guatemala.   
UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Speech Stands
Up for Community Radio in GuatemalaAfter taking part in the February 11, 2010, press confer-ence on community radio organized by Cultural Survival,UN Special Rapporteur Frank La Rue filed a case inGuatemala's Constitutional Court against the govern-ment, claiming that the existing telecommunications lawis in violation of freedom of expression and speech guar-anteed in the Guatemalan Constitution. He spoke of thismatter at the press conference and has taken action rec-ommending that passing the proposed bill that CulturalSurvival and its partners have submitted to Congress willresolve the constitutional violation. 
11ANNUAL REPORT 2010PROGRAMS : GUATEMALA RADIO PROJECT
PROMOTING INDIGENOUS VOICES IN GUATEMALACULTURAL SURVIVAL“Language is important not only
as a way of communicating withothers, but as a carrier of culture.Language loss has many ramifica-tions, such as loss of culture, fami-
ly ties, lifeways, and the ability tobe successful in one’s environ-ment. Preservation of the uniquelanguage and cultural heritage ofthe Northern Arapaho Tribe isparamount in the tribe and mustbe maintained for future genera-tions. We are very appreciative ofthe assistance, professionalism,generosity and support ofCultural Survival.”
— Gail Ridgely, Superintendent, 
Arapaho Language Lodge
Y oney Spencer teaching the Euchee language to
tribal children. Photo courtesy of Euchee LanguageProject.The Endangered Language Program offers support to
Native American programs around the country, whichare working to revitalize their languages, 70 of which arespoken by only a handful of very elderly people. In addi-tion to efforts to increase federal funding and createonline resources for all tribal language efforts, the pro-gram has four principal partners, the Euchee LanguageProject, the Northern Arapaho Language Lodges, theSauk Language Department of the Sac and Fox Nation,and the Wopanaak Language Reclamation Project. Thework with partners includes assistance with grant writing,fund raising, and events that have generated more than$850,000 in direct aid to tribes since these partnershipswere first established during 2007-2008. The money haspaid for Native language immersion education activitiesand materials such as master-apprentice teams, preschooland kindergarten classroom equipment, language gram-mars and teaching books, youth after-school programs,and summer camps.
For example, this funding provided the
Hinon'eitiino'oowu (Arapaho Language Lodge) immer-sion school on the Wind River Reservation in Wyomingwith a truckload of equipment for their preschool andkindergarten classrooms, including sand and water tables,play kitchens, dress-up centers, mobile listening and artstations, grocery sets, stuffed animals, a doctor’s office,and a variety of writing materials. Teachers will use all ofthese items and the additional funds to help the studentslearn Arapaho and apply the language to daily life.
The Sac and Fox Nation won a $300,000 grant from the
federal Administration for Native Americans, which willhelp create the Sauk language Kimachipena immersionschool. The grant will support a master-apprentice pro-gram in which three teachers will learn the Sauk languagefrom the last five elderly speakers. With that training, theteachers should be fluent enough to teach children in theimmersion school, which is scheduled to open in 2012.We also were able to raise funds in direct support for theEuchee Language Project’s daily youth language programs
in Sapulpa, Oklahoma. 
Work continued on the Endangered Languages Program’s
website, the Language Gathering, with 57 tribal languageprogram profiles from 22 states added to the websiteunder construction. Additional content development isunderway. We will eventually have profiles of nearly 300tribal language programs, all of which will be able to shareinformation, ideas, and best practices.
I n  J u l y ,  a s  a  m e m b e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l  A l l i a n c e  t o  S a v e
Native Languages, Cultural Survival co-sponsored theAlliance’s annual National Native Language RevitalizationSummit that brought top officials from the U.S. depart-ments of Education and Interior and members ofCongress and their staffers into direct dialogue withimmersion-school program directors and Native lan-guage advocates. Participants pressed federal officials touphold provisions of the 1990 Native AmericanLanguages Act that allow Native children to be taught andtested in their own languages and that the No Child LeftBehind Act has undermined. Language summit attendeesalso urged congressional appropriators to increase fund-ing in 2011 for language preservation and maintenanceprojects.
This spring Cultural Survival also presented a draft of a
presidential executive order on Native language revital-ization to members of the Obama administration. Thedraft order highlights the urgent situation of more than70 endangered languages and mandates broad intera-gency cooperation and support for Native languagesacross federal agencies. The order would also mandatethat federal agencies comply with previously disregardedprovisions in the 1990 Native American Languages Act.Cultural Survival was one among more than a dozenorganizations to develop and propose the order. 
PROGRAMS : ENDANGERED LANGUAGES
13ANNUAL REPORT 2010REVITALIZING NATIVE LANGUAGESCULTURAL SURVIVAL“Cultural Survival has given me the
chance to demonstrate myIndigenous art.  It has allowed meto speak about the history of weav-ing and share ideas about organicdyeing. It has also given me thechance to talk about the history ofOaxaca and my village. I have beenable to explain many aspects of myZapotec culture to people at thebazaars.  Without Cultural Survivalthis exchange would not have beenpossible.”
—Zapotec weaver Jose Buenaventura
Gonzalez, Oaxaca, Mexico
The bazaar program creates a meaningful venue for cul-
tural exchange. For Indigenous artisans and performerpartners, fair trade companies and nonprofits, thebazaars provide a marketplace for handmade Native artsand crafts, and fund important community projects, aswell as the artisan’s livelihoods. For Cultural Survival,the bazaars are an important part of our outreach andeducation. Every year the bazaars’ advertising and thearticles it generates reach more than one million people. 
Since 2002, the bazaars have raised almost $3.5 million
dollars for Native artists, their communities, fair trade,and important human rights and environmental pro-grams. In 2010, Cultural Survival hosted nine bazaarsthat added over $473,000 to that total. 
The bazaars last year generated $272,000 for artisans
from 33 countries and supported community-generatedprojects that ranged from student scholarships to micro-loan programs, agricultural development, and healthclinics. For example, some of the $16,000 that fair-traderetailer Thread of Hope raised at the bazaars went toUnited for a Better Life, a cooperative of about 80 Mayanwomen who live in marginalized communities on theoutskirts of Guatemala City. They used the money to
finance daycare, a Montessori preschool and elementaryschool, and partially subsidize the pharmacy and med-ical clinic, including a prenatal clinic and healthy babiesprogram. Some of the $3,000 that Y ayla Rugs generatedwent to Barakat, an Indigenous organization in Pakistanthat provides school and human rights training for morethan 3,000 women and children in central Asia eachyear. And the $4,000 generated by Ugandan nonprofitorganization Project Have Hope supported displacedAcholi people through agri cultural programs like bal-
cony gardens and mushroom cultivation, sponsoring101 children in school, establishing an adult literacyprogram for 32 female students, providing micro-loansto enable 76 women to expand or start new businesses,and giving vocational training to 26 women. These andmany other community projects are in addition to thebenefits of simply providing a living to artisans’ familiesand reinforcing Indigenous traditions. PROGRAMS : CULTURAL SURVIVAL BAZAARS
15ANNUAL REPORT 2010“Cultural Survival brings together artisans like us, who are living our heritage through
the production of our art.  We educate the public about the danger we face of losing ourcultures through mass production in a global marketplace. Cultural Survival provides the venues and marketing necessary for successful shows, especially in the current economy. Offering shopping in a global marketplace to knowledgeable peoplehas not only proven beneficial for us, but essential in allowing us the opportunity to earnthe income needed to continue focusing on creating original art that is true to our ancestry.”
—Lenny Novak,  Algonquin/Abenaqui ArtistPROMOTING INDIGENOUS ARTS AND CULTURECULTURAL SURVIVAL
ANNUAL REPORT 201017Communications is a central part of Cultural Survival’s
work, informing people about Indigenous issues andcultures and providing a platform for Indigenous writersand photographers to tell their stories. 
Our website continues to be a major focus of our
communications efforts, and over the past year it hasseen constant revision and improvement, with a newhome page design and new structural changes to makenavigation easier for site visitors. We have also beenadding much more video amd multimedia to the site. Allthese efforts have paid off in increasing numbers ofvisitors, longer average time spent on the site, and morepages viewed in each visit. In December alone we hadalmost 60,000 visitors from 192 countries and territories.
The Cultural Survival Quarterly this year reflected several
ongoing priorities. First, and most important, we greatlyincreased the number of pieces written by Indigenousauthors, with a goal of eventually having almost all of ourpieces produced by Indigenous writers. We also put amuch greater emphasis on artwork by Indigenous artistsin addition to the beautiful photographs we regularlyfeature.  The magazines we produced this year included amajor article on Cultural Survival’s human rightsinvestigation in Kenya (based on the investigation’scomprehensive report), explorations of Indigenousefforts to mitigate the effects of climate change, a reporton how Indigenous communities are being displaced by
well-meaning conservation programs, and several verypersonal essays by young Indigenous women. Thecoming year will see even more Indigenous writing andartwork, along with increasing emphasis on the role ofIndigenous Peoples in environmental protection.
We also produced a special extra edition of the Quarterly
in Portuguese as an advocacy tool for Xavantecommunities in Brazil, who are trying to reclaim theirtraditional territory. A thousand copies were shipped toBrazil and are now being used by the Xavante.
Our monthly e-newsletter is now reaching about 18,000
readers, carrying updates on our various advocacycampaigns, news from the wider world of Indigenousrights, and information about Cultural Survivalinitiatives and events.  PROGRAMS : COMMUNICATIONS
PUBLICIZING INDIGENOUS ISSUESCULTURAL SURVIVAL
Ngöbe people throughout Panama are protesting a
new law that makes it easier for companies toexploit their lands and natural resources. Here theypray that mining will not desecreate the sacredMount Chorcha. Photo by Marian Ahn Thorpe.ANNUAL REPORT 2010PROGRAMS - CHANGUINOLA DAM CAMPAIGN
For the past three years, Cultural Survival has been pur-
suing a case on behalf of the Ngöbe people of Panamathrough the Inter-American human rights system, firstthrough a petition with the Inter-AmericanCommission on Human Rights and ultimately in theInter-American Court of Human Rights. The case dealswith a hydroelectric dam being built across theChanguinola River by a subsidiary of an American ener-gy company, AES, under license from the Panamaniangovernment. That dam will flood the homeland of sev-eral Ngöbe communities. The company and the govern-ment used a variety of unscrupulous methods to get theland from the people, in process ignoring or, in somecases, overtly violating their rights. At one point, a per-manent police cordon was set up around the area tofacilitate the dam construction. The communities askedCultural Survival to intervene on their behalf, and withthem we filed a petition with the Inter-AmericanCommission, seeking an injunction to stop constructionof the dam and start consultations with Indigenousstakeholders. 
With generous donations from our members, Cultural
Survival enlisted experts, gathered evidence, prepareddocumentation, and brought Ngöbe representatives tothe United Nations Permanent Forum on IndigenousIssues and to congressional hearings in Washington,D.C., to give testimony on the petition. After those hear-ings, the commission did, indeed, call for the govern-ment to stop construction while the case was beingheard, but the government and company ignored thatcall (the commission has limited enforcement powers)and they stepped up construction. Cultural SurvivalExecutive Director Ellen Lutz, who handled the case,traveled to Panama a second time in 2009 to work withthe local communities and plan strategy, but she foundthat there was increasing disagreement among thosecommunities. AES had been working hard to sow dis-sent, systematically paying off community members,aggravating existing factions, and using intimidation into undermine opposition and show that the communi-
ties were not unanimously opposed to the dam. 
At the same time, Ellen’s health began to fail (see page
22), and she could no longer carry on her work. SoCultural Survival asked the Harvard Law School HumanRights Program to take over active pursuit of the case, asthey had the resources and expertise to continue ourefforts. In December 2010, when Inter-AmericanHuman Rights Commissioner Dinah Shelton conducteda site visit in Panama, a team from the Harvard clinicwas there to present witnesses from the dissenting com-munities. At this writing, while the Inter-AmericanCourt of Human Rights continues its deliberations, theclinic is helping the Ngöbe negotiate the best possiblecompensation package from AES. 
While Cultural Survival (with the collaboration of
national and international environmental organiza-tions) has not succeeded in stopping construction of theChan 75 dam, our involvement is producing a betteroutcome for the affected Ngöbe families. Chan 75 is thefirst of more than 40 dams that the government ofPanama is planning. One of our goals from the begin-ning was to make this fight costly enough for the gov-ernment that they would be more likely to respectIndigenous rights in future dam plans. There is no ques-tion that the government has been publicly humiliatedby the long case in the Inter-American human rightssystem. We remain hopeful that they might take a moreenlightened approach in the future.
19CULTURAL SURVIVAL
Ngöbe delegates, Feliciano Santos  Santos (left)
and Estanislao Bejerano from Panama testify infront of the T om Lantos Human RightsCommittee on how American investments aredestroying their culture and way of life.  Photoby Paula Palmer."The Ng öbe community thanks
Global Response/Cultural Survivalvery much for your support and sol-idarity in the successful campaign torevoke Law # 30, which caused somuch pain and suffering to our fam-ilies in Bocas del T oro. We deeplyappreciate your solidarity." 
— Feliciano Santos Santos, Movement for
the Defense of the T erritories and
Ecosystems of Bocas del T oro, Panama Cultural Survival Participates in Congressional
Human Rights HearingsCultural Survival took part in a hearing held by the U.S.House of Representatives Tom Lantos Human RightsCommission on Indigenous Peoples in Latin America,development, and U.S. foreign policy. The Indigenousspeakers in the April 29 hearing explained how U.S.foreign policy is affecting their communities, often indramatic and disastrous ways. Cultural Survival directorEllen Lutz worked with the commission to set up thehearings, and hired a bus to bring Indigenous observersfrom New Y ork, where they were attending the UNPermanent Forum on Indigenous Issues.
Commission co-chair James McGovern, who has long
been a strong advocate for human rights, called forinvestment in the protection of Indigenous lands, bothas a conservation measure and in recognition ofIndigenous Peoples’ rights. "Protect land, protect it fromdevelopment that would displace people," he said fromthe chair. McGovern also strongly encouraged directconversations between Indigenous Peoples and nationalgovernments, especially with regard to the Free TradeAgreements proposed between the United States andvarious Latin American nations, which currently arebeing negotiated without the input of IndigenousP eoples. “ I hope we mo ve a wa y from tha t, ” he said. “ I fwe’re all talking about the rights of Indigenous Peoples,they need to have a larger presence." The hearingincluded representatives of the State Department andUSAID, as well as Professor Dinah Shelton of GeorgeWashington University School of Law and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.Cultural Survival at the United Nations Permanent
Forum on Indigenous IssuesDuring the ninth session of the United NationsPermanent Forum on Indigenous Issues in April, 2010,Cultural Survival hosted two special events. “Persuadingthe United States and Canada to adopt the Declarationon the Rights of Indigenous Peoples” was a strategysession on how to get the last two opposing countries toendorse the UN declaration, cosponsored withLancaster University. “Mapping Community-BasedProtected Areas: a model for sustainable developmentand cultural and environmental protection” wascosponsored by CORALINA and the Heller School forSocial Policy and Management at Brandeis University. 
Rights of Indigenous People Symposium
To encourage dialogue around the U.S. endorsementand implementation of the UN Declaration on theRights of Indigenous Peoples, Cultural Survivalpartnered with Urban Zen and Amnesty Internationalto host a panel discussion with innovative thoughtleaders and policy makers on November 10 in NewY ork. The evening was moderated by ElsaStamatopoulou, former Chief of the UN PermanentForum on Indigenous Issues. Speakers included LarryCox, the executive director of Amnesty International;Les Malezer (Gabi Gabi), member of the board ofCultural Survival and general manager for theFoundation of Aboriginal and Islander Research Action;and Kent Lebsock (Lakota), coordinator of the Owe AkuInternational Justice Program.
OTHER CULTURAL SURVIVAL ACCOMPLISHMENTS
ANNUAL REPORT 201021Ellen Lutz, the executive director of Cultural Survival
from 2004 to 2010, passed away on November 4, the vic-tim of metastatic breast cancer. She was 55. 
Ellen became director of the Cultural Survival in 2004 and
transformed the organization over the next six years,strongly emphasizing human rights and advocacy, areas inwhich she had an international reputation. She ledCultural Survival into Native American language revital-ization; she started a program to submit Indigenous rightsreports to the UN Human Rights Council; she launchedour first on-the-ground human rights investigation, inKenya; she oversaw Cultural Survival’s merger with GlobalResponse; she helped organize congressional hearings onIndigenous rights; and she moved the organization awayfrom development work and project sponsorship, build-ing and strengthening Cultural Survival’s own programs.And that’s the short list. 
Beyond the programmatic changes, Ellen pushed very
h a r d  t o  h a v e  C u l t u r a l  S u r v i v a l  m o v e  t o w a r d  m o r eIndigenous involvement in the organization itself. Sheprompted a significant increase in the number ofIndigenous board members and Cultural Survival staffmembers, aiming for a 50/50 mix of Indigenous and non-Indigenous representation. Those Indigenous boardmembers have included international luminaries, includ-ing the chair of the UN Permanent Forum on IndigenousIssues, the chair of the Indigenous Peoples’ Caucus, andthe principal defender for the Special Court for SierraLeone. “From the beginning, ” says Cultural Survival boardvice-chair Richard Grounds, “she was very clear aboutdirectly engaging Indigenous communities in terms oftheir concerns, their input, and their involvement withprograms, not only on the receiving end, but making deci-sions and participating in the work of Cultural Survival.That way of going about the work has really revolution-ized the organization. ” IN MEMORIAM :
ELLEN LUTZ
CULTURAL SURVIVAL
22“It is painful to lose a great friend, a great visionary leader,
and a courageous person. Ellen lived her life with full dignity
and respect.” —Stella Tamang, South Asia Indigenous Women’s Forum As Ellen’s disease progressed, she actually increased her
efforts, and in addition to presiding over CulturalS u r v i v a l ’ s  m o s t  a m b i t i o u s  y e a r  y e t ,  s h e  c o - e d i t e d  t w opioneering books, Prosecuting Heads of State
(Cambridge University Press) and Human Rights and
Conflict Management in Context (Syracuse University
Press). She continued working at Cultural Survival untilmere weeks before her death.
Ellen’s concern for human rights began when, as a 15-
year-old exchange student to Uruguay, she witnessed theonset of Uruguay’s state-sponsored “Dirty War. ” Aftergraduating from Temple University in 1976, she earneda master’s degree in anthropology from Bryn Mawr in1978, then took a law degree in international law andhuman rights from Boalt Hall Law School at theUniversity of California at Berkeley.
Ellen’s interest in Latin America continued as profes-
sional work with Amnesty International in SanFrancisco and Washington, D.C. From 1989 to 1994 sheheaded the California office of Human Rights Watch,where she conducted research and published on little-known but extensive human rights abuses in Mexico,and where she was co-counsel in two groundbreakinghuman rights cases in U.S. courts, against the infamousPhilippine dictator Ferdinand Marcos and Argentinegeneral Suarez-Mason.
Moving with her family to Massachusetts in 1994, she
helped to set up the Center for Human Rights andConflict Resolution at the Fletcher School of Law andDiplomacy at Tufts University. She was the first execu-tive director for that center and also taught internation-al law, human rights, and mediation at Tufts, Harvard,and the University of Massachusetts, and she wrotewidely. One of her students, now a professor atOccidental College, recalled how “warm and desirousshe was of connecting to students in an often cold insti-tutional world; a marvelous force of nature. ”As news of Ellen’s death circulated, heartfelt tributes to
her poured into Cultural Survival’s offices from everycorner of the world, reflecting both her wide circle offriends and the enormous impact of her human rightswork. Cultural Survival board member Westy Egmontspoke for many—including the Cultural Survival staff—when he wrote, “Ellen has been one of my heroes. Shetaught so man y of us that no tyrant should go unchal-lenged and no small group should be powerless. Shelived large, fought with a superior intellect to wrest jus-tice out of life’s most unjust developments, and never lether own self-interest interfere with those efforts. Ellencame to all such engagements with total humility, gen-uine concern, apparent knowledge, and a progressive seto f val ues tha t all wo rk ed together bea u tifully . W e ha velost a champion, an esteemed leader, a hero of all weaspire to do in the name of justice. I have lost a dearfriend. ” 
A fund has been set up in Ellen’s name to underwrite an
annual Ellen L. Lutz Indigenous Rights Award, whichwill honor a heroic advocate for the rights of IndigenousPeoples.  To learn more about the fund, please contactPolly Laurelchild-Hertig at polly@cs.org or 617-441-5400 x 18. 
ANNUAL REPORT 201023“Ellen has been one of my heroes. She
taught  us that no tyrant should gounchallenged and no small groupshould be powerless. She fought witha superior intellect to wrest justiceout of life’s most unjust develop-ments, and never seemed to have herown self-interest interfere withefforts. We have lost a champion, anesteemed leader, a hero of all weaspire to do in the name of justice.” 
—Westy Egmont, Egmont Associates, Cultural
Survival board member 
She was one of those dynamic leaders whose
energetic work for human rights causes should bean inspiration to us all.”
—Doug Herman, Smithsonian
National Museum of the American Indian Cultural Survival is governed by a board of directors that serves as the organization's legal accountability mechanism and bear s all the
responsibilities of boards of directors in the United States and in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. The board works throughcommittees, including an Executive Committee, a Finance Committee, a Fundraising Committee, and a Nominating Committee.
A unique feature of our board is our Program Council, a committee predominantly made up of Indigenous board members who possess  the
knowledge, experience, and skills to assist the organization to  evaluate current programs, set policy on complex program-relate d issues, and
identify potential new programs and opportunities for growth.GOVERNANCE
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
PRESIDENT AND CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD
Sarah Fuller is the president of Decision Resources, Inc., an international publishing and consulting firm. She 
previously served as vice president of Arthur D. Little, Inc., and president of Arthur D. Little Decision Resources.
VICE CHAIR 
Richard A. Grounds , Euchee, directs the Euchee Language Project, in which fi rst-language Euchee-speaking elders teach community leaders
and youth. He is active in international affairs regarding Indigenous Peoples' rights. He received his doctorate in comparative  religion from
Princeton University and served as co-chair of Cultural Survival's Program Council from 2005-2008.
TREASURER
Jeff Wallace is founder of North Star Management, a firm that manages and develops commercial buildings in Boston. He holds a degree from
Huxley College of Environmental Studies in Bellingham, W A, and an MBA. His past experience includes working for a venture capit al firm
and for an architect/developer before founding his company. 
CLERK
Jean Jackson is a professor of anthropology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Her books, articles, and teaching focus on medical
anthropology, social and ethnic identity, gender issues, and Indigen ous mobilization in Colombia. She received her doctorate in  anthropolo-
gy from Stanford University.
Karmen Ramírez Boscán, Wayuu, is an international Indigenous Peoples’ rights activist with a lifetime of experience working with Wayuu
communities in Colombia as well as national organizations such as Sütsüin Jiyeyu Wayuu—Strength of Women Wayuu—NationalIndigenous Organization of Colombia, and Andean Coordinator of Indigenous Organizations. She has advocated for Indigenous issue s
internationally working as a consultant for the International Labor Organization, Indigenous Peoples and Minorities Unit at the  Office of
the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Organization of American States, and the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. Sh e
has a background in social communication and journalism.  
Marcus Briggs-Cloud is Miccosukke of the Great Maskoke Nation of Florida, and is a son of the Wind Clan people and grandson of the
Bird Clan people. He recently worked as a Maskoke language instructor at the University of Oklahoma and as a high school studen t coun-
selor for the Indian Education Office in Norman, Oklahoma. He also has  served as assistant director of youth programs and Mask oke lan-
guage instructor for the Poarch Band of Creek Indians of Alabama. He currently is an Oxfam International Y outh Action Partner a nd a
National Steering Committee member of the United Methodist Student Movement. Marcus earned a master’s degree in theological stu dies at
the Harvard Divinity School. 
24CULTURAL SURVIVALBOARD OF DIRECTORS (CONTINUED )
Westy A. Egmont , Egmont Associates, was the president of the International Institute of Boston for nine years. He previously served
as the director of the Greater Boston Food Bank and hosted and produced a public television program. He holds a doctorate of di vin-
ity from Andover Newton Theological School. 
Laura R. Graham is a professor of anthropology at the University of Iowa. Her work focuses on lowland South American Indigenous
Peoples’ activities in national and international arenas, especially the Xavante of central Brazil (Ge) and the Wayúu (Arawak, also
known as Guajiro) of Venezuela and Colombia. She is past chair of the American Anthropological Association’s Committee for Huma n
Rights and chairs their Task Group on Language and Social Justice.  From 1994-2005 she directed the Xavante Education Fund, aCultural Survival Special Project. She now coordinates the Xavante Warã Association's projects with Cultural Survival.   
James Howe is a professor of anthropology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. A specialist on the Kuna of Panama, his
research focuses on political and historical anthropology, Indigenous-state relations, and the impact of missionaries. He recei ved his
doctorate in anthropology from the University of Pennsylvania. 
Cecilia Lenk , town councilor for Watertown, Massachusetts, is the former vice president of information technology for Decision
Resources. She has developed numerous national and international Internet initiatives in the areas of science, health, and scie nce edu-
cation. She received her doctorate in biology at Harvard University. 
Pia Maybury-Lewis is a cofounder of Cultural Survival. She was a member of the staff until 2009, managing the intern and bazaar pro-
grams. 
Les Malezer, Native Australian of the Gabi Gabi Community, is the ge neral manager for the Foundation for Aboriginal and Islander
Research Action based in Woolloongabba, Australia. He is also  the chairperson for the international Indigenous Peoples’ Caucus.  He
was instrumental in lobbying governments to support the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples with thecaucus. 
P . Ranganath Nayak is the chief executive officer of Cytel Software. He has more than 24 years of senior-level management experience
in technology and management consulting, and holds a doctorate in mechanical engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technolog y.
Vincent O. Nmehielle, Ikwerre from the Niger Delta region of Nigeria, is an associate professor of law at the University of the
Witwatersrand Law School, Johannesburg, South Africa. He was the former principal defender for Liberian president Charles Taylo r
at the Special Court for Sierra Leone in The Hague. He holds a doctorate in international and comparative law from GeorgeWashington University. 
Ramona L. Peters (Nosapocket of the Bear Clan), Mashpee Wampanoag, lives and works in Cape Cod, Massachusetts, and is a nation-
ally known artist who has revived her tribe’s traditional pottery-m aking techniques. She is a visual historian of her culture, fulfilling
this role through various undertakings as a teacher, spokesperson, curator, interpreter, consultant, and Indigenous rights acti vist. 
25ANNUAL REPORT 2010BOARD OF DIRECTORS (continued)
Stella Tamang, Tamang tribe from Nepal, was chair of the International Indigenous Womens Caucus at the third session of the U.N.
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues and is currently the chair of the South Asia Indigenous Womens Forum and an advisor to theNepal Tamang Women Ghedung. She founded Bikalpa Gyan Kendra in Nepal to contribute to students’ education and livelihood by com -
bining academic learning with practical training. 
Martha Claire Tompkins serves as the principal of a personal investment management and acquisitions fund in Houston, Texas. She has
a degree from Sarah Lawrence College and studied with Cultural  Su rvival co-founder David Maybury-Lewis at Harvard University.   
Roy Y oung established Nature’s Own, a wholesale and retail mineral and fossil business that imports handcrafts from Pakistan and Brazil.
He has a deep commitment to environmental conservation and founded numerous  environmental nonprofit organizations, includingGlobal Response, ECOS, Northern Ohio Recycling Project, Eco-Cycl e, Rocky Flats Truth Force, Global Greengrants Fund, and Trust for
Land Restoration. He holds a BS in geology from Duke University. 
ADDITIONAL PROGRAM COUNCIL MEMBERS AND PROGRAM ADVISORS
jessie little doe baird (Wampanoag) 
Theodore Macdonald, Jr.
26CULTURAL SURVIVALSuzanne Benally (Navajo and Santa Clara Tewa), Executive Director
Mark Camp, Deputy Executive DirectorMark Cherrington, Director of CommunicationsDanielle Deluca, Program OfficerKristen Dorsey (Chickasaw), Donor Relations OfficerDavid Michael Favreau, Director of MarketingSofia Flynn, Financial OfficerJamie Malcolm-Brown, Graphic Design and IT SpecialistCesar Gomez Moscut (Pocomam), Guatemala Radio Project CoordinatorPolly Laurelchild-Hertig, Director of Program ResourcesJacob Manitoba-Bailey (Sauk), Language Appr entice, Team Leader, Endangered Languages
Jason Moore, Membership OfficerPaula Palmer, Director of Global Response Program Agnes Portalewska, Program OfficerRosendo Pablo Ramirez (Mam), Guatemala Radio Project Assistant CoordinatorAlberto Recinos (Mam), Guatemala Radio Project Legislative Coordinator
Jennifer Weston (Hunkpapa Lakota/Standing Rock Sioux), Program and Communications OfficerAncelmo Xunic (Kaqchikel), Gu atemala Radio Project BookkeeperSTAFF27“Interning at Cultural Survival was a particularly reward-
ing experience. I was exposed to a variety of work, large-ly focused on advocacy initiatives involving theDeclaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and spe-cific cases of mining exploitation in Panama and PapuaNew Guinea. I developed a stronger understanding ofnonprofit advocacy work and the many issues facingIndigenous Peoples worldwide.”
—Bradford Merzigian, summer 2010 intern
“I had a great experience during my time as a Marketingand Events Intern.  I especially enjoyed learning abouthow the bazaars mutually benefited both Indigenousartists and Cultural Survival.  They are a creative andquite unusual event that serves many purposes at once,which I find to be an important characteristic of socialjustice work.  The bazaars are inspiring events that I washonored to be a part of.” 
—Katherine Quackenbush, summer 2010 internINTERN PROGRAM
Cultural Survival’s work could not be accomplished without our
interns. Interns are involved in all areas of the organization’s workand play a vital role in day-to-day operations at Cultural Survival.This year we hosted 28 interns from universities around the coun-try.
Guatemala Radio Project: Interns assisted in evaluating all the
radio program episodes, helped write quarterly reports and grantapplications, and  set up speaking engagements about the projectfor station representatives.
Endangered Languages :  Interns helped organize materials for
hundreds of Native American language advocates attendingthe National Native Language Revitalization Summit. Internsalso assisted with fundraising, helping research foundationsand develop donor files for potential funders for NativeAmerican language programs. Interns and graduate volun-
teers helped organize outreach calls and interviews withdozens of tribal language programs across the United States.
Fundraising and Events : Interns contributed to the success of
our expanded bazaars program by educating the public aboutIndigenous issues and fair trade, setting up and breakingdown the bazaars, maintaining security, encouraging atten-dees to join Cultural Survival, assisting vendors and perform-ers, selling rugs and crafts, handing out flyers, and directingtraffic. 
Publications and Research: Interns wrote or contributed to
articles that were published in the Cultural Survival Quarterly
and wrote features and urgent appeals for the website. 
ANNUAL REPORT 201028CULTURAL SURVIVAL MEMBERS
CULTURAL SURVIVALAnne St. Goar
Anne St. Goar has been a Cultural Survival member and donor
since 1989, when cofounder David Maybury-Lewis gave a talk atMassachusetts General Hospital in Boston where she was a primary care physician. Now 88, Anne is retired; she is an activemember of the Unitarian Universalist church, an avid amateurhorticulturist, and enjoys traveling and spending time with herchildren and eight grandchildren.  
Why she became a donor to Cultural Survival: 
“It’s important to keep cultures alive.  Maintaining the culture is central to Indigenous Peoples’ lives.”  
What she sees as a current challenge:  “Climate c hange is
affecting Indigenous Peoples disproportionately.”  
MEMBERSHIP
Our members continue to make all our work possible, writing letters to governments and corporations, offering
ideas and help, and providing the financial resources needed  to carry out our mission. This year 1,203 people joined
the organization. Making a difference as a family:  The Balcoms
The Balcom family of Clovis, California —Jan, Mark, and daughter Heather —have been involved in Global
Response campaigns since Heather was in middle school.  Jan relates, "Our daughter found it empowering as
a relatively powerless youngster to be able to help make a difference by writing letters." While their 
daughter is now grown, Jan is still actively involved:  writing letters and reading and then passing on her copyof the Cultural Survival Quarterly to her local library (where she assures us it "is prominently displayed"), and
donating to Cultural Survival.  
T oday, Jan says,
"I appreciate the important work of the Global Response program and of Cultural Survival.
We NEED the cultural knowledge and wisdom that we endanger and extinguish every day — knowledge our
civilization has largely forgotten of how to live sustainably with this world.  Cultural Survival recognizes thisand does something about it."BENEFACTOR 
Administration for Native
Americans
AMB FoundationAnonymousFrederique Apffel-MarglinBarona Band of Mission
Indians
Yseye Maria BarnwellBay and Paul FoundationsHanne BeckAva BerinsteinBulletproof Recording CompanyJane BuninCarolyn Byerly & Kay McGrawElizabeth Cabot
Paul & Virginia Cabot
Charitable Trust 
Mary A. CampCindy CarlisleDonna Ching & Richard LemanThe Christensen Fund
Cynda Collins Arsenault
Cottonwood Foundation
William & Francine Crawford
Dean Cycon & Dean's BeansPatrick and Lynn De FreitasIsabel Dulfano
Westy & Susan EgmontElliott Badgley Foundation
Wendy EmrichEndangered Language FundEqual Exchange
Samuel Freilich
Sarah FullerJulia GibbsGrace Jones Richardson TrustLaura R. Graham & T.M.
Scruggs
William and Jeanie GrausteinPeter N. HellerKarin HolserJames & June HoweJean E. JacksonRalph JonesCarl Keil*Baine KerrKeweenaw Bay Indian Community
Lannan FoundationLouise Lamphere
Polly Laurelchild-Hertig
Leaves of Grass Fund
Cecilia LenkBarbara H. and S.J. LevyEllen L. Lutz*Maine Community 
Foundation
Jesse W. MarkowPia Maybury-LewisBarbara D. MillerRanganath and Sandy NayakThomas J. NergerNew England Biolabs 
Corporation 
New England Biolabs 
Foundation
Nancy S. NordhoffOpen Society InstituteCharlie PapazianKit PilgrimSusanna & David PlacePlum Blossom ClinicSusanna M. PorteQuitiplas FoundationRiaEnjolie, IncJerome & Janet RegierBarbara RogoffDavid RosensteinAndrew P. SaitoSave Our SpiritsEileen Schjelderup
Scola
Peter L. SheldonKathryn SikkinkKristina Simmons & 
Michael Sheridan
Teresa M. & Anthony SmithSolbert Romaine 
Gustava Trust
Mary Gay SpragueSt. John's Episcopal 
Church, Boulder
Sue Thompson
Theo Chocolate
Martha Claire TompkinsTides FoundationTietz Family FoundationJeff & Elizabeth WallaceElias WhitmanWhole Foods
Winky FoundationMary Wright
Philip D. YoungRoy Young & Rosa Venezia
PATRON 
Rosamond AllenJanet K. Amighi
Anonymous
Barbara AppelWhitney Beals & Pamela EstyWilliam BernthalSteve BeyerBoston Area Spanish ExchangeThe Boston Foundation
Boulder Meeting of Friends
Jerry D. BuschVictoria J. Carter
Cultural Intrigue
Joseph De RiveraLinda DeLauriAna, Erica, & Tomas Deutsch   Donald & Marty DickGene & Ruth FaxDean & Sheryl FosterFoundation for 
Shamanic Studies
Lisa GrausteinPhoebe HackettDoris HassNance HikesDonald HindleyAnn Hunter & David WelbornSandi KazuraJack & Sara KellerWillett KemptonWalter KingsberyJudith KoslovWilma Leinonen & 
Richard Hogue
Larry LewartonPatricia J. LyonMariana M. McClanahanRichard & Deyne MeadowThe Middle Passage Foundation
Greta Morgan
Jill E. NewhouseFelicia OldfatherPete & Patricia Palmer
Charlie & Shirley PatersonXavid PretzerThe Sara Blair Winter
Foundation
Susan Sherman
Christopher SimpsonCynthia H. SunderlandDetlev & Dorothy VagtsStephanie Van Dyke
SUSTAINER 
Louise T. AmblerNeal Anderson & Janice StuttsRichard & Elaine AndrewsAnonymous
Rebecca Arnoldi
Robert BernthalBruce & Judith BillingsMarion BittingerShirley & Tim BlanckeFrances BolerClare L. BoulangerHelen BourneLisa D. BrooksLouise M. BurkhartRobert & Ann BuxbaumElizabeth W. CadyJohn P. Camp, Jr.Jay T. CaturiaDuane ChampagneFay & Alfred ChandlerAnnie ChaseSandra ColiverJohn D. & Sylvia ConstableJudy Conti
Community Shares of Colorado
C. A. CorryJean CrandallCulver Family FoundationSharon DollChris DonahueBarbie DuttonRegina M. EdmondsKirk & Karen EndicottLester & Trudy FagenBryan & Lois FeuerNancy E. Fleischer
Five Star Quality CareRon Forthofer
John FriesGabriel & Sara FrommerDouglas P. FryJoseph GaulHelen W. GjessingEric GoldByron & Mary Jo GoodJohn C. GoodmanStanley Griffith & Ann
Schauffler
Morris HalleJohn HallinanFrancie Lynne HansenKevin J. HealySusan J. HerlinMichael & Cornelia HerzfeldLeanne HintonTara HolemanCheri & Keith JamesonLouis KampfThomas F . King & 
Patricia Parker
Gary W. KingSamuel C. KinserIan KlineSeena & Danny KohlLawrence KoplikJohn LennieMilton & Jean LeRoyMark & Helena Licalzi
The Lifshutz Foundation
David LockardPeter LomhoffDonna LongGeorge MartinElise A. MartinHerbert A. Masters IIIJenny MasurRoma MayurChristian MiliteauBill MoningerRosemary MuddConnie & Robert MutelRandy MuthJohanna NicholsBarbara P. NorfleetPhyllis OdiseosAugustin H. ParkerMichael PerloffSylvia Pigors
SUPPORTERS
* Benefactor - ($1,000.00 + )    Patron - ($500-$999)    Sustainer ($250-$499)    Sponsor ($100-$249)
29ANNUAL REPORT 2010CULTURAL SURVIVALKatharine M. Preston &
John Bingham
Fred & Susan PutnamWilliam B. RadcliffePenelope RichRandolph E. RichardsonJohn P. RogersBarbara RottierMaria RubinoJane SaferCarole Samworth & 
Sallyann Roth
Tom SargentFannette SawyerLou ScharpfMatthew Simonson
Smithsonian Folkways
Recordings
Anne St. GoarWilliam T. StewartGayatri ThampyKathryn S. TholinCatherine VogtKirsten Waerstad & 
Dharmesh Shah
John F . WalkerBertie J. WeddellRichard WeinbergDolores WeltyAlex & Margaret 
Wertheimer
Gretchen WhisenandCatherine M. WilliamsGraham S. WoodSteven Zuckerman & 
Paula Gorlitz
SPONSOR 
Douglas L. Adkins
Kenneth AdkissonHilary M. Ainger
Alchemy Foundation
Henry J. AlexanderMarie AliStephanie J. AllenKristina & Peter AllenGraham & Jean AlvordElias AmidonAnn AndersonJon AndreasAnonymous
George AppenzellerSheldon & Elizabeth AppletonSusan Arnott
A Thread of Hope
Elizabeth AtkinsKeith Ball & Diana MorabitoMark BaranowskiBradford C. BarberOfer & Daniella Bar-YosefBarbara Bennett & 
Michael Chapman
Richard & Made BergDan BergerRuth J. BerkheiserHoward & Deborah BernsteinWilmar & Lorna BernthalCarol BernthalLinda C. BlackMichael BlackmoreAndy BlueCarolyn BninskiJoan BolkerVera & Ross BooneMartha A. BostianJudith B BoucherErika E. BourguignonAnthony R. BoxallAnn L. BragdonMr. and Mrs. Cabell BrandArik & Sally BrissendenAlan R. BrombergDelaine BrownSunny BrownElizabeth M. BrumfielW.S. BrundageJohn & Agnes BurkeMartha BushnellJerry & Barbara ButtreyJudy ButzineSamantha CameraGordon G. CampbellJim Campen & Phyllis EwenFrancis A. CancianJim CarlstedtJohn B. CarmanJuliet CarpenterJohn J. CarverLaura CastorWinston Cavert & Carol WitteNorman M. ChapinMurray & Linley Chapman
Ivan ChaseIra ChernusCarla ChildsFred ClarkRichard & Carolyn 
Clemmer-Smith
Nicholas ClinchMartin CobinDeborah CohenElizabeth H. CokerBarbara CollierE. ColsonMartha ComfortLoring & Louise ConantDavid R. ConnaFrances & Thomas ConnellJeff CookCynthia C. CookMargaret D. CooleyRobin CossinWilliam Coughlin & 
Ronald Bedard
Douglas & Christina CristWilliam H. & Jean G. CrockerMark E. CrosbyCarolyn A. 
Cunningham
Alison E. DavisDeidre DawsonLarry L. DekkerBill & Nancy DennisAnne DeruyttereWilliam DevoreAlbino Di RienzoJoseph DifillippoEstelle DischWilliam A. DoebeleKatherine DomotoMary Ann Donegan & 
Timothy Gray
Gwen DooleyDeborah & John DorseyMary & Jim DowntonMax & Ann DrakeBobbi Dunham-CarterWilliam & Katy DurhamDavid EckCarol L. EllisRisa S. EllovichSusan EnowitzNaomi & Alan Epstein
John & Jeanne EtterJames FallMike FarrellSeymour FassCynthia K. FischerDennis J. FischerMichael Fischer & 
Susan Wilkinson
John & Diane ForsdaleJeremy & Angela FosterMichael FromeLyle FunderburkRobert & Judith GassMichael GehmanDaniel R. GeorgeGeorge GibsonTeresa GilmanRichard GnaedingerPeter D. GoldbergRobert J. Golten & Joan BrettEllen Goodman & Robert LeveyLion GoodmanRoger GrayRobert GrayEdward & Brita GroverJohn A. GuarnacciaStephen GudemanSteinthor V. GudmundssonJane & Bernard GuyerAndreas HalbachH. S. HalperinMartha S. HansenSean HartzellFrances J. HayashidaMarilyn HayesCarol HaymanNicholas & Suzanne HelburnStephen D. HerbertJohn HerringtonJohn & Dorothy HerzogR. James HillsSue HiltonSue HinshonJoshua D. HinsonChristine Hobbie & 
Neil Brander
Dennis L. HolemanRichard A. HorvitzMr. and Mrs. Philip HouckThe Richard R. Howe 
Foundation
Sarah L. HudsonJohn HuntCarl & Lorena HydeJoan A. Hyra
Injoy Productions Inc
Judith T. IrvineWayne ItanoKaren ItoMargaret JacksonKarin Jacobson & 
Robert Seeman
Nora JacquezDenise & Ervin JindrichGeorgeann JohnsonZanette JohnsonWillene JohnsonBrian JosephKate Judd & Robert MillerKu KahakalauGary & Shoni KahnLawrence & Lucille KaplanMichael KarathanosAnn R. KarnovskyEllen & Marc KaufmannShomarka Omar Y. KeitaDennis I. KelloggDoris KennedyThomas KieferSue Ellen KingsleyMarjorie KoldingerDebra KoppmanGlenn KorffDavid F . KremenNancy KricorianJoseph & Rachel KruskalCatherine KubitschekCatherine KunkelSusan M. KusKurt KutayMarie LaursenGail A. LauzzanaEleanor LazarusJudith & Joseph LeaderCatherine LegrandDavid LeitchWilliam B. LenoirJim LeonardJoan LesterSherman & Alison Lewis
30ANNUAL REPORT 2010Heidi Lewis
Benjamin LilienthalOlga F . LinaresMatthew LindholmChristopher LishMarie M. LloydMaryel LockeMichael LolwerikoiLeslie LomasWiley & Christie LongChristine A. LovelandJeff LoweMary LuntNancy LurieLorraine LymanJean MacMillanEllen Sarkisian & 
John Maher
Charles & Pauline MaierEda MalenkyAlan MallachJoy MalnarAllen MaretFrances W. MaslandPeter MastersMargaret S. MaurinNelson MaxRaymond A. MayerRobert MayerMarcella MazzarelliDavid H. H. McAlpinLeon R. MccullohJulia McGinnDaniel & Tammy McKananRachelle MckenzieWilliam McLarneyBetty J. MeggersCarole & Gary MehlCyrus & Satu MehtaJane MeyerdingValerie Miller & Ralph FineDavid MillerMelva L. MillsJohn MinekaJames & Barbara MingleHelaine MinkusWilliam P. MitchellMichael & Lillian MoatsEllen G. MootNicola Moscufo & 
Kristin Leader
David MoshmanJoan L. Muellner
Christopher MullerSalomon NahmadJan NesporLindsey Newbold
Janice E. Newman
Gilbert G. NicholsSandy Noborikawa
North Shore Country 
Day School
Devin OdellRollin OdellJoan K. O'DonnellSuzanne OlbrichtEric OlsenPatrick OlsenDavid OsmondYasuyuki OwadaPaula PalmerCharles PalmerKathy PartridgeEva PattenHenry PaulusNeenah E. PayneJames & Florence PeacockHoward & Cynthia PedlikinAnitra PellFrancesco PellizziDavid PellowPauline & Mark PetersBarbara PetersonNancy Peterson WalterJames PhillipsWilliam O. PickRichard & Irene PipesJohn R. PollardAnne S. PoselLawrence PowellJames & Karla PowellJoseph M. PrinceSusan ReiderPatrica ReinsteinElsbeth ReisenDave G. RichNancy RiesRachel Z. RitvoCaralee & Fred RobertsJoyce & Steven D. RobinsonJo Raine RodgersElizabeth A. Rose
Rosebud Sioux TribesAbby Rosenberg
Barr & June RosenbergEdward H. RosenthalHerbert & Deborah RothschildRussell's Garden Center   
Charitable Foundation
Stephen Sachs & 
Leah Ingraham
Paul L. SaffoSonya & Myron SalamonKay H. SandbergMana SanguansookHoward & Inge SargentSanjay & Gitanjali SarmaMary Anne SaulVictor SchachterCarl SchachterMichael SchafferPeggy SchearNorbert SchneiderAnn SchultzThayer & Mary ScudderBob & Char SeeleyContee SeelySharon G. SeimThomas K. SeligmanMicah & Melanie SeyboldJudith ShapiroSayre P. SheldonJohn SherryJoel SherzerTimothy SieberDavid Silver & Darlene LorrainDaniel B. & Sybil M. SilverAnne SincerbeauxMarcia SingerBetty A. & John SmallwoodJacquiline A. SmithD. N. SnarrJohn M. SneadPhilip SneadJason SorensonPauline SpiegelHelen St. JohnMiriam StampferJane M. StarkeyBurton SteckChristopher & 
Rebecca Steiner
Joseph & Caroline StepanekNathan StephensonDavid Stephenson &
Lynn Musgraves
John D. StokesAndrew StoneJessica E. StrausGeorge & Helene  
Strauss
Darol StreibDonald D. StullCarole SudermanMartha C. TaubBahram M. TavakolianMary Jane & George
Taylor
Barbara ThomasRichmond & Sarah 
Thomason
Catherine W. ThompsonAmy ThomsonMeghan TierneyJohn Tirman
Tolland High  School
Elizabeth TraubeSteve Trimble
Shih-Chung Tristan Hsieh
Jack F . TropeJohn & Sue TrostleTerence S. Turner & 
Jane Fajans
University of Notre Dame
Anthropology Department
Cornelia H. van der ZielDolph J. VanderpolCharles C. VerharenPhilip J. VilardoMichi VojtaThe Volunteer CenterRichard W. Von KorffC. M. WaagCharles WagnerRyan Walker
Walk Your Dog With Love             
Margaret WallaceAda WanWesley T. WardGene WeinsteinSusan WeirTom S. WeisnerEmily WellsJane WestbergDoug Whalen
Janet WhiteStephen WileyYvonne WillemseKaren A. WillyoungRichard WilshusenJoyce P. WinstonPamela A. WithersH. Martin & Jude WobstJim & Nurit WolfWilliam WoodAutumn K. WoodwardDavid WyckoffYoshiko YamamotoLouise YoungMatt YoungTod YoungCindy YoungZaid YoussfiSusan E. ZarutskieDavid ZiemannMichael J. Zimmerman
* Benefactor - ($1,000.00 + )    Patron - ($500-$999)    Sustainer ($250-$499)    Sponsor ($100-$249)
3132CULTURAL SURVIVALFISCAL YEAR2010
ExpensesFISCAL YEAR2010
Income
General Contributions 
& Subscriptions
InvestmentGrant RevenueBazaars Communications Program 
& Publications
Other Income
SubotalSpending from 
Cash Reserves
Total$656,862
$13,560
$399,956$472,844
$22,178
$22,958
$1,588,358
$119,781
$1,708,13938%
1%
23%28%
1.5%
1.5%
7%
Investment 1%Communications Program
& Publications 1.5%
General Contributions 
& Subscriptions38%
Bazaars 
28%
Audited Grant Revenue23%Other Income 
1.5%
Cash Reserves
7%
FundraisingGeneral AdministrationEndangered Languages 
Program
Communications Program 
& Publications
Community Radio 
Program
Bazaar ProgramGlobal Response 
Program
Other Programs
Total$108,653 
$124,615 
$209,234 $395,586 $173,409 
$389,525 
$150,969 
$156,149 
$1,708,1397%
7%
12%23%10%
23%
9%
9%
 Fundraising
7%
Bazaar Program23%Communications 
Program
& Publications 
23%
AuditedGlobalResponseProgram9%Other
Programs9%Endangered
LanguagesProgram12%
Community
RadioProgram10%General
Administration7%ANNUAL REPORT 2010FINANCIAL REPORT
33There are many aspects to Indigenous issues, more th an any single organization can address. Cultural
Survival has identified several areas that it feels are especially important, and, as the charts oppositeshow, we have focused our efforts and our finances around them. 
We feel that one of the largest contributing factors to abuses of Indigenous Peoples’ rights is the fact that
they happen out of sight. Most non-Indigenous people know very little about Indigenous communitiesor about their efforts to defend themselves. As a result, the larger public doesn’t take action to supportthose communities’ efforts. It is crucial, then, to give Indigenous Peoples a voice, a platform to makethemselves and their issues known to the broader world. Our publications and communications program addresses that concern.
One of the most urgent issues that Indigenous communities face is the loss of their languages, often as a
result of government programs and the cultural hegemony of the larger, non-Indigenous society. Weaddress this issue through our Endangered Languages Program, which seeks to support Native commu-nities’ efforts to keep their languages alive.
Many Indigenous communities are small, remote, and isolated, making it difficult to defend themselves,
to get outside information, or to coordinate their efforts with other groups. Our Community RadioProgram is addressing that issue by building a network of small, affordable radio stations throughoutGuatemala. 
A huge number of Indigenous communities face severe environmental damage from mines, dams, oil
drilling, and other extractive industries taking pl ace on their land, usually without their permission.
These communities are often too small to have political power or to generate broad public support fortheir cause, and without it they face dire consequences. The Global Response Program addresses thisconcern by launching international letter-writing campaigns in partnership with these communities.
Culturally appropriate economic development is a rare commodity in many Indigenous communities.
These remote communities don’t have ready access to markets or the capacity to promote their prod-ucts. The Bazaars Program bridges that gap and introduces hundreds of thousands of non-Indigenouspeople to Indigenous artists. At the same time, it provides revenue that supports individual artists’ fami-lies and whole communities.CULTURAL SURVIVAL35U.S. Endorses UN Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous PeoplesAt the White House Tribal Nations Conference onDecember 15, 2010, President Barack Obamaannounced that the United States would “lend itssupport” to the UN Declaration on the Rights ofIndigenous Peoples. “The aspirations it affirms, ” he said,“including the respect for the institutions and richcultures of Native peoples, are one we must always seekto fulfill. . . I want to be clear: what matters far morethan words, what matters far more than any resolutionor declaration, are actions to match those words. . .That’s the standard I expect my administration to beheld to. ”
The statement is significant because the United States
was one of only four countries that voted against thedeclaration when the UN General Assembly adopted itin 2007, and the last of those four to have reversed itsformer opposition. 
Cultural Survival program officer Jennifer Weston was
on hand for Obama’s announcement as a member of thepress, and she reports that the mood was jubilant.President Fawn Sharp of the Quinault Nation, whointroduced President Obama to open the summit,reflected later, “It’s exciting and a long time coming, butI especially appreciate his comments that it’s actions notwords that matter, and I believe he’s very committed tonot only being a signatory but to implementing both thespirit and intent of the declaration. ”
The president’s decision is the result of a comprehensive
review of the declaration by the Obama administration,which held extensive consultations with tribalgovernments and received over 3,000 writtencomments.  Cultural Survival this summer mounted acampaign to provide every tribal president and
chairperson in the U.S. with a copy of the declaration, as a m p l e  l e t t e r  t o  s u b m i t  t o  P r e s i d e n t  O b a m a ,  a n dbackground information and perspective on thedeclaration. Volunteers and staff then logged hundredsof follow-up calls to tribal government offices urgingsubmission of letters detailing how the declarationreinforces the exercise of local tribal rights.  Many tribessent letters, and their pressure played a role in changingthe U.S. position.  Many of the largest nationalintertribal organizations in the U.S., including theNational Congress of American Indians and the UnitedSouthern and Eastern Tribes, also passed resolutionscalling for endorsement and implementation of thedeclaration.
At the close of the Tribal Nations Conference the White
House issued their official statement on supporting thedeclaration, which was generally positive, highlightingthe administration’s many efforts on behalf of NativePeoples. It was, in fact, far more wholehearted in itsendorsement than those of Canada or New Zealand, twoof the other countries that initially voted against thedeclaration. There was, however, one disappointingaspect of the statment. 
Perhaps the most important provision in the declaration
is the requirement that governments get IndigenousPeoples “free, prior, and informed consent” beforeembarking on any development project or other actionthat would affect the Indigenous People’s territory. TheWhite House statement says that, “the United Statesunderstands [the importance of a] call for a process ofmeaningful consultation with tribal leaders, but notnecessarily the agreement of those leaders, before theactions addressed in those consultations are taken. ”
INDIGENOUS RIGHTS IN ACTION
ANNUAL REPORT 2010Cultural Survival
Main Office: 
215 Prospect StreetCambridge, MA  02139 USA    t: 617.441.5400    f: 617.441.5417
P.O. Box 7490     
Boulder, CO  80306-7490 USAt: 303.444.0306f: 303.449.9794
7 Avenida Norte #51      
Antigua Guatemala,Sacatepequez, Guatemala    
culturalsurvival@cs.org
www.cs.org
Cultural Survival is a 501(c)(3)federal tax-exempt organization.