CSVANW January 2022 NewsletterCommunity Care is TraditionJanuary 2022 NewsletterHappy New Year, Relatives!We hope you all had yourselves a very warm, safe, and grounding holiday and new year. We are excited to start the new year with you all and continue our mission to stop violence against Native women and children in our tribal communities this 2022.January is National Slavery and Human Trafficking Prevention Month. It is a key time for us all as individuals to learn and increase our awareness of human trafficking to identify the signs of trafficking. Human trafficking can happen to anyone, at any time, especially during this time of the COVID-19 pandemic. Within our tribal communities, Native women, cis and trans women, and girls are victimized by human trafficking at rates higher than that of the general population due to factors that include (but are not limited to) poverty or lack of access to work or services on or near reservations. It is also a time for us take these messages to our workplaces, our communities, our schools, our representatives and everywhere else.January is also National Stalking Awareness Month (NSAM)! Though millions of men, women and non-binary people are stalked every year in the United States, the crime of stalking is often misunderstood, minimized and/or ignored. And stalking often predicts and/or co-occurs with sexual and domestic violence. Stalking is a pattern of behavior directed at a specific person that causes fear. Many stalking victims experience being followed, approached and/or threatened. No matter where you are, or where you come from, everyone has the inherent right to be and feel safe in their own home, community, and online. We all have a role to play in identifying stalking and supporting victims and survivors.Join us this month as we move against trafficking and stalking in our tribal communities. Follow us as we support national efforts and share information through social media to bring awareness to the underground crime of human trafficking and the crime of stalking that affects our relatives. Community care is tradition.Advocate Corner - January 2022 LetterHello advocates and direct service providers. It feels so good to be back at work after a much-needed break. As omicron surges across the nation, we have seen our numbers of covid-19 continue to rise in all our pueblos and tribal nations. If you need more PPE, please let me know and I can get orders out to your organization. Home test kits have also been hard to come by at the stores and are in high demand. There is a link that you can order a home test kit if you and other families need it: https://learn.vaulthealth.com/nm/ .I believe with the current Covid-19 surge we are seeing; we will remain working from home as it is safer for us and our families.Our first Advocate Community Meeting is set for Thursday, January 20, 2022 at 10:30 AM. If you wish to join our community of advocates in our discussions around upcoming trainings, technical assistance, grant opportunities, or just to check in with our tribal advocates to share resources and support, we would love to have you.Please email our Advocate Coordinator, Tiffany Jiron at tjiron@csvanw.org.﻿Stay safe.‌‌‌‌On December 16, 2021 CSVANW along with many others witness New Mexico Governor Michelle Lujan-Grisham, NM Department of Indian Affairs Secretary Lynn Trujillo, Navajo Nation First Lady Phefilia Nez, and the Honorable Navajo Nation Council Delegate Amber Kanazbah Crotty surrounding District Attorney Raúl Torrez sign an memorandum of understanding to form a specialized Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Relatives (MMIWR) Task Force subunit within the District Attorney’s Office.CSVANW sits down with 'The G Word' for an in-depth conversation on genocide and accountabilityCSVANW's Sexual Violence Coordinator, Floripa Olguin, and Executive Director, Angel Charley, sat down with the creators of "The G Word" for a podcast interview this past December to talk about genocide, accountability, and violence against Native Women. They talked about how violence, both historical and present, against Native women and communities create obstacles for accountability. We will share the podcast episode when it becomes available.Virtual Engagement with Indigenous Women Leaders from Mexico, Canada and the United StatesOur executive director joined a small delegation of Indigenous women from Mexico, Canada and the United States for a convening with The White House last month to share information to strengthen system response to tribal communities. The gathering was in preparation for the 4th Trilateral Virtual Engagement with Indigenous Women Leaders from Canada, Mexico, and the United States.The Trilateral Working Group on Violence Against Indigenous Women and Girls (Working Group) was initially an outcome of the 2016 North American Leaders’ Summit, when Canada, Mexico and the United States decided to convene the Working Group to address the high rates of violence against women and girls from Indigenous communities as a regional concern. The United States subsequently hosted the first meeting of the Working Group at the White House in 2016. Canada hosted the second convening of the Working Group in 2017, followed by the third convening that was hosted by Mexico in 2018. At the Generation Equality Forum in June of 2021, the U.S. announced its commitment to host the fourth meeting of the Working Group with Mexico and Canada.‌‌‌‌Follow us on social media to stay updated when CSVANW is in the community.THANK YOUTO OUR CHANGE MAKERSDecember 2021 DONORSGeneral contributions and donations from individual supporters and organizational partners are essential for CSVANW's sustainability and effectiveness. Your donation helps make it possible for us to cultivate and strengthen our ability to advocate for Native women and children and breaking of cycles of violence.Donate todayCSVANW Membership MeetingJanuary 27, 2022SAVE THE DATESAlthough our 7th Annual Little One Holiday Book Fundraiser passed, we are accepting donations until Friday, January 21, 2022.Our Little One Holiday Book Fundraiser is an opportunity to call on the community to join the movement of cycle breaking to help New Mexico Native youth & their family who have experienced and/or witness violence find comfort in story and the daily bonding routine of reading.We are fundraising to supply books to Native youth and families in New Mexico domestic violence shelters by the end of January 2022.DonateAdvocate Community MeetingJanuary 20, 2022More information will be made soon.Next Steps: Continuous Care for Survivorsof Human TraffickingJanuary 26, 202210AM to 12PM (MT) - VIRTUALThe importance of continuous care for survivors of human trafficking is often overlooked. CSVANW would like to highlight what continuous care looks like for survivors of human trafficking.Because the experience of severe trauma is repeated, and often survivors deal with a variety of complications. We will discuss the type of care and resources which will meet survivors’ immediate needs, such as medical care, counseling, food, clothing, and physical protection.Join us in an educational training on how we as relatives can be there for survivorsRegisterSexual Violence in Tribal CommunitiesFebruary 28, 2022 - 9am-5pm (MT)Join CSVANW for a one-day training on Sexual Violence in Tribal Communities. Participants will learn about sexual violence in a historical and present context, Native youth and sexual health, and finally, Jurisdiction 101 Training. Throughout the training there will be breakout groups for in-depth discussion, a workshop for brainstorming ways to address sexual violence in tribal communities, and time for reflection from the participants. This is open for those who need an introduction to understanding sexual violence in tribal communities or would like to review material.More information coming soon!Advancing Core Advocacy Training in Tribal CommunitiesFebruary 8, 15, & 22, 2022Advancing Advocacy is the Coalition to Stop Violence Against Native Women's 40 Hour-Core Advocacy Training that provides new domestic violence and sexual assault advocates and first responders with state certification. CSVANW's 40 Hour Advocacy Training is 1 of 2 state certified training for new domestic violence advocates. CSVANW aims to help first responders and domestic violence advocates work together effectively in a times of crisis.﻿CSVANW's service area is all of New Mexico, the Four Corners region (northeastern Arizona), and Ysleta del Sur Pueblo in El Paso, Tx. If you are from out of this area and interested in the training, please contact us at 505-243-9199 or email Jolene Holgate at jholgate@csvanw.org so we can put you in touch with an organization in your region.More information coming soon!RegisterKeep checking back for more opportunities here.Become a MemberDonate TodayFollow us on Social Media‌‌‌‌Stay Updated: Sign Up for Our Emails