Our work began with a simple
conversation. As a young vol-unteer for Amnesty International,
Rudy Perpich Jr. asked his father—then Governor of Minnesota—a tough question: “What are youdoing for human rights?”
Inspired by his son’s challenge,
Governor Perpich directed a taskforce to research various initiatives,the most ambitious of which was arehabilitation center for survivorsof torture.
When the Center for Victims of
Torture was founded in 1985, noone could have predicted its impact. 
In our early years, two volunteer
physicians donated their time tocare for clients in an office at theInternational Clinic of St. Paul
Ramsey Medical Center. After twoyears, we moved to a small houseon the University of Minnesotacampus.
“When I started at CVT in 1987
we had five employees,” sharedRosa Garcia-Peltoniemi, senior consulting clinician. “We weresqueezed together in just a fewrooms where we cared for clients,raised money and built the founda-tion for CVT. Very quickly moreand more survivors heard aboutour work and we needed to addstaff and find a bigger space.”
CVT expanded to a stately
three-story Victorian house next-door to its previous home.Renovating the house was a com-
munity effort with local businessesand individuals donating materials,funds and labor to make the housecomfortable, welcoming and func-tional. 
“At the time there wasn’t any
research or standard technique onhow to help torture survivors, but weknew we wanted them to feel safe,”explained Rosa. “The cliniciansbegan to understand the real devas-tating, long-term effects of torture.We used the best practices from our professions and developedapproaches to help survivors healand then reconnect with the community.”Fall 2010, Volume 20, Issue 4    A Publication of the Center for Victims of Torture    www.cvt.org       
INSIDE
2Letter from the Executive Director
4Healing Across Cultures
4Helping CVT and Helping YourselfOur mission: To heal the wounds of 
torture on individuals, their families 
and their communities, and to 
stop torture worldwide.
PHOTO © EDIE LEWISONSee page 3CVT: A 25-Year Legacy of Hope and Healing
Yuvenalis Omagwa (left)
and Angelina Mukii Mwauworked in Guinea andSierra Leone; MichaelKariuki Kamau served inSierra Leone and Liberia.They attended a retreat in Sierra Leone in 2004.CVT clinicians continuelearning and training about healing from torture and war trauma.Jordan CountryDirector, DarrinWaller, andPsychotherapist,Shirley Gillan, cut the ribbon toopen the Irbid,Jordan healingcenter inOctober 2010.
PHOTO © CVT2Letter from the Executive Director
September is a month of transitions here at CVT.
As I write, we are preparing to open a new project in the refugee 
camps of Dadaab, Kenya, where we will care for survivors of torture and trauma from the war in Somalia. Over 260,000 Somali and ethnic minority refugees languish in the Dadaab camps which were built to hold 90,000. An overwhelming number of these men, women and children have experienced torture and war trauma. 
One United Nations official told CVT that new arrivals at the camps have some of the most
complex and devastating torture histories of all refugees in the camps. 
CVT clinicians will soon begin extending care to survivors. They will also recruit and train
Somali refugees to serve as peer counselors. As we have done in all our projects in Africa and theMiddle East, the peer counselors will develop the training and skills to meet community mentalhealth needs far beyond the tenure of CVT’s project. 
As we prepare to open the project in Dadaab, we also say goodbye to our Minneapolis 
Healing Center. In September we’re moving all clinical staff to our Healing Center in St. Paul.
As I reflect on the thousands of survivors healed inside these walls, I am sad to bid farewell 
to such a wonderful place. But remembering those who stepped through these doors and found aplace of hope, I rejoice that the spirit of this place lives on in the lives that have been rebuilt here.
Clarisse is one such client. She endured unspeakable cruelty. She couldn’t speak without 
weeping when she first walked through our door. But months later, when a United States Senatorasked about her experience here, she said, “They dug me up from my grave.” 
Thank you for making this life-saving work possible.Sincerely,
Douglas A. JohnsonDouglas A. Johnson
The St. Paul Healing Center
is now the base for ourlocal healing services.
PHOTO © C.C.STROMTraining and Advocating to 
Heal Survivors
Having begun to learn the 
intricacies of caring for torture survivors, we realized we couldhelp more men and women bytraining other professionals. Westarted teaching local educators,social workers and medical profes-sionals about the effects of tortureand what they could do to providesensitive and appropriate servicesto survivors.
Then we took the training 
overseas. In the former Yugoslavia,while the war still raged, we trainedcare providers in the specializedtreatment of survivors of torture. In Turkey we strengthened the skills of medical professionals andnongovernmental organizationsworking with torture survivors.Since then, each year brings newtraining opportunities, from Kenyato Cambodia to Guatemala.
We also began sharing our
knowledge with newly-establishedtorture survivor centers in the U.S.In 1998 we hosted the first meetingof U.S. centers. Today we continueto strengthen domestic programsthrough small grants, consultingand trainings. 
Representing torture survivors
around the world, we worked inWashington, D.C., to establish government support for torture survivor centers. Congress passedthe Torture Victims Relief Act in1998, and the funds secured throughthe appropriations process supportboth domestic and internationaltorture survivor rehabilitation programs. 
3From page 1
Healing Survivors Around the World
Building on our experience in
Minnesota, we launched our firstinternational project in a refugeecamp in Guinea in 1999. In theaftermath of war, 20,000 SierraLeoneans and Liberians lived in thecamp, the vast majority of whomhad endured torture and war trauma.We provided mental health servicesto thousands of survivors andtrained camp residents to work asparaprofessional mental healthcounselors, who could continue torebuild the community long afterour tenure.
Building on that success, we
launched projects in Sierra Leone,Liberia and the DemocraticRepublic of Congo to bring healingto men, women and children whowere tortured during war in thosecountries. Most recently, webrought our mental health andhealing services to Iraqi refugeeswho have sought safety in Jordan.
In 25 years we have grown fromCVT: A 25-Year Legacy of Hope and Healing
a tiny staff in a cramped hospitaloffice to become an internationalorganization with nearly 300 staffin five countries. Our capacitybuilding projects support more than50 colleague groups in the U.S. andabroad. We have helped nearly20,000 survivors of torture rebuildtheir lives. And we have madeimportant contributions to theglobal movement of torture survivorrehabilitation centers working toend the use of torture.
Yet despite our many accom-
plishments, so much work remains.There are 500,000 torture survivorsliving in the U.S. but the combinedcapacity of domestic care programsis just 6,000 annually. Tens of thousands of torture survivors arein urgent need of care.
So as we look ahead to the 
next quarter-century, we strive tomaintain the support of our generousdonors—and join with thousandsof new supporters to bring hopeand healing to people who havesuffered in ways that are scarcelyimaginable.
Abraham worked with CVT in Lofa County,
Liberia. With his salary, he was building thishouse for his family, siblings and elderly parents.International Clinical ConsultantLinda Nielsen with Congolesecounselor Madeline KishimbaMande. The international servicesclinical staff provides on-goingtraining and consultation to localcounselors who lead therapygroups for survivors.
PHOTO © SUZANNE PEARL
PHOTO © AMY-JO VERSOLATOCVT Country Directors Maki Katoh
and Alieu Sannoh have overseenthe treatment of thousands of 
torture survivors and witnessed thereconstruction of communities afterconflict.
Maki has directedCVT programs inGuinea, Sierra Leoneand Liberia, and iscurrently the countrydirector in theDemocratic Republicof Congo (DRC).She first becameinvolved with torturerehabilitation when a nonprofit asked her to manage a treatment program for
survivors in the U.S. “I quickly learnedthat people have an enormous capacityto survive incredible atrocities, andstill be resilient enough to re-establisha productive and fulfilling life,” she said.
Alieu grew up in Liberia during
his country’s brutal civil war and firstheard of CVT as a refugee in Guinea.“I was one of the lucky few who werenot tortured when my country brokedown,” he shared. After workingwith Maki in the Guinea program,Alieu directed CVT’s program in theDRC, and will soon serve as countrydirector in Kenya. Working acrossborders, Alieu learned to see theprocess of healing in a local context.
Healing Across Cultures: 
Maki Katoh and Alieu Sannoh
Restoring the dignity of the human spirit
649 DAYTON A VENUE    www .cvt.org     
ST. PAUL, MN 55104 cvt@cvt.orgToll Free 1-877-265-8775    © 2010 Center for Victims of Torture
All rights reserved. Please contact CVT for permissionto reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.
10-ND5In this uncertain economy, many
donors want very much to sustaintheir support for organizations that
make a difference in the world. At the same time, they worry about theirown financial situations. More andmore donors are finding that charitablegift annuities are a good solution tothis dilemma.  
A charitable gift annuity is a
planned gift whereby an individualmakes a contribution of a specificamount—and in return receives a stable, fixed income for as long as sheor he lives. In this economy, a fixedannuity can be very reassuring forindividuals in their retirement years.  
The interest rates for charitable
gift annuities just increased on July 1stand are now as high as 9.5% annually,depending upon the age of the individual. These annuities are income
that you can count on for the rest ofyour life. 
Gift annuities are also very benefi-
cial for CVT because they help buildour long-term endowment fund.Annuities thus provide CVT with someof the same long-term financial stabilitythat they provide our supporters.Funds from annuities support ourefforts to rebuild the lives of torturesurvivors in the United States, Africa,and the Middle East.
Please consider whether a charitable
gift annuity makes sense for you, andlet us know if CVT can answer anyquestions. You may contact PeterDross at 1-877-265-8775 (toll free)or by e-mail at pdross@cvt.org for
more information.
Help CVT and Help Yourself at the Same Time… 
Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Your generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery of healing services.
Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
In-Kind Donations of specific items
improve the lives of survivors.
Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,MN 55455, or call 1-877-265-8775 forother ways to give. Thank you for yourongoing commitment to healing thewounds of torture.“The DRC is quite
different from West Africa, but the cultures and traditions and livingconditions all havesome similarities.”
Maki agrees that
CVT’s model ofgroup counseling for clients is consistently effective, evenas it changes to fit the environment.“In all programs, universal values of empathy and self-awareness arepromoted, but traditional culturalelements such as rituals, stories, music,or dance enrich the process and makeeach of the programs unique. Thecapacity of counselors to employ 
different kinds of healing, and to adjustto the cultural and contextual back-ground of their program is consistent
in CVT programs a round the world.”
PHOTOS © STEPHANIE HYNES
Maki KatohAlieu Sannoh