The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
CVT opened a policy advocacy
office in Washington, D.C., in 1992,to win release of nearly $400,000that the United States had pledged,but not paid, to the United NationsVoluntary Fund for Victims ofTorture. With that successful campaign, we launched an effort to generate additional funding tosustain and expand the work of the growing international network
of torture survivor rehabilitationprograms. 
We posted a significant accom-
plishment with passage of theTorture Victims Relief Act (TVRA)in 1998. Since 2000, TVRA hasensured federal funding for domesticand foreign torture survivor programs. It’s nowhere nearenough, but at about $25 millionannually, this funding makes theU.S. the largest international donorto torture survivor rehabilitation.And because of our work, every year60,000 torture survivors worldwidereceive the care they so urgently need.
Post-9/11 Work
In the aftermath of the terrorist
attacks on September 11, 2001, the United States made illegal andunwise decisions that led to a systematic use of torture, cruel andinhuman treatment in U.S. detentionfacilities in Iraq, Guantanamo,Afghanistan and secret prisonsaround the world. 
To counteract these actions, we
organized the Campaign to BanTorture—a partnership with theNational Religious CampaignAdvocating for Survivors and an End to T ortureVOLUME 24, ISSUE 2 •WWW.CVT.ORG
INSIDE
2 Letter from the Executive Director, Curt Goering
4 Volunteer Coordinators: Connecting Survivors with Volunteers  
4 Join CVT’s Circle of Hope 
Restoring 
the Dignity of the Human SpiritINSIDE   
THEstory cloth
MAY 2014
The Campaign to Ban T orture made
the case for a presidential executiveorder banning torture.
PHOTO © STEPHANIE HYNESAgainst Torture and a group of
senior leaders from the military,national security and foreign policy sectors—to make the casefor a presidential executive orderbanning torture. The campaignsucceeded with President Obamaissuing an executive order banningtorture and cruelty on his secondfull day in office.
“With his signature, President
Obama has signaled to the worldthe end of one era and the start ofa new one where America’s greateststrengths—our core values—areonce again clear to the world,”commented former executive director Douglas A. Johnson afterthe order was issued.
Despite this initial action, we
remained critical of the ObamaAdministration for hinderingefforts to secure accountability forthe post-9/11 torture and for failing
to close gaps in U.S. law that could
again allow United States personnelto engage in acts of torture. In abreak with its usual practice of confidentiality, the InternationalCommittee of the Red Crossdescribed prisoner accounts of  
See page 32Letter from the Executive Director
A recent editorial in the Lancet Global Health journal calls for 
urgent changes in research and advocacy for mental health care in low- and middle-income countries. The article points out that mental disorders and substance misuse are the greatest contributors to the global burden of disability.
This burden has a steep economic cost. A 2011 World Economic Forum 
report estimated that the cost of the global burden of mental illness in 2010 was $2.5 trillion. This is projected to rise to more than $6 trillion by 2030—an amount three timesgreater than international development assistance spent by all nations between 1990-2010.
Throughout the world, millions of men, women and children are survivors of torture and
other violent human rights abuses. And those survivors often endure severe anxiety, deep depressionor other debilitating conditions that impair their ability to care for themselves or their families. 
All people affected by psychological distress and mental health problems need access to a
range of appropriate services and supports including mental health care, protection and other basicneeds. But globally, there are very few resources available to address the tremendous mental healthneeds of affected individuals and communities. 
In CVT’s international programs, we see the extraordinary need for additional mental health
resources. Our staff provides quality mental health care to survivors of torture and war atrocities,but their work alone is not enough to address the long waiting lists or the lack of referral options toother qualified care providers. We see firsthand the way mental health needs impact the long-termeconomic, social, and familial outcomes of survivors.  
As mentioned in the lead article, CVT helped create the Global Mental Health Advocacy
Working Group, a partnership among U.S.-based non-governmental organizations advocating withthe U.S. government and multilateral agencies to advance the prioritization, quality and availabilityof mental health services in humanitarian, transition and development settings. Mental health careis both a public health and a human rights priority, and its recognition as such is long overdue.
As always, thank you so much for supporting our work. And please contact us if you have
questions or want additional information.
Sincerely, 
Curt Goering
Executive Director......................................................
Curt Goering
PHOTO © CVTOur staff in Zarqa,
Jordan, discussesour work providing mental health counseling and physical therapy for Syrian and Iraqirefugees. In Jordan, we are piloting a project to track datarelated to human rights violations in Syria.
3Advocating for Survivors and an End to T orture
From page 1
previous interrogation techniques
that included waterboarding, beatings, confinement in smallboxes, prolonged nudity, sleepdeprivation, exposure to cold temperatures, prolonged shackling
and deprivation of solid food.
Acting on these accounts of 
torture, the Senate Select Committeeon Intelligence (SSCI) produced areport on the CIA’s detention, U.S.interrogation and rendition programpost-9/11. At more then 6,000pages, the report is said to concludethat the program produced very little valuable intelligence and thatthe CIA intentionally misled theWhite House, Congress and thepublic about the effectiveness of theprogram. The study is also said todocument the use of interrogationmethods not approved by theJustice Department or CIA head-quarters. While the Office of LegalCounsel opinion that repetition ofthe interrogation methods “will notbe substantial because the techniquesgenerally lose their effectivenessafter several repetitions,” the studyis reported to conclude that oneprisoner was waterboarded 83times in one month, and another183 times in one month.
On April 3, 2014, in a swift and
decisive 11-3 vote, the IntelligenceCommittee approved declassifyingthe executive summary, findings,and conclusions of its report. “Forfive years, Senator Dianne Feinsteinhas led the Senate IntelligenceCommittee in a monumental effortto uncover the brutal truth of theCIA’s illegal and misguided policiesof torture and cruelty,” said CurtGoering, executive director of CVT.“As a result, we now know that theCIA program was far more cruel,sweeping, and ineffective than 
previously known.” 
The report has been sent to the
Administration for declassification,and we are urging that the 480-pageexecutive summary, and the findingsand conclusions, be released in a formthat is as unredacted as possible.President Obama has indicated hesupports doing so, and we are urging that he direct it to happenwithout delay.
Future Policy Initiatives
Beyond addressing the aftermath
of our country’s use of torture andsecuring resources to support thework of torture survivor centers,we are now working to raise theprofile of mental health and torturesurvivor rehabilitation. As part ofthese efforts, we have co-launchedthe Global Mental HealthAdvocacy Working Group, urgingU.S. policymakers to improve theAnn Willhoite, international clinical services
advisor, spoke at a panel discussion at anevent coordinated by the Global MentalHealth Advocacy Working Group—a new NGO coalition to advance the prioritization,quality and availability of mental health services in humanitarian, transition anddevelopment settings.
PHOTO © ANNIE SOVCIK
. . .the study is reported to conclude that one 
prisoner was waterboarded 83 times in one month, and another 183 times in one month.access and quality of mental health
and psychosocial support servicesglobally, particularly for crisis-affected populations.  
Annie Sovcik, director of our
Washington, D.C. office, is leadingour work to create a stronger linkbetween our healing and policyadvocacy efforts. In Jordan, we are piloting a project with Syrian survivors to track data related tohuman rights violations in order tomake new contributions to advocacyon humanitarian relief, as well as to promote accountability. “CVT’sclinical expertise, in addition to itswork in the field and with clients,provides us with a unique depth ofknowledge, insights, and credibility.This can be extraordinarily powerfulin influencing policies that can helpsurvivors find healing and end thepractice of torture worldwide,”said Annie.and personality with a well-chosen
volunteer.”
The survivors are deeply appre-
ciative of their relationships withvolunteers. “Volunteers are greatfriends. They changed and trans-formed my life. They committed tohelping me,” said a second survivor.“They are people I will never forget.”
.....................................................................................................Iwant to thank all the volunteersand my teachers and helpers,”said one survivor from our St.
Paul Healing Center. “Because oftheir help my health is better and I am feeling much better.”
Four women play an important,
yet often understated role at our St. Paul Healing Center. MarilynMackie, Cynthia Crooks, RitaManninen and Nancy Wagner (leftto right in the photo) recruit andmatch volunteers with survivors for tutoring, befriending, and otheractivities. With backgrounds inteaching and healthcare, they allbring a commitment to helping survivors adapt to their new community. Outside of their work
with CVT, they enjoy spending time with family, reading and beingoutdoors.
“Because the wounds of torture
are repaired through relationships,the volunteer coordinators play avital role in matching each survivorwith a volunteer who has the rightcombination of personal qualities,interests, and skills to provide thatperson with a healing experience,”said Andrea Northwood, client services director. “We sometimestake this for granted because ourvolunteers are so wonderful, butthe first step in this process ismatching a given survivor’s needs
649 Dayton Avenue
St. Paul, MN  55104www.cvt.org
© 2014 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.14-NB5With your ongoing support, 
you have made a significant difference in our ability to heal
the wounds of torture—in torturesurvivors, their families and theircommunities. We are so grateful foryour compassion and generosity.
Today we invite you to help 
CVT and bring hope and healing to thousands of torture survivorsworldwide in a very special way—by becoming a member of CVT’sCircle of Hope.
In the first four months of 2014,
more than 20 new CVT supportershave stepped forward to join ourCircle of Hope . By making a gift to
CVT each month, you can join nearly450 other committed supporters inbuilding a steady stream of supportthat allows us to bring healing to survivors in Kenya, Ethiopia, Jordanand here in the United States. Circle
of Hope gifts also provide vital 
support to our advocacy efforts toend the use of torture.
Our Circle of Hope program is
growing because people like youmake modest gifts of $15, $20 or$25 each month. For less than a dollar a day, you can make an enormous difference in the life of a torture survivor. Monthly gifts can be made with an automatic credit card charge or via electronicfund transfers.
We invite you to join the Circle 
of Hope by contacting Ashley at
612.436.4892 or agotreau@cvt.org.It’s easy and convenient, and you can change or stop your monthlycontribution at any time. Thank youfor your continued commitment toCVT’s mission of hope and healing.
Join CVT’S Circle of HopeMake a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Y our generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 forother ways to give. Thank you for yourongoing commitment to healing thewounds of torture.Volunteer Coordinators: Connecting 
Survivors with Volunteers
The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
