When you say the words 
“counseling” or “psycho- 
therapy” to Westerners, they 
probably envision some clinical 
room with a desk and chairs, 
perhaps a nice watercolor hanging 
on the wall. But counseling can 
happen more or less anywhere. 
In Uganda, for example, group 
sessions occur in a hut. It has a 
beautiful fresh-thatched roof and 
everybody sits on the ground. The 
hut doubles as the local church. 
It is a very familiar setting for the 
people. So we adjust to them. For 
them, it is not unusual to talk with people sitting in a circle on the 
ground; it is customary. We perform 
intakes and follow-ups sitting in 
the grass outside in the camp. 
Our work with interpreters is 
a key element. It ’s important to 
build up a strong relationship and 
a therapeutic alliance with the 
interpreter. We collaborate together 
to translate words in a culture that 
doesn ’t have the same expression 
of emotions. In some countries, 
there are few words or no words 
for a certain emotion (for an 
example in Arabic, “ stress ” and 
“tension” are the same word). And sometimes it is better for us 
to use metaphors because images 
can be clearer. 
We take in consideration that in 
many countries, time is precious. 
People do not invest in activities 
if they are not useful—women, in 
particular. Most of their days are 
dedicated to work from early in 
the morning, so coming to our 
session without receiving any 
material support must be useful. 
Otherwise, they would not come. 
This is the final proof that the 
CVT healing process works. 
People continue to participate in 
sharing and listening. They continue 
to talk. They know they will not 
receive anything else except talking 
therapy. So something happens—a 
change occurs, small at first and 
then more profound. And that is 
the value of our work. There is 
nothing as beautiful as this change. 
By Luca Modenesi, CVT clinical 
advisor for mental health. 
INSIDE 
2Letter from the Executive Director 
3The Community Outreach Ripple Effect 
3Parenting While Healing 
4CVT’s Healing Reach in 2016 The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
VOLUME 27, ISSUE 3 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
Restoring the 
Dignity of 
the Human Spirit 
THE sto rycloth 
AUGUST 2017 
Respecting Culture in the 
Healing Process 
Sometimes it is 
better for us to 
use metaphors 
because images 
can be clearer. PHOTO © SYDNEY STEAD 2Letter from the Executive Director 
Dear Friends, 
Recent developments at the federal level are a mix of bad news and 
good for survivors of torture and war atrocities. 
The Supreme Court ’s partial reinstatement of President Trump ’s travel 
ban and the prohibition of refugees entering the country for 120 days once 
again threw thousands of survivors of torture into a situation of uncertainty 
and fear. 
The travel ban is based on President Trump ’s false portrayal of victims as perpetrators, and 
his false assertion that the U.S. Refugee Admissions Program cannot properly vet persons who 
come to this country as refugees. The fact is that refugees are the most thoroughly vetted people 
who travel to the United States from other countries. And CVT ’s research shows that up to 
44 percent of refugees are torture survivors. 
The president ’s budget proposal for fiscal year 2018 calls for massive reductions in foreign 
and humanitarian assistance, a scheme that runs counter to both American values and our national 
security. One casualty of the president ’s budget would be funding for the U.N. Voluntary Fund 
for Victims of Torture, which supports more than 100 torture survivor rehabilitation centers 
worldwide—including CVT. For programs in some parts of the world, that funding is the only 
available source of financial support. 
CVT ’s healing projects in Ethiopia, Jordan, Kenya and Uganda could be affected, due to the 
budget ’s proposed decrease in funding for Migration and Refugee Assistance programs, which 
supports our work. 
But in a piece of good news, the Survivors of Torture program in the United States was not 
cut in the president ’s proposed budget. It helps fund CVT ’s healing centers in Minnesota and 
Atlanta, as well as 33 additional torture survivor rehabilitation programs across the country. 
This funding program also supports CVT ’s National Capacity Building project, which organizes 
technical assistance and training for torture survivor programs in the U.S. 
It ’s important to remember that the White House budget proposal is just that, however— 
a proposal. The final budget Congress passes will be very different and your input to your elected 
officials will be vital to influencing the outcome. 
I will keep you up to date, and we ’ll let you know how you can help ensure that funding 
remains available to rebuild the lives and restore the hope of people who ’ve suffered in ways that 
are scarcely imaginable. Thank you for being our partner in healing, and for all you do.  
With my thanks , 
Curt Goering 
Executive Director . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Curt Goering 
3The Community Outreach Ripple Effect 
Mebratu*, a middle-aged 
Eritrean man, fled to Ethiopia 
after being imprisoned in a 
tiny underground cell. It was so 
dark he could not see his cellmates. 
They were given so little water, 
sharing it with the others was a 
matter of life or death. He said that 
once he escaped and had begun his 
new life in the refugee camp, a CVT 
counselor noticed him and started 
saying hello when their paths 
crossed. Over time, he quietly 
reached out a hand of kindness to 
Mebratu and one day asked, “Why 
are you alone? Come to CVT.” Mebratu went through the 10-week 
group counseling cycle and said, 
“Before CVT, I never talked about 
my experience. I kept it to myself 
for years; it was hurting me for all 
those years.” 
Outreach by clinical staff in 
the refugee community is key for 
bringing torture survivors to CVT 
Ethiopia for care. CVT uses several 
tools to reach out within the 
refugee community to survivors like 
Mebratu, including mental health 
awareness and education sessions, 
as well as sessions where staff talk to 
the community about rehabilitative 
care. In addition, CVT counselors 
and staff who live in the refugee 
camps are connected to social 
workers and caregivers who let them 
know when someone needs the kind 
of healing care CVT brings. 
The effectiveness of these forms 
of outreach is clear in the numbers 
of survivors who come for care at 
CVT Ethiopia. In 2016, CVT saw 645 clients in two camps, Adi Harush 
and Mai Ayni, with an estimated 
2,580 family members benefiting 
from our clients ’ improvements. 
These outreach methods have 
been in continuous use since 2013 
when CVT Ethiopia first opened 
its centers. In addition, CVT ’s 
community education and outreach 
make progress in correcting the 
misperception about mental health 
that can be found in the refugee 
community, that CVT is a place for 
people who are “insane.” With 
CVT ’s intensive community out -
reach, there has been a change in 
attitude and people now see that 
CVT is for healthy people who 
have survived traumatic situations. 
Osman*, another former client 
at CVT Ethiopia, put it simply, 
“CVT helps us changing from 
non-life to life.” 
*Names have been changed for 
confidentiality and privacy.
Several CVT clinicians shared 
insights on clients ’ experiences 
of taking on the healing journey 
while also raising children. This 
is a composite story. 
There is pain after torture that 
hides in your joints. Sometimes 
it is a dull small pain, sometimes 
it goes away completely. Sometimes 
there is nothing you can do, the 
pain is too great. The pain takes 
your breath away. Even walking to 
the market becomes impossible. 
On top of the pain comes the 
feeling of guilt for not being able to provide for your children. On 
top of the guilt is the stress caused 
by the financial, educational and 
health concerns of your family 
while facing an uncertain future. 
The children know that some -
thing is wrong. You do your best 
to hide it from them. You do your 
best to shelter them from the cruelties 
of the world. When you are alone, 
this is when you cry. 
If you are a parent and you are 
reading this, you know there is 
another side to this story. Your 
children will be the only thing 
that can bring you back from the Parenting While Healing 
PHOTO © CVT ETHIOPIA 
PHOTO © AGNES MONTANARI 
darkness. You get out of bed wanting 
to help yourself for the sake of your 
children. This motivates you. The 
maturity they show when helping 
you cook and bathe their younger 
brothers and sisters gives you 
(see page 4) 2356 University Avenue W, Suite 430 
St. Paul, MN 55114 
www.cvt.org 
© 20 17 Center for Victims of T orture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it. 17-ND5 The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE Parenting While Healing 
(from page 3) 
strength. The intuition they show 
sensing your sadness and anxiety 
will let you know that you are 
raising a caring kid. 
You will learn that focusing on 
providing for the needs of your 
children can be helpful and can give 
a sense of purpose to life. After 
what you and your family survived, 
purpose might not otherwise exist. 
This thought scares you and causes 
you to hold your children close. You ’ll meet other parents in 
CVT ’s group counseling sessions. 
You ’ll listen as they share their 
challenges at home openly and 
realize that you are not alone in 
your experiences. During the 10 
weeks together, group members 
really get to know each other, begin 
to trust again, and for you it is the 
first time that you feel part of a 
new community. 
The pain in these moments 
seems absent. The thorns of stress, guilt, anger and shame in your heart 
will slowly dissolve. The memories 
of torture and warfare you fled to 
find a safe place for your children 
are fading, and as those memories 
fade they make room for new ones. 
You ’ll join community groups and 
make plans to meet outside of CVT 
to support each other. 
You will tell your counselor at 
CVT more about your children 
than you will about the pain caused 
by torture, and you ’ll feel the pain 
in your body making more space 
for what has kept you alive this 
entire time: love. CVT’s Healing Reach in 2016 