INSIDE 
2Letter from CVT President and CEO Dr. Simon Adams 
3Bringing Mental Health Care to Clients in Tigray 
4Ways You Can Help More Survivors Rediscover Hope The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
VOLUME 32, ISSUE 2 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
Restoring 
the Dignity of 
the Human Spirit 
THE sto rycloth 
JANUARY 2022 
“I have a story that I have waited 
almost two decades to tell, so I
want to thank you for taking the 
time to listen to my statement.” 
That was how Majid Khan—who 
was held captive for three years 
in secret CIA prisons and has 
spent the last 16 at Guantanamo— 
began his statement to a panel of 
jurors, all senior military officers, 
convened to sentence him following 
his plea agreement with the United 
States government.  It was followed 
by two hours of wrenching testimony 
about the brutality he endured at 
the hands of the CIA, including a 
medical professional he called the 
“torture doctor.” 
Since this was the first time that 
a CIA torture program survivor has 
been permitted to describe openly, 
in any forum, what he endured, 
CVT was present to witness the 
powerful testimony.  Although 
Mr. Khan has apologized to the 
victims of the attack in which he 
acknowledges playing a role, the 
CIA perpetrators who brutalized him—including the medics who 
raped him with a garden hose, the 
doctor who sharpened the feeding 
tubes and smeared them with hot 
sauce before forcing them into Mr. 
Khan’s nose and down his throat, 
and others—have never been held 
accountable.  Indeed, the govern -
ment has never apologized to him. 
Mr. Khan, in contrast, included a 
message in his testimony:  “To 
those who tortured me, I forgive 
you—all of you.” 
The entire hearing was a stark 
reminder of the impunity that 
perpetrators have enjoyed, and 
the lack of accountability for U.S. 
torture more broadly.  Even 
regarding basic transparency, Mr. 
Khan was allowed to tell his story 
only because he cooperated with 
the government and bargained for 
the ability to provide this 
testimony. 
The gravity of Mr. Khan’s first -
hand testimony was evidenced by 
the extraordinary step that seven of 
the eight jurors took after listening 
to him:  they drafted and signed a handwritten letter urging he receive 
clemency. 
Their letter forcefully and 
powerfully condemned U.S. torture 
and indefinite detention.  They 
wrote that Mr. Khan “has been 
held without the basic due process
under the Constitution” and in 
“complete disregard for the founda -
tional concepts upon which the 
Constitution was founded,” a 
situation they described as “an 
affront to American values and 
concept of justice.” 
(see page 3)A CIA Torture Program Survivor 
Finally Tells His Story 
2Letter from the President and CEO 
Dear Friend, 
As the new President/CEO of the Center for Victims of Torture, I need 
to acknowledge something at the outset. 
I wouldn’t be here without you.  And CVT wouldn’t be here without you. 
The lifeblood of this organization has always been the community of 
supporters joining together to heal the wounds of torture and bring us closer 
to a world where human rights are universally respected and protected. 
Thank you for being part of that community.  As someone whose own life has been shaped by 
the bitter conflict in Northern Ireland—a period now commonly referred to as “the Troubles”— 
I understand how powerful it is for those who have experienced violence to know that compassion 
still exists in the hearts of people like you.  I still remember when I was a child and my aunt and 
cousins were burnt out of their home in Belfast by a sectarian paramilitary gang.  And I also remember 
the kindness and support they were given when they left Ireland and started to build a new life in 
a new country. 
I understand that only together will we be able to realize our bold vision of CVT’s lifesaving, 
and expanding, role in 2022 and beyond. 
That starts, as it always does at CVT, with giving more survivors the help they desperately 
need to recover from their wounds and rediscover hope.  As the world continues to face the worst 
refugee and asylum seeker crisis since the Second World War, the need for our care has never been 
higher—from Africa to the Middle East to the U.S. southern border. 
With instability and insecurity in so much of the world, we need to increase our ability to 
rapidly respond to emerging crises.  As we have seen too often in recent years, sudden eruptions 
of conflict can drive hundreds of thousands of families from their homes.  CVT wants to be there 
to help those who need us the most. 
A third important goal this year is to dramatically increase our healing capacity by expanding 
our programs aimed at training, providing technical assistance and forging partnerships with 
colleague organizations.  CVT already partners with 42 organizations that extend our healing 
reach around the globe, and we are looking to add new partnerships in 2022. 
And finally, we are exposing torture and holding perpetrators accountable, including, as the 
article on Page 1 vividly shows, in our own backyard.  When it comes to torture, silence is complicity. 
Thank you for making all of this work possible … and for sharing our vision of a world 
without torture. 
Sincerely, 
Dr. Simon Adams 
President and CEO ...................................................... 
Dr. Simon Adams 
Of all the places where CVT 
works, few pose as many chal -
lenges as the Tigray region of 
Ethiopia—where an intense civil 
war has resulted in atrocities, mass 
displacement and a famine that 
now threatens over two million 
people. 
But through it all, CVT’s dedi -
cated staff have continued to pro -
vide healing care, both to Eritrean 
refugees and displaced Ethiopians, 
focusing on the care of their clients 
after the difficult and traumatizing 
situations they have endured. 
One important example came 
on World Mental Health Day in 
October, when our CVT Ethiopia 
staff commemorated the occasion 
with a theme—“Mental Health 
in an Unequal World.”  Through 
interactive events at different 
displacement camps throughout 
the region, the theme was also 
used to open discussions on ways to act together to help people 
access good mental health care, 
even in the midst of a crisis.  
Before a large gathering in 
Mai-Tsebri, CVT staff talked about 
the stigma of mental health, 
presented detailed self-care tips 
and outlined CVT services.  After 
observing glimpses of smiles and 
3Bringing Mental Health Care to Clients in Tigray 
(from page 1)
The members wrote further that 
“Mr. Khan was subjected to physical
and psychological abuse well-beyond 
approved enhanced interrogation 
techniques, instead being closer to 
torture performed by the most abu -
sive regimes in modern history.” 
That conduct “is a stain on the 
moral fiber of America. … [T]he 
treatment of Mr. Khan in the hands
of U.S. personnel should be a source 
of shame for the U.S. government.” 
That is the power of torture 
survivors telling their stories directly. 
Secondhand accounts, movies and 
the like simply cannot match what 
it felt like to listen to Mr. Khan’s own words—to watch him explain 
how he was tortured, demonstrating 
how guards held him down in his 
cell and spread his legs so that the 
“torture doctor” could rape him. 
He paused to take deep breaths in 
an effort to continue calmly amidst 
a flood of memory and emotion 
that most of us cannot begin to 
fathom. 
That is also why government 
officials have fought so hard to 
silence these survivors.  If more 
people were exposed to their 
powerful testimony, it would be 
much harder to defend refusing to 
hold perpetrators accountable, and 
to justify the snail’s pace at which A CIA Torture Program Survivor Finally Tells His Story laughter, and long applause from 
the audience, our staff said that 
it was a pleasure to share some 
moments of happiness with so many 
people who have been displaced. 
At the event, a representative of 
internally displaced persons stood 
up and made a short statement 
(see page 4)
steps toward closing Guantanamo 
are proceeding. 
And that is why, with the support 
of caring people like you, the 
Center for Victims of Torture will 
continue to fight for greater trans -
parency and accountability, for 
closing Guantanamo and for helping 
survivors heal.  Our mission is a 
world without torture.  The United 
States has the power to drive the 
international community toward 
such a world, but only if it owns 
these crimes and reckons meaning -
fully with the profound harm it 
caused. We, like you, stand for 
accountability for the perpetrators 
and justice for the survivors. 
2356 University Avenue W, Suite 430 
St. Paul, MN 55114 
www.cvt.org 
© 2022 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
22-NB5 Ways Y ou Can Help More Survivors Rediscover Hope 
Your compassion and generosity helps CVT give 
torture survivors the care they need to recover from 
their wounds, rebuild their lives and rediscover hope 
and joy.  Here are some ways you can magnify your 
impact and help even more survivors. 
Employer-Matching.  Many employers will match 
charitable giving from their employees, doubling 
or even tripling their contributions.  Contact your 
employer’s human resources department to find out 
whether this is a way you can leverage your impact. 
Monthly Giving. Rather than donating once a year, 
many of our supporters choose to join the CVT Circle 
of Hope by having a smaller gift charged every month 
to a credit card or transferred electronically from a 
checking account.  As a Circle of Hope member, you 
will help provide a stable source of reliable funding, 
reduce our administrative costs and ensure that even 
more of your donation supports life-changing rehabili -
tative care.  You will receive an annual statement in 
January with all of your donations for the previous 
year.  And, of course, you can change, suspend or 
cancel your giving at any time.  To join the Circle of
Hope , contact us at (612) 436-4808 or giving@cvt.org .
Legacy Giving. Many donors who do not have the 
resources to make substantial gifts during their life -
times find it possible to be extraordinarily generous 
through their estate planning.  A gift of this kind will 
extend your legacy of hope to torture survivors while 
also offering potential financial benefits to you and your loved ones, including sparing them complex 
probate procedures and costly taxes. 
•Bequest — Making a bequest to CVT through your 
will or living trust is one of the simplest ways to create 
a legacy gift to CVT.  A bequest can be modified or 
canceled at any time, and it can be for a specified 
amount or percentage of your estate. 
•Life Insurance or Retirement Plan Beneficiary —
Another simple way to leave a lasting impact to 
survivors of torture is by naming CVT a beneficiary of 
your life insurance, IRA or other retirement account. 
•Qualified Charitable Distribution from an IRA — 
If you are 70½ years of age, you can make a qualified 
charitable distribution to CVT from your Individual 
Retirement Account (IRA). 
FOR MORE INFORMATION on any of these options 
or other ways to make a legacy gift to the Center for 
Victims of Torture, please contact Laura Kuhlmann at 
Lkuhlmann@cvt.org.  Of course, you should always 
consult with your attorney, accountant or financial 
planner to ensure that your gift fits your personal 
situation. 
To make an immediate gift, visit us online at www.cvt.org ,
send a check to 2356 University Avenue W, Suite 430, 
St. Paul, MN 55114, or call (612) 436-4808.  Thank 
you for your ongoing commitment to healing the 
wounds of torture. (from page 3)
to the audience: 
CVT is one of the strongest
organizations, an organization 
that stands for us, gives us hope 
and dignity and helps us to be 
strong psychologically.  We are 
proud of you [pointing to CVT 
staff members] .  I know thisyear is extremely difficult to all
of us including for CVT workers;
however, they use the energy 
they have left to support our
people from the very beginning.
Our staff could not have asked for 
a better affirmation of their work’s 
value.  Helping to heal others gives 
our staff a feeling of agency in helping to correct some of the 
wrongs they have observed all too 
closely over the last months.  We will 
continue to build on the capacity 
that we have invested in over the 
last eight years, supporting our 
staff’s resilience so that they, in 
turn, can build resilience in the 
communities we serve. Bringing Mental Health Care to Clients in Tigray 