The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of
TORTURE 
For nearly five years, Ye Naing 
Shinn has visited the St. Paul 
Healing Center several times a
week. As a Burmese interpreter, 
he is an essential part of the healing 
process for survivors. Ye sits with 
survivors, psychotherapists and 
social workers, interpreting stories 
of torture, words of reassurance, 
lessons on the effects of torture and 
referrals for clothing and housing. 
Ye was born and raised in Burma 
where he learned English — primarily 
reading and writing. In 1995, he came 
to the United States to study math 
in college. But when he re-located to Minnesota, he began interpreting 
in the community and at CVT. 
Last year, CVT provided counseling 
to 3,287 men, women and children. 
While the majority of psychothera -
pists and social workers are English 
speakers, the survivors we care for 
speak nearly 20 languages. In all of 
our healing work we use interpreters 
like Ye. 
“Using an interpreter adds a 
different dynamic to counseling 
because another person with her 
own story, background and style 
are part of the counseling process,” 
said Sara Pearce, psychotherapist Interpreting for Healing VOLUME 25, ISSUE 2 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
INSIDE 
2Letter from the Executive Director, Curt Goering 
4David Weissbrodt: From Task Force to Emeritus Director 
4Join CVT’s Circle of Hope 
Restoring 
the Dignity of 
the Human Spirit INSIDE   
THE sto rycloth 
MAY 2015 
and trainer at our Ethiopia project. 
“It’s hard to get the concepts across. 
A lot of mental health terms don’t 
have direct translations so it can be 
tricky to find a shared understanding 
of what is happening for survivors .” 
Ye experiences this regularly so 
he must figure out how to describe 
mental health concepts. Typically, 
he first explains the symptoms of 
PTSD to the survivor, and then 
says, “In the U.S., this is what they 
call PTSD.” As the survivor begins 
healing and adapting to the U.S. 
culture, Ye reduces the focus on the 
symptoms and begins referring 
more to the English terms of PTSD, 
anxiety and depression. “Some 
Karen [a minority group from 
Burma] have little education,” he 
explained. “They may be elderly 
and have memory problems, so it’s 
important to use words they can 
understand.” 
“Not communicating with the 
client directly is challenging,” said 
Amanda McDonald, a social worker 
at our St. Paul Healing Center 
who works with interpreters daily. 
See page 3 
Sara Pearce (left) is 
a psychotherapist/ 
trainer in Ethiopia.
Ye Naing Shinn (right) 
has interpreted for 
Burmese survivors for 
nearly five years.
PHOTOS © C.C. STROM 2Letter from the Executive Director 
This month we mark 30 years of CVT. When CVT launched in 
May 1985, we were a very small staff working at the International Clinic 
of St. Paul Ramsey Medical Center. A few years later, we moved our offices 
to a Victorian house overlooking the Mississippi River on the University 
of Minnesota Campus and began building our programs. 
We’ve grown dramatically since that time. Our international work began in Bosnia and 
Croatia in 1993 when psychotherapists travelled to the region to train care providers in the 
specialized treatment of torture survivors. And in 1999, we launched our first international direct 
healing project working with Sierra Leonean refugees in Guinea. We’ve now helped more than 
33,000 survivors find the hope and courage needed to rebuild their lives. 
But this work isn’t possible without supporters like you. Some of you have been with us 
from the earliest days. On the back page of this newsletter, you can read about one of those early 
supporters: David Weissbrodt was one of our founders and is now an emeritus director. There are 
others like him who have been donors for 30 years, and we’re so grateful for that long-term support. 
The theme for this 30-year milestone is “It starts with hope” because hope is at the core of all 
of our work. We know that a survivor’s healing journey begins with just a glimmer of hope buried 
within the soul. Our training work starts with our hope for a larger community of professionals 
and organizations dedicated to healing survivors. And our policy advocacy work is inspired by our 
hope for a world without torture. 
Looking forward, we still have so much work to do. Countless torture survivors around the 
world need healing. And while we will never meet the needs of all survivors, CVT is well placed 
to meet more of them — both here in the U.S. and abroad. We hope you’ll continue with us on 
this journey. 
Please visit www.cvt.org/cvt30 to learn more about how we’ve grown into an international 
organization. And stay tuned during the coming year for more stories about our past and future. 
Thank you for your ongoing partnership. 
Sincerely, 
Curt Goering 
Executive Director ...................................................... 
Curt Goering 
3Interpreting for Healing 
from page 1 
“When you only understand half 
of what is said in a room, it can 
take longer to develop a strong 
relationship.” 
To adapt to this challenge, the 
survivors, interpreters and care 
providers follow a few best practices. 
This begins at the first meeting with 
clear messages on the interpreter’s 
commitment to confidentiality so 
that the survivor can feel safe. 
The provider and survivor pause 
frequently to allow for interpreting. 
And to facilitate non verbal commu -
nication, the counselor and survivor 
maintain eye contact, with the 
interpreter sitting close to both. 
“Interpreters must have a bit of 
openness and empathy,” said Sara. 
“They need to be fully present and 
fully focused in a counseling session 
so they can interpret accurately.” 
Body language is also a part of 
interpreting. If an interpreter sits 
back and yawns, they show they 
are not very alert which can affect 
the counseling interaction. 
Interpreters also help the coun -
selors understand a culture’s values 
and customs. “They’re a bridge 
between cultures,” said Sara, and 
can provide guidance on the best 
words and terms to use. 
“Interpreters have to give words 
to people’s stories and trauma, and 
speaking in first person can be very re-traumatizing,” said Sara. To stay 
emotionally healthy, interpreters 
are encouraged to take care of 
themselves. They may practice 
relaxation breathing, take a walk 
or talk with a colleague. 
To cope with the survivors’ stories 
he hears and tells, Ye sometimes 
talks with one of the client services 
staff. “The more I understand the 
survivor’s situation, the more I can 
cope with what they’re going 
through,” he said. 
Interpreting Internationally 
Interpreting for an international 
project brings additional challenges. 
Most of the healing work occurs 
during group counseling. Often 
people talk over each other which 
doesn’t allow time for interpretation. 
The interpreter must slow down 
the talking so the English-speaking 
psychotherapist/trainer can keep up. 
For the Ethiopian interpreters 
who live near the refugee camp 
during the week, self-care can be 
difficult. Interpreters are encouraged 
to debrief with staff and attend all 
self-care and training activities. Due 
to the high risk of burnout and 
secondary trauma in the camps, the 
interpreters often opt to tell stories 
of trauma or torture in the third 
person. Rather than saying “I was 
raped,” the interpreter might say, 
“She says she was raped,” and then 
switch back to speaking in the first 
person. The team has found this helps 
to reduce the risk of re-traumatization. 
Outside of the counseling sessions, 
the interpreters provide written 
translations of all training materials 
and assessments of survivors. And 
since the local refugee counselors 
don’t speak English, the interpreters 
must be present during meetings and job interviews. This added respon -
sibility requires that international 
interpreters have a very high level of 
proficiency in reading and writing 
English, as well as speaking the 
language. 
“When working with other 
cultures, we need to really value our 
interpreters and their knowledge. 
CVT recognizes this and I’m grateful 
for that,” said Sara. 
Committed to Healing 
No matter what language they 
interpret or the location where they 
work, interpreters must be dedicated 
to healing survivors. “A successful 
interpreter at CVT is someone who 
truly cares and is committed to 
what we do,” said Amanda. 
“The survivors need a lot of help, 
and I see a lot of suffering,” Ye said. 
And because the healing journey 
includes many ups and down, “the 
hardest thing is that every week, 
you don’t know what they’ll have 
experienced.”  
Ye explained that it’s difficult to 
see survivors in the early stages of 
counseling. “They don’t understand 
what they’re experiencing. I put 
myself in their shoes and try to be 
passionate about it,” said Ye. “I’m 
very proud to be part of CVT and 
see what a great job it’s doing. 
Without CVT, I don’t know how 
the survivors would rehabilitate.” “The survivors need a lot 
of help, and I see a lot of 
suffering.... Without CVT, 
I don’t know how [they] 
would rehabilitate. ” 
Amanda 
McDonald is 
a social worker 
at the St. Paul
Healing Center.
PHOTO © CVT 
CVT’s activities in Ethiopia are financed by the 
United States Department of State’s Bureau 
of Population, Refugees and Migration.and former board 
members. “It was 
agood group of 
people. They all 
cared a lot and 
were fun to work 
with.” 
“CVT has 
established a 
level of credibility in the human rights 
movement. It has knowledge of 
torture from the medical perspective, 
which makes it unique and important,” 
said David. “I’m proud of having made 
a contribution to what has become 
one of the most significant human 
rights organizations in the world.” 
..................................................................................................... When University of Minnesota 
law professor David Weissbrodt 
traveled to Copenhagen to visit 
the International Research and 
Rehabilitation Centre for Torture 
Victims early in 1985, he never 
thought it would launch a 22-year 
director role with a torture survivor 
rehabilitation center. 
David made the trip as part of a 
task force appointed by Minnesota 
Governor Rudy Perpich. The Governor 
directed the group to examine the 
feasibility of a Minnesota center for 
torture survivors.  
Initially, there was a list of various 
initiatives to support survivors of 
torture. A healing center was the 
most ambitious. “Ideas are cheap, 
but we kept pushing forward with the organization,” said David. 
“It was out of that visit that I wrote 
a memo about creating a center,” 
said David. Proceeding with the idea, 
CVT’s articles of incorporation were 
filed on May 14, 1985. 
A widely published international 
human rights law expert and founder 
of the University of Minnesota Human 
Rights Center, David served on CVT’s 
board of directors from the founding 
to 2007, and is an emeritus director 
of CVT. During his time on the board, 
CVT hired long-time Executive 
Director Douglas A. Johnson, opened 
an office in Washington, D.C., and 
launched international training and 
healing projects. 
David readily gives credit for 
CVT’s launch to several other current 
649 Dayton Avenue 
St. Paul, MN  551 04
www .cv t.org 
© 20 15 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it. 15-NB5 With your ongoing support, you 
have made a significant difference 
in our ability to heal the wounds 
of torture — in torture survivors, their 
families and their communities. We 
are so grateful for your compassion 
and generosity. 
Today we invite you to bring hope 
and healing to thousands of torture 
survivors in a very special way — 
by becoming a member of CVT’s 
Circle of Hope .
In the first four months of 2015, 
more than 30 new supporters have 
stepped forward to join our Circle of 
Hope . By making a gift each month, 
you can join 475 other committed 
supporters in building a steady stream 
of support that allows us to bring 
healing to survivors in Kenya, 
Ethiopia, Jordan and here in the United States. Circle of Hope gifts 
also provide vital support to our 
advocacy efforts to end the use of 
torture. 
Our Circle of Hope program is 
growing because people like you make 
modest gifts of $15, $20 or $25 each 
month. For less than a dollar a day, 
you can make an enormous difference 
in the life of a torture survivor. 
Monthly gifts can be made with an 
automatic credit card charge or via 
electronic fund transfers. 
You can join the Circle of Hope 
by contacting Ashley at 612.436.4892 
or agotreau@cvt.org. It’s easy and 
convenient, and you can change or 
stop your monthly contribution at any 
time. Thank you for your continued 
commitment to CVT’s mission of 
hope and healing. Join CVT’s Circle of Hope Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor 
Your generous support brings healing 
to torture survivors worldwide. CVT 
welcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery 
of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your 
legacy of support . 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors 
while offering tax benefits to 
donors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific 
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or 
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a 
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,
MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 for 
other ways to give. Thank you for your 
ongoing commitment to healing the 
wounds of torture.David Weissbrodt: From Task Force 
to Emeritus Director 
The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of
TORTURE 
Photographer: Tim Rummelhoff. 
Photo courtesy of the University 
of Minnesota Law School. 