INSIDE   The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
After spending an intensive week
at CVT headquarters for orien-tation in July, Australian Adam
Horner headed to his post at theDadaab refugee camp in Kenya.Adam is the newest addition to CVT’scorps of expatriate psychotherapist/trainers at our international projects.“Landing in Dadaab was a bit confusing,” he said. “When I gotout of the plane I was sure I wasback in the Australian outback. Itwas the same heat, the same fieryred sand and the same scrubbybushes. I took a double-take andquickly concluded it was the same,but different.”
Like all international nongovern-
mental organizations, CVT relies onexpatriate (or expat) professionalslike Adam who live in a foreigncountry and provide high qualitymental health care to survivors oftorture and war trauma. CVT’s psychotherapist/trainers play a leadership role by training localcounselors to lead mental healthsupport and education groups, andby offering individual counseling to survivors who are more severelyaffected by their experiences. They dothis under difficult circumstances,working in refugee camps and post-
conflict countries. Both expatriateand national staff live and work inareas where infrastructure and services are limited.
Becoming a psychotherapist/
trainer is an emotionally and physically tiring experience. Theweek-long orientation just toucheson the many things expats need toknow before heading to the field,such as the CVT code of ethics, how to avoid getting sick from food or water, how to interact withsecurity forces, appropriate clothing,cooking, the use of CVT vehiclesand many other everyday activities.New expats must also be preparedto deal with the emotional aspects oftheir work, including hearing storiesof torture and trauma regularly andliving as a stranger in a community.“Expats live in a culture that theywill never be a part of,” said SuzannePearl, international services programmanager. “It can be disappointingto work so hard but always be considered an outsider.” 
CVT has hired expats from
around the world, including Vietnam,France, Brazil and Kenya. In additionto being a skilled psychotherapist,
an expat needs to be able to adaptto unexpected challenges, to havean innate sense of curiosity andwant to learn about new cultures,and to be able to articulate them-selves well so they can teach counseling skills and communicatewith the local community members.“We also look for people who havegood self-care strategies—who have
See page 3Living and Healing InternationallyVOLUME 22, ISSUE 3 •WWW.CVT.ORG
2 Letter from the Executive Director, Curt Goering
4 Donor Profile: George Golden Rebuilds Lives with Planned Giving
4 Planning for Hope, Healing—and Y our Legacy
Restoring 
the Dignity of the Human Spirit
Australian Adam Horner is the newest
expatriate psychotherapist/trainer atour Dadaab project.
PHOTO © C.C. STROM
THEstory cloth
AUGUST 20122Letter from the Executive Director
I am thrilled and honored to join the Center for Victims of Torture
as executive director. Like many others in the human rights movement,I’ve admired the great work pioneered and honed by CVT. At AmnestyInternational, where I worked for nearly 30 years, we often referred torture survivors to CVT for care.
Still, many have asked me why I moved from a senior position with a global human rights
organization based in New York to CVT. I came here for the same reason you support CVT:the compelling mission to heal survivors of torture and work towards a world without torture.
CVT is a leader in the torture treatment movement and one of the most highly respected
torture rehabilitation organizations in the world. This didn’t just happen. It has been carefullyand painstakingly built. CVT has a highly motivated and professional staff, assembled and ledfor many years by my predecessor, Douglas A. Johnson. 
CVT is equally fortunate to have a dedicated and high-functioning board of directors. 
Its collective experience is remarkable, and any nonprofit would be well-served to have a board of similar caliber. 
And of course, the broader CVT community includes hundreds of volunteers (including
professionals) and thousands of supporters who enable us to expand our reach and impact.Their contributions cannot be overstated.
Our staff is doing important, life-saving work. Over 100 countries used torture last year
and in dozens of them, torture was systemic and widespread. The needs are immense, and survivors often have no other place to turn.
Every day we see the tragedy unfolding in Syria, where tens of thousands have been 
displaced, many of them tortured or fleeing torture of the worst kind. CVT is one of the onlyorganizations that can provide care for highly traumatized refugees like those fleeing Syria, butour healing services in Jordan are unable to care for more survivors without additional resources.
At CVT, we feel strongly the need to do more, but we can only do so with additional 
support. Thank you for giving as generously as you can so we may extend healing to survivors,like those fleeing Syria today.
Sincerely,
Curt Goering
Executive Director......................................................
Curt Goering
In Jordan, the mobile
unit travels fromAmman to Zarqa to care for men and women who fled from torture.   
PHOTO © CVTbroaden the professional mental
health community. We worked withcollege faculty to include traumatraining in the curriculum so stu-dents will have a deeper under-
standing of how to counsel sur-
vivors of torture and war trauma.Through this work, we have restoredhope to countless men and women sothey can rebuild their communities.
As one Congolese man said,
“Since my horrible experience duringthe war, nobody, not even a memberof my family was interested in mypain, but when CVT approachedme and understood my pain, myhope returned... Thank you CVT.”
CVT extends its thanks to the
U.S. State Department’s Bureau ofPopulation, Refugees and Migration,the European Instrument for
3From page 1Living and Healing Internationally
support networks and take care of
their minds and their bodies,” saidErin Morgan, clinical supervisor,who also served for a year in theDemocratic Republic of Congo.
Working as an expat can be very
isolating. “There’s a lot of timespent in very small rooms with alaptop,” said Suzanne. “Your roomis your refuge.” Laptops are a lifeline for many, providing enter-tainment and communication withloved ones via Skype calls or e-mail.E-readers have made it easier forexpats to have a number of bookswithout having to pack pounds ofpaper in their suitcases. 
Exercise relieves stress and fills
the downtime for expats. Yoga isparticularly popular. Running,walking or biking might be theexercise of choice in another setting,but, according to Erin, “expats livein a fishbowl. The communitymembers watch you and talk toyou and about you. That can bevery emotionally draining.” Manyexpats bring portable equipment,like exercise bands or videos, to beable to do some cardio exercisesaway from the public eye.
Typically expats sign on to a
CVT project for a year. Because of
A Lasting Impact in the DRC
In 2007 we began working in theDemocratic Republic of Congo(DRC) in the aftermath of a
decade-long war that left more than 5 million people dead, nearly2 million displaced and countlesstorture survivors suffering insilence. We are now closing ourproject, but our work is leaving alasting impact. 
During our time in the DRC,
we helped more than 4,800 men,women and children rebuild theirlives. We connected with more than25,000 Congolese through commu-nity and group events so they couldlearn about the effects of torture,how they can care for themselvesand how they can help others. Wetrained more than 60 local coun-selors and psychology students to
Database Assistant Felicien working
with Bavon, an intern, and Francoise, alocal counselor, in Moba in the DRC.
PHOTO © SARA FELDMANthe intensive nature of the work,
they are usually granted a rest andrelaxation leave after four andeight months. If, like many CVTexpats, they decide to sign on foranother project, they’ll have amonth or two away to reconnectwith friends and family and takecare of any other personal matters.
The life of an expat is not easy,
yet it is filled with intangible rewards.“Watching the local counselorslearn and integrate knowledge isrewarding,” said Erin. “And ofcourse, we have the privilege ofhearing directly from the survivors—frequently—how their lives havechanged as a result of workingwith CVT.”
................................................................
Democracy and Human Rights, theUnited Nations Voluntary Fund forVictims of Torture, the U.S.-basedInternational Ministries of theUnited Methodist Church’s Women’sDivision, Al and Diane Kaneb, theSundance Family Foundation andthe United Nations DRC PooledFund.The life of an expat is not easy, yet it is filled
with intangible rewards.“If your energy and caring meet a
need in the world, go do it. Takeyour investment in CVT to the nextlevel. You have the opportunity foryour passion and involvement tochange lives.”
With his planned gift to CVT,
George is a member of our DouglasA. Johnson Circle. He invites youto join with him to rebuild lives—it is never too early or too late. 
................................................................George Golden has been involvedwith CVT for nearly 25 years asboth a donor and volunteer. He
helped launch the New Tactics inHuman Rights project and is a current member of our speaker’sbureau. He was drawn to CVT’swork because of the hope and healingit provides, plus an opportunity forrenewing lives and providing a second beginning. CVT’s missionfits into George’s personal themesfor work and life: self-awareness,leadership and spirituality. Georgeconsulted and taught as a facultymember at the Opus School ofBusiness at the University of St.Thomas in St. Paul. He believes hiswork with CVT has strengthenedhis own hope and renewal.
As George and his wife Deanna
did their financial planning, theyknew they could provide for theirfamily as well as the organizationsthey are passionate about. Georgeexplained, “Our blessings havebeen great and we wanted toshare.” They made a list of theirfavorite organizations to include asprimary and secondary beneficiarieson their donor advised fund.George said, “It was easy to do, andwe worked closely with our financialadvisor to achieve our goals.”
George, who describes himself
as a “tomorrow person,” likes tothink about the big picture. Heencourages others to support CVT. 
649 Dayton Avenue
St. Paul, MN  55104www.cvt.org
© 2012 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.12-NC5Avery special group of supporters
—like George Golden profiledabove—have stepped forward 
to help CVT in a significant andenduring way by naming the Centerfor Victims of Torture as a benefi-ciary in their wills and becomingmembers of the Douglas A. JohnsonCircle.  
The Circle was named for CVT’s
longstanding executive director,Douglas A. Johnson, as a tribute tohis 24-year commitment to stoppingtorture in the world and to healingtorture survivors. This new Circlewas a fitting legacy to Doug’s manycontributions over the years—and a bequest may be a fitting way tocarry out your own values and philanthropic interests for many
years to come.
Remembering CVT with a 
charitable bequest will bring youspecial recognition and benefits ifyou wish. But your greatest benefitis likely to be the powerful message of hope and healing that you willbe sending to survivors of tortureand their families—people who are rebuilding their lives after the inhumanity of torture.
If you’d like to learn more about
the Douglas A. Johnson Circle ormaking a charitable bequest gift tosupport CVT’s work, please contactRachel Hughes by calling 612-436-4859 or by e-mail at rhughes@cvt.org.
Planning for Hope, Healing—and Y our Legacy
PHOTO PROVIDED BY GEORGE GOLDEN
Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Y our generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 forother ways to give. Thank you for yourongoing commitment to healing thewounds of torture.George Golden: Rebuilding Lives
with Passion and a Planned Gift
The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
..................................