INSIDE    The
CENTERfor
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
Ibrahimis a Syrian torture survivor
who sought safety for his family inAmman. With the help of CVT’s
care, he’s learned to cope with thememories of his torture and its profound effects. But, as refugees, he
and his family continue to struggle.In Amman, his children were treated
so poorly by teachers and classmates
that he pulled them out of school.  
Like Ibrahim, most CVT inter-
national clients struggle as refugeeswhile also coping with the aftermath
of torture. Nightmares, debilitatingdepression, anxiety and PTSDplague many survivors. As refugees,they face the additional challengesof language barriers, finding meaning
in life and earning a meager wage. 
When fleeing torture and violence
in their homelands, individuals canregister as a refugee in a camp or ina city. Once an individual registersas a refugee in a camp, he or she hasaccess to food rations, healthcare,education and interpreters to helpwith communication. In urban areaslike Nairobi and Amman, though,refugees typically have limitedsupport from nongovernmentalorganizations. 
Paul Orieny is CVT’s international
services clinical advisor for mentalhealth for the Dadaab and NairobiT orture Survivors Cope in Camps and Cities VOLUME  26, ISSUE 1•WWW.CVT.ORG
2Letter from the Executive Director,  Curt Goering
4Shalya Rajathurai Volunteers to Support Human  Rights
4Join Our Circle of Hope
Restoring the Dignity of the Human Spirit
THEstorycloth
FEBRUARY  2016
The Riruta neighborhoodin Nairobi where many
torture survivors live  
and attend counselinggroups.
PHOTO © CVTprojects, and has witnessed thechallenging lives of refugees. “It’ssurvival to the core,” said Paul.Since opening in 1992, the Dadaabrefugee camps have been home totens of thousands of families whohave been unable to return to their
homesbecause of ongoing conflictor persecution. Food, education,
healthcare and housing are provided,
but there is limited free will. For torture survivors in camps, thefuture doesn’t necessarily give hope.
“Howdo you get yourself up everyday in a place that’s supposed to be
temporary, but is indefinite?” askedPaul. “It’s incredibly frustrating forthe survivors there.” Yet because of
See page 3
Survivors’  names  have been changed  to protect  their identities.129545_IDM_S5_V01_FINAL  2/3/16  11:08 AM  Page 12Letter from the Executive Director
“I want my experience to mean something,” a Syrian torture 
survivor told me when I met him recently at our CVT Jordan rehabilitative program. In addition to working on rebuilding his life after horrific torture, this 35-year-old, slightly-built man wants twothings: he wants to believe that the perpetrators of the torture and war atrocities he and his family endured will be held accountable. And he desperately hopes for a future for his children that will be free from the war and desperation they have known as refugees.
CVT has just released Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect, a report of the  experiences 
and impacts of torture as described by Syrian and Iraqi survivors who have been through our interdisciplinary rehabilitative program in Jordan. This report is based on the stories of 
64 Syrian and Iraqi clients, describing their experiences of survival in the face of torture, serious human rights abuses and war crimes, and of resilience amid the devastating challengesthey have faced after being displaced from their homes. In a very real sense, these stories represent hundreds of thousands of others.
The clients I met in Amman want their stories to matter. They want their experiences  to
be used to bring accountability to those who torture and terrorize.
To me, this new report demonstrates another reason we do this work: to help give a 
platform for the voices of those who cannot be silenced by torture and abuse. I applaud the
strength survivorsshow in sharing these stories publicly. It takes conviction to describe the 
brutal abuses they endured when those perpetrators are not very distant. I believe that the willingness of these 64 individuals to recount their experiences speaks to the trust they have in the Center for Victims of Torture to take this information and promote real change.
This trust has been built by years of dedicated work, which is only possible because of  
the ongoing support of donors like you. Thank you for your generosity and your commitment
to eradicating torture and its wounds, around the world.
Sincerely, Curt GoeringExecutive Director......................................................
Curt Goering
Download the full report at
www.CVT.org/ReclaimingHopeDignityRespect.129545_IDM_S5_V01_FINAL  2/3/16  11:08 AM  Page 23Torture Survivors Cope in Camps and Cities 
From page 1the geographic confines of the camp,
it’s easier for torture survivors toget to the counseling groups andconnect with other survivors than it is for some urban clients. 
While basic support is available
in Dadaab, perpetrators can get into
the camp, causing security issuesand, in some cases, intimidating thevery men and women whom theytortured. Refugee camps also havemajority clans, which can causecommunity or social pressure forthose from minority groups. Incamps, refugees must live closelywith issues including crime, deadlyclashes, sexual violence and forcedmarriage. These conditions compound
the effects of torture and war trauma,
and are among the reasons someSyrian survivors say they wouldrather “die” than live in the Za’atari
camp in Jordan.  Urban refugees
Yet without the safety net of a
camp, refugees must find their ownhousing, pay for their own expenses
or negotiate support with differentorganizations individually. 
Job Onyango worked as a 
psychosocial counselor at CVT’sNairobi project before becoming a psychotherapist/trainer at ourEthiopia project where we work in
a refugee camp. According to Job,women who live outside of a campin Amman and Zarqa struggle tomaintain dignity. Khadijaand Yasser
are both Syrian torture survivorswho have received care from CVT.Yasser is in a wheelchair and cannot
afford his diabetes and blood pressure medications. Their son,Adel, tried to work in Amman. Butwhen Adel was discovered, he wasthreatened with deportation because
refugees are restricted from working
in Jordan. Other survivor refugees in
Jordan experience similar challenges.
To help survivors heal and rebuild
their lives, CVT’s group counselingprocess specifically helps survivorsthrough the indefiniteness of life ina refugee camp and the challenge ofaccessing resources in cities.  During
the counseling process,survivors
learn coping skills and identify the
supports and resources in their livesand communities. While refugeesurvivors face many challenges,those who receive CVT’scare learn
how to manage their feelings ofdespair and support each other.with their families are typically thesole breadwinner because their husbands have been injured or are too traumatized to function.“The most readily available workfor women is washing clothes forsingle men,” said Job. “Then theyface sexual abuse or harassment. Inmost cases after rape or harassment,
the women don’t tell their spouses,resulting in both physical and psychological tragedies.” Men who
are unable to provide for their families feel helpless and useless—particularly when they have teenage
daughters who find other men toprovide for them. The men who are able to work are usually limited
to day labor.
Medical care and shelter options
are limited for most refugeesbecause of finances. “Refugees getthe worst of the housing in a city.Two unrelated families may live in
a one-room tin shack. This canbring additional challenges forinterpersonal or intimacy dynamics
of families,” said Paul. “The desperation of some survivors inNairobi makes healing difficult.”
While daily life in Nairobi is
generally more difficult than in acamp, it appeals to some individuals
because it may offer more potentialfor income. “Human beings like tofeel like they work hard for whatthey have,” said Paul. Teachers and those with technical skills aresometimes able to find side jobs tosupport themselves. “For the younger
population, there seems to be manymore opportunities,” said Job, “and
even a bigger chance to integratewith the host communities in social,
cultural, educational and sportsactivities.”
In Jordan, the survivors we see
These tukuls provide privacy and shelter
from the elements for torture survivors
during group counseling in Dadaab.  
PHOTO ©  PABLO TRASPAS
In Zarqa,  many Syrian 
torture survivors say theywould rather “die”  than
live in a refugee camp.  CVT’s activities in Kenyaand Jordan are financedby the United StatesDepartment of State’s Bureau ofPopulation,  Refugees and Migration
(BPRM) and the United NationsVoluntary Fund for Victims  of Torture.
129545_IDM_S5_V01_FINAL  2/3/16  11:08 AM  Page 3with the current
mass displacementof people, CVT’sniche expertise inrehabilitative care is needed more than
ever,” said Shalya.“And to comple-ment that work,New Tactics gives hope to human rights activists and organizations who are most often isolated with a limited range of tactics available.I feel privileged to play a small rolein the organization.”
.....................................................................................................Shalya Rajathurai worked as a civil litigation attorney inMalaysia and Singapore before
relocating to Minneapolis in March
last year when she got married.Volunteering has always been anintegral part of her life, so she waseager to find a volunteer role inMinnesota. Her husband had previously volunteered for CVT, so she called to offer her services.
After being connected with the
New Tactics in Human Rights program, Shalya started writingsummaries of the online conversa-tions for human rights defenders.“These conversations on selectedhuman rights topics are simply brilliant,” said Shalya. “The NewTactics website gives human rightsactivists a platform to exchangeideas and express their views to aglobal audience. This gives hope toactivists who may be struggling alone
in a remote part of the world.”
Shalya has also researched and
written summaries of tactics thatadvance human rights causes around
the world. She was impressed witha tactic by Ujamaa Africa that lowered the number of rapes among
schoolchildren in Nairobi. By writing
a summary of the tactic and sharingit on the New Tactics website, otheractivists can try a similar approachto ending endemic rape.
To support the online dialogues,
Shalya has also helped identifyexperts to lead the conversations.“CVT is a great organization, and
649 Dayton AvenueSt. Paul, MN  55104
www.cvt.org
© 2016 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact  CVT for permission to  reproduce this newsletter or  any part  of it.16-NA5CVT’s Circle of Hope offers 
you a unique opportunity to helpsupport healing of torture survivorsand our efforts to end torture. Bychoosing to join the Circle of Hope,you pre-authorize monthly gifts toCVT on your credit card.
With your reliable, monthly 
generosity, you help decrease ouradministrative costs and ensure that more of your donation helpstorture survivors directly. Yourmonthly contributions automatically
renew your annual CVT supportand, best of all, they help bringhope and healing to thousands oftorture survivors worldwide.
Please sign up today by going 
to www.CVT.org/CircleOfHope . 
You can also make a one-time
gift online, send a check to 649Dayton Avenue, St. Paul, MN55104, or call us directly at 1-877-265-8775. 
Thank you for your ongoing
commitment to healing the woundsof torture.Make a Difference in the Life of 
a Survivor Today – Join our Circle of Hope!Make a Difference  
in the Life of a Survivor
Your generous support brings healingto torture survivors worldwide.  CVT
welcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly  Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning  and delivery 
of healing services.
•Planned  Givingcontinues your
legacy of support.  
•Gifts of Stocksupport survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
•In-Kind  Donations of specific
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute  Giftscelebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org,  send a
check to 649 Dayton Avenue,  St. Paul,
MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775  for
other ways to give.  Thank you for your
ongoing commitmentto healing the
wounds of torture.Shalya Rajathurai Volunteers to Support Human Rights
The
CENTERfor
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
Shalya Rajathurai129545_IDM_S5_V01_FINAL  2/3/16  11:08 AM  Page 4