INSIDE   
2Letter from the Executive Director, Curt Goering 
4Laura Sivert: Befriender, Curator, and Speaker 
4Ensuring Hope and Healing for Future Torture Survivors The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
In remote, rural areas of northern 
Uganda, torture survivors often 
suffer alone — alienated from 
their communities because of what 
they’ve endured. Beginning in the 
late 1980s, the Lord’s Resistance 
Army (LRA) battled government 
troops before targeting civilians in 
local communities. The rebels 
murdered, mutilated and tortured 
individuals. Close to 2 million people 
moved to camps for internally 
displaced persons for security. 
Children were particularly at risk 
of abduction from their homes and schools. To avoid abduction, some 
children would walk several miles in 
the afternoon to sleep in the relative 
safety of cities, only to walk back 
home in the morning. If captured, 
they would be forced to join the 
LRA forces and ordered to beat or 
kill others. Girls could be given to 
commanders as wives or forced into 
sexual servitude. 
“Many girls or young women 
who were abducted came back home 
carrying children,” said Gabriele 
Marini, psychotherapist/field repre -
sentative. “In these communities, Healing in Uganda: 
From Capacity Building to Direct Care VOLUME 25, ISSUE 4 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
Restoring 
the Dignity of 
the Human Spirit 
THE sto rycloth 
NOVEMBER 2015 
status is given by the father so 
these children have no status. They 
are victims of the war. They are not 
welcomed in the community and 
can have trouble receiving educa -
tional or medical support. Once 
you’ve been abducted and returned 
from the bush, you are not eligible 
for marriage like other girls. These 
survivors are suffering from their 
current situation as well as the 
trauma.” 
Since 2009, CVT has worked 
in Uganda to help survivors of the 
LRA conflict through a capacity- 
building and training approach. 
While a number of organizations 
were providing economic, medical 
and basic needs assistance, few 
provided mental health care to 
address the debilitating and lingering 
effects of torture. 
Gabriele Marini joined CVT to 
train and support local counselors 
who were helping Ugandans rebuild 
their lives. For five years, Gabriele 
has conducted formal trainings and 
side-by-side co-therapy to help the 
Psychosocial Counselors 
Grace and Ketty, and 
Gabriele Marini, 
psychotherapist/field 
representative, 
traveling to a Ugandan 
community for a 
counseling group.
PHOTO © CVT STAFF See page 3 2Letter from the Executive Director 
We’ve all seen the news reports and photos of refugee families risking 
everything in hopes of finding safety and security. The images and stories of 
desperate men, women and children taking to the sea and, if lucky, landing 
on beaches or running for trains are heartbreaking. While Syrians are most 
prevalent in these stories, there are others around the world who do not 
make that journey but still seek safety and healing. 
Our programs in Kenya and Ethiopia are stretched caring for these men and women. In 
Ethiopia, we care for Eritreans who have fled a notoriously repressive and authoritarian government. 
The Eritrean government is responsible for systematic human rights abuses, including arbitrary 
detention, torture and severe restrictions on freedom of movement and expression. 
In Dadaab, Kenya, we extend care to African refugees — primarily Somalis, but others 
including South Sudanese and Congolese. And in Nairobi, we provide counseling and physical 
therapy to refugees who fled conflicts or torture in several central African countries. 
President Obama has committed to accepting 100,000 refugees in 2017 to help some of those 
who are in such desperate situations. We applaud his efforts, but because refugees are also frequently 
torture survivors, we have called on the U.S. to welcome 200,000 refugees in 2016, including 
100,000 Syrians. 
In fact, we recently conducted a meta-analysis of existing studies and challenged the decades- 
old estimate that 400,00 0–500,000 refugee torture survivors reside in the United States. We now 
believe that the number of refugee torture survivors in this country could be as high as 1.3 million. 
Based on the new number, we’ve called on Congress to increase support for the Office of 
Refugee Resettlement which funds torture rehabilitation centers like CVT. Survivors have the right 
to rehabilitation. It’s our responsibility — both legally and morally — to provide this care. And 
without adequate funding, access to rehabilitative care is limited. 
We rely on supporters like you to help fund this critical, life-changing work. Your support 
by December 31 allows us to more effectively plan and allocate our resources for 2016 so that 
more survivors can rebuild their lives. Thank you for your ongoing generosity and commitment 
to helping torture survivors around the world. 
Sincerely, 
Curt Goering 
Executive Director ...................................................... 
Curt Goering 
This year’s annual Restoring Hope fundraising breakfast marked our 
30 years of healing. Psychotherapist/trainer Reem Abbasi shared 
the healing story of one Syrian girl seeking refuge in Jordan.
PHOTO © TODD DONERY 3Healing in Uganda 
counselors learn new techniques 
first-hand. Now, CVT has begun 
providing direct counseling care to 
broaden the range of healing ser -
vices for survivors. “We realized 
that some survivors needed more 
consistent care than was currently 
available,” said Suzanne Pearl, 
CVT program manager. “With our 
experience in other areas in Africa 
and strong relationships in the 
country, we were able to easily 
transition our work to include 
counseling groups in the most 
affected communities.” 
Based in Gulu, the commercial 
and administrative center of the 
region, Gabriele and three local 
counselors travel to rural communi -
ties to provide 10-week counseling 
groups for torture survivors. Before 
starting the commute, CVT staff 
connects with a community facilita -
tor to ensure that the survivors are 
still available to meet. Community 
events such as funerals or critical 
times in the farming cycle can 
prevent survivors from attending 
groups. After traveling in a large 
SUV an hour or more to the desig -
nated community, the counselors 
set up a space for the group in a school or church. 
While local economies have begun 
to rebuild, survivors generally live 
in remote, agrarian communities, 
relying on subsistence farming for 
their income. More than 80 percent 
of the survivors we’ve cared for in 
Uganda never or rarely have enough 
money for necessities. For survivors, 
this daily stress is compounded by 
the memories and ongoing effects 
of their torture and trauma. 
During the first year of our direct 
counseling work, survivors told 
stories dominated by abductions, 
rapes and forced servitude. More 
than two-thirds of the survivors in 
our counseling groups are women. 
Now, following their torture, the 
women are marginalized and often 
experience domestic violence in 
their home communities. “While we 
cannot change their life conditions, 
the counseling gives the women 
internal strength to better cope 
with the overwhelming stressors,” 
said Gabriele. 
In our capacity-building work 
in Uganda, we’ve established a 
close relationship with Makerere 
University in Kampala. To build the 
skills of upcoming therapists, we 
provide internships to masters-level psychology students. Gabriele is also 
continuing to train and support 
Ugandan counselors in their 
professional development so that 
survivors can receive the counseling 
and healing care needed to rebuild 
their lives. Through these training 
experiences, we’re working with 
Ugandans to broaden the fields of 
psychology and counseling within 
the country. 
“Initially, the survivors we see 
think they can’t get better by ‘only’ 
talking,” said Gabriele. “But then 
they experience the CVT counseling 
method and are amazed that they 
can feel a real change in their lives 
without receiving any material 
support. Some survivors say they 
feel they’ve had a ‘re-birth’ from 
the group counseling. And others 
who have had suicidal thoughts for 
a long time have started to think 
about the future with determination 
and initiative.” 
CVT’s work in Uganda is supported by 
the Trust Fund for Victims (TFV) at the 
International Criminal Court (ICC). From page 1 
CVT staff, Ketty and Pons, prepared to 
lead a counseling group in a Ugandan 
community. PHOTO © CVT STAFF 
Counselors from local
Ugandan organizations 
participated in trainings 
to support their 
professional 
development.
PHOTO © CVT STAFF topics. It’s really 
fascinating and I’ve 
learned so much,” 
she said. 
With the gallery 
project complete, 
Laura plans to 
join the Speakers 
Bureau, telling 
CVT’s story at 
churches, schools 
and community 
groups. “I’m really 
happy to be working 
with CVT, and that I’ve had the 
opportunity to meet and get to know 
the supportive and dedicated staff,” 
Laura said. “It’s a wonderful 
experience.” 
..................................................................................................... When Laura Sivert moved back to 
the Minneapolis-St. Paul area 
in 2014, she was eager to begin 
volunteering to get reacquainted with 
the local community. Thinking she 
might be able to use her fluent 
French skills translating materials, 
she contacted CVT. Instead, with so 
many volunteer opportunities, she’s 
taken on several different roles, first 
helping set up at small special events 
and Expanding Circles, the young 
professionals group. Then, in May, 
she became a befriender to a survivor. 
Together, they have explored local 
neighborhoods, lakes and museums. 
Earlier this year, Laura’s PhD in 
art history became particularly 
valuable to CVT. To mark CVT’s 
30 years of work, Laura curated a 
gallery of items to display at the annual Restoring Hope breakfast. 
With historical items such as blue -
prints, articles and photos, and art 
representing the cultures of survivors, 
the gallery allowed supporters to 
learn about CVT’s evolving history. 
“What surprised me about the 
project is how much art CVT has. The 
headquarters and the St. Paul Healing 
Center are filled with beautiful works,” 
said Laura. “It shows how important 
art is to healing — particularly how 
the clinical aspects of a space needed to 
become non-clinical to be welcoming 
to the survivors.” 
Through her volunteering, Laura 
is also learning about a wide range of 
topics. “I love how many opportunities 
there are for volunteers to become 
more knowledgeable about amnesty, 
legal status, psychology and other 
649 Dayton Avenue 
St. Paul, MN  551 04
www .cv t.org 
© 20 15 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it. 15-ND5 Acompassionate group of donors 
has stepped forward to be sure 
CVT has future funds to heal 
torture survivors and end torture 
worldwide — by naming the Center 
for Victims of Torture as a beneficiary 
in their wills. 
These generous donors who have 
left such a legacy bequest belong to 
the Douglas A. Johnson Circle. This 
legacy society was named for CVT’s 
longstanding former Executive 
Director, Douglas A. Johnson, as a 
tribute to his 24-year commitment 
to stopping torture in the world and 
to healing torture survivors. 
Please consider joining the 
Douglas A. Johnson Circle. Your 
kind bequest will send a powerful 
message of hope and healing to survivors of torture and their families 
— people who are rebuilding their 
lives after the inhumanity of torture. 
You will help CVT maintain its 
advocacy work to bring an end to 
torture across the globe. 
The language to use to leave a 
bequest is: I give, devise and bequeath 
to the Center for Victims of Torture, 
649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul, 
Minnesota, 55104, tax ID 36-3383933 
$_______  (state sum of money or 
otherwise describe security or property) 
to be used for its general uses and 
purposes. 
If you have any questions, feel 
free to contact Michelle Woster at 
612-436-4859 or by email at 
mwoster@cvt.org. Thank you for 
your caring legacy commitment. Ensuring Hope and Healing for 
Future T orture Survivors Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor 
Your generous support brings healing 
to torture survivors worldwide. CVT 
welcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery 
of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your 
legacy of support . 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors 
while offering tax benefits to 
donors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific 
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or 
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a 
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,
MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 for 
other ways to give. Thank you for your 
ongoing commitment to healing the 
wounds of torture.Laura Sivert: Befriender, Curator and Speaker 
The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
Laura Sivert 