INSIDE 
2Letter from the Executive Director 
3The Travel Ban: Still Doing Damage One Year Later 
4Multiply the Healing Power of Your Gift The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
VOLUME 28, ISSUE 1 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
Restoring 
the Dignity of 
the Human Spirit 
THE sto rycloth 
FEBRUARY 2018 
Hope for Survivors 
Who Would Say #MeT oo 
The #MeToo movement has 
captured U.S. news headlines 
and launched widespread social 
change as professional women 
across industries have stepped 
up to disclose sexual assault and 
harassment and to say No More. 
In rebuilding the lives of 
survivors of torture, CVT is all 
too familiar with issues of sexual 
violence. We have been listening 
to survivors ’ stories for more than 
30 years and CVT stands with all 
our clients who would say Me, Too. 
“Clinicians effectively work 
under the assumption that many clients have suffered some version 
of sexual assault, humiliation or 
serious threat thereof,” says 
Andrea Northwood, Ph.D., LP, 
CVT ’s director of client services. 
“To be imprisoned or detained for 
political reasons in most of the 
countries where our clients lived 
means being under implicit threat 
of sexual violation. In addition, 
torture is used to destroy a person ’s
identity, and because our sexuality 
is a deep part of who we are, 
torturers often use sexual assault 
in order to achieve their aim.” 
Rape is used by tyrannical 
regimes as a weapon of war, a 
horrific method of humiliating 
and wounding individuals and 
controlling communities. CVT 
clinicians describe clients being 
illegally detained by government 
officials, or non-state actors some -
times for months, and enduring 
sexual assault—often repeatedly— 
to serve a larger political goal. Afterward, many survivors are 
hesitant to report what they ’ve 
experienced. 
Cultural issues and social stigma 
often silence the victims of sexual 
and gender-based violence and 
keep them from asking for the help 
they need. Clients are often not 
comfortable disclosing the sexual 
violence they ’ve survived until 
they ’ve been to multiple counseling 
sessions over several weeks or even 
months. 
That was certainly true for 
Dina*, who was only a teenager 
when she was abducted by a militia 
in Congo. The soldiers took Dina 
and other girls to their camp, 
where the girls were raped daily 
and forced to do domestic chores. 
Dina was frequently beaten, 
threatened with loaded guns, 
denied food and, at times, sleep. 
The camp leader singled Dina 
out to be his wife and locked her 
(see page 4) 
*Names and some details have been changed for her security and confidentiality.
ILLUSTRATION: AMANDA SCHEID 2Letter from the Executive Director 
Dear Friends, 
According to The Wall Street Journal , the U.S. admitted about 5,000 
refugees from October through December of last year. That number is less 
than that of similar periods in recent years—and 20,000 fewer refugees 
than were admitted during the same three months in 2016. 
If this pace continues, far fewer refugees than the 45,000 cap the 
president set will be admitted into the United States this year—and that 
number is down from 110,000 in 2017. Right now, thousands upon thousands of refugees— 
including children—are fleeing for their lives, many escaping unimaginable torture and propelled 
by the hope and safety of resettlement. 
Severely cutting the number of refugees welcomed to the U.S. is reprehensible, especially 
considering the unprecedented numbers of refugees at this moment. And now on top of that, 
even more refugees will be subjected to intolerable delays because of the increased restrictions 
on refugees and their families the president ordered when his 120-day refugee ban expired last 
October. 
Adding restrictions on people already “extremely vetted,” and indefinitely suspending 
reunification of families separated by violence and war, is a wanton display of nativism and 
cruelty. The executive order was a thinly-veiled, pernicious effort to devastate the refugee 
program from the inside out, and the very low number of refugees admitted to the U.S. recently 
is gravely concerning, not to mention a betrayal of our humanitarian tradition of welcoming 
refugees fleeing torture and persecution. 
We know from CVT ’s research that nearly half of refugees living in the U.S. are torture 
survivors. Further closing this country ’s doors to the world ’s most vulnerable people in urgent 
need of our help is unconscionable. 
As this President rejects the principles of basic humanity, civil society organizations must 
step in. CVT is proud to be a part of that movement, standing up to draw attention to the 
impacts of these shameful actions. We ’re rallying with allies to stand with refugees and for 
the care and protection of the great number of torture survivors who are caught up in this 
devastating global humanitarian crisis. 
Thank you for standing with us, and adding power to CVT ’s voice as a moral beacon in 
these deeply troubling times. 
Gratefully, 
Curt Goering ...................................................... 
Curt Goering 
3“What can we do now?” asked 
Fajer*, whose family escaped 
torture and death threats in his 
home country, Iraq. He and his 
family are still struggling to carve 
out a refugee life after the president ’s
Travel Ban cancelled their 
resettlement to the United States. 
Four years ago, Fajer ’s family 
began to receive death threats 
because they are part of an ethnic 
minority group. Fajer was arrested 
and endured torture while he was 
held. After he was released, a close 
family member was murdered. 
Fajer and his family ran from their 
home, leaving everything behind. 
Because of symptoms caused by the torture, Fajer found CVT 
Jordan. He and two of the children 
came for rehabilitative care and 
began feeling that their lives were 
getting closer to normal. They 
took all the necessary steps to be 
placed in the pipeline for resettle -
ment, and when asked to choose 
either the U.S. or the U.K. as their 
future home, they selected the 
United States because they had 
relatives living in Massachusetts. 
The family went through all 
the required phases and screenings, 
a process that took two years 
before they were approved for 
resettlement in the U.S. They 
started their preparations to travel in February 2017 but then the UN 
informed Fajer that they were not 
going to the U.S. They were not 
given any explanation for the 
change. The U.S. Travel Ban was 
announced January 27, 2017. 
For refugee families who ’ve 
gone through the years-long 
screening process, it ’s not possible 
to simply select a different country 
and get on a different plane. One 
year later, Fajer still lives in a world 
of questions and uncertainty. 
For Fajer and his family, the 
impacts have been catastrophic 
and deeply personal. Everything 
had to start over again. They 
cannot return home under fear of 
death, but they cannot stay in 
Jordan indefinitely either. The 
travel ban ended the only way for 
them to build a new life. 
Fajer said he doesn ’t understand 
why this is happening to them. “I 
lived all my 40 years peacefully in 
my home country. I worked as a 
civilian, had no connection to any 
conflict. I always lived co-existent 
with my neighbors. Why us?” he 
said. “What can we do now?” The T ravel Ban: 
Still Doing Damage One Y ear Later 
*Name has been changed for 
confidentiality and security. 
The name Fajer means Dawn 
of a New Day. Funding for 
CVT’s work in Jordan is 
provided by the United States 
Department of State’s Bureau 
of Population, Refugees and 
Migration and the United 
Nations Voluntary Fund for 
Victims of Torture. 
ILLUSTRATION © ROUT E55 | DREAMSTIME.COM 2356 University Avenue W, Suite 430 
St. Paul, MN 55114 
www.cvt.org 
© 20 18 Center for Victims of T orture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it. 18-NB5 The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE Hope for Survivors Who Would Say #MeT oo 
(from page 1) 
away from the others. She feared 
he would kill her, especially when 
he realized she was pregnant. So, 
she and another girl fled, running 
for hours. Dina ’s friend was eight 
months pregnant and started 
bleeding. There was nothing Dina 
could do as she watched her friend 
die in her arms. 
Finally, a caring individual gave 
her money to flee to Nairobi, 
Kenya. Once she was there, she 
found people from her community, 
and then she found CVT. When 
Dina came for counseling, she 
often spoke with a soft voice, 
avoiding eye contact. She reported having nightmares and frequently 
would remember her friend and 
start crying. Dina was also struggling 
with mixed feelings about the baby 
she had born as a result of rape. 
Gradually, with CVT ’s counseling 
Dina began to heal. Dina said CVT 
walked with her without judging 
her and gave her hope when she 
had lost hope. At her follow-up a 
year later, Dina was strong and 
happy and felt hopeful about her 
future. She was well dressed and 
beautiful. Her baby was doing 
well, and Dina felt Lucky was a 
gift from God. 
The effects of rape, sexual and 
gender-based violence, sexual assault and torture are deep and 
long-lasting, but with CVT ’s help 
survivors like Dina can embark on 
a transformative healing journey 
that enables them to rebuild their 
lives. 
There is hope for CVT clients 
who would say #MeToo. 
CVT is very grateful for the 
generosity of our supporters and 
any contribution you are able to 
make to help survivors and end 
torture worldwide. Thank you for 
your gifts of hope and healing, and 
considering some of the many ways 
you can further support CVT. 
Circle of Hope, 
CVT ’s Monthly Giving 
As a Circle of Hope member, 
your monthly gift ensures reliable 
support for CVT and hassle-free 
giving for you. Every gift to CVT 
makes a difference in our ability to 
provide lifesaving care to survivors 
of torture. Circle of Hope members 
help CVT work more efficiently by 
providing a stable source of reliable funding. With monthly gifts, you 
help decrease our administrative 
costs and ensure that more of your 
donation helps torture survivors 
directly. Your monthly contributions 
automatically renew your annual 
CVT support and, best of all they 
bring hope and healing to thousands 
of torture survivors worldwide. 
Workplace Giving and 
Corporate Matching Gifts 
If your employer has a workplace 
giving program or will match your 
charitable contributions, designating 
CVT as the recipient is a convenient 
and easy way to leverage your 
generosity. Some companies will 
allow you to make a simple payroll 
deduction, and others will match Multiply the Healing Power of Y our Gift 
your donations, doubling or even 
tripling your impact. 
Planning Your Legacy 
You can extend your support for 
the Center for Victims of Torture 
and leave a legacy of hope for 
torture survivors with a bequest in 
your will or another planned gift. 
You don ’t have to be wealthy to 
make a meaningful gift, and there 
are many ways you can personally 
benefit as well as spare your loved 
ones from complex probate proce -
dures and costly taxes. 
For more information on making 
a planned gift to the Center for 
Victims of Torture, please contact 
Fawn Bernhardt-Norvell at (612) 
436-4888 or giving@cvt.org. CVT’s work in Nairobi is made 
possible by a grant from the U.S. State 
Department’s Bureau of Population, 
Refugees and Migration; the United 
Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims 
of Torture; United Methodist Women; 
and the S.L. Gimbel Advised Fund at 
The Community Foundation –Inland 
Southern California. 