The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
Francisco was a college student
and part of a pro-democracygroup protesting the president’s
most recent efforts to consolidatepower. One day at school, he wastaken by armed guards to a policestation where he was tortured withbeatings and electric shock. He wasreleased but told to report to thepolice station the following day.After his family arranged for him to flee the country, his father wasarrested and died three days later in
police custody.
When Francisco arrived at the
Center for Victims of Torture’s St. Paul Healing Clinic, he was paralyzed with fear and guilt. Unableto sleep or eat, he refused to use aninterpreter, fearing his country’s surveillance extended beyond borders.
CVT found an alternative 
interpreter and during his firstappointments would leave office
doors open and hide
electrical cords.Gradually, Franciscobuilt trust with hisproviders at CVT, which grew to include a team of mental health,medical, and socialservice provid ers and
a pro bono attorney. Although he continuesto grieve for hisfather, and his familyremains in danger,Francisco has built anew life with structureand purpose in eachday. He hopes toNew Allies, New ResourcesVOLUME 23, ISSUE 4 •WWW.CVT.ORG
INSIDE
2 Letter from the Executive Director, Curt Goering
4 Donor Profile: Marie Souied, Supporting T orture Survivors  
4 Y our Y ear-End Giving Creates Hope and Healing re
Restoring 
the Dignity of the Human SpiritINSIDE   
THEstory cloth
NOVEMBER 2013
achieve the career and life goals he
had before the police arrived at hisclassroom door.
Francisco and thousands of
other torture survivors have hopefor a new life because of the policywork done by CVT’s Washington,D.C. office—and made possiblewith your support. 
CVT wrote the Torture Victims
Relief Act in 1993 with SenatorDave Durenberger (R-MN). Thisfederal legislation authorizes fundingfor torture survivor centers in theUnited States and abroad. We’vesecured appropriations every yearsince 2000. The annual $25 milliondoesn’t come close to meeting theneed, but our work makes it possiblefor tens of thousands of torturesurvivors to receive the care they so desperately need.
Since September 11, 2001, CVT
has worked on problems created by the United States’ embrace oftorture and cruelty in counter-terrorism efforts. Our work hascentered on two areas: establishingjust and humane detention andinterrogation practices, and securing
See page 3Jennifer Windsor, Associate Dean for Programs and
Studies at the School of Foreign Service, GeorgetownUniversity, and Omar Bah, journalist and torture survivor,speaking at CVT’s June 26 symposium: Torture as a
Weapon Against Democracy.
PHOTO © CHRIS MADDALONI / WWW.CHRISMADDALONI.COM2Letter from the Executive Director
Millions of torture survivors suffer in silence, desperate for CVT’s 
help. But we face significant challenges in providing vital, life-saving care to torture survivors in the U.S., Africa and the Middle East. 
Torture is committed in more than 100 countries, with millions 
suffering from its devastating effects. Over the last 25 years, we’ve restored the health and lives of more than 25,000 survivors—the majority of them in the past thirteen years since we began working internationally. 
Our work in Jordan began in 2008 with Iraqi torture survivors. Today, we see an 
extraordinary number of Syr ian survivors who report types of torture similar to Iraqis: 
beatings, rapes and sexual assaults, and excruciatingly painful stress positions. The viciousness of the torture, and the large number of child victims, is horrifying. 
In addition to Jordan, we continue our work in the world’s largest refugee camps in 
the northeastern part of Kenya. The camps are dangerous; beatings and sexual assaults arecommonplace. Women and girls are particularly vulnerable.
I recently visited our newest international projects. In Nairobi, we care for urban refugee 
torture survivors from the region. In Ethiopia, we’re staffing up to extend care to Eritrean survivors, many of whom were brutally tortured because they attempted to escape their country’s indefinite military conscription policies. 
In Nairobi, I met a survivor I’ll call “Mary.” Mary described for me the first time she 
was raped. And the second time. And again and again. She became pregnant from one of therapes and gave birth to a daughter who is a constant reminder of the rapes. With no means of support, she entered the sex trade to feed her daughter.
But working with CVT’s counselors, Mary is now rebuilding her life. She has found
domestic work and no longer sells her body. She told me, “When I see CVT’s logo, it makes me happy.”
My sadness and anger at her abuse were tempered by her resilience—her ability, with 
our help, to pick up the pieces of her shattered life and regain a vision for her future.Rebuilding lives and restoring hope is at the core of what we do at CVT, and your supportmakes it possible.  
As you consider your year-end charitable contributions, I hope you’ll keep in mind Mary
and the more than 2,000 survivors we’ll help this year. Please give as generously as you can.
Sincerely, 
Curt Goering
Executive Director......................................................
Curt Goering
3New Allies, New Resources
From page 1
accountability for the use of torture.
We’re placing particular focus
on securing the release of theSenate Intelligence Committee’sreport on the CIA’s detention andinterrogation policies, which The
New York Times called “A blistering
6,000 page Senate study that includesincendiary accusations that agencyofficials misled the White House,the Justice Department and Congressabout the so-called enhanced interrogation techniques like waterboarding that were used onQaeda prisoners.” 
We are also advancing a set of
political asylum policy reforms aspart of the drive for comprehensiveimmigration reform, includingreducing delays in immigrationcourt, eliminating the one-year filingdeadline for asylum applications,reducing the frequency of detentionof asylum seekers and expandinghumane alternatives to detention,and mitigating the harm to asylumseekers resulting from overly broaddefinitions of terrorist activity inU.S. immigration laws.
We approach our advocacy
work from a perspective that is different from our human rightscolleagues. We are not attorneys;we are healers. We give voice topeople who were purposely silencedby the perpetrators of torture. Weare the only human rights advocacygroup that is grounded in more thantwo decades of helping individualtorture survivors heal from theirwounds and rebuild their lives.Having extended care to more than25,000 survivors, CVT has a uniquelevel of knowledge, experience andcredibility.
CVT will raise almost $290,000
this year in restricted funds to support our policy work. But we’llspend $525,000 to generate the$25 million that makes possiblerehabilitation care for tens of thousands of survivors worldwide,while seeking accountability for thetorture committed post-9/11 andwhile working for urgently neededchanges to our nation’s immigrationand political asylum systems. 
As you consider your year-end
charitable contributions, pleaseconsider a gift to the Center forVictims of Torture. Your gift willfund our advocacy as we createnew allies against torture and newresources to heal survivors. Andyour gift will help to rebuild thelives and restore the hope of torturesurvivors in the U.S., Africa and theMiddle East—those who receivecare from CVT, and those who willnever reach our door.“Throughout all of this, if I 
can compliment all of you, theCenter for Victims of T orturehas stayed true to its mission,helping torture survivorsrecover and rebuild their lives,and you deserve congratulationsfor that. And over the years, aschairman of the appropriationscommittee that provides thefunding to carry out our foreignpolicy, I have made a point ofincreasing the amount availableto help torture survivors—through organizations like theCenter for Victims of T ortureand the United NationsVoluntary Fund for Victims ofT orture. […] I applaud you fordoing what you do to make itpossible for them. Every singleone that you’re able to help,every single one that you’reable to bring here, every singleone that you’re able to keepfrom torture makes the worldbetter. ”
— Senator Patrick Leahy, 
US Senator from Vermontand Chair, JudiciaryCommittee
Senator Patrick Leahy (D-VT) speaks at
CVT’s symposium June 26—InternationalDay in Support of Victims of T orture
Curt Goering introduces
Senator Patrick Leahy(D-VT), CVT’s 2013Eclipse Award recipientfor his extraordinary service on behalf of torture survivors.
PHOTOS © CHRIS MADDALONI / WWW.CHRISMADDALONI.COMwide,” said Marie.
“I was curious tolearn more about the intersectionbetween the clinical work and the policy/legal aspects ofthe work in Washington, D.C.” 
Marie, who is of Lebanese
descent and is proficient in Arabic,hopes to focus her career on thepromotion of the rule of law in the Middle East, in particularstrengthening institutions to betterprotect human rights.
.....................................................................................................Mental health services are oftenforgotten in disaster situations,”said Marie Souied. Marie just
completed an eight-month internshipwith CVT’s Washington, D.C.office. A third-year law student atAmerican University WashingtonCollege of Law, Marie used herlegal education to support CVT’sadvocacy work. Marie’s internshipincluded researching and draftingan upcoming publication thataddresses how torture rehabilitationis crucial to the overall healing of a society reeling from the effects of conflict or oppression. 
“Our small policy team in
Washington has an ambitious agenda,”said Annie Sovcik, Director ofCVT’s Washington Office. “Mariebrought with her such a wealth ofknowledge, skills and passion forhuman rights. She quickly became avalued and integral part of our team.”
A former producer with the 
Al Arabiya News Channel in theUnited Nations office, Marie wasdrawn to CVT because of its broadinternational reach. “The effects ofCVT’s policy work are felt far and
649 Dayton Avenue
St. Paul, MN  55104www.cvt.org
© 2013 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.13-ND5At the end of the year, many of
our donors choose to make theirtax-deductible contributions to
support CVT’s work. These year-endgifts help us extend care to survivorsof torture and war atrocities andpropel our advocacy to end tortureworldwide. Gifts received in 2013also help us to more effectively planand allocate our resources for 2014.
If you haven’t had a chance to
send a gift to CVT this year, please doso in the weeks ahead. Or if you’vealready made a gift and you canmake an additional tax-deductiblecontribution, we will be doublygrateful. Your annual supportinspires us at CVT—and it alsosends a powerful message of hopeto torture survivors.
This year we are offering oursupporters an opportunity to give
Gifts of Hope as holiday gifts. Your
friends and family members willappreciate knowing that a person’slife is being restored in their names.And when you give a Gift of Hope ,
we’ll send you cards that you canuse to announce your thoughtfulgifts.
Thank you for your continuing
generosity and for your commitmentto helping torture survivorsthroughout the world. Please makeyour tax-deductible gift by check,by credit card, or by donatingonline at www.cvt.org . If you’d 
like to discuss a gift of stock or abequest gift, please contact Ashleyat 1-877-265-8775 (toll-free) or atagotreau@cvt.org.
Y our Y ear-End Giving Creates
Hope and Healing
Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Y our generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 forother ways to give. Thank you for yourongoing commitment to healing thewounds of torture.Marie Souied: Supporting T orture Survivors
with Legal Research
The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
