The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
Halimah fled her home country
after being tortured, shot at,raped, and held by rebels for six
months. Desperate for a new life,she made her way to Nairobi. Whenshe finally found CVT, she was inpain with a broken bone and a tornmuscle. She found life meaningless.“Halimah covered her face becauseshe was fearful and didn’t have anyconfidence,” said Jepkemoi Kibet,CVT’s physical therapist/trainer inNairobi.
Halimah joined a women’s 
counseling group and started healingemotionally and psychologically.But when she joined one of the newphysical therapy groups, her physicalhealing and transformation began.
Mind-Body Connection
At the healing centers in Nairobi,
Jordan and St. Paul, the Center forVictims of Torture
TMis providing
physical therapy (also called “phys-iotherapy”) to survivors like Halimahto help heal their minds and bodiesof the violence they survived.
“Physical therapy can improvenot just physical health, but also
mental health. They are so inter-twined,” said MaryAnn deRuiter,physical therapy clinical advisor.“We often see a survivor’s mentalhealth improve when their physicalabilities improve and vice versa.”Survivors begin their hea ling with
counseling and are then referred to the physical therapists for anassessment.
“Sometimes it can be very 
difficult to determine if pain iscaused by physical issues or emo-tional and psychological issues,”said Jepkemoi. “Survivors who aresuffering from depression or anxietymay have physical symptoms evenHealing the Body and Mind with Physical TherapyVOLUME 24, ISSUE 1 •WWW.CVT.ORG
INSIDE
2 Letter from the Executive Director, Curt Goering
4 In Memoriam: Michael MacLeod  
4 Y our Annual Renewal Sends a Message of Hope 
Restoring 
the Dignity of the Human SpiritINSIDE   
THEstory cloth
FEBRUARY 2014
In Jordan, local counselors
practiced a core stabilityexercise to help strength, coordination and balance inthe trunk. The empty cupson their backs promptedthe counselors to keep their trunks still while they moved their limbs.
PHOTO © CVTClient’s name has been changed
to protect her identity.though their bodies have healed.
Others have ongoing physical issuescaused by torture such as falangaor being hung by their arms.”
Torture can also leave survivors
with an altered body awarenessand trouble self-regulating. “Whensomeone is being tortured, they oftendissociate as a survival technique,”explained Laura Gueron, physicaltherapy clinical advisor for theNairobi project. “But this can leadsurvivors to feel disconnected fromtheir bodies long after the tortureends. Through physical therapy,survivors can reconnect with theirbodies so they have better control  
See page 32Letter from the Executive Director
This month, CVT began counseling for Eritrean survivors of torture
and war atrocities living in refugee camps in northern Ethiopia. Eritrea is one of the most under-reported refugee crises in the world today—2 millionEritrean refugees live globally, with another 3,000 fleeing every month.
The human rights situation in Eritrea is desperately bleak, and Eritreans 
are forced to flee because life in their country is truly impossible. Torture and other extreme human rights violations are endemic.
I visited our Ethiopia project in September and was surprised by the serious lack of basic 
services in the camps. 
One reception center visited by our staff was intended to provide shelter for just a few days
while people are registered as refugees. Instead, people live there up to four months with few services beyond basic food and health care. For the large number of youth who cross the border on their own, living conditions are particularly bleak. 
One unique contribution we make is to hire and train members of the refugee population to
be skilled mental health counselors. In Ethiopia, 21 psychosocial counselors and two counselingsupervisors have already undergone nearly 100 hours of training on trauma, healing and counseling.
When group counseling began, these counselors continued their training by observing two 
experienced trauma psychotherapists lead the groups. Soon, the counselors will co-facilitate counseling sessions with the psychotherapists, who will provide ongoing professional training and daily mentoring. 
Given the scale of torture and human rights atrocities in Eritrea, the training and skills of
these counselors will be needed for many years to support refugees seeking safety.
They will be an important voice in their community, acting as educators about the effects of
torture and trauma, and participating in the development of community-based approaches toaddressing the needs of the community.
We hope world leaders will bring attention to the situation in Eritrea and build more long-term
solutions. With your support, we will continue to speak about torture and other ongoing humanrights violations within Eritrea and to support the needs of survivors.
Sincerely, 
Curt Goering
Executive Director......................................................
Curt Goering
PHOTO © SARA FELDMANThe Ethiopia staff took a break from planting trees last fall. The
cement blocks were used in construction of the counseling huts,or “tukuls, ” and the trees provide shade and comfort to the area. 3Healing the Body and Mind
with Physical Therapy
From page 1
over them, which can improve their 
functioning in everyday life.”
Physical Therapy Groups
Like our counseling process,
physical therapy has three stages:Safety and Stabilization, Remembranceand Mourning, and Reconnection. 
In the first few sessions of physical
therapy, survivors learn core stabilityexercises. They practice breathingand relaxation techniques to helpthem self-regulate when they feelanxiety or low energy.  Str etching,
balancing on yoga balls and playingcatch with a beanbag help survivorsloosen their muscles and reconnectwith their bodies. “In this stage, theclients learn to become more awareof their bodies and begin to feel safein their abilities to move or relax,”said Jepkemoi.  
During the Remembrance and
Mourning stage, survivors recallactivities they did before their torturesuch as walking a child to schoolor gardening. Physical therapistslead this process with activities thatstrengthen their physical abilitiesincluding strength training, yoga-type balance moves and ball throwing at targets. Survivors whoare unable to return to previousactivities are taught ways to moveand modify activities that can helpthem regain function.Finally, survivors begin recon-
necting to their current life. “I’llgive each survivor an exercise chartso they can do exercises at home,”said Jepkemoi. “If they need to docertain activities like carry children,I give directions on how to do thatwithout hurting themselves.” In thegroup sessions, survivors skip andhop, do push-ups, squats, and otherexercises to regain more function andstrength. Often survivors are ableto resume activities they previouslyenjoyed or are able to find newways to experience movement andphysical activities.
In both Nairobi and Jordan, 
the physical therapy groups are separated by gender to address specific issues such as pelvic painand incontinence caused by sexualassaults. “Each physical therapistdecides from a collection of exercisesand activities what is most appro-priate for their group,” explainedIlona Fricker, physical therapist/trainer in Jordan. “The types ofexercises and speed of progressionand number of exercises in each session depends on the clients. InJordan, women enjoy doing theirtraditional line dance, the dabke.Teen boys like to do more strengthand endurance exercises. With children, we turn the exercises intogames with balls or a parachute.”
The integrated care is proving 
The Nairobi team (left to right): 
physical therapist/trainer JepkemoiKibet, physical therapists StephenOgwata and Jennifer Chepkemoi
PHOTO © CVT
“My hard work doing my exercises has helped me to
improve. I feel that I am defeating my torturers byregaining my function. ”
—Minnesota torture survivor to be beneficial to survivors like
Halimah. Through physical therapy,she has learned to manage the painof her physical injuries and restoredher ability to function after her torture. “Now, she no longer coversher face. She smiles, and she canwalk without pain,” said Jepkemoi.“She was in the depths of despair,and today she is the very embodimentof the strength of the human spirit.”
Watch a video interview with
Jepkemoi about physical therapy at www.cvt.org/nairobi.
CVT’s physical therapy activities in
Nairobi are financed by the UnitedStates Department of State’s Bureau ofPopulation, Refugees and Migration(BPRM). Support for CVT’s physicaltherapy activities in Jordan comes fromthe American People through USAID,BPRM and theUnited NationsVoluntary Fundfor Victims ofT orture.
individual. 
In his short
time as a CVTboard member,he gained theadmiration andrespect of all who knew him. His loss will be deeply felt. But his spirit lives onthrough the work of the manyorganizations he was committed to, and his impact will be felt foryears to come.
.....................................................................................................Michael MacLeod, a CVT boardmember and tireless humanrights advocate, passed away
on November 19, 2013.
Michael dedicated his profes-
sional and personal life to publicservice. He founded Public InterestData, Inc., a technology firm thatsupported nonprofit fundraising.He worked to advance humanitariancauses through three decades of service to organizations includingAmnesty International, Oxfam,CVT and The Harlem Link CharterSchool. In 1980 he managed the
presidential campaign of JohnAnderson.
Michael was deeply committed
to the fight against torture, particu-larly survivor rehabilitation. Heformed extraordinary bonds withmany staff and board members inthe dozens of organizations whobenefited from his wisdom and generosity. His sharp insights, intellect and gentle demeanor were just some of the attributesthat made him such a remarkable
649 Dayton Avenue
St. Paul, MN  55104www.cvt.org
© 2014 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.14-NA5The beginning of the year is a time
for reflecting and renewing. Thisyear, we encourage all of our
supporters to reflect on the hopeand healing your support gives toso many survivors of torture. And,we ask you to once again join inour work to end torture and healsurvivors by renewing your annualmembership. Gifts received early inthe year have a greater impact by providing financial support for ourwork throughout the year. 
Your past commitment helped
CVT care for 2,000 torture survivors in 2013—giving themstrength and courage to rebuildtheir lives. In 2014, we expect toserve even more torture survivors—in the United States, Kenya andEthiopia, and in Jordan wherewe’re caring for men, women and children who have enduredunspeakable abuses in Syria’s brutal civil war. 
Your renewal also provides
essential funding for our policyadvocacy in Washington, D.C.,where we work against torture andgenerate funding to heal survivors. 
When you receive your renewal
request, please don’t hesitate. Yourgift is urgently needed to heal livesand send a message of hope. Youcan also renew your annual supportonline via our secure server by visiting www.CVT.org and clicking“DONATE NOW.” Our Web sitealso makes it easy for you to becomea member of our monthly givingprogram, the Circle of Hope. 
Please feel free to call us toll-free
at 1-877-265-8775 if you wish touse your credit card or if you haveany questions. And thank you, once again, for your generous partnership with CVT.
Y our Annual Renewal Sends 
A Message of Hope
PHOTO PROVIDED BY WHITNEY BURNETT
Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Y our generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 forother ways to give. Thank you for yourongoing commitment to healing thewounds of torture.In Memoriam: Michael MacLeod
The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
Michael MacLeod and 
his wife Whitney Burnett