INSIDE 
2Letter from the Executive Director 
3Helping Survivors Realize All They Can Do for Themselves 
3CVT Acts to End Intentionally Cruel Treatment of Asylum Seekers The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
VOLUME 28, ISSUE 4 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
Restoring 
the Dignity of 
the Human Spirit 
THE sto rycloth 
AUGUST 2018 
Healing Across Cultures and 
Languages Spanning the Globe 
On any given day, a CVT clini -
cian’s work traverses the world, 
as the survivors of torture and 
war atrocities are from diverse cul -
tural and linguistic backgrounds. In 
helping them heal, each detail, each 
word or phrase, and each individual 
person involved in a survivor’s care 
is regarded with significance. 
Professional interpreters are 
integral members of what CVT 
refers to as the “therapeutic triad.” 
In each therapy session, the room is 
set up with the client and clinician facing each other to simulate direct 
conversation, and the interpreter 
sits to the side. Many torture 
survivors arrive at their initial 
counseling sessions feeling fearful 
and often reveal that they have 
difficulty trusting. CVT uses the 
triad model to alleviate this uneasi -
ness and to demonstrate to clients 
that they are part of a cohesive team. 
Interpreters are required to 
interpret everything said in the 
room, including side conversations 
or phone calls. Every word matters. 
When survivors understand what 
is being said and do not feel that 
anything is left out, it helps to 
increase trust and transparency in 
the healing relationship. 
Interpreting for mental health 
appointments across cultures adds 
a layer of complication that inter -
preters and clinicians grapple with 
on a daily basis. Expressions of 
psychological and emotional distress 
are deeply embedded with cultural 
meaning, and it is part of the 
interpreter’s role to find a way to communicate concepts of distress 
across cultural barriers, while still 
adhering to professional boundaries 
and role expectations. 
In CVT’s Healing Hearts, 
Creating Hope project, we work 
with Karen survivors, an ethnic 
minority from Burma with a distinct 
linguistic and cultural heritage. 
They often describe their distress 
with heart-based idioms, such 
as expressing that they have a 
“heavy heart” or a “tired heart.” 
The interpreter must find the words 
to communicate this concept in a 
way that retains the original mean -
ing and that makes sense to the 
clinician, often a cultural outsider. 
The clinician, then, must unpack 
the meaning of these expressions as 
it relates to a client’s past trauma 
history and current experience of 
suffering and healing. 
CVT staff were intrigued by the 
process. They wondered, how are 
idioms of distress being interpreted? 
How do interpreters deal with 
(see page 4) How do interpreters 
deal with expressions 
that are so culturally 
bound and may not 
have exact equivalents 
in English? 2Letter from the Executive Director 
Dear Friends, 
In caring for survivors of extreme violence, torture and atrocities 
committed by militias, violent governments and armies, every day we 
hear about the nightmares they endured and the duress of flight. They 
speak of loss—loss of loved ones, homes, communities, countries. 
The loss they know is like the air they breathe. For many, pain is 
part of their daily existence. 
For people in these circumstances—fleeing atrocities in a desperate attempt to reach 
safety—to be met at America’s border by United States officials who pulled their children 
from their arms was an outrageous act of cruelty. The Trump Administration’s “zero tolerance” 
policy is intentionally compounding the trauma and fear these people are experiencing— 
including survivors of torture and horrific violence. The impact of separation on children 
who are already traumatized is devastating and long lasting, particularly for toddlers and 
young children. 
And locking children up with their parents indefinitely is not a “solution” to the family 
separation crisis the president’s policy created. It only trades one set of harms for another. 
Herded into an immigration detention system that has proven to be both unsafe and 
unaccountable, the Justice Department’s goal is to deport these families as fast as possible 
with no regard for their right to due process. And that includes asylum seekers who face 
a credible fear of persecution and possible death if returned to their home country. 
The Trump Administration’s policies of punishing, expelling and excluding the world’s 
most vulnerable people are monstrous. Terrorizing children and deliberately inflicting more 
pain and anguish on families fleeing for their lives is not who we are as Americans. 
Thank you for standing with CVT in condemning this outrage being conducted in our 
names and taking action with us to stop this extreme cruelty. Together, we must be a strong 
moral beacon in these very dark days in our country’s history, and we are grateful to have 
you at our side. 
Gratefully, 
Curt Goering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Curt Goering 
by Habiba Mohamed, psychosocial counselor, CVT Nairobi 
In my work with survivors of tor -
ture, at first clients tell me the very 
dark stories about their past, but 
with counseling we can help them 
move away from their experience of 
torture and begin to reconnect with 
the resources they have inside. They 
begin to help themselves to move 
ahead with their lives. 
I remember a young woman who 
came to the center for help who was 
very sick. We sat down to do an 
intake interview with an interpreter, 
but when I asked about trauma and 
pain, she started crying. She could 
not go on and couldn’t do the intake. 
With this survivor, I could see 
from that first meeting that she 
needed to move forward at her own pace. I stopped the interview, and 
we did another appointment the 
next day. The following day, I felt 
that she was brighter and not as 
weak as the day before. She had 
been through a lot.  
She told me warriors came to her 
village early in the morning. They 
were torching houses, killing people 
haphazardly, and taking women and 
girls into captivity, including her. 
They were gang raped. When she 
refused, she was tortured on every 
part of her body. She eventually 
came to Kenya alone. All her family 
was gone and her husband had been 
killed. But as she began the healing 
process with CVT, she was also 
reunited with her children. That was her happiest moment. After she 
went through the counseling cycle, 
at her three-month follow-up session 
she said now she has hope. She was 
not as frail, smartly dressed, and 
taking good care of herself. At her 
12-month follow-up session, she 
said she has started a small business. 
We know torture has profound 
long-term effects, so we give sur -
vivors skills to take care of them -
selves. As they practice these skills, 
they can go on with their lives. We 
show them that they can’t heal in 
one day, but with time, they will see 
improvements. We give them hope 
that what they are doing is not lost. 
CVT Acts to End Intentionally Cruel Treatment of Asylum Seekers 
The Trump Administration’s 
policy of adding barriers against 
individuals and families seeking 
asylum is reprehensible. People flee -
ing violence and persecution have 
the legal right to seek safe haven in 
the United States, and CVT forcefully 
condemns the decision of the Attor -
ney General to unilaterally overturn 
years of case law that afford asylum 
seekers basic protections. 
Deporting and turning away fam -ilies and individuals who have a 
legitimate claim for asylum is cruel 
and inhumane. The vast majority 
of CVT clients in the United States 
are asylum seekers who have 
survived torture, and the vulnerable 
people this policy targets have a 
right to rehabilitative care, not pun -
itive treatment. 
From the beginning of the 
humanitarian crisis the Trump 
Administration created at the south -
ern border, CVT has been working 
diligently with coalition partners to 
end family separation and overturn 
the Attorney General’s decisions on 
asylum. We have been visiting con -
gressional offices and mobilizing 
people nationwide to pressure their 
elected representatives to take action 
to end this despicable policy. CVT has been explaining the 
impact of these policies on torture 
survivors to lawmakers and the 
media and stressing how efforts to 
narrow asylum protections will 
endanger them. Quite literally, it will 
send them back to their torturers. 
In addition, many survivors in 
our care in the U.S. have been deeply 
affected by what is happening to 
other asylum seekers like them, reliv -
ing their own harrowing flight from 
life-threatening persecution and vio -
lence, and our counselors are work -
ing extra closely with these clients. 
We cannot be complacent in the 
face of this continued harsh treat -
ment of survivors, and CVT is 
calling on all Americans to join us 
in raising our voices against this 
cruel policy. 
3
Helping Survivors Realize All 
They Can Do for Themselves 
CVT’s work in Nairobi is made possible by a grant from the U.S. State Department’s Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration; the United Nations Voluntary 
Fund for Victims of Torture; United Methodist Women; and the S.L. Gimbel Advised Fund at The Community Foundation—Inland Southern California. © Kireev Art |Dreamstime 
© Suriyawut Suriya |Dreamstime 2356 University Avenue W, Suite 430 
St. Paul, MN 55114 
www.cvt.org 
© 20 18 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it. 18-NE5 The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE Healing Across Cultures and 
Languages Spanning the Globe 
(from page 1) 
expressions that are so culturally 
bound and may not have exact 
equivalents in English? To answer 
these questions, clinical and research 
staff collaborated to design a 
small-scale project working with 
interpreters. 
For this project, staff obtained 
permission to use audio clips of 
clients describing idioms of distress, 
and then met with Karen interpreters 
to listen to clips together, and dis -
cuss the many ways a single phrase 
could be interpreted. The goal 
was not to “check” whether an 
interpreter translated a certain 
phrase correctly; the research team 
rejects the idea that there is only 
one way to correctly interpret most 
cultural statements. Instead, we 
wanted to more thoroughly explore 
the idiomatic phrases used by 
Karen participants and the 
different ways these might be 
interpreted into English. 
Many factors are at play in 
these situations. Interpreters don’t 
only consider cultural context, 
but also religious beliefs, ethical 
considerations, technical terminology, 
beliefs about traditional healing, 
and the role of mind, body, heart 
and soul in suffering and healing. 
From interpreters’ perspectives, 
one thing rang true: trust on all 
ends is essential to interpreting 
for torture survivors. Infographic by Amanda Scheid 
The Interpreter Project group includes Alyce Eaton, CVT’s former research coodinator; Leora Hudak, MSW, 
LICSW, psychotherapist with CVT’s Saint Paul Healing Center; and EhTa Zar, client services coordinator for 
CVT’s Healing Hearts project. 