Sexual assault is a common form
of torture, including for the survivors we work with in the
United States, the DemocraticRepublic of Congo (DRC) andJordan. Among the men and womenwe care for in Minnesota, 67 percenthave experienced some type of sexual torture. 
“By its very nature, rape is more
invasive than other forms of tortureand often results in overwhelmingfeelings of shame,” said CVT’sDirector of Client Services, AndreaNorthwood, Ph.D., L.P.. “The level
of invasion caused by sexual assaultis difficult to match because it goesto the most private, core identity of a person,” leaving devastatingeffects on individuals, relationshipsand communities.
It also puts both men and
women at risk for HIV and sexuallytransmitted diseases and can leavethem unable to have children. Forsurvivors in Minnesota, rape canalso complicate the asylum process.Men who were forced to rape tosave their own lives and women
who were held as sex slaves mightbe denied asylum because they are considered perpetrators or“supporters” of those who enslavedthem. Despite the physical invasion,lingering health issues and legalcomplications, the men and womenwe care for are able to heal and live fully again. 
The woman’s experience
“Culturally, rape has profound
social and economic consequencesfor women,” said Andrea. “When agirl is raped, she may no longer beconsidered eligible to marry in thecommunity. When a wife is raped,her husband may have intolerableguilt for not being able to protecther and blame her instead.” It candestroy marriages and families.Physically, women may bleed formonths or years or have chronicinfections. May/ June 2011, Volume 21, Issue 3    A Publication of the Center for Victims of Torture    www.cvt.org       
INSIDE
2Letter from the Executive Director
4Jane Reilly—from Paris to Rural Africa 
4A New Way to Help CVT—and Y ourselfOur mission: T o heal the wounds of 
torture on individuals, their families 
and their communities, and to 
stop torture worldwide.PHOTO © JANE REILLYSee page 3Restoring Dignity After Sexual T orture
Women in the Democratic Republic 
of Congo marched during the 16 Daysof Activism against Gender Violenceto raise awareness of the devastationof rape.2Letter from the Executive Director
June is significant for all of us dedicated to healing survivors of torture
and ending this global scourge. Each year on June 26, we commemorateUnited Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture.
CVT will be joined by volunteers, supporters and survivors at special 
events in Minnesota; Washington, D.C.; Jordan; the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Dadaab refugee camps in Kenya.
This year we are honored to present Dr. Elizabeth Lira with CVT’s Eclipse Award. The 
award is given each year on June 26 to pay tribute to an individual who has made an outstandingcontribution to the protection or healing of torture survivors.  
Past recipients include Elisa Massimino, President and Chief Executive Officer of Human
Rights First; Dr. Inge Genefke, founder of the International Rehabilitation Council for TortureVictims; and Alberto Mora, former General Counsel of the U.S. Navy who waged a three-year campaign against the United States’ use of torture and cruelty in counterterrorism efforts post-9/11.
A pioneer in the field of care for torture survivors, Dr. Lira is one of the most inspiring
thinkers in torture rehabilitation. Today, she is a psychologist and researcher at the Center forEthics, Universidad Alberto Hurtado in Santiago, Chile.  
Since 1977, Dr. Lira has worked mainly in the field of mental health and human rights in 
clinical services, psychosocial research and national and international advocacy. She has co-authoredseveral books on political reconciliation with San Diego State University Professor Brian Loveman,and written other books related to therapy and memory for victims of human rights violations.
“I am thrilled Dr. Lira is receiving this year’s Eclipse Award,” said CVT’s Senior Consulting
Clinician Rosa E. Garcia-Peltoniemi, Ph.D., L.P. “I consider her the founding mother of torturetreatment and having her for a mentor has been my great privilege.”
Dr. Lira will receive the Eclipse Award at CVT’s annual reception in Washington, D.C., on
June 23, 2011. If you will be in the Washington area and would like to attend, please let us know at cvt@cvt.org.
I also invite you to check www.cvt.org or CVT’s Facebook page for updates on June 26 
activities in Minnesota and at CVT projects in Jordan, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Kenya.
Thank you for your continued support and for joining us on June 26 to celebrate the strength
and resiliency of torture survivors. 
Sincerely,
Douglas A. JohnsonDouglas A. Johnson
......................................................
Chilean psychologist 
Dr. Elizabeth Lira will receive the Eclipse Award for her pioneering work incaring for torture survivors.Visit www.cvt.org to learn about events commemoratingUN International Day in Support of Victims of T orture.
In many cultures, a woman who
is raped is shunned, making it veryeffective in destroying communities.During the war in the DRC, rapewas used extensively to frighten andintimidate men and women. “Youcan be certain that a very high per-centage of women in our counselinggroups in the DRC have beenraped,” said CVT psychotherapistand trainer Jane Reilly. 
But in the DRC, attitudes
towards rape survivors are changing.Village chiefs are beginning tounderstand how devastating it isand are slowly starting to respondby making sure women receive themedical care they need. “Duringmy time in the DRC, I’ve seenwomen begin to speak out, not just about their own rapes, butabout how their communities andgovernments need to combat sexual violence,” said Jane.
“Lots of women come to us 
saying they can’t trust a man,”explained Andrea. “They may feelon-guard in any public setting.They may feel so branded or shamedthat they become convincedstrangers can identify them as arape survivor, as if it’s tattooed ontheir forehead.” Most women cannot talk about rape early intheir treatment. Slowly, though,women find the words to talkabout their experience. They beginto feel safe and empowered and areable to develop relationships withother women.
“Whether she is in Africa or the
U.S., when a woman can acceptherself again, then she is makingsteps towards healing,” said Andrea.
3From page 1
The man’s experience
For men, rape or other forms 
of sexual torture such as beating tothe genitals, is particularly shamefuland humiliating because of genderroles and expectations. “In Jordanwe work with many Iraqi men who have been raped or sexuallytortured in a variety of ways,” saidJosephine Anthoine-Milhomme,CVT psychologist and trainer.“And very often the men are furtherhumiliated by the perpetrators saying ‘You will not be a man anymore.’” 
While women are frequently
assaulted by more than one perpe-trator in a public setting, men aretypically tortured in a more secretivemanner. Because of the secrecy andthe stigma, men are less likely tospeak about their experience—evento their own spouses or families. Inthe counseling setting, a man mightbegin talking hypothetically aboutrape as a way to slowly bring up hisexperience. Or, the psychotherapistmight ask a survivor what rapeRestoring Dignity After Sexual T orture
means within his culture. 
When a man is able to disclose
his rape, he has taken the first steptowards healing. Then he can bereferred to physicians for medicalcare and receive physical therapy for lingering physical issues as well. Healing the body promotes emotional and psychological healing.
Men who were sexually assaulted
may be left impotent or unable todigest solid food. “One man Iworked with had his genitals beaten.He was haunted by the idea ofnever having children,” saidAndrea. “But we arranged for himto see a urologist and he was sorelieved when he learned he couldstill be a father. And when he doesbecome a father, he will be a goodone.”
There are countless survivors 
of sexual torture in desperate needof help. But with your support,we’ll continue helping them heal so they can rebuild their lives andrelationships.Michael Buttsworth
(center) and MaryAnn de Ruiter are trainingAhmad Hudaib and otherphysical therapists inJordan in techniquesthat can be used for sexual assault survivors. Physical therapy is used in Jordan and the U.S. tohelp sexual assault survivors with lower back and pelvic pain. After a medicalexam for untreated injuries, physical therapy can address issues of pelvicalignment, muscle tension and injured tissues. In Jordan, some severe casesfirst require very gentle and non-threatening treatment to peripheral areas.Once a survivor develops trust in the physical therapist, more directapproaches to treating the lower back and pelvic areas can be applied. 
PHOTO © CVTJane Reilly’s professional path
from culinary school to psycho-therapy in a remote area of the
Democratic Republic of Congo(DRC) is a bit unusual. 
After her culinary career, includ-
ing training in Paris, Jane studiedclinical social work and beganworking for torture rehabilitationcenters on the East Coast. In 2005she relocated to Minneapolis towork at CVT as a psychotherapist/trainer and coordinator of a school-based mental health program forrefugee children. Jane led therapygroups; trained educators, socialworkers and graduate students onthe effects of torture; and wrote a curriculum for working withrefugee youth in schools.Since September Jane has been
counseling individuals and supervisingand training local counselors in theDRC. “This experience has changedthe way I work as a clinician,” saidJane. “Being with clients in theircultural homes and being in theplace where the horrific atrocitiesoccurred have developed my under-standing of the refugee experienceand trauma treatment.”
While Jane adjusted to the living
conditions, she still misses hotshowers and easy access to cleanwater. The rewards far outweighthe challenges, though. “I now havea more thorough understanding ofthe extreme poverty and hardshipthat grips most of the people livingon this planet and am keenly awareof my responsibility to support
individual and community healingand human rights for all people.”
“Our work in the DRC is so
important,” Jane continued. “Thelocal counselors we’re training willstay and make a difference in theircommunities. I wish every clinicianhad the opportunity to work withsurvivors in their home countries.”
Jane Reilly: From Paris to Rural Africa
© 2011 Center for Victims of Torture
All rights reserved. Please contact CVT for permissionto reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.
11-NC5Some of our supporters have 
chosen to help the Center forVictims of Torture in a unique
way—and have helped themselvesto significant tax savings at the sametime. People who are 70½ years ofage or older may make distributionsfrom their IRAs directly to nonprofitorganizations without incurring thetaxes that would apply to a normalwithdrawal from their IRA accounts.This special opportunity has beenextended to the end of 2011, so youstill have time to take advantage of making a gift from your IRA.
An IRA distribution of this kind
is a wonderful way to make a contribution to CVT, and for somepeople it may also mean their heirswill pay lower taxes on inheritedIRAs. Distributions like this are a
creative way for CVT supporters toprovide funding that makes it possi-ble for torture survivors throughoutthe world to heal from theirwounds and rebuild their lives.
If you qualify for this opportunity,
be sure to speak with a professionaladvisor to understand your tax benefits. This information is notintended as legal or financial advice,and the tax savings may not be thesame for all individuals.
If you have questions or would
like additional information on howto ensure this gift is made properlyto avoid being taxed, please contactRachel Hughes, Individual GivingOfficer, at 1-877-265-8775 orrhughes@cvt.org.
A Unique Way to Help CVT—and Help Y ourselfMake a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Y our generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 forother ways to give. Thank you for yourongoing commitment to healing thewounds of torture.
PHOTO © APO NGELEKA MATULU
The CENTER for
VICTIMS ofTORTURE
Restoring the Dignity of the Human Spirit
649 Dayton Avenue   St. Paul, MN  55104
www.cvt.org...........................CVT psychotherapist and trainer Jane
Reilly with local Congolese children.
.................................................................................................