2016 CVT | Enforced Disappearances: Ambiguity Haunts the Families of Iraq’s Missing  • 1 Since the fall of the Saddam Hussein regime in 2003, 
disappearances in Iraq have remained largely off the 
radar in human rights reporting. However, the violation 
has not stopped under the fog of war and may be on 
the rise with the control of various militias in cities and 
towns across the country. With the increase in the 
number of Iraqi refugees and displaced since 2014, 
stories of disappearance are slowly emerging. 
The disappeared are a specific sub-category of persons 
who are missing. State-enforced disappearance is a 
human rights violation and the widespread practice—by 
state or non-state actors—amounts to a crime against 
humanity. This is a type of ambiguous loss, a category 
of loss for which there is no closure or verification of the 
loss. The absence of certainty or possibility of closure 
“can traumatize and immobilize grief and coping 
processes, and prevent individuals and families from 
moving forward with their lives.” 1
About 81 of 310 individuals from Iraq who sought 
rehabilitative care from the Center for Victims of 
Torture™ (CVT) in Jordan in 2016 report a missing family 
member. Missing persons are those unaccounted 
for as a result of conflict or violence. 2 Not all of these 
missing family members are disappeared. Clients’ 
family members may be missing for a wide range of 
reasons, such as generalized violence or inability to 
communicate with family in refuge or displacement, but 
interviews with several of these individuals indicated that some of the missing may have been disappeared. 
The ambiguity associated with disappearance can be 
particularly grave for family members. Unlike other 
forms of ambiguous loss, disappearance involves the 
specific targeting of individuals or groups for detention 
and the refusal of state or controlling authorities to 
provide any information about the missing person. The 
disappearance therefore “confronts those impacted 
by it with the power of perpetrators; power to not only 
deny life but to deny even confirmation of death.” This 
power is thus manifested in the disappeared and lives 
on “in the minds and bodies of their families through 
trauma and somatization.” 3 It can affect their whole 
lives, long after conflict or mass atrocities are over. A 
key component of psychological healing from grief is to 
work through the closure.
To understand the perspective of those who have 
experienced the disappearance of a family member, 
we conducted interviews with seven former CVT 
clients in May 2016. These individuals were invited 
to participate because they had reported missing 
family members and those family members were likely 
disappeared based on criteria provided to clinicians. 
Their psychosocial counselors also identified that 
these individuals had shown significant improvements 
in their group participation and may feel comfortable 
sharing their experiences for public reporting. 4 
Interviews with several of these individuals reveal 
INTRODUCTIONEnforced
Disappearances:
Ambiguity Haunts the Families of Iraq’s MissingEnforced Disappearances: Ambiguity Haunts the Families of Iraq’s Missing  | 2016 CVT • 2 
The International Convention for the Protection of All 
Persons from Enforced Disappearance, commonly 
referred to as CED, defines an enforced disappearance 
as “arrest, detention, abduction or any other form 
of deprivation of liberty by agents of the State or 
by persons or groups of persons acting with the 
authorization, support or acquiescence of the State, 
followed by a refusal to acknowledge the deprivation 
of liberty or by concealment of the fate or whereabouts 
of the disappeared person, which place such a person 
outside the protection of the law.” 5 States are, therefore, 
prohibited from engaging in or acquiescing to enforced 
disappearances. Breaches of this prohibition violate the 
state’s obligation to protect fundamental human rights. Furthermore, enforced disappearance is an international 
crime for which a perpetrator may be punished under 
international criminal law. The Rome Statute of the 
International Criminal Court criminalizes disappearance 
as a crime against humanity when it is part of a 
“widespread or systematic attack” on the civilian 
population. 6 It largely follows the definition provided 
in the CED and expands the potential actors to states 
or political organizations. 7 Disappearances are further 
prohibited under the customary laws of war and may be 
tried as war crimes when committed in the context of 
armed conflicts. 8
THE INTERNATIONAL PROHIBITION
AGAINST ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCEthat many of the missing may in fact be victims of 
enforced disappearance by various militias that exert 
control in regions across the country and carry out 
disappearances with impunity. Although the sample 
size of refugees interviewed for this paper is relatively 
small, the interviewees shed light on what may be a 
larger scale phenomenon across the country. 
The difficulty of tracking and retaining data on human 
rights abuses in Iraq has left disappearances vastly 
underreported. As operations to drive out the self-
proclaimed Islamic State (ISIS) ramp up and the Iraqi 
government or militias attempt to re-assert authority, 
the possibility of arbitrary detention and enforced disappearance increases. This paper provides a glimpse 
into the situation of disappearances in Iraq after the fall 
of Saddam Hussein’s regime. 
As the Iraqi government has made some strides 
in addressing the widespread phenomenon of 
disappearances under the previous regime, it must 
begin to grapple with disappearances that took place 
after its fall. The emotional and practical consequences 
of disappearances on family and loved ones of the 
disappeared must be addressed not only in Iraq, but by 
refugee host countries, the UN High Commissioner for 
Refugees and countries of resettlement, as well. 
Enforced disappearance is an international crime for which a 
perpetrator may be punished under international criminal law.2016 CVT | Enforced Disappearances: Ambiguity Haunts the Families of Iraq’s Missing  • 3 Despite all of the international prohibitions, the 
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has 
open reports of disappearances in 70 countries and 
territories around the world. 9 Iraq, whose accession to 
the CED in 2010 brought the treaty’s entry into force, 
has a long history of disappearances under the regime 
of Saddam Hussein. 10 At that time, security forces were 
often cited as the perpetrators, and stifling dissent 
in the face of popular uprisings or external armed 
conflicts was the primary reason for the large-scale 
disappearances. UN experts received reports of tens of 
thousands of cases of disappeared men, women and 
children from various ethnic and religious communities 
in the 1980s and 1990s. 11
After the fall of the former regime, Iraq acknowledged 
its history as a state with “one of the highest rates of 
enforced disappearances” 12 and moved to bring justice 
for the families of the disappeared. Under the Iraqi 
law used to try crimes committed between 1968 and 
2003, systematic disappearances are crimes against 
humanity, and members of the former regime have 
been prosecuted under this law. 13 In its report to the 
committee that monitors implementation of the CED 
(Committee on Enforced Disappearances) in 2015, Iraq 
discussed the steps being taken to fulfill its obligation 
with regard to disappearances perpetrated by the 
former regime, including the protection and excavation 
of mass graves. 14 However, this phenomenon has not 
ended with the regime’s fall, and relevant Iraqi law should be bolstered and enforced to compensate and 
bring justice for the victims of this ongoing violation. 15 
  
Increasingly since 2014, media outlets are reporting 
disappearances perpetrated by militias and, in some 
cases, Iraqi forces as they fight to drive ISIS out of 
territory in Iraq. 16 CVT’s own experience providing 
mental health support to individuals who have fled 
violence in Iraq since 2014 demonstrates that these 
disappearances are not limited to previously ISIS-held 
territories, but have popped up all over the country. 
Current Iraqi law criminalizes all unlawful detentions 
and contains criminal sanctions against the deprivation 
of liberty without judicial decision and abduction; 17 
it does not specifically define and criminalize 
disappearances in accordance with the CED and 
international law. 18 The deliberate withholding of 
information or refusal to investigate associated with 
enforced disappearance, therefore, is not punishable. 
Furthermore, since 2009, Iraqi law provides for the 
“compensation of those who have sustained damages 
as a result of the war, military errors and acts of 
terrorism” covering any such injury after March 2003. 19 
The Iraqi government acknowledged that under this 
law, families may “obtain redress for any injury they 
suffered as a result of activities including abductions 
and enforced disappearances carried out by armed 
groups, terrorist bands and criminal organizations.” 20 
To the extent that any of these laws apply to enforced 
DISAPPEARANCES IN IRAQEnforced Disappearances: Ambiguity Haunts the Families of Iraq’s Missing  | 2016 CVT • 4 disappearances, their enforcement has been entirely 
ambiguous. Other mechanisms, such as the High 
Commission for Human Rights, which is supposed to 
receive complaints concerning human rights violations 
in Iraq, 21 is ineffectual 22 and insufficiently utilized in the 
documentation and investigation of disappearances. 
 
Across the country, militias—some allied with the 
government, others fighting against it and some 
unaffiliated criminal gangs—perpetrate disappearances 
with complete impunity. Victims include rowdy children 
who raise the militia members’ ire, men from minority 
ethnic or religious groups in that region, and in one 
case a young girl who happened to be home when the 
militia’s targets—her brothers—fled. Victims say the goal 
is to sow fear and assert power. In each case identified 
by CVT, the government failed to provide even a 
semblance of investigation. 
Families and loved ones of the victims have a right to 
know the truth about what happened to disappeared 
individuals; this is a basic principle that undergirds 
the prohibition against disappearance in all of its 
forms. Under the Rome Statute, a disappearance 
is characterized by the perpetrator’s “refusal to 
acknowledge that deprivation of freedom or to give 
information on the fate or whereabouts of those persons” 
and their intention to “remov[e] them from the protection 
of law[.]” 25 According to the UN Human Rights 
Committee, the state must investigate, prosecute those 
responsible and ensure that victims or relatives receive 
“fair and adequate compensation.” 26 The third article 
to the CED requires state parties to “take appropriate 
measures to investigate acts [of disappearance] 
committed by persons or groups of persons acting without the authorization, support or acquiescence of 
the State and to bring those responsible to justice.” 27 
Regardless of the perpetrator, the state, therefore, has 
the obligation to investigate and bring perpetrators to 
justice in fulfillment of the family’s right to truth. 
In a seminal case on disappearances, the European 
Court of Human Rights noted that determining whether 
a family member of a disappeared person is also a 
victim depends “on the existence of special factors” that 
set apart suffering over disappearances in a “dimension 
and character distinct from the emotional distress […] 
inevitably caused to relatives of a victim of a serious 
human-rights violation.” The key factors articulated 
by the court are the attempts of the family member to 
obtain information and the response of the authorities 
STATE (IN)ACTION
When four militia members came knocking on the 
door of Amal’s 23 parents’ house in Kirkuk, her 
brothers knew they were coming for them and fled 
from rooftop to rooftop until they escaped. Amal, 
only eleven years old at the time, seemed to be an 
improbable target. They grabbed the young girl 
anyway, after searching for the sons and looting 
the house. Amal’s mother 24 describes her reactions 
to the whole situation: “I was deaf and blind from 
fear when this happened. I went to the street 
and screamed and cried. No one did anything. 
Everyone is scared. The gangs are the police and 
the government is in their hands.” Amal was one 
of the lucky few who were eventually released, but 
thoughts of what may have happened to her during 
her capture still haunt her parents. 2016 CVT | Enforced Disappearances: Ambiguity Haunts the Families of Iraq’s Missing  • 5 to such inquiries. This is so, the court notes, because 
the violation “does not so much lie in the fact of the 
‘disappearance’ of the family member but rather in 
the authorities’ reactions and attitudes to the situation 
when it is brought to their attention. It is especially in 
respect of the latter that the relative may claim directly 
to be a victim of the authorities’ conduct.” 28 It is thus the 
lack of action of the state that exacerbates the suffering 
of the family and triggers the legal prohibition against 
enforced disappearances. 
This indeed was the cause of suffering for many 
individuals interviewed by CVT. They pointed out that 
their neighbors could hear their screams, but no one 
did anything to help. At this time period, they describe 
how everything changed and they couldn’t tell who 
was an enemy and who was a friend, compounding 
the feeling that there’s no protection and that there 
is no appreciation for human life. These feelings 
of helplessness, isolation and degradation from 
the authorities and from their own community can 
exacerbate the emotional and psychological problems 
related to the loss, thus increasing the suffering related 
to disappearances. 
In Iraq, the governing authorities have routinely denied 
the right to truth to the families of the disappeared, and 
the compensation required under international law is 
elusive, at best. Some individuals cite an inability by local 
authorities to investigate the disappearance situation 
because of the strength of the militia. Others point to 
collusion between Iraqi authorities and the perpetrating 
militias. In either scenario, the ultimate result is a family 
left suffering in limbo, denied the right to truth. 
"The country that doesn't keep 
its citizens safe, is not a country."
Salah’s 29 uncle disappeared from his home in Diyala 
province in 2007. Salah, his father and his brother 
made multiple attempts to find him through the local 
government and the courts. Finally, the most useful 
advice they received came from a police officer who 
said to Salah’s father, “You look like a nice man, so I 
want to advise you: If you value your life, the lawsuit 
you submitted about your [missing] brother, you 
should withdraw it. If you continue on with it, you 
will end up dead.” It is thus no surprise that when 
Salah’s father and brother disappeared within days 
of one another in 2015, he had little faith in the local 
governments, both in Diyala and Baghdad—to which 
the rest of the family had escaped—to find them. 
Salah said, “In Diyala, there were no authorities. The 
checkpoints are right near us. This incident happened 
right in front of their eyes. They saw everything. Cars 
of armed groups come to the area; it’s not possible 
for them not to see what happened. We had tried to 
go to them when my uncle was taken. And my father 
was threatened by armed men on motorcycles. […] 
In [Baghdad] there are militias out in the open in the 
street with their weapons. There is no government 
there. They rule everything; they are the judges and 
the executioners. […] The country that doesn’t keep 
its citizens safe, is not a country. The home country is 
one that considers you a human. The country is like 
a mother. It doesn’t have to birth the child to be the 
mother; it just has to take care of him.”
Enforced Disappearances: Ambiguity Haunts the Families of Iraq’s Missing  | 2016 CVT • 6 
An enforced disappearance is one of the few violations 
of international law in which the violation itself does 
not end and remains ongoing until it is investigated 
and the fate and whereabouts of the individual are 
revealed. 30 As the international bodies have noted, 
enforced disappearances are often indicative of 
violations of a series of rights that remain unknown 
until more information is revealed. 31 In addition to 
the disappearance itself, missing individuals may be 
“deprived of all their rights and are at the mercy of 
their captors” who may subject them to torture or 
extrajudicial killing and violate their rights to liberty, 
security, a fair trial and an identity. 32
With all evidence supporting a negative outcome, family 
and friends are left to ruminate over the possibility that 
their loved one may be enduring horrible treatment 
during their disappearance. Often, there is little support 
for those left behind, and environmental, financial and 
interpersonal community pressures compound this 
struggle and often force families to either move on with 
their lives or wait for their loved ones. 33
 
The denial of the right to know the fate or whereabouts 
of the disappeared individual causes levels of suffering 
on the family and loved ones that may amount to 
cruel and inhuman treatment or torture. International 
law has long recognized the severity of this suffering. 
The European Court of Human Rights and the Inter-
American Court of Human Rights both note that the 
mental anguish and distress associated with not 
knowing the fate of family members is a breach of 
the prohibition against torture and cruel, inhuman or 
degrading treatment. 34 Similarly, the UN Human Rights 
Committee has held that enforced disappearance is a violation of the prohibition against torture and cruel, 
inhuman or degrading treatment for the family. 35 
This recognition of the multiple layers of violations 
disappeared individuals may be facing is reflected 
in the worry and suffering of their family and loved 
ones. It is precisely because loved ones are left to 
wonder and ruminate over what happened or what 
may have happened to the disappeared individual, 
without support or investigation from the authorities 
entrusted with protection, that the violation is ongoing. 
The impacts of disappearance can be long lasting 
on the individuals, their families and even the wider 
community. If left untreated, the mental health effects of 
treatment during detention may lead to posttraumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD), depression and other mental 
illnesses for the individuals. Families suffering from 
this ambiguous loss may exhibit similar effects. 
Furthermore, the stigma of what may have happened 
during a disappearance may follow both the individuals 
and families around for a lifetime. 
THE ONGOING NATURE OF THE VIOLATION AND SUFFERING
“I wish they had taken the boys and 
not the girl. People will talk about what 
happened when she was taken away. 
What if she wants to get engaged when 
she is 20? They will keep talking about 
her time in capture. We don’t know what 
happened to her in that time. She is not 
very aware. This incident changed our 
whole life.”
— Amal’s  mother regarding the stigma of 
sexual violence during her capture. 2016 CVT | Enforced Disappearances: Ambiguity Haunts the Families of Iraq’s Missing  • 7 The ambiguity of the loss and the ongoing nature of 
the violations are often mirrored in—and exacerbated 
by—the tenuous life in refuge. For Iraqi refugees in 
Jordan, finding a steady means of support for their 
families proves nearly impossible. Unlike some other 
refugee and immigrant groups, Iraqis who do not hold a 
Jordanian residency permit are prohibited from working 
in Jordan. Over 56,000 Iraqi refugees are registered with 
UNHCR in Jordan as of August 2016. 37 Because there 
are no camps for Iraqis, they primarily live in urban 
areas, mainly in the Jordanian capital, Amman, and 
subsist on international assistance or sporadic illegal 
work opportunities. The lack of a consistent routine and 
an unstructured lifestyle may feel unsafe and out of 
control, exacerbating the fear many already have from 
having a lack of control over their situation with missing 
loved ones. Idleness and lack of opportunities can 
make room for cyclical worrying about past losses and 
potentially being re-victimized themselves. 
MIRRORS OF AMBIGUITY IN THE REFUGEE CONTEXT
“When my husband was killed, I saw him with my own 
eyes. But my daughter, she’s only 17 years old. I went 
searching through the streets. I told the government, 
I complained. I told the police. I complained to the 
government of Basra. Is it possible for a government 
to look and not find any clue for a year? What kind 
of government is that? Is it sleeping? My kids told 
me I have to accept she’s dead. ‘If you keep looking, 
they’ll kill you,’ they said. They even hid her things 
from me, so I could move on. But I want to report [her 
disappearance] to organizations that have decency 
and humanity. I looked through corpses. I looked at 
hospitals and in mental institutions. I even went to Baghdad looking for her. I thought maybe they raped 
her and took her away somewhere. I wish I had found 
her dead. I would be relieved. I see her in front of me. 
I hear her voice screaming for me. […] I keep talking 
to myself. I ask her if it’s possible that she could find 
an escape and come back to me. Is it possible that 
they killed her? I don’t know. I accepted my husband’s 
death because I saw him, but now I am being tortured. 
If I see her body, I will know that she is dead. But 
before that, there is hope that she is still alive.”
— Naima 36, on the disappearance of her daughter, who 
was taken by militia members in Basra from her home.
Jabir ,38 a farmer from southern Iraq, was himself 
kidnapped and tortured by a militia after 2003. He was 
eventually released when his sons paid a hefty ransom. 
His family quickly fled afterwards, first to Syria and later 
to Jordan. In 2010, while still in Syria, his eldest sons could 
no longer sit idly by without work and went back to Iraq. 
Only ten days after they arrived in Iraq, Jabir received a 
call from one son’s phone number, but on the other line 
was a strange voice that asked for a significant ransom. 
“I begged and told them I don’t have that kind of money. 
After a few days, I called the number again and it was 
disconnected. I have not heard anything from my sons 
since.” Jabir fled to Jordan shortly after. He says of the 
militias, “They have friends everywhere. They blend in 
with the civilians; you don’t know who it could be.” This 
has affected even his life in Jordan, where, he believes, 
the militias may still be able to find him if they found his 
sons all of these years later. He describes only leaving 
his house with his face covered to avoid recognition or 
asking his wife to do all external chores because she can 
more readily cover her face without arousing suspicion. 
THE ONGOING NATURE OF THE VIOLATION AND SUFFERINGEnforced Disappearances: Ambiguity Haunts the Families of Iraq’s Missing  | 2016 CVT • 8 Others wait months and even years to hear anything from 
international organizations such as UNHCR, or foreign 
governments, about their resettlement or humanitarian 
parole cases, which may emphasize the ongoing nature 
of the violations. The typical lack of communication and 
uncertainty about their future in the refugee context 
may seem parallel to the refusal of the authorities to give 
information about disappearances. Perceived (or actual) 
corruption in the humanitarian aid and resettlement 
systems may reinforce the notion that authority figures 
are not dependable and cannot be trusted. 
In addition to these struggles that plague many refugees, 
families of the disappeared face additional concerns. 
When a parent is missing, families often struggle with 
what to tell their young children, who ask when their 
father or mother is coming home. Spouses have to 
navigate cultural and community pressures when 
deciding whether or not to remarry or leave the Middle 
East. 39 Women whose husbands have disappeared 
often face additional legal hurdles to already complex 
processes to relocate to third countries—whether through 
refugee resettlement programs or humanitarian parole. 
Her young sons understand, 
in theory, that their father is 
missing, but she says “They 
don’t really understand what that 
means. If someone asks, they say 
that their father is missing, and 
they don’t ask me about him, but 
they ask why we came to Jordan 
without him. They wonder why 
he didn’t come with us. ” These daily concerns only compound the difficulty of 
grappling with an ambiguous loss. Individuals and families 
struggle with whether they should move on or continue 
to pursue any possibility of finding their loved ones. Such 
ambiguity can inhibit an individual’s healing process. CVT 
counselors have identified specialized healing strategies 
for families of the disappeared to deal with ambiguity. 
Legal actors and policymakers must likewise address the 
particularized concerns and vulnerabilities of the families 
of the disappeared and ensure their protection. 
Karima’s 40 husband walked to work in Baghdad 
one day in 2012 and never got there. Karima reported 
it to the police who “mocked me and told me maybe 
he married someone else. They don’t do anything. 
They don’t care about these things. The souls of 
people are worthless to them.” This incident came 
after her son was shot and killed by militias months 
earlier, and her family had received a series of 
sectarian threats from local militias. She fled Iraq 
for Jordan, where she had the possibility of being 
paroled or resettled to another country. However, 
due to Jordanian law that restricts a mother’s ability 
to travel with her children when the father is missing, 
and grants custody to the nearest male relative, she 
had to get permission from her husband’s brother to 
leave Jordan with her own children. She noted how 
restricting this was, saying “I’m their mother.” She has 
been unable to work, and delays in the resettlement 
process have left her in limbo for months without any 
communication from UNHCR. “I just want stability. 
I’m a woman alone, under threat.” Her young sons 
understand, in theory, that their father is missing, but 
she says “They don’t really understand what that 
means. If someone asks, they say that their father 
is missing, and they don’t ask me about him, but 
they ask why we came to Jordan without him. They 
wonder why he didn’t come with us.” 2016 CVT | Enforced Disappearances: Ambiguity Haunts the Families of Iraq’s Missing  • 9 
IRAQ:
• Make a declaration under articles 31 and 32 of the 
International Convention for the Protection of All 
Persons from Enforced Disappearance accepting the 
Committee’s competence to hear individual commu -
nications and state communications, respectively. 
• Pass legislation specifically criminalizing 
any incident of enforced disappearance and 
categorizing “widespread and systematic” enforced 
disappearances as a crime against humanity, 
in accordance with international law, including 
disappearances perpetrated by non-state armed 
groups, in fulfillment of obligations under article 4 of 
the Convention for the Protection of All Persons from 
Enforced Disappearance.
› To ensure successful investigation and 
punishment of enforced disappearance, Iraq 
should create mechanisms of implementation that 
center on the advice and needs of the affected 
families and civil society. 
› Investigate disappearances in line with the 
Convention, including disappearances by non-
state armed actors aligned with and opposed 
to the government. In particular, ensure that the 
investigation and excavation of mass graves is carried 
out in line with international standards and protects 
the dignity of the individuals and their families. 
› The national government’s investigation and 
punishment should include systematic tracking and 
reporting of disappearances in a centralized fashion. • Clarify Act No. 20 of 2009 on victims of terrorism 
to include all non-state armed actors, and allow for 
compensation of victims of enforced disappearance 
regardless of the identity of the perpetrator group. 
Reparations and compensation to the victims 
should including provision of mental health and 
psychosocial services. 
• Continue to make progress on investigating the fate 
and whereabouts of individuals disappeared under 
the former regime of Saddam Hussein, in line with 
recommendations and conclusions made by the UN 
Committee on Enforced Disappearances in 2015. 
• A truly national project for the advancement of 
peace and the carrying out of justice in Iraq must 
uphold the dignity of all who suffered. Upon the 
establishment of relative peace in Iraq, a reckoning 
with past violence, whether in the form of truth 
commission or otherwise, should include a mandate 
to address violence for much longer than January 
2014, including the disappearances and other crimes 
against humanity, war crimes and human rights 
violations under the former regime, as well as those 
since its fall, not limited by certain perpetrators. 
• Utilize the national High Commission on Human 
Rights to carry out its work and document instances 
of disappearances. All cases of disappearances 
that are locally reported should be referred to this 
commission, and it should be empowered to carry 
out investigations across the country, including 
through local affiliates. The work of this commission 
should be informed by consultation with civil society. 
RECOMMENDATIONSEnforced Disappearances: Ambiguity Haunts the Families of Iraq’s Missing  | 2016 CVT • 10  TO U.S. CONGRESS AND 
ADMINISTRATION:
• In any legislation passed, ensure that calls for access 
to justice cover all victims of serious human rights 
violations, crimes against humanity and war crimes 
in Iraq, to prevent against prioritizing suffering 
of some over others and fostering sectarianism. 
Legislation that covers accountability should include 
accountability for perpetrators across Iraq. 
• Increase funding for mental health and psychosocial 
services to survivors of trauma, particularly in regions 
and localities that faced prolonged violence and those 
hosting refugees and internally displaced persons. 
• Fund research and tracking of human rights abuses 
in Iraq with a view to national accountability 
and enhancing local justice and accountability 
mechanisms, including judicial mechanisms. 
• Under international guidelines, women at risk are a 
priority resettlement group, including women whose 
husbands are missing. Ensure that family members 
of disappeared persons are not prevented from 
accessing safe resettlement in the United States. TO U.S. AND INTERNATIONAL 
FORCES SUPPORTING IRAQI 
MILITARY
• U.S. government agencies providing training and 
equipment to the Iraqi army should ensure that those 
in whose hands its equipment and training fall do not 
commit grave violations of human rights, including 
disappearances. In the instances of credible reports 
of disappearance, in accordance with U.S. laws 
prohibiting the transfer of weapons and equipment 
to such units, the United States Secretary of State 
and Secretary of Defense should cut off funding until 
credible steps are taken towards justice. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
CVT  would like to thank the 
courageous individuals who 
were interviewed for and 
profiled in this paper.2016 CVT | Enforced Disappearances: Ambiguity Haunts the Families of Iraq’s Missing  • 11 1 Judith Twala, Center for Victims of Torture Healing and 
Human Rights Blog, “Supporting Survivors Through 
Ambiguous Loss,” Aug. 31, 2015, http://www.cvt.org/blog/
healing-and-human-rights/supporting-survivors-through-
ambiguous-loss.
2 Simon Robins, Families of the Missing: A Test for 
Contemporary Approaches to Transitional Justice  
(Routledge: 2014) at 4 [hereinafter Robins]. 
3 Robins, supra  note 2, at 4-5. 
4 The process for identifying former clients to potentially 
participate in interviews was to first identify the full number 
of clients reporting missing family members. Clinicians 
were then advised on the definition of disappearances 
and identified the individual clients within that group who 
may have a disappeared relative and whose recovery 
process may allow them to discuss their experiences. 
Clinicians contacted several clients and explained the 
interview process to them and reiterated that the interview 
would be voluntary and would not affect their relationship 
with the Center for Victims of Torture. Finally, individuals 
who agreed to an interview participated in a process of 
informed consent carried out by CVT’s Policy Council. 
Interviews were conducted in English, with translation, by 
Marie Soueid in CVT’s Amman office. Interviews lasted on 
average one hour. They were semi-structured. Participants 
were then invited to return for a second interview in 
which they discussed the information they had previously 
provided and reviewed if they were willing to have specific 
pieces of their information on record. All seven individuals 
who provided an initial interview returned for the second 
interview and had an opportunity to review or retract their 
information. In this report, all names are changed. Other 
identifying information has been  left out as requested by 
the participants, such as specific towns or villages and 
names of family members. All specific details of individual 
stories represented in this report have been approved by 
the participants.
5 International Convention for the Protection of All Persons 
from Enforced Disappearance, art. 2, G.A. Res. 61/177 (2007), 
entered into force Dec. 23, 2010 [hereinafter CED].   
6 Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, July 17, 
1998, 2187 U.N.T.S. 90, art. 7(1)(i), [hereinafter Rome Statute].
7 Id. art. 7(2)(i), (“‘Enforced disappearance of persons’ means 
the arrest, detention or abduction of persons by, or with 
the authorization, support or acquiescence of, a State or a 
political organization, followed by a refusal to acknowledge 
that deprivation of freedom or to give information on the 
fate or whereabouts of those persons, with the intention 
of removing them from the protection of the law for a 
prolonged period of time.”)
8 International Committee of the Red Cross, “Customary IHL: Practice Relating to Rule 98: Enforce Disappearance,” 
https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/customary-ihl/eng/docs/
v2_cha_chapter32_rule98; Brian Finucane, “Enforced 
Disappearance as a Crime Under International Law: A 
Neglected Origin in the Laws of War,” 35 YALE J. OF INT. 
L. 171 available at  http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=1427062. 
9 “Day of the Disappeared: The Missing Around the World,” 
International Committee of the Red Cross: Intercross Blog, 
Aug. 30, 2016, http://intercrossblog.icrc.org/blog/day-of-the-
disappeared-the-missing-around-the-world.
10 See e.g., Economic and Social Council, E/CN.4/1994/58, 
25 Feb. 1994, Commission on Human Rights, 50th 
Session; Report on the situation of human rights in Iraq 
submitted by Mr. Max van der Soel, Special Rapporteur of 
the Commission on Human Rights, in accordance with 
Commission resolution 1993/74, ¶ 26-33 available at  http://
ap.ohchr.org/documents/alldocs.aspx?doc_id=220.
11 Id. ¶ 26-33. 
12 Committee on Enforced Disappearances, CED/C/IRQ/1, 
25 July 2014, Consideration of Reports of States Parties, 
Iraq, ¶ 10, (more than 16,400 cases were recorded in 
Iraq, mostly prior to 2003) available at http://tbinternet.
ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.
aspx?symbolno=CED/C/IRQ/1&Lang=en [hereinafter Iraq 
CED Report 2014].
13 Id. ¶ 11. 
14 Id. (“In 2012, the Iraqi Government formed a committee to 
look into these cases and provide documentary evidence 
to the Working Group); ¶ 20-21 (on the protection and 
excavation of mass graves.)
15 Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, 
Committee on Enforced Disappearances reviews 
report of Iraq, Sep. 8, 2015, available at  http://www.
ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.
aspx?NewsID=16395&LangID=E.
16 Ned Parker and Jonathan Landay, Special Report: 
Massacre Reports Show U.S. Inability to Curb Iraqi Militias,” 
Reuters, Aug. 23, 2016, http://www.reuters.com/article/
us-iraq-massacres-falluja-special-report-idUSKCN10Y1VD; 
Jason Ditz, “Disappearances Grow as Iraqi Troops Detain 
Fleeing Fallujah Civilians,” Antiwar.com, Jun. 14, 2015, http://
news.antiwar.com/2016/06/14/disappearances-grow-as-
iraqi-troops-detain-fleeing-fallujah-civilians/.
17 Iraq CED Report 2014, supra note 12, ¶ 37 – 41. 
18 Id. ¶ 36; CED, supra  note 5, art. 4 (“Each State Party shall 
take the necessary measures to ensure that enforced 
disappearance constitutes an offence under its criminal 
law.”)  CED List of Issues in relation to the report submitted Enforced Disappearances: Ambiguity Haunts the Families of Iraq’s Missing  | 2016 CVT • 12 by Iraq, Mar. 16, 2015, ¶ 7 available at  http://tbinternet.ohchr.
org/Treaties/CED/Shared%20Documents/IRQ/CED_C_
IRQ_Q_1_19557_E.pdf. 
19 Iraq CED Report 2014, supra  note 12, ¶ 25-26. 
20 Id. ¶ 26. 
21 Iraq CED Report 2014, supra  note 12, ¶ 85. 
22 Iraq High Commission for Human Rights: Before the 
International Coordinating Committee of NHRIs, Dec. 19, 
2014, available at  http://en.alkarama.org/documents/Alk_
IRQ_NHRI_19122014_EN_Final.pdf.
23 Interviewed in October 2015 in Amman, Jordan. All names 
have been changed to protect victims’ identities.  
24 Mother interviewed in May 2016, in Amman, Jordan.  
25 Rome Statute, supra  note 6, art. 7(1)(i). 
26 International Committee of the Red Cross, “Customary 
IHL: Practice Relating to Rule 98: Enforce Disappearance,” 
Concluding Observations of UN Human Rights Committee 
on Honduras (2006) https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/
customary-ihl/eng/docs/v2_cha_chapter32_rule98.
27 CED, supra  note 5, art. 3.  
28 International Committee of the Red Cross, “Customary 
IHL: Practice Relating to Rule 98: Enforce Disappearance,” 
European Court of Human Rights, Cyprus Case (2001) 
https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/customary-ihl/eng/docs/
v2_cha_chapter32_rule98. 
29 Interviewed in May 2016 in Amman, Jordan. 
30 UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappear -
ances, “General Comment on Enforced Disappearance as a 
Continuous Crime,” available at  http://www.ohchr.org/Docu -
ments/Issues/ Disappearances/GC-EDCC.pdf. 
31 Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Velázquez 
Rodriguez  Case (1988) ¶ 157 (“The practice of enforced 
disappearances often involves secret execution without 
trial, followed by concealment of the body to eliminate any 
material evidence of the crime and to ensure the impunity 
of those responsible. This is a flagrant violation of the right 
to life.”); UN Human Rights Committee, Sarma v. Sri Lanka  
(2003) ¶ 9.3 (“Any act of such disappearance constitutes 
a violation of many of the rights enshrined in the [ICCPR], 
including the right to liberty and security of person (article 
9) the right not to be subjected to torture or to cruel, 
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (article 7), 
and the right of all persons deprived of their liberty to be 
treated with humanity and with respect for the inherent 
dignity of the human person (article 10). It also violates or 
constitutes a grave threat to the right to life (article 6).”) 
32 United Nations, “International Day of the Victims of Enforced 
Disappearance: August 30,”  http://www.un.org/en/events/disappearancesday/background.shtml.
33 Veronica Laveta, Center for Victims of Torture Healing and 
Human Rights Blog, “Jordan Counseling Group Session 7: 
Grief and Loss/Reconnecting with Memories of Lost Loved 
Ones,” Oct. 23, 2015, http://www.cvt.org/blog/healing-and-
human-rights/jordan-counseling-group-session-7-grief-
and-lossreconnecting-memories. 
34 European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR), Orhan v. Turkey  
(2002) ¶ 358-360 (“[T]he uncertainty and apprehension 
suffered by the applicant over a prolonged and continuing 
period [. . .] has clearly caused him severe mental distress and 
anguish constituting inhuman treatment[.]”); ECtHR, Kurt v. 
Turkey  (1998) (holding that because the mother has been left 
in anguish of knowing that her son is detained without more 
information as to his fate, her rights in the convention under 
Art. 3 have been violated); Inter-American Court of Human 
Rights, Godínez Cruz  Case, Compensatory Damages, (Ser. 
C) No. 8 (1990) ¶ 48-49 (finding that the disappearance of the 
head of the family caused harmful psychological impacts on 
his family that entitled them to moral damages).
35 UN Human Rights Committee, Quinteros v. Uruguay  (1983) 
(acknowledging that the anguish and stress caused to the 
mother by disappearance of her daughter including by the 
continuing uncertainty of her fate and whereabouts make 
the mother a victim of the violations under Article 7 of the 
ICCPR). 
36 Interviewed in May 2016 in Amman, Jordan. 
37 UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Jordan UNHCR 
Operational Update: August 2016, http://reporting.unhcr.org/
sites/default/files/UNHCR%20Jordan%20Operational%20
Update%20-%20August%202016.pdf. 
38 Interviewed in May 2016 in Amman, Jordan.
39 Judith Twala, Center for Victims of Torture Healing and 
Human Rights Blog, “Supporting Survivors Through 
Ambiguous Loss,” Aug. 31, 2015, http://www.cvt.org/blog/
healing-and-human-rights/supporting-survivors-through-
ambiguous-loss.
40 Interviewed in May 2016 in Amman, Jordan. 
CVT International Headquarters
2356 University Avenue West • Suite 430
St. Paul, MN 55114
CVT Washington, D.C. Office
1730 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW • 7th Floor
Washington, D.C. 20006
www.cvt.org | © 2016 The Center for Victims of Torture