 
 
215 E. 9th St, Cincinnati, OH 45202   |   ohiojpc.org   |   (513) 421 -1108      Download and share : http://ojpc.co/EmployerCQEs  
 
Certificates of Qualification for Employment  
What Employers Need to Know  
Under a new Ohio law, employers can hire, promote, and retain qualified applicants with criminal records 
without  fearing legal barriers and liabilities . Job seekers who receive a Certificate of Qualification for 
Employment (“CQE”)  have prov en to a court that they are rehabilitated . The court has removed certain legal 
limitations on the CQE -holder’s employment and pr ofessional licensing.  
Personnel decisions often  include background checks – and CQEs ensure that employers are not held back 
from hiring qualified  people to fill  their staffing needs.  
HOW DO THESE CERTIFICATES  BENEFIT EMPLOYERS ? 
Expand the Pool of Qualified Candidates  
1 in 6  Ohioan has a felony or misdemeanor conviction . Economic research suggests that Ohio loses $2 billion 
GDP annually due to otherwise -qualified workers being excluded by over -restrictive  criminal -record s barriers . 
Allow Employers D iscretion to Hire  
CQEs remove mandatory  rules prohibiting professional licensure or employment bas ed on certain criminal 
records. CQEs allow employer s or licensing agencies  discretion to individually assess an applicant’s suitability. 
The e mployer or licen sing agency is not required  to accept the applicant. Rather, a CQE -holder , who was 
previously barred,  can be treated like  any other applicant and evaluated based on his or her qualifications.  
Protect Employers from Negligent- Hiring Liability  
The CQEs  provide legal protection from negligent -hiring lawsuits for employers who  knowingly hire CQE-
holders. This immunity means that an employer can feel confident that hiring a person with a criminal record 
does not create a legal liability.  
HOW ARE CERTIFICAT ES GRANTED ? 
• CQE -holders  successfully complete  a rigorous application process, demonstrating their rehabilitation and 
identifying their professional goals.  
• Applications are thoroughly reviewed by the Department of Rehabilitations and Corrections and a Court  
of Common Pleas , with potential input from prosecutors and multiple judges.  
• CQEs are only granted if the individual has successfully maintained a crime -free record for a legally-
prescribed waiting period.  
• After the application process, employers ca n be confident  that certificate -holders will be motivated  
employees who will not create a risk to the safety of the workplace. Employers can request the individual CQE print -out from a job seeker and can  check the validity of a CQE at:  
http://www.drc.ohio.gov/web/cqe_list.pdf
 (granted CQEs may take a month to appear; allow for lag time).  
 
Employers who hire CQE- holders have the opportunity to maximize their applicant pool,  
overcome mandatory hiring barriers under Ohio law and  
gain immunity from negligent hiring liability.  