1 AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDTTaabbllee  ooff  CCoonntteennttss
Introduction .................................................................................................................. ................ page 2
Executive Director’s Report .................................................................................................... ........ page 4
Chairman’s Message............................................................................................................. ........... page 6
The Board of Directors ........................................................................................................ ........ page 7
The National Support Committee ................................................................................................ p age 7 
The Preservation of T ribal Existence .......................................................................................... .... page 8
The Protection of T ribal Natural Resources ................................................................................ page  14
Major Activities 2014 - NARF Case Map .................................................................................. page 24The Promotion of Human Rights .............................................................................................. pag e 26
The Accountability of Governments ............................................................................................ pa ge 38
The Development of Indian Law ................................................................................................ pa ge 40
Financial Report  ............................................................................................................. ........... page 43
Contributors ................................................................................................................... ............. page 44
NARF Staff ..................................................................................................................... ............. page 48
Main Office
Native American Rights Fund1506 BroadwayBoulder, CO 80302303-447-8760http://www.narf.org
Alaska Office
Native American Rights Fund745 West 4th Avenue, Suite 502Anchorage, Alaska 99501-1736907-276-0680
Washington, D.C. Office
Native American Rights Fund1514 P Street, NW, Suite D (Rear)Washington, D.C. 20005202-785-4166Workplace Campaigns – NARF is a member of America’s
Charities, a national workplace giving federation. Giving throughyour workplace is as easy as checking off NARF’s box, #10350 onthe Combined Federal Campaign (CFC) pledge form authorizingautomatic payroll deduction.  
Cover and Art: Bruce Pierre is an enrolled Lummi T ribal
Member and a descendant of Tlingit/Haida.  Bruce was raised onthe L ummi Reservation and spent his whole life in the fishing
industry. In 2002, he began to focus on his artwork as a way to
connect to his culture. Bruce likes to paint legends of the north-west tribes and family clans.  The focus of his art consists ofgraphic and mixed media art. Bruce started a small business wherehe sells silk screened art prints and sweatshirts at local Nativeevents.  He has been commissioned by the Lummi IndianBusiness Council, the Colville T ribe, an Indian County Todayarticle, Indian Gaming Magazine, and logo design work for variousT ribal programs.  Bruce Pierre can be reached at 360-305-6096or: pierrebruce1@gmail.com. Design & layout Nakota Designs .
Tax Status:  The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is a nonprofit, charitable organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws
of the District of Columbia.  NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the provisions of Section 501(c)(3) of the InternalRevenue code.  Contributions to NARF are tax deductible.  The Internal Revenue Service has ruled that NARF is not a “private foundation” as defined in Section 509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.  NARF was founded in 1970 and incorporated in 1971 inWashington, D.C.The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is
the oldest and largest nonprofit national Indianrights organization in the country devoting all itsefforts to defending and promoting the legal rightsof Indian people on issues essential to their tribalsovereignty, their natural resources and their humanrights. NARF believes in empowering individualsand communities whose rights, economic self-suffi-ciency, and political participation have been system-atically or systemically eroded or undermined. 
Native Americans have been subjugated and
dominated. Having been stripped of their land,resources and dignity, tribes today are controlled bya myriad of federal treaties, statutes, and case law.Yet it is within these laws that Native Americansplace their hope and faith for justice and the pro-tection of their way of life. With NARF’s help,Native people can go on to provide leadership intheir communities and serve as catalysts for justpolicies and practices towards Native peoplesnationwide. From a historical standpoint NativeAmericans have, for numerous reasons, been targetsof discriminatory practices.
Since its inception in 1970, NARF has represented
over 250 T ribes in 31 states in such areas as tribaljurisdiction and recognition, land claims, huntingand fishing rights, the protection of Indian religiousfreedom, and many others. In addition to the greatstrides NARF has made in achieving justice onbehalf of Native American people, perhaps NARF’sgreatest distinguishing attribute has been its abilityto bring excellent, highly ethical legal representationto dispossessed tribes. NARF has been successful inrepresenting Indian tribes and individuals in casesthat have encompassed every area and issue in thefield of Indian law. The accomplishments andgrowth of NARF over the years confirmed the greatneed for Indian legal representation on a nationalbasis. This legal advocacy on behalf of NativeAmericans continues to play a vital role in the sur-vival of tribes and their way of life. NARF strives toprotect the most important rights of Indian peoplewithin the limit of available resources. 
One of the initial responsibilities of NARF’s first
Board of Directors was to develop priorities thatwould guide the Native American Rights Fund inits mission to preserve and enforce the legal rights ofNative Americans.  The Committee developed five
priorities that continue to lead NARF today:
• Preservation of tribal existence
• Protection of tribal natural resources• Promotion of Native American human rights• Accountability of governments to Native
Americans
• Development of Indian law and educating the
public about Indian rights, laws, and issues
Under the priority of the preservation of tribal
existence, NARF works to construct the foundations
that are necessary to empower tribes so that they cancontinue to live according to their Native traditions,to enforce their treaty rights, to insure their independence on reservations and to protect theirsovereignty. 
Throughout the process of European conquest
and colonization of North America, Indian tribesexperienced a steady diminishment of their landbase to a mere 2.3 percent of its original size.Currently, there are approximately 55 million acresof Indian-controlled land in the continental UnitedStates and about 44 million acres of Native-ownedland in Alaska.  An adequate land base and controlover natural resources are central components ofeconomic self-sufficiency and self-determination,and as such, are vital to the very existence of tribes.Thus, much of NARF’s work involves the protection
of tribal natural resources. 
Although basic human rights are considered a
universal and inalienable entitlement, NativeAmericans face an ongoing threat of having theirrights undermined by the United States govern-ment, states, and others who seek to limit theserights. Under the priority of the promotion of human
rights, NARF strives to enforce and strengthen laws
which are designed to protect the rights of NativeAmericans to practice their traditional religion, touse their own language, and to enjoy their culture.  
Contained within the unique trust relationship
between the United States and Indian nations is the inherent duty for all levels of government to rec-ognize and responsibly enforce the many laws andregulations applicable to Indian peoples.  Becausesuch laws impact virtually every aspect of tribal life,
Introduction
2 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT3NARF maintains its involvement in the legal 
matters pertaining to accountability of governments
to Native Americans.
The coordinated development of Indian law and
educating the public about Indian rights, laws, andissues is essential for the continued protection of
Indian rights.  This primarily involves establishingfavorable court precedents, distributing informa-tion and law materials, encouraging and fosteringIndian legal education, and forming alliances with Indian law practitioners and other Indianorganizations. 
NARF’s Funding
NARF’s existence would not be possible without
the efforts of the thousands of individuals who haveoffered their knowledge, courage and vision to helpguide NARF on its quest.  Of equal importance,NARF’s financial contributors have graciously provided the resources to give our efforts life.Contributors such as the Ford Foundation havebeen with NARF since its inception.  The OpenSociety Institute and the Bay and Paul Foundationshave made long term funding commitments.  Also,the positive effects of NARF’s work are reflected inthe financial contributions by a growing number oftribal governments like the Yocha Dehe WintunNation, the Seminole T ribe of Florida, the ShakopeeMdewakanton Sioux Community, the San ManuelBand of Mission Indians, the Muckleshoot T ribe,the Sycuan Band of Kumeyaay, the ConfederatedT ribes of Siletz Indians, the T ulalip T ribes, theChickasaw Nation, and the Poarch Band of CreekIndians.  United, these financial, moral, and intel-lectual gifts provide the framework for NARF tofulfill its goal of securing the right to self-determi-nation to which all Native American peoples areentitled.  Finally, NARF’s legal work was greatlyenhanced by the on-going generous pro bono contributions by the law firm of Patton Boggs LLP .Their many hours of work made it possible forNARF to present the best positions possible and tomove forward in insuring NARF’s success.
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD
Bruce Pierre feature artist for this years 2014 NARF
Annual Reaport 2014 marked the 44th year that the Native
American Rights Fund has been serving as thenational Indian legal defense fund, providing legaladvice and assistance to tribes, Native organizationsand individuals in cases of major significance.  Onceagain during the year, we were able to help Nativepeople achieve several important victories andachievements.
In a stunning victory for tribes, the Supreme
Court of the United States issued its opinion inMichigan v. Bay Mills Indian Community, reaffirm-
ing the vitality of the doctrine of tribal sovereigntyimmunity from suit without their consent.  It wasonly the second win for Indian tribes in elevenIndian cases heard by the Supreme Court since JohnRoberts became Chief Justice in 2005.  The T ribalSupreme Court Project, which the Native AmericanRights Fund staffs along with the NationalCongress of American Indians, coordinated the fil-ing of amicus curiae briefs in the case.
The only Native American federal judge out of
866 federal judgeships was confirmed in 2014 whenDiane Humetewa, Hopi, became a United StatesDistrict Judge for the District of Arizona.  She wassupported by the Judicial Selection Project, staffedagain by the Native American Rights Fund alongwith the National Congress of American Indians,which regularly works to ensure that qualifiedNative candidates are considered and nominated tofill current vacancies on the federal bench.
The Final Unified Decree in the Snake River Basin
Adjudication was signed formally implementing theSnake River Settlement Act which was approved byCongress in 2004.  The Native American RightsFund successfully represented the Nez Perce T ribe ofIdaho in both the litigation and settlement phases ofthe Adjudication for over 16 years.
In Katie John v. Norton, the Native American
Rights Fund represented an Alaska Native assertingpriority subsistence fishing and hunting rights pro-vided by the Alaska National Interest LandsConservation Act.  We prevailed in a decision by theNinth Circuit Court of Appeals which rejected theState of Alaska’s challenge to the plan of theSecretary of the Interior and the Secretary ofAgriculture to implement the Act.  The Court heldit was reasonable for the
Secretaries to decide thatthe public lands subjectto the Act’s rural subsis-tence priority includedthe waters within andadjacent to federal reser-vations in Alaska.During the year, theU.S. Supreme Courtdenied the State ofAlaska’s petition seekingreview of the decision, ending 27 years of litigationover subsistence rights in Alaska.
In Yount v. Jewell, the Federal District of Arizona
upheld the 2012 Northern Arizona Withdrawalwhere the Secretary of the Interior withdrew over amillion acres of federal land around the GrandCanyon from future uranium mining claims.  TheNative American Rights Fund filed an amicus curi-ae brief in the case on behalf of the Indian PeaksBand of Paiute Indians, the San Juan SouthernPaiute T ribe and the Morningstar Institute support-ing the Withdrawal and citing American Indianspiritual beliefs and cultural rights in these formerIndian lands now under federal ownership.
The Department of the Interior announced $2.5
million in competitive discretionary grants for trib-al education departments under a new Sovereigntyin Education Program.  The grants are to promotefull tribal capacity to manage and operate triballycontrolled Bureau of Indian Education fundedschools.  The T ribal Education DepartmentsNational Assembly (TEDNA), represented by theNative American Rights Fund, successfully advocat-ed in Congress for this new program.  
In State of Alaska v. Native Village of T anana, the
Alaska Supreme Court in 2011 held that Alaskatribal court orders issued in Indian Child WelfareAct child custody proceedings are entitled to fullfaith and credit in Alaska state courts to the sameextent as other states’ and foreign orders.  TheNative American Rights Fund represented theNative Village of Tanana and several other Alaskatribes and Alaska Natives in the case.  In 2014, wewere successful in having the States RulesCommittee adopt new rules making that decision
Executive Director’s Report
4 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT
5more effective in practice by providing clear proce-
dures for the registration, confirmation and enforce-ment of tribal court child custody orders. 
In Parks v. Simmonds, the Alaska Supreme Court
issued a unanimous decision affirming the full faithand credit for a Minto T ribal Court’s child custodyorder and dismissed a state court case challengingthe order.  The Court’s opinion was notable in thatit affirmed the tribal exhaustion doctrine and reiter-ated that litigants must exhaust a tribal court’sappellate process before approaching state courts.The Native American Rights Fund represented thecouple receiving permanent custody of a child fromthe Minto T ribal Court when parental rights wereterminated by the Court.
In another Alaska tribal court child custody case,
Brasket v. Frankson, an Alaska state court dismissed
a challenge to a Nulato T ribal Court order on fullfaith and credit and tribal exhaustion grounds.  TheNative American represents the adoptive couple andthe Nulato T ribe in the case.
In Toyukak v. Treadwell, the Alaska Federal
District Court held that the State of Alaska violatedthe Voting Right Act by not complying with thelanguage assistance provisions for Yup’ik speakingvoters.  The Native American Rights Fund repre-sented two Alaska tribes and two Alaska Natives inthe case.  After a lengthy trial, the Court orderedbroad remedial relief including the written andaudio translation of all pre-election materials dis-tributed in English, posting of bilingual translatorsat all polling places and ordering a report back toCourt after the election.At the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples
at the United Nations, the Native American RightsFund represented the National Congress ofAmerican Indians.  The outcome document adopt-ed by the U.N. General Assembly included the fourelements that we advocated for:  the establishmentof a body at the U.N. to monitor the implementa-tion of the U.N. Declaration on the Rights ofIndigenous Peoples; the creation of a permanent,dignified and appropriate status for IndigenousPeoples at the U.N.; address violence againstIndigenous women; and protections of sacred sites.
Through our Indian Law Support Center
Project, the Native American Rights Fund contin-ues to work with the 25 Indian Legal Services pro-grams.  As in past years, we continued seeking fed-eral funds for both civil and criminal tribal courtassistance grants for the 25 programs.  In 2014 wewere successful in being awarded funding in theamounts of $597,000 for the criminal grants and$527,000 for the civil grants which will be made tothe programs.
All of these significant victories and accomplish-
ments would not have been possible without thecontinuing support and assistance of our manygrantors and donors.  We once again want to thankyou all for standing with us in 2014 and hope thatwe can continue to count on you to help us in 2015.
John E. Echohawk
Executive Director
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD
In its’ nearly forty-five years of asserting and
defending the rights of Indian tribes, organizationsand individuals nationwide, the Native AmericanRights Fund (NARF) has stood and continues tostand guard over a way of life rooted in andinformed by the interconnectedness and value of allliving things.  Simply put, NARF defends theNative soul.  The impact this way of being is likelyto have on an economic system where resourcesbecome commodities is usually the motivating fac-tor behind efforts to paint that soul as primitive andillegitimate.  It’s no small wonder NARF has its’skilled and proficient yet limited hands full.
In Hawai‘i, there is a tree that shows how robust
and resilient it is by being the first to take root in anew lava flow.  By establishing its place in such ahostile environment, it ultimately becomes theshade and shelter for the eventual establishment ofan entire native forest.  Hawai‘i would likely be avery desolate place without this tree.Chairman’s Message
6 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT
In much the same way this tree selflessly offers
the necessary support for the flourishing of a nativeHawaiian forest, your financial support of NARFprovides the Native soul, through NARF’s resultingdiligence, the shade and shelter it needs to thriveand grow.  Thank you for your generous support.
Moses Haia
Chairman, Board of Directors
Gerald Danforth
Outgoing Chairman, Board of DirectorsNARF Board Chairman Moses Haia, former Board member Mahealani Wendt, NARF Executive Director John Echohawk, former Board member Kunani Nihipali.7 AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDThe Native American Rights Fund has a gov erning board composed of Native
American leaders from across the country – wise and distinguished people who arerespected by Native Americans nationwide.  Individual Board members are chosen basedon their involvement and knowledge of Indian issues and affairs, as well as their tribalaffiliation, to ensure a comprehensive geographical representation.  The NARF Board ofDirectors, whose members serve a maximum of six years, provide NARF with leadershipand credibility, and the vision of its members is essential to NARF's effectiveness in representing its Native American clients.NARF’s Board of Directors:
First row (left to right):Virginia Cross (Muckleshoot
Indian T ribe), Mark Macarro
(Pechanga Band of LuiseñoIndians), Gerald Danforth ,
Board Chairman (OneidaIndian Nation of Wisconsin).Second Row (left to right):Larry Olinger (Agua Caliente
Band of Cahuilla Indians), Tex Hall , Board T reasurer
(Three Affiliated T ribes),Robert McGhee (Poarch
Band of Creek Indians).  (Not Pictured): Natasha V.
Singh , Board Vice-Chair
(Native Village of Stevens);Peter Pino , (Zia Pueblo);
Moses Haia , (Native
Hawaiian); Julie Roberts-
Hyslop , (Native Village of
Tanana); Barbara Smith
(Chickasaw Nation); Gary Hayes (Ute Mountain
Ute T ribe); Stephen Lewis ,
(Gila River Indian Community).Board of Directors
Randy Bardwell 
(Pechanga Band of LuisenoMission Indians)
Jaime Barrientoz 
(Grand T raverse Band of Ottawa & Chippewa Indians)
John BevanWallace Coffey (Comanche Nation)
Ada Deer (Menominee)
Harvey A. DennenbergLucille A. Echohawk (Pawnee)
Jane FondaEric GinsburgNational Support Committee
The National Support Committee assists NARF with its fund raising and public relations efforts nationwide.  Some of the
individuals on the Committee are prominent in the field of business, entertainment and the arts.  Others are known advo-cates for the rights of the underserved.  All of the 30 volunteers on the Committee are committed to upholding the rights ofNative Americans.
Jeff Ginsburg
Rodney Grant (Omaha)
Chris E. McNeil, Jr.
(Tlingit-Nisga’a)
Billy Mills (Oglala Lakota)
Amado Pena Jr. (Yaqui/Chicano)
Wayne RossNancy Starling-RossMarc RudickPam RudickErnie Stevens, Jr. 
(Wisconsin Oneida)
Andrew Teller (Isleta Pueblo)Verna Teller (Isleta Pueblo)
Richard Trudell (Santee Sioux)
Rebecca Tsosie (Pasqua Yaqui)
Tzo-Nah (Shoshone-Bannock)
Aíne UngarRt. Rev. William C. Wantland
(Seminole)
W. Richard West, Jr. 
(Southern Cheyenne)
Randy Willis (Oglala Lakota)
Teresa Willis (Umatilla)
Mary T. Wynne (Rosebud Sioux)“We at United Tribes of Bristol Bay want to say
congratulations to an amazing, genuine leaderfor her recognition for her lifetime of dedicationto Alaska’s indigenous people! From winning theKatie John case to fighting for us in Bristol Bayagainst the mines like Pebble, and everything inbetween Heather has dedicated her life’s work toprotecting our way of life and fighting for trueself-determination for Alaska’s tribes. AlaskaNatives are lucky to have such a tireless advocatefor our people who has accomplished so much inher lifetime on our behalf, all for the love of herpeople. Quyana Heather for your work and forwho you are, a true beacon of light for AlaskaNative people – your work is changing our worldfor the better.” — (NARF attorney Heather
Kendall-Miller received a Lifetime AchievementAward from the Alaska State Legislature.) 
Under the priority of the preservation of tribal
existence, NARF works to construct the foundationsthat are necessary to empower tribes so that they can
continue to live according to their Native traditions,to enforce their treaty rights, to insure their independence on reservations and to protect theirsovereignty. 
Specifically, NARF’s legal representation centers
on sovereignty and jurisdiction issues and also onfederal recognition and restoration of tribal status.Thus, the focus of NARF’s work involves issuesrelating to the preservation and enforcement of thestatus of tribes as sovereign governments.  T ribalgovernments possess the power to regulate the inter-nal affairs of their members as well as other activi-ties within their reservations.  Jurisdictional con-flicts often arise with states, the federal governmentand others over tribal sovereignty.
Tribal Sovereignty
The focus of NARF’s work under this priority is
the protection of the status of tribes as sovereign,self-governing entities. The United StatesConstitution recognizes that Indian tribes are inde-
The Preservation of Tribal Existence
8 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT9pendent governmental entities with inherent
authority over their members and territory.  Intreaties with the United States, Indian tribes cededmillions of acres of land in exchange for the guaran-tee that the federal government would protect thetribes' right to self-government.  From the early1800s on, the Supreme Court has repeatedlyaffirmed the fundamental principle that tribesretain inherent sovereignty over their members andtheir territory. 
Beginning with the decision in Oliphant v.
Suquamish Indian Tribe in 1978 and with increasing
frequency in recent years, the Supreme Court hassteadily chipped away at this fundamental principle,both by restricting tribal jurisdiction and by extend-ing state jurisdiction.  These decisions by theSupreme Court have made this priority more rele-vant than ever and have led to a T ribal SovereigntyProtection Initiative in partnership with theNational Congress of American Indians (NCAI)and tribes nationwide to restore the traditional prin-ciples of inherent tribal sovereignty where thosehave been undermined and to safeguard the core ofsovereignty that remains.
This Initiative consists of three components.  The
first component is the T ribal Supreme CourtProject, the focus of which is to monitor casespotentially headed to the Supreme Court and thosewhich actually are accepted for review.  When casesare accepted, the T ribal Supreme Court Projecthelps to ensure that the attorneys representing theIndian interests have all the support they need andto coordinate the filing of a limited number ofstrategic amicus briefs.  A second component of theInitiative is to weigh in on judicial nominations atthe lower court and the Supreme Court levels.Finally, there is a legislative component to fight billsthat are against tribal interests and to affirmativelypush legislation to overturn adverse Supreme Courtdecisions.
The T ribal Supreme Court Project is a joint proj-
ect staffed by the Native American Rights Fund andthe National Congress of American Indians. TheT ribal Supreme Court Project is based on the prin-ciple that a coordinated and structured approach toSupreme Court advocacy is necessary to protecttribal sovereignty — the ability of Indian tribes tofunction as sovereign governments — to make theirown laws and be ruled by them.  Early on, the T ribalSupreme Court Project recognized the U.S.Supreme Court as a highly specialized institution,
with a unique set of procedures that include com-plete discretion on whether it will hear a case or not,with a much keener focus on policy considerationsthan other federal courts.  The T ribal SupremeCourt Project established a large network of attor-neys who specialize in practice before the SupremeCourt along with attorneys and law professors whospecialize in federal Indian law.  The T ribal SupremeCourt Project operates under the theory that ifIndian tribes take a strong, consistent, coordinatedapproach before the Supreme Court, they will beable to reverse, or at least reduce, the on-going ero-sion of tribal sovereignty by Justices who appear tolack an understanding of the foundational princi-ples underlying federal Indian law and who areunfamiliar with the practical challenges facing tribalgovernments.
On June 30, 2014, the Supreme Court of the
United States held its last conference of the OctoberTerm 2013 (“OT13”), and rose for its summerrecess.  During OT13, 15 petitions for a writ of cer-tiorari were filed in Indian law cases and consideredby the Court.  One petition was granted (Michigan
v. Bay Mills Indian Community), two petitions were
dismissed (withdrawn voluntarily) pursuant toSupreme Court Rule 46 (Michigan v. Sault Ste.
Marie Tribe of Chippewa Indians and Madison
County v. Oneida Indian Nation of New York), and
12 petitions were denied review by the Court.  Inreviewing the 15 petitions filed, one important factstands out: state and local governments were partiesin 10 of the Indian law cases – 5 times as the peti-tioner (lost in the lower court) and 5 times as therespondent (won in the lower court).  The UnitedStates was a party in 3 of the Indian law cases,always as the respondent.  This high number ofpetitions involving state and local governments as aparty is remarkable given the low number of peti-tions filed.  On average, 25 petitions are filed inIndian law cases each term (OT11–26 petitions;OT10–26 petitions; OT09–24 petitions; OT08–26petitions), but over the past two terms, this numberhas declined significantly (OT13–15 petitions;OT12–14 petitions).  We will watch the next termwith interest to determine whether this is an aberra-tion, or whether there is a trend towards Indiantribes to stay away from the Supreme Court of theUnited States.
In May 2014, in a stunning victory for Indian
tribes, the Supreme Court of the United States
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDissued its opinion in Michigan v. Bay Mills Indian
Community, reaffirming the vitality of the doctrine
of tribal sovereign immunity.  The lawsuit had itsorigin in a dispute between the State of Michigan
and the Bay Mills Indian Community over whether
certain lands constituted “Indian lands” eligible forgaming under the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act(IGRA), but had turned into a much larger legalbattle over the rights of all Indian tribes across thecountry. 
In a 5-to-4 decision, Justice Kagan, joined by
Chief Justice Roberts, Justices Kennedy, Breyer andSotomayor, affirmed the decision of the U.S. Courtof Appeals for the Sixth Circuit which had held thatfederal courts lack jurisdiction to adjudicate theState’s claims against the Bay Mills IndianCommunity under the Indian Gaming RegulatoryAct (IGRA),” and that the claims are barred by thedoctrine of tribal sovereign immunity.  In an unex-pected development, Chief Justice Roberts providedthe crucial fifth vote to secure this legal victory, hav-ing not voted in favor of tribal interests in a singlecase since he joined the Court in 2005. 
First, the Court quickly recognized that although
Congress did provide for a partial abrogation oftribal sovereign immunity within IGRA, none ofthe State’s arguments fell within the plain terms ofIGRA.  Second, the Court declined the State’s invi-tation to revisit and reverse its decision in Kiowa.
The Court looked to the doctrine of stare decisis —
the long line of precedent affirming tribal sovereignimmunity, its reliance on the rule in Kiowa in sub-
sequent cases, and the reliance interests of tribes andtheir business partners—as a strong basis “to standpat.”  And the Court, in no uncertain terms, reaf-firmed the principle announced in Kiowa that the
Court should defer to Congress to determine thecircumstances where Indian tribes should be subjectto suit.  And although the Project has characterizedthe recent losing streak for Indian tribes before theCourt as “an era of judicial termination of tribalsovereignty,” the Court took this opportunity toreassert the primary authority of Congress overIndian affairs:  “The special brand of sovereignty thetribes retain—both its nature and its extent—restsin the hands of Congress.”  Nonetheless, the major-ity opinion explicitly leaves open the door to poten-tial exceptions to the general rule in Kiowa .  
Justice Thomas wrote the principal dissent,
joined by Justices Scalia, Ginsberg, and Alito.  Noneof the dissenting Justices took issue with majority’s
interpretation and holding in relation to IGRA.However, the dissent views Kiowa as a mistake
which the Court should rectify.  Justice Thomasexplicitly recognizes that Indian tribes retain a sov-ereignty “of a unique and limited character,” withimmunity from suit as one attribute of that sover-eignty.  The dissent has no objection to tribes rais-ing the immunity defense in tribal courts, but con-tends that it “cannot be sustained in the courts ofanother sovereign” ( e.g., state and federal courts).  
Although the win-loss record for Indian tribes
before the Roberts Court remains a dismal 2 winsand 9 losses, the Bay Mills decision marks the first
time that Chief Justice Roberts has voted in favor oftribal interests and, in this case, provided the criticalfifth vote.  At present, Justice Alito remains steadfastin voting against tribal interests in every Indian lawcase since he joined the Court in 2006.
The research objective of the Judicial Selection
Project evaluates the records of federal court judicialnominees on their knowledge of Native Americanissues.  The Project’s analysis and conclusions areshared with tribal leaders and federal decision-mak-ers in relation to their decision whether to supportor oppose a particular judicial nomination.  Giventhe number of federal court cases involving NativeAmerican issues, the Project works with the U.S.Senate Judiciary Committee to ensure that all nom-inees are asked about their experience with Indiantribes and their understanding of federal Indian lawduring confirmation proceedings.  
The Judicial Selection Project prioritized the
development of a process to identify, evaluate andpromote qualified Native attorneys, tribal judgesand state court judges for nomination to the feder-al bench.  A primary objective of the JudicialSelection Project is to ensure that qualified Nativecandidates are considered and nominated to fill cur-rent vacancies on the federal bench.  There are 866federal judgeships – nine on the Supreme Court,179 on the Courts of Appeals and 678 for the dis-trict courts.  Up until now, there were zeroAmerican Indian, Alaska Native and NativeHawaiian federal judges.  In May 2014, the UnitedStates Senate unanimously confirmed DianeHumetewa as a United States District Court Judgefor the District of Arizona.  Humetewa is a memberof the Hopi T ribe and is now the first AmericanIndian woman federal judge.  NARF and NCAI
10 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT11will continue to work with the White House
General Counsel Office, the White House Office ofIntergovernmental Affairs and the U.S. Departmentof Justice Office of Legal Policy to ensure that quali-fied Native candidates are considered and nominatedto fill other current vacancies on the federal bench.
NARF was also invited to the White House for
the President’s announcement of three nominationsto fill vacancies on the U.S. Court of Appeals for theD.C. Circuit—sometimes referred to as the secondmost powerful court in the United States.  Throughthe work of the T ribal Supreme Court Project,NARF has worked closely with one of the nomi-nees, Patricia Millett, in her capacity as a partner,head of the Supreme Court Practice, and co-leaderof the National Appellate Practice at Akin GumpStrauss Hauer & Feld, LLP .  NARF submitted a let-ter of support on her behalf to the Senate JudiciaryCommittee for her confirmation, and on December10, 2013, the U.S. Senate confirmed Ms. Millett asa judge on the D.C. Circuit.
Another part of NARF’s work under this priority
is the environmental law and policy initiative.NARF has played a key role in the implementationof federal environmental law and policy that recog-
nizes tribal governments as the primary regulatorsand enforcers of the federal environmental laws onIndian lands.  After several years of fruitful partner-ship, NARF has recently begun representing NCAIon climate change matters.  Climate change is oneof the most challenging issues facing the worldtoday. Its effects on indigenous peoples throughoutthe world are acute and will only get worse. Theeffects are especially pronounced in Alaska where asmany as 184 Alaska Native villages are threatenedwith removal.  NARF , in addition to working withsome of its present clients on this issue, previouslyworked with National T ribal EnvironmentalCouncil (NTEC) on comprehensive federal climatechange legislation.  NTEC, NARF , NCAI and theNational Wildlife Federation worked together andcreated a set of T ribal Principles and worked withnational environmental organizations on detailedlegislative proposals.  Unfortunately, these effortscontinue to be stalled in Congress.  
Federal Recognition of Tribal Status
The second category of NARF’s work under this
priority is federal recognition of tribal status.NARF currently represents Indian communities
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD
who have survived intact as identifiable Indian
tribes but who are not federally recognized.  T ribalexistence does not depend on federal recognition,but recognition is necessary for a government-to-government relationship and the receipt of manyfederal services.
In 1997, the Branch of Acknowledgment and
Research (BAR) placed the Little Shell T ribe ofChippewa Indians of Montana federal recognitionpetition on active review status. In 2000 theAssistant Secretary for Indian Affairs (AS-IA) pub-lished a Preliminary Determination in favor ofrecognition.  A technical assistance meeting washeld with the Office of Federal Acknowledgment(OFA) to outline a program of action to strengthenthe petition prior to the final determination.Substantial work was done to strengthen the T ribe’spetition and the final submissions were made in2005.  In October 2009, the Acting AS-IA issued aFinal Determination against recognition of theT ribe, overruling the decision in the PreliminaryDetermination.  The stated rationale for FinalDetermination was the unwillingness to go alongwith the “departures from precedent” which theprevious AS-IA found to be justified by historical
circumstances.  In February 2010, the T ribe filed aRequest for Reconsideration with the InteriorBoard of Indian Appeals (IBIA).  The IBIA allowedinterested parties, if any, to file opposition briefs byJuly 2010.  No one filed an opposition brief.  
In an important development after the IBIA deci-
sion, in June 2013 the AS-IA made an announce-ment of “Consideration of Revision toAcknowledgment Regulations” along with prelimi-nary discussion draft regulations which proposemajor changes in the regulations.  In light of thisannouncement, NARF urged the SOI to requestthe AS-IA to suspend consideration of the FinalDetermination pending completion of the revisionprocess as the proposed amendments are very significant.  In January 2014, the AS-IA granted theLittle Shell T ribe’s request to place their petition onsuspension pending completion of the process toamend the acknowledgment regulations.  
In May 2014 the AS-IA issued proposed regula-
tions for comment.  Several consultations and public hearings on the proposed regulations were
12 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT
13held around the country and comments on the 
proposed regulations were submitted on behalf ofthe T ribe in September 2014.  The T ribe continuesto pursue legislative recognition and the T ribe’srecognition bill was passed out of the SenateCommittee on Indian Affairs by voice vote in April2014.  Rep. Daines (R-MT) introduced a similarbill, H.R. 2991 in the House.  It has been referredto the Committee on Natural Resources.
After years of preparing the necessary historical,
legal, genealogical and anthropological evidence tofully document its petition for federal acknowledg-ment, the Pamunkey Indian T ribe, located on the Pamunkey Indian Reservation, Virginia, filed its petition with the Office of FederalAcknowledgment (OFA) in October 2010.  TheT ribe received OFA’s letter of Technical Assistance(TA) in April 2011 and a response to the TA letterwas filed in July 2012.  In late July 2012, OFAinformed the T ribe that its petition was moved tothe top of the “Ready” list, and active considerationcommenced August 2012.  The T ribe received goodnews in January 2014 when the Assistant Secretaryfor Indian Affairs issued a Proposed Finding toacknowledge the Pamunkey Indian T ribe.  This ini-
tiated a comment period for the T ribe to submitmore materials and for other parties to commentbefore a Final Determination is issued.
The Pamunkey Indian T ribe is the only tribe
located in Virginia to have filed a fully documentedrecognition petition.  Established no later than1646, the T ribe's Reservation is located next to thePamunkey River, and adjacent to King WilliamCounty.  The Reservation comprises approximately1,200 acres and is the oldest inhabited Indian reser-vation in America.  NARF has represented the T ribe in this effort since 1988 and now is co-counselon this matter.
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD
“The Lakota people have always been stewards of
this land.  We feel it is imperative that we provide safe and responsible alternative energyresources not only to tribal members but to non-tribal members as well.  We need to stopfocusing and investing in risky fossil fuel projectslike TransCanada’s Keystone XL pipeline. We need to start remembering that the earth isour Mother and stop polluting her and start taking steps to preserve the land, water, and our grandchildren’s future.” — Cyril Scott,
President of the Rosebud Sioux T ribe
Throughout the process of European conquest
and colonization of North America, Indian tribesexperienced a steady diminishment of their landbase to a mere 2.3 percent of its original size.Currently, there are approximately 55 million acresof Indian-controlled land in the continental UnitedStates and about 44 million acres of Native-ownedland in Alaska.  An adequate land base and controlover natural resources are central components of
economic self-sufficiency and self-determination,and as such, are vital to the very existence of tribes.Thus, much of NARF’s work involves the protection
of tribal natural resources. 
Protection of Indian Lands
Without a sufficient land base, tribal existence is
difficult to maintain.  Thus NARF helps tribesestablish ownership and control over lands whichare rightfully theirs. 
NARF has been retained by the Eastern
Shoshone T ribe (EST) of the Wind River IndianReservation to analyze the Surplus Land Act ofMarch 3, 1905, and other legislation and cases, todetermine their implications for the boundaries ofthe Reservation. 
The EST and Northern Arapaho T ribes cooper-
ated in an application to the U.S. EnvironmentalProtection Agency (EPA) for delegation of “treat-ment in the same manner as a state” in the admin-
14 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTTThe Protection of Tribal Natural Resources
15istration of certain Clean Air Act programs.  EPA
issued its approval of their application in December2013.  In its approval decision, EPA determinedthat the boundaries of the Reservation were notaltered by the 1905 Surplus Land Act.  The State ofWyoming filed a Petition for Reconsideration andStay with EPA in January 2014.  That Petition for astay was granted in part by EPA as to lands overwhich jurisdiction is in dispute.  Wyoming thenfiled a Petition for Review in February 2014, withthe US Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuitwhich was followed in due course by separatePetitions for Review from Devon Energy and theWyoming Farm Bureau.  The Court of Appealsconsolidated the three petitions into one case.  TheCity of Riverton and Fremont County have filedmotions for Intervention on the side of thePetitioners.  Those motions are pending.  TheNorthern Arapahoe T ribe filed a Motion forIntervention which the Court granted, and the ESTfiled a Notice of Intervention which the Court alsogranted.  The T ribes are urging the parties to sitdown to negotiations in mediation or other settingsto address the broad range of issues facing all of theparties.  So far, the State of Wyoming has indicatedno interest in talks.  Devon Energy approached theT ribes with a request that they engage in mediationand settlement of Devon’s petition.  The T ribes andDevon are presently working with the Tenth CircuitMediation Office to craft a settlement between theT ribes and Devon Energy.
NARF represents the Hualapai Indian T ribe of
Arizona in preparing and submitting five applica-tions for the transfer into trust status of 8 parcels ofland owned in fee by the T ribe.  The T ribe is locat-ed on the south rim of the Grand Canyon inArizona, and claims a boundary that runs to thecenter of the Colorado River. The applications havebeen submitted to the BIA which is preparing themfor review by the U.S. Interior Department’sSolicitor for a Preliminary Title Opinion (PTO) onthe applications. The Regional Solicitor in Phoenixrecently issued a PTO on one of the Applications.
In July 2014 NARF filed an amicus brief in the
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit sup-porting the Jemez Pueblo’s claim of aboriginal titleto land purchased by the United States and putinto the Valles Caldera National Preserve in NewMexico.  The district court denied the Pueblo’sclaim, holding that the Indians ClaimsCommission Act has transmuted all aboriginal titleclaims into monetary claims and the Pueblo should
have sued under that Act for loss of its aboriginaltitle.  Oral argument in the appeal was held inNovember 2014 at the University of New Mexicoin Albuquerque.
In Akiachak Native Community, et al. v.
Department of Interior, et al., the Akiachak Native
Community, et al., represented by NARF , broughtsuit in the U.S. District Court for the District ofColumbia seeking judicial review of 25 C.F .R. Part151 as it pertains to federally-recognized T ribes inAlaska.  This federal regulation governs the proce-dures used by Indian T ribes and individuals whenrequesting the Secretary of the Interior to acquiretitle to land in trust on their behalf.  The regulationbars the acquisition of land in trust in Alaska otherthan for the Metlakatla Indian Community or itsmembers.  After full briefing, but nearly three yearsof no action by the federal court, the case was trans-ferred to Judge Rudolph Contreras.  In March2013, an Order was issued by Judge Contreras,granting Plaintiffs complete relief on all of theirclaims – a major victory for Alaska T ribes.  Briefingon remedies was concluded and a MemorandumOrder was entered in September 2013 denying theState of Alaska’s motion for reconsideration, andsevering and vacating Part 1 of 25 C.F .R. 151.   TheState filed its motion of appeal.  
In May 2014, the Department of the Interior
published a proposed rule addressing the acquisi-tion of land into trust in Alaska.  Specifically, theproposed rule would delete a provision in theDepartment’s land-into-trust regulations at Part151 that excluded from the scope of the regulations,with one exception, trust acquisitions in the State ofAlaska.  Following the notice of rule-making, theState of Alaska filed a motion to stay the rule-mak-ing pending appeal.  In June 2014, the court issuedan Order granting in part and denying in partAlaska’s motion to stay pending appeal.  The courtfound that the State would suffer no harm fromallowing the rule-making to proceed but grantedthe stay in part to prevent the Department fromconsidering specific applications or taking landsinto trust in Alaska until resolution of the appeal.The D.C. Court of Appeals recently issued its brief-ing Order directing that briefing be completed bythe end of February 2015 with oral argument yet tobe scheduled.
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDWater Rights
The culture and way of life of many indigenous
peoples are inextricably tied to their aboriginal habi-tat. For those tribes that still maintain traditionalties to the natural world, suitable habitat is requiredin order to exercise their treaty-protected hunting,fishing, gathering and trapping rights and to sustaintheir relationships with the animals, plants and fishthat comprise their aboriginal habitats. 
Establishing tribal rights to the use of water in
the arid western United States continues to be amajor NARF priority.  The goal of NARF's Indianwater rights work is to secure allocations of waterfor present and future needs for specific Indiantribes represented by NARF and other westerntribes generally.  Under the precedent established bythe Supreme Court in 1908 in Winters v. United
States and confirmed in 1963 in Arizona v.
California, Indian tribes are entitled under federal
law to sufficient water for present and future needs,with a priority date at least as early as the establish-ment of their reservations.  These tribal reservedwater rights are superior to all state-recognizedwater rights created after the tribal priority date.Such a date will in most cases give tribes valuablesenior water rights in the water-short west.
Unfortunately, many tribes have not utilized theirreserved water rights and most of these rights areunadjudicated or unquantified.  The major need ineach case is to define or quantify the amount ofwater to which each tribe is entitled through litiga-tion or out-of-court settlement negotiations.  T ribesare generally able to claim water for any purposewhich enables the T ribe’s reservation to serve as apermanent homeland.
NARF , together with co-counsel, represents the
Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians in a lawsuitfiled in May 2013 in the U.S. District Court for theCentral District of California, asking the Court todeclare the existence of the T ribe’s water rights as thesenior rights in the Coachella Valley under federal law, to quantify these rights, and to preventCoachella Valley Water District and Desert WaterAgency from further injuring the T ribe, its membersand residents in surrounding communities through-out the Valley by impairing the quantity and quality of water in the aquifer.
The water districts import and then fail to 
adequately treat substantially lower quality water
16 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT
17from the Colorado River and inject that water into
the aquifer. The recharge water, which containshigher total dissolved solids, nitrates, pesticides, andother contaminants, is re-injected into theCoachella Valley aquifer at a facility close to theT ribe’s lands. Thus, the groundwater in the WesternCoachella Valley, including the water below theAgua Caliente Reservation, which includes the citiesof Palm Springs, Cathedral City, Rancho Mirage,and Thousand Palms, is being polluted at a fasterrate than the aquifer down-valley.
In February 2014 the court set a discovery and
pre-trial motion practice schedule in the case.  Theparties completed discovery in Phase I of the casethis past summer. The United States moved tointervene in the case and the court granted the US’intervention, a significant achievement for the T ribeand its attorneys.  Summary judgment motionswere filed in October 2014, and response briefswere filed in November 2014 and reply briefs inDecember 2014.
NARF has represented the Nez Perce T ribe in
Idaho in its water rights claims in the Snake RiverBasin Adjudication (SRBA) both litigation and settlement phases for over 16 years. In 2004
Congress enacted and the President signed theSnake River Settlement Act.  We continued to workwith the T ribe, on a very limited basis, to securefinal approval of the settlement by the state watercourt, and on the federal appropriations process.Additionally, we have been representing the T ribe inthe drafting and negotiations with the UnitedStates, the State and private water interests of a FinalUnified Decree that will be the capstone documentclosing the SRBA.  With the court, and one of thespecial masters, we have worked through manydrafts of the Final Unified Decree with an eyetoward resolving all objections to the text. The signing of the Final Unified Decree occurredAugust 25-26, 2014, at a conference and ceremonyin Boise, ID.  
Exceptions to the Oregon Water Resources
Department’s Findings of Fact and Order ofDetermination (FFOD) in the Klamath BasinAdjudication were filed by the Klamath T ribes andother Adjudication parties in October 2014.  Over190 exceptions were filed.  A statutorily requiredInitial Hearing was also held in October. The hearing was largely pro forma, with the only action
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD
taken being the adjustment of the schedule for
future proceedings.  Under the current schedule,requests to be heard on exceptions are due inJanuary 2015.  A case management conference toestablish the structure and processing of future proceedings on the various claims included in theFFOD, including those of the Klamath T ribes, will be held in March 2015.
In April 2014, Upper Basin stakeholders, 
including the Klamath T ribes, signed the UpperKlamath Basin Comprehensive Agreement (UBA).The UBA is an agreement for water managementand restoration in the Upper Klamath Basin.  Whenfully implemented, the UBA will provide forincreased inflows into Upper Klamath Lake of atleast 30,000 acre-feet annually, and enhance andprotect riparian conditions to help restore T ribalfisheries.  Public access sites for exercise of T ribalT reaty fishing rights and an EconomicDevelopment Plan for the Klamath T ribes are additional components of the UBA.  Federal legisla-tion (S. 2379) that is needed to fully implement theUBA, as well as the Klamath Basin RestorationAgreement and the Klamath HydroelectricSettlement Agreement, is pending in Congress.  
After almost 30 years of advocacy, the T ule River
Indian T ribe, represented by NARF , successfully settled its water rights in November 2007 by signing a Settlement Agreement with water users onthe South Fork T ule River of California. TheSettlement Agreement secures a domestic, munici-pal, industrial, and commercial water supply for theT ribe. The T ribe now seeks federal legislation to rat-ify the Settlement Agreement and authorize appro-priations to develop the water rights through thecreation of water infrastructure and reservoirs onthe T ule Reservation. Bills introduced in the U.S.House and Senate in 2007, 2008, and 2009 did not pass. With the present Congress, we are onceagain engaged in strategy meetings with theCalifornia Congressional delegation regarding thepossible introduction of a water settlement bill.Additionally, we are continuing work with the federal Bureau of Reclamation on necessary studiesfor the feasibility and design of the T ribe’s waterstorage project.  New federal negotiation teammembers were appointed recently by the Secretary’sIndian Water Rights Office.  The first meeting withthe new team was held in July 2014 and a secondmeeting was held the first week of October 2014.In June 2006, the Kickapoo T ribe in Kansas, rep-
resented by NARF , filed a federal court lawsuit in aneffort to enforce express promises made to the T ribeto build a Reservoir Project.  The Nemaha BrownWatershed Joint Board # 7, the Natural ResourcesConservation Service of the U.S. Department ofAgriculture, and the State of Kansas made thesepromises to the T ribe over a decade ago.  In theintervening years these parties have been activelydeveloping the water resources of the watershed,resulting in the near depletion of the T ribe's seniorfederal water rights in the drainage. 
According to the Environmental Protection
Agency, the water supply for the Reservation is inviolation of the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974.The Kickapoo people are unable to safely drink,bathe or cook with tap water.  There is not enoughwater on the reservation to provide basic municipalservices to the community and the T ribe is not evenable to provide local schools with reliable, safe run-ning water.  The fire department cannot provideadequate fire protection due to the water shortage.The proposed Reservoir Project is the most costeffective and reliable means by which the T ribe canimprove the water supply.
The US, the State and the local watershed district
all concede the existence of the T ribe’s senior Indianreserved water rights; the real issue is the amount ofwater needed to satisfy the T ribe’s rights, and thesource or sources of that water.  The T ribe and theUS have also discussed funding to quantify theT ribe’s water rights.  
In March 2011, the watershed district rejected a
Condemnation Agreement that the State and T ribehad approved.  That agreement created the mecha-nism for condemning the property for the waterstorage project.  NARF then succeeded in restruc-turing the litigation to place an immediate focus ondiscovery against the watershed district and on get-ting the condemnation dispute resolved by the fed-eral court.  Most recently, the federal court enteredsummary judgment in favor of the watershed districton the question of whether a 1994 agreement obli-gated the district to make its condemnation poweravailable to aid the T ribe in acquiring the land for thewater storage project area.  The T ribe is now evaluat-ing its options, including discussions with theInterior Department and the State of Kansas to findan alternative means of securing the land rights forthe project.  Additionally, the State, the US and the
18 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT19T ribe have recently resumed active negotiations of
the T ribe’s federally reserved water rights.
Protection of Hunting and Fishing Rights 
The subsistence way of life is essential for the
physical and cultural survival of Alaska Natives.  Asimportant as Native hunting and fishing rights areto Alaska Natives’ physical, economic, traditionaland cultural existence, the State of Alaska has beenand continues to be reluctant to recognize theimportance of the subsistence way of life. 
In Katie John v. Norton, Katie John, represented
by NARF , filed a lawsuit in 2005 in the U.S.District Court for the District of Alaska challengingFederal Agencies' final rule implementing the priorKatie John mandate as being too restrictive in itsscope.  Katie John alleged that the Federal agenciesshould have included Alaska Native allotments aspublic lands and that the federal government’s inter-est in water extends upstream and downstream fromConservation Units established under the AlaskaNational Interest Lands Conservation Act.  TheState of Alaska intervened and challenged the regu-lations as illegally extending federal jurisdiction tostate waters.  In 2009 the court upheld the agencies’
final rule as reasonable.  While rejecting Katie John’sclaim that the agency had a duty to identify all of itsfederally-reserved water rights in upstream anddownstream waters, the court stated that the agencycould do so at some future time if necessary to ful-fill the purposes of the reserve.  The case wasappealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the NinthCircuit where oral argument was held in July 2011.  
In July 2013, a panel of the Ninth Circuit Court
of Appeals affirmed the district court’s decisionsupholding the 1999 Final Rules promulgated by theSecretary of the Interior and the Secretary ofAgriculture to implement part of the AlaskaNational Interest Lands Conservation Act concern-ing subsistence fishing and hunting rights.  InMarch 2014, the U.S. Supreme Court denied theState’s petition ending twenty-seven years of litiga-tion over subsistence rights in Alaska.
In the subsistence case of Stickwan v. Catholic
Church, NARF is representing the Stickwan family
from Tazlina in the establishment of a prescriptiveeasement to protect a historic customary and tradi-
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD
tional fishing site on property owned by the
Catholic Church that is slated to be sold.  TheChurch received the land in a special legislative landgrant in 1952 with a reservation that land would beused as a mission school for Indians.  A complainton behalf of the family was filed in April 2014.Within days the Catholic Church directed theirattorney to settle the case in favor of Plaintiffs’claims.  In settlement discussions the Church alsoindicated that it preferred to settle all potentialother claims by subsistence users at one time.  Thecase was stayed through August 2014 while the par-ties negotiated the terms of the settlement.  The staywas recently extended to allow further negotiation.
The Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation
Act (ANILCA) provides a subsistence harvest prior-ity to Alaska’s “rural” residents.  ANILCA itself,however, does not define which individuals or com-munities qualify as “rural.”  The Organized Villageof Saxman is a coastal community of 411 residents.The population is overwhelmingly Alaska Native.Saxman has its own federally recognized tribal gov-ernment, its own state recognized municipality, andits own ANCSA village corporation.  Saxman is,however, connected to the city of Ketchikan by a
two-mile long road.
In 2007, the Federal Subsistence Board (FSB)
promulgated a final rule revoking Saxman’s ruralcommunity status.  The FSB reasoned that Saxman’sclose proximity to Ketchikan justified aggregatingthe two communities together as non-rural.  TheSaxman IRA Council, assisted by NARF , is pursu-ing its administrative remedies in order to reinstateits rural status.  Implementation of the 2007 FinalRule was delayed by the Secretary of the Interiorand the FSB is presently engaging in an overhaul ofthe rural determination criteria used to designatecommunities “rural or non-rural” under ANILCA.Although there is strong support among the presentFSB members to reverse the prior Board’s decision,the statute of limitations to challenge the 2007Final Rule expired in July 2014.
NARF filed a complaint for declaratory and
injunctive relief in Alaska’s federal district court inJune 2014.  The complaint challenges the merits ofthe FSB’s 2007 decision to classify Saxman as non-rural.  As expected, the federal government has asked
20 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT
21for and received an extension of time to answer the
complaint.  In addition to the litigation, NARF con-tinues to pursue action in the administrative realm.While the FSB’s proposed overhaul is currentlybefore the Secretaries of Interior and Agriculture,NARF is working with state and national organiza-tions, such as the Alaska Federation of Natives andthe National Congress of American Indians, to pushthe Secretaries to publish the proposed rule andbegin the formal rulemaking process.  
The Bering Sea Elders Group is an alliance of
thirty-nine Yup’ik and Inupiaq villages that seeks toprotect the sensitive ecosystem of the Bering Sea,the subsistence lifestyle, and the sustainable com-munities that depend on it.  NARF has designed acomprehensive plan to help this group of AlaskaNative villages in their efforts to protect the area andbecome more engaged in its management.Subsistence is the inherently sustainable Native phi-losophy of taking only what you need.  There areoften no roads and no stores in rural Alaska, and sono other group of people in the United States con-tinues to be as intimately connected to the land andwater and as dependent upon its vast naturalresources as Alaska’s indigenous peoples. 
NARF has been working with the Elders Group
in their negotiations with the bottom trawl indus-try.  These negotiations have resulted in the creationof a Working Group which will study various issuesincluding seafloor habitat and subsistence uses ofthe area and make recommendations about neededchanges.  The first Working Group meeting washeld in November 2014.
Alaska’s Bristol Bay region is home to the largest
wild salmon runs in the world.  It is also home tothe Yup’ik, Dena’ina, and Alutiiq people whodepend on the sustainable salmon runs for theirsubsistence.  In April 2013, NARF assisted in thecreation of the United T ribes of Bristol Bay(UTBB).  UTBB is a consortium of federally- rec-ognized tribes in the region.  It was formed in orderfor tribes to directly address regional large-scalemining proposals threatening salmon rearingstreams – such as the proposed Pebble Mine, whichwould sit on the headwaters of the largest salmon-producing river in Bristol Bay.  Exercising its dele-gated governmental authority, with NARF as legalcounsel, UTBB has actively engaged the federalgovernment in direct government-to-governmentconsultation on large scale mining in Bristol Bay.EPA released its Watershed Assessment in
January 2014.  The assessment is a science- baseddocument that supports the use of 404(c) authorityby EPA to prohibit or restrict hard rock mining inthe Bristol Bay watershed.  In February 2014, EPAgave their 15-day notification that it would initiatea 404(c) process for the Pebble Mine.  The State ofAlaska immediately filed a statement requesting astay to allow the developer to submit a permit underthe NEPA process.  EPA granted the State and theCorp. of Engineers a thirty day extension torespond to the notification of 404(c) process.Public hearings commenced over the 2014 summerseason.
The global mining firm Rio Tinto announced in
April 2014, that it will divest its 19 percent stake inthe controversial Pebble Mine project in Alaska,donating its shares to two state charities.  The deci-sion is the latest blow to the proposed gold, copperand molybdenum mine, which is under federalscrutiny for how it could affect the nearby BristolBay watershed, which supports nearly half theworld’s sockeye salmon.  In May 2014, PebbleLimited Partnership filed suit against EPA andRegion 10 Administrator challenging EPA’s Section404(c) review process as exceeding its statutoryauthority under the Clean Water Act.  The State ofAlaska filed a motion to intervene as a plaintiff andsuch motion was granted in June 2014.  Both par-ties moved for a preliminary injunction.  TheUTBB, represented by NARF , filed a motion tointervene as Intervenor-Defendants in July 2014,and such motion was granted.  The defendant’sopposition to Pebble’s preliminary injunctionmotion and potential motion to dismiss was sub-mitted in July 2014.  In September 2014 JudgeHolland heard oral argument then ruled from thebench dismissing PLP and the State of Alaska’sMotion for a Preliminary Injunction on the groundthat agency action was not final.  PLP and State ofAlaska filed their motion to appeal in October2014.
In response to a Request for Assistance in relation
to a dispute with the State of Maine involving the2014 Elver Fishery, NARF has been retained by the Passamaquoddy T ribe to provide pro bono legalrepresentation concerning their treaty-reservedmarine fishery rights.  NARF has completed thelegal research and analysis related to the T ribe’s substantive legal rights under the Maine IndianLand Claims Settlement Act and the Maine
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDImplementing Act.  NARF is in the process of
preparing a legal opinion detailing its findings andconclusions in relation to possible federal court liti-gation to vindicate those rights and will be meetingwith the Joint T ribal Council to discuss the tribe’slegal options
Climate Change Project
Global warming is wreaking havoc in Alaska. In
recent years scientists have documented meltingocean ice, rising oceans, rising river temperatures,thawing permafrost, increased insect infestations,animals at risk and dying forests. Alaska Natives arethe peoples who rely most on Alaska’s ice, seas,marine mammals, fish and game for nutrition andcustomary and traditional subsistence uses; they arethus experiencing the adverse impacts of globalwarming most acutely. In 2006, during the Alaska Forum on the Environment, Alaska Nativeparticipants described
increased forest fires, moredangerous hunting, fishingand traveling conditions,visible changes in animalsand plants, infrastructuredamage from melting per-mafrost and coastal ero-sion, fiercer winter storms,and pervasive unpre-dictability. Virtually everyaspect of traditional Alaska Native life isimpacted. As noted in theArctic Climate ImpactAssessment of 2004,indigenous peoples arereporting that sea ice isdeclining, and its qualityand timing are changing,with important negativerepercussions for marinehunters. Others are report-ing that salmon are dis-eased and cannot be driedfor winter food. There iswidespread concern aboutcaribou habitat diminish-ing as larger vegetationmoves northward. Becauseof these and other dramat-ic changes, traditionalknowledge is jeopardized,as are cultural structures
and the nutritional needs of Alaska’s Indigenouspeoples. Efforts are continuing to conveneCongressional hearings on climate change impactson indigenous peoples.
After several years of fruitful partnership, NARF
has recently begun representing NCAI climatechange matters.  Climate change is one of the mostchallenging issues facing the world today. Its effectson indigenous peoples throughout the world areacute and will only get worse. The effects are especially pronounced in Alaska where as many as184 Alaska Native villages are threatened withremoval.  
On the international stage, the first meetings on
the specifics of the new “protocol” to be adopted byDecember 2015 were held in Bonn in April/Mayand June, 2013. NARF attended all of the April/
22 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT
23May meeting and part of the June meeting on
behalf of NCAI.  NARF was the only one to makea brief statement on behalf of the indigenous view-point at the April/May meeting.  So far, the processis very slow and developed countries are spending alot of time on general concepts, but no specific language has been proposed yet.  In November2013 NARF attended Conference of the Parties 19(COP) in Warsaw, Poland and the results were disappointing. Disturbingly, Poland only author-ized a small percent of Non-GovernmentalOrganizations (NGOs) to attend. One indigenousorganization requested 30 slots and only seven wereapproved. The main accomplishment of COP 19was the approval of a loss and damage mechanism(though with no finding) which would address lossdue to climate change.
On a more positive note, the Indigenous Caucus
met with the organizers of COP 20 to be held inLima, Peru in December 2014 and were assuredthat ample attendance by Indigenous participantswould be approved and that a pre-meeting would be held between Indigenous representatives andfriendly states just as had been done before COP 16
in Mexico and COP 17 in Durban, South Africa.Finally, the caucus also met with organizers forCOP 21 to be held in France in 2015 who gaveassurance of ample participation as well, thoughthey did not commit to a pre-meeting.
At the March 2014 meeting of the United
Nations Framework Convention on ClimateChange in Bonn, an open-ended consultationoccurred where countries exchanged views on theelements of the 2015 agreement. No text was produced and developing countries expressed theirview that more formal negotiations that allowed forthe tabling of text were due.  In the June 2014 session, it was anticipated that draft text would betabled but this did not happen, as more discussionoccurred on the elements of a draft text.  An additional session was held in Bonn in October2014. In anticipation of the COP 20, a meeting washeld in Lima, Peru in late November 2014.
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD
MAJOR ACTIVITIES 2014 - CASE MAPNative American Rights FundTule River Tribe 
– Tribal Water Rights 
Yurok Tribe 
– Tribal Trust Funds
COLORADO
NARF HEADQUARTERS
BOULDER, COLORADO
Southern Ute Tribe 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Valmont Butte 
– Sacred Site Issue
FLORIDA
Seminole Tribe of Florida 
– Tribal Trust Funds
IDAHO
Nez Perce Tribe - Water Rights 
KANSAS
Kickapoo Tribe – Water Rights 
MAINE
Penobscot Indian Nation 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Passamaquoddy Tribe 
– Fishing Rights
MICHIGAN
Grand Traverse Band of
Ottawa and Chippewa Indians– Tribal Trust Funds
MINNESOTA
Prairie Island Indian
Community – Tribal Trust Funds
White Earth Band of Chippewa
Indians - Tribal Trust Funds 
MONTANA
Chippewa-Cree Tribe of the
Rocky Boys Reservation – Tribal Trust Funds
Crow Tribe 
– Coal Reclamation
Little Shell Tribe of Chippewa
Indians – Recognition &Tribal Trust Funds
NEW MEXICO
Pueblo of Acoma 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Jemez Pueblo 
– Sacred Site Protection
NORTH DAKOTA
Turtle Mountain Chippewa
Tribe – Tribal Trust Funds
North Dakota 
Voting Rights Law
OKLAHOMA
Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Comanche Nation ALASKA
NARF ANCHORAGE OFFICEAkiachak Native Community 
– Land into Trust
Native Village of Atka 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Aleut Community of St. Paul
Island – Tribal Trust Funds
Bering Sea Elders Group 
– Subsistence
Chilkoot Indian Association 
– Land into Trust
Chalkyitsik – Land into TrustChistochina Tribe 
– Subsistence
Churyung v. Alaska
– Indian Child Welfare 
Native Villages of Eyak,
Tatitlek, Chenega, Nanwalek,and Port Graham –Subsistence & Aboriginal Title
Ivanof Bay Village 
– Sovereign Immunity
Kaltag Tribe 
– Indian Child Welfare
Native Village of Kasigluk 
– Voting Rights Act Suit
Katie John v. Norton –
Subsistence
Kenaitze Indian Tribe 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Native Village of Kivalina -
Global Warming Project
Native Village of Kwigillingok
– Voting Rights Act Case
Gwich’in Steering Committee
– Environmental/Subsistence
Native Village of Nulato 
– Indian Child Welfare
Ninilchick Tribe – SubsistenceTanana – Tribal SovereigntyTlingit and Haida Indian
Tribes – Tribal Trust Funds
Native Village of Tuluksak 
– Trust Lands & Voting RightsAct Case
Native Village of Tuntutuliak 
– Voting Rights Case
Native Village of Tyonek 
– Subsistence & CulturalPreservation
Native Village of Venetie 
– Subsistence
United Tribes of Bristol Bay –
Environmental/Subsistence
ARIZONA
Hualapai Tribe 
– Boundary Issue 
Kaibab Paiute Tribe – NAGPRAArizona Inter Tribal Council 
– Education Trust Funds
CALIFORNIA
Agua Caliente Band of
Cahuilla Indians – Tribal Water Rights
San Luis Rey Indian Water
Authority – Tribal Trust Funds– Tribal Trust Funds
Kickapoo Tribe 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Muscogee Creek Nation 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Pawnee Nation – Water RightsSac & Fox Nation 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Tonkawa Tribe 
– Tribal Trust Funds
OREGON
Klamath Tribes – Water Rights
& Tribal Trust Funds
Confederated Tribes of the
Umatilla Reservation – Tribal Trust Funds
SOUTH DAKOTA
Oglala Sioux Tribe 
– Environmental 
Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate 
– Tribal Trust Funds
TEXAS
Native American Church 
of North America – Religious Freedom
VIRGINIA
Pamunkey Tribe 
– Tribal Recognition
WASHINGTON
Nooksack Tribe 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Quinault Indian Nation 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Samish Indian Nation 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Shoalwater Bay Tribe 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Skokomish Tribe 
– Tribal Trust Funds
WASHINGTON, D.C.
NARF WASHINGTON, D.C.
OFFICE
Tribal Supreme Court Project
WISCONSIN
Bad River Band of Lake
Superior Chippewa Indians – Tribal Water Rights 
WYOMING
Eastern Shoshone Tribe 
– Land Issue 
INTERNATIONAL
Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples/ClimateChange Issues – Organizationof American States and UnitedNations26 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT“We are now living outside the laws of nature
where nature is now turning against man andbecoming the enemy.  Climate change is the con-sequence of the fact that man is operating outsidethe laws of life and laws of nature, law of the bal-ance of the world.  And doing so will destroy thebalance.” — Kogi
Although basic human rights are considered a
universal and inalienable entitlement, NativeAmericans face an ongoing threat of having theirrights undermined by the United States govern-ment, states and others who seek to limit theserights. Under the priority of the promotion of human
rights, NARF strives to enforce and strengthen laws
which are designed to protect the rights of NativeAmericans to practice their traditional religion, touse their own language and to enjoy their culture.NARF also works with T ribes to ensure the welfareof their children.  In the international arena, NARF
is active in efforts to negotiate declarations on therights of indigenous peoples.
Religious Freedom
Because religion is the foundation that holds
Native communities and cultures together, religiousfreedom is a NARF priority issue. 
In NARF’s Sacred Places Project, NARF has part-
nered with the National Congress of AmericanIndians and the Morningstar Institute to helpensure that various federal agencies with jurisdictionover federal lands are held accountable to their obli-gation to protect sacred places and provide mean-ingful access to tribal people wishing to use thoseplaces for traditional purposes. These efforts willinclude providing best practices analysis, as well asraising awareness of issues and different approachesthat can be used to protect sacred places held by thefederal government.  To the extent possible, analysis The Promotion of Human Rights
27and practices learned from federal lands will also be
compared for use on private and state-held lands.
NARF has a long history in the protection of
Native religion and cultural property, includingsacred sites.  Thanks to recent funding from a chal-lenge grant from a generous private donor, NARFwill now redouble its sacred sites protection efforts.The project focuses on monitoring legal issuesimpacting sacred places for Native peoples, collabo-rating with various groups that are already workingto protect sacred places, monitoring and participat-ing in litigation to protect sacred places, and advo-cating for greater protection and access for sacredplaces at the congressional and administrative levels.A website will be developed to act as a clearinghouseof information regarding sacred places protectionlaws and cases.
NARF has begun to provide input to the federal
Departments of the Interior, Agriculture, Defense,and Energy, which signed a Memorandum ofUnderstanding (MOU) Regarding InteragencyCoordination and Collaboration for the Protectionof Indian Sacred Sites to improve the protection ofand tribal access to Indian sacred sites throughenhanced and improved interdepartmental coordi-nation and collaboration.  The MOU was followedin March 2013 with an “Action Plan” calling forestablishment of working groups to perform vari-ous listed activities to facilitate better coordinationand access.  NARF will continue to provide inputto the working groups on best practices and suggestions going forward as the working groupwill have a series of consultations on some propos-als they have for better protecting and providingaccess to sacred sites.  
NARF , representing the Indian Peaks Band of
Paiute Indians, the San Juan Southern Paiute T ribe,and the Morningstar Institute, filed an amicus briefin Yount v. Jewell, a case in federal district court of
Arizona about the Northern Arizona Withdrawal.In 2012, then-Interior Secretary Salazar announcedthat he was withdrawing over a million acres ofBureau of Land Management and Forest Serviceland around the Grand Canyon from future uranium mining claims.  The Northern ArizonaWithdrawal would prohibit future mining claimsfrom being perfected as of January 2012, but wouldpermit claims that were valid as of that date to goforward.  Several mining companies and individualschallenged the Withdrawal on many grounds,including that the Withdrawal violated the
Establishment Clause of the U.S. Constitutionbecause it relied on American Indian spiritualbeliefs and therefore constituted an impermissibleestablishment of religion.  NARF’s amicus briefaddressed the Establishment Clause argument aswell as the other American Indian cultural argu-ments that the mining companies raised.  The ami-cus brief was in support of the United States, theHavasupai T ribe, and other environmental groupsthat intervened in the matter.  Oral argument washeld in September 2014, and in a comprehensiveopinion, the court upheld the Northern ArizonaWithdrawal, therefore preventing new future min-ing claims.  The Court gave little attention to thePlaintiff’s Establishment Clause and AmericanIndian arguments indicating they were withoutmerit.  The mining companies are expected toappeal this decision.  
In September 2014, NARF filed an amicus brief
on behalf of the Blackfeet T ribe of the BlackfeetReservation in the case of Solonex v. Jewell. 
The energy company Solonex is challenging thegovernment’s process and decision to limit oil andgas development that would threaten the T ribes’sacred sites.
Legal work continues on Native American
Graves Protection and Repatriation (NAGPRA)implementation issues.  When Sac and FoxOlympian, Jim Thorpe passed away in the 1950s,he was taken to Oklahoma so that traditional tribal ceremonies could be conducted and he couldbe buried on the Sac and Fox Reservation as was hiswish.  Jim Thorpe’s third wife, accompanied byOklahoma State police, interrupted the ceremonyand removed his body.  His wife then began to contact states and municipalities willing to pay forhis body and erect memorials in his honor.  MauchChunk and East Mauch Chunk, two old miningtowns in Pennsylvania facing economic hardshipsagreed with her to have him buried in their respec-tive towns on several conditions.  They had to erectmemorials in his name and they had to re-incorpo-rate as the Borough of Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania.Thus, Jim Thorpe was buried in the Borough ofJim Thorpe, Pennsylvania – a place he had neverbeen in his life.  
In 2010, Jim Thorpe’s oldest son filed a federal
lawsuit under the Native American GravesProtection and Repatriation Act (“NAGPRA”) to
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDhave Jim Thorpe’s remains returned to the Sac and
Fox Reservation in Oklahoma.  The Sac and FoxNation eventually joined the lawsuit as well as severalof Jim Thorpe’s other children.  The Federal districtcourt ruled that NAGPRA applied to Jim Thorpe’sremains and to the Borough of Jim Thorpe.  TheBorough of Jim Thorpe appealed that ruling to theU.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit.NARF , representing the National Congress ofAmerican Indians, filed an amicus brief in supportof the Thorpe sons and the Sac and Fox Nation, andin opposition the Borough of Jim Thorpe.  NARFargued that NAGPRA is constitutional on severalgrounds; that NAGPRA applies to the Borough ofJim Thorpe and Jim Thorpe’s remains for many reasons, and that laches is inconsistent with the purpose of NAGPRA.  A panel of the Third CircuitCourt of Appeals ruled in October 2014 that NAG-PRA as written applies to the Borough, but thatapplying in this case would produce an absurd resultdemonstrably at odds with the intentions ofCongress.  The panel was not exactly clear what itsaw as “absurd” but also ruled that NAGPRA wasonly meant to apply to original burial locations orfinal resting places. In December 2014, the Thorpesand Sac and Fox Nation filed a petition for rehear-ing or rehearing en banc.  Former Senator BenNighthorse Campbell and NCAI also filed a briefin support of a petition for rehearing or rehearingen banc.  The parties argued that the Third Circuitpanel opinion wrongly interpreted NAGPRA andCongress’ intent, left out major procedural provisions of the statute, and created a judicialexception to its application.  
The massive Chuitna Coal project in Alaska
threatens to destroy a vital salmon habitat streamthat the Native Village of Tyonek (NVT) utilizes forsubsistence fisheries.  After agreeing to assist theT ribe in protecting its subsistence fisheriesresources, legal research established that much morewas at stake as recent field surveys and excavationsfound numerous house pits, cultural features, andreligious remains in the project area.  Under suchcircumstances the National Historic PreservationAct requires that the federal agency tasked withjurisdiction immediately contact the impacted T ribeto seek consultation regarding the protection of thehistoric resources. Under existing law Tyonekshould be granted the opportunity to identify itsconcerns about historic properties, advise on theidentification and evaluation of historic properties,including those of traditional religious and culturalimportance, articulate its views on the undertak-
ing's effects on such properties, and participate inthe resolution of adverse effects.  NARF hasengaged an expert and has been working with theT ribe’s Council, the State Historic PreservationOffice, the National Park Service and others toeffectively engage the Army Corp of Engineers onNational Historic Preservation Act issues.  
NARF is also actively engaged in helping the
T ribe acquire 160 acres of land currently owned bythe Nature Conservancy.  The Nature ConservancyBoard of  Directors has agreed to move forwardwith the “Land T ransfer” in order to assist NVT toprotect ancient culture sites, which have been foundon the land.  The Alaska State Historic PreservationOffice has determined that the boundary of theChuit’na Archeological   District be expanded toinclude the Nature Conservancy Land.  An accessagreement has been completed to allow NVT andthe Great Land T rust in Anchorage to complete anyfurther inspections prior to the closing date of theland transfer and the development of the conserva-tion easement. 
NARF represents the Kaibab Paiute T ribe in their
dispute with the King County Water District andthe Army Corps of Engineers who are preparing tobuild a dam over a burial ground that is known tocontain the remains of almost 100 people.  TheWater District and the Corps have not finished theirstudy to determine exactly how many people arestill buried there, and the Kaibab do not want thedam built or the reservoir filled until the full extentof the burials are known and steps can be taken toprotect the site and the people under the NativeAmerican Graves Protection and Repatriation Act.  
NARF has also continued its representation of
the Native American Church of North America inaddressing issues concerning the sacramental use ofpeyote in their religious ceremonies.  NARF hasbegun a project to research the impact of the peyoteharvest decline in Texas on Native AmericanChurch members and to develop and support accessto and the use of the holy sacrament, peyote, for ourclient, the Native American Church of NorthAmerica.  
Indian Education
During the 19th and into the 20th century, pur-
suant to federal policy, Native American childrenwere forcibly abducted from their homes to attend
28 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT29Christian and government-run boarding schools.
The purpose was to "civilize" the Indian and tostamp out native culture. It was a deliberate policyof ethnocide and cultural genocide.  Cut off fromtheir families and culture, the children were pun-ished for speaking their native language, bannedfrom conducting traditional or cultural practices,shorn of traditional clothing and identity of theirnative culture, taught that their culture and tradi-tions were evil and sinful, and that they should beashamed of being Native American.  Placed oftenfar from home, they were frequently neglected orabused physically, sexually and psychologically.Generations of these children became the legacy ofthe federal Boarding School Policy.  They werereturned to their communities, not as theChristianized farmers that the Boarding SchoolPolicy envisioned, but as deeply scarred humanbeings with none of the acculturated skills – com-munity, parenting, extended family, language, cultural practices – gained by those who are raisedin their cultural context. 
There has been scant recognition by the U.S. 
federal government that initiated and carried outthis policy, and no acceptance of responsibility forthe indisputable fact that its purpose was culturalgenocide.  There are no apparent realistic legalavenues to seek redress or healing from the deep and
enduring wounds inflicted both on the individualsand communities of tribal nations.  Lawsuits byindividuals have been turned aside, and unlike othercountries that implemented similar policies – e.g.Canada, Australia – there has been no official U.S.proposal for healing or reconciliation.
The National Native American Boarding School
Healing Coalition (NABS or the “Coalition”) is pri-marily conducting education and outreach withthree general areas of focus at this time: (1) IndianCountry, (2) Congress, and (3) Churches.Outreach in Indian country has included presenta-tions at regional tribal organization meetings, aswell as working with Indian Country media when-ever available.  To date, 17 resolutions have beenpassed by tribes and tribal organizations to supportthe project.  These can be seen on the project web-site at http://www.boardingschoolhealing.org/state-ments-resolutions .  In October 2014 in Atlanta, theNational Congress of American Indians adopted aresolution calling for more education about the his-tory and current impacts of the boarding schoolpolicy, as well as healing models for addressing his-torical trauma.  A special breakout session address-ing boarding school healing took place at the sessionwhere NARF and other experts provided a briefing
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD
to tribal leaders and other interested parties in atten-
dance about the project, and the hopeful messagethat healing is possible along with a plan to movetowards that healing.  
NABS has shifted its emphasis for informing
Congressional staff to engaging in a partnershipwith the National Museum of the American Indianto develop and provide a briefing to create aware-ness of NABS and the goals we are pursuing.  Weare maintaining contact with the Assistant Secretaryof Indian Affairs’ staff and are keeping that officeinformed of our work.  We continue to work withrepresentatives from the Council of NativeAmerican Ministries to raise awareness amongchurches working in Indian Country, and to collab-orate with the Friends Committee on NationalLegislation to provide educational materials andraise awareness about this project.
The annual meeting of the Coalition was held at
the NARF office and via teleconference, inDecember 2014.  Task groups and subcommitteesof the Board of the Coalition continue to meet regularly, via phone.  Recently, groups focusing on building awareness and support among triballeaders, on interaction with the Substance Abuseand Mental Health Agency for technical and otherassistance, and on planning for a strategic planningmeeting, have all met. 
Recent developments mark a historical shift 
in Indian education law and policy by taking thefirst step in accomplishing “educational tribal sover-eignty.”  NARF , other Indian organizations andtribes have been advocating for systemic changes toAmerican Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN) education.Changes that would increase involvement of tribalgovernments, educators, parents, and elders in whatAI/AN students are taught, how they are taught,who teaches them, and where they learn.  T ribalcontrol of these core issues can amount to educa-tional tribal sovereignty.  
NARF represents the T ribal Education
Departments National Assembly (TEDNA), anational advocacy organization for tribal educationdepartments and agencies (TEDs/TEAs) that worksto strengthen the legal rights of tribes to control theformal education of tribal members.  NARF startedTEDNA in 2003 with a group of tribal educationdepartment directors from Indian tribes across thecountry.  After over 20 years of work, NARF andTEDNA secured the first source of direct federal
funding – $ 2 million – for tribal education depart-ments (“TEDs”) in the Labor, Health, and HumanServices Fiscal Year 2012 Appropriations Bill dis-tributed by the U.S. Department of Education via acompetitive grant process under a new State T ribalEducation Partnerships (“STEP”) Program. TheSTEP program authorizes eligible TEDs to partici-pate in a pilot project that allows TEDs to operatefederal education programs in schools located onIndian reservations.  
In FY 2014, the Department of the Interior
announced $2.5 million in competitive discre-tionary grants for TEDs under a similar newSovereignty in Education (SIE) Program.  TEDNAtestified before the House Interior AppropriationsSub-Committee in April 2014 on TED fundingthrough the Interior Department.  SIE Programgrants are to promote full tribal capacity to manageand operate tribally controlled Bureau of IndianEducation (BIE)-funded schools.  Grantee tribeswill develop school reform plans with the goals ofimproved efficiencies and effectiveness in schooloperation and improved student educational out-comes.  BIE will provide SIE grantees with techni-cal assistance in planning and implementing assess-ment and implementation plans and in strengthen-ing school processes.  It also will provide a forum forgrantee tribes to work collaboratively with eachother to gain insights and develop or share tribaland BIE-problems solving strategies.  ThroughNARF’s and TEDNA’s efforts, another $2 millionfor tribal departments of education has beenincluded in the 2015 federal budget.  
NARF received a sub contract from the U.S.
Department of Education through the Region IXEquity Assistance Center at West Ed, which is oneof ten such Centers that provide technical assistanceand training in the areas of civil rights, equity andschool reform.  NARF reviewed and commented onWest Ed’s report on the Indian education laws andpolicies of Arizona, Nevada, and Utah.  The reportwill soon be published.
On behalf of a student who was affected by a
change in Haskell Indian Nations University’sadmissions policy, NARF made a Freedom ofInformation Act request to the Bureau of IndianEducation (BIE) for the agency’s legal and decision-making documentation supporting its policy.  TheBIE responded and NARF is reviewing the response.  
30 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT31Civil and Cultural Rights
From the embryonic days of our Nation, Indian
tribes have long struggled against the assimilationistpolicies instituted by the United States whichsought to destroy tribal cultures by removing NativeAmerican children from their tribes and families.As an example, the federal government failed toprotect Indian children from misguided and insen-sitive child welfare practices by state human serviceagencies, which resulted in the unwarrantedremoval of Indian children from their families andtribes and placement of those children in non-Indian homes. Statistical and anecdotal informationshow that Indian children who grow up in non-Indian settings become spiritual and culturalorphans. They do not entirely fit into the culture inwhich they are raised and yearn throughout theirlife for the family and tribal culture denied them aschildren. Many Native children raised in non-Native homes experience identity problems, drugaddiction, alcoholism, incarceration and, most disturbing, suicide.
In order to address these problems facing tribes as
a result of the loss of their children, the IndianChild Welfare Act (ICWA) was enacted byCongress in 1978. It established minimum federaljurisdictional, procedural and substantive standardsaimed to achieve the dual purposes of protecting
the right of an Indian child to live with an Indianfamily and to stabilize and foster continued tribalexistence.  Since that time, there have been misin-terpretations and, in some cases, outright refusal tofollow the intent of the law by state agencies andcourts. 
State services frequently do not reach village
Alaska. T ribal courts must therefore handle mostcases involving the welfare of village children.  Staterecognition of those tribal court proceedings istherefore critical to assure that proceedings whichoccur in tribal court are then respected by otherstate agencies.  Otherwise, adoptive parents may notbe able to participate in state-funded assistance programs, to secure substitute birth certificates necessary to travel out of state, to enroll children inschool, or to secure medical care.  
In January 2005, NARF filed a complaint on
behalf of the Villages of Tanana, Nulato, Akiak,Kalskag, Lower Kalskag, and Kenaitze along withTheresa and Dan Schwietert against the State ofAlaska, then-Attorney General Greg Renkes, andvarious state agencies challenging a policy opiningthat state courts have exclusive jurisdiction overchild custody proceedings involving Alaska Native
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD
children.  The policy as implemented instructed
state employees to stop recognizing tribal courtdecrees on the alleged basis that T ribes in Alaska donot have concurrent jurisdiction to hear children’scases unless (1) the child’s T ribe has successfullypetitioned the Department of Interior to reassumeexclusive or concurrent jurisdiction under theIndian Child Welfare Act (ICWA), or (2) a statesuperior court had transferred jurisdiction of thechild’s case to a tribal court in accordance with 26U.S.C. § 1911(b).  Plaintiffs sought a declarationthat T ribes have inherent jurisdiction to initiateT ribe member children’s proceedings without firstfiling a petition to reassume jurisdiction underICWA.  In May 2007, the state superior courtissued an opinion in the T ribes’ favor rejecting all ofthe State of Alaska’s arguments.  After extensivebriefing on the form of relief, judgment wasentered.  The State appealed to the Alaska SupremeCourt and oral argument was heard in December2009.  
In March 2011, the Alaska Supreme Court pub-
lished its decision in State of Alaska v. Native Village
of T anana and reaffirmed that (1) Alaska T ribes hadnot been divested of
their jurisdiction toadjudicate children’scustody cases, and (2)Alaska’s tribes have con-current jurisdiction withthe State.  The court fur-ther held that tribes thathad not reassumedexclusive jurisdictionunder ICWA nonethe-less had concurrentjurisdiction to initiateICWA-defined childcustody proceedings,regardless of the pres-ence of Indian countryand that as such, thedecisions of tribal courtsin these cases were duefull faith and creditunder ICWA.  
Following the Alaska
Supreme Court’s deci-sion upholding tribalauthority to initiate children’s proceedings,
NARF has been working with the Alaska StateAttorney General’s office to formalize policies andprotocol to implement the Tanana decision.  
In April 2014, nine years after the Renkes
Opinion was issued, and three years after the AlaskaSupreme Court issued State v. Native Village of
T anana, Attorney General Michael Geraghty finally
withdrew the Renkes Opinion as “superseded” bythe Tanana decision.  In October 2014, the StateRules Committee adopted Supreme Court Opinion(SCO) 1784 to provide a mechanism for the regis-tration, confirmation, and enforcement of tribalcourt orders entered in ICWA-defined child cus-tody proceedings. This rule change became effectivein October 2014. 
SCO 1784 adds a new PART XI and new Child
in Need of Aid (CINA) Rules 24 and 25 that pro-vide a mechanism for the registration, confirmation,and enforcement of tribal court orders entered inchild custody proceedings as defined by ICWA.  InState of Alaska v. Native Village of T anana, the court
held that such orders are entitled to full faith andcredit to the same extent as other states’ and foreign
32 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT
33orders. These new rules will make that decision
more effective in practice by providing clear proce-dures.  The new CINA Rule 24 addresses the regis-tration, confirmation and enforcement of tribalcourt child custody orders, and the new CINA Rule25 provides for expedited enforcement of such orders.
The Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) establishes
adoptive placement preferences for placing anIndian child with a member of the child’s extendedfamily, other members of the child’s tribe, or withother Indian families.  A court may deviate fromthese preferences only upon a showing of goodcause.  NARF has worked with tribes on the issue ofensuring that state courts abide by a tribe’s adoptiveplacement preference.  In Alaska, courts had beenapplying the incorrect standard – the preponder-ance of the evidence standard – instead of the clearand convincing standard of proof.  At issue inNative Village of Tununak v. State of Alaska was this
proper burden of proof that the Alaska Office ofChildren’s Services must meet in order to move achild from one placement to another.  NARFauthored an amicus brief in the case on behalf of theNative Village of Kotzebue. 
In June 2013 the Alaska Supreme Court issued
an important ruling in the case which held thatICWA implicitly mandates that good cause to devi-ate from ICWA’s adoptive placement preferences beproved by clear and convincing evidence, not theweaker preponderance of the evidence standard.This is an important decision because Alaska hadbeen the only state where courts applied the pre-ponderance of the evidence burden of proof to find-ings of good cause to deviate from ICWA’s adoptionpreferences.  In addition, the court’s opinion alsoincludes important language on the need for trialcourts to evaluate the suitability of placements notunder “white, middle class standards” but under“the prevailing social and cultural standards of theIndian community.”  Unfortunately, the ruling didnot end the status of the appeal as the adoptive par-ents asked the Court to revise its ruling in light ofthe United States Supreme Court’s decision inAdoptive Couple v. Baby Girl(Baby Veronica). The
Alaska Court has asked the parties to brief theeffect, if any of Baby Veronica on the pending adop-
tion case.  NARF submitted an amicus brief inNovember 2013 in support of the tribal placementpreference.  Oral argument was heard in January2014 and in September 2014, the Alaska SupremeCourt issued its decision.  The Alaska SupremeCourt ruled that, in order to be considered as an
adoptive placement option for children in the custody of the State, family members, and otherNative families must file formal adoption cases.The Court held that the United States SupremeCourt’s decision last year in the Baby Veronica case
required this new rule.  
Because filing a formal petition for adoption is a
very complicated process that requires the assistanceof a lawyer and the vast majority of Alaska Nativefamilies (especially those in rural Alaska) lack accessto or resources for an attorney, this new requirementwill be an insurmountable hurdle for most familiesand will prevent them from asserting their rightsunder ICWA. It also means that grandparents,rather than encouraging their children’s efforts toreunite with their children, will have to file adop-tion cases seeking to terminate their own children’sparental rights.  The Native Village of T ununak isasking the Court to reconsider its decision.
In another Alaska ICWA case, after numerous
hearings in Parks v. Simmonds, the Minto T ribal
Court terminated the parental rights of Mr. Parksand Ms. Stearman and granted permanent custodyof a child to the Simmonds.  Mr. Parks sued in statecourt, claiming, among other things, that the tribalcourt has no jurisdiction over him and that his rightto due process was violated when the Minto Court– in accordance with its traditional practices andprocedures – did not permit Mr. Parks’ attorney topresent oral argument.  Based on these arguments,Mr. Parks claims that the tribal court terminationorder is not entitled to full faith and credit underICWA.  The Simmonds argued that the terminationorder is entitled to full faith and credit and theymoved to dismiss the state court action, but thismotion was denied by the state court in November2010.  The state court reasoned that failure to allowan attorney to present oral argument did violate Mr. Parks’ due process rights.
The Simmonds petitioned the Alaska Supreme
Court for review.  The petition was granted inMarch 2011 and the case was remanded to the trialcourt for it to make specific factual findings andlegal conclusions.  Briefing on remand was con-cluded in May 2011 and oral argument was held inDecember 2011.  The trial court issued findingsand concluded in part that tribal courts may nothave jurisdiction over nonmembers outside ofIndian Country, and also suggested that tribal
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDcourts must permit oral argument.  The Simmonds
filed another petition for review with the AlaskaSupreme Court asking that numerous aspects of thisdecision be overturned.  In July 2012, the AlaskaSupreme Court granted the petition.  Oral argu-ment was delivered in March 2014 and in July2014, the Alaska Supreme Court issued a unani-mous decision affirming full faith and credit for theMinto T ribal Court’s order and dismissing the case.The court’s opinion was notable in that it affirmedthe tribal exhaustion doctrine and reiterated that lit-igants must exhaust a tribal court’s appellate processbefore approaching state courts.  
After transferring her Child in Need of Aid case
from the Alaska court system to the Nulato T ribalCourt in Brasket v. Frankson, a birth mother
worked with tribal social services for nearly twoyears toward reunification with her daughter.These efforts were not successful, however, and the
T ribal Court eventually decided to terminate thebirth mother’s parental rights.  The T ribal Courtprovided the birth mother written and oral noticeof the termination hearing, but she did not attend.At the conclusion of the hearing, the T ribal Courtheld it was in the best interests of the child to ter-minate the birth mother’s parental rights and placethe child for adoption.  The T ribal Court chose theFranksons, a Native family from a neighboring vil-lage, as adoptive placement.
The birth mother filed a child custody suit
against the Franksons in state court.  The lawsuitclaimed that the T ribal Court's rulings should notbe accorded full faith and credit under the IndianChild Welfare Act (ICWA) because: 1) the T ribalCourt’s notice did not comply with due process and2) the T ribal Court violated ICWA’s placement 
34 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT
35preferences by placing the child with a non-relative
Indian family.  As her ultimate remedy, the birthmother requested the state court assume jurisdic-tion over the tribal custody case.
The Franksons and the Nulato T ribe, represented
by NARF , sought to dismiss the suit.  Over thecourse of two hearings, the T ribe argued that notonly did it provide adequate notice of the termina-tion hearing, but that the birth mother's claimsbased on ICWA’s placement preferences were inap-plicable, as the adoptive placement was made intribal—not state court.  The T ribe also argued thatunder ICWA, the T ribal Court had exclusive juris-diction over the ultimate placement of the child, asshe is legally a ward of the T ribal Court.  
In August 2014, the court issued an order accord-
ing the T ribal Court’s ruling full faith and credit anddismissing the birth mother’s case.  The court dis-missed the birth mother’s challenge on the basis thatshe failed to exhaust her tribal court remedies andthat the T ribal Court fully notified her of the pro-ceedings.  In addition, the court held as a matter oflaw that the T ribal Court’s placement of the childwith Frankson’s did not violate ICWA’s placementpreferences because the preferences apply only toadoptions made under state law.  A request forreconsideration was denied and an appeal to theAlaska Supreme Court is expected.
Voting Rights
NARF brought a lawsuit to enforce Section 203
of the Voting Rights Act in 2007 called Nick v.
Bethel. The plaintiffs were four tribal councils and
four individual elders in the Bethel Census Area.  Ahuge swath of Alaska is not organized into any bor-oughs or counties so the census had made its cover-age determinations based on federal census areas.  Inthe Bethel Census Area, the first language spoken in75 percent of homes was Yup'ik and the illiteracyrate was 17 times the national average.  NARF wona preliminary injunction in July 2008 mandatingrelief for the 2008 election cycle, including sampleballots written in Yup'ik.  The case was settled inJanuary 2010 when the Alaska Department ofElections (DOE) agreed to provide some electionmaterials in Yup'ik as well as provide increased train-ing for poll workers, among other relief.  Because thecensus areas above and below Bethel, the WadeHampton and Dillingham Census Areas respective-ly, spoke the same language and had nearly identicalstatistics and needs, the Nick Plaintiffs assumed thatthe same relief would be afforded to them even
though they were not in the actual lawsuit. 
Beginning with the 2012 election cycle, NARF
began to receive complaints from the adjacent WadeHampton and Dillingham Census Areas that theywere receiving none of the benefits from the Nick
case and indeed almost no language assistance at all.In fact, the DOE appears to have been distributingsample ballots in Yup'ik in all three census areas, butrestricting all other Yup'ik election materials to theBethel Census Area.  NARF sued the DOE again inJuly 2013.  This time the Plaintiffs from the adja-cent census areas added Fourteenth and FifteenAmendment claims under the U.S. Constitutionbecause if you know there are language problemsand you have materials you use elsewhere but refuseto provide, you are discriminating.  
This second case, called Toyukak v. Treadwell,
did something very unusual for a Section 203case: it went all the way through trial.  This is notvery common for cases brought under this lawbecause jurisdictions usually do not fight theirvoters on something so simple all the way to thebitter end.  It is also generally easy to proveSection 203 cases in that the evidence consists ofthe materials made available in English and thematerials made available in the relevant language.If they do not match one to one, there is liability.However, what made this case drag on throughtrial was not just the DOE’s recalcitrance tochange – they wanted a rule of law establishedthat, because of the Stevens Proviso, they just did not have to translate everything.  In otherwords, Native language speaking voters get less
voting information than other voters. 
During the two-week trial from June 23 – July 3,
2014, it became very clear what the electoral systemlooked like if you are a Yup'ik speaking voter.Almost no pre-election information was translated.The “outreach workers” in the villages were sup-posed to be bilingual and they were asked to trans-late a brief set of facts on a sheet of paper called a“certificate of outreach”: the date and time of theelection, the location of the polling place, and thefact that language assistance was available.  That’s it.In contrast, English-speaking voters receive in themail an Official Election Pamphlet (called the OEP)that consists of more than 100 pages of informationabout the candidates and all ballot measures. So this case boiled down one comparison: the 
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDcertificate of outreach versus the OEP , and the result
was that Native language speakers were receivingless than one percent of the information English
speaking voters were receiving. 
In September 2014 the federal district court in
Anchorage found that the Plaintiffs had establishedviolations of Section 203.  The Court then asked fora schedule for the parties to file briefs setting forthwhat remedies they wanted the Court to order.  TheDefendant (DOE) actually rose in Court and sug-gested there be no changes ordered for this electionbecause there simply wasn’t time to do anything.The Court set a briefing schedule anyway andissued a list of remedies to be implemented in the2014 cycle.  It contains 21 items and is eight pageslong.  Although limited by what could reasonablybe completed before the election, it nonethelessorders some highly significant changes: (1) all trans-lated materials must account for dialect variationsand understandable to people in the different cen-sus areas; (2) translated public service announce-ments must be made available on a variety of topicsincluding the deadline to register to vote, the dead-line to request absentee ballots, the availability ofearly voting, and specifically listing the name of theperson in each village assigned to provide voterswith translated materials; (3) posters in the Nativelanguage have to be posted both in public places likeschools and stores but also in the polling placetelling voters they can receive language assistanceeither from a poll worker or someone of their ownchoice; (5) the entire OEP had to be translated intothe Native languages, and (6) the Court requiredpost-election reporting on how the DOE did in itsefforts to meet the terms of the order.  
The goal of this case (and the one before it), and
the goal of the Court’s interim order is equality —a level playing field.  Native voters should not bereceiving less than their English-speaking counter-parts.  The whole point of the 1975 Amendments –and the whole point of the 14th and 15thAmendments to the Constitution – is equality.  Thisis especially critical when the subject is voting,because voting is the core right in a democracy andpreservative of all other rights.  These changes areway overdue. 
Last year, the U. S. Supreme Court in the Shelby
County case invalidated Section 4 of the VotingRights Act which required preclearance by theJustice Department of changes in state voting lawsin certain states with histories of discrimination.
On behalf of Bristol Bay Native Corporation and theAlaska Federation of Natives, NARF is currentlyworking on a Congressional amendment to theVoting Rights Act that would protect AlaskaNatives and American Indians from the kinds ofvoting discrimination they face across the country.  
The NatiVRA (S.2399) was introduced in the
Senate in an attempt to remedy some of the long-standing issues such as the lack of language assis-tance, lack of polling places, and lack of early vot-ing.  Despite significant efforts, a large coalition ofcivil rights groups were unable to get a broader“Shelby Fix” through this Congress. Our efforts willnow focus on the next Congress. This work willbecome increasingly important as states and localgovernments nationwide pass new and more stringent laws to restrict access to the polls.
International Recognition of Indigenous Peoples
The development of international laws and stan-
dards to protect the rights of indigenous peoplesgreatly benefits Native American peoples.  NARFand the National Congress of American Indians(NCAI) entered into an attorney-client relationshipover a decade ago for the purpose of working in theinternational arena to protect indigenous rights.  
In September 2007, the United Nations General
Assembly overwhelmingly adopted the Declarationon the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (U.N. DRIP).The vote was 143 in favor, 4 opposed, and 11abstaining. The votes in opposition were Canada,Australia, New Zealand, and the United States. Thishistoric vote came after 30 years of worldwideindigenous efforts.  NARF has represented NCAI inthis matter since 1999.  The U.N. DRIP recognizesthat indigenous peoples have important collectivehuman rights in a multitude of areas, including selfdetermination, spirituality, and lands, territoriesand natural resources. The U.N. DRIP sets outminimum standards for the treatment of indigenouspeoples and can serve as the basis for the develop-ment of customary international law.
In 2009 Australia and New Zealand reversed
their positions and now support the U.N. DRIP .Canada endorsed the U.N. DRIP in November2010 and in December 2010, President Obamamade the historic announcement that the U.S. wasreversing its negative vote and now endorses theU.N. DRIP .
36 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT37In January 2011, NARF participated in a brain-
storming session with tribal leaders, Indian lawpractitioners and scholars on implementation of theU.N. DRIP hosted by the Yocha Dehe WintunT ribe in California.  In June 2011 the SenateCommittee on Indian Affairs held a hearing onU.N. DRIP’s implementation at which NARF andits client NCAI submitted written testimony.NARF moderated a panel on implementation of theDeclaration at NCAI’s Annual Convention inPortland, Oregon in November 2011.  In March2012 NARF participated in a presentation toCalifornia Indian leaders on implementation of theDeclaration at Yocha Dehe Wintun.  In September2012, NARF spoke on implementation of theDeclaration at a Conference at the University ofCalifornia at Berkeley.
In February and March, 2013, NARF , on behalf
of NCAI, participated in a meeting of the NorthAmerican Indigenous Peoples caucus to prepare forthe High Level Plenary Meeting (HLPM) to beknown as the World Conference on IndigenousPeople (WCIP) to be held in New York City inSeptember 2014 and for the Indigenous preparato-ry meeting in Alta, Norway in June 2013.  Thismeeting produced an outcome document whichwill be used by indigenous peoples to lobby states inadvance of the WCIP .
NARF and NCAI, along with other indigenous
organizations and tribal governments participatedin interactive hearings with states during the sum-mer of 2014 as part of the United Nations WorldConference on Indigenous Peoples (WCIP) inSeptember 2014 in New York City.  A statementsigned on by NARF , the National Congress ofAmerican Indians, 72 tribes and other non-govern-mental organizations was presented at the WCIP .The Statement highlighted those issues deemedmost important to be dealt with at the WCIP: 1)establishment of a body at the United Nations tomonitor the implementation of the United NationsDeclaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples; 2)creation of a permanent, dignified and appropriatestatus for Indigenous Peoples at the United Nations;3) address violence against Indigenous women; and4) protections of sacred sites.  The outcome docu-ment was adopted by the General Assembly andincludes all of the elements proposed by NARF ,NCAI, and the other indigenous organizations andtribal governments.  The adoption of the U.N. DRIP has impacted
the Organization of American States (OAS) process.NARF also represents NCAI in this process.  InNovember 2007 it was agreed that the U.N. DRIPwould be used as the foundation for an OAS docu-ment, in that all the terms of the OAS documentwould be consistent with, or more favorable to,Indigenous rights than the U.N. DRIP .  It was fur-ther agreed that the terms of the OAS declarationwould be agreed upon through a consensus baseddecision making process which includes Indigenousrepresentatives. The United States and Canada, whoat the time opposed the U.N. DRIP , neverthelessagreed they would not oppose the process movingforward in the OAS. 
The most recent OAS negotiation session was
held April 2012 in Washington, D.C.Disappointingly the U.S. and Canada did notactively participate even though they both now sup-port the U.N. DRIP .  The session lasted only threedays and progress was hampered by the lack offunding to enable the Indigenous caucus to meetahead of time and work on its proposals.  There wasone highlight, however, with the approval of a treatyprovision supporting the understanding of theindigenous peoples involved in any given treaty.  Noadditional negotiation sessions were held in 2013and 2014.  A three day negotiating session has beenset in Washington, D.C. for February 2015.
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD
38 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT“We also recommit to supporting tribal self-deter-
mination, security, and prosperity for all NativeAmericans. While we cannot erase the scourgesor broken promises of our past, we will moveahead together in writing a new, brighter chap-ter in our joint history.” — President Barack
Obama
Contained within the unique trust relationship
between the United States and Indian nations is theinherent duty for all levels of government to recog-nize and responsibly enforce the many laws and regulations applicable to Indian peoples and thetrust duties to which those give rise.  Because suchlaws impact virtually every aspect of tribal life,NARF maintains its involvement in the legal matters pertaining to accountability of governments
to Native Americans. 
In Pembina Chippewa v. U.S., NARF represents
the T urtle Mountain Chippewa, Chippewa Cree,White Earth Band of Minnesota Chippewa, andLittle Shell Chippewa T ribes in this case against the
federal government for misaccounting and misman-agement of their tribal trust fund, the PembinaJudgment Fund (PJF), since the inception of thefund in 1964.  In 2006 the T ribes defeated theUnited States’ motion to have the case dismissed.Since August 2007, the parties have been trying toresolve the T ribes’ claims primarily through alterna-tive dispute resolution proceedings before aSettlement Judge of the Court of Federal Claims.In August 2009, the parties reached agreement atleast for settlement negotiations purposes on thepopulation of “baseline” (non-investment) transac-tions in the PJF .  Since that time the parties havebeen negotiating the Pembinas’ claims of the government’s investment mismanagement of thePJF and discussing numerous procedural matters inthe event that agreement is reached on a settlementamount.
In Nez Perce v. Jewell, NARF represented forty
one plaintiffs: the Nez Perce T ribe; the MescaleroApache T ribe; the T ule River Indian T ribe; theHualapai T ribe; the Klamath T ribes; the Yurok
The Accountability Governments
39T ribe; the Cheyenne Arapaho T ribe; the Pawnee
Nation of Oklahoma; the Sac and Fox Nation; theSantee Sioux T ribe of Nebraska; the Tlingit andHaida Indian T ribes of Alaska; Aleut Community ofSt. Paul Island; Bad River Band of Lake SuperiorChippewa Indians; Bois Forte Band of Chippewa;Cachil Dehe Band of Wintun Indians of ColusaRancheria; Confederated Salish & Kootenai T ribes;Confederated T ribes of Siletz Indians; GrandT raverse Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians;Kaibab Paiute T ribe; Kenaitze Indian T ribe;Kickapoo T ribe in Kansas; Lac Courte OreillesBand of Ojibwe; Lac Du Flambeau Band of LakeSuperior Chippewa; Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe;Minnesota Chippewa T ribe; Native Village of Atka;Nooksack Indian T ribe; Prairie Island IndianCommunity; Pueblo of Zia; Qawalangin T ribe;Rincon Luiseno Band of Indians; Samish IndianNation; San Luis Rey Indian Water Authority; SaultSte. Marie T ribe of Chippewa; Shoalwater BayT ribe; Skokomish T ribe; Spirit Lake DakotahNation; Spokane T ribe; Summit Lake Paiute T ribe;T ulalip T ribes; and, Ute Mountain Ute T ribe, inthis action filed in the federal district court for theDistrict of Columbia in December 2006 seekingfull and accurate accountings of their trust funds.Such accountings never have been provided by the federal government which is the trustee for the funds.
Pending before the Court is the government’s
motion to dismiss the action for lack of jurisdic-tion, which the T ribes have opposed.  In 2009 theT ribes represented by NARF in this case wereamong the over 90 T ribes who wrote PresidentObama regarding his campaign promise to resolveequitably all Indian trust fund mismanagement lit-igation against the federal government, by begin-ning settlement negotiations in this case and othertribal trust cases.  In 2010 and 2011 NARF attor-neys along with the attorneys for dozens of otherT ribes litigating trust accounting and mismanage-ment claims coordinated and attended many meet-ings hosted by the President’s appointees inWashington, D.C. in preparation for settlementnegotiations.  In December 2011 active claims set-tlement negotiations on a tribe-by-tribe basis beganfor many T ribes.  To date, 35 of NARF’s clientT ribes in this case have reached settlement agree-ments or other resolution of their claims with theUnited States.  The settlement agreements havebeen filed in, and approved by, the Court.  Per thesettlement agreements, once the T ribes havereceived their settlement payments their claims are
dismissed with prejudice.  NARF continues to rep-resent its remaining client T ribes in this case intheir on-going settlement negotiations.
In Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate v Jewell, NARF 
represents 10 tribes – Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate;Quinault Indian Nation; White Earth ChippewaNation; Oklahoma Kickapoo T ribe; ComancheNation; Penobscot Indian Nation; Pueblo ofAcoma; Seminole T ribe of Florida; Southern UteIndian T ribe; and Confederated T ribes of theUmatilla Indian Reservation – in this case filed inApril 2013 in the Federal District Court for theDistrict of Columbia seeking historical accountingsof the T ribes’ trust accounts, funds, and resources.In November 2013 the government filed a Motionto Dismiss the case for lack of jurisdiction. The T ribes’ opposed dismissal. The dismissalmotion is now fully briefed and is pending beforethe Court.  We also hope to engage in settlementnegotiations at the political level with the Obama Administration regarding the T ribes’ trustaccounting and mismanagement claims.
In January 2014 in Muscogee (Creek) Nation v.
Jewell, the Muscogee Creek Nation retained NARF
to represent it in its pending action in the federaldistrict court for the District of Columbia for historical accounting of its trust funds and assets.NARF and experts retained by NARF have beenreviewing the Nation’s trust account data providedby the government in the context of political nego-tiated settlements by the Obama Administration,and are working with the Nation in on-going settlement discussions with the government.
NARF is also preparing a legal opinion for the
Intertribal Council of Arizona on its rights andpossible claims under a 1988 statute establishing itseducation trust funds.
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD40 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT“The work that we have is for all of us to do. 
We do this for our grandchildren.” — Vickie
Downey, Clan Mother, Tesuque Pueblo
The coordinated development of Indian law and
educating the public about Indian rights, laws andissues is essential for the continued protection ofIndian rights.  This primarily involves establishingfavorable court precedents, distributing informationand law materials, encouraging and fostering Indianlegal education, and forming alliances with Indianlaw practitioners and other Indian organizations.NARF has three ongoing projects which are aimedat achieving this goal: the Indigenous PeacemakingInitiative; the National Indian Law Library; and theIndian Law Support Center.
Indigenous Peacemaking Initiative 
The mission of the Indigenous Peacemaking
Initiative (IPI) is to promote and support Nativepeoples in restoring sustainable peacemaking practices.  This project provides NARF with an
opportunity to support traditional peacemakingand community building practices as an extensionof Indian law and sovereign rights.  The project isguided by an Advisory Committee consisting of traditional peacemaking experts and practitioners.
Peacemaking is a community-directed process to
develop consensus on a conflict resolution plan thataddresses the concerns of all interested parties. Thepeacemaking process uses traditional rituals such asthe group circle, and Clan structures, to involve theparties to a conflict, their supporters, elders andinterested community members. Within the circle,people can speak from the heart in a shared searchfor understanding of the conflict, and togetheridentify the steps necessary to assist in healing allaffected parties and to prevent future occurrencesand conflicts.
The most significant activity of the IPI during
the last year is a training the IPI cooperatively devel-oped and provided with Columbia Law School. The Development of Indian Law
41 AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDThe training was conceived in response to a 
request for proposals for training services issued bythe National American Indian Court JudgesAssociation, and took place in October 2014 inCatoosa, Oklahoma.  About 45 people attended thetraining, and feedback from those who attended hasbeen excellent.  IPI personnel also administered anew survey to gather further direction and data toadvocate for increased support for peacemaking,with participation from training attendees.  Analysisof the new survey results began in November 2014.  
NARF’s National Indian Law Library (NILL)
staff have developed a draft web page and continueintegrating that page with the electronic versions ofresources on Peacemaking in the NILL catalog.  Thewebpage will serve as a basis for outreach and pro-vide easy access to resources gathered for the project.The project also continues to grow and strengthenits networks, as part of raising awareness and alsorecruiting additional expert resources.  The projecthas also been working closely with Columbia LawSchool to complement each other’s work, and theColorado University Indian Law Clinic has placedan intern to help in development and analysis of thecatalog of resources for the project.  
The National Indian Law Library
The National Indian Law Library (NILL) is the
only law library in the United States devoted toIndian law. The library serves both NARF andmembers of the public. Since it was started as aNARF project in 1972, NILL has collected nearly9,000 resource materials that relate to federal Indianand tribal law. The Library’s holdings include thelargest collection of tribal codes, ordinances andconstitutions; legal pleadings from major Indiancases; and often hard to find reports and historicallegal information. In addition to making its catalogand extensive collection available to the public,NILL provides reference and research assistancerelating to Indian law and tribal law and its profes-sional staff answers over 2,000 questions each year.In addition, the Library has created and maintains ahuge web site that provides access to thousands offull-text sources to help the researcher.  NARF’swebsite has recorded over 200,000 visits each year.See www.narf/org/nill/index.htm. 
The Access to T ribal Law Project continues to be
an invaluable resource for researchers and practi-tioners in tribal law.  In the last fiscal year, wereceived updates to 71 Constitutions or Codes from39 tribes.  NILL has developed good relationships
with a number of tribes who regularly send updatesto their laws as changes are made and we are work-ing to develop relationships with others who haveexpressed interest.  NILL is also working to movetribal law pages from our old tribal law index to our new T ribal Law Gateway.  NILL has receivedseveral enthusiastic compliments on the new platform, with researchers saying it is helpful andeasy to navigate.  
The website for the Indigenous Peacemaking
Initiative has been launched as NILL worked closelywith IPI attorneys, the IPI Advisory Committeeand other NARF staff members to create the newIPI website, which is available at http://narf.org/peacemaking. The website provides resources tohelp visitors learn about peacemaking as well astools to help practitioners implement peacemakingin their community.  Many of the resources high-lighted are available online and NILL has obtainedpermission to post some resources that were notalready available online.
In providing access to law review articles on
Indian law, each week when the Indian LawBulletin is published, NILL indexes the law reviewarticles from the bulletin and puts them in ouronline catalog. By including a table of contents andsubject headings for each article, we have created asearchable database of articles on Indian law for ourpatrons.  Whenever an article is available for freeonline, we add a link, making it easy for researchersto access the article quickly.  In the event an articleis not available online, patrons can contact thelibrary to request a copy of the article.  BecauseNILL has been indexing articles for over 10 years,our online catalog is a useful place to start researchon Indian law for attorneys and academics alike.
In providing for a T ribal Nation Pronunciation
Guide, NILL is actively seeking funds as well as vol-unteers and/or interns to help develop and publishan audio index of tribal nations.  We believe thisunique guide will be a valuable resource for thosewho need to communicate with tribes. The guidewill allow people to address a tribe in a respectfulmanner.  This project would involve developing andimplementing a plan to: 1) find authoritative pronunciations for each Indian nation’s name; 2)lease/purchase proper recording equipment/technology to capture the correct pronunciation ofeach Indian nation’s name for publication on theInternet; and 3) capture and publish the recorded
names on the National Indian Law Library website.  
Indian Law Support Center
NARF continues to perform Indian Law Support
Center duties by sending regular electronic mailouts nationwide to the 25 Indian Legal Services(ILS) programs, hosting a national listserv, handlingrequests for assistance, and working with ILS pro-grams to secure a more stable funding base fromCongress.  The Indian T ribal Justice and LegalAssistance Act of 2000 authorizes the U.S.Department of Justice to provide supplementalfunding to Indian legal services programs for theirrepresentation of Indian people and T ribes whichfall below federal poverty guidelines.  After fundingin 2003, 2004, and 2005, funding in 2006 - 2009was unsuccessful.  In 2010 we secured a line itemappropriation of $2.35 million from Congress.  InFY 2011 Congress appropriated $2.49 million forcivil and criminal assistance in tribal courts.  In FY2012 both civil and criminal tribal court assistancegrants were awarded to NARF in the amounts of$850,659 and $875,000 respectively, and NARFwas awarded civil and criminal grants in theamounts of $715,000 and $515,000, respectivelyfrom the FY 2013 federal budget.  Funding
amounts were reduced due to the effects of budgetcuts and sequestration.  NARF was recently success-ful in being awarded supplemental funding in theamounts of $597,000 for the criminal grant and$527,000 for the civil grant.    
Other Activities
In addition to its major projects, NARF contin-
ued its participation in numerous conferences andmeetings of Indian and non-Indian organizations inorder to share its knowledge and expertise in Indianlaw.  During the past fiscal year, NARF attorneysand staff served in formal or informal speaking andleadership capacities at numerous Indian andIndian-related conferences and meetings such as theNational Congress of American Indians ExecutiveCouncil, Midyear and Annual Conventions and theFederal Bar Association’s Indian Law Conference.NARF remains firmly committed to continuing itseffort to share the legal expertise which it possesseswith these groups and individuals working in sup-port of Indian rights and to foster the recognition ofIndian rights in mainstream society.
42 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT
43 AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDBased on our audited financial statements for the
fiscal year ending September 30, 2014, the NativeAmerican Rights Fund reports unrestricted revenues
of $9,595,558 against total expenditures of$10,098,690.  Total revenue and net assets at the end
of the year came to $6,729,288 and $15,718,340,respectively.  Due to presentation requirements of theaudited financial statements in terms of recognizingthe timing of certain revenues and expenses, they donot reflect the fact that, based on NARF’s internalreporting, expenses and other cash outlays exceededrevenue resulting in a decrease of $146,464 toNARF’s reserve fund.  When compared to fiscal year2013: the decrease in Public Contributions is mostlydue to receiving approximately $500,000 less inbequests (this area can vary widely from one year tothe next).  The decrease in T ribal Contributions is dueto the difference in contributions from our Nez Perce
v. Salazar clients (who received settlement awards
from the federal government in fiscal year 2012).Federal Awards relate to our Bureau of JusticeAssistance (BJA) contracts (the majority of which isalso included in expenses since it is paid-out to sub-recipients) and, although we continue to be awardednew contracts, the amounts vary from year to year.We received new Foundation Grants that wererestricted to our work in Alaska.  Legal Fees heldsteady.  Some of NARF’s investment holdings did notperform as well as they did in the prior year.
Unrestricted Revenue and Expense comparisons
between fiscal year 2014 and fiscal year 2013 areshown below (not including contributed services).
Public Contributions
Tribal Contributions
Federal Awards 
Foundation Grants
Return on Investments
Other
TOTALS      $  1,417,397
       3,355,204
      1,467,829  
      1,410,689
  1,306,465 
         609,308
           28,666
  $   9,595,558    14.8%
    35.0%
 15.3% 14.7% 13.6%
 6.3%
 0.3%
    100%   $ 1,901,958
      4,512,844
      1, 744,556
      1,227,729
      1, 277,395
      1,006,879
           21,254
   $ 11,692,615          16.3%
   38.6%   14.9%   10.5%   10.9%     8.6%     0.2%    100%dollars percents
2014
dollars percents2013
Legal Fees
dollars percents2014
dollars percents2013
Litigation and Client Services
National Indian Law Library     Total Program Services
Management and GeneralFund Raising     Total Support Services
                         TOTALS     $ 7,598,844
           389,780
        7,988,624
           860,765
        1,249,301
        2,110,066
   $ 10,098,690 75.2%
   3.9%
 79.1%
 8.5%
 12.4%
  20.9%
 100%   73.6%
     3.3%
   76.9%
 9.3%
 13.8%
 23.1%
 100%    $ 6,904,183
          306,352
       7,210,535
          871,821
       1,290,092
       2,161,913
    $ 9,372,448UNRESTRICTED SUPPORT AND REVENUE COMPARISON
Note: This summary of financial information has been extracted from NARF’s audited financial statements which received an unmodified opinion by
the accounting firm of BKD, LLP.  Complete audited financials are available, upon request, through our Boulder office or at www .narf.org.EXPENSE COMPARISONFY 2014 Financial Report44 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTTWe thank each and every one of our supporters
for their commitment to the goals of NARF .NARF’s success could not have been achievedwithout the generosity of our many donorsthroughout the nation. NARF receives contribu-tions from foundations, corporations, tribes andNative organizations, bequests and trusts, benefac-
tors, private donations, and in-kind contributions.We gratefully acknowledge these gifts received forfiscal year 2014 (October 1, 2013 throughSeptember 30, 2014).
Tribes and Native
Organizations
Amerind Risk
ManagementCorporation
Bay Bank (Oneida)Chickasaw NationComanche Nation 
of Oklahoma
Confederated Salish &
Kootenai T ribes
Confederated T ribes 
of Siletz Indians 
Cow Creek Band of
Umpqua T ribe of Indians
Fort Mojave Indian T ribeLummi Indian Business
Council 
Modoc T ribe of
Oklahoma
Muckleshoot T ribeNative Village 
of Fort Yukon
Native Village 
of Port Lions
Nome Eskimo
Community
Nottawaseppi Huron
Band of Potawatomi
Oneida T ribe of Indians
of Wisconsin
Organized Village 
of Saxman
Pechanga Band of
Luiseño Mission Indians
Poarch Band 
of Creek Indians
San Manuel Band of
Mission Indians
Seminole T ribe of FloridaSeven Cedars
Casino/JamestownS'Klallam
Shakopee Mdewakanton
Sioux CommunitySpirit Lake 
Dakotah Nation
Sycuan Band 
of Kumeyaay
Three Affiliated T ribes 
of Fort BertholdReservation
Tonkawa T ribeT ulalip T ribesT wenty-Nine Palms Band
of Mission Indians
Yocha Dehe 
Wintun Nation 
Foundations,
Corporations and Law Firms
Agua Fund Inc.ARIA FoundationArches FoundationJohnson Barnhouse &
Keegan, LLP
Bay and Paul
Foundations 
Belgarde EnterprisesBiedenharn FoundationBoulder History Museum Boulder Meeting 
of the Religious Societyof Friends
Casey Family Programs Evergreen FundGorlitz Foundation, Ltd.Edward & Verna Gerbic
Family Foundation
Ferriday FundFord Foundation Foundation to Promote
Open Society
Law Offices of Bruce
Green & Associates
Impact Assets   Lannan Foundation Gordon and Betty Moore
FoundationOak Foundation 
Paragon Management
SNF , LLC
Shelby Response FundTilden McCoy &
Dilweg, LLP
Tzo'-Nah Fund Whizin FoundationCorporate Matching
Gifts – Corporations
nation-wide make match-ing gifts to NARF onbehalf of their employees.Please check with yourhuman resources depart-ment to participate in thisprogram.
Abbot Fund AIG Matching Grants
Program
Apple Matching GiftsBoettcher FoundationEdison InternationalGE FoundationGoldman, Sachs &
Company
Highmark Matching
Gifts Program
Merck FoundationMicrosoft CorporationP .S.E.G.Pfizer FoundationQVC Partners in GivingVerizon FoundationXcel EnergyLiving Waters
Endowment
Elwood H. Brotzman
Memorial Fund
Jerome Davis Living
Waters Endowment Fund
Kathleen and Ruth
Dooley Family Fund
Edward & Verna Gerbic
Family Foundation Susan K. Griffiths
Memorial Fund
The Robert & Joy
Hanson LelandEndowment
Frank J. McCormick
Family Fund
Marvin W. Pourier, Jr. &
Donna M. DeansMemorial Fund
Mary Lou Mosca-Ragona
Memorial Fund
Ernest L. Schusky
EndowmentThe Snoqualmie 
Indian T ribe
Helen & Sidney Ungar
Memorial EndowmentFund
Dan and Beth
Whittemore
Bequests and TrustsLois AllenSandra BergerCharles & Mary Bowers
T rust
Janet CongeroDiane DelpWeda GregorieffAlfred HooseDorothy HuelsmanHarold JohnsonSheila KnopPeter LarkinAnna LauferFrancis MousseauVirgina NatwickCharlotte ReinkeFrances Claire RevilleMary SacherJoel SchenkmanDaniel Evan TallmanJohn VaupelNARF Acknowledgment of Contributions:45 AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDPeta Uha – Peta Uha is
an exclusive membershipprogram for donors mak-ing substantial annualcommitments to NARF .
Peta Uha Pipestone Charles & Mary BelgardeAlfred HooseAnn LauferDon LichtyDan & Beth WhittemorePeta Uha TurquoiseRev. & Mrs. Frederick &
Judith Buechner
Janet CongeroSharon KnoppAnn E. LarimoreJudy SherryBridget M. K. StroudJohn & Carson TaylorPeta Uha GraniteAnna BradberryJane A. BrownKaren J. CrookDale HooperPaul & Eileen LeFortYvonne T. LeMelleMarion McCollom
Hampton
Michael MoranPaul and Julie Murphy-
Ribes
Virginia NatwickBrenda TomarasPeta Uha FlintCleo AllenRobert Anderson &
Marilyn Heiman
Kent BachGeorge BaetjerFran BaileyBarbara J. BastleByron T. BeasleyWilliam & Elsa BoyceMichael CaputoFay Chandler Richard W. CobbEric DahlstromMr. & Mrs. Lyle
Dethlefsen
Robert DuffieldLucille EchohawkSusan E. EichhornFred FisherJulie FletcherAndrew & Audrey
Franklin
Daniel FrenchDuncan A. HaasAmy HallCollier HandsKarin HolserJudy JuddCatherine M. KnaebleRichard K. KnutsonRicki and Scott KresanIngrid LeBlancNeeta LindJames MarienthalStephen & Sally
McVeigh
Barbara J. MeislinGerrish MillikenShirley MiollaBrent & Marilyn MinneyLisa MoersdorfMichael MoranCassandra  S. NaylorFrannie OatesClaude & Noelle
Poncelet
Scott PudalovArthur & Maria
Richmond
Faith RoesselBuford L. RolinEllen Schoenfeld BeeksErnest  & Mary Sue
Schusky
Peter L. SheldonGenny SmithMary G. SpragueKelley StanleyElizabeth SteeleWalter A. StockMr. & Mrs. George
Tinker
Margaret VerbleAmelia W. VernonMary Lee ZerbyPeta Uha ObsidianDean Scott AttawayValerie M. BarthDavid & Barbara
Boerner
Dr. & Dr. David BoydJoyce BrowneHermann BurchardRuth O. CarrollBruce CobernSamuel CookRick DauphinaisJohn DorschnerAlfred EckersbergBenjamin W. EdelmanJennifer ErdmannJohn & Barbara EverettLenore FeigenbaumJulie FletcherHerbert D. FloydJulie FrancisCarla FredericksAdam & Carol GeballeEric & Jennifer GinsburgPaula GorlitzMr. & Mrs. Kenneth
Graham
Kim GrayBruce GreeneJan GriesingerMartin GriffithHeide GulgowskiMoses HaiaTerence HancockJack HartleyRobert HenryGeorge C. HetrickRaymond C. 
Honeywell, Jr.
Mitch & Andrea
Horowitz
Joan L. HowisonAnne Humes
Margaret JacobsAllison JonesRichard Jongmok KimMark A. KadzielskiMorris KarnovskyGerri KayEva LeeKathleen E. LentzJames LichtensteinA. LowryStuart MacaulayMelody MacKenzieLiz Marr & John PriceD. Michael McBrideMartha McEldowneyScott and Sally McElroyDouglas McFarlanMary McNeilThomas V. MullerBarbara J. MusicusMarie-Luise NagelMary J. NefedovSara D. NerkenNobuyuki NakajimaMyron & Birdie PaineDorothy T. ParrisMichael PfefferMike PopeCasey PortnoyBennett PudlinEdith QuevedoEllen RifkinMartin RitterHenry RobertLorna Rose-HahnRobert RothhouseGordon RothrockDr. & Mrs. Richard 
A. Ryan
Ezra Rosser & Sarah
Krakoff
Roy ShaverSusan ShererSusan SlaughterKaighn Smith
Fiscal Year 201446 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTTJennifer Stanley
Morgan StanleyJoshua & Jill StoffJay StonerJonathan SunshineCharles Lawrence SwezeyBeverly TerryMargaret T ravisCathern T uftsMark & Maggie UdallDaniel & Dianne VapnekKay WadeJanice WarnerStephen L. WasbyRonald WelchKatharine WilsonDavid WinstonMary YoungCircle of Life – Circle of
Life members have madea lasting commitment byincluding NARF in theirwills.
Catches Bear & 
Judy Adams
Rodney J. AddisonGloria AdkinsonDale M. ArmitageMaxwell K. BarnardBarbara BeasleyDiane Ben AriRoy BensonBobby BitnerBetty E. BlumenkampDale E. BrandWilliam BrownGloria BurgessPatricia BurnetArthur CarterRobert CarterMary CasmusEd ChasteenJudith A. DayHarvey DennenbergGary DickerhoofStarr DormannPatricia R. DuvalNoelle EdwardsSusan E. EichhornAllison B. EmersonJudy Fair-Spaulding
James K. FeeDebra K. FrazierJan FreemanLyle FunderburkLawrence H. GellerDeborah GhoreyebEstela GoldsmithLouise Gomer BangelGene GrabauAnna GulickJean GundlachMerrill HakimMichael S. HallMargaret HartnettTheodora C. HaughtonPatricia HeidelbergerKarin HolserJudith HortonVeronica IfillElizabeth A. JohnsonVusama KaribaBetty KleczyEllyne Krakower-RiceEdward KriegeSharon LaughlinIngrid LeBlancJames LehnererFrank O. LovelandRima LurieSuzanne MacDonaldPatricia Marks-GreenfieldHelen McCahillMarion McCollom
Hampton
Joseph McNamaraWilliam G. MilliganGary MontgomeryLeila V. MooreJeanne Morrel-FranklinJeanne MoskalMarc PearceMoses PeterRandall PetersenDenise PfalzerThelma Populus GordonRobert & Mary ResnikMaureen RipleyBarbara H. RobertsAndrea Robinsong
Ray RodgersJune RosenthalKeith I. RossWilliam RozierB.W. SampsonLaRoy SeaverMichael SeeleyCharlotte SelverKatey Lynn SimetraKirk SperryHerbert StewartJames & Patricia StrausMichael & Carol SullivanLouis TaboisValeria TenyakCharlotte ThompsonM.D. T urekJohn H. TylerRene VivoWilliam Joseph WadeTed WeitzRobert & Mary WellmanRoger L. WelschMr. & Mrs. Dan
Whittemore
Karen Williams-Fast
Horse
Marcel E. WingateDavid YeomanWayne W. ZengelNARF Board of
Directors and EmployeeGiving – NARF Board
members and employeescommit thousands of hoursto protecting the rights oftribes.  They also committheir own funds to helpNARF .
Jonathan BriggsVirginia CrossRose CunyJohn EchohawkKim GottschalkDavid GoverRichard Guest Moses HaiaTex HallJulie Roberts-HyslopLora Johnson-DieckHeather Kendall
Mark MacarroMelody McCoySteven MooreMauda MoranMorgan O’BrienLarry OlingerChris PereiraRay RamirezBuford RolinNatasha SinghDebbie ThomasDon WhartonJoel WilliamsIn-Kind Donations
There are many ways tosupport the NativeAmerican Rights Fund, in addition to cash gifts.People who volunteer theirtime and talents, or donatevaluable goods and services,provide crucial support for the NARF mission.  We would like to expresslythank the following indi-viduals and organizationsfor their generosity:
AltaramaRich de Bodo, Bingham
McCutchen Law Firm
Patton Boggs LLPVirginia CrossMorgan Lewis &
Bockins, LLP
Peter Enichen, Enichen
Law Office LLC
Ann EstinTex HallMitchel HoldrichJulie Roberts-HyslopMark MacarroLarry OlingerZoe OstermanBuford RolinNatasha SinghLucy WalkerChristina WarnerWestlaw Other Anonymous
Individuals47 AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  --  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDNative Ways Federation – The Native Ways
Federation (Native Ways) is the only workplacegiving program in the United States to exclusivelyfund Native nonprofits that serve people and com-munities in Indian Country.  Learn how your com-pany can support Indian Country through work-place giving. Please visit www.nativewaysfedera-tion.org.  Your business can make a difference!
Boulder-Denver Advisory Committee – Lucille
A. Echohawk, Thomas W. Fredericks, AvaHamilton, Jeanne Whiteing, Charles Wilkinson.
Show Your Support in NARF’s programs – NARF
receives contributions from many sources and for manypurposes.  Below are descriptions of NARF’s donorprograms and additional ways you can get involved.
Peta Uha Membership – Peta Uha in the Lakota
(Sioux) language means firekeeper – an individualwho made a solemn commitment to ensure thatthe sacred flame, source of light, heat and energyfor his people, would always be kept burning.  Likethe firekeepers of old, members of the Peta UhaCouncil can demonstrate constancy and vigilanceby helping to ensure that the critical work of theNative American Rights Fund continues to moveever forward.  For benefits associated with eachlevel of Peta Uha membership, please contact ourDevelopment Department, 303.447.8760. 
Tsanáhwit Circle – Tsanáhwit is a Nez Perce word
meaning equal justice.  Tsanáhwit Circle membersrecognize the constant need to stand firm for jus-tice by pledging and making monthly contribu-tions.  Monthly contributions add up over the yearsto make a real difference for the tribes we serve.
Otu’han Gift Membership – Otu’han is the
Lakota Sioux word translated as giveaway.  Otu’hanis a memorial and honoring gift program modeledafter the tradition of the Indian giveaway in whichitems of value are gathered over a long period oftime to be given away in honor of birthdays, mar-riages, anniversaries, and in memory of a departedloved one.Circle of Life – NARF’s Circle of Life donors pro-
vide a lasting legacy to the Native American RightsFund by including NARF in estate planning ordeferred gifts.  The circle is an important symbol toNative Americans, representing unity, strength andthe eternal continuity of life.  These lasting giftshelp ensure the future of NARF and our Indianclients nationwide.
Endowments – NARF has two established endow-
ments.  The 21st Century Endowment is a perma-nent fund in which the principal is invested andinterest income is used for NARF’s programs.  Thisendowment is designed to provide a permanent,steady income that can support the ever-increasingcosts of providing legal representation to our tribalclients.  The Living Waters Endowment directlyfunds the 21st Century Endowment.  It allowsdonors to honor friends and loved ones by makingan endowment gift of $10,000 or more.  By desig-nating a gift to either endowment, you can be surethat your contribution will continue to generateannual funds in perpetuity.  
Workplace Campaigns – NARF is a member of
America’s Charities, a national workplace givingfederation.  Giving through your workplace is aseasy as checking off NARF’s box, #10350 on theCombined Federal Campaign (CFC) pledge formauthorizing automatic payroll deduction.  
Matching Gifts – Currently, 14 foundations and
corporations nationwide make matching gifts toNARF on a regular basis.  Employers match theiremployees’ contributions sometimes doubling oreven tripling their donation.  Please check withyour human resources office and request a match-ing gift form.
E-News – Sign up at www.narf.org  for our e-news
network by providing NARF with your emailaddress.  This is a great way to get periodic caseupdates, calls-to-action, special events information,invitations and other activities.  Your e-mail addressis confidential and we will not share it with anyoutside sources.  For further information about anyof the programs or services, please contact NARF’sDevelopment Department at 303-447-8760.Thank you.CORPORATE OFFICERS
John E. Echohawk (Pawnee)
Executive Director/Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk
Litigation Management CommitteeMember/Attorney
Natalie Landreth (Chickasaw)
Litigation ManagementCommittee/Attorney
Melody McCoy (Cherokee)
Litigation Management CommitteeMember/Attorney
Michael Kennedy
Chief Financial Officer
Morgan O’Brien
Director of Development
Ray Ramirez
Corporate Secretary
BOULDER MAIN OFFICE STAFF
John E. Echohawk (Pawnee)
Executive Director/Attorney
Matt Campbell 
(Native Village of Gambell)Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk
Attorney
David Gover (Pawnee/Choctaw)
Attorney
Melody McCoy (Cherokee)
AttorneySteven C. Moore
Attorney
Sue Noe
Attorney
Brett Shelton (Oglala Lakota)
Attorney
Donald R. Wharton
Attorney
Heather Whiteman Runs Him (Crow)
Attorney
Nate Ahrens
Systems Administrator/Webmaster
Rose Cuny (Oglala Lakota)
Office Manager
Chrissy Johnson Dieck
Paralegal
Shayna Gutierrez (Oglala Lakota)
Receptionist/ Office Services Assistant
Scott Denver Jacket 
(Ute Mountain Ute/Navajo)Legal Assistant
Michael Kennedy
Chief Financial Officer
Mireille Martinez
Annual Giving Director
Katrina Mora (Oglala Lakota)
Administrative Assistant
Morgan O'Brien
Director of Development
Don Ragona (Mattinecock)
Assistant Development DirectorNARF STAFF
48 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTTRay Ramirez
Editor/Grant Writer
Jennifer Redbone
(Apache/Comanche/ Kiowa)Development SupportSpecialist
Kalee Salazar (Taos Pueblo
and Santa Ana Pueblo)Accounting Clerk
Jeff Schmidt
Paralegal
Debbie Raymond-Thomas
(Navajo)Controller
Jennie Tsikewa (Zuni)
Accountant
Skuya Zephier 
(Oglala Lakota)Legal Assistant
NATIONAL INDIAN
LAW LIBRARY
David Selden
Librarian
Anne Lucke
Assistant Law Librarian
Mauda Moran
Library & InformationTechnology Assistant
ANCHORAGE OFFICE
STAFF
Heather Kendall-Miller
(Athabascan)Attorney
Erin Dougherty
Attorney
Natalie Landreth
(Chickasaw)Attorney
Matt Newman
Attorney
WASHINGTON, D.C. 
OFFICE STAFF
Richard Guest
Attorney
Joel Williams (Cherokee)
Attorney
Eric Anderson
Legal Assistant
The “Native American Rights Fund 
Statement on Environmental Sustainability.”
“It is clear that our natural world is undergoing severe, unsustainable and 
catastrophic climate change that adversely impacts the lives of people andecosystems worldwide. Native Americans are especially vulnerable and are experiencing disproportionate negative impacts on their cultures, health andfood systems. In response, the Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is committedto environmental sustainability through its mission, work and organizationalvalues. Native Americans and other indigenous peoples have a long tradition of living sustainably with the natural world by understanding the importance of preserving natural resources and respecting the interdependence of all livingthings. NARF embraces this tradition through its work and by instituting sustainable office practices that reduce our negative impact on our climate andenvironment. NARF is engaged in environmental work and has established aGreen Office Committee whose responsibility is to lead and coordinate staffparticipation in establishing and implementing policies and procedures to minimize waste, reduce energy consumption and pollution and create a healthful work environment.” 1506 Broadway
Boulder, CO 80302
303-447-8760
www.narf.org 