IN MEMORY OF ROSE MARIE CUNY
This Annual Report is dedicated to the memory of Rose Cuny who walked into the
Spirit World on February 17, 2015
Rose Marie Cuny was hired at NARF in 1980 as our receptionist.  She was quickly 
promoted to Legal Secretary in 1981 and then to Office Manager in 1984.  During hertime here at NARF, Rose received almost 30 certificates for advancing her educationand also in recognition of her dedication to the causes that we fought so hard for.  Rosespent over half of her life working for NARF.  Rose was an integral part of NARF’s successes.  Rose devoted herself to achieving justice and in protecting our peoples’ wayof life.
When one thinks about NARF and Rose, one cannot separate the two.  Rose became
the heart and soul of NARF.  She fought hard to make sure NARF stayed true to itscourse, kept our “Indian” identity intact and that we stayed true to our commitment to our peoples.  We believe a
major reason for this was that Rose deeply loved her Indian people and her Lakota ways.  Rose’s Indian name was“He Sapa Glunica Wi.”  She was proud of that name and strived to live up to it.  NARF became the vehicle in whichshe could do just that by working tirelessly to help all Indian people.
If anyone was in need, whether it be a coworker or a member of the Indian community, Rose was always the first
one to step up to help organize ways to help an individual or a family.  She would never accept no as an answer.She made each one of us better human beings.  She helped each one of us to understand the importance of sharing whatever we may have to help someone else in their time of need.  If you fell, she would be the first one tooffer her hand to pick you up.  But make no mistake, if you deserved it, she would knock you down and then explainto you why you deserved it.
Wherever Rose travelled, she made life-long friends.  To this day, everywhere we go we are given condolence on
Rose’s passing and told how important Rose was to them and that they will always remember her.  That’s the kindof impact that Rose had on everyone she would meet including all of us here at NARF.  NARF will always be betterbecause we had Rose as our guide and our conscience.  We celebrate her life, her contributions for the greater good.Her memory will forever be carried by each one of us.  We are grateful that she chose NARF as her second home.
This is what Rose has taught us here at NARF – our families and our people always come first.  If we trust, the Spirits
will always surround us and help guide us.  Now, Rose surrounds us.  
Wopila tanka.
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155Introduction ............................................................................................................................ pag e 2
Executive Director’s Report .................................................................................................... page 4
Chairman’s Message ................................................................................................................ page 5
The Board of Directors .......................................................................................................... page 6
The National Support Committee .......................................................................................... page 7 
The Preservation of Tribal Existence .................................................................................... page 9
The Protection of Tribal Natural Resources ...................................................................... page 15
Major Activities 2015 - NARF Case Map ............................................................................ page 26
The Promotion of Human Rights ........................................................................................ page 29
The Accountability of Governments .................................................................................... page 39
The Development of Indian Law .......................................................................................... page 43
Financial Report  .................................................................................................................... page 46
Contributors ............................................................................................................................ pag e 47
NARF Staff ............................................................................................................................... . page 52
Main Office
Native American Rights Fund1506 BroadwayBoulder, CO 80302303-447-8760 - www.narf.org
Alaska Office
Native American Rights Fund
745 W. 4th Ave, Suite 502 
Anchorage, Alaska 99501 
907-276-0680
Washington, D.C. Office
Native American Rights Fund1514 P Street, NW, Suite D (Rear)Washington, D.C. 20005202-785-4166
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is a nonprofit,
charitable organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws of the
District of Columbia.  NARF is exempt from federal income tax underthe provisions of Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue code.Contributions to NARF are tax deductible.  The Internal RevenueService has ruled that NARF is not a "private foundation" as defined inSection 509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.  NARF was founded in1970 and incorporated in 1971 in Washington, D.C.
Workplace Campaigns – NARF is a member of America’s Charities,
a national workplace giving federation. Giving through your workplace
is as easy as checking off NARF’s box, #10350 on the CombinedFederal Campaign (CFC) pledge form authorizing automatic payrolldeduction.  
Cover and Art: Bernie Granados' tribute to Merlin Eagle who was
born in Oak Creek Canyon, Arizona where Merlin learned to talk to the
"the thin people" or those on the other side. He was a gifted craftsman,writer, poet, and now, spirit warrior.
Bernie Granados Jr. is a multi-talented artist who works in a wide vari-
ety of mediums, including embossed acrylic paintings, watercolor,prismapencil, pen and ink drawings, masks, illustration, and bronze.Drawing from his Apache and Zacatec roots, Mr. Granados producespaintings, sculptures, masks, prints, and miniatures featuring beautifulimages of horses, buffalo, and ancient ancestral figures inspired by per-sonal visions and cave art throughout America. He finds inspiration inNature's force and beauty, his smarter-than-human quarter horses, hisfellow artists, and his love and respect for the Creator.  Mr. Granadosis a gifted teacher who headed the Fine Arts Department of theIntertribal Pre-University Summer Program at University of CaliforniaIrvine and taught at the Los Angeles High School of the Arts. He is list-ed in the Biographical Directory of Native American Painters.  He wasthe featured artist for the Native American Rights Fund "Visions of theFuture" Gala. He has had many one-man shows over the years. He hascreated set designs, fine art, and hand props for film and stage and hasworked in the film industry for over 36 years.  Today Mr. Granados'ongoing passion is helping native youth cultivate their artistic talentand knowledge.
Bernie has been proud to support NARF, with his art, over a period of
many years. You can see the artist's work at www.elstudiogranados.com,and clearedart.com, his fine-arts-for-film site www.adobespaceship.comis a site promoting filming on native lands.  Telephone: 818-240-4421.Please leave a message.
1
Table of Contentsexample, NARF long had a practice of filing amicus
briefs in every Supreme Court case involving Indians butsince 2001 we have had the Tribal Supreme CourtProject, where NARF continues this practice with theNational Congress of American Indians (NCAI).  No, wehaven't had a lot of great results recently, but that is dueto the Court, not us.  
NARF's consistent, long-time commitment to founda-
tional issues in Indian Law, and in Indian country gener-ally, can also be seen in NARF's efforts in education.  Thereality was and is that a majority of Indian children areeducated in state schools, many of them off the reserva-tions. Early on, recognizing the connection betweensovereignty and education, NARF was a strong supporter of the movement for Indian-controlledschools, a grassroots effort to increase the number ofIndian people on state school boards.  Over time, themission was expanded and for the past several yearsNARF has been a leader in achieving considerable success in creating tribal education codes that applyboth on the reservations and in state schools.
NARF has taken a leadership role in yet another foun-
dational and complex area, the settlement of tribalwater rights cases.  From the beginning, tribes looked toNARF for leadership.  In the 1980s, NARF made contactwith the Western Governors Association and theWestern States Water Council and they joined in aneffort to set a context for settlements, in recognition ofthe fact that, for all water users, including tribes, settle-ment can often be the preferred option over litigation.This partnership continues today.
Native people know their homelands and, far more
than most, understand the destructive impacts of climate change. Tribal villages in Alaska, northwestWashington, and elsewhere have already been affectedby rising ocean waters.  All across the country, Indianpeople are seeing and feeling the impacts on forests,rivers, rangeland and animals.  NARF is working toassure that tribes will be treated as sovereigns in stateand federal assessments and planning for public landand water resources.  The climate change work dovetailswith NARF’s involvement in international issues where,since 1999, has been active in the adoption and imple-mentation of the United Nations Declaration on theRights of Indigenous Peoples representing NCAI.Among other things, NARF has steadfastly participatedin the elaborate United Nations Framework Conventionon Climate Change process representing NCAI.
2 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDIn the year 2015, the Native American Rights Fund
(NARF) realized its 45th year of existence.  From the van-
tage point of these 45 years, we can see how thedynamic of NARFs work has played out.  It can be trulysaid that starting in 1970 and today, NARF’s role hasbeen a significant contributor to the modern tribalmovement.  Through NARF’s priorities, established by itsfirst Steering Committee and still in force today –Preservation of tribal existence; Protection of tribal naturalresources; Promotion of Native American human rights;Accountability of governments to Native Americans; and,the Development of Indian law and educating the publicabout Indian rights, laws, and issues – NARF’s victories
and work have made a major difference in Indian country.
The extraordinary 1974 ruling by Judge George Boldt
in United States v. Washington –which mid-19th century
treaties guaranteed to tribes the right to harvest 50% ofthe salmon in Northwest Washington–has turned out to be even more historic than the decision seemed at the time.  This dynamic was at work in United States
v. Michigan, where NARF played a sturdy role in that
case and in the tribal revival in the Upper Great Lakesarea.  So, too, with Menominee Restoration in 1973,which led directly to the restoration of all terminatedtribes; the recognition of non-recognized tribes; and theformation by all of those tribes of active and effectivesovereign tribal governments.  
Many of the revived Eastern tribes have built their
modern operations upon the Eastern land claims cases,where NARF broke new ground.  At Pyramid Lake inNevada, the Pyramid Lake Paiutes and its leadersachieved true comprehensive watershed restorationthroughout the Truckee and Carson watersheds, andthen put together an expanded tribal government in thefashion seen in the Northwest, but it never could havehappened without the all-out commitment to the litiga-tion by the Native American Rights Fund. 
By the mid-1980s, NARF was hard at work combatting
the scourges of excavation and theft of traditional cultural objects and human remains.  Numerous law-suits and negotiations finally funneled into the NativeAmerican Graves Protection and Repatriation Act of1990, one of the most luminous accomplishments forNARF and all of Indian country.  NARF has continued itssacred obligation to represent tribes with limitedresources and significant legal needs while maintainingits centrality in the national Indian law community.  ForIntroductionAANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155 3Foundation have been with NARF since its inception.
The Open Society Institute and the Bay and PaulFoundations have made long term funding commit-ments as has the Chorus Foundation.  Also, the positiveeffects of NARF’s work are reflected in the financial con-tributions by a growing number of tribal governmentslike the Yocha Dehe Wintun Nation, the Seminole Tribeof Florida, the Shakopee Mdewakanton SiouxCommunity, the San Manuel Band of Mission Indians,the Muckleshoot Tribe, the Confederated Tribes of SiletzIndians, the Tulalip Tribes, the Chickasaw Nation, andthe Poarch Band of Creek Indians.  United, these finan-cial, moral, and intellectual gifts provide the frameworkfor NARF to fulfill its goal of securing the right to self-determination to which all Native American peoples areentitled. Finally, NARF’s legal work was greatly enhancedby the on-going generous pro bono contributions bythe many attorneys who have devoted their time andexpertise to our causes and the Tribal Supreme CourtProject.  Their many hours of work made it possible forNARF to present the best positions possible and to moveforward in insuring NARF’s and Indian country’s success.Progress has been painfully slow but the stakes are high
and NARF will continue to press for full recognition ofthe special circumstances and rights of American Indiansand other indigenous peoples. 
The specifics vary across Indian country but every tribe
is burdened in some significant way by the weight ofhistory.  Alaska is as bad as it gets.  The NARF Alaskaoffice has taken on about every issue you can name inthat big state, from voting rights to the Indian ChildWelfare Act to fishing and hunting rights to land intotrust.  And, somehow, ultimately, after the SupremeCourt’s Venetie decision–about as wrong-headed anddevastating as court opinions get–they have, impossibly,piece by painstaking piece, made significant progress inresurrecting the sovereignty that seemed lost forever. 
NARF’s Funding
NARF’s existence would not be possible without the
efforts of the thousands of individuals who have offeredtheir knowledge, courage and vision to help guide NARFon its quest.  Of equal importance, NARF’s financial contributors have graciously provided the resources togive our efforts life.  Contributors such as the Ford
A legal challenge to the
new revisions of the federalGuidelines for State Courtsand Agencies in ChildCustody Proceedings wasdismissed by a federal dis-trict court in Virginia.  Wehad filed an amicus curiaebrief in the case on behalfof several national Nativeorganizations seeking touphold the Guidelineswhich will help to imple-ment the Indian Child Welfare Act.  The Act was passedby Congress in 1978 to help stop the unwarrantedremoval of Indian children from their Indian families andtribes and the misguided placement of those children innon-Indian homes. 
After extensive litigation and negotiations, a federal
district court in Alaska approved a settlement in ourAlaska Native voting rights case providing for a compre-hensive Native language assistance program, theappointment of federal election observers, translation ofall pre-election information into Native languages, thecreation of a new state-level position specifically devotedto language assistance and continued court oversightand reporting.  In addition, we helped to start a nationalNative American Voting Rights Coalition consisting ofNative voting rights advocates, lawyers, experts andtribal advocates to coordinate Native voting rights protection efforts across Indian country.
Finally, we prevailed in a new tribal trust funds mis-
management case against the federal government whena federal district court ruled against the government’smotion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction.  As a result, the parties have agreed to stay further litigation andproceed with settlement negotiations.  
All of these successful efforts would not have been
possible without the support of all of the funders of ournon-profit organization.  We thank you for your grantsand contributions and hope that your support will con-tinue into 2016 and beyond to enable us to make moreprogress on behalf of Native Americans.
John E. Echohawk
Executive Director
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD
42015 was a year of celebration as the Native American
Rights Fund observed our 45th anniversary.  We havehad many successes in asserting and protecting Indianrights over the last 45 years and continued to achievemore important victories and accomplishments forNative people during the year.
The Pamunkey Indian Tribe of Virginia received a final
determination from the Department of the Interioracknowledging their existence as an Indian tribe.  Wehave been representing the Tribe on this issue since1988.  The Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians ofCalifornia received a favorable ruling from a federal dis-trict court upholding their reserved right to groundwa-ter under their reservation around Palm Springs.  We arepleased to be representing them in their fight to stopthe depletion and pollution of groundwater in that area.
In Alaska, we were able to reach a settlement in a case
on behalf of an Alaska Native family against the CatholicChurch that resolved a property dispute that will allowthe family year round access to their fish camp whichprovides their subsistence.  On behalf of the Native vil-lage of Saxman, we were able to preserve through liti-gation their rural designation which allows them tomaintain their subsistence hunting and fishing rightsunder federal law.  
At the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change in Paris, we continued our representa-tion of the National Congress of American Indians on cli-mate change issues and assisted in securing language inthe Agreement and Decision referencing indigenouspeoples.  The rights of indigenous peoples must beacknowledged when states take action on climatechange and the traditional knowledge of indigenouspeoples shall help guide the science used to address cli-mate change.
Our work on behalf of the Tribal Education
Departments National Assembly continued and was suc-cessful in securing further funding for tribal educationdepartments to participate in the State Tribal EducationPartnerships program in public schools and theSovereignty in Education program in federal Bureau ofIndian Education schools.  We were also able to helptribal departments of education be included in the new
Every Student Succeeds Act so that they can continuetheir work to advance tribal self-determination in education.
Executive Director’s ReportAANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155 5Aloha mai kakou,  
In November, NARF and its
supporters commemoratedNARF’s forty-fifth year of serv-ice to Indian tribes, organiza-tions and individuals onimportant legal issues.  Thissignificant milestone was cel-ebrated with a series of wellattended events.  On behalfof the staff and the Board, Ido humbly extend to each ofyou who shared this special occasion with us our deep grat-itude and thanks.  We also extend this same gratitude andthanks to all who support NARF’s necessary work throughyour continuing financial and in-kind contributions.  Its’success, as evidenced by the recent Paris Agreement, thefirst ever universally binding accord on climate changeadopted under the United Nations Framework Conventionon Climate Change that for the first time includes languagethat takes into account indigenous peoples and theirknowledge systems, was achieved through the dedicated,unwavering work of its staff, would simply not be possiblewithout the support you continue to provide.
NARF has proposed an ambitious new project: gathering
voting rights advocates, lawyers, experts, and tribal advo-cates into one room to discuss current problems with vot-ing in Indian Country and begin to develop solutions tothese problems.  With the completion of the initial meet-ing, the participants have developed an ongoing projectcalled the Native American Voting Rights Coalition(NAVRC).  It meets on a monthly basis, as do its subgroupson redistricting, litigation, capacity building and data gath-ering.  The NAVRC is actively working on its 2016 work aswell as fundraising for the group itself.
The results achieved by NARF on the 50+ cases and/or
projects, as recorded in this report, is again only possiblewith and through your continued support.  And so, onbehalf of the staff and Board of NARF, thank you again foryour support.  So that NARF may continue its valuablework, I encourage each of you to continue with your givingand support.
Mahalo,Moses K. N. Haia III
Chairman, Board of Directors
Chairman’s MessageThe Native American Rights Fund has a governing board
composed of Native American leaders from across thecountry – wise and distinguished people who arerespected by Native Americans nationwide.  IndividualBoard members are chosen based on their involvementand knowledge of Indian issues and affairs, as well astheir tribal affiliation, to ensure a comprehensive geo-graphical representation.  The NARF Board of Directors,whose members serve a maximum of six years, provideNARF with leadership and credibility, and the vision of itsmembers is essential to NARF's effectiveness in repre-senting its Native American clients.NARF’s Board of Directors:
First row (left to right): Robert McGhee , Vice-Chairman
(Poarch Band of Creek Indians), 
Moses Haia , Chairman , (Native Hawaiian), 
Virginia Cross , outgoing Board member
(Muckleshoot Indian Tribe), 
Julie Roberts-Hyslop (Native Village of Tanana).  
Second Row (left to right): 
Tex Hall , Board Treasurer (Three Affiliated Tribes), 
Kurt BlueDog (Sisseton-Wahpeton Sioux), 
Michael Smith (Chickasaw Nation), 
Peter Pino , (Zia Pueblo), 
Anita Mitchell , incoming new Board member
(Muckleshoot Indian Tribe).  
(Not Pictured): 
Larry Olinger (Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians),
Gary Hayes (Ute Mountain Ute Tribe); 
Stephen Lewis , (Gila River Indian Community), 
Richard Peterson (Central Council of the Tlingit and
Haida Indian Tribes), Jefferson Keel (Chickasaw Nation). 
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 6Board of DirectorsAANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155 7The National Support Committee assists NARF with its
fund raising and public relations efforts nationwide.Some of the individuals on the Committee are promi-nent in the field of business, entertainment and the arts.Others are known advocates for the rights of the under-
served.  All of the 29 volunteers on the Committee arecommitted to upholding the rights of Native Americans.
Randy Bardwell (Pechanga Band of Luiseno Mission Indians)
Jaime Barrientoz (Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa & Chippewa Indians)
John BevanWallace Coffey (Comanche Nation)
Ada Deer (Menominee)
Harvey A. DennenbergLucille A. Echohawk (Pawnee)
Jane FondaEric GinsburgJeff GinsburgRodney Grant (Omaha)
Chris E. McNeil, Jr. (Tlingit-Nisga’a)
Billy Mills (Oglala Lakota)
Amado Pena Jr. (Yaqui/Chicano)
Wayne RossNancy Starling-RossMarc RudickPam RudickErnie Stevens, Jr. (Wisconsin Oneida)
Andrew Teller (Isleta Pueblo)
Verna Teller (Isleta Pueblo)
Rebecca Tsosie (Pasqua Yaqui)
Tzo-Nah (Shoshone-Bannock)
Aíne UngarRt. Rev. William C. Wantland (Seminole)
W. Richard West, Jr. (Southern Cheyenne)
Randy Willis (Oglala Lakota)
Teresa Willis (Umatilla)
Mary T. Wynne (Rosebud Sioux)
National Support CommitteeUnder the priority of the preservation of tribal exis-
tence, NARF works to construct the foundations that are
necessary to empower tribes so that they can continueto live according to their Native traditions, to enforcetheir treaty rights, to insure their independence on reser-vations and to protect their sovereignty. 
Specifically, NARF’s legal representation centers on
sovereignty and jurisdiction issues and also on federalrecognition and restoration of tribal status.  Thus, thefocus of NARF's work involves issues relating to thepreservation and enforcement of the status of tribes assovereign governments.  Tribal governments possess thepower to regulate the internal affairs of their membersas well as other activities within their reservations.Jurisdictional conflicts often arise with states, the federalgovernment and others over tribal sovereignty.
Tribal Sovereignty
The focus of NARF’s work under this priority is the
protection of the status of tribes as sovereign, self-gov-erning entities.  The United States Constitution recog-nizes that Indian tribes are independent governmentalentities with inherent authority over their members andterritory.  In treaties with the United States, Indian tribesceded millions of acres of land in exchange for the guar-antee that the federal government would protect thetribes' right to self-government.  From the early 1800son, the Supreme Court has repeatedly affirmed the fun-damental principle that tribes retain inherent sovereign-ty over their members and their territory. 
Beginning with the decision in Oliphant v. Suquamish
Indian Tribe in 1978 and with increasing frequency in
recent years, the Supreme Court has steadily chippedaway at this fundamental principle, both by restrictingtribal jurisdiction and by extending state jurisdiction.These decisions by the Supreme Court have made thispriority more relevant than ever and have led to a TribalSovereignty Protection Initiative in partnership with theNational Congress of American Indians (NCAI) andtribes nationwide to restore the traditional principles ofinherent tribal sovereignty where those have beenundermined and to safeguard the core of sovereigntythat remains.
This Initiative consists of three components.  The first
component is the Tribal Supreme Court Project, thefocus of which is to monitor cases potentially headed tothe Supreme Court and those which actually are accepted
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155
9for review. When cases are accepted, the Tribal Supreme
Court Project helps to ensure that the attorneys repre-senting the Indian interests have all the support theyneed and to coordinate the filing of a limited number ofstrategic amicus briefs.  A second component of theInitiative is to weigh in on judicial nominations at thelower court and the Supreme Court levels.  Finally, thereis a legislative component to fight bills that are againsttribal interests and to affirmatively push legislation tooverturn adverse Supreme Court decisions.
The Tribal Supreme Court Project is a joint project
staffed by the Native American Rights Fund and theNational Congress of American Indians. The TribalSupreme Court Project is based on the principle that acoordinated and structured approach to Supreme Courtadvocacy is necessary to protect tribal sovereignty —the ability of Indian tribes to function as sovereign gov-ernments — to make their own laws and be ruled bythem.  Early on, the Tribal Supreme Court Project rec-ognized the U.S. Supreme Court as a highly specializedinstitution, with a unique set of procedures that includecomplete discretion on whether it will hear a case ornot, with a much keener focus on policy considerationsthan other federal courts.  The Tribal Supreme CourtProject established a large network of attorneys whospecialize in practice before the Supreme Court alongwith attorneys and law professors who specialize in fed-eral Indian law.  The Tribal Supreme Court Project oper-ates under the theory that if Indian tribes take a strong,consistent, coordinated approach before the SupremeCourt, they will be able to reverse, or at least reduce, theon-going erosion of tribal sovereignty by Justices whoappear to lack an understanding of the foundationalprinciples underlying federal Indian law and who areunfamiliar with the practical challenges facing tribalgovernments.“When asked by an anthropolo-
gist what the Indians calledAmerica before the white mencame, an Indian said simply“Ours.”  Vine Deloria, Jr.The Preservation of Tribal Existence10Circuit could have a significant negative impact on the
Katie John Native subsistence rights case.  
On December 7, 2015, the Court heard oral argu-
ment in Dollar General v. Mississippi Band of Choctaw
Indians to decide, once again, the scope of tribal civil
jurisdiction over non-Indians who come on to the reser-vation to do business with the Tribe and its members.The scope of tribal inherent sovereign authority overnon-Indians and the source of Congress’ authority overIndian affairs were taken up by the Court where at leastfour Justices openly questioned the protections in placefor non-Indians in tribal courts, and the source ofCongress’ authority in these matters under the U.S.Constitution.  It is difficult to discern from oral argumenthow the Justices may vote and ultimately decide thiscase, but the outcome has significant implications for allof Indian country.  And on December 1, 2015, the Courtheard oral argument in Menominee Indian Tribe v. United
States , its first Indian law case of the term, to resolve a
conflict between the U.S. Courts of Appeals for the DCCircuit and the Federal Circuit regarding the appropriate
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDThe Preservation of Tribal Existence
The October 2015 Term of the Supreme Court of the
United States is shaping up as the busiest term for theTribal Supreme Court Project in its history, and has thepotential to become a “watershed” term for the futuredevelopment of Indian law.  The Supreme Court willhear oral argument on January 20, 2016, its third Indianlaw case of the October Term 2015.  In Nebraska v.
Parker, the Court will consider whether changing demo-
graphics and justifiable expectations of non-Indiansshould be given greater weight in its analysis of whetherIndian reservation boundaries have been diminished ordisestablished.  This case has the potential to re-definethe manner in which courts will view tribal regulatoryauthority over non-Indian communities located withinthe reservation.  On the same day, the Court will alsohear argument in Sturgeon v. Masica, an Indian law-related case decided by U.S. Court of Appeals for theNinth Circuit which held that the Alaska NationalInterest Lands Conservation Act of 1980 did not preventthe National Park Service from imposing its generallyapplicable regulations on non-federal lands within con-servation system units in Alaska. A reversal of the Ninth
11standard for obtaining equitable tolling of the statute of
limitations for filing claims against the Indian HealthService for unpaid contract support costs.
On December 14, 2015, the Court granted review in
the fourth Indian law case of this term, accepting thepetition filed by the United States in U.S. v. Bryant that
involves the question of whether tribal court criminalconvictions for domestic violence may be used in federalcourt prosecutions as a habitual offender under 18 USC§117 only if the tribal court guarantees a right to counsel.  The Ninth Circuit, in conflict with the Eighthand Tenth Circuits, concluded that it is constitutionallyimpermissible to use uncounseled convictions to estab-lish an element of the offense in a subsequent prosecu-tion under § 117(a).  
And other petitions are awaiting consideration. For
example, it appears that the Court is holding the petitionfiled in Jensen v. EXC , Inc. as it considers the question of
tribal civil jurisdiction over torts committed by non-Indians in Dollar General . And in relation to the question
of reservation diminishment/disestablishment, petitionswere filed by Wasatch County and Uintah County againstthe Ute Indian Tribe on November 13, 2015, based onthe Court’s 1994 decision in Hagen v. Utah .  In a separate
federal criminal prosecution, a petition was filed onNovember 19, 2015, in Zepeda v. United States which
seek review of an en banc decision of the Ninth Circuitregarding how courts are to determine who is “Indian”under the Indian Major Crimes Act, and whether theconsideration of “some quantum of Indian blood”impermissibly discriminates on the basis of race.
The research objective of the Judicial Selection Project
evaluates the records of federal court judicial nomineeson their knowledge of Native American issues.  TheProject’s analysis and conclusions are shared with triballeaders and federal decision-makers in relation to theirdecision whether to support or oppose a particular judi-cial nomination.  Given the number of federal courtcases involving Native American issues, the Projectworks with the U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee toensure that all nominees are asked about their experi-ence with Indian tribes and their understanding of fed-eral Indian law during confirmation proceedings.  
The Judicial Selection Project is about research and
education: to educate the federal judiciary about tribalissues; to educate tribal leaders about the federal judici-ary and the judicial nomination process; and to reach out
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155to elected officials and the public at large about the need
for judges in the federal courts who understand theunique legal status of Indian tribes.  The research objec-tive of the Project evaluates the records of judicial nomi-nees on their knowledge of Indian issues.  The analysisand conclusions are shared with tribal leaders and federaldecision-makers in relation to their decision whether tosupport or oppose a particular nomination.  The Projectworks with the U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee toensure that all nominees are asked about their experi ence
with Indian tribes and their understanding of federalIndian law during confirmation proceedings.  
As the Obama Administration looks to its final year in
office, additional inquiries have been made in relation tonames of qualified Native American attorneys, tribalcourt judges and state court judges who are interestedin being considered for vacancies on the federal bench.In particular, current vacancies on the U.S. DistrictCourts for the Western District of Oklahoma and for theWestern District of Washington are getting attention.However, it is doubtful that even if the President put for-ward nominations at this time that the Republican-con-trolled Senate will hold hearings and vote to confirm hisnominees.  Nonetheless, the Project is moving forwardwith vetting candidates in anticipation of a newAdministration—Democrat or Republican—taking officein January 2017.  Although successful in its work withthe White House and U.S. Senate to ensure the nomina-tion and confirmation of Diane J. Humetewa to the U.S.District Court for the District of Arizona in 2014, theProject needs to continue to work with its partners—NCAI and the National Native American BarAassociation—to ensure the consideration of qualifiedNative judicial candidates.
Federal Recognition of Tribal Status
The second category of NARF’s work under this prior-
ity is federal recognition of tribal status.  NARF currentlyrepresents Indian communities who have survived intactas identifiable Indian tribes but who are not federallyrecognized.  Tribal existence does not depend on feder-al recognition, but recognition is necessary for a gov-ernment-to-government relationship and the receipt ofmany federal services.
In 1997, the Branch of Acknowledgment and Research
(BAR) placed the Little Shell Tribe of Chippewa Indians ofMontana federal recognition petition on active reviewTTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 12The Preservation of Tribal Existence
status. In 2000 the Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs
(AS-IA) published a Preliminary Determination in favor of
recognition.  A technical assistance meeting was held withthe Office of Federal Acknowledgment (OFA) to outline aprogram of action to strengthen the petition prior to thefinal determination. Substantial work was done to strength-en the Tribe's petition and the final submissions were madein 2005.  In October 2009, the Acting AS-IA issued aFinal Determination against recognition of the Tribe,
overruling the decision in the PreliminaryDetermination.  The stated rationale for FinalDetermination was the unwillingness to go along withthe "departures from precedent" which the previous AS-IA found to be justified by historical circumstances.  InFebruary 2010, the Tribe filed a Request forReconsideration with the Interior Board of Indian
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155 13Appeals (IBIA).  The IBIA allowed interested parties, if
any, to file opposition briefs by July 2010.  No one filedan opposition brief. 
In an important development after the IBIA decision,
in June 2013 the AS-IA made an announcement of“Consideration of Revision to AcknowledgmentRegulations” along with preliminary discussion draftregulations which propose major changes in the regula-tions.  In light of this announcement, NARF urged theSOI to request the AS-IA to suspend consideration of theFinal Determination pending completion of the revisionprocess as the proposed amendments are very signifi-cant.  In January 2014, the AS-IA granted the Little ShellTribe’s request to place their petition on suspensionpending completion of the process to amend theacknowledgment regulations.  
In May 2014 the AS-IA issued proposed regulations
for comment.  Several consultations and public hearingson the proposed regulations were held around thecountry and comments on the proposed regulationswere submitted on behalf of the Tribe in September2014.  The final rule was published in July 2015.  In themeantime, the Tribe continues to pursue legislativerecognition and the Tribe’s recognition bill was reportedout of the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs by voicevote in March 2015.  In addition, a hearing was held onthe House bill in October 2015 in the House Natural
Resources Committee.  
In an historic day for the Pamunkey Indian Tribe, in
July 2015, after decades of research and participation inthe federal acknowledgment regulatory process, theAssistant Secretary – Indian Affairs, U.S. Department ofthe Interior published a Final Determination acknowl-edging that the Tribe exists as an Indian tribe within themeaning of Federal law.  A request for reconsideration,however, was filed on October 6, 2015, with the IndianBoard of Indian Appeals (IBIA), an independent appel-late review body within the Department’s Office ofHearings and Appeals.  The case will now proceedthrough the administrative review process with the issueof standing having been briefed and the parties await-ing a ruling in 2016 by the IBIA.  
The Pamunkey Indian Tribe is the only tribe located in
Virginia to have filed a fully documented recognitionpetition.  Established no later than 1646, the Tribe'sReservation is located next to the Pamunkey River, andadjacent to King William County.  The Reservation com-prises approximately 1,200 acres and is the oldestinhabited Indian reservation in America.  NARF has rep-resented the Tribe in this effort since 1988 and now isco-counsel on this matter.
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155 15Throughout the process of European conquest and
colonization of North America, Indian tribes experi-enced a steady diminishment of their land base to amere 2.3 percent of its original size.  Currently, there areapproximately 55 million acres of Indian-controlled landin the continental United States and about 44 millionacres of Native-owned land in Alaska.  An adequate landbase and control over natural resources are central com-ponents of economic self-sufficiency and self-determina-tion, and as such, are vital to the very existence of tribes.Thus, much of NARF’s work involves the protection of
tribal natural resources. 
Protection of Indian Lands
Without a sufficient land base, tribal existence is diffi-
cult to maintain.  Thus NARF helps tribes establish own-ership and control over lands which are rightfully theirs. 
NARF has been retained by the Eastern Shoshone
Tribe (EST) of the Wind River Indian Reservation to ana-lyze the Surplus Land Act of March 3, 1905, and otherlegislation and cases, to determine their implications forthe boundaries of the Reservation. 
The EST and Northern Arapaho Tribes cooperated in
an application to the U.S. Environmental ProtectionAgency (EPA) for delegation of “treatment in the samemanner as a state” in the administration of certain CleanAir Act programs.  EPA issued its approval of their appli-cation in December 2013.  In its approval decision, EPAdetermined that the boundaries of the Reservation werenot altered by the 1905 Surplus Land Act.  The State ofWyoming filed a Petition for Reconsideration and Staywith EPA in January 2014.  That Petition for a stay wasgranted in part by EPA as to lands over which jurisdictionis in dispute.  Wyoming then filed a Petition for Reviewin February 2014, with the US Court of Appeals for theTenth Circuit which was followed in due course by sep-arate Petitions for Review from Devon Energy and theWyoming Farm Bureau.  The Court of Appeals consoli-dated the three petitions into one case.  The City ofRiverton and Fremont County have filed motions forIntervention on the side of the Petitioners.  Thosemotions are pending.  The Northern Arapahoe Tribefiled a Motion for Intervention which the Court granted,and the EST filed a Notice of Intervention which theCourt also granted.  The Tribes were unsuccessful in urg-ing the parties to sit down to negotiations in mediationor other settings to address the broad range of issuesfacing all of the parties.  The State, City of Riverton,
County of Fremont and Wyoming Farm Bureau have allfiled their briefs.  EPA filed its brief in May 2015. An ami-cus brief of law professors in support of EST was filed inApril 2015. The Reply briefs of the State, City ofRiverton, Fremont County and the Wyoming FarmBureau have all been filed.  The Joint Appendix was filed“The Earth was created by the assistance
of the sun, and it should be left as itwas.  The country was made withoutlines of demarcation, and it is no man’sbusiness to divide it.  I see whites allover the country gaining wealth, and seetheir desire to give us lands which areworthless.  The earth and myself are ofone mind.  The measure of the land andthe measure of our bodies are the same.Say to us if you can say it, that you weresent by the Creative Power to talk to us.Perhaps you think the Creator sent youhere to dispose of us as you see fit.  If Ithought that you were sent by theCreator I might be induced to think youhad a right to dispose of me.  Do notmisunderstand me, but understand mefully with reference to my affection tothe land.  I never said the land was mineto do with it as I chose.  The one who hasthe right to dispose of it is the one whocreated it.  I claim a right to live on myland, and accord you the privilege to live on yours.”  Heinmot Tooyalaket(Chief Joseph, Nez Perce)The Protection of Tribal Natural Resourcessupporting the Jemez Pueblo’s claim of aboriginal title to
land purchased by the United States and put into theValles Caldera National Preserve in New Mexico.  Thedistrict court denied the Pueblo’s claim, holding that theIndians Claims Commission Act transmuted all aborigi-nal title claims into monetary claims and the Puebloshould have sued under that Act for loss of its aboriginaltitle.  Oral argument in the appeal was held inNovember 2014.  In June 2015, the Court of Appealsissued a favorable decision remanding the case to thedistrict court where the Pueblo will have an opportunityto prove up its aboriginal title.  The United States hasfiled a petition for rehearing en banc and the Pueblo wasasked to, and did respond.  The Court denied the peti-tion for rehearing in November 2015.  It is unclear if theUnited States will petition the Supreme Court for a grantof certiorari.
In Akiachak Native Community, et al. v. Department of
Interior, et al., the Akiachak Native Community, et al.,
16 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDThe Protection of Tribal Natural Resources
in July 2015 and conformed briefs were filed in August
2015.  Oral argument was held in November 2015.Supplemental briefs on “Mootness” were filed by all parties in December 2015.
NARF represents the Hualapai Indian Tribe of Arizona
in preparing and submitting five applications for thetransfer into trust status of 8 parcels of land owned in feeby the Tribe.  The Tribe is located on the south rim of theGrand Canyon in Arizona, and claims a boundary thatruns to the center of the Colorado River. The applica-tions have been submitted to the BIA which is preparingthem for review by the U.S. Interior Department’sSolicitor for Preliminary Title Opinions (PTO) and FinalTitle Opinions. The Field Solicitor in Phoenix has issueda PTO on two of the applications. Another application isready for submission for a Final Title Opinion.
In July 2014 NARF filed an amicus brief on behalf of
NCAI in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit
represented by NARF, brought suit in the U.S. District
Court for the District of Columbia seeking judicial reviewof 25 C.F.R. Part 151 as it pertains to federally-recog-nized Tribes in Alaska.  This federal regulation governsthe procedures used by Indian Tribes and individualswhen requesting the Secretary of the Interior to acquiretitle to land in trust on their behalf.  The regulation barsthe acquisition of land in trust in Alaska other than forthe Metlakatla Indian Community or its members.  Afterfull briefing, but nearly three years of no action by thefederal court, the case was transferred to Judge RudolphContreras.  In March 2013, an Order was issued byJudge Contreras, granting Plaintiffs complete relief on allof their claims – a major victory for Alaska Tribes.Briefing on remedies was concluded and aMemorandum Order was entered in September 2013denying the State of Alaska’s motion for reconsideration,and severing and vacating Part 1 of 25 C.F.R. 151.   TheState filed its motion of appeal.  
In May 2014, the Department of the Interior pub-
lished a new proposed rule addressing the acquisition ofland into trust in Alaska. Specifically, the proposed ruledeleted the provision that excluded trust acquisitions inthe State of Alaska. Following the notice of rule-making,the State of Alaska filed a motion to stay the rule-makingpending appeal. In June 2014, the court issued an ordergranting in part and denying in part Alaska’s motion tostay pending appeal. The court found that the statewould suffer no harm from allowing the rule-making toproceed but granted the stay in part to prevent theInterior Department from considering specific applica-tions or taking lands into trust in Alaska until resolutionof the appeal. In December 2014, the InteriorDepartment published its final rule rescinding the“Alaska Exception”, which became effective in January2015.  In January 2015, the State of Alaska moved tosuspend briefing in this appeal, to “explore a range ofpolicy options on this issue and related tribal issues inAlaska, including potential alternatives to continuingthis litigation.”  The Court granted the stay, as well as anadditional, 30-day extension of time.  In August 2015,the State of Alaska filed its Appellate brief.  FederalAppellees filed a motion to dismiss in October 2015, onthe ground that the Secretary’s rescission of the “Alaska“Exception” moots the case.  In December 2015, NARFand the Department of the Interior each filed theirresponse briefs.  Alaska filed its reply brief shortly beforethe Christmas holiday.  With briefing now closed, theCourt set March 4, 2016 as the date for oral argumentin the case.
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155
17Water Rights
The culture and way of life of many indigenous peoples
are inextricably tied to their aboriginal habitat. For thosetribes that still maintain traditional ties to the naturalworld, suitable habitat is required in order to exercisetheir treaty-protected hunting, fishing, gathering andtrapping rights and to sustain their relationships withthe animals, plants and fish that comprise their aborigi-nal habitats. 
Establishing tribal rights to the use of water in the arid
western United States continues to be a major NARF pri-ority.  The goal of NARF's Indian water rights work is tosecure allocations of water for present and future needsfor specific Indian tribes represented by NARF and otherwestern tribes generally.  Under the precedent estab-lished by the Supreme Court in 1908 in Winters v. United
States and confirmed in 1963 in Arizona v. California ,
Indian tribes are entitled under federal law to sufficientwater for present and future needs, with a priority dateat least as early as the establishment of their reserva-tions.  These tribal reserved water rights are superior toall state-recognized water rights created after the tribalpriority date.  Such a date will in most cases give tribesvaluable senior water rights in the water-short west.Unfortunately, many tribes have not utilized theirreserved water rights and most of these rights are unad-judicated or unquantified.  The major need in each caseis to define or quantify the amount of water to whicheach tribe is entitled through litigation or out-of-courtsettlement negotiations.  Tribes are generally able toclaim water for any purpose which enables the Tribe'sreservation to serve as a permanent homeland.
NARF, together with co-counsel, represents the Agua
Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians in a lawsuit filed inMay  2013 in the U.S. District Court for the CentralDistrict of California, asking the court to declare the exis-tence of the Tribe's water rights as the senior rights inthe Coachella Valley under federal law, to quantify theserights, and to prevent Coachella Valley Water Districtand Desert Water Agency from further injuring the Tribe,its members and residents in surrounding communitiesthroughout the Valley by impairing the quantity andquality of water in the aquifer.
The water districts import and then fail to adequately
treat substantially lower quality water from the ColoradoRiver before injecting that water into the aquifer. Therecharge water, which contains higher total dissolved18 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDsolids, nitrates, pesticides, and other contaminants, is
reinjected into the Coachella Valley aquifer at a facilityclose to the Tribe's lands. Thus, the groundwater in theWestern Coachella Valley, including the water below theAgua Caliente Reservation, which includes the cities ofPalm Springs, Cathedral City, Rancho Mirage, andThousand Palms, is being polluted at a faster rate thanthe aquifer down-valley.
In February 2014 the court set a discovery and pre-
trial motion practice schedule in the case.  The partiescompleted discovery in Phase I of the case in summer2014. The United States moved to intervene in the casein May 2014, and the court granted the US’ interven-tion, a significant achievement for the Tribe and itsattorneys.  Summary judgment motions were filed inPhase I of the case in October 2014, and briefedthrough January 2015.  Oral argument was heard inMarch 2015 and the court issued its ruling at the end ofMarch 2015.  The court ruled largely in the Tribe’s favor,holding that the Tribe has a reserved right to water, andthat groundwater is a water source available to fulfillthat right; the court also denied the Tribe’s motion forsummary judgment on its claim for aboriginal title togroundwater.  The water districts filed a petition withthe U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit for inter-locutory review of the portion of the court’s orderaddressing the Tribe’s reserved right to groundwater.The Tribe opposed interlocutory review but in June2015, the Ninth Circuit granted the water districts’ peti-tion for interlocutory review.  Briefing before the NinthCircuit is underway, with the water districts’ openingbrief filed in October 2015, and the Tribe’s and UnitedStates’ briefs due in February 2016.  Oral argument willlikely take place in early 2016.    The water agenciesmoved to stay proceedings before the district courtwhile the Ninth Circuit reviews the court’s decision onthe Tribe’s reserved right to groundwater and the districtcourt granted their motion in part in September 2015.However, Phase 2 is moving forward on a limited basis,with the court agreeing to hear arguments on the issueof whether the equitable defenses raised by the wateragencies apply to tribal water rights claims.   Briefing onthat issue was completed in November 2015 and oralargument was heard in December 2015.  At oral argu-ment, the judge stated that he was inclined to rule inthe Tribe’s favor on two of the equitable defense issues:laches and balancing of the equities.  However, thejudge ordered supplemental briefing on the third issuebefore the court:  whether the unclean hands doctrinecould, as a matter of law, apply to this type of claim.NARF is awaiting the court’s ruling on the equitable
defenses.  The remainder of Phase 2 issues were stayedby the court pending the Ninth Circuit’s resolution ofthe water agencies’ appeal.  
NARF represented the Nez Perce Tribe in Idaho in its
water rights claims in the Snake River Basin Adjudication(SRBA) both litigation and settlement phases for over 16years. In 2004 Congress enacted and the Presidentsigned the Snake River Settlement Act.  NARF’s workwith the Tribe has now turned to development of waterrights claims in the Palouse River Basin Adjudication(PRBA).  The State of Idaho will commence the PRBA in 2016.
In the Klamath Basin tribal water rights case, the
Klamath County Circuit Court has issued two new CaseManagement Orders related to the first sub-phase of theKlamath Basin Adjudication proceedings (Phase 1A),concerning the resolution of jurisdictional and otherthreshold legal issues.  Under these Case ManagementOrders, Parties have until January 2016 to submit com-ments on the Court’s proposed list of jurisdictional andother threshold legal issues for resolution in Phase 1A.February 2016 is the deadline for parties to file responsesto any such comments.  A full briefing and hearingschedule on these issues is expected to be issued by theCourt in spring 2016.  Following resolution of these pre-liminary legal issues, the Court will begin to proceedwith sequential scheduling and conducting of briefingand hearings for the remainder of the other phases ofthe Adjudication.  
Federal legislation to implement the three Klamath
Basin water agreements – the Klamath Basin RestorationAgreement (KBRA), the Klamath HydroelectricSettlement Agreement (KHSA), and the Upper KlamathBasin Comprehensive Agreement (UKBCA) – was intro-duced in the Senate (S 133) in January 2015 andreferred to the Committee on Energy and NaturalResources.  A sister House bill has not been introduced.The KBRA, the fishery restoration and water manage-ment agreement, however, terminated in December2015 because federal authorizing legislation was nottimely enacted per the terms of the Agreement.  TheKHSA and the UKBCA remain in effect but are interde-pendent with the recently terminated KBRA.  The partieswill confer to determine the fate of the two remainingagreements and consider whether the goals of the KBRAcan still be achieved.
The Protection of Tribal Natural ResourcesAANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155 19After almost 30 years of advocacy, the Tule River
Indian Tribe, represented by NARF, successfully settledits water rights in November 2007 by signing aSettlement Agreement with water users on the SouthFork Tule River of Califor nia. The Settlement Agreement
secures a domestic, municipal, industrial, and commer-cial water supply for the Tribe. The Tribe now seeks fed-eral legislation to ratify the Settlement Agreement andauthorize appropriations to develop the water rightsthrough the creation of water infrastructure and reser-voirs on the Tule River Reservation.  
New Federal Negotiation Team members were
appointed by the Secretary’s Indian Water Rights Officein 2014.  The Tribal Water Team met in February 2015with the Federal Negotiation Team to discuss the variousalternatives that will be analyzed and the NegotiationTeams’ response that the Tribe’s Settlement is too expen-sive.  Currently, the Tribal Water Team is assisting theFederal Negotiation Team in developing an appraisal
level study of several alternatives that were identified inthe February 2015 meeting.  The Federal Team promisedto be done with the study by November 2015 so that theTribe and Federal Negotiation T eam can proceed to
negotiate an appropriate settlement to present toCongress for introduction early 2016.  Regrettably, theFederal Negotiation Team advised the Tribe inNovember of 2015 that, despite utilizing the past twoyears to look at any and all alternatives, it will have to goback and analyze further alternatives.  
According to the Environmental Protection Agency,
the water supply for the Reservation is in violation of theSafe Drinking Water Act of 1974. The Kickapoo peopleare unable to safely drink, bathe or cook with tap water.There is not enough water on the reservation to providebasic municipal services to the community and the Tribeis not even able to provide local schools with reliable,
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 20safe running water. The fire department cannot provide
adequate fire protection due to the water shortage.  Theproposed Reservoir Project is the most cost effective andreliable means by which the Tribe can improve the watersupply.
In June 2006, the Kickapoo Tribe in Kansas, repre-
sented by NARF, filed a federal court lawsuit in an effortto enforce express promises made to the Tribe to builda Reservoir Project.  The Nemaha Brown Watershed JointBoard #7, the Natural Resources Conservation Service ofthe U.S. Department of Agriculture, and the State ofKansas made these promises to the Tribe over a decadeago.  In the intervening years these parties have beenactively developing the water resources of the water-
shed, resulting in the near depletion of the Tribe's seniorfederal water rights in the drainage.  The U.S., the Stateand the local watershed district all concede the exis-tence of the Tribe's senior Indian reserved water rights;the real issue is the amount of water needed to satisfythe Tribe's rights, and the source or sources of thatwater. The Tribe and the US have also discussed fundingto quantify the Tribe's water rights. 
The watershed district rejected a Condemnation
Agreement that the State and Tribe had approved.  Thatagreement would have created the mechanism for con-demning property for the water storage project.  After a
The Protection of Tribal Natural ResourcesAANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155 21return to litigation, the federal court entered summary
judgment in favor of the watershed district on the ques-tion of whether a 1994 agreement obligated the districtto make its condemnation power available to aid theTribe in acquiring the land for the water storage projectarea.  The Tribe is now evaluating its options, includingdiscussions with the Interior and AgricultureDepartments and the State of Kansas to find an alterna-tive means of securing the land rights for the project.Additionally, the State, the US and the Tribe are contin-uing active negotiations of settlement of the Tribe’s fed-erally reserved water rights.  
Protection of Hunting and Fishing Rights 
The subsistence way of life is essential for the physical
and cultural survival of Alaska Natives.  As important asNative hunting and fishing rights are to Alaska Natives'physical, economic, traditional and cultural existence,the State of Alaska has been and continues to be reluc-tant to recognize the importance of the subsistence wayof life. 
In the subsistence case of Stickwan v. Catholic Church ,
NARF represented the Stickwan family from Tazlina inthe establishment of a prescriptive easement to protecta historic customary and traditional fishing site on prop-erty owned by the Catholic Church that is slated to besold.  The Church received the land in a special legisla-tive land grant in 1952 with a reservation that landwould be used as a mission school for Indians.  A com-plaint on behalf of the family was filed in April 2014.After nearly a year of negotiations, the parties reached asettlement agreement in which the Stickwan family willreceive full fee simple title to the land underlying theirfamily’s fish camp.  In addition, the Church will conveytwo perpetual access easements to the Stickwans forcontinued year round access to their fish camp andNative allotment.
The Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act
(ANILCA) provides a subsistence harvest priority toAlaska's "rural" residents.  ANILCA itself, however, doesnot define which individuals or communities qualify as"rural."  The Organized Village of Saxman is a coastalcommunity of 411 residents.  The population is over-whelmingly Alaska Native.  Saxman has its own federallyrecognized tribal government, its own state recognizedmunicipality, and its own ANCSA village corporation.Saxman is, however, connected to the city of Ketchikanby a two-mile long road.In 2007, the Federal Subsistence Board (FSB) promul-
gated a final rule revoking Saxman’s rural communitystatus.  The FSB reasoned that Saxman’s close proximityto Ketchikan justified aggregating the two communitiesas one non-rural community.  The Saxman IRA Councilpursued its administrative remedies in order to reinstateits rural status.  Implementation of the 2007 Final Rulewas delayed by the Secretary of the Interior as the FSBengaged in an overhaul of the rural determination crite-ria used to designate communities “rural or non-rural”under ANILCA.
In June 2014, NARF filed a complaint for declaratory
and injunctive relief in Alaska’s federal district court chal-lenging the merits of the FSB’s 2007 decision to classifySaxman as non-rural.  Soon after the Complaint wasfiled, the Deputy Secretary of the Interior announcedthe initiation of administrative rule-making aimed atrequiring “the Federal Subsistence Board to use moreflexible criteria to designate rural communities” duringthe rural/non-rural determination process.  Subsequently,NARF and the U.S. Department of Justice jointly movedto stay the litigation during the pendency of the admin-istrative rule-making.  The court granted the stay inDecember 2014.  In January 2015, a proposed rule forthe rural determination process was published in theFederal Register.  NARF assisted the Organized Village ofSaxman IRA in drafting written comments on the pro-posed rule and appeared with Saxman officials at publichearings.  In May 2015, Senator Murkowski andCongressman Young introduced bills which would leg-islatively reinstate Saxman as a rural community.  TheFSB voted unanimously to adopt the proposed adminis-trative rule favoring Saxman’s rural status.  The pro-posed rule and updated community list were publishedin the Federal Register in November 2015.  With the rulenow in effect, NARF will soon move to dismiss the fed-eral lawsuit.  NARF will continue working with Saxmanon issues surrounding the FSB and federal subsistencemanagement program – including future policy issuessurrounding rural community status.  
The Bering Sea Elders Group (BSEG) is an alliance of
thirty-nine Yup’ik and Inupiaq villages that seeks to pro-tect the sensitive ecosystem of the Bering Sea, the sub-sistence lifestyle, and the sustainable communities thatdepend on it.  NARF has designed a comprehensive planto help this group of Alaska Native villages in theirefforts to protect the area and become more engaged inits management.  Subsistence is the inherently sustain-able Native philosophy of taking only what you need.TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 22The Protection of Tribal Natural Resources
There are often no roads and no stores in rural Alaska,
and so no other group of people in the United Statescontinues to be as intimately connected to the land andwater and as dependent upon its vast natural resourcesas Alaska’s indigenous peoples.
NARF has been working with BSEG in its negotiations
with the bottom trawl industry over the course of thelast few years.  These negotiations have resulted in thecreation of a Working Group which is a co-managementbody with equal representation between the bottomtrawl industry and representatives from Native villagesthat are close to the industry’s primary fishing grounds.The most recent Working Group meeting was held inearly November 2015.   
In John Sturgeon v. Sue Masica et al. , the federal courts
upheld the right of the National Park Service to prohib-it the use of a hovercraft on a river inside a NationalPark or Preserve (here, the Yukon-Charley RiversNational Preserve).  The hovercraft was being used onthe Nation River, which is a navigable river inside theYukon-Charley Preserve.  The lower federal courts ruledin favor of the federal government on the basis thatnationwide park and preserve rules generally apply toall lands and waters that are inside a park or preserve.Yet, a key provision of the 1980 Alaska National InterestLands Conservation Act (ANILCA) was intended toexempt those kinds of lands from precisely these kindsof federal park rules.  ANILCA specifically declares thatstate, Alaska Native and private lands are not subject to“regulations applicable solely to public lands withinsuch units,” while federal laws and regulations of gen-eral applicability to private and public lands alike — likethe hovercraft ban — wouldn’t be affected by theexemption.  The Ninth Circuit’s ruling rejected an inter-pretation of the ANILCA provision that exempted stateand Alaska Native corporate lands from the scope ofregulations. 
Because the Ninth Circuit’s ruling resulted in ANCSA
lands being subject to Park regulations, ANCSA corpo-rations joined Mr. Sturgeon and the state of Alaska inpetitioning Supreme Court review.  The Court grantedreview in October 2015.  NARF elected to file an ami-cus brief on behalf of subsistence users in support of thefederal government at the Supreme Court level becauseof concern that the case may inadvertently implicatesubsistence fishing rights established by the Katie John
litigation.In Katie John , the federal courts ruled that the govern-
ment owns a federal interest in navigable rivers runninginside parks and preserves under the reserved waterrights doctrine.  On that basis the courts upheld theright of the federal government to protect subsistencefishing in those rivers.  The same, one would think,would be the case here—since the government owns aninterest in navigable waters inside a preserve, the gov-ernment can regulate other uses of those waters.  ButMr. Sturgeon and the State of Alaska argued in Sturgeon
that the State owned the submerged lands and naviga-ble waters that run through parks and thus the federalgovernment has no interest in navigable waters insideparks and preserves.  If the Supreme Court were toagree, the basis for federal regulation of subsistence fish-ing could be undermined.  Oral argument is scheduledto be held in January 2016.  
Alaska’s Bristol Bay region is home to the largest wild
salmon runs in the world.  It is also home to the Yup’ik,Dena’ina, and Alutiiq people who depend on the sus-tainable salmon runs for their subsistence.  In April2013, NARF assisted in the creation of the United Tribesof Bristol Bay (UTBB).  UTBB is a consortium of federally-recognized tribes in the region.  It was formed in orderfor tribes to directly address regional large-scale miningproposals threatening salmon rearing streams – such asthe proposed Pebble Mine, which would sit on theheadwaters of the largest salmon-producing river inBristol Bay.  Exercising its delegated governmentalauthority, with NARF as legal counsel, UTBB has activelyengaged the federal government in direct government-to-government consultation on large scale mining inBristol Bay.
EPA released its Watershed Assessment in January
2014.  The assessment is a science- based documentthat supports the use of 404(c) authority by EPA to pro-hibit or restrict hard rock mining in the Bristol Bay water-shed.  In February 2014, EPA gave their 15-day notifica-tion that it would initiate a 404(c) process for the PebbleMine.  The State of Alaska immediately filed a statementrequesting a stay to allow the developer to submit a per-mit under the NEPA process.  EPA granted the State andthe Corp. of Engineers a thirty day extension to respondto the notification of 404(c) process.  Public hearingscommenced over the 2014 summer season.
In February 2014, EPA gave its 15-day notification
that it would initiate a Clean Water Act 404(c) processfor the Pebble Mine.  The State of Alaska immediatelyAANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155 23filed a statement requesting a stay to allow the develop-
er to submit a permit under the NEPA process.  EPAgranted the State and the Corp. of Engineers a thirty dayextension to respond to the notification of 404(c)process.  In May 2014, Pebble Limited Partnership (PLP)filed suit against EPA and the Region 10 Administratorchallenging EPA’s Section 404(c) review process asexceeding its statutory authority under the Clean WaterAct.  The State of Alaska filed a motion to intervene as aplaintiff which was granted in June 2014.  Both partiesmoved for a preliminary injunction.  UTBB, representedby NARF, filed a motion to intervene as Intervenor-Defendants.  In September 2014 Judge Holland heardoral argument, and then ruled from the bench dismiss-ing PLP and the State of Alaska’s Motion for aPreliminary Injunction on the ground that the agencyaction was not final.  PLP filed a motion to appeal andoral argument was held in May 2015.  Two weeks later,the Ninth Circuit issued a per curiam opinion affirmingJudge Holland in all respects – effectively ending thecase in favor of NARF’s clients.In September 2014, PLP filed another complaint
against EPA for declaratory and injunctive relief underthe Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA).  The FACAimposes requirements on federal agencies when theyestablish or utilize any “advisory committee.” InNovember 2014, Judge Holland held oral argument onPLP’s motion for preliminary injunction and again issueda ruling from the bench he stated that he was unper-suaded that PLP was likely to succeed on the merits ofthe case, but granted the preliminary injunction, there-by halting EPA’s work on the 404(c) process in BristolBay.  Judge Holland held oral argument in May 2015and issued a written ruling a week after, ruling againthat PLP’s claims as to whether EPA created the anti-mine coalition and the anti-mine scientists were merit-less.  Judge Holland dismissed half of the claims in PLP’samended complaint, but denied the motion to dismisson others, holding that PLP had stated plausible claimson whether EPA had “utilized” the “expertise” of allegedFACs.  In October 2015, however, Judge Holland issueda broad order quashing Pebble’s subpoenas, specificallyfinding that the Company’s efforts pushed the federal
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 24The Protection of Tribal Natural Resources
discovery rules to their very limits.  Since Judge Holland’s
issued his order, Pebble has withdrawn its remainingsubpoenas, but has made statements in the media thatit intends to reissue others at a later date.  The case iscontinuing through the discovery phase, which is notslated to be completed until June 2016.  In the interim,Judge Holland’s preliminary injunction remains in effect. 
NARF is representing the Native Village of Tyonek
(NVT) as a co-operating agency in the development of aSupplemental Environmental Impact Statement (SEIS) inresponse to a permit proposal by PacRim to mine coal
from the Beluga coal fields in the Cook Inlet.  NARF con-tinues to be actively engaged in a multifacetedapproach to assist NVT in its opposition to the proposedChuitna Coal Project.  
NARF helped the Tribe acquire 160 acres of land that
was formerly owned by the Nature Conservancy.  TheNature Conservancy Board of Directors agreed to the“Land Transfer” in order to assist NVT in protectingancient cultural sites, which have been found on the
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155 25land.  The transfer agreement was completed in March
2015 and the deed of final conveyance was registeredwith the title agency.  The Alaska State HistoricPreservation Office then made a determination that theboundary of the Chuit’na Archeological  District beexpanded to include the former Nature Conservancyland.  NARF continues to retain experts to analyze SEIScomponent parts.  Experts have been retained torespond to each draft chapter of the draft SEIS, allappendices and related studies within the SEIS.  
Climate Change Project
Global warming is wreaking havoc in Alaska. In recent
years scientists have documented melting ocean ice, rising oceans, rising river temperatures, thawing per-mafrost, increased insect infestations, animals at risk anddying forests. Alaska Natives are the peoples who relymost on Alaska's ice, seas, marine mammals, fish andgame for nutrition and customary and traditional sub-sistence uses; they are thus experiencing the adverseimpacts of global warming most acutely. In 2006, dur-ing the Alaska Forum on the Environment, Alaska Nativeparticipants described increased forest fires, more dan-gerous hunting, fishing and traveling conditions, visiblechanges in animals and plants, infrastructure damagefrom melting permafrost and coastal erosion, fiercerwinter storms, and pervasive unpredictability. Virtuallyevery aspect of traditional Alaska Native life is impacted.As noted in the Arctic Climate Impact Assessment of2004, indigenous peoples are reporting that sea ice isdeclining, and its quality and timing are changing, withimportant negative repercussions for marine hunters.Others are reporting that salmon are diseased and cannot be dried for winter food. There is widespreadconcern about caribou habitat diminishing as largervegetation moves northward. Because of these andother dramatic changes, traditional knowledge is jeop-ardized, as are cultural structures and the nutritionalneeds of Alaska's Indigenous peoples. Efforts are contin-uing to convene Congressional hearings on climatechange impacts on indigenous peoples.
After several years of fruitful partnership, NARF has
recently begun representing NCAI climate change mat-ters.  Climate change is one of the most challengingissues facing the world today. Its effects on indigenouspeoples throughout the world are acute and will onlyget worse. The effects are especially pronounced inAlaska where as many as 184 Alaska Native villages are
threatened with removal.  
On the international stage, the first meetings on the
specifics of the new “protocol to be adopted byDecember 2015, were held in Bonn, Germany inApril/May and June, 2013.  At the March 2014 meetingof the United Nations Framework Convention onClimate Change in Bonn, an open-ended consultationoccurred where countries exchanged views on the ele-ments of the 2015 agreement. No text was producedand developing countries expressed their view thatmore formal negotiations that allowed for the tabling oftext were due.  In the June 2014 session, it was antici-pated that draft text would be tabled but this did nothappen, as more discussion occurred on the elements ofa draft text.  An additional session was held in Bonn inOctober 2014. In anticipation of the COP 20, a meetingwas held in Lima, Peru in late November 2014.
In December 2015, the Paris Agreement, the first ever
universally binding accord on climate change, wasadopted under the United Nations FrameworkConvention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and achievesthe universality which was missing from the last attemptat such an agreement – the Kyoto Protocol.  TheInternational Indigenous Peoples Forum on ClimateChange (IIPFCC or indigenous caucus), which NARF hasparticipated in, has been involved in the UNFCCCprocess for years.  It is clear that without the presence ofIndigenous Peoples’ representatives, the Agreement andDecision would have had no reference to them.  Whilethe indigenous caucus did not achieve all that it sought,it did achieve some very significant references which canbe built on going forward.  The language in theAgreement states that when taking action on climatechange the rights of indigenous peoples must beacknowledged and that traditional knowledge, knowl-edge of indigenous peoples and local knowledge systems shall help guide the science used to address climate change.  This language recognizes the need tostrengthen knowledge, technologies, practices andefforts of local communities and indigenous peoples,related to addressing and responding to climate change,and establishes a platform for the exchange of experi-ences and sharing of best practices on mitigation andadaptation in a holistic and integrated manner.MAJOR ACTIVITIES 2015 - NARF CASE MAPMAINE
Penobscot Indian Nation –
Tribal Trust Funds
MICHIGAN
Grand Traverse Band of
Ottawa and Chippewa Indians– Tribal Trust Funds
MINNESOTA
Menominee Indian Tribe –
Equitable Tolling
White Earth Band of Chippewa
Indians - Tribal Trust Funds 
MISSISSIPPI
Mississippi Band of Choctaw
Indians – Tribal CivilJurisdiction
MONTANA
Blackfeet Tribe – Sacred SitesChippewa-Cree Tribe of the
Rocky Boys Reservation -Tribal Trust Funds
Little Shell Tribe of Chippewa
Indians - Recognition & TribalTrust Funds
NEW MEXICO
Pueblo of Acoma – 
Tribal Trust Funds
Jemez Pueblo – Sacred Site
Protection/Aboriginal Title
NORTH DAKOTA
Turtle Mountain Chippewa
Tribe - Tribal Trust Funds
North Dakota Voting Rights
Law
OKLAHOMA
Comanche Nation – 
Tribal Trust Funds
Kickapoo Tribe – 
Tribal Trust Funds
Muscogee Creek Nation –
Tribal Trust Funds
OREGON
Klamath Tribes - Water Rights
& Tribal Trust Funds
Confederated Tribes of the
Umatilla Reservation – Tribal Trust FundsALASKA
NARF ANCHORAGE OFFICE
Akiachak Native Community –
Land into Trust
Aleut Community of St. Paul
Island – Tribal Trust Funds
Bering Sea Elders Group –
Subsistence
Bristol Bay – Subsistence Chilkoot Indian Association –
Land into Trust
Chalkyitsik – Land into TrustOrganized Village of Saxman –
Subsistence
Stickwan – Subsistence Native Village of Toyukuk
–Voting Rights Act 
Native Village of Tyonek –
Subsistence & CulturalPreservation
United Tribes of Bristol Bay –
Environmental/Subsistence
ARIZONA
Arizona Inter Tribal Council –
Education Trust Funds
Hualapai Tribe – Boundary
Issue 
San Juan Southern Paiute –
Northern Arizona Withdrawl
CALIFORNIA
Agua Caliente Band of
Cahuilla Indians – TribalWater Rights
Tule River Tribe – Tribal
Water Rights 
COLORADO
NARF HEADQUARTERS
BOULDER, COLORADO
Indigenous Peacemaking
Initiative
National Indian Law LibrarySouthern Ute Tribe – Tribal
Trust Funds/Sacred Sites
FLORIDA
Seminole Tribe of Florida –
Tribal Trust Funds
IDAHO
Nez Perce Tribe - Water Rights 
KANSAS
Kickapoo Tribe – Water Rights SOUTH DAKOTA
Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate –
Tribal Trust Funds
TEXAS
Native American Church of
North America – ReligiousFreedom
UTAHNorthwestern Band of
Shoshone Nation – SacredSites
Paiute Indian Tribe – Sacred
Sites
Indian Peaks Band of Paiute
Indians – Sacred Sites
VIRGINIA
Pamunkey Tribe – 
Tribal Recognition
WASHINGTON
Quinault Indian Nation –
Tribal Trust Funds
Skokomish Tribe – 
Tribal Trust Funds
WASHINGTON, D.C.
NARF WASHINGTON, D.C.
OFFICE
National Congress of
American Indians –International Representation
Tribal Supreme Court ProjectMorningstar Institute –
Arizona Withdrawl
WISCONSIN
Bad River Band of Lake
Superior Chippewa Indians –Tribal Water Rights 
WYOMING
Eastern Shoshone Tribe -
Land Issue 
INTERNATIONAL
Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples/ClimateChange Issues – Organizationof American States and UnitedNationsAlthough basic human rights are considered a univer-
sal and inalienable entitlement, Native Americans facean ongoing threat of having their rights undermined bythe United States government, states and others whoseek to limit these rights. Under the priority of the promotion of human rights , NARF strives to enforce and
strengthen laws which are designed to protect the rightsof Native Americans to practice their traditional religion,to use their own language and to enjoy their culture.NARF also works with Tribes to ensure the welfare oftheir children.  In the international arena, NARF is activein efforts to negotiate declarations on the rights ofindigenous peoples.
Religious Freedom
Because religion is the foundation that holds Native
communities and cultures together, religious freedom isa NARF priority issue. 
In NARF’s Sacred Places Project, NARF has partnered
with the National Congress of American Indians and theMorningstar Institute to help ensure that various federalagencies with jurisdiction over federal lands are heldaccountable to their obligation to protect sacred placesand provide meaningful access to tribal people wishingto use those places for traditional purposes. These effortswill include providing best practices analysis, as well asraising awareness of issues and different approaches thatcan be used to protect sacred places held by the feder-al government.  To the extent possible, analysis andpractices learned from federal lands will also be com-pared for use on private and state-held lands.
NARF has a long history in the protection of Native
religion and cultural property, including sacred sites.NARF’s Sacred Places Project focuses on monitoringlegal issues impacting sacred places for Native peoples,collaborating with various groups that are already workingto protect sacred places, monitoring and participating inlitigation to protect sacred places, and advocating forgreater protection and access for sacred places at thecongressional and administrative levels.  A website willbe developed to act as a clearinghouse of informationregarding sacred places protection laws and cases.
NARF provides input to the federal Departments of
the Interior, Agriculture, Defense, and Energy, whichsigned a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)Regarding Interagency Coordination and Collaborationfor the Protection of Indian Sacred Sites to improve the
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155
29protection of, and tribal access to, Indian sacred sites
through enhanced and improved interdepartmentalcoordination and collaboration.  The MOU was followedin March 2013 with an “Action Plan” calling for estab-lishment of working groups to perform various listedactivities to facilitate better coordination and access.NARF continues to provide input to the working groupson best practices and suggestions. It is hoped that theworking group will have a series of consultations onsome proposals they have received for better protectingand providing access to sacred sites.
NARF, representing the Indian Peaks Band of Paiute
Indians, the San Juan Southern Paiute Tribe, and theMorningstar Institute, filed an amicus brief in Yount v.
Jewell , a case in federal district court of Arizona about
the Northern Arizona Withdrawal.  In 2012, then-Interior Secretary Salazar announced that he was with-drawing over a million acres of Bureau of LandManagement and Forest Service land around the GrandCanyon from future uranium mining claims.  TheNorthern Arizona Withdrawal would prohibit futuremining claims from being perfected as of January 2012,but would permit claims that were valid as of that dateto go forward.  Several mining companies and individualschallenged the Withdrawal on many grounds, includingthat the Withdrawal violated the Establishment Clause ofthe U.S. Constitution because it relied on AmericanIndian spiritual beliefs and therefore constituted animpermissible establishment of religion.  NARF’s amicusbrief addressed the Establishment Clause argument aswell as the other American Indian cultural argumentsthat the mining companies raised. The amicus brief wasin support of the United States, the Havasupai Tribe, andother environmental groups that intervened in the “Humankind has not woven the
web of life.  We are but onethread within it.  Whatever wedo to the web, we do to our-selves.  All things are boundtogether.  All things connect.”Chief Seattle, 1854The Promotion of Human Rights(BLM) to conduct on-the-ground surveys to identify cul-
tural artifacts in need of protection on more than 4,000miles of dirt roads and trails where BLM has permittedoff-road vehicles to be driven.  BLM challenged thatdecision in the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals. NARF,representing the Paiute Indian Tribe of Utah, IndianPeaks Band of Paiutes, the Southern Ute Indian Tribe,and the Morning Star Institute, filed an amicus brief insupport of the environmentalists and requested that thesurveys be conducted.  The Tenth Circuit confirmed thatBLM must comply in December of 2015.  “This region ishome to an abundance of archaeological resources,including caves, rock shelters and rock art, that providea window in to the lives of the early inhabitants of theColorado Plateau,” said Kevin Jones, former Utah Statearchaeologist. “Off-road vehicles pose a serious threat tothese irreplaceable resources.”  Less than five percent ofthe public lands managed by the Richfield Field Officehave been surveyed for cultural resources. BLM is nowrequired to survey the routes designated for off-highwayvehicle use within three years.
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD
30matter.  Oral argument was held in September 2014,
and in a comprehensive opinion the court upheld theNorthern Arizona Withdrawal, preventing new futuremining claims.  The Court gave little attention to thePlaintiff’s Establishment Clause and American Indianarguments indicating they were without merit.  The min-ing companies have appealed this decision to the U.S.Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.  NARF, represent-ing the Paiute Indian Tribe of Utah, San Juan SouthernPaiute Tribe, Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians, HualapaiTribe of the Hualapai Reservation, Northwestern Band ofthe Shoshone Nation, the Morning Star Institute, and theNational Congress of American Indians again filed anamicus brief in the Ninth Circuit.  The brief asked theCourt of Appeals to uphold the withdrawal and coun-tered arguments made against tribal interests by themining companies and other amicus parties.
In May of 2015, environmentalists and historic preser-
vation advocates secured a victory when a Utah federaldistrict court judge in Southwest Utah Wilderness Alliance
v. Schneider ordered the Bureau of Land ManagementThe Promotion of Human Rights
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155 31In September 2014, NARF filed an amicus brief on
behalf of the Blackfeet Tribe of the Blackfeet Reservationin the federal district court case of Solonex v. Jewell .  The
energy company is challenging the government’sprocess and decision to limit oil and gas developmentthat would threaten the Tribe’s sacred sites.  Most recent-ly the court ordered the federal government to decide byNovember 2015 whether it would seek to cancel or to lifta suspension on Solonex’s gas permit on lands sacred tothe Blackfeet Nation.  The United States decided to cancel the oil and gas lease but the litigation continues.
NARF has represented the Native American Church of
North America (NACNA) and its member chapters forfour decades in the litigation and legislative arenas.NARF represented NACNA and its several dozen localmembership chapters throughout the United States tosuccessfully enact federal legislation in 1994 that finallycreated national protection for the traditional, indige-nous use of Peyote by Native peoples.  For the past twoyears, NARF has been working with the NACNA on aproject to research the impact of peyote decline onNative American Church members and to develop andsupport access to and the use of peyote for NACNA.  
Because importation from Mexico, where most of the
naturally occurring peyote grows, is presently not legal,and because artificial cultivation is difficult and extraor-dinarily expensive, North American peyotists currentlydepend on the only region where Peyote abundanceoccurs in the United States, the Rio Grande River Valleyin south Texas.  In recent years it has become increas-ingly apparent that the domestic supply of peyote isunder threat of unsustainability due to a myriad of factors.  The decline in the availability of peyote is attrib-uted to four major factors: growing Indian demand;exploitation and commercialization by non-Indian peo-ple; damage from private landowner land use practicesincluding cattle ranching; and damage from incorrectharvesting practices and over-harvesting of the peyotecactus.  There is a limited amount of available, publishedscholastic sources that support this hypothesis.  NARF’sPeyote Research Project team met in the Spring of 2015and most recently in September 2015, and has devel-oped a specific plan to guide its work through 2016.Near term action will focus on Texas and developing arelationship with private landowners to heighten theawareness of the need to protect the sacrament.  Indian Education
During the 19th and into the 20th century, pursuant
to federal policy, Native American children were forciblyabducted from their homes to attend Christian and gov-ernment-run boarding schools.  The purpose was to"civilize" the Indian and to stamp out Native culture. Itwas a deliberate policy of ethnocide and cultural geno-cide.  Cut off from their families and culture, the chil-dren were punished for speaking their native language,banned from conducting traditional or cultural prac-tices, shorn of traditional clothing and identity of theirnative culture, taught that their culture and traditionswere evil and sinful, and that they should be ashamed ofbeing Native American.  Placed often far from home,they were frequently neglected or abused physically,sexually and psychologically. Generations of these chil-dren became the legacy of the federal Boarding SchoolPolicy.  They were returned to their communities, not asthe Christianized farmers that the Boarding SchoolPolicy envisioned, but as deeply scarred human beingswith none of the acculturated skills – community, par-enting, extended family, language, cultural practices –gained by those who are raised in their cultural context. 
There has been scant recognition by the U.S. federal
government that initiated and carried out this policy,and no acceptance of responsibility for the indisputablefact that its purpose was cultural genocide.  There are noapparent realistic legal avenues to seek redress or heal-ing from the deep and enduring wounds inflicted bothon the individuals and communities of tribal nations.Lawsuits by individuals have been turned aside, andunlike other countries that implemented similar policies– e.g. Canada, Australia – there has been no official U.S.proposal for healing or reconciliation.
The National Native American Boarding School
Healing Coalition (NABS or the “Coalition”) is primarilyconducting education and outreach with three generalareas of focus at this time: (1) Indian Country, (2)Congress, and (3) Churches.  Outreach in Indian countryhas included presentations at regional tribal organiza-tion meetings, as well as working with Indian Countrymedia whenever available.  To date, 19 resolutions havebeen passed by tribes and tribal organizations to supportthe project.  These can be seen on the project website athttp://www.boardingschoolhealing.org/statements-res-olutions.  TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 32Recent developments mark a historical shift in Indian
education law and policy by taking the first step inaccomplishing “educational tribal sovereignty.”  NARF,other Indian organizations and tribes have been advo-cating for systemic changes to American Indian/AlaskaNative (AI/AN) education.  Changes that would increaseinvolvement of tribal governments, educators, parents,and elders in what AI/AN students are taught, how theyare taught, who teaches them, and where they learn.Tribal control of these core issues can amount to educa-tional tribal sovereignty.  NARF represents the TribalEducation Departments National Assembly (TEDNA), anational advocacy organization for tribal educationdepartments and agencies (TEDs/TEAs) that works tostrengthen the legal rights of tribes to control the formaleducation of tribal members.  NARF started TEDNA in2003 with a group of tribal education department direc-tors from Indian tribes across the country.
After over 20 years of work, NARF and TEDNA secured
the first source of direct federal funding – $ 2 million –for tribal education departments (“TEDs”) in the Labor,Health, and Human Services Fiscal Year 2012 and 2015Appropriations Bills to be distributed by the U.S.Department of Education via a competitive grantprocess under a new State Tribal Education Partnerships("STEP") Program. The STEP program authorizes eligibleTEDs to participate in a pilot project that allows TEDs tooperate federal education programs in schools locatedon Indian reservations. The first round of STEP grantswere awarded to the Nez Perce Tribe, the ConfederatedTribes of the Umatilla Reservation, the Navajo Nation,and the Chickasaw Nation. All of these tribes have beenlong time members of TEDNA. The second round ofgrant awardees was announced late 2015 and they arethe Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes, theMuscogee (Creek) Nation, the Nez Perce Tribe, theCoeur d'Alene Tribe, and the Chickasaw Nation andCheyenne and Arapaho Consortium.  TEDNA has sinceworked to ensure continued funding for the STEP pro-gram and to make it a permanent program as part ofthe reauthorization by Congress of the Elementary andSecondary Education Act (ESEA).
In FY 2015, the U.S. Department of the Interior’s
Bureau of Indian Education announced its new directfunding for TEDs, the Sovereignty in Education (SIE)Program.  Six tribes have been awarded grants underthis pilot program.  An additional $1 million was setaside for another round of the SIE program for 2016.Additionally, for FY 2016, Congress has appropriated anadditional $2 million for TEDs to be distributed by
Bureau of Indian Education via a competitive grantunder its 1988 statutory authorization which has neverbefore been funded.  In November 2015, the followingTEDs were provided BIE TED funds:  Cohort 1: HopiTribe, Navajo Nation, Oglala Sioux Tribe, Pueblo ofAcoma, Rosebud Sioux Tribe, Santa Clara Indian Pueblo,and Standing Rock Sioux Tribe; and Cohort 2: Sault Ste.Marie Tribe of Chippewa Indians, Leech Lake Band ofOjibwe, Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, and theMuscogee (Creek) Nation. NARF and TEDNA haveworked diligently to get federal funding for TEDs andare proud to see that work come to fruition with thesenew funding opportunities.  
NARF and TEDNA continued to work with NCAI and
the National Indian Education Association (NIEA) onESEA amendments to provide for greater tribal self-deter-mination in the area of education.  The Every StudentSucceeds Act (ESSA) was signed by President Obama inDecember 2015, and was a re-authorization of theElementary and Secondary Education Act that was a longtime coming.  The bill rejects the overuse of standardizedtests and one-size-fits-all mandates on our schools,ensures that our education system will prepare everychild to graduate from high school ready for college andcareers, and provides more children access to high-qualitystate preschool programs.  With regard to IndianEducation, the ESSA moved Title VII to Title VI.  WithinTitle VI, the ESSA incorporated several suggestions fromTEDNA and our education partners on the formula grantfunds that typically go to Local Education Agencies.  TheESSA now provides that, should an LEA or Indian Tribenot apply for a grant an Indian Organization or IndianCommunity Based Organizations can now apply for andreceive a grant so long as certain conditions are met.The broad definition of organization will permit addi-tional grants to be awarded to ensure our students arereceiving services they may need.  
Importantly, a funding provision for TEDs was
retained and amended in the ESSA.  That provision pro-vides that grants may be given to a Tribe or TribalEducation Agency for a variety of broad goals to supportself-determination in education. Grants may now beused to promote self-determination in education;improve the academic achievement of Indian childrenand youth; and promote the coordination and collabo-ration of tribal educational agencies with state educa-tional agencies and local educational agencies to meetthe unique educational and culturally related academic
The Promotion of Human Rightsneeds of Indian students.  This broadening of potential
uses of grant funds will provide tribes and TEDs withflexibility to utilize those grants for many important pur-poses to advance tribal self-determination in education.
On behalf of a student who was affected by a change
in Haskell Indian Nations University’s admissions policy,NARF made a Freedom of Information Act request to theBureau of Indian Education (BIE) for the agency’s legaland decision-making documentation supporting its pol-icy.  The BIE responded and NARF has reviewed theresponse.  NARF met with BIE officials in January 2015.NARF followed-up that meeting with a written requestfor clarification regarding the policy and is awaiting aresponse from the BIE. 
Civil and Cultural Rights
From the embryonic days of our Nation, Indian tribes
have long struggled against the assimilationist policiesinstituted by the United States which sought to destroytribal cultures by removing Native American childrenfrom their tribes and families.  As an example, the fed-eral government failed to protect Indian children frommisguided and insensitive child welfare practices bystate human service agencies, which resulted in theunwarranted removal of Indian children from their fam-ilies and tribes and placement of those children in non-Indian homes. Statistical and anecdotal informationshow that Indian children who grow up in non-Indiansettings become spiritual and cultural orphans. They donot entirely fit into the culture in which they are raisedand yearn throughout their life for the family and tribalculture denied them as children. Many Native childrenraised in non-Native homes experience identity prob-lems, drug addiction, alcoholism, incarceration and,most disturbing, suicide.
In order to address these problems facing tribes as a
result of the loss of their children, the Indian ChildWelfare Act (ICWA) was enacted by Congress in 1978. Itestablished minimum federal jurisdictional, proceduraland substantive standards aimed to achieve the dualpurposes of protecting the right of an Indian child to livewith an Indian family and to stabilize and foster contin-ued tribal existence.  Since that time, there have beenmisinterpretations and, in some cases, outright refusal tofollow the intent of the law by state agencies and courts. 
State services frequently do not reach village Alaska.
Tribal courts must therefore handle most cases involving
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155
33the welfare of village children.  State recognition of
those tribal court proceedings is therefore critical toassure that proceedings which occur in tribal court arethen respected by other state agencies.  Otherwise,adoptive parents may not be able to participate in state-funded assistance programs, to secure substitute birthcertificates necessary to travel out of state, to enroll chil-dren in school, or to secure medical care.  
In January 2015, the BIA published its new revisions to
the Guidelines for State Courts and Agencies in IndianChild Custody Proceedings.  The new Guidelines repre-sent major progress in addressing many of the problem-atic areas which have arisen since ICWA was enacted in1978 – such as the Existing Indian Family exception,which the Guidelines expressly repudiate.  In February2015, the BIA announced it intended to take its reformseven further by proposing, for the first time ever, topromulgate binding federal regulations governing theimplementation of ICWA.  These reforms, however, havedrawn the ire of ICWA opponents nationwide.  
The first response from ICWA opponents came in May
2015, when the National Council for Adoption (NCA)filed a suit against the BIA in federal district court for theEastern District of Virginia.  The case, National Council for
Adoption v. Jewell, claims that the BIA exceeded its
authority in publishing the updated 2015 Guidelines;that the Guidelines themselves violate the Constitutionalrights of Indian children and parents, and that provi-sions of ICWA itself are unconstitutional under the TenthAmendment.  Days after the case was filed, NARF beganworking with other attorneys from the National IndianChild Welfare Association (NICWA), the NationalCongress of American Indians (NCAI), and theAssociation of American Indian Affairs (AAIA) to developa response.  Together, this informal working group hasworked to develop a litigation defense strategy.  The BIAfiled a motion to transfer venue in July 2015, which thecourt denied.  Plaintiffs then filed for summary judg-ment, which the BIA opposed, and filed a motion to dis-miss for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction and for judg-ment on the pleadings.   NARF representing NICWA,NCAI, and AAIA, filed an amicus brief in support of theBIA in September 2015.  In September 2015, the courtdenied Plaintiff’s motion for summary judgment on thegrounds that (1) Plaintiffs lacked standing to challengethe Guidelines, (2) the Guidelines are not a “final agencyaction” within the meaning of the APA because they donot create legal rights and obligations, and (3) theGuidelines are non-binding interpretive rules not subjectTTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 34to the Administrative Procedures Act’s notice-and-com-
ment procedures.  The court later issued a full order dis-missing the case in its entirety.  In addition to the pointsraised in its order denying Plaintiff’s motion for summa-ry judgment, the Court held:  (1) that ICWA is a lawrationally related to American Indians as a political classand therefore did not offend due process, and (2) thatthe Plaintiff foster parents did not have a cognizableconstitutionally-protected right to raise the Native fosterchildren in their care.  With the Court’s order on dis-missal, the case is formally closed at the district courtlevel.  An appeal of the decision is unlikely.     
In Minnesota, leading members of the Academy of
Adoption Attorneys filed a constitutional challenge instate court to the Minnesota Indian Family PreservationAct.  The case, Doe v. Jesson , makes many of the same
constitutional challenges to the MIFPA as the plaintiffsmake in National Council for Adoption v. Jewell; specifical-
ly, that the MIFPA violates the rights of Indian childrenand parents by requiring them to notify the tribe of the
adoptive proceeding and by allowing a tribe to inter-vene in the case.  Plaintiffs filed for a preliminary injunc-tion and requested expedited consideration of the case.NARF immediately reached out to the attorneys for theTribe involved, the Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe, and pro-vided research and technical assistance in forming aresponse.  The Tribe was ultimately successful in defeat-ing the preliminary injunction, with the court findingthe plaintiffs would suffer no irreparable harm by havingto notify the Tribe on the adoptive proceeding in statecourt.  The Tribe and the State have since filed separatemotions to dismiss the case.  Because many states haveenacted similar state-ICWAs like Minnesota’s MIFPA,NARF is working in conjunction with the attorneys fromthe Minnesota based firm BlueDog, Paulson & Small,P.L.L.P. in developing an amicus strategy on behalf ofMinnesota’s other tribal governments.  The court heardoral arguments on the motions to dismiss in early August2015.  NARF is awaiting a decision from the bench.The Promotion of Human Rights
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155 35Finally, in July 2015, the Goldwater Institute—a con-
servative think tank located in Phoenix, Arizona—filed alawsuit challenging the constitutionality of ICWA and therevised Guidelines.  The suit, filed in Arizona federal dis-trict court as A.D. v. Washburn, seeks declaratory and
injunctive relief and specifically targets the transfer, activeefforts, burdens of proof for removal and termination ofparental rights, and placement preferences provisions ofthe ICWA, as well as corresponding sections in theGuidelines.  The complaint requests that the courtdeclare these provisions of ICWA, and the correspondingGuidelines, unconstitutional as beyond the authority ofCongress and the Department of the Interior. It furtherrequests that the court enjoin the defendants from ensur-ing enforcement of the provisions.  NARF, together withNICWA, NCAI, and others immediately began formulat-ing a media and legal response to the suit.  NARF hasbeen coordinating with the two tribes with member chil-dren in the case—the Navajo Nation and the Gila RiverIndian Community.  NARF also continues to coordinatewith NICWA, NCAI, and AAIA and filed an amicus brief inthe case on behalf of the organizations. Oral argumenton the motions to dismiss was held in mid-December2015.  In addition to the federal cases listed above,NARF’s ICWA Defense team is monitoring importantcases in Michigan and Oklahoma.
Voting Rights
In July 2013, NARF and co-counsel Morgan, Lewis &
Bockius LLP and Armstrong Teasdale LLP, acting onbehalf of two tribal councils and two Alaska Native vot-ers, filed suit in federal court charging state electionsofficials with ongoing violations of the federal VotingRights Act (VRA) and the United States Constitution.Toyukuk v. Treadwell claimed state officials failed to pro-
vide oral language assistance to citizens whose first lan-guage is Yup’ik, the primary language of many AlaskaNatives in the Dillingham and Wade Hampton regions.Trial was held in June and July 2014 and the court ren-dered an oral decision in September 2014.  The Courtheld that the Defendants had in fact violated Section203 of the VRA in all the census areas at issue.  The Courtfurther found that the Defendants had improperly reliedon what they called “outreach workers” in villages totranslate the entire Official Election Pamphlet them-selves, even though these workers had never been askedto do so and there was no evidence showing they coulddo this.  The Court found that the end result was anabsence of all pre-election information such as candi-date statements, ballot measures, pro and con state-ments for ballot measures and all other information
available to English speaking voters before an election.After briefing, the Court ordered broad remedial reliefincluding the written and audio translation of all pre-election materials distributed in English, posting of bilin-gual translators at all polling places, and also orderedDefendants to report back to the Court on their progressafter the November 2014 election, which was submittedshortly before Christmas 2014.
In 2015, NARF and the plaintiffs spent several months
in an extended negotiation with the State of Alaska tosettle the case.  In September 2015, the Court approveda settlement agreement with the Defendants that pro-vides broad relief in the form of a comprehensive lan-guage assistance program, including the appointmentof federal observers through the 2020 elections, transla-tion of all pre-election information into the Yup’ik andGwich’in languages, the creation of a new state-levelposition specifically devoted to language assistance, andcourt oversight and reporting through 2020.
In 2013, the U. S. Supreme Court in the Shelby County
case invalidated Section 4 of the Voting Rights Act whichrequired preclearance by the U.S. Justice Department ofchanges in state voting laws in certain states with histo-ries of discrimination.  On behalf of Bristol Bay NativeCorporation and the Alaska Federation of Natives, NARFhas been working on a Congressional amendment tothe Voting Rights Act that would protect Alaska Nativesand American Indians from the kinds of voting discrimi-nation they have faced across the country since 2013.Senator Mark Begich introduced the NatiVRA (S.2399)in an attempt to remedy some of the longstandingissues such as the lack of language assistance, lack ofpolling places, and lack of early voting, but it did notpass before expiration of the 2013-2014 congressionalterm.  Despite significant efforts, a large coalition of civilrights groups were unable to get a broader “Shelby Fix”through Congress either.  
In June 2015, Senator Leahy and approximately 30
co-sponsors introduced the Voting Rights AdvancementAct, a broad-based bill that prevents specific practiceswherever they may occur in the country.  That bill alsoincludes a new Section 2 called “Voting on Indian lands”that mandates equal access to early voting, absenteevoting and in-person polling locations on all Indianlands, which is very broadly defined in the bill.  NARFhelped author these sections in response to commentsand complaints from Indian reservations and Native vil-36lages.  Senator Murkowski (AK) signed on as the first
Republican co-sponsor in September 2015.  Additionally,in August 2015, Senator Tester introduced S 1912, a voting bill specifically directed at election problems inIndian Country.  NARF submitted some comments andsuggested changes to the bill to ensure that while Tribeshave an opportunity to designate polling locations, statesshould not be permitted to shift their expenses and bur-dens for these matters onto the Tribes.
NARF is preparing a suit on behalf of seven Native
Americans from North Dakota under the Voting RightsAct and the U.S. and North Dakota Constitutions chal-lenging North Dakota’s recently enacted voter ID law onthe grounds it disproportionately burdens NativeAmericans and denies qualified voters the right to vote.The plaintiffs are challenging North Dakota House Bills1332 and 1333, which require North Dakota voters topresent one of only four qualifying IDs with a currentresidential address printed on it in order to vote. Beforeenactment of these laws, North Dakota required a pollclerk to request an ID, but a voter without one could stillvote if the clerk vouched for their qualifications or thevoter signed an affidavit of identity. While other statesalso have voter ID requirements, North Dakota is theonly state without a fail-safe provision, such as provi-sional balloting that allows a voter to produce their IDwithin a few days of the election or an affidavit of iden-tity. Additionally, North Dakota’s list of acceptable IDs ismuch more limited than other states, which allow U.S.passports and military IDs to be used.    
Many Native Americans living on Indian reservations in
North Dakota do not have qualifying IDs, such as driver'slicenses or state ID cards containing a residential address.Thus, in both the primary and general election in 2014,many qualified North Dakota Native American voterswere disenfranchised because their IDs did not list theirresidential address.  The lawsuit alleges that NorthDakota’s new voter ID requirements arbitrarily and unnec-essarily limit the right to vote and disproportionately burden Native American voters in North Dakota. The bur-dens are substantial for a number of Native Americanswho cannot afford to drive to the nearest driver’s licensesite (“DMV”). There are no DMV locations on any Indianreservations in North Dakota, and for many NativeAmericans, a DMV location may be over 60 miles away.Many Native Americans live below the poverty line, anddo not have dependable access to transportation or cannot afford travel to a distant DMV location.In January 2015, NARF proposed an ambitious new
project: gathering voting rights advocates, lawyers,experts, and tribal advocates into one room to discusscurrent problems with voting in Indian Country andbegin to develop solutions to these problems.  Themeeting was held in May 2015 in Washington, DC.  Itwas convened in part because the 2016 election cyclepromises to be an unusually important one at thenational, state and local levels. The national electionsinclude the selection of a new President, and 34 Senateseats.  Six of these Senate seats are in states with signif-icant (and potentially determinative) AmericanIndian/Alaska Native (AIAN) populations: Alaska,Arizona, California, North Dakota, Oklahoma, and SouthDakota. There are also eleven gubernatorial races in2016, three of which are in states where the Native votemay play a significant role (North Dakota, Montana andWashington). 
In addition, in the wake of the U.S. Supreme Court’s
decision in Shelby County, numerous state legislatureshave passed new election laws that impose significantbarriers to AIAN voters. Currently, individuals and organ-izations working on AIAN voting rights issues do so inde-pendent of one another, with no coordinated strategy inplace to address voting rights issues in Indian Country.To date, this work has been generally (but not exclu-sively) reactive – in response to an immediate threat –rather than proactive or planned in advance of a specif-ic election. That is what this project hopes to change. 
A meeting was conceived and planned specifically to
address the shifting and increasingly complex issues sur-rounding AIAN voting. The specific goals of the meetingwere: (1) Prepare pre-session reports/memos (by partic-ipants) describing history of work on voting rights issuesin Indian country, effectiveness of strategies employed,and current status of issues (e.g., resolution by settle-ment or consent decree, ongoing litigation); (2) Bringtogether in one room lawyers, advocates, and grassrootsorganizers involved in litigating voting rights cases inIndian Country and others who have information toshare about current problems in Indian Country; (3)Conduct a series of work sessions in which the partici-pants discuss common issues, brainstorm approaches tothese challenges, and generate a strategy and litigationplan to address the highest priority voting rights issuesin Indian Country; (4) Allocate or assign issues to specificpeople or organizations and form collaborative partner-ships to execute our strategy and litigation plan; and (5)
The Promotion of Human Rights
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD37Have an organized and prepared litigation strategy for
the 2016 election cycle.  With the completion of this ini-tial meeting, the participants have developed an ongo-ing project called the Native American Voting RightsCoalition (NAVRC).  It meets on a monthly basis, as doits subgroups on redistricting, litigation, capacity build-ing and data gathering.  The NAVRC is actively workingon its 2016 work as well as fundraising for the groupitself.  
International Recognition of Indigenous Peoples
The development of international laws and standards
to protect the rights of indigenous peoples greatly ben-efits Native American peoples.  NARF and the NationalCongress of American Indians (NCAI) entered into anattorney-client relationship over a decade ago for thepurpose of working in the international arena to protectindigenous rights.  
In September 2007, the United Nations General
Assembly overwhelmingly adopted the Declaration onthe Rights of Indigenous Peoples (U.N. DRIP). The votewas 143 in favor, 4 opposed, and 11 abstaining. Thevotes in opposition were Canada, Australia, NewZealand, and the United States. This historic vote cameafter 30 years of worldwide indigenous efforts.  NARFhas represented the National Congress of AmericanIndians (NCAI) in this matter since 1999.  The U.N. DRIPrecognizes that indigenous peoples have important col-lective human rights in a multitude of areas, includingself determination, spirituality, and lands, territories andnatural resources. The U.N. DRIP sets out minimumstandards for the treatment of indigenous peoples andcan serve as the basis for the development of customaryinternational law.
In 2009 Australia and New Zealand reversed their
positions and now support the U.N. DRIP.  Canadaendorsed the U.N. DRIP in November 2010 and inDecember 2010, President Obama made the historicannouncement that the U.S. was reversing its negativevote and now endorses the U.N. DRIP.
In March 2015, NARF and NCAI participated in several
days of meetings with an ad hoc group of indigenous rep-resentatives in Geneva, Switzerland to focus on the imple-mentation of Outcome Document paragraphs 28 and 33,which address participation of indigenous peoples at theUnited Nations, and on implementation of the U.N. DRIP.The group met with UN mechanism representatives, and
with a number of states.  Based on those meetings, thegroup discussed general strategy and shared informationon upcoming UN meetings with a common goal of mov-ing those important initiatives forward.  
NARF attended the Expert Mechanism on the Rights
of Indigenous Peoples in Geneva in July 2015, to partic-ipate in discussions about revising the mandate of thatmechanism to advance and implement compliance withthe U.N. DRIP by member states.  NARF, on behalf ofNCAI, gave an oral statement before the Human RightsCouncil’s 30th Session in Geneva, urging the Council toadopt a resolution expanding and strengthening theExpert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,and also cosponsored oral and written statements pre-sented by the Indian Law Resource Center at theSeptember 2015 Human Rights Council session on pro-tecting and advancing the rights of indigenous women.  
NARF facilitated a panel discussion on international
indigenous advocacy, and updates on the implementa-tion of the U.N. DRIP, the participation of indigenousgovernments at the United Nations, and the OAS draftdeclaration negotiations, during a break-out session atNCAI’s annual conference in October 2015.  
The adoption of the U.N. DRIP has impacted the
Organization of American States (OAS) process.  NARFalso represents NCAI in this process.  In November 2007it was agreed that the U.N. DRIP would be used as thefoundation for an OAS document, in that all the termsof the OAS document would be consistent with, or morefavorable to, Indigenous rights than the U.N. DRIP.  Itwas further agreed that the terms of the OAS declarationwould be agreed upon through a consensus based deci-sion making process which includes Indigenous repre-sentatives. The process was finally rejuvenated with athree day negotiation session held in February 2015, fol-lowed by sessions in March, April and May 2015.  Thehope was to finish the negotiations so the Declarationcould be submitted to the General Assembly forapproval in 2015, but negotiations were not completed.It remains to be seen if the work will be carried on in2016 or if political will is lacking. 
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155Contained within the unique trust relationship
between the United States and Indian nations is theinherent duty for all levels of government to recognizeand responsibly enforce the many laws and regulationsapplicable to Indian peoples and the trust duties towhich those give rise.  Because such laws impact virtual-ly every aspect of tribal life, NARF maintains its involve-ment in the legal matters pertaining to accountability of
governments to Native Americans. 
In Pembina Chippewa v. U.S. , NARF represents the
Turtle Mountain Chippewa, Chippewa Cree, White EarthBand of Minnesota Chippewa, and Little Shell ChippewaTribes in this case against the federal government formisaccounting and mismanagement of their tribal trustfund, the Pembina Judgment Fund (PJF), since theinception of the fund in 1964. In 2006 the Tribes defeat-ed the United States' motion to have the case dismissed.Since August 2007, the parties have been trying toresolve the Tribes' claims primarily through alternativedispute resolution proceedings before a SettlementJudge of the Court of Federal Claims. In August 2009,the parties reached agreement at least for settlementnegotiations purposes on the population of "baseline"(non-investment) transactions in the PJF. In July 2015the parties reached agreement on a monetary amountfor a potential settlement of the Plaintiffs’ claims in thiscase. Since that time the parties have been discussingnumerous non-monetary components of a potential set-tlement, and preparing various documents.
In Nez Perce v. Jewell, NARF represented forty plaintiffs:
the Nez Perce Tribe; the Mescalero Apache Tribe; the TuleRiver Indian Tribe; the Hualapai Tribe; the Klamath Tribes;the Yurok Tribe; the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma; theSac and Fox Nation; the Santee Sioux Tribe of Nebraska;the Tlingit and Haida Indian Tribes of Alaska; AleutCommunity of St. Paul Island; Bad River Band of LakeSuperior Chippewa Indians; Bois Forte Band ofChippewa; Cachil Dehe Band of Wintun Indians ofColusa Rancheria; Confederated Salish & KootenaiTribes; Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians; GrandTraverse Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians; KaibabPaiute Tribe; Kenaitze Indian Tribe; Kickapoo Tribe inKansas; Lac Courte Oreilles Band of Ojibwe; Lac DuFlambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa; Leech LakeBand of Ojibwe; Minnesota Chippewa Tribe; NativeVillage of Atka; Nooksack Indian Tribe; Prairie IslandIndian Community; Pueblo of Zia; Qawalangin Tribe;Rincon Luiseno Band of Indians; Samish Indian Nation;
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155
39San Luis Rey Indian Water Authority; Sault Ste. Marie
Tribe of Chippewa; Shoalwater Bay Tribe; SkokomishTribe; Spirit Lake Dakotah Nation; Spokane Tribe;Summit Lake Paiute Tribe; Tulalip Tribes; and, UteMountain Ute Tribe, in this action filed in the federal dis-trict court for the District of Columbia in December 2006seeking full and accurate accountings of their trust funds.Such accountings never have been provided by the fed-eral government which is the trustee for the funds.
To date, 38 of NARF’s client Tribes in this case have
reached settlement agreements or other resolution oftheir claims with the United States.  The settlementagreements have been filed in, and approved by, theCourt.  Per the settlement agreements, once the Tribeshave received their settlement payments their claims aredismissed with prejudice.  NARF continues to representits remaining client Tribes in this case in their on-goingsettlement negotiations.
In Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate v. Jewell, NARF represents
10 tribes - Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate; Quinault IndianNation; White Earth Chippewa Nation; OklahomaKickapoo Tribe; Comanche Nation; Penobscot IndianNation; Pueblo of Acoma; Seminole Tribe of Florida;Southern Ute Indian Tribe; and Confederated Tribes ofthe Umatilla Indian Reservation – in this case filed inApril 2013 in the federal district court for the District of“The medicine wheel is the symbol 
we use to express and represent themeaning of life, and meaning pro-vides us with purpose and under-standing.  The symbol of the circleholds a special place of importancein our belief system.  There is nohierarchy in a circle, it’s aboutequality.”  Chi-Ma'iingan (Larry Stillday)The Accountability of Governments40Columbia seeking historical accountings of the Tribes'
trust accounts, funds, and resources.  In November2013 the government filed a Motion to Dismiss the casefor lack of jurisdiction.  The Tribes’ opposed dismissal.The hearing on the Motion to Dismiss was held in July2015 and in September 2015 the Court denied the gov-ernment’s Motion to Dismiss.  In October 2015, the par-ties jointly requested the Court to stay further active lit-igation in this case while the parties engage in settle-ment negotiations of the Tribes’ trust accounting andtrust fund and asset mismanagement claims at the polit-ical level, and the Court approved the stay.  The partieshave since proceeded with their settlement negotia-tions.
In Muscogee Creek Nation v. Jewell, the Muscogee
Creek Nation retained NARF to represent it in its pend-ing action in the federal district court for the District ofColumbia for historical accounting of its trust funds andassets.  NARF and experts retained by NARF have beenreviewing the Nation’s trust account data provided bythe government in the context of political negotiated
settlements by the Obama Administration, and haveassisted the Nation in making an offer of settlement tothe government.  In September 2015 the partiesreached agreement on a settlement in principle of theTribe’s claims in this case and are proceeding to imple-ment the agreement.
In April of 2015 in Intertribal Council of Arizona v.
United States, NARF filed on behalf of the Intertribal
Council of Arizona (ITCA) in a breach of trust caseagainst the United States in the U.S. Court of FederalClaims seeking $50 million in damages for mismanage-ment of the Arizona Intertribal Trust Fund (AITF).  TheAITF was established by Congress in 1988 to compen-sate Arizona tribes for the closure of the Phoenix IndianSchool which was an off-reservation boarding schooloperated by the Bureau of Indian Affairs since 1891.  Theschool’s closure allowed the Department of the Interiorto exchange the land on which the school had beenlocated for privately owned lands in Florida that would
The Accountability of Governments
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDAANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155 41become part of a national wildlife refuge.  The Phoenix
lands were more valuable than the Florida lands andCongress approved the land exchange only if the differ-ence in value - $35 million – went to the AITF and a trustfund for the Navajo Nation.  The private owner of theFlorida lands has paid some, but not all, of the $35 mil-lion, and has given the United States notice that he willno longer make the AITF or Navajo Nation trust fundpayments.  The lawsuit seeks to hold the United Statesliable for the remaining payments into the AITF.  In July2015, the United States filed a Motion to Dismiss thiscase, which ITCA opposed in October 2015.  At a statusconference in December 2015, the Court indicated thatit likely would be scheduling oral argument on theMotion to Dismiss sometime in early 2016.
NARF has been retained to seek repeal of the Klamath
Tribe Distribution of Judgment Fund Act which wasadopted as part of the legislation that terminated theTribes’ government-to-government relationship in1954.  That relationship was restored in 1986, but theremnant legislation contained in section 565 was not
repealed. The Distribution Act requires distribution ofjudgments from the United States Treasury to descen-dants of those who appear on the final roll compiledpursuant to the Termination Act. That would include dis-tribution of tribal funds to a significant number of non-Indians and individuals who are not enrolled membersof the Tribes. Repeal would result in funds deposited inthe Treasury from judgments against the United Statesbeing distributed pursuant the Distribution of JudgmentFunds Act for all Tribes.  Discussions with congressionalstaff on this matter are ongoing.
The coordinated development of Indian law and edu-
cating the public about Indian rights, laws and issues isessential for the continued protection of Indian rights.This primarily involves establishing favorable courtprecedents, distributing information and law materials,encouraging and fostering Indian legal education, andforming alliances with Indian law practitioners and otherIndian organizations. NARF has three ongoing projectswhich are aimed at achieving this goal: the IndigenousPeacemaking Initiative; the National Indian Law Library;and the Indian Law Support Center.
Indigenous Peacemaking Initiative 
The mission of the Indigenous Peacemaking Initiative
(IPI) is to promote and support Native peoples in restor-ing sustainable peacemaking practices.  This project pro-vides NARF with an opportunity to support traditionalpeacemaking and community building practices as anextension of Indian law and sovereign rights.  The proj-ect is guided by an Advisory Committee consisting oftraditional peacemaking experts and practitioners.Peacemaking is a community-directed process to devel-op consensus on a conflict resolution plan that address-es the concerns of all interested parties. The peacemak-ing process uses traditional rituals such as the group cir-cle, and Clan structures, to involve the parties to a con-flict, their supporters, elders and interested communitymembers. Within the circle, people can speak from theheart in a shared search for understanding of the con-flict, and together identify the steps necessary to assistin healing all affected parties and to prevent futureoccurrences and conflicts.
The IPI program helped facilitate the planning of a
two-site introductory peacemaking training for OglalaSioux Tribe community members, attended a meetingand provided an expert plenary speaker at a Universityof Washington program that trains judges from stateand tribal courts.   IPI also continued discussions with ajudge from a state court in Southern California who isinterested in implementing peacemaking to help with adependency and delinquency docket that includes ahigh number of Native children.
The collaborative efforts with the National American
Indian Court Judges Association and the Columbia andNew Mexico Schools of Law continue. The collaboratorsrecently provided a training workshop in St. Paul,The Development of Indian Law
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155 43Minnesota, in conjunction Tekamuk Inc.  (the training
business wholly owned and operated by the MesaGrande Band of Mission Indians). The St. Paul trainingwas attended primarily by members of the variousMinnesota Chippewa Tribes working in the Twin Cities orat their home reservations, as well as participants fromtribes in Arizona, Idaho, South Dakota, and Michigan.  “When you go out there to represent
Indian people, you see your family– your brothers, your sisters, yournephews, your mother and father,your grandparents.  You realize thedevastating impact that society canhave on people because they are adifferent culture, because their skinis a different color.  Being Indian atNARF brings a focus—a fire—adetermination to do the very best.You’re going to be as good a lawyeras any non-Indian lawyer who everwalked into a court-room.  Thisorganization is like a warrior socie-ty.  You put your life on the line—be the best you can be—always beprepared.  You are fighting for thesurvival of your people.”  YvonneKnight (NARF attorney-retired)44 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDThe Development of Indian Law
The collaborative group added the Chief Justice from
the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians and a MichiganState Court judge to the faculty, and provided an inno-vative three-day training in peacemaking and integrat-ing culture, sponsored by the Pokagon Band ofPottawatomi Tribal Court in Dowagiac, Michigan, asrequested by that Tribe’s Court. 
NARF’s National Indian Law Library staff have devel-
oped a web page and continue integrating that pagewith the electronic versions of resources onPeacemaking in the NILL catalog.  The webpage willserve as a basis for outreach and provide easy access toresources gathered for the project.  The project also con-tinues to grow and strengthen its networks, as part ofraising awareness and also recruiting additional expertresources.  The project has also been working closelywith Columbia Law School to complement each other’s
work, and the Colorado University Indian Law Clinic hasplaced an intern to help in development and analysis ofthe catalog of resources for the project.  
The National Indian Law Library 
The National Indian Law Library (NILL) is the only law
library in the United States devoted to Indian law. Thelibrary serves both NARF and members of the public.Since it was started as a NARF project in 1972, NILL hascollected nearly 9,000 resource materials that relate tofederal Indian and tribal law. The Library’s holdingsinclude the largest collection of tribal codes, ordinancesand constitutions; legal pleadings from major Indiancases; and often hard to find reports and historical legalinformation. In addition to making its catalog and
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155 45extensive collection available to the public, NILL pro-
vides reference and research assistance relating to Indianlaw and tribal law and its professional staff answers over2,000 questions each year. In addition, the Library hascreated and maintains a huge web site that providesaccess to thousands of full-text sources to help theresearcher.  NARF’s website has recorded over 200,000visits each year.  See www.narf/org/nill/index.htm. 
The Access to Tribal Law Project continues to be an
invaluable resource for researchers and practitioners intribal law.  In the last fiscal year, we received updates to71 Constitutions or Codes from 39 tribes.  NILL hasdeveloped good relationships with a number of tribeswho regularly send updates to their laws as changes aremade and we are working to develop relationships withothers who have expressed interest.  NILL is also work-ing to move tribal law pages from our old tribal lawindex to our new Tribal Law Gateway.  NILL has receivedseveral enthusiastic compliments on the new platform,with researchers saying it is helpful and easy to navigate.  
The website for the Indigenous Peacemaking Initiative
has been launched as NILL worked closely with IPI attor-neys, the IPI Advisory Committee and other NARF staffmembers to create the new IPI website, which is availableat http://narf.org/peacemaking. The website providesresources to help visitors learn about peacemaking as wellas tools to help practitioners implement peacemaking intheir community.  Many of the resources highlighted areavailable online and NILL has obtained permission to postsome resources that were not already available online.
In providing access to law review articles on Indian
law, each week when the Indian Law Bulletin is pub-lished, NILL indexes the law review articles from the bul-letin and puts them in our online catalog. By includinga table of contents and subject headings for each article,we have created a searchable database of articles onIndian law for our patrons.  Whenever an article is avail-able for free online, we add a link, making it easy forresearchers to access the article quickly.  In the event anarticle is not available online, patrons can contact thelibrary to request a copy of the article.  Because NILL hasbeen indexing articles for over 10 years, our online cat-alog is a useful place to start research on Indian law forattorneys and academics alike.
In providing for a Tribal Nation Pronunciation Guide,
NILL is actively seeking funds as well as volunteersand/or interns to help develop and publish an audio
index of tribal nations.  We believe this unique guide willbe a valuable resource for those who need to communi-cate with tribes. The guide will allow people to addressa tribe in a respectful manner.  This project wouldinvolve developing and implementing a plan to: 1) findauthoritative pronunciations for each Indian nation’sname; 2) lease/purchase proper recording equipment/technology to capture the correct pronunciation of eachIndian nation’s name for publication on the Internet;and 3) capture and publish the recorded names on theNational Indian Law Library website.  
Indian Law Support Center
NARF continues to perform Indian Law Support
Center duties by sending regular electronic mail outsnationwide to the 25 Indian Legal Services (ILS) pro-grams, hosting a national listserv, handling requests forassistance, and working with ILS programs to secure amore stable funding base from Congress.  The IndianTribal Justice and Legal Assistance Act of 2000 authoriz-es the U.S. Department of Justice to provide supple-mental funding to Indian legal services programs fortheir representation of Indian people and Tribes whichfall below federal poverty guidelines.  After funding in2003, 2004, and 2005, funding in 2006 - 2009 wasunsuccessful.  However, funding has been received inFYs 2010-2015 and made available to NARF for the ILSprograms through the Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA)in the Department of Justice.  
Other Activities
In addition to its major projects, NARF continued its
participation in numerous conferences and meetings ofIndian and non-Indian organizations in order to share itsknowledge and expertise in Indian law.  During the pastfiscal year, NARF attorneys and staff served in formal orinformal speaking and leadership capacities at numer-ous Indian and Indian-related conferences and meetingssuch as the National Congress of American IndiansExecutive Council, Midyear and Annual Conventionsand the Federal Bar Association’s Indian LawConference.  NARF remains firmly committed to contin-uing its effort to share the legal expertise which it pos-sesses with these groups and individuals working in sup-port of Indian rights and to foster the recognition ofIndian rights in mainstream society.FY 2015 Financial Report
Based on our audited financial statements for the 
fiscal year ending September 30, 2015, the NativeAmerican Rights Fund reports unrestricted revenues of$12,381,359 against total expenditures of $10,013,022.Total revenue and net assets at the end of the year cameto $12,934,588 and $18,639,906, respectively.  Due topresentation requirements of the audited financial state-ments in terms of recognizing the timing of certain rev-enues and expenses, they do not reflect the fact thatbased on NARF’s internal reporting, revenue exceededexpenses and other cash outlays resulting in an increaseof $2,240,041 to NARF’s reserve fund.  When comparedto fiscal year 2014: the increase in Public Contributionsis mostly due to receiving approximately $200,000 morein bequests (this area can vary widely from one year tothe next).  The final contributions from our Nez Perce v.
Salazar Tribal clients (who received settlement awardsfrom the federal government in fiscal year 2012) were
received in fiscal year 2014.  Federal Awards relate to ourBureau of Justice Assistance (BJA) contracts (the majorityof which is also included in expenses since it is paid outto sub recipients) and, although we continue to beawarded new contracts, the amounts vary from year toyear.  We continue to receive new Foundation Grantsthat are restricted to our work in Alaska.  The increase inLegal Fees is mostly due to a large settlement related toone of our cases.  Along with the overall investment mar-kets, NARF’s investments took a hit near the end of thefiscal year.
Unrestricted Revenue and Expense comparisons
between fiscal year 2015 and fiscal year 2014 are shown below.
46 TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDPublic Contributions
Tribal Contributions
Federal Awards 
Foundation Grants
Return on Investments
Other
TOTALS      $  1,701,434
       1,004,250
        1,330,607        1,707,184
    7,065,520
          (443,858)
            16,222
  $  12,381,359          13.7%
      8.1%
 10.8% 13.8% 57.1%
 -3.6%
 0.1%
    100%      $ 1,417,397
      3,355,204      1,467,829      1,410,689
      1, 306,465
          609,308
            28,666
   $  9,595,558          14.8%
   35.0%   15.3%   14.7%   13.6%     6.3%     0.3%    100%dollars percents
2015
dollars percents2014
Legal Fees
dollars percents2015
dollars percents2014
Litigation and Client Services
National Indian Law Library     Total Program Services
Management and GeneralFund Raising     Total Support Services
                         TOTALS                 $ 7,160,564
           358,675
        7,519,239
           789,122
        1,704,661
        2,493,783
   $ 10,013,022   71.5%
   3.6%
 75.1%
 7.9%
 17.0%
  24.9%
 100%         75.2%
     3.9%
   79.1%
 8.5%
 12.4%
 20.9%
 100%             $ 7,598,844
          389,780
       7,988,624
          860,765
       1,249,301
       2,110,066
  $ 10,098,690UNRESTRICTED SUPPORT AND REVENUE COMPARISON
EXPENSE COMPARISON
Note: This summary of financial information has been extracted from NARF’s audited financial statements which received an
unmodified opinion by the accounting firm of BKD, LLP.  Complete audited financials are available, upon request, through ourBoulder office or at www.narf.org.NARF Acknowledgment of Contributions: Fiscal Year 2015
We thank each and every one of our supporters
for their commitment to the goals of NARF.  NARF’ssuccess could not have been achieved without thegenerosity of our many donors throughout thenation. NARF receives contributions from founda-tions, corporations, tribes and Native organizations,
bequests and trusts, benefactors, private donations,and in-kind contributions.  We gratefully acknowl-edge these gifts received for fiscal year 2015(October 1, 2014 through September 30, 2015).
Tribes and Native
Organizations
Alatna Village
Council
Chickasaw NationConfederated Tribes
of Siletz Indians 
Cow Creek Band of
Umpqua Tribe ofIndians
Keweenaw Bay
Indian Community
Lac Du Flambeau
Band of Lake SuperiorChippewa Indians
Mohegan Indian
Tribe of Connecticut
Muckleshoot Indian
Tribe
National Indian
Gaming Association
Nome Eskimo
Community
Pechanga Band of
Luiseno MissionIndians
Sac and Fox Nation
of Oklahoma
San Manuel Band of
Mission Indians
San Pasqual Band of
Diegueno MissionIndians
Seminole Tribe of
Florida
Seven Cedars
Casino/JamestownS'Klallam
Tanana Chiefs
ConferenceTanana Native Council
Twenty-Nine Palms
Band of MissionIndians
Wildhorse
Foundation/Umatilla 
Yavapai-Prescott
Indian Tribe
Yocha Dehe Wintun
Nation
Foundations,
Corporations andLaw Firms
Alaska Conservation
Foundation 
Arches Foundation Aria FoundationAgua Fund Inc.Bay and Paul
Foundations 
Biedenharn
Foundation
Calvert FoundationCasey Family ProgramsCharles P. & Mary E.
Belgarde Foundation
Comcast Foundation Davis Graham &
Stubbs LLP 
Dowl, LLCFerriday FundFord Foundation Foundation to
Promote OpenSociety 
Edward & Verna
Gerbic FamilyFoundationGordon and Betty
Moore Foundation
Impact Fund Inge Foundation Keluche-Fuller
Foundation, Inc.
Lannan Foundation MALDEF Natural Resources
ConsultingEngineers, Inc.
NEO Philanthropy Northwest Area
Foundation
Oak Foundation Oceans 5 RiverStyx
Foundation
Stetson Engineers,
Inc.
Tiffany & Company
Foundation
Tilden McCoy +
Dilweg LLP
True North
Foundation 
Tzo'-Nah FundCorporate
Matching Gifts –
Corporations nation-
wide make matchinggifts to NARF on behalfof their employees.Please check with yourhuman resourcesdepartment to partici-pate in this program.
American Express
Gift Matching GiftProgram
Apple Matching
Gifts Program
Boettcher
Foundation
Edison InternationalGE FoundationHIGHMARK
Matching GiftCompany
IBM CorporationJP Morgan Chase
Foundation
Microsoft
Corporation
PEW Charitable
Trusts
Pfizer FoundationMorgan StanleyXcel Energy
Foundation
Living Waters
Endowment
Elwood H. Brotzman
Memorial Fund
Jerome Davis Living
Waters EndowmentFund
Kathleen & Ruth
Dooley Family Fund
Susan K. Griffiths
Memorial Fund
The Robert & Joy
Hanson LelandEndowment
Frank J. McCormick
Family FundMarvin W. Pourier,
Jr. & Donna M.Deans MemorialFund
Mary Lou Mosca-
Ragona MemorialFund
Ernest L. Schusky
Endowment
The Snoqualmie
Indian Tribe
Helen & Sidney
Ungar MemorialEndowment Fund
Dan & Beth
Whittemore
Bequests and
Trusts
Jeannette AndersonSandra Carroll
Berger
Robert BorschWilliam & Jovana
Brown
Fay ChandlerDale CrayneDiane DelpCarolyn FerridayVirginia FlackWilliam GuimondJohn HodgsonEthel HuebnerDorothy HuelsmanAnna LauferRuth Emily LeimanFranklin Loveland
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155
47NARF Acknowledgment of Contributions: Fiscal Year 2015
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 48Randles Family
Living Trust
Frances Claire RevilleMildred RiedellPaul SimonsDaniel Evan TallmanJohn VaupelPeta Uha – 
Peta
Uha is an exclusivemembership programfor donors making sub-stantial annual commit-ments to NARF.
Peta Uha
Pipestone
Charles BelgardeDon LichtyFrank LovelandPeta Uha
Turquoise
Jane BrownFrederick & Judith
Buechner
Marion McCollom
Hampton
Thomas HuntSusan KyleBruno RudolphJohn & Carson
Taylor
Jan WinnifordPeta Uha GraniteAnna BradberryKaren CrookSteven PosthumusHelene
Presskreischer
Mary ZerbyPeta Uha FlintLynne AltwergerRobert Anderson &
Marilyn Heiman -EVENT
Kent BachBarbara BastleByron BeasleyJohn BevanAlice BronerHermann BurchardMichael CaputoRichard CobbAndrew ColbertEric DahlstromDaren & Amy EilertJulie FletcherHerbert FloydAndrew & Audrey
Franklin
Daniel FrenchDuncan HaasJohn HirschiJohn HodgsonMargaret JacobsJudy JuddLois KatnickNorman KlotzRichard KnutsonIngrid LeBlancEva LeePaul & Eileen LeFortStewart MacaulayJames MarienthalBarbara MeislinShirley MiollaCassandra NaylorFrannie OatesClaude & Noelle
Poncelet
Edith QuevedoArthur & Maria
Richmond
Faith RoesselErnest SchuskyPeter SheldonGenny SmithKelley StanleyElizabeth SteeleWalter StockVictoria SujataBrenda TomarasMargaret VerbleAmelia VernonMary YoungJeanne ZasadilPeta Uha
Obsidian
Dean AttawayValerie BarthBonnie BeckelWilliam & Elsa
Boyce
David BoydKristin BriggsSusan BushEd ButterworthGeorge ClowardShayne CohenSamuel CookKeith CowanJoAnna DaleAnne DeMuthLyle DethlefsenJoyce DobbertJon DorschnerBrad EngdahlJennifer ErdmannAlan EssnerLenore FeigenbaumJulie Francis
Christine GalvezAdam & Carol
Geballe
Ann GetchesChris GoodwinKim GrayMartin GriffithHagop HaladjianTerence HancockWayne HardwickRobert HenryAnne HumesLiz Marr & John
Price
Andrean LarsonKathleen LentzJames & Cynthia
Leonard
John & Susanne
Manley
Otwin MareninMartha
McEldowney
Virginia MeadeMeredith MillerBarbara MusicusMarie-Luise NagelNobuyuki NakajimaSara NerkenMartha NewellSue NguyenJames OlanderDorothy ParrisCasey PortnoyBennett PudlinDarius PuffJohn ReedMitch RogersLorna Rose-Hahn
Robert RothhouseEllen Schoenfeld
Beeks
Susan ShererKaighn SmithJennifer StanleyJohn StoliarJonathan SunshineCharles SwezeyBeverly TerryMargaret TravisMark & Maggie
Udall
Janice WarnerStephen WasbyDavid WinstonVirginia WittmerSteven ZuckermanCircle of Life –
Circle of Life members
have made a lastingcommitment by includ-ing NARF in their wills.
Catches Bear & Judy
Adams
Rodney J. AddisonGloria AdkinsonDale M. ArmitageMaxwell K. BarnardBarbara BeasleyDiane Ben AriRoy BensonSandra Carroll
Berger
Bobby BitnerBetty E.
Blumenkamp
Charles BowersDale E. BrandAANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155 49William Brown
Gloria BurgessPatricia BurnetArthur CarterRobert CarterMary CasmusEd ChasteenJudith A. DayHarvey DennenbergLyle A. DethlefsenGary DickerhoofStarr DormannPatricia R. DuvalNoelle EdwardsSusan E. EichhornAllison B. EmersonJudy Fair-SpauldingJames K. FeeDebra K. FrazierJan FreemanLyle FunderburkLawrence H. GellerDeborah GhoreyebEstela GoldsmithLouise Gomer
Bangel
Gene GrabauAnna GulickJean GundlachMerrill HakimMichael S. HallMargaret HartnettTheodora C.
Haughton
Patricia HeidelbergerKarin HolserAlfred HooseJudith HortonBarbara HumesVeronica Ifill
Elizabeth A. JohnsonVusama KaribaBetty KleczyMargo M.
Kochruthe
Ellyne Krakower -
Rice
Edward KriegeJames LangharstSharon LaughlinIngrid LeBlancJames LehnererFrank O. LovelandRima LurieSuzanne MacDonaldPatricia Marks-
Greenfield
Helen McCahillMarion McCollom
Hampton
Joseph McNamaraPeter & Betty MeyerWilliam G. MilliganGary MontgomeryLeila V. MooreJeanne Morrel-
Franklin
Jeanne MoskalAnthony PampenaMarc PearceMoses PeterRandall PetersenDenise PfalzerThelma Populus
Gordon
B.J. PowellRobert & Mary
Resnik
Maureen RipleyBarbara H. Roberts
Andrea RobinsongRay RodgersJune RosenthalKeith I. RossWilliam RozierB.W. SampsonLaRoy SeaverMichael  SeeleyCharlotte SelverKatey Lynn SimetraCharles SmithKirk SperryHerbert StewartJames & Patricia
Straus
Michael & Carol
Sullivan
Louis TaboisValeria TenyakCharlotte ThompsonM. D. TurekJohn H. TylerRene VivoWilliam Joseph
Wade
Ted WeitzRobert & Mary
Wellman
Roger L. WelschDan & Beth
Whittemore
Karen Williams-Fast
Horse
Marcel E. WingateDavid YeomanWayne W. ZengelNARF Employee
Giving – 
NARF
employees committhousands of hours toprotecting the rights oftribes.  They also com-
mit their own funds tohelp NARF.
John Echohawk
Kim GottschalkDavid GoverRichard GuestChrissy Johnson
Dieck
Heather Kendall
Miller
Melody McCoySteven MooreMorgan O’Brien Ray RamirezDonald WhartonJoel WilliamsNARF’s 45th
Anniversary Event– 
2015 marked NARF’s
45th Anniversary.Tribes, businesses andindividuals cametogether to celebratethe milestone.  The fol-lowing helped make thecelebration possiblethrough monetary gifts,donated auction itemsand in-kind services.
Agua Caliente Band
of Cahuilla Indians
Alamo Drafthouse
Cinema
Alpine Dog BreweryAMCAmerican Indian
College Fund 
Ameriprise Financial
Services
Association on
American IndianAffairs 
A Touch of BlissBanana GramsBarefoot
Champagne
Barre ForteFrances BassettBKD, LLPBy The Numbers
Bookkeeping
Bellweather ClubRich Bienstock &
Carla Fredericks
Blackbird Public
House
Janice Black Elk Jim
& Daniel Jim
Kurt BlueDogJuanita BordasKerri ButlerMatthew & Nikki
Campbell
Duncan CampbellClyfford Still
Museum
Kitcki CarrollRichard CollinsColorado History
Museum
Core Power YogaComanche Nation
of Oklahoma 
Virginia CrossJoanne CurryCurtis HotelJerilyn Decoteau &
Tod Smith
Denver Art MuseumDenver Bronco’sDenver ZooWayne Dieck &
Chrissy JohnsonDieck
Jeff DoctorCaryn DonaldTTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 50NARF Acknowledgment of Contributions: Fiscal Year 2015
Erin Dougherty
Lynch
Julie Dougherty
Winger
50 DressesSarah Eagle HeartCrystal EchohawkLucille EchohawkSarah EchoHawkSusan Jordan
Eichorn
First Nations
DevelopmentInstitute
Frame de ArtFredericks Peebles &
Morgan LLP
Tom & Judy
Fredericks
Melinda Garcia &
Irvin Lucero
Don & Mary GentryAnn GetchesGigi’s CupcakesYvonne GillespieEric GinsburgGlamour BarKim & Linda
Gottschalk
David & Cita GoverBruce GreeneGinny GrimmRichard GuestShayna GutierrezMoses K.N. Haia III
& Lynn Haia
Anita HauckHogan Lovells 
US, LLP
IBM Inn at Crested ButteInnovairre/Quadriga
Keslie KandtHeather Kendall
Miller
Martha KingKroenke SportsHeidi KummliNatalie LandrethLaw’s Whiskey
House
Paul & Eileen LeFortYvonne & Patrice
LeMelle
Lils Sushi BarMary C. LovatoLucky Strike Bowling
Alley
Melody MacKenzieHenrietta MannRobert E. MartinezDallin MaybeeRobert G. McCoyRobert McGheeThe Melting PotReid MilanovichTristan MilanovichLaird MooreSteve Moore &
Martha Griffith
Liz MooresRob & Mauda
Moran
Mike Moran &
Cammie Cloman
National Indian
Gaming Association
Native American
Bank, N.A.
Ben Nighthorse
Campbell
Sue NoeMorgan & Fern
O’Brien
Oweesta
Corporation 
Paako Ridge Golf
Course
PahponeePanzanoPeg’s Glorified Ham
‘n Eggs
John PepionRichard PetersonPF Chang’sPink Fog StudiosPeter PinoWilliam PlonJennifer PrimreauxDennis PruettRay & Carmen
Ramirez
Revolution Advisors,
LLC
Rob RiceJulie Roberts-HyslopRobins Kaplan, LLPWilliam RobinsonAndrew RodriguezRachel SmithWayne Ross &
Nancy Starling Ross
Running Strong for
American IndianYouth
Montoya WhitemanBrian WilkersonDoug WittEddie Running WolfKalee SalazarThe Sawaya Law
FirmScribbles Stationary
Store
Sea Glass Fine Art
Photography
Brett SheltonAnsley ShermanSuzan Shown HarjoSipping & PaintingSnooze AM EaterySouth West
American IndianArtists Association
Spa UniversaireAce Stuebens VestaDavid Gary SuazoPat TenorioStillaguamish Tribe
of Indians
Timothy Terry Jr.The Bridal CollectionBill & Debbie
Thomas
Thompson Brother’s
Lacrosse
Jennie TsikewaTying the KnotUnited South &
Eastern Tribes
Wag n’ WashWellness Brands Inc.Donald WhartonSiSeeNaxAlt 
White Eagle
Montoya WhitemanWild Women WinePetur WilliamsRick & Sally WilliamsShawn YannityPearl ZoebischIn-Kind Donations
There are many ways to
support the NativeAmerican Rights Fund,in addition to cash gifts.People who volunteertheir time and talents,or donate valuablegoods and services, pro-vide crucial support forthe NARF mission.  Wewould like to expresslythank the followingindividuals and organi-zations for their gen-erosity:
Sara Barudin
Kurt BlueDogCaitlyn BrandtConner & Winters,
LLP
Copeland Franco,
Attorneys at Law
Virginia CrossAllison DudleyAnn EstinCourtney HallMitch HolditchAmanda MarquezRobert McGheeThe National
Institute for TrialAdvocacy  
Larry OllingerRichard PetersonJulie Roberts-HyslopLucy WalkerOther Anonymous
IndividualsBoulder-Denver Advisory Committee: Lucille
A. Echohawk, Thomas W. Fredericks, Ava Hamilton,Jeanne Whiteing, Charles Wilkinson.
Show Your Support in NARF’s programs – 
NARF receives contributions from many sources andfor many purposes.  Below are descriptions of NARF’sdonor programs and additional ways you can getinvolved.
Peta Uha Membership – Peta Uha in the Lakota
(Sioux) language means firekeeper – an individualwho made a solemn commitment to ensure thatthe sacred flame, source of light, heat and energyfor his people, would always be kept burning.  Likethe firekeepers of old, members of the Peta UhaCouncil can demonstrate constancy and vigilanceby helping to ensure that the critical work of theNative American Rights Fund continues to moveever forward.  For benefits associated with eachlevel of Peta Uha membership, please contact ourDevelopment Department, 303.447.8760. 
Tsanáhwit Circle – Tsanáhwit is a Nez Perce
word meaning equal justice.  Tsanáhwit Circlemembers recognize the constant need to standfirm for justice by pledging and making monthlycontributions.  Monthly contributions add up overthe years to make a real difference for the tribes weserve.
Otu’han Gift Membership – Otu’han is the
Lakota Sioux word translated as giveaway.Otu’han is a memorial and honoring gift programmodeled after the tradition of the Indian giveawayin which items of value are gathered over a longperiod of time to be given away in honor of birth-days, marriages, anniversaries, and in memory of adeparted loved one.
Circle of Life – NARF’s Circle of Life donors pro-
vide a lasting legacy to the Native American RightsFund by including NARF in estate planning ordeferred gifts.  The circle is an important symbol toNative Americans, representing unity, strength andthe eternal continuity of life.  These lasting giftshelp ensure the future of NARF and our Indianclients nationwide.Endowments – NARF has two established
endowments.  The 21st Century Endowment is apermanent fund in which the principal is investedand interest income is used for NARF’s programs.This endowment is designed to provide a perma-nent, steady income that can support the ever-increasing costs of providing legal representationto our tribal clients.  The Living Waters Endowmentdirectly funds the 21st Century Endowment.  Itallows donors to honor friends and loved ones bymaking an endowment gift of $10,000 or more.By designating a gift to either endowment, youcan be sure that your contribution will continue togenerate annual funds in perpetuity.  
Workplace Campaigns – NARF is a member of
America’s Charities, a national workplace givingfederation.  Giving through your workplace is aseasy as checking off NARF’s box, #10350 on theCombined Federal Campaign (CFC) pledge formauthorizing automatic payroll deduction.  
Matching Gifts – Currently, 18 foundations and
corporations nationwide make matching gifts toNARF on a regular basis.  Employers match theiremployees’ contributions sometimes doubling oreven tripling their donation.  Please check withyour human resources office and request a match-ing gift form.
E-News – Sign up at www.narf.org  for our e-news
network by providing NARF with your emailaddress.  This is a great way to get periodic caseupdates, calls-to-action, special events informa-tion, invitations and other activities.  Your e-mailaddress is confidential and we will not share it withany outside sources.  For further information aboutany of the programs or services, please contactNARF’s Development Department at 303-447-8760.  Thank you.
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155 51NARF STAFF
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001155 52CORPORATE OFFICERS
John E. Echohawk
(Pawnee) Executive Director/Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk
Litigation ManagementCommitteeMember/Attorney
Natalie Landreth
(Chickasaw)Litigation ManagementCommittee/Attorney
Melody McCoy
(Cherokee)Litigation ManagementCommittee Member/Attorney
Michael Kennedy
Chief Financial Officer
Morgan O’Brien
Director of Development
Ray Ramirez
Corporate Secretary
BOULDER MAIN OFFICE
STAFF
John E. Echohawk
(Pawnee) Executive Director/Attorney
Matt Campbell 
(Native Village of Gambell)Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk
Attorney
David Gover
(Pawnee/Choctaw)Attorney
Melody McCoy
(Cherokee)Attorney
Steven C. Moore
Attorney
Sue Noe - AttorneyBrett Shelton 
(Oglala Lakota) Attorney
Donald R. Wharton
AttorneyHeather Whiteman Runs
Him (Crow)Attorney
Nate Ahrens - Systems
Administrator/ Webmaster
Rose Cuny 
(Oglala Lakota) Office Manager
Chrissy Johnson Dieck
Paralegal
Shayna Gutierrez 
(Oglala Lakota)Receptionist/ OfficeServices Assistant
Scott Denver Jacket 
(Ute MountainUte/Navajo)Legal Assistant
Michael Kennedy
Chief Financial Officer
Brandy Lonchena
Law Office Administrator
Mireille Martinez
Annual Giving DirectorKatrina Mora 
(Oglala Lakota)Administrative Assistant
Morgan O'Brien
Director of Development
Don Ragona
(Mattinecock)Assistant DevelopmentDirector
Ray Ramirez
Editor/Grant Writer
Jennifer Redbone
(Apache/Comanche/Kiowa)Development SupportSpecialist
Kalee Salazar 
(Taos Pueblo and SantaAna Pueblo)Accounting Clerk
Jeff Schmidt
Paralegal
Debbie Raymond-Thomas
(Navajo)ControllerJennie Tsikewa (Zuni)
Accountant
Skuya Zephier 
(Oglala Lakota)Legal Assistant
NATIONAL INDIAN LAW
LIBRARY
David Selden
Director, National IndianLaw Library
Anne Lucke
Assistant Law Librarian
Mauda Moran
Library & InformationTechnology AssistantANCHORAGE OFFICE
STAFF
Heather Kendall-Miller
(Athabascan)Attorney
Erin Dougherty Lynch
Attorney
Natalie Landreth
(Chickasaw)Attorney
Matt Newman
Attorney
WASHINGTON, D.C.
OFFICE STAFF
Richard Guest
Attorney
Joel Williams (Cherokee)
Attorney
Eric Anderson
Legal Assistant
The “Native American Rights Fund
Statement on Environmental
Sustainability.”
“It is clear that our natural world is undergoing severe,
unsustainable and catastrophic climate change thatadversely impacts the lives of people and ecosystemsworldwide. Native Americans are especially vulnerableand are experiencing disproportionate negative impactson their cultures, health and food systems. In response,the Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is committed toenvironmental sustainability through its mission, workand organizational values. Native Americans and otherindigenous peoples have a long tradition of living sustainably with the natural world by understanding theimportance of preserving natural resources and respecting the interdependence of all living things. NARF embraces this tradition through its work and byinstituting sustainable office practices that reduce ournegative impact on our climate and environment. NARFis engaged in environmental work and has established aGreen Office Committee whose responsibility is to leadand coordinate staff participation in establishing andimplementing policies and procedures to minimizewaste, reduce energy consumption and pollution andcreate a healthful work environment.” 1506 Broadway, Boulder, CO 80302
303-447-8760 • www.narf.org