ANNUAL REPORT 2018Executive Director’s Report .................................................................................................... ................................................ 1
Chairman’s Message ............................................................................................................. ................................................... 2
Board of Directors and National Support Committee .............................................................................. .......................... 3
Introduction ................................................................................................................... ........................................................... 5
Preserving Tribal Existence ................................................................................................... ................................................. 5
Protecting Tribal Natural Resources ........................................................................................... ......................................... 9
Promoting Human Rights ........................................................................................................ ............................................ 17
Holding Governments Accountable ................................................................................................ .................................... 24
Developing Indian Law .......................................................................................................... .............................................. 26
Financial Report .............................................................................................................. ...................................................... 28
Contributors .................................................................................................................. ........................................................ 29
NARF Staff .................................................................................................................... .......................................................... 33
Boulder Office (main)
1506 BroadwayBoulder, CO 80302-6296303-447-8760www.narf.orgAnchorage Office
745 West 4th Avenue, Suite 502Anchorage, Alaska 99501-1736907-276-0680Washington D.C. Office
1514 P Street, NW (Rear) Suite D Washington, D.C. 20005-1910202-785-4166
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is a nonprofit, charitable organization incorporated in 1971
under the laws of the District of Columbia. NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the provisions of Section
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue code. Contributions to NARF are tax deductible. The Internal Revenue Service hasruled that NARF is not a “private foundation” as defined in Section 509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. NARF was
founded in 1970 and incorporated in 1971 in Washington, D.C.Cover and Art: Avis Charley (Spirit Lake Dakota/Navajo) is a mother
and an artist. She was born and raised in Los Angeles, California.Charley is a painter and a ledger artist using color pencils on antiquedocuments. She enjoys depicting Native empowerment using the female form as her main subject. Charley relishes bringing attentionto and celebrating the evolution of the Native identity—from pre-reservation period to present day, from ancestral homelands tocity life. She uses this awareness to continually redefine and reclaimher identity as a modern Indigenous woman and as an artist. Charley is a graduate from the Institute of American Indian Arts. Find Charley on Instagram and Facebook @AvisCharley.
Photo credit: Jason S. Ordaz
TABLE OF CONTENTSNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND012018 was the 48th year that the Native Amer-
ican Rights Fund has been serving as the na-tional Indian legal defense fund providinglegal advice and assistance to tribes, Native or-ganizations, and individual Indians in cases ofmajor importance across the country. Onceagain during the year, we are proud that wewere able to help our Native American clientsachieve several significant legal victories andaccomplishments.
The Tribal Supreme Court Project that we staff
along with the National Congress of AmericanIndians assisted tribes in prevailing in two im-portant cases before the United States SupremeCourt. In Patchak v. Zinke, the Supreme Court upheld an act of
Congress taking land into trust for the Match-E-Be-Nash-She-Wish Band of Pottawatomi Indians/Gun Lake Tribe in Michigan, which had been challenged in a pending lawsuit. In Washington v. US, the Supreme Court affirmed lower court
decisions that found that the state had violated tribal treatyfishing rights by having culverts that diminished salmon runsand compelled the state to correct the barrier culverts.
The Alaska Historical Commission voted to nominate the
Ch’u’itna watershed for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places as a Traditional Cultural Landscape. The designation would recognize the profound importance that the Ch’u’itna watershed has played in shaping and sustainingthe culture, traditions, identity, and subsistence lifestyle of people of the Native Village of Tyonek, NARF’s client, and ensure that impacts on Tyonek are considered in any future development plans in the watershed.
NARF began representation of three federally recognized
Gwich’in Tribes opposing the oil and gas development of theArctic National Wildlife Refuge’s Coastal Plain, the home to thecalving grounds of the Porcupine Caribou Herd, which is oneof the largest wild herds in the world and of great cultural andsubsistence importance to the Gwich’in Tribes. A 2017 act ofCongress opened up the area for development, and NARF represents the Tribes during the environmental reviewprocesses required by the National Environmental Policy Actand the National Historic Preservation Act before developmentcan occur.
A historic step forward was taken at the United Nations Frame-
work Convention on Climate Change where NARF representsthe National Congress of American Indian. A Facilitative WorkingGroup was established to develop a work plan for the tradi-tional indigenous knowledge platform estab-
lished in the Paris Agreement on climatechange that helps guide the science used to address climate change. The Working Groupis to be composed of seven country and sevenindigenous representatives.  This marks the firsttime that indigenous representatives chosen byindigenous peoples will participate on anequal basis within a United Nations body.
On behalf of the Rosebud Sioux Tribe in South
Dakota and the Fort Belknap Indian Commu-nity in Montana, NARF filed a lawsuit oppos-ing the proposed Keystone XL Pipeline whichwould link oil producers in Canada with the
refiners and exporters on the Gulf Coast. The proposed pipelineroute crosses over sacred Sioux land with cultural sites andburials and over many rivers and the Ogallala Aquifer whichprovide water to the Tribes and others. The Trump Adminis-tration has approved a project permit, but no consultation hasoccurred between the federal government and the Tribes as required by law.
NARF represents the American Indian Higher Education 
Consortium (AIHEC) as amicus curiae in a case brought against
a tribal college by a former employee of the college,  allegingthat he was discriminated against by the college in violation offederal law. The tribal college, supported by AIHEC, was successful in having the case dismissed on the ground the college is an arm of the Confederated Salish and KootenaiTribes of Montana and the Tribes have sovereign immunityfrom suit without their consent.
The Native American Voting Rights Coalition (NAVRC)  
completed and released a thirty-five tribe survey of over 5,000Native voters in Nevada, Arizona, New Mexico and SouthDakota that documented widespread discrimination and dis-enfranchisement. NAVRC, founded by NARF, is a non-partisanalliance of organizations, scholars, and activists advocating forequal access for Native Americans in the political process.NAVRC coordinates efforts at overcoming the barriers NativeAmericans face in registering to vote, casting their ballot, andhaving an equal voice in elections.
These legal victories and accomplishments would not have
been possible without the contributions and grants from themany supporters of our nonprofit organization. We thank youfor your support in 2018 and hope that your support will con-tinue in 2019 and beyond so we can continue to pursue justicefor Native Americans.  
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR'S REPORT
ANNUAL REPORT 2018
John E. Echohawk
Executive DirectorGreetings.
Over the years, I have had the opportunity to
serve as an advocate for Native American is-sues at all levels of government. I have repre-sented my tribe in government-to-governmentactions at the local, state, and federal levels re-garding issues of education, health care, eco-nomic development, and sovereign immunity.With the perspective gained from these expe-riences, I have a tremendous respect and ap-preciation for the long history of the NativeAmerican Rights Fund and the gains that ithas made for Indian country.
NARF has forty-eight years of experience in establishing or re-
establishing government-to-government relationships. Theirlong fought battles for justice and sovereignty for and on behalfof Indian Country, not only safeguard the rights of tribes andNative peoples but also protect shared American values suchas justice, integrity, and a commitment to doing what is right.NARF’s staff and board are dedicated to providing high-qualitylegal representation to America’s indigenous
people.
In looking back at 2018, it is clear that the need
for these services has not diminished. Withdozens of high-stakes cases and projects un-derway, this year has proven challenging formany Native communities across the UnitedStates. NARF is called upon not only to con-tinue its efforts, but to redouble them. 
We need your help during these challenging
times. It is only with the support of tribes,foundations, and individuals that NARF cancontinue to be the driving force in the fight for 
Indian rights and justice for Indian country. As we begin a newyear that looks to be equally uncertain, I urge you to lend yourhelp, your financial support, and your individual involvementto sustain this fight to ensure and protect Native peoples’ rightsand our nation’s priorities.
Mvto. (Thank you.)
02NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
CHAIRMAN'S MESSAGE 
Robert R. McGhee
Chairman, NARF Board of
Directors 03ANNUAL REPORT 2018
The Native American Rights Fund has a gov-
erning board composed of Native Americanleaders from across the country. IndividualBoard members are chosen based on their in-volvement and knowledge of Indian issuesand affairs, as well as tribal affiliation, to ensurecomprehensive geographical representation.The NARF Board of Directors, whose membersserve a maximum of six years, provide NARFwith leadership, and the vision of its membersis essential to NARF's effectiveness in repre-senting its Native American clients.
NARF’s Board of Directors (L to R): Robert Miguel
(Ak-Chin Indian Community); Anita Mitchell
(Muckleshoot Indian Tribe); Rebecca Miles (Nez
Perce Tribe); Derek Valdo (Pueblo of Acoma);
Michael Colbert Smith (Chickasaw Nation);
Kenneth Kahn (Santa Ynez Band of Chumash 
Indians); Camille Kalama (Native Hawai`ian);
Rhonda Pitka (Athabascan/Inupiaq); Lacey Horn
(Cherokee Nation); Robert McGhee , Chairman
(Poarch Band of Creek Indians). Not pictured: Kurt
BlueDog , Vice-Chairman (Sisseton-Wahpeton
Sioux); Tex Hall , Treasurer (Three Affiliated
Tribes); MaryAnn Johnson (Portage Creek)
The National Support Committee assists
NARF with fundraising and public rela-tions efforts. Some members are prominentin the fields of business, entertainment,and the arts. Others are known advocatesfor the rights of the underserved. All arecommitted to upholding the rights of Native Americans.
Randy Bardwell (Pechanga Band of Luiseño
Mission Indians)
Deborah BardwellJaime Barrientoz (Grande Traverse Band of
Ottawa and Chippewa Indians)
John Bevan Wallace Coffey (Comanche) Ada Deer (Menominee) 
Harvey A. Dennenberg Lucille A. Echohawk (Pawnee) 
Jane Fonda Eric Ginsburg Jeff Ginsburg Rodney Grant (Omaha) 
Dr. Marion McCollom Hampton Chris E. McNeil, Jr. (Tlingit-Nisga’a)
Billy Mills (Oglala Lakota)
Amado Peña, Jr. (Yaqui/Chicano) 
Wayne Ross Nancy Starling-Ross Mark Rudick Pam Rudick 
Michael G. Sawaya Ernie Stevens, Jr. (Wisconsin Oneida) 
Andrew Teller (Isleta Pueblo)
Verna Teller (Isleta Pueblo) 
Richard Trudell (Santee Sioux) 
Rebecca Tsosie (Pascua Yaqui) 
Tzo-Nah (Shoshone Bannock)
Aine Ungar Rt. Rev. William C. Wantland (Seminole)
W. Richard West (Southern Cheyenne)
Randy Willis (Oglala Lakota) 
Teresa Willis (Umatilla) 
Mary Wynne (Rosebud Sioux)
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
NATIONAL SUPPORT COMMITTEEThe US Constitution recognizes that Indian tribes are inde-
pendent governmental entities with inherent authority overtheir members and territory. Tribal governments possess thepower to regulate the internal affairs of their members as wellas activities within their reservations. In treaties with theUnited States, Indian tribes ceded millions of acres of land inexchange for the guarantee that the federal government wouldprotect the tribes' right to self-government. Under the priorityof preserving tribal existence , NARF empowers tribes to live 
according to Native traditions, to enforce their treaty rights, toensure their independence on reservations, and to protect theirright to self-govern (sovereignty). 
TRiBAL S oVERE iGnTy AnD JuRiSDiCTion
Tribal Sovereignty Protection Initiative
From the 19th to mid-20th century, the US Supreme Court repeatedly affirmed the principle that tribes retain inherent sovereignty over their members and territory. However, withthe 1978 decision in Oliphant v. Suquamish Indian Tribe , the
Supreme Court began chipping away at tribal sovereignty byrestricting tribal jurisdiction and extending state jurisdiction.In response, NARF partnered with the National Congress ofAmerican Indians (NCAI) in 2001 to develop the Tribal Sover-eignty Protection Initiative to restore the principle of inherenttribal sovereignty and safeguard the core of sovereignty thatremains. The Initiative monitors legislation, judicial appoint-ments, and cases related to tribal interests. 
~ Tribal Supreme Court Project
A major component of the Initiative is the Tribal Supreme CourtProject, which monitors cases potentially headed to theSupreme Court as well as those actually accepted for review.Staffed jointly by NARF and NCAI, the Tribal Supreme CourtProject is based on the idea that a strong, consistent, coordi-nated approach will be able to reverse, or at least reduce, theon-going erosion of tribal sovereignty by Supreme Court Jus-
tices who appear to lack an understanding of the foundationalprinciples underlying federal Indian law and who are unfamiliarwith the practical challenges facing tribal governments. The Project also ensures that attorneys representing Indian interests before the Supreme Court have the support they need,including coordinating the filing of a limited number of strategic amicus briefs. 
During the October 2017 term, the Supreme Court decided
three cases related to Indian interests.
In February 2018, the Court issued its opinion in Patchak v.
Zinke. David Patchak, a non-Indian landowner, successfully 
argued before the Supreme Court in 2012 that he had standingto challenge to the acquisition of trust land for the benefit ofthe Match-E-Be-Nash-She-Wish Band of Pottawatomi Indians/Gun Lake Tribe. Subsequently, Congress passed the Gun LakeTrust Land Reaffirmation Act of 2014 (the Gun Lake Act), whichreaffirmed the Department of the Interior’s decision to take theland in question into trust for the Tribe, and removed jurisdic-tion from the federal courts over any actions relating to thatproperty. Mr. Patchak challenged the Gun Lake Act as an unconstitutional infringement by Congress on judicial power.The Supreme Court affirmed the decision of the US CircuitCourt of Appeals for the District of Columbia and held that theGun Lake Act did not violate the separation of powers. TheCourt explained that Congress may make laws that applyretroactively to pending lawsuits, even when that legislationensures that one side will win.
In May 2018, the Court reversed and remanded Upper Skagit
Indian Tribe v. Lundgren to the Washington Supreme Court. 
This case arose out of a property dispute between the UpperSkagit Indian Tribe and adjacent property owners who allegedthey had acquired land along the common boundary throughANNUAL REPORT 2018
One of the initial responsibilities of NARF’s first Board of Di-
rectors was to develop priorities that would guide the NativeAmerican Rights Fund in its mission to preserve and enforcethe legal rights of Native Americans. Those five priorities con-tinue to lead NARF today:• Preserving tribal existence
• Protecting tribal natural resources• Promoting Native American human rights• Holding governments accountable to Native Americans• Developing Indian law and educating the public about 
Indian rights, laws, and issuesINTRODUCTION 
05Following, find NARF’s recent work within each of these priority areas.
PRESERVING TRIBAL EXISTENCEadverse possession. The tribe raised sovereign immunity, but
the Washington Supreme Court decision held that tribal sov-
ereign immunity did not bar an in rem action against real prop-erty. The US Supreme Court held that the Washington SupremeCourt erred when it relied on County of Yakima v. Confederated
Tribes and Bands of Yakima Nation for the proposition that Tribes
lack sovereign immunity in an in rem action. However, the USSupreme Court remanded for the lower court to considerwhether the “immovable property exception” to common lawsovereign immunity applied in this case.In June 2018, the Court issued a per curiam order
that affirmed the Ninth Circuit’s judgment infavor of tribal interests in Washington v. US.
This case is the latest chapter in litigation overtreaty fishing rights in Washington dating backmore than a century with seven prior SupremeCourt decisions. In this case, the lower courtsfound that the state violated its treaty obliga-tions by having culverts that diminishedsalmon runs and the court compelled the stateto correct barrier culverts. The Supreme Court’saffirmance leaves that decision in place and ad-heres to time-honored approaches to Indiantreaty interpretation. 
For the October 2018 term, the Court has heard
three Indian law cases argued: Washington State
Dep’t of Licensing v. Cougar Den (Indian treaty
preemption of state taxes), Herrera v. Wyoming
(off-reservation hunting rights), and Carpenter v.
Murphy (reservation disestablishment).
~ Judicial Selection Project
Another important component of the TribalSovereignty Protection Initiative is the JudicialSelection Project. The Project’s focus is researchand education: to educate the federal judiciaryabout tribal issues, to educate tribal leadersabout the federal judiciary, and to reach out toelected officials and the public at large aboutthe need for federal judges who understand theunique legal status of Indian tribes. 
In June 2018, Justice Anthony Kennedy an-
nounced his retirement from the SupremeCourt. After a contentious set of hearings, theSenate confirmed President Trump’s nominee,DC Circuit Court of Appeals judge Brett 
Kavanaugh, as Justice Kennedy’s replacement. Both NCAI andNARF opposed Kavanaugh’s confirmation based on his recordon the rights of indigenous people, particularly in relation toRice v. Cayetano. A memorandum setting forth Kavanaugh’s 
Indian law background is available at https://sct.narf.org/articles/indian_ law_jurispurdence/kavanaugh.pdf.
Big Horn Electric Cooperative v. Alden Big Man, et al.
In 2012, Alden Big Man, an elderly member of the Apsaalooke(Crow) Tribe sued the Big Horn Electric Cooperative in the
06NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Crow Civil Court pursuant to an Apsaalooke tribal statute lim-
iting heat and electricity service disconnections during wintermonths for homes where elderly and disabled individuals re-side. In 2013, the tribal court dismissed the case, holding thatit lacked jurisdiction over the case, which was brought againsta non-member utility company. Mr. Big Man appealed the rul-ing to the Apsaalooke Appeals Court. In April 2017, the Ap-saalooke Appeals Court issued a decision holding that the trialcourt did have jurisdiction over Big Horn Electric and re-manded the case to the Crow Civil Court for further proceed-ings. Big Horn Electric then filed a complaint in federal districtcourt in May 2017, asking the court to find that tribal courtremedies had been exhausted and that the tribal court andjudges lacked jurisdiction over the suit. NARF, representing theApsaalooke Appeals Court judges and Crow Tribal HealthBoard members, filed a Motion to Dismiss for failure to exhausttribal court remedies and lack of jurisdiction, but those motionswere denied because the federal district court was of the viewthat exhaustion in this case had occurred. Pretrial conferencewas held December 2018.FEDERAL REC oGniTion  oF TRiBAL STAT uS
NARF represents Indian communities who have survived intact
as identifiable Indian tribes but are not federally recognized. Tribalexistence does not depend on federal recognition, but recognitionis necessary for a government-to-government relationship.
Little Shell Tribe of Chippewa Indians of Montana
NARF continues to represent the Little Shell Tribe of ChippewaIndians of Montana in its pursuit of federal recognition. Morethan 20 years ago, in 1997, the government placed the LittleShell Tribe’s federal recognition petition on active review status.Since that time, the Tribe has endured through several about-face decisions by various Assistant Secretaries for Indian Affairswho found first in favor and then against recognition of theTribe. In 2013, NARF urged the Secretary of the Interior to sus-pend consideration of the Final Determination pending revi-sions to the federal acknowledgement regulations. New rulesfor the federal acknowledgement process were published in July2015. The Tribe is now proceeding under the new, substantiallychanged rules and continues to pursue legislative recognition.In September 2018, the House of Representatives passed HR3764, which would recognize the tribe. The bill was sent to theSenate where it died with the end of the legislative session.
07ANNUAL REPORT 2018
Throughout North America's colonization, Indian tribes expe-
rienced a diminishment of their land base to a mere 2.3 percentof its original size. Currently, there are approximately 55 million acres of Indian-controlled land in the continentalUnited States and about 44 million acres of Native-owned landin Alaska. An adequate land base and control over natural resources are central components of economic self-sufficiencyand self-determination and are vital to the existence of tribes.Thus, much of NARF's work involves protecting tribal natural
resources. 
inDiAn LAnDS
Hualapai Tribe Fee to Trust Applications
NARF represents the Hualapai Indian Tribe of Arizona inpreparing and submitting applications for the transfer intotrust status of eight parcels of land owned in fee by the Tribe.Three of the parcels have been accepted into trust. Decisionson the other five parcels will be significantly delayed. In April2017, the Acting Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs withdrewauthority from BIA Regional Directors to approve off-reserva-tion fee-to-trust applications and placed that authority with theAssistant Secretary of Indian Affairs. The BIA issued proposedchanges to the existing regulations in October 2017. In additionto tribal consultation meetings, the Tribe has submitted writtencomments on the proposed changes.
Herrera v. Wyoming
NARF represents the Crow Tribe as amicus in a case involving
the State of Wyoming's citation of Clayvin Herrera, a Crow cit-izen, for illegally taking an elk in the Big Horn National Forestin Wyoming. Herrera asserts that the Fort Laramie Treaty of1868 reserved to members of the Crow Tribe the right to hunton unoccupied lands within the area ceded by the Tribe underthat Treaty, including the Big Horn National Forest. TheWyoming courts declined to allow Herrera to assert any treaty-related defenses, citing cases which they asserted went againstthe Tribe's treaty rights. The Wyoming courts also declined toallow the Crow Tribe to file amicus briefs. Herrera petitioned to
the US Supreme Court for review, which was granted. NARFfiled a brief for the Crow Tribe as amicus curiae . The case will
be argued in January 2019.
Akiachak Native Community, et al. v. Department of Interior, et al.
In 2006, the Akiachak Native Community, the Chilkoot IndianAssociation, the Chalkyitsik Village Council, and the TuluksakNative Community IRA, represented by NARF, brought suit inthe US District Court for the District of Columbia seeking judi-cial review of 25 CFR Part 151 as it pertains to federally recog-nized tribes in Alaska. This federal regulation governs the pro-
cedures used by Indian tribes and individuals requesting theSecretary of the Interior to acquire title to land in trust on theirbehalf. At the time, the regulation barred the acquisition of landin trust in Alaska other than for the Metlakatla Indian Commu-nity or its members.
In March 2013, the court granted Plaintiffs complete relief on
all of their claims–a major victory for Alaska tribes. The Stateof Alaska and the Interior Department (DOI) filed appeals tothe US Court of Appeals for the DC Circuit. However, whilethe appeal was pending, DOI changed course. In December2014, DOI published its final rule rescinding the “Alaska Ex-ception.” On the State's appeal, DC Circuit ruled 2-1 in favorof the Tribal appellees.
Pursuant to the Court of Appeals' decision, DOI completed one
trust land acquisition in Alaska in January 2017 with nearly adozen more pending. However, in July 2018, the Trump Ad-ministration officially withdrew the Solicitor's opinion supportingland-into-trust for Alaska Tribes and announced the Depart-ment would undertake a wholesale review of whether to rein-state the “Alaska Exception” into the Part 151 regulations. 
Since the announcement, NARF has represented clients at tribal
consultations around Alaska, making clear Alaska tribes willtolerate nothing more than full reinstatement of the trust landsprogram in Alaska. 
WATER R iGHTS
Establishing tribal water rights, especially in arid western
states, is a major NARF priority. Indian tribes are entitled underfederal law to sufficient water for present and future needs,with a priority date at least as early as the establishment of theirreservations. These reserved water rights are superior to allwater rights created after the tribal priority date. In most cases,such a date gives tribes senior water rights in the water-shortwest. Unfortunately, many tribes have not used their reservedwater rights and most of these rights are unadjudicated or un-quantified. The major need is to define or quantify the amountof water to which each tribe is entitled. 
Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians
NARF, with co-counsel, represents the Agua Caliente Band ofCahuilla Indians in a lawsuit filed in May 2013 in the US Dis-trict Court for the Central District of California, asking the court(a) to declare the Tribe's water rights as the senior rights in theCoachella Valley, (b) to quantify these rights, and (c) to prevent
09ANNUAL REPORT 2018
PROTECTING TRIBAL NATURAL RESOURCESCoachella Valley Water District and Desert Water Agency from
further injuring residents throughout the Valley by impairingthe quantity and quality of water in the aquifer through the im-port of lesser quality water.
In March 2015, the court ruled largely in the Tribe's favor, holding
that the Tribe has a reserved right to water and that groundwateris a water source available to fulfill that right. The water agenciesappealed that decision and, in March 2017, the Ninth Circuitunanimously affirmed the lower court's ruling. The water dis-tricts petitioned the US Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari, but
that petition was denied and the lower court's decision held. 
With this “phase one” part of the trial put to rest, the parties
are addressing what are called the “phase two” legal issues.Phase two will deal with the correct method for quantifyingthe Tribe's share, whether there is a right to water of a certainquality, and whether the Tribe owns the groundwater storagespace under its reservation. Throughout 2018 the parties ex-plored settlement options. However, the parties were very farapart on possible settlement positions, and the mediator sus-pended settlement talks. Therefore, briefing and discovery onPhase 2 issues is now occurring in the district court.
Palouse River Basin Adjudication - Nez Perce Tribe Water Rights
NARF represents the Nez Perce Tribe in its water rights claims inthe Palouse River Basin Adjudication (PRBA). In October 2016,the Idaho Water Court issued a commencement order for thePRBA. An initial hearing was held on the PRBA in January 2017.NARF and the Tribe are working with the United States to exam-ine the nature and scope of the Tribe's water rights claims in thePalouse watershed. Potential claims include those for instreamflows for fish habitat in the mainstream Palouse, for springs, andfor allotments on a small portion of the northwest corner of theReservation. Tribal claims likely will be filed in December of 2019.
Klamath Basin Water Rights
Represented by NARF, the Klamath Tribes' water rights wererecognized in the federal courts in United States v. Adair in 1983,
but the courts left quantification of the Tribal water rights tothe State of Oregon's general stream adjudication, the KlamathBasin Adjudication (KBA). Following conclusion of the 38-year-long administrative phase of the KBA, the Tribes were able toenforce their water rights for the first time during the 2013 irrigation season. The Oregon Water Resources Department's(OWRD's) Findings of Fact and Order of Determination(FFOD) issued in the KBA are now under review in the Klamath County Circuit Court. The court adopted a phased approach for the review.In 2017 and 2018, the Klamath County Circuit Court resolved
jurisdictional and other threshold legal issues as well as generalprocedural issues and threshold or cross-cutting issues not ad-dressed in earlier sub-phases. Importantly, the court issued rul-ings limiting discovery and the introduction of new evidence,thus preventing a complete do-over of the administrative pro-ceedings. However, the court ruled that a de novo standard of
review will apply, in which the court will “look anew” at thedeterminations of OWRD in the FFOD and may give deferenceto OWRD's determinations. 
Now the KBA is in Phase 3, which addresses the substantive
exceptions filed to the individual water right claim determina-tions in the FFOD. Opening briefs for the first of three claimgroups began in August 2018 and oral argument is scheduledfor February 2019.
Related case Baley v. US : After sixteen years of litigation, the
Court of Federal Claims resoundingly re-affirmed the superi-ority of the senior water rights of the Klamath Tribes anddownriver Klamath Basin tribes over other water interests inthe Klamath Basin. Though the Tribes were not parties to thecase, NARF filed several amicus briefs on their behalf. In De-
cember 2017, the irrigators filed an appeal to the US Court ofAppeals for the Federal Circuit. Briefing was held throughout2018 and NARF filed an amicus brief on behalf of the Klamath
Tribes in September 2018.
Tule River Tribe
After almost 30 years of advocacy, the Tule River Indian Tribe,represented by NARF, successfully settled its water rights inNovember 2007. The settlement agreement secured a domestic,municipal, industrial, and commercial water supply for theTribe. The Tribe now seeks federal legislation to ratify theagreement and authorize appropriations to develop the waterrights through the creation of water infrastructure and reser-voirs on the Tule River Reservation. 
The Tribe's team assisted the federal team in developing an ap-
praisal of several alternatives. The federal team promised to bedone with the study by November 2015 so that the Tribe couldproceed to negotiate an appropriate settlement to present toCongress. In December 2016 the federal team delivered its re-port to the Tribe. The Tribe and its team performed a detailedanalysis and critique of the report and met with Interior De-partment officials in March 2018 to brief them and bring themup to speed on negotiation developments.
10NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDKickapoo Tribe in Kansas
In recent decades, according to the Environmental ProtectionAgency, the water supply for the Kickapoo Reservation has attimes been in violation of the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974.Consequently, the Kickapoo people fear they are unable tosafely drink, bathe, or cook with tap water. There also is notenough water on the reservation to provide basic municipalservices to the community-the Tribe is not able to provide localschools with reliable, safe running water, and the fire depart-ment cannot provide adequate fire protection. In June 2006, theKickapoo Tribe in Kansas, represented by
NARF, filed a federal court lawsuit in an effortto enforce express promises made to the Tribeto build a Reservoir Project, the most cost effec-tive and reliable means to improve the watersupply. The Nemaha Brown Watershed JointBoard #7, the Natural Resources ConservationService of the US Department of Agriculture,and the State of Kansas made promises to theTribe over two decades ago. Since that time,these parties have been actively developing thewater resources, resulting in the near depletionof the Tribe's senior federal water rights. The federal government, the state, and the localwatershed district all concede the existence ofthe Tribe's senior Indian reserved water rights;the real issue is the amount of water needed tosatisfy the Tribe's rights, and the source of thatwater. 
In September 2016, the Tribe and the state exe-
cuted a comprehensive settlement agreementthat includes as its centerpiece a negotiatedwater right for the Tribe, as well as all of the details for the administration of the Tribe's rightin the Delaware River watershed. The Tribe andNARF developed legislation in consultationwith the Kansas congressional delegation to ap-prove the water right negotiated with the state.In November 2017, Kansas Senator Moran in-troduced S 2154, Kickapoo Tribe in KansasWater Rights Settlement Agreement Act, whichwas referred to the Senate Indian Affairs Com-mittee. A hearing was held in July 2018 beforethe Committee, and the bill was favorably reported out of committee in September 2018.The bill was very favorably scored by the Congressional Budget Office. A companion bill,HR 7034, was introduced by Congresswoman
Jenkins in the House in October 2018 and referred to the HouseCommittees on Natural Resources and Agriculture. Neither billwas enacted into law at the end of the 115th Congress. TheTribe will work with the State and the Kansas congressionaldelegation to re-introduce the bill early in 2019.
Pauma Band of Luiseno Indians
The Pauma Band of Luiseno Indians is one of the five tribesparty to the San Luis Rey Water Rights Settlement. The San LuisRey Tribes' water rights were initially addressed by a Congres-
11ANNUAL REPORT 2018
sionally-approved settlement act in 1988. However, for a wide
variety of reasons, the settlement was unenforceable and didnot address the needs of the tribes. In 2016, a bill amending theoriginal settlement act was passed by Congress, and the SanLuis Rey Water Rights Settlement is now in its implementationstage. NARF represents the Pauma Band in the implementa-tion, which includes allocation of water and funding as well asexamining groundwater management strategies. 
HunTinG AnD FiSHinG RiGHTS 
Tribal rights to hunt and fish are grounded in tribal sovereignty
and affirmed in many treaties and agreements. As with water,the overall demand for game and fish today often exceeds thesupply. In contrast, subsistence is the sustainable Native phi-losophy of taking only what you need. NARF has defendedtribal hunting, fishing, and subsistence rights in a variety ofcases, most recently focused in Alaska. There often are no roadsor stores in rural Alaska, and so no other group of people in theUnited States continues to be as intimately connected to 
the land and water and as dependent upon its vast natural resources as Alaska's indigenous peoples.
Organized Village of Saxman IRA Council Rural 
Determination StatusThe Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act(ANILCA) of 1980 provides a subsistence harvest priority toAlaska's rural residents. However, it does not define who qual-ifies as rural. Saxman village is a coastal community of approx-imately 400 residents, most of whom are Alaska Native. In2007, the Federal Subsistence Board (FSB) promulgated a finalrule that revoked Saxman's rural community status. The FSBreasoned that Saxman's close proximity to the town ofKetchikan–they are connected by a two–mile long road-justi-fied aggregating the two communities as one non-rural com-munity. NARF assisted the tribe as it sought to reinstate itsrural status. 
12NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
In May 2015, legislation to reinstate Saxman as a rural commu-
nity was introduced and soon thereafter the FSB adopted theproposed administrative rule favoring Saxman's rural status.NARF continues to work with the Tribe on issues surroundingthe FSB and federal subsistence management program, includ-ing future policy issues surrounding rural community status. 
Bering Sea Elders Group
The Bering Sea Elders Group (BSEG) is an alliance of thirty-nine Yup'ik and Inupiaq villages that seeks to protect the sen-sitive ecosystem of the Bering Sea, as well as the subsistencelifestyle and the communities that depend on it. NARF has de-signed a comprehensive plan to help this group of Alaska Na-tive villages in their efforts to protect the area and become moreengaged in its management. 
In December 2016, NARF's work with BSEG resulted in Presi-
dent Barack Obama signing an historic Executive Order creat-ing the Northern Bering Sea Climate Resilience Area. However,in April 2017, President Trump signed an executive order called“Implementing an America-First Offshore Energy Strategy.”While the order was aimed at re-opening Arctic and Atlanticareas for offshore drilling, it also entirely revoked ExecutiveOrder 13754. This reversal occurred without notice and despiteall indications that the suite of northern Bering Sea protections-including the focus on the role of Tribes in future decisions-were not in danger. BSEG responded immediately in the media,determined to restore the important conservation, economic,and cultural provisions. BSEG Elders passed a resolution call-ing for the reinstatement of the Executive Order and its protec-tions. BSEG and allies are working with federal representativesto restore the provisions.
Finally, NARF is working with BSEG in its ongoing negotia-
tions with the bottom trawl industry. These negotiations re-sulted in the creation of a working group, which is aco-management body with equal representation between thebottom trawl industry and Native villages that are close to theindustry's primary fishing grounds.
Pebble Mine
Alaska's Bristol Bay region is home to the largest wild salmonruns in the world. It is also home to the Yup'ik, Dena'ina, andAlutiiq peoples who depend on sustainable salmon runs fortheir subsistence. In 2013, NARF helped create the UnitedTribes of Bristol Bay (UTBB), a consortium of tribes in the re-gion. UTBB was formed for tribes to directly address regionallarge-scale mining proposals threatening salmon-rearingstreams. Exercising its delegated governmental authority, withNARF as counsel, UTBB has engaged the federal government
in direct government-to-government consultation on largescale mining in Bristol Bay like the proposed Pebble Mine. 
The proposed Pebble Mine would sit on the headwaters of the
largest salmon-producing river in Bristol Bay. In February 2014,EPA gave notice that it would initiate a Clean Water Act 404(c)process for the proposed mine. Section 404(c) authorizes EPAto prohibit or restrict the discharge of material in waters whenit determines that such disposal would have an unacceptableadverse impact on various resources, including fisheries,wildlife, municipal water supplies, or recreational areas. Assoon as the EPA announced that it would study the PebbleMine, the State of Alaska requested a stay to allow the devel-oper to submit a permit under the National Environmental Pol-icy Act (NEPA) process. EPA granted the state and the Corp ofEngineers an extension to respond to the notification of 404(c)process. The stay ended in April 2013, and Pebble Limited Part-nership (PLP) filed suit in May challenging the EPA's reviewprocess. The district court and the US Court of Appeals bothdismissed the case.
So, in September 2014, PLP filed another complaint against
EPA. The court granted the preliminary injunction, therebyhalting EPA's work on the 404(c) process in Bristol Bay. As thecase continued, the judge issued a broad order quashing PLP'ssubpoenas, finding that they pushed federal discovery rules totheir very limits. After the order, PLP withdrew its remainingsubpoenas, but PLP began serving narrower subpoenas, whichalso were quashed. In the last days of 2016, the parties re-quested a stay of the proceedings in order to negotiate a settle-ment of the case. 
In May 2017, the parties reached a total settlement of the litiga-
tion. Key terms of the settlement include: (1) dismissing all Peb-ble's pending lawsuits against the EPA; (2) EPA's agreeing topropose to withdraw the proposed Section 404(c) determina-tion; (3) EPA's agreeing it will not move to finalize any Section404(c) action until 48 months from the date of the settlement oruntil the US Army Corps of Engineers issues its final environ-mental impact statement, whichever comes first.
PLP filed its federal permit application in December 2017,
thereby beginning the NEPA review process. NARF and UTBBcontinue to work to protect Bristol Bay throughout the federaland state permitting process surrounding the Pebble Mine.
John Sturgeon v. Sue Masica et al.
In John Sturgeon v. Sue Masica et al ., federal courts upheld the
13ANNUAL REPORT 2018right of the National Park Service to prohibit
the use of a hovercraft on a river inside a na-tional park or preserve. The lower federalcourts ruled in favor of the federal governmenton the basis that nationwide park and preserverules generally apply to all lands and watersthat are inside a park or preserve. Yet, the 1980Alaska National Interest Lands ConservationAct (ANILCA) specifically declares that state,Alaska Native, and private lands are not subjectto “regulations applicable solely to public landswithin such units”. 
Because the Ninth Circuit's ruling resulted in
Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA)lands being subject to park regulations,ANCSA corporations joined in petitioning forreview of the case by the US Supreme Court.The Court granted review, and NARF filed anamicus brief on behalf of subsistence users in
support of the federal government because ofconcern that the case may inadvertently impli-cate subsistence fishing rights.
In March 2016, the Supreme Court agreed that
the lands get special treatment under ANILCAand are not to be treated as if they were federalpublic lands, but the court went no further. TheSupreme Court said it was for the lower courtsto decide if the Nation River is public land forpurposes of ANILCA and whether the ParkService has the power to regulate activities inthe river even if it does not qualify as federalpublic land. NARF filed an amicus brief sup-
porting the federal government's position andthe subsistence fishing rights established by theKatie John line of cases. 
In October 2017, the Ninth Circuit Court of Ap-
peals upheld for the second time the right of thePark Service to prohibit the use of a hovercraft on the NationRiver. In reaching its ruling, the Court relied upon and reaf-firmed all three of the Court of Appeals' prior Katie John deci-
sions. In January 2018, Mr. Sturgeon again sought SupremeCourt review. The Court accepted the case. The case has beenfully briefed by the parties and the Court held oral argumentin November 2018. Ch'u'itnu Traditional Cultural Landscape 
NARF represented the Native Village of Tyonek (NVT) in re-sponse to a permit proposal by PacRim to mine coal from theBeluga coal fields in the Cook Inlet. NVT focused on the Na-tional Historic Protection Act (NHPA) to identify historic prop-erties eligible for listing. In March 2017, PacRim Coalannounced its decision to suspend pursuit of permitting effortson the Chuitna Coal Project. 
14NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Regardless of the closed permitting process, NARF helped
NVT nominate the entire Ch'u'itnu watershed for inclusion onthe National Register of Historic Places as a Traditional Cultural Landscape. The designation would recognize the profound importance the Ch'u'itnu watershed has played inshaping and sustaining NVT's peoples' culture, traditions,identity, and subsistence lifestyle and ensure that impacts toTubughna cultural, traditional, and subsistence practices aretaken into consideration during future consultation processesfor projects within the Ch'u'itnu.
In April 2018, the Alaska Historical Commission voted 6-2 that
the Ch'u'itnu Historic District, Traditional Cultural Propertywas eligible for listing on the National Register and recom-mended that the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) approve the nomination. The SHPO rejected the Commission'srecommendation, but nevertheless sent the nomination to theKeeper of the National Register for final determination. NVTand NARF are working with the Keeper's staff to ensure thatthe nomination is adequately documented before it is listed.
Arctic National Wildlife Refuge
The Arctic National Wildlife Refuge's Coastal Plain is home tothe calving grounds of the Porcupine Caribou Herd-one of thelargest wild herds in the world-and of great cultural impor-tance to the Gwich'in Tribes of Alaska, who refer to the area asIizhik Gwats'an Gwandaii Goodlit (the sacred place where lifebegins). Since 1980, when the Coastal Plain was first consideredfor development, the Gwich'in Tribes have worked tirelessly toprotect the Refuge and the caribou. NARF represents the Native Village of Venetie Tribal Government, Venetie VillageCouncil, and Artic Village Council, three federally recognizedGwich'in tribes, and advises them on their rights and strategicoptions surrounding proposed development of the CoastalPlain.
In 2017, Congress enacted tax reform legislation that contained
a provision opening the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge'sCoastal Plain to oil and gas development. The Bureau of LandManagement (BLM) began the environmental review processto open the Coastal Plain to oil and gas leasing. 
NARF is working with tribal clients during the review
processes required by the National Environmental Policy Actand the National Historic Preservation Act. This involvementmeans that the tribes have been at the decision-making tablefrom the outset, influencing the scope and direction of theprocesses, rather than being just spectators. However, in December 2018, the BLM published its draft environmental 
impact statement without any prior notice to the tribes despitemonths of government-to-government meetings. The draft EISis based on pre-existing data and research from other regionsin Alaska that brushes aside the effects on subsistence and cultural resources.
EnViRonMEnTAL PR oTECT ion  
NCAI Climate Change Matters
The effects of climate change on indigenous peoples through-out the world are acute and will only get worse. NARF repre-sents the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI) onclimate change matters at the international level through theUnited Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change(UNFCCC). NARF and NCAI are ensuring that indigenousrights are protected in any international treaty or agreementgoverning greenhouse gas emissions reductions.
In December 2015, the Paris Agreement, the first universally
binding accord on climate change, was adopted under the UNFCCC. The International Indigenous Peoples Forum on Climate Change (indigenous caucus), which NARF participatesin, did not achieve all that it sought, but it achieved significantreferences that can be built on going forward. The Agreementstates that, when taking action on climate change, the rights ofindigenous peoples must be acknowledged and that tradi-tional, indigenous knowledge shall help guide the science usedto address climate change. It also recognizes the need tostrengthen that knowledge and establishes a platform for thesharing of information and best practices. Since the ParisAgreement, the indigenous caucus has made efforts to makethe traditional knowledge platform a reality. 
In December 2018, a historic step forward was taken at the 24th
Conference of the Parties (COP 24) when they established a Facilitative Working Group to develop a work plan for the plat-form. The working group will have fourteen representatives:seven country representatives and seven indigenous represen-tatives appointed by indigenous peoples. This representationof indigenous peoples is unprecedented, marking the first timethat indigenous representatives (chosen by indigenous peoples) will participate on an equal basis with states within a United Nations body.
15ANNUAL REPORT 2018Under the priority of the promoting human rights , NARF 
concentrates on enforcing laws regarding equal protection andfreedom from discrimination in areas such as voting, education, incarceration, and religion. NARF also helps developlaws that provide unique protections for Native collectiverights, traditions, culture, and property such as sacred places,peyote, eagle feathers, burial remains, and funerary objects.
RELiGiou S FREED oM AnD SACRED PLACES
Bears Ears
For several years, the Bears Ears Inter Tribal Coalition, a con-sortium of five sovereign Indian nations (Hopi Tribe, NavajoNation, Ute Indian Tribe, Ute Mountain Ute Tribe, and Puebloof Zuni) worked to protect the Bears Ears region, America'smost significant unprotected cultural landscape. The Bears Earsregion, located in Utah, contains at least 100,000 archaeologicalsites, some dated back to 12,000 BCE, and remains critical tomany tribes today for spiritual as well as hunting and gatheringpurposes. In response to these efforts, in December 2016, Pres-ident Obama designated the Bears Ears National Monumentand established the Bears Ears Commission “to provide guid-ance and recommendations on the development and imple-mentation of management plans and on management of themonument.” The Commission included one elected officer eachfrom the Hopi Nation, Navajo Nation, Ute Mountain Ute Tribe,Ute Indian Tribe, and Pueblo of Zuni. 
In April 2017, President Trump directed the Department of the
Interior to review the Bears Ears National Monument to deter-mine if it was created without “public outreach and proper coordination.” The suggestion that the monument's designationlacked outreach and coordination is disingenuous. The BearsEars National Monument was created after years of advocacyand many public meetings in the Bears Ears region and inWashington, DC. The effort to protect Bears Ears was very long,very public, and very robust.
Despite an outpouring of public support for Bears Ears, in 
December 2017, President Trump issued an Executive Order revoking and replacing the Bears Ears National Monument.Representing the Hopi, Zuni, and Ute Mountain Ute Tribes,NARF sued the Administration for violations of the AntiquitiesAct, the Separation of Powers, the Property Clause and the Administrative Procedures Act. The case was assigned to ajudge in the federal court in the District of Columbia. In Sep-tember 2018, the DC District Court denied the government'smotion to transfer to Utah, so the case will be litigated in DC.The government immediately filed a motion to dismiss andNARF responded on behalf of the Hopi, Zuni, and Ute Moun-
tain Ute Tribes. However, the real issue is that President Trumpdoes not have the authority to do what he did. Only Congresshas the power to extinguish monuments once established.
Keystone XL Pipeline
The TransCanada Keystone XL Pipeline is a massive oilpipeline intended to link the oil producers in Canada with therefiners and export terminals on the Gulf Coast. It stretches1,179 miles and crosses or comes very close to the boundariesof many reservations and tribal land holdings, including theOceti Sacowin or Great Sioux Nation lands from before the Fort
Laramie Treaty of 1868. It also crosses many rivers and theOgallala Aquifer, which provides water to South Dakota, Nebraska, and others. Moreover, the proposed pipeline routecrosses over sacred Sioux land and an undetermined numberof cultural sites and burials. Despite these realities, no consul-tation has occurred between the federal government and thetribes affected. President Obama rejected the permit requiredfor the Canada-US boundary crossing in 2015, but the TrumpAdministration reversed course and granted the necessary permit, reviving a project that many thought dead. A lawsuitwas filed on behalf of the Rosebud Sioux Tribe and the FortBelknap Indian Community in August 2018, opposing thepipeline and any intrusion onto sacred tribal and treaty lands,as well as any environmental damage to the water supply.
Northern Arizona Withdrawal
In 2012, an action known as the Northern Arizona Withdrawalremoved over a million acres of land around the Grand Canyonfrom any new uranium mining claims. Several mining compa-nies and individuals challenged the Withdrawal on manygrounds, including that the withdrawal violated the Establish-ment Clause of the US Constitution because it relied on American Indian spiritual beliefs and constituted an impermis-sible establishment of religion. NARF, representing the IndianPeaks Band of Paiute Indians, the San Juan Southern PaiuteTribe, and the Morningstar Institute, filed an amicus brief in
Yount v. Jewell. The court upheld the Northern Arizona With-
drawal. 
The mining companies appealed this decision to the US Court
of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. NARF, representing the PaiuteIndian Tribe of Utah, San Juan Southern Paiute Tribe, KaibabBand of Paiute Indians, Hualapai Tribe of the Hualapai Reser-vation, Northwestern Band of the Shoshone Nation, the Morn-ing Star Institute, and the National Congress of AmericanIndians, again filed an amicus brief. In December 2017, the
Ninth Circuit affirmed the district court's opinion upholding
17ANNUAL REPORT 2018
PROMOTING HUMAN RIGHTSthe Northern Arizona Withdrawal. In March 2018, one of the
mining companies filed a certiorari petition with the US
Supreme Court. The Supreme Court declined to hear the mat-ter. This is a great victory that will prevent future mining claimsfor the time being.
Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance, et al. v. Schneider
In May 2015, environmentalists and historic preservation advocates secured a victory when a Utah federal district courtordered the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) to conduct on-the-ground surveys to identify cultural artifacts in need ofprotection on more than 4,000 miles of dirt roads and trailswhere BLM permits off-road vehicles to be driven. BLM appealed that decision in the US Court of Appeals for the TenthCircuit. NARF, representing the Paiute Indian Tribe of Utah, Indian Peaks Band of Paiutes, the Southern Ute Indian Tribe,and the Morning Star Institute, filed an amicus brief requesting
that the surveys be conducted. A settlement agreement was executed in January 2017. The settlement terms include require-ments for new travel planning on thirteen different areas underfederal management, including additional and more intensivecultural resource surveys and inventories, as well as other provisions related to wilderness areas, updated oil and gasguidance and modeling efforts, and vacating the district courtopinion. NARF continues to monitor the progress of the caseand the viability of the settlement.
Solonex v. Jewell
NARF represented the Blackfeet Tribe as amicus curiae in the
federal district court case, Solonex v. Jewell. Solonex LLC 
challenged the authority of the United States to cancel its oiland gas lease in areas that would threaten the Tribe's sacredsites. In 2017 and 2018, the parties completed briefing and oralarguments on motions for summary judgment and in Septem-ber 2018, the judge entered summary judgement in favor ofSolenex, concluding that the lease cancelation was “arbitraryand capricious” because more than 30 years of indecision bythe agency constituted an unreasonable delay. The judge alsoconcluded that Department of the Interior did not give Solenexappropriate notice that it was canceling the lease, which violated a duty to act in good faith. At this time, it is not knownwhether the United States intends to appeal the decision.
Standing Rock Sioux Tribe v. Army Corp of Engineers - Amicus
Brief StrategyNARF and the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI)are assisting the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and their attorneysto develop and coordinate an effective amicus brief strategy in
their lawsuit against the US Army Corps of Engineers in rela-tion to the Dakota Access Pipeline (DAPL). In December 2016,
the Army Corps of Engineers issued a statement that it wouldnot grant an easement to allow the Dakota Access Pipeline tocross under Lake Oahe. The Corps determined that further en-vironmental review was warranted. However, in January 2017,President Trump directed the Corps to take “any and all actionsappropriate” to review and approve the easement, rescind ormodify the December memo, and consider any prior determi-nations in the matter. 
In February 2017, the Department of Justice informed the court
that the Corps had provided notice of its intention to grant aneasement to Dakota Access, LLC, to construct a pipeline underLake Oahe. Both Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and CheyenneRiver Sioux Tribe filed amended complaints and motions forsummary judgment challenging the issuance of the easement.NARF, in conjunction with NCAI, coordinated an amicus brief
strategy in support of the Tribes' motions for summary judg-ment. 
In June 2017, the court issued a favorable ruling for the Tribes,
finding that the Corps “did not adequately consider the im-pacts of an oil spill on fishing rights, hunting rights, or envi-ronmental justice, or the degree to which the pipeline's effectsare likely to be highly controversial.” In February and March2018, the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe and Standing Rock SiouxTribe requested that the court issue clearer guidelines for theCorps' consultation with the Tribes in the remand process, as-serting that the Corps has been unresponsive to requests for in-formation and otherwise not meaningfully engaged with theTribes in developing an oil spill response plan. In April 2018,Dakota Access filed its oil spill response plan, after which thecourt denied the Tribes' request for clarification and consulta-tion guidelines, ruling that the request was mooted by the filingof the oil spill response plan.
In August 2018, the Corps issued a decision affirming its 
original decision to issue a construction permit for DAPL. The Corps concluded that the “. . . review on remand did notreveal 'significant new circumstance[s] or information relevantto environmental concerns.' The court ordered proposals forpost-remand proceedings. NARF and NCAI continue to workwith the Tribes' attorneys and coordinate amicus strategy as 
requested.
Native American Church of North America
NARF has represented the Native American Church of NorthAmerica (NACNA) and its member chapters for four decadesin litigation and legislative action. For the past two years,
18NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNARF has worked to develop and support access to and the
use of peyote for NACNA. Importing from Mexico, where mostnaturally occurring peyote grows, is presently not legal, andartificial cultivation is difficult and extraordinarily expensive,so North American peyotists depend on the only region wherepeyote abundance occurs in the United States, the Rio GrandeRiver Valley in south Texas. That supply of peyote is becomingless sustainable due to a myriad of factors: growing Indian de-mand; exploitation and commercialization by non-Indian peo-ple; damage from land use practices including cattle ranching;and damage from incorrect harvesting practices and over-har-vesting of the peyote cactus. For the last few years, the Peyote Research Project has focused
on raising awareness in Texas of the need to protect the sacra-ment. NARF and NACNA representatives have held manymeetings with landowners, peyoteros, and botanists to developrelationships. A meeting with Texas Department of Public Safetyofficials was held in January 2018 to brief them on the Project
In 2017, NARF closed on the purchase of 605 acres of south
Texas land, made possible by a grant from the RiverStyx Foun-dation of California. Currently, NARF, with Native AmericanChurch representatives and the philanthropy community, iscreating a nonprofit organization to hold title to the land andput a peyote conservation project in place. 
19ANNUAL REPORT 2018
inDiAn EDuCATion
Boarding School Healing Project
During the 19th and into the 20th century, pursuant to federalpolicy, Native American children were forcibly abducted fromtheir homes to attend Christian and government-run boardingschools. The purpose was to "civilize" the Indian and to stampout Native culture. There has been scant recognition and no ac-ceptance of responsibility by the US federal government thatinitiated and carried out this policy of cultural genocide. Unlikein other countries (e.g. Canada, Australia), there has been noofficial US proposal for healing or reconciliation. 
NARF represents the Native American Boarding School Heal-
ing Coalition in seeking appropriate acknowledgment by theUnited States and major Christian denominations of their rolesin establishing and implementing the boarding school policyof cultural genocide. The Coalition provides education and out-reach in Indian Country, churches and the non-Indian public,Congress, and international venues. 
Tribal Education Departments 
National AssemblyNARF founded the Tribal Education Departments National As-sembly (TEDNA) almost fifteen years ago with funding fromthe US Department of Education to start a national member-ship organization for Tribal Education Departments (or Agen-cies). With NARF's assistance, TEDNA has become a leadingIndian education organization that focuses on tribal gover-nance over K-12 education provided by state, federal, and tribal
schools. NARF continues to repr esent TEDNA on national leg-
islative and administrative matters. Recently, NARF has re-viewed tribal education codes to identify areas for increasedtribal governance. NARF also provides training for TEDNAand its partners on various national, state, and tribal educationlegislation and other legal matters. 
McCoy v. Salish Kooetnai College
NARF represents the American Indian Higher Education Con-sortium (AIHEC) as amicus curiae in this case brought against a
tribal college by a former employee of the college alleging thathe was discriminated against by the college in violation of TitleVII of the Civil Rights Act. The college has moved to dismisson the ground that the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribeshave sovereign immunity and the college is an arm of theTribes. AIHEC sought to participate on behalf of its 36 membertribal colleges and universities. In April 2018, over the em-ployee's opposition, the court granted AIHEC's motion to fileits amicus brief. The court heard oral argument on the college'sdismissal motion in August 2018. The court granted the tribal
college's motion to dismiss, but the individual has appealed to the US Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. 
Rosebud Sioux Tribal Education Code Revision Project
In 1987 NARF accepted the request of the Rosebud Sioux Tribeto develop a precedent-setting tribal education code to regulate all K-12 schools on it reservation. The Rosebud SiouxTribe adopted its Education Code in 1991. In 2015, the RosebudSioux Tribe received a grant from the Department of the Interior to revise its 25-year-old Education Code. The Tribe retained NARF to do this revision; work on the revision is ongoing.
Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe Education Code
NARF represents the Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe in drafting acomprehensive education code. NARF met with the Leech LakeEducation Director, the Tribal Council, and in-house legal staffin early October, and is proceeding with developing the codeand gathering input from stakeholders on the Reservation.
inDiAn CHiLD WELFARE ACT DEFE nSE 
The Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) was passed by the US
Congress in 1978 in response to the disproportionate numbersof American Indian and Alaska Native children being removedfrom their families by state agencies and state courts and placedin non-Native foster or adoptive homes or residential institu-tions. Congress found that many of these removals and place-ments were due to state officials' inability or unwillingness tounderstand tribal cultures and societies. The impact of the re-movals and placements was extremely detrimental to the chil-dren, their families, and tribes. 
In 2016, the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) issued regulations
and guidelines for the implementation of ICWA. The past sev-eral years have seen a dramatic increase in the number of legalchallenges brought by opponents of ICWA, all with the goal ofundermining ICWA and tribal sovereignty. The ICWA Defense Project is a partnership formed to protect the rights of children,families, and tribes in ICWA proceedings nationwide.
Most recently, in October 2018, in the case Brackeen v. Zinke (in
the US District Court for the Northern District of Texas) thejudge ruled that both ICWA and the 2016 ICWA regulations areunconstitutional. The arguments Judge O'Connor relied uponto hold ICWA and the regulations unconstitutional are contraryto the Constitution, congressional intent, and decades of well-established federal Indian law. NARF is working closely with
20NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDour partners and the tribal defendants to coordinate amicus briefs
and is committed to ensuring that this decision is reversed.
Finally, NARF has been heavily involved in recent efforts in
Alaska to transfer more control over the state's child welfare sys-tem to tribes through a compacting process. Initial negotiationstook place over the course of 2017, and the Alaska Tribal ChildWelfare Compact was signed in October 2017. This compact al-lows tribes to enter into an agreement with the
State to provide services and/or perform func-tions that are currently provided by the AlaskaOffice of Children's Services. In 2018, the tribes negotiated additional services for the comingfiscal year.
VoTinG AnD CiViL RiGHTS
Brakebill, et al. v. Jaeger
In 2016, NARF, on behalf of seven NativeAmericans from North Dakota fought thestate's voter ID law, which disproportionatelyprevented Native Americans from exercisingtheir right to vote. Judge Daniel L. Hovland ofthe US District Court for the District of NorthDakota found “[i]t is undisputed that the moresevere conditions in which Native Americanslive translates to disproportionate burdenswhen it comes to complying with the newvoter ID laws.” Judge Hovland, therefore, heldthe law likely violated the US Constitution because it disproportionately kept NativeAmericans from voting. He required the stateto provide a fail-safe mechanism for thosewithout IDs in the 2016 general election. JudgeHovland wrote, “… it is clear that a safety netis needed for those voters who simply cannotobtain a qualifying voter ID with reasonable effort.”
The state legislature amended the law in 2017,
but still failed to include meaningful protec-tions for voters' rights. In December 2017, Plain-tiffs filed an amended complaint alleging thenew law violated the Voting Rights Act and theUS and North Dakota Constitutions because ofthe disproportionate impacts on Native Amer-icans. Plaintiffs also alleged that the law's intentwas to burden Native American voters in orderto suppress their vote and that the new law
constitutes an illegal property requirement to vote. In April2018, the court stopped enforcement of the new voter ID law.The court ordered the state to accept a much broader swath ofIDs for voting purposes and put a significant amount of powerback under tribal control. The state appealed to the US Courtof Appeals for the Eighth Circuit. In late September, after ab-sentee voting had begun, the Eighth Circuit changed the rulesof the election and permitted the state to use residential street
21ANNUAL REPORT 2018
addresses even though Native communities in
the state often lack them. The Supreme Courtupheld that decision. The Eighth Circuit is nowconsidering the merits of the appeal. 
Native American Voting Rights Coalition
In 2015, NARF founded the Native AmericanVoting Rights Coalition (NAVRC), a non-parti-san alliance of organizations, scholars, and ac-tivists advocating for equal access for NativeAmericans to the political process. NARF devel-oped the project to coordinate efforts at over-coming the barriers Native Americans face inregistering to vote, casting their ballot, and hav-ing an equal voice in elections. NAVRC employsthree primary methods to achieve its goal. It ed-ucates the public about the unique challengesNative voters face. It works with policy makersand election officials to address those challenges.
And, when necessary, NAVRC members may
pursue other legal avenues, including litigation,to stop practices that have a discriminatory pur-pose or effect on Native voters.
One of the significant achievements of the
Coalition so far is the completion of a thirty-tribe survey of over 5,000 voters in Nevada,Arizona, New Mexico, and South Dakota. Theresults documented widespread discriminationand disenfranchisement. The final survey wasreleased in January 2018. Subsequently, theCoalition completed its second ambitious proj-ect: to conduct field hearings throughout In-dian Country to document barriers toregistration and voting in non-tribal elections.Information from the hearings will help promote public education, identify policy solu-tions, and consideration of other legal remediesto expand Native access to voting. Results fromthe field hearings are forthcoming.
The NAVRC, led by NARF, developed a de-
tailed strategic plan for both the 2018 and 2020 elections and isworking on funding and meeting its many objectives.
Smith v. State
For decades, the Alaska Court System has excluded the residents of over 150 rural villages from being called for juryservice. The courts claim that it's too expensive to include ruralresidents; however, the exclusion of rural residents disenfran-
chises communities with lower incomes and that are predom-inately Alaska Native. Not including those communities in thejury pool results in thirty percent of Alaska Natives being excluded from participating in the justice system. It affects perceptions of the justice system-when excluded from juryservice, then one only encounters the courts as a victim, 
22NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
witness, or defendant. And, it results in unrepresentative juries
and likely disproportionate sentences.
In February 2017, NARF filed an amicus brief before the Alaska
Court of Appeals in support of Appellant Smith's argumentsthat costs savings alone are not a sufficient government interest,under an equal protection and due process analysis, to excludethirty percent of the Alaska Native community from servingon juries. Briefing has been completed and oral argument washeld May 2018.
inTERnATion AL REC oGniTion  oF 
inDiGEnou S PEoPLES
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
Since 1999, NARF has represented the National Congress ofAmerican Indians (NCAI) in the international arena to protectindigenous rights. In September 2007, the United Nations Gen-eral Assembly overwhelmingly adopted the Declaration on theRights of Indigenous Peoples (Declaration). The Declarationrecognizes that indigenous peoples have important collectivehuman rights in a multitude of areas, including self-determi-nation, spirituality, cultural and linguistic heritage, and lands,territories and natural resources. It sets minimum standards forthe treatment of indigenous peoples and can serve as the basisfor the development of customary international law. 
NARF's most recent actions on behalf of the NCAI have fo-
cused on the participation of indigenous institutions at theUnited Nations (UN). Until now, indigenous peoples have hadto appear in most UN bodies as non-governmental organiza-tions, which is precisely what they are not. Indigenous peoples'representatives from around the world, including one fromNCAI, met in November 2016 to discuss areas of consensus. In-formal consultations with member states began in December2016 and continued through July 2017. This series of consulta-tions concluded without any real movement on the issue, butthe UN General Assembly committed, in September 2017, tocontinue to consider the issue for the next five sessions, and di-rected that additional regional consultations take place and thata report be compiled. A compilation of submissions by Indige-nous Peoples and member states can be found atwww.un.org/development/desa/indigenouspeoples/reports-by-members-of-the-permanent-forum.html.
Organization of American States Draft Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous PeoplesThe Organization of American States (OAS) has been workingon an American Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples for over twenty-five years. NARF has been represent-
ing NCAI on this matter. The General Assembly of the OAS approved the American Declaration on the Rights of Indige-nous Peoples in June 2016. This Declaration marks a major victory for indigenous peoples. The American Declaration goesbeyond the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indige-nous Peoples in several respects including addressing treaties,the rights of children, and the rights of peoples in voluntaryisolation. The United States commented it had been a persistentobjector to the text and could not be bound by it. NARF attended the first Inter-American week for Indigenous PeopleAugust 6-10, 2018 in Washington, DC.
World Intellectual Property Organization
NARF represents NCAI in the ongoing negotiations for an international instrument to protect various intellectual property, including Traditional Knowledge, Genetic Resourcesand Associated Traditional Knowledge (GRAATK), and Tradi-tional Cultural Expressions (TCE). The United States has beenparticipating in these negotiations at the World IntellectualProperty Organization (WIPO) since 2000. Since 2009, the negotiations have centered on the draft text of the three poten-tial instruments concerning TK, GRAATK, and TCE. 
In May 2017, NARF and the University of Colorado (CU) Law
School hosted a drafting session on the TCE instrument. NARFtook a draft of new TCE provisions to the 34th WIPO sessionin June 2017. The WIPO Indigenous Caucus approved the draftand some of the text from it was introduced into the WIPOdraft TCE instrument. In 2017, the new WIPO IntergovernmentalCommittee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore (IGC) mandate and workplan were approved by the WIPO General Assembly. 
Building on that experience, NARF and CU Law School hosted
another major drafting session in May 2018 focusing on theGRAATK instrument. Once again, the draft text that was madeavailable to and approved by the Indigenous Caucus, thusstrengthening the Caucus' ability to participate effectively innegotiations. In June 2018, NARF served as a speaker on theIGC Indigenous Panel on the topic of “Practical Measures Relating to Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources: Databases and Contracts - Indigenous Peoples' and Local Communities' Perspectives.”
23Within the unique trust relationship between the United States
and Native nations is the inherent duty for all levels of govern-ment to recognize and responsibly enforce the many laws andregulations applicable to Native peoples. Because such lawsimpact virtually every aspect of tribal life, NARF is committedto holding governments accountable to Native Americans. 
TRuST FunD MATTERS
Pembina Chippewa v. United States
NARF represents the Turtle Mountain Chippewa, ChippewaCree, White Earth Band of Minnesota Chippewa, and LittleShell Chippewa Tribes in this case against the federal govern-ment for misaccounting and mismanagement of their tribaltrust fund, the Pembina Judgment Fund. Starting in August2007, the parties engaged in alternative dispute resolution proceedings in the Court of Federal Claims. In July 2015, theparties reached agreement on a monetary amount for a potential settlement of the Plaintiffs' claims in this case. In March 2018, the parties reached agreement on the non-monetarycomponents of a potential settlement. The parties are now proceeding to seek their formal approvals of the settlement.
Muscogee (Creek) Nation v. Zinke 
In January 2014, the Muscogee Creek Nation retained NARF torepresent it in its pending action in federal district court for anhistorical accounting of its trust funds and assets. NARF re-viewed the Nation’s trust account data provided by the gov-ernment and assisted the Nation in its settlement negotiationswith the government. In August 2016, the final settlementagreement was filed with and approved by the Court. The JointStipulation of Dismissal was filed in September 2016 and isawaiting approval by the Court. 
Intertribal Council of Arizona v. United States 
In April 2015, NARF filed on behalf of the Intertribal Councilof Arizona (ITCA) a breach of trust case against the UnitedStates seeking damages for mismanagement of the Arizona In-tertribal Trust Fund (AITF). The AITF was established by Con-gress in 1988 to compensate Arizona tribes for the closure ofthe Phoenix Indian School, an off-reservation boarding schooloperated by the Bureau of Indian Affairs since 1891. The school’s closure allowed the Department of the Interior toexchange the land on which the school had been located forprivately owned lands of the Barron Collier Company inFlorida that would become part of a national wildlife refuge.The Phoenix lands were more valuable than the Florida lands,and Congress approved the land exchange only if the differ-ence in value of the properties went to the AITF and a trustfund for the Navajo Nation. Collier paid some, but not all, of
the property value and then gave notice that they would nolonger make payments. The lawsuit seeks to hold the UnitedStates liable for the remaining payments into the AITF. Afterfailed negotiation efforts, ITCA filed its Second AmendmentComplaint in April 2018, which the United States moved to dis-miss. The court heard oral argument on the motion in October2018 and granted virtually the entire motion, dismissing all buta portion of one of ITCA’s claims. NARF is researching optionsand recommendations for ITCA.
Repeal of the Klamath Tribe Distribution of Judgment Act
The Klamath Tribe retained NARF to seek repeal of the Distribution of Judgment Fund Act, which was adopted as partof the legislation that terminated the Tribes' government-to-government relationship in 1954. That relationship was restored in 1986, but the remnant legislation was not repealed.The Distribution Act requires distribution of judgments fromthe United States Treasury to descendants of those who appearon the final roll compiled pursuant to the Termination Act. Thatwould include distribution of tribal funds to a significant number of non-Indians and individuals who are not enrolledmembers of the Tribes. Repeal would result in funds depositedin the Treasury from judgments against the United States beingdistributed pursuant the Distribution of Judgment Funds Actfor all Tribes. Senators Merkley and Wyden introduced S 1223in May 2017 to repeal the Klamath Tribe Judgment Fund Act.NARF provided testimony in support of its adoption. S 1223 was adopted in the Senate in March 2018, but was notconsidered by the House before the end of the legislative session. The Tribe will work to re-introduce the bill in 2019.
Center for Biological Diversity, et al. v. US Army Corps of 
Engineers, et al.NARF represented the Santa Ynez Band of Chumash Indiansin a case challenging the issuance of a Clean Water Act Section404 permit. The proposed Newhall Ranch Project area encom-passes 12,000 acres along 5.5 linear miles of the Santa ClaraRiver and calls for the construction of nearly 21,000 homes onapproximately 2,550 acres. The project area is also the ancestralhomeland of Chumash and includes at least two significant ar-chaeological sites as well as a number of ancient burials. TheCorps issued a Clean Water Act Section 404 permit to Newhallin October 2012; the suit soon followed. The Tribe joined thiscase to protect their right to government-to-government con-sultation under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) andthe National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA). The Tribe’sclaim is simple: the Corps never contacted, much less formallyconsulted, the Tribe about the project. The Corps failed to fol-
24NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
HOLDING GOVERNMENTS ACCOUNTABLElow the statutory and regulatory mandates with respect to the
Tribe. Thus the Section 404 permit the Corp’s granted toNewhall is in violation of the NHPA and APA. Oral argumentwas held in February 2017. Subsequently, Newhall began settlement discussions in earnest and the case was settled inSeptember 2017. The Tribe negotiated for cultural resource protections that exceed what is required by California and 
federal law, support for their cultural center, and amending ofthe flawed agreement that previously applied to the project.NARF is now counsel to Santa Ynez to implement the terms ofthe settlement agreement.
25ANNUAL REPORT 2018
NARF has three ongoing projects aimed at developing Indian law
and educating the public about Indian rights, laws, and issues: the
Indigenous Peacemaking Initiative, the National Indian LawLibrary, and the Indian Law Support Center. NARF also par-ticipates in numerous conferences and meetings to share itsknowledge and expertise in Indian law. NARF remains firmlycommitted to continuing its effort to share its legal expertise insupport of Indian rights.
inDiGEnou S PEACEMAK inG iniTiATiVE 
Indigenous peacemaking is a community-directed conflict res-
olution process that addresses the concerns of all interestedparties. The peacemaking process uses traditional rituals suchas the group circle and Clan structures to involve the parties toa conflict, their supporters, elders and interested communitymembers. Within the circle, people can speak from the heart ina shared search for understanding of the conflict, and togetheridentify the steps necessary to assist in healing all affected par-ties and to prevent future occurrences and conflicts. Learn morefrom the IPI video at http://bit.ly/IPI-video. 
Trainings and technical assistance for tribes continues to be a
primary focal point for the project. IPI completed its 4th annualtraining session at the Pokagon Band of Potawatomi TribalCourts in Michigan and is in multi-phase training plans forIsleta Pueblo, the Ho-Chunk Nation in Wisconsin, and the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians. IPI also worked with theHo-Chunk Nation to develop a plan to support peacemakingimplementation within the tribal court system.
IPI staff and Advisory Committee members participated in a
Mindfulness New Mexico workshop in April 2018 and metwith researchers from the University of New Mexico to discusspossible approaches for measuring success in peacemaking,which would allow the development of statistical data for tribal communities and funding agencies. Outreach to otherrestorative justice practitioners is ongoing, as project staff attempt to develop more awareness of peacemaking in thelarger restorative justice community.
THE nATion AL inDiAn LAW L iBRAR y 
The National Indian Law Library (NILL) is the only publicly
available law library in the United States devoted to Indian law.The library serves NARF staff, but also members of the public.Since its start in 1972, NILL has collected nearly 9,000 resourcematerials that relate to federal Indian and tribal law. The collection includes tribal laws and constitutions, pleadings
from major Indian cases, and hard-to-find reports and historicallegal information. The library maintains an immense website(www.narf.org/nill/), which receives 26,000 visits each month.In addition to making its extensive collection available to the public, NILL provides research assistance related to Indianlaw and tribal law, and its staff answers over 2,000 questionseach year.
The library’s holdings include the largest collection of tribal
codes, ordinances and constitutions, and the Tribal Law Gateway (www.narf.org/nill/triballaw/) continues to be aninvaluable resource for tribal law. In the last year, NILL received updates to 73 constitutions/codes from 43 tribes.
Each week, NILL provides free updates on Indian law through
the Indian Law Bulletins (www.narf.org/nill/bulletins/). More than 6,400 subscribers currently receive the bulletin up-dates by email. For more than a decade, the library has offeredaccess to federal and state court cases, legal news and scholar-ship, federal legislation, and regulatory action from agenciesand departments like the Environmental Protection Agencyand the Bureau of Indian Affairs. That collection of materials,archived on the NILL website, can be used as a searchable data-base of Native American law and legal news. 
inDiAn LAW S uPPoRT CE nTER
The Indian Tribal Justice and Legal Assistance Act of 2000 
authorizes the US Department of Justice (DOJ) to provide supplemental funding to Indian Legal Services (ILS) programsfor their representation of Indian people and tribes that fallbelow federal poverty guidelines. NARF continues to performIndian Law Support Center duties by sending regular commu-nications to ILS programs, hosting a national listserv, handlingrequests for assistance, and working with ILS programs to secure a more stable funding base. DOJ recently announced itsintent to award FY 2018 funding of $300,000 for civil programsand $300,000 for criminal programs. NARF is working with theNational Association of Indian Legal Services to transfer management of these DOJ grants with this next round of grantawards. NARF will complete the management function for all grant awards that NARF currently manages.
26NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
DEVELOPING INDIAN LAW28NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
FY 2018 FINANCIAL REPORT 
Based on our audited financial statements for the fiscal year ending
September 30, 2018, NARF reports total revenue and net assets of $14,453,263 and $43,878,073, respectively. Due to pres-entation requirements of the audited financial statements interms of recognizing the timing of certain revenues and expenses, they do not reflect the fact that based on NARF’s internalreporting, expenses and other cash outlays exceeded revenue resulting in a decrease of $64,488 to NARF’s reserve fund.
When compared to fiscal year 2017: The increase in public 
contributions is mostly due to escalated direct mail campaigns(donations increased over 50% in that area). The significant decrease in tribal contributions is due to receiving generous,
one-time, donations from our tribal trust fund clients last year.Federal awards relate to our Bureau of Justice Assistance con-tracts, the majority of which is also included in expenses sinceit is paid-out to sub-recipients, and, although we continue tobe awarded new contracts, the amounts vary from year to year.The increase in foundation grants is mostly due to receivingmany new grants restricted to our important projects and cases.The decrease in legal fees is mostly related to the fees we received last year for our tribal trust fund work, we did not receive any of these fees in 2018. Along with the overall markets, NARF’s investments continue to perform well. 
Public Contributions
Tribal Contributions
Federal Awards 
Foundation Grants
Return on Investments
Other
TOTALS          $ 3,583,370
927,200
1,139,6404,580,4911,340,0722,843,631
38,859
$14,453,26324.8%
6.4%7.9%
31.7%
9.2%
19.7%
0.3%
100.0%$ 2,121,784
23,771,360
1,001,888
907,065
2,123,889
2,115,776
55,646
$32,097,4086.6%
74.1%
3.1%2.8%6.6%6.6%0.2%
100.0%dollars percents
2018
dollars percents2017
Legal Fees
dollars percents2018
dollars percents2017
Litigation and Client Services
National Indian Law Library     Total Program Services
Management and GeneralFund Raising     Total Support Services
                         TOTALS   68.5%
2.6%
71.1%
8.1%
20.8%28.9%
100.0%            69.9%
3.2%
73.1%
8.2%
18.7%26.9%
100.0%                        $ 7,738,649 
         356,178 
      8,094,827  
         902,350 
      2,068,248       2,970,598  
 $11,065,425 
                             $ 8,782,554 
         332,551 
      9,115,105  
         1,036,746 
      2,668,574       3,705,320 
 $12,820,425 EXPENSE COMPARISON
Note: This summary of financial information has been extracted from NARF’s audited financial statements which received an unmod ified opinion
by the accounting firm of BKD, LLP . Complete audited financials are available, upon request, through our Boulder office, or at www.narf.org.SUPPORT AND REVENUE COMPARISONNARF's success relies on the generosity of our donors through-
out the nation. We invite you to learn more about the benefitsassociated with each program listed below, please contact ourDevelopment Department at 303-447-8760.
We gratefully acknowledge these donors for fiscal year 2018
(october 1, 2017 through September 30, 2018).
TRiBES A nD nATiVE oRGAnizATion S
Ak-Chin Indian Community, AMERIND Risk, Buena Vista
Rancheria Band of Me-Wuk Indians, Cabazon Band of MissionIndians, Cherokee Nation, Chickasaw Nation, Choctaw Nationof Oklahoma, Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians, Cow CreekBank of Umpqua Tribe of Indians, Delaware Nation of Oklahoma, Fort McDowell Yavapai Nation, Keweenaw Bay Indian Community, Match-E-Be-Nash-She-Wish Band of Pottawatomi Indian, Miccosukee Tribe of Indians, MuckleshootIndian Tribe, National Indian Gaming Association, NativeAmerican Church, Nome Eskimo Community, Pala Band ofMission Indians, Pechanga Band of Luiseño Mission Indians,Poarch Band of Creek Indians, Ponca Tribe of Nebraska, Quapaw Tribal Gaming Agency, San Manuel Band of MissionIndians, Santa Rosa Band of Cahuilla Indians, Seminole Tribeof Florida, Seven Cedars Casino/Jamestown S'Klallam,Shakopee Mdewakanton Sioux Community, Suquamish IndianTribe of Port Madison, Yavapai-Prescott Indian Tribe, YochaDehe Wintun Nation
Foun DATion S, CoRPoRATion S AnD LAW F iRMS
Adirondack Foundation; Agua Fund; Alaska Conservation
Foundation; AOH Foundation; Aria Foundation; Better WayFoundation; Casey Family Programs; Charles P . & Mary E. Belgarde Foundation; Chorus Foundation; Cold MountainFund of RSF Social Finance; Comcast NBCUniversal Founda-tion; Darby Foundation; Defense Against Thought ControlFoundation; Edgerton Foundation; Edward & Verna GerbicFamily Foundation; Ethel Kennedy Foundation; Ford Founda-tion; Gary NFP; Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation; Hanuman Foundation; Hewlett Foundation; Impact Fund; Lannan Foundation; MALDEF; Morton K. and Jane BlausteinFoundation; NEO Philanthropy; Oak Foundation; Oceans 5;Pew Charitable Trust; RiverStyx Foundation; Round RiverFoundation; Solidarity Giving; Stardust Foundation; SteinerFamily Foundation; Carey Turnbull; Tiffany & Co. Foundation;Tzo'-Nah Fund; Washkewicz Family Foundation; Cherry Republic, Inc.; Dr. Bronner's Magic Soaps; Patagonia; RobinsKaplan, LLP; Tilden Toelupe, LLCLiving Waters Endowment -The Living Waters Endowment 
allows donors to honor friends and loved ones by making an endowmentgift of $10,000 or more, where the principal is invested and interest income is used for NARF's programs. By designating a gift to endow-ment, contributions generate annual funds and provide legal represen-tation to our tribal clients in perpetuity. 
Elwood H. Brotzman Memorial Fund, Jerome Davis Living Waters
Endowment Fund, Kathleen & Ruth Dooley Family Fund, JohnEchohawk, Kim Gottschalk, Susan K. Griffiths Memorial Fund,The Robert & Joy Hanson Le land Endowment, Frank J. McCormick
Family Fund, Melody McCoy, Steven Moore, Marvin W.Pourier Jr. & Donna M. Deans Memorial Fund, Mary LouMosca-Ragona Memorial Fund, Ernest L. Schusky Endowment,The Snoqualmie Indian Tribe, Helen & Sidney Ungar Memorial Endowment Fund, Dan & Beth Whittemore, Joel Williams
29ANNUAL REPORT 2018
NARF A CKNOWLEDGMENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS : FISCAL YEAR 2018
Bequests and Trusts
Theresa Grant Blumen, Jovana Brown, Diane D.Delp, Carolyn Ferriday, William Guimond, Patricia Heidelberger, Jeannette Hoffenkamp,Kurt Low, Joseph Padula, Mary Sacher, ErmaleeBonar Skillman, Cathern Elizabeth Tufts, JohnTyler, John L. Vaupel, Amelia W. Vernon, MaryBrizius Weingart
Peta uha-Peta Uha in the Lakota (Sioux) language
means firekeeper, an individual who makes a solemncommitment to ensure that the sacred flame-source oflight, heat, and energy for the people-will be keptburning. Peta Uha is a membership program fordonors making substantial annual commitments toNARF. Like the firekeepers of old, members of the PetaUha Council demonstrate constancy and vigilance toensure the protection of justice for Native Americans.
Peta uha Pipestone 
Art L. Davidson, Lucille Echohawk, Lucile Hamlin,Benjamin Kazez, Rhoda Lindsay, Jay Scheide,Bill Thomson, Jean Del Vecchio, Dan & BethWhittemore
Peta uha T urquoise
Rev. & Mrs. Frederick & Judith Buechner, Dave & Sheila Gold, Nancy H. Gensburg, MarkGoldman, Willodean Harness, Michael & Barbara Krancer, Ann E. Larimore, Lynn Marran,Paul & Julie Murphy-Ribes, Helene Presskreischer,Mr. & Mrs. Robert J. Quinn
Peta uha Granite
Karen Benjamin, Sharon K. Blair, Mark & SusanBronson, Michael & Beth Chardack, Ty Cobb, Rima Fujita, oVer-tone Haircare, Eileen Heaser, Lois Katnick, Shea Kenyon, EvaLee, Paul & Eileen LeFort, Dale & Carol Miller, David Murray,Frannie Oates, Barbara Rogoff, Shilo Rohlman, Stephen Wald-man, Carol Weale, Julian & Stacy Yochum, Mary Lee Zerby
Peta uha Flint
Olivia Acharya, Kamal Ahmed, Robert Anderson, BarbaraAustin, Kent Bach, Carlin Barton, Judith Belsky, Pam Best,Diane Boehm, Lynne Bonnett, Cathryn Booth-LaForce, RichardBoutwell, Anna Bradberry, Mathew Brady, Alice Broner, JaneBrown, Susan Bush, Curt Cacioppo, Elizabeth Caplan, Mr. &Mrs. Michael Caputo, Catalina Chacon, Richard Cobb, CharlesCole, James Cole, Karen Crook, Newell Crookston, James Cuny,Eric Dahlstrom, Barbara Davis, Craig Du Prey, Thomas 
Egelhoff, Carol Eichelberger, Susan Eichhorn, Peter Ember,Yanka Erimtan, Joan Eshler, Mb Fafunwa, Eli Feldman, SisterMaureen Finnott, Herbert Floyd, Andrew & Audrey Franklin,Phyllis Friedman, Ann Getches, Robert Gips, Kathryn Greis,Michelle Groleau, Edward Haddock, Amy Hall, Craig & SusanHamada, Collier Hands, Margaret Hansen, Brian Highland,Hollie Hirst, Joan Howison, Anne Humes, Elizabeth Hurkes,Wayne Hyatt, Irving & Varda Rabin, Charles Kelly, Philip Kenney, Carolyn Kipper, Richard Knutson, Herr Georg Kochjar,Katherine Kovner, Ricki and Scott Kresan, Mrs. T. Labrecque,David Lemal, Sarah Litwin, Terry Luke, Stewart Macaulay,Melody MacKenzie, Archie Magnuson, Joey Majka, Dr. & Mrs.Alex Malaspina, Otwin Marenin, Patricia Mautner, Peyton
30NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Mays, Barbara Meislin, Gail Miliken, Roger & Tara Milliken,
Lisa Moersdorf, RN, John Montgomery, Maizy Myers, CassandraNaylor, Alan P . Neuman, James Olander, Gary Parlet, Beth Peisner, Kathryn Pfaff, Isabelle Philippe, David Pokross, NoellePoncelet, Edith Quevedo, Mike Revere, Arthur & Maria Richmond, Catherine Ridgway, Caryl Rine, Faith Roessel,Robert Ryan, David Saiget, Margaret Sass, Robert Saunooke,Michael Sawaya, Ernest & Mary Sue Schusky, Peter Sheldon,William Sherman, Linda Skogrand, Steven Slomka, JackSousae, Margaret Spanninger, Mary Gabrielle Sprague, JenniferStanley, Kelley Stanley, Wayne Ross and Nancy Starling Ross,Frances Stevenson, Samantha Swig, Beth Temkin, Beverly Terry,Tom Tremaine, Mary Van Kerrebrook, Todd VanderHeiden,Geraldine Walsh, Albert & Maxine Ware, Elizabeth Warren,Suzanne Way, Richard Weaver, Alexander Weiss, Aaron Wernham, Katharine Wilson, Harry & Belle Yaffe
Peta uha obsidian 
Maureen L. Abel, James Abell, Carla Allen, Keith Allison, JoyAlwan, James Anderson, Thomas Andreas, Dana Andrewson,Suzanne Bachman, Theresa Bagent, Bill Bajari, Neil Baldwin,Simrita Banwatt, Magdalene Bauer, Terry Benjamin, Raoul &Celesta Birnbaum, MarynJane Blaustein, David & BarbaraBoerner, Elise Bornstein, Lorraine Bosche, William & ElsaBoyce, Kristen Boyles, Herbert Brentlinger, Kristin Briggs, Jennifer Bright, Martha Brimm, Nancy Brinkman, Liz Brolaski,Penelope Brownell, Mary Bucholtz, Sean Buffington, JimmyBurchfield, Peter Burkhardt, Robert Busey, Brian Caffrey,Dwight Call, Betty Calloway, Cheryl Capps, Kim Caris, Douglas Carnahan, Ruth Carroll, Marshall Carter, CaseyCarter, Robert Cathcart, Dennis Chrisbaum, Paul Chrostowski,Condors Class of 2017-18, George Cloward, Bruce Cobern,Joyce Coffland, Joyce Cogar, Anne Cohen, Felice Cohen (Fritzi),Charles Coleman, Barbara Cook, Samuel Cook, DeliaCosentino, Roger Coupal, Keith Cowan, Jai Cross, MarthaCrothers, Patrick Crowley, George Cummings, Curtis & SusanCushman, Carol Daley, Michael Dallin, Ursula Dalzell, ArielDavis, Anne DeMuth, Robert Dentan, George Desmond, CarolDeWever, Philip Diamond, Tom Dorsey, Bonnie Duarte, Rosemary Duesterhaus, Peter Dusenberry, Shannon Eaton,Clinton Ecker, Gail Einhaus, Catherine Elliott, Robert Endres,Carl Eschbacher, Earl Evans, John & Barbara Everett, LenoreFeigenbaum, Anita Fineday, Helen Finestone, Catherine Frazzini, Anthony Freathy, Carla Fredericks, John Fueller, Ellen Furnari, L. J. Furnstahl, Betty Gallagher, Domino Gehred-O'Connell, Lawrence Geller, Donna Gilliss, James Gilroy, Marlene Gloege, Duncan Gold, Lisa Goldberg, Pamela Gordon,Shan Goshorn, Martin Griffith, Jacob Grubman, Heide Gulgowski, Wayne Hardwick, Corey Harvower, MelissaHaskell, Hayden Havens, Rebecca Haynes, Nicholas 
Hazelbaker, Anthony Heilbut, Ralph Helms, Linda Henry,Robert Henry, William Hintzman, Larry Hoellwarth, FrankHolberg, Rick Holmstrom, Raymond Honeywell, Dale Hooper,Jeff Hoyme, William Hoyt, Thomas Hoyt, Eileen Hufana, Elizabeth Hunt, Leon Ingram, Matthew Irwin, Rob Jackson,Margaret Jacobs, Susan Jacobson, Richard Janis, Charles Johnson, Bernadine Jones, Rodolfo Juarez, Mary Jungerman,Peter Kaczmarek, Julie Karbo, Rebecca Kay, Scott & MichelleKegler, Karen Kehoe, Frank Kernan, Julie Kiene, GraydonKingsland, Holly Kinney, Robert Knapp, Bill & Ildiko Knott,Susan Kozlowski, Susan Kyle, Charles Lee, Yvonne LeMelle,James & Cynthia Leonard, Virginia Lincoln, Karen Littlejohn,Sheila Loftus, Alexandrine Lyons-Boyle, Lindsay Mack, Margarita Maestas, Florence Maher, Sheila Maloney, John & Susanne Manley, Virginia Marshall, Richard Marx, ShelleyMaxfield, Michael McBride, Mary McClure, Vicky McLane,Yolanda McPhee, Stephen & Sally McVeigh, Scott Meehan,Margaret Meyerhofer, Caryle Miller, Charles Miller, LeonardMogelvang, Lydia Money, Richard Monkman, Melvin Moore,Theodore Moosnick-Schatzki, Rebecca Munoa, Eric Naismith,Nobuyuki Nakajima, Carol Navsky, William Neighbors, GrantNelson, Sara Nerken, Robbie Nevil, Chieu Nguyen, MarianneNick, Vuyisile Nkomo, Victoria Norris, Allan Olson, DorothyParris, William & Coleen Pass, Jan Madeleine Paynter, CarlosPerez, Paul & Diane Perry, Alan Peterson, Jeffrey & Joan Petertil, Caleb Phillips, Nick Poeppelman, Claudia Polsgrove,Lester Poretsky Family, Eric Powell, Linda Price, Sharon Priven,Lawrence Procell, Hope Putnam, Amelie Ratliff, Jouni Rauti,David Reed, John Reed, Frances Reid, Herbert Rempel, KeithReynaud, John Riley, Jimmy Roberts-Miller, Helen Roche, Marvis Rorie, Jr., Mary Rose, F. Rose, Lorna Rose-Hahn, TiaRosengarten, Robert Rosner, Robert Rothhouse, GordonRothrock, Peter Rozsa, Milton Russell, Rebecca Salinas, Jill Saling, Benjamin Sandel, Jack Sayers, Timothy Scalzone, JamesSchlessinger, Mrs. F. Schoenborn, The Susan & Ford SchumannFoundation , Seattle Chocolate Company , Jerry Sell, James D.Sharp, Noel Sheer, Greg Shell, Rachel Simmons, Peter Simonson, Susan Slaughter, Kaighn Smith, Henry Smith, Elenor
Smith, Jennifer Solomon, Peter Sorensen, Ann Sprayregen,Mr. & Mrs. Edward Squire, John Squires, Edi Stauffer, SaraSteiner, Norah Stevens-Kittner, Kerry & Bill Stevenson, NickStokes, Livia Stone, Margaret Storey, Mary Strachota, WesStudi, Jonathan Sunshine, Ingrid Swenson, Steve Tait, PilarThomas, Darlene Thoroughgood, Allen Topel, Demian Trask,Julia Tullis, Alice Turak, Kathleen Valetsky, Daniel & DianneVapnek, Carmen Velasquez-Bales, Margaret Verble, Peter Waldor, Linda Walsh, Reino Wantin, Mr. & Mrs. Chris Ware,Janice Warner, Stephen Wasby, Karen Welmas, Cynthia Gail
31ANNUAL REPORT 2018Werner, Paul Wilhite, Moira Wilkinson, David Winston, John
Wolfgang, Jeanette Wolfley, Elisabeth Wood, Lee-Andra Year-gans, Mary Young, Mr. & Mrs. Anthony Zens, Amy Zucker-man, Edward Zukoski
Circle of Life - The circle is an important symbol throughout Native
American cultures, representing unity, strength, and the eternal con-tinuity of life. NARF's Circle of Life donors provide a lasting legacyto the Native American Rights Fund by including NARF in estateplanning or deferred gifts. 
Catches Bear & Judy Adams, Rodney Addison, Gloria Adkinson,
Maxwell Barnard, Barbara Beasley, Dani BenAri, Roy Benson,Bobby Bitner, Nanette Bohren, Dale Brand, Nina Brilli, SamuelBroaddus & Sandra Jensen, William Brown, Gloria Burgess, Patricia Burnet, Arthur Carter, Robert Carter, Ed Chasteen, Judith Day, Harvey Dennenberg, Gary Dickerhoof, Starr Dormann, Patricia Duval, Susan Eichhorn, Allison Emerson,James Fee, Pete Floros, Jan Freeman, Lyle Funderburk, SuzanneGartz, Lawrence Geller, Deborah Ghoreyeb, Louise GomerBangel, Gene Grabau, Anna Gulick, Jean Gundlach, MerrillHakim, Michael Hall, Margaret Hartnett, Theodora Haughton,Karin Holser, Barbara Humes, Elizabeth Johnson, VusamaKariba, Betty Kleczy, Ellyne Krakower-Rice, Edward Kriege,Sharon Laughlin, Ingrid LeBlanc, James Lehnerer, Jane Libby,Rima Lurie, Suzanne MacDonald, Patricia Marks-Greenfield,Mireille Martinez, Helen McCahill, Marion McCollom Hampton,Joseph McNamara, William Milligan, Gary Montgomery, LeilaMoore, Jeanne Moskal, Anthony Pampena, Marc Pearce, MosesPeter, Randall Petersen, Denise Pfalzer, Thelma Populus Gordon, Robert & Mary Resnik, Maureen Ripley, BarbaraRoberts, Andrea Robinsong, Ramon Rodgers, June Rosenthal,Keith Ross, William Rozier, B. Sampson, LaRoy Seaver, MichaelSeeley, Charlotte Selver, Katey Simetra, Kirk Sperry, HerbertStewart, James & Patricia Straus, Michael & Carol Sullivan,Louis Tabois, Valeria Tenyak, Charlotte Thompson, M. Turek,Rene Vivo, William Wade, Ted Weitz, Robert & Mary Wellman,Roger Welsch, Timothy Wernette, Dan & Beth Whittemore,Karen Williams-Fast Horse, Marcel Wingate, Wayne Zengel
Corporate Matching Gifts - Many companies support causes that
are important to their employees by matching their charitable contri-butions-sometimes doubling or even tripling their donation. See ifyour employer participates at https://doublethedonation.com/narf.
Aetna Foundation, Bank of America, BD Matching Gift Pro-
gram, BMS Matching Gift Program, Boetcher Foundation,Charles Stewart Mott Foundation, Dolby Match Program, FM Global Foundation, Fetzer Institute, Ford Foundation, GAPInc., GE Foundation, Graham Holdings Company, Henry LuceFoundation, Nordstrom, Pfizer Foundation, Salesforce.org, The
Merck Foundation, The Pew Charitable Trusts, Verizon, W.K.Kellogg Foundation, Xcel Energy
nARF Employee Giving - NARF employees commit thousands of
hours to protecting the rights of tribes. They also commit their ownfunds to help NARF. We appreciate their steadfast dedication.
in-Kind Donations
Nora Antoine, PhD, Michael G. Black, Kurt BlueDog, GinaBlum, Chief Justice Kevin Briscoe, Chief Judge Tim Connors,Rich De Bodo, Tom Dickson, Ann Estin, Justice Cheryl DemmertFairbanks, Natasha Gourd, Lacey Horn, Polly E. Hyslop, PhD,Kayla Jankowski, Kenneth Kahn, Robert McGhee, RobertMiguel, Anita Mitchell, Chief Judge Michael Petoskey, Hon. Dave Raasch, Natasha Rigg Photography, Evan Roberts, Carson Smith, Nadyah Spahn, Derek Valdo, Hon. Laurie Vilas,Robert Yazzie, Shawn Watts
Boulder-Denver Advisory Committee
Lucille A. Echohawk, Thomas W. Fredericks, Ava Hamilton,Jeanne Whiteing, Charles Wilkinson.
oTHER WA yS To SHoW you R SuPPoRT 
FoR THE R iGHTS oF nATiVE PE oPLES
Tsanáhwit Circle -Tsanáhwit is a Nez Perce word meaning equal
justice. Tsanáhwit Circle members recognize the constant need tostand firm for justice by making monthly contributions. With casesthat can span years, monthly and ongoing contributions make areal difference for protecting the rights of the tribes we serve. Visitour online donation page at www.narf.org to join the Circle.
otu'han -Otu'han is the Lakota (Sioux) word translated as give-
away. Otu'han gifts are memorial and honoring gifts modeledafter the tradition of the Indian giveaway in which items ofvalue are gathered over a long period of time to be given awayin honor of birthdays, marriages, anniversaries, and in memoryof a departed loved one. Visit our online donation page atwww.narf.org to make a tribute gift.
Follow us -Sign up at www.narf.org for our e-news or like and
follow us on Facebook. These are both great way to get periodiccase updates, calls-to-action, special events information, andinvitations. Your e-mail address is confidential and we will notshare it with any outside sources.
32NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDCoRPoRATE oFFiCERS
John E. Echohawk (Pawnee)
Executive Director/Attorney
Matt Campbell (Native Village of Gambell)
Litigation Management Committee Member/Attorney
Natalie Landreth (Chickasaw)
Litigation Management Committee Member/Attorney
Melody McCoy (Cherokee)
Litigation Management Committee Member/Attorney
Michael Kennedy
Chief Financial Officer
Donald M. Ragona (Matinecock)
Director of Development/House Counsel
Gary Hayes (Ute Mountain Ute)
Corporate Secretary
BouLDER MA in oFFiCE STAFF
John E. Echohawk (Pawnee)
Executive Director/Attorney
Matt Campbell (Native Village of Gambell)
Attorney
Jacqueline D. De León (Isleta Pueblo)
Attorney 
K. Jerome Gottschalk
Attorney
David Gover (Pawnee/Choctaw)
Attorney
Melody McCoy (Cherokee)
Attorney
Steven C. Moore
Attorney
Sue Noe
Attorney
Brett Shelton (Oglala Lakota)
Attorney
Joe M. Tenorio (Santo Domingo Pueblo)
Attorney
Donald R. Wharton
Attorney
Heather Whiteman Runs Him (Crow)
Attorney
Nate Ahrens
Systems AdministratorCandace Bonham (Cochiti Pueblo)
Accountant
Kevin Cheng
Paralegal
Brooklyvon Descheny (Navajo)
Office Services Assistant/Receptionist
Cita Gover (Diné)
Development Donor Accounting Analyst
Michael Johnson (Arikara/Hidatsa/Ojibwe)
Assistant Director of Development
Nicole Keller
Paralegal
Michael Kennedy
Chief Financial Officer
Mireille Martinez
Annual Giving Director
Katrina Mora (Oglala Lakota)
Administrative Assistant
Mauda Moran
Communications Manager
Donald M. Ragona (Matinecock)
Director of Development/House Counsel
Jennifer Redbone (Apache/Comanche/ Kiowa)
Donor Information/Gift Processing Manager
Kalee Salazar (Taos Pueblo/Santa Ana Pueblo)
Legal Assistant
Jeff Schmidt
Paralegal
Debbie Raymond-Thomas (Navajo)
ControllerJennie Tsikewa (Zuni)
Accountant
nATion AL inDiAn LAW L iBRAR y
David Selden
Director, National Indian Law Library
Anne Lucke
Law Librarian
AnCHoRAGE oFFiCE STAFF
Heather Kendall-Miller (Athabascan)
Attorney
Natalie Landreth (Chickasaw)
Attorney
Erin Dougherty Lynch
Attorney
Matt Newman
Attorney
Wesley Furlong
Attorney 
Jill Rush
Office Manager/Legal Assistant
WASH inGTon D.C. oFFiCE STAFF
Dan Lewerenz (Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska)
Attorney
Joel Williams (Cherokee)
Attorney
S. Denver Jacket (Ute Mountain Ute/Navajo)
Office Manager/Paralegal
33ANNUAL REPORT 2018
NARF STAFF
1506 Broadway, Boulder, CO 80302
303-447-8760
www.narf.org 