Annual Report 2001-2002 
Celebrating 30 years of Cultural Survival   
CUL
TU
RAL
SUR
VI
VAL
ABOUT CULTURAL SURVIVAL
Goals & Strategies                                                  2  
From the Directors                                                  3From the President, David Maybury-Lewis: 
Crisis of the Ethnosphere                                 4  
PROGRAMS 
Research & Publications Cultural Survival Quarterly                                5
Cultural Survival Voices                                      6
Ethnosphere  Website                                          7Indigenous News from the Ethnosphere     8    
Education & Outreach                  1
Education Program                                                 9
Student Conferences                                           10Teacher Training  & Research Materials     11    Public Events - Bazaars                                        12Internship Program - Speakers series  1 3-14
Indigenous Tools & Services   
Special Projects                                               15-18Indigenous Speakers Forum                            19
MEMBERSHIP
Membership Profile                                              20
WHO WE ARE 
History  of Cultural Survival                              21    Boards                                                                        22Staff & Interns                                                         23Acknowledgements                                       24-25How You Can Help                                                  26
FINANCIAL SUMMARY
Operating Income and Expenses                    27Contents
Publications  & Research
Education & Outreach                  
Indigenous Empowerment
MEMBERSHIP
WHO WE ARE 
FINANCIAL SUMMARYOur Mission:
In promoting the rights, voices, and
visions of indigenous peoples the worldover, Cultural Survival  addresses thecritical need to acknowledge and honortheir cultural wisdom, knowledge of theenvironment, aesthetic sensibility, andspiritual orientation
.ABOUT CULTURAL SURVIVALThe diversity of cultures around the world is
increasingly endangered due to the use of vio-lence, forced resettlement, and the pressure toassimilate. This diversity constitutes the wealth ofall humanity. We, the global community, havemore than a moral obligation to respect and pro-mote cultural diversity—it is in our self-interest. 
Publications & Research
Our award-winning Cultural Survival Quarterly
magazine, along with the Cultural Survival Voices
newspaper, serve to expand the public aware-ness of indigenous peoples' struggles for eco-nomic, environmental, cultural, and political self-determination.  These publications bring the cen-tral insight of anthropology — the value of otherpeoples' lifeways and world views — to a generalreadership, reaching libraries, bookstores, andnewsstands throughout the United States andabroad.Education and Outreach
Cultural Survival's Education and Outreach ini-
tiatives introduce educators, students, and thebroader public to indigenous issues. Through ourSecondary Schools Program, which has beenorganizing student conferences for the pastseven years, we  educate students and teachersfrom around New England  about indigenous cul-tures and related perspectives and controversies.Our teaching methods and participation in ourconferences motivate students to learn andexplore complex topics. To promote the teachingof indigenous cultures in the classroom, we havedeveloped a range of educational resource mate-rials,  curricula that support national learningstandards, and we offer teacher training. We con-tinue to refine our curricula so that they can beused in high schools throughout the nation.  Tocultivate the cross-cultural sharing of ideas and toraise the profile of indigenous issues, CulturalSurvival hosts, sponsors and presents at manypublic events and international conferences eachyear. 
Indigenous Empowerment
By providing administrative support and tax-
exempt status to indigenous groups and pro-indigenous organizations, we  help them pursuetheir independent initiatives.  Cultural Survival iscurrently sponsoring projects initiated by indige-nous peoples who seek to obtain land rights, pro-tect and manage their natural resources, marketsustainable products, increase literacy, gatheroral histories, or promote health care in their com-munities. We also organize the IndigenousSpeakers Forum, which brings indigenous lead-ers together to discuss common concerns andspeak with specialists, students, teachers, andthe general public in the Boston vicinity.  CulturalSurvival also supports indigenous communities under duress through advocacy campaigns pro-
moted on our website and in our publications.  
Ethnosphere Initiative
Cultural Survival's Ethnosphere website draws
together all the programs of Cultural Survival, andis the principle means through which we pursueour mission today and into the 21st century. TheIndigenous Empowerment component of thewebsite will provide indigenous communities,leaders, and activists with a resource whichfocuses on the most significant issues that indige-nous people face. Benchmark cases, referencesto related books and articles, links to organiza-tions, legal documentation, and an extensivedatabase dealing with each issue will be avail-able. The Cultural Survival Quarterly will also be
used, to construct what will be the world's mostcomprehensive database dealing with indigenousissues.
www.cs.org
About Cultural Survival
22Goals
Cultural Survival has three major goals: 
1.  Spread awareness and provide 
formal documentation of the myriadchallenges confronting indigenouspeoples around the world.
2. Engage and educate the next 
generation about the critical issues facing indigenous peoples and their importance within the global community.
3. Provide empowerment tools that 
support indigenous efforts to effectivelyresist cultural degradation and threatsto their sovereignty. Goals & Strategies
Surap te, Xavan te Indian,Brazil
From the Directors : Redefining Roles for a New Century
3At Cultural Survival's memorable 30th anniversary dinner party
on May 17, we launched the pilot phase of our most ambitiousproject to date, the Ethnosphere website. This comprehensiveinternet gateway will celebrate the richness of cultural diversi-ty in the world, and document threats to that diversity.  Ourmajor partner in the Ethnosphere project, the NationalGeographic Society, presented Cultural Survival PresidentDavid Maybury-Lewis with a check for $100,000, affirming ouralliance and mutual desire to create an online gateway to vital-ly important information about the Earth's endangered andevolving human cultures. The website includes news, docu-mentary and experiential features, reference tools, and educa-tional resources, among other features.
The evening's award ceremony was a highlight. Lifetime
achievement awards were presented to the co-founders ofCultural Survival, David and Pia Maybury-Lewis, and humanrights awards were bestowed on two outstanding indigenousleaders: Rosita Worl and Jim Anaya. Anaya, the Samuel M.Fegtly Professor of Law at the University of Arizona, alsoserves as special counsel to the Indian Law Resource Center,a U.S.-based non-governmental organization with consultativestatus at the United Nations.  Worl, a Tlingit of ShangukeidiThunderbird Clan and House Lowered From the Sun, is ananthropology professor at the University of Alaska Southeastand president of the Sealaska Heritage Institute. The awardswere presented by Denmark's Ida Nicolaisen, the EuropeanUnion's representative on the U.N. Permanent Forum onIndigenous Issues, and Mexico's Rudolfo Stavengahen, U.N .Human Rights and Indigenous Peoples Rapporteur. 
While 2002 is a time for looking back over 30 years of
research and advocacy on behalf of the world's indigenouspeoples, it is also an opportunity for Cultural Survival to plan forthe future. Indigenous rights advocacy has gone from strengthto strength since 1972 and the momentum for justice andreform culminated in May 2002 with the inaugural meeting ofthe UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. This tremen-dous and long-overdue development has necessitated anoverall rethink of how, in pursuing our mission, CulturalSurvival can promote the work of this important institution. 
One of Cultural Survival's core roles over the past 30 years
has been to sponsor research on indigenous peoples — whothey are, where they are, what problems they face, and whatsolutions have been developed for them. With the aid of a net-work of indigenous collaborators and pro-indigenous scholarsto ensure the very best analyses, we have published the
results in the Cultural Survival Quarterly , which continues to be
one of the leading journals of indigenous affairs. With theestablishment of the Permanent Forum, indigenous peopleshave, for the first time, a voice in the international arena — andthe need for basic information on indigenous peoples, and alsoscholarly analyses of indigenous issues, is at a peak. 
Cultural Survival's Ethnosphere website will house an unpar-
alleled, continually renewed source of reliable, quality informa-tion on indigenous peoples, their cultural worlds, breakingnews, and issues of concern. This innovative site will drawtogether the various departments and programs of CulturalSurvival, and will be the principle means through which we pur-sue our mission in the 21st century. The Cultural Survival
Quarterly , our flagship journal, will be used, among other
means, to construct a comprehensive database. We expectthis website to be the source of record for indigenous peoples,government and non-governmental organizations and institu-tions, and the environmental movement. It will be a keyresource for the United Nations Permanent Forum onIndigenous Issues.
The Ethnosphere website will also be an integral component
of our education initiative. Cultural Survival's educational mod-ule will impel students from around the world to utilize the web-site's features such as chat room e-pals, educational links, anda research database. 
Perhaps the most distinctive feature of the Ethnosphere web-
site will be its use as an empowerment tool for indigenous peo-ples. Essential components include links to relevant humanrights organizations and other important contacts; benchmarkcases documenting successes in indigenous activism across aspectrum of key issues such as land rights, health and envi-ronment, self-determination, and sovereignty; and self-helpmanuals that will walk indigenous leaders and activists throughthe process of successfully negotiating the attainment of theirgoals.
We are proud of our achievements over the past 30 years. At
the same time, we are enthusiastic about the increasinglyimportant role we will play in securing the rights and empower-ing the voices of the world's indigenous peoples.
Ian S. McIntosh & Bart J. Ryan
Co-directors of Cultural Survival“The Ethnosphere is a notion perhaps best defined as
the sum total of all thoughts, beliefs, myths, and intu-itions made manifest today in the myriad cultures of theworld. The Ethnosphere is humanity's greatest legacy.”
-Wade Davis, Cultural Survival Board member 
National Geographic Explorer-in-Residence 
Time and again history has recorded indigenous peo-ples being conquered and marginalized by powerfulstates with devastating results.  Ethnocide, the extermi-nation of indigenous cultures, remains official policy inmany, if not most, parts of the world due in part to mis-guided views of indigenous peoples.  This policy isdefended in many ways: indigenous peoples mustabandon their traditional beliefs and practices and mod-ernize for their own good; progress is inevitable andindigenous peoples cannot impede development; theethnic difference that indigenous peoples representdestabilizes the nation-state and causes dangerouspolitical conflicts.  These arguments are demonstrablywrong.  
Indigenous peoples do not stand in the way of
progress; rather they contribute to it if given the chance.Traditional cultures are not failed attempts at modernity,but valuable alternative visions of what it means to behuman.  Suppressing dynamic cultural traditions richwith meaning not only disrupts the indigenous peoples,but also has a serious effect on the entire world's popu-lation.  As additional worlds and cultures are lost, thecrisis of the Ethnosphere is deepened.  
The survival of a culture is not a matter of preserving
a traditional way of life, but rather enabling the people ofa culture to maintain and cultivate it.  The danger weface in the modern world is not that archaic cultures aredisappearing, but that vibrant cultures are being forcedout of existence.  If the trend is allowed to continueunchecked, then we shall lose cultural diversity — thatvast store of knowledge and practice — that ishumankind’s greatest and most remarkable resource.Globalization and the increasing dominance of the lib-
eralized marketplace present an ever-increasing threatto indigenous peoples and the holistic paradigm of sus-tainable development.  Indigenous peoples, residing ontop of the world's most coveted resources, are at theepicenter of resource wars yet ironically remain amongthe most impoverished people on the planet. The result-ing global tensions have given rise to conflicts as well aspositive trends increasing civil society alliances and cre-ative resolutions to the current stand-off. These variedcultures in jeopardy are often victims of flagrant viola-tions of human rights and international laws. 
Beyond the moral imperative to promote cultural
diversity there is an additional incentive — the health ofthe Ethnosphere. These diverse communities containvital wisdom needed for developing a sustainablefuture.
Despite opposition and subordination from powerful
states and a largely unaware public, the ability of indige-nous peoples to fight back is slowly improving.  In anenvironment of increased awareness of the rich andremarkable quality of indigenous people's traditions andthe problems they currently face, the time is ripe to takeaction to allow indigenous peoples to control and culti-vate their own lives.  As a result of this burgeoninginternational indigenous movement and the compellingnature of its urgent message, an increasing number ofinternational development and global financial institu-tions are developing program policies regarding, and inconsultation with, indigenous peoples.  Not only havemany expressed their desire to move more purposeful-ly in this direction, many have even made concreteprogress in this respect.  Many of the world's indigenous peoples are now rep-
resented by indigenous-led local, regional, and interna-tional networks and coalitions, which identify commonissues and devise strategies for cultural survival.  TheUnited Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issuesis a new advisory body to U.N. agencies that providesindigenous peoples, for the first time, an avenue withinthe U.N. system for communication with governmentnations. A growing international array of pro-indigenousorganizations — of which Cultural Survival has been aleading voice — assist and promote these organizationsand issues.  The public's tolerance for cultural differ-ence and awareness of the importance of ensuring thesurvival of cultural diversity has vastly increased.These trends are positive moves toward resolving thecrisis of the Ethnosphere, and must be fostered so thattheir promise for a better future is not squandered.
How can the struggles of indigenous peoples to regain
control over their lives be supported effectively?  Howcan the general public learn more about different cultur-al worlds and the importance of their continued vitality?And how can the crisis of the Ethnosphere be checked?Cultural Survival believes an important part of the solu-tion to these problems lies in communication via theinternet. More specifically, it lies in the capacity of theinternet to facilitate communication between a variety ofgroups and its ability to mediate the exchange of knowl-edge between a variety of audiences.  These attributesmake it an ideal platform from which to launch theCultural Survival Ethnosphere, a web-based programthat has already enhanced access to well-researchedand well-presented information, improved communica-tion, and fostered continued innovation regarding poli-cies and practices of local and global institutions.
4From  the President— David Maybury-Lewis: Crisis of the Ethnosphere 
Founded in 1982, Cultural Survival Quarterly
(CSQ) is our award-winning journal. CSQ bases
its mission on the belief that the survival ofIndigenous peoples depends on the preservationof their right to decide how to adapt traditionalways to a changing world.  Articles explore theinterconnected issues that affect indigenous andethnic minority communities, including environ-mental destruction, land rights, sustainable development, and cultural preservation.  Each 80 page issue of CSQ focuses on a central
theme. Supporting articles cover news, resources, andnotes from the field.  In addition, CSQ reports on the
latest releases of books, videos, and world music.Approximately 7,000 copies of each issue are printedfor international distribution.  As part of theEthnosphere project, past and current issues of CSQ
have been made available online.  More than 1,500CSQ articles are currently available on our website,www.cs.org.
Cultural Survival Quarterly
Spring 2002   
The  Kalahari San
The San of southern Africa were one of thelast peoples to practice hunting and gather-ing in the 20th century.    Although forced toabandon their nomadic ways, the San haveretained their language, culture, and religiousbeliefs.  This issue begins with case studiesrepresenting the range of situations in whichcontemporary San live.  Richard Lee
(University of Toronto), Robert Hitchcock
(University of Nebraska-Lincoln), and Megan
Biesele (University of Texas-Austin and
Texas A&M University) serve as guest edi-tors.Summer 2002       Aboriginal Australia
The essays in this issue attempt to makeconnections across generations of indige-nous peoples and between indigenous andnon-indigenous groups.  A special emphasisis placed on Aboriginal Australians and theirconcept of "Dreaming," which links creationand connection in the real world.  This issueattempts to reconcile the people of Australiawith their history, their land, and each other.Articles are co-authored by indigenous andnon-indigenous people.  The guest editor isDeborah Bird Rose .  Winter 2002      
Maroons in the Americas
This issue focuses on Maroons — descen-dants of escaped slaves — and their situationas minorities who are severely threatened bylogging and mining operations and by otherassaults on their territories and cultural iden-tities.  Specialists on Maroons in Brazil,Colombia, Ecuador, French Guiana,
Jamaica, and Suriname bring their hopesand struggles to light.  Richard Price
(College of William and Mary
) serves as
guest editor.  
Fall 2002     
Melanesia
Western Melanesia (New Guinea, Vanuatu,
New Caledonia, and the Solomon Islands)
has been one of the world’s most ethno-
graphically investigated regions of theworld. This issue highlights how, despitethe political, economic, and physicalhazards brought about by Melanesia'sincreasing exposure to a global world,local communities have responded toaugment and enhanced their culturalidentity and uniqueness. James Weiner
(Australian National University) servesas guest editor.
5“...the conscienceof anthropology.”
-NewsweekPublications &ResearchCultural Survival published the first issue of Cultural Survival
Voices in November 2001.  Like the Action Update , which it
replaced, Voices is published quarterly.  Its scope, however, is
much more comprehensive. 
Voices is meant to serve several purposes: expand our audi-
ence, increase membership, direct people to the Ethnospherewebsite, motivate readers to take action, generate interest anddonations for CS Special Projects, and serve as a generalbrochure for our organization.  In order to accomplish thesegoals, we expanded the Action Update from a four-page black
and white newsletter to a 16-page (eight pages in color) news-paper and renamed it Cultural Survival Voices .
Voices is action-oriented. Members and interested parties are
encouraged to engage in letter-writing campaigns to unsympa-thetic governments, or to divest from those companies that harmindigenous lifeways.
Voices includes everything the Action Update contained (mem-
bership appeals, action suggestions, and appeals for  featuredSpecial Projects).  In addition, it features information about all 21Special Projects, a CS publications catalog, and highlights fromall  CS programs (education, internships, and events) thatserveto promote the many facets of our organization to the generalpublic.  News items keep readers in touch with current eventsthat impact indigenous peoples.  All issues are available online.
This year we printed approximately 40,000 copies of each
issue of Voices. About 20,000 went to members, former mem-
bers, and nonmembers from our mailing list.  The remaining20,000 were distributed by anthropology professors  to their stu-dents, along with a host of volunteers (mostly former CS interns)who delivered Voices around the United States.  Volunteer distri-
bution has proved to be beneficial for a number of reasons: itexpanded the distribution network, and strenghtened face-to-face interaction. The first time we asked for volunteers, demandfar exceeded our supply. 
Cultural Survival Voices
6Volume 1: Issue 1 FALL 2001  
Cover story: Cease to Do Evil, Then Learn to Do Good
Volume 1: Issue 2 SPRING 2002Cover stories: The Courage to Resist: A Tibetan Nun's PrisonStruggle Volume 1: Issue 3 SUMMER 2002Cover Story: Mau Forest Destruction: Human and EcologicalDisaster in the Making
Volume 1: Issue 4 FALL 2002Cover story:  Congo's Civil War Imperils Ituri LivelihoodPublications &Research“The information superhighway offers vast prospects as well as 
pitfalls and challenges to indigenous peoples. While it has beenused as an instrument to sustain hegemonic discourse from the center (Western, colonial, majority), it may also create spaces forvoices from the periphery. It is also possible to push an indigenouscounter-discourse in cyberspace. We could achieve this by increas-ing indigenous peoples' access to these resources, increasing theircapacity to manage the production and dissemination of information, and encouraging the infusion of indigenous languagesinto cyberspace.”
Raymundo Rovillos and Vicky Tauli-Corpuz, 
Tebtebba Foundation/Indigenous Peoples International 
Center for Policy-Research and Education
7The Ethnosphere Initiative uses the internet to house an unparalleled andcontinually renewed source of reliable information about and for endangeredindigenous peoples.  It simultaneously celebrates the richness and diversityof indigenous cultures and lifeways, and identifies threats to this diversity.Moreover, it uses real time interactive tools for advocacy, challenging stake-holders and the public at large to work toward a future in which indigenouspeoples 1) can maintain their languages and cultures in the face of assimi-latory pressures, 2) enjoy unrivalled access to their ancestral lands andwaters, and 3) pursue their own development agendas on their own terms.
This year at Cultural Survival, the Ethnosphere has served as an organiz-
ing framework to Cultural Survival’s various programs.  Through theEthnosphere, each Cultural Survival program  has become better equippedto gather, analyze, and share information within the organization and with anincreasingly electronically linked global audiences. It also allows us to playa more central role in the documentation and dissemination of knowledgerelated to indigenous peoples, organizations, and international movements.  
Ethnosphere research projects this year included interviews with indige-
nous leaders, development of the online Indigenous News service, andselective country-level documentation on indigenous cultures, issues andpolitical organizing. To promote the Ethnosphere, we have built e-lists to pro-vide updates to our existing networks and continue to develop new contactsthrough the Internet and international conferences. In 2002 Cultural Survivalcreated a prominent Ethnosphere exhibit at the United Nations, which coin-cided with the first meeting of the First  Permanent Forum on IndigenousIssues in New York. It then traveled to the U.N. in Geneva for other interna-tional conferences.  These virtual networks provide consistency and follow-up to the face-to-face international meetings with partner organizations,helping to coordinate and disseminate materials.Ethnosphere website
Components of the Ethnosphere Website
Indigenous Empowerment 
The Indigenous Empowerment component of the Ethnosphere website will provideindigenous communities, leaders, and activists with an unparalleled resource whichfocuses on the most significant issues that indigenous people face. The website willinclude benchmark cases, references to related books and articles, links to organiza-tions, legal documentation, and an extensive database dealing with each issue.  
Research & Publications
Cultural Survival’s 30 years of research and documentation will serve as the foundationof our Ethnosphere database.  In addition to Cultural Survival Quarterly , Cultural
Survival Voices , and Indigenous News, Cultural Survival’s research team continues to
collect articles, references, and links in order to create the most comprehensible data-base available. All documentation is searchable and organized by region, issue, and
peoples.
Education & Outreach
The Education and Outreach web component helps to educate the next generation
about the cultural diversity and continuing struggles of indigenous peoples through inter-active modules, curricula, online teaching manuals, e-pal links with indigenous youththroughout the world, and other educational resources.  
Cultural Survival’s Ethnosphere HomepagePublications &ResearchIndigenous News is a weekly e-news service that covers
breaking events concerning indigenous peoples worldwide.It is posted on our Ethnosphere website, sent to a growinge-mail list, and picked up by other news services throughnews-sharing agreements.  A news director and threeregional intern editors cover events by region (Americas;Africa, Europe & Middle East; and Oceania & Asia), writingseveral headlines and a feature article each week.  The pur-pose is to broaden awareness of often under-reportedevents that directly impact the livelihoods of indigenous peo-ples, while shedding light on global issues and trends.  
Content for the stories is gleaned from print and online
media, local sources, and ‘listserves’. News items are alsosubmitted from our readers and growing e-mail subscriptionlist that includes indigenous leaders and pro-indigenousspecialists. When appropriate, readers are given information on advocacy campaigns related to news items.Generally these campaigns are managed by other pro-indigenous and human rights organizations.  
Each week the news is archived in our Ethnosphere data-
base and becomes searchable by peoples, place, andissue.  This important feature keeps the Ethnosphereupdated and informs readers on current events.  News,archives, and a comments section can all be viewed byregion on our website:
http://www.culturalsurvival.org/news/index.cfm  
Important priorities include the expansion of news-sharing
agreements and development of an automated online serv-ice through which Cultural Survival members and otherscan sign up to receive the news on their desktop,  in region-specific format.
Indigenous News from the Ethnosphere
www.cs.org
8U’wa women in Colombia demonstrate against drilling on their ancestral lands by U.S . oil
company Occidental Petroleum
Tatiana Roa— Censat Agua Viva - FOEPublications &ResearchEducation Program
Dinéyouth reaches out to students at the fall con ference
J. Brown
9The purpose of Cultural Survival's Education and Outreach initia-
tives  are to increase awareness of indigenous issues for futuregenerations.  Through our Education Program we offer youth andeducators from around New England various ways to learn aboutindigenous cultures and the multiple perspectives surroundingindigenous issues.  By engaging in these issues and attending ourconferences, students are motivated to learn and explore complextopics. To promote the teaching of indigenous issues in the class-room, we develop educational resource materials and curricula thatsupport national learning standards and provide teacher training.These resources help students make connections between indige-nous issues and their own lives.  These educational programs aremade possible through generous support of the Josephine BayPaul and C. Michael Paul Foundation.
Twice a year, Cultural Survival brings high school students and
teachers together with indigenous leaders and experts for a day ofdialogue, performances, and activities.  Classes from each partici-pating school conduct research on a specific aspect of the confer-ence theme and present their findings at the event. 
This year marked the beginning of a new online approach to pro-
viding resources to educators about indigenous peoples by provid-ing curriculum materials through the Ethnosphere website.  Freeaccess and global distribution to educators, indigenous peoplesand the general public will ensure the wider dissemination of thesematerials. 
""What makes Cultural Survival special is that stu-
dents and their teachers hear from the people of aculture themselves rather than relying mainly onwhat outside observers have to say.  This offers aunique perspective that is invaluable.  It leads students to realize that the indigenous people theyare learning from really are people, not characters ina movie or stock figures in a textbook description."
Mary Anne Saul, Social Studies teacher, North Reading High School  August 2, 2002Education & OutreachIn honor of Cultural Survival's 30th
anniversary, the education programhad its own celebration in an excit-ing student conference called"MOOMBA!"— an AustralianAboriginal word meaning "festival"or "celebrate."  Local high schoolsresearched and performed celebra-tions from around the globe.May  17, 2002Moomba! The Diversity of Celebrations
Schools:
- Boston High School- Cambridge Rindge and Latin- Hudson High School- Marblehead High School- Martha's Vineyard Regional 
High School
- North Reading High School- Shackleton School- Urban League of Rhode Island Speakers:
-David Maybury-Lewis (Harvard Professor; Founder and President of
Cultural Survival)
-Meitamei Olol-Dapash (Executive Director of the Maasai Environmental
Resource Center)
-David J. Smith (award-winning teacher, author of If the World Were a
Village , and teaching consultant)
-Haitian Dance Troupe (performance)
-Arysteides Turpana (Representative of the Kuna)
-Trinidadian Steel Drum Ensemble (performance) led by Mackie
Burnette, famed artist, teacher, and composer.
10Trinidadian Steel Drum Ensemble
Speakers :
-IIan McIntosh (Director of Cultural Survival)
-Clemente Wilson, Taina Hedman ,and Iguaibiliguina Hedman ,
Mount Kuna (Organizers for the Movimiento de la Juventud Kuna,
Panama)
-Jesus Avirama , Kokonuco (Regional Council of Indigenous Peoples of
Cauca, Colombia, Colombian Indigenous Organization, and the Social
Alliance of Indigenous People)
-Maria Eugenia Choque , Aymara (Executive Director of Andean Oral
History and author)
Cultural Survival chose to focus the fall student conference on issues
and stakeholders in Plan Colombia, a controversial $1.6 billion aidpackage to fight drug production in Colombia.  Students participated infive workshops focusing on the most pertinent aspects of PlanColombia: a "Militarization of the Region" simulation; "NaturalResources and Economic Motivations," which utilized guided imagery;"Destruction of Indigenous Cultures"; "Fumigation"; and "Drugs andRebellion." The workshop activities included role-playing and discus-sions. Two new high schools joined the spring student conference.  December 4, 2001Plan Peoples: Coca, Plan Colombia, andIndigenous Peoples
Schools:
- Austin Preparatory School- Boston High School- Cambridge Rindge and Latin- Hudson High School- Martha's Vineyard Regional    
High School
- South Shore High School- Urban League of Rhode  Island
Student Conferences
Students from Boston High presented on AlbaniaMaria Eugenia Choque with studentsEducation & 
Outreach11In our work with educators we examine indigenous cultures and
related issues then demonstrate their close relationship, thoughoften excluded or misrepresented, to many content areas andthemes studied in schools.  The June 2002 teacher workshopfocused on use of a new Cultural Survival curriculum on Maasaipeoples.  It included units on stereotypes and ways to explorethe term "indigenous."  Teachers and CS staff examined the rel-evance of these materials to learning standards and specificstrategies for classroom implementation.  The curriculum isdesigned in collaboration with the Harvard Graduate School ofEducation, using its Teaching for Understanding framework.Representatives from five school districts new to CS participat-ed in this workshop.Teacher Training & Resource Materials
Speakers:-Meitamei Olol-Dapash 
(Executive Director of the Maasai
Environmental Resource Center)
-Shannon Martin Croft (Researcher and Project
Coordinator at Wide-Scale Interactive Development for
Educators [WIDE] of the Harvard Graduate School ofEducation, specializing in education with new technologies)
-Lisa Matthews (Cultural Survival Education Coordinator)
-Larry Childs (Cultural Survival Ethnosphere Coordinator)June 26 and 27, 2002  
Teacher  workshop
Tourism: A Challenge
to Maasai Survival
Meitamei Olol-Dapash (Executive Director ofthe Maasai Environmental Resource Center)
J.BrownEducation & Outreach12To reach out to our local and
global communities, CulturalSurvival hosts and sponsorsmany public events eachyear. Public events promotecross-cultural sharing ofideas, raise the profile ofindigenous issues, andattract public support to spe-cific peoples and issues.These events includebazaars, indigenous speak-ers fora, student confer-ences, and a variety of otherconferences and events thatwe participate in or co-spon-sor.
At Cultural Survival's
fundraising bazaars, localartisans sell indigenous artand crafts, while the thou-sands who attend learnabout Cultural Survival andindigenous issues.Proceeds support CulturalSurvival programs. Thebazaars are full of life andcolor, and this year's wereno exception. The WinterBazaar took placeDecember 15-16, 2001, atHarvard University; theSpring Bazaar from May 17-19, 2002, at Harvard LawSchool; and the SummerBazaar from August 10-11,2002, in Tiverton, RhodeIsland.  Attendance atBazaars this year exceeded12,000.  PUBLIC EVENTS
Cultural Survival sponsored, co-sponsored,or participated in each of the following
events:
September 2001
Mining Minerals and Sustainable
Development Conference 
Quito, Ecuador
November 28-December 2, 2001
100th Annual Meeting American
Anthropological Association
Washington, DC, USA
December 4, 2001
Cultural Survival Student Conference 
Plan Peoples: Coca, Plan Colombia, andIndigenous Peoples
Gutman Center, Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
December 5, 2001
Cultural Survival Indigenous Speakers Forum
Plan Colombia
David Rockefeller Center for Latin
American Studies at Harvard UniversityCambridge, Massachusetts, USA
December 15-16, 2001
Cultural Survival Winter Bazaar
Pound Hall, Harvard Law School
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
February 20, 2002
Ecuadorian Film Screening
Boston Public LibraryBoston, Massachusetts, USA
February 21-24, 2002
Indigenous Peoples Global Conference
United Nations, New York, USA
March 6-9, 2002
Meeting of Comparative and International
Education SocietyTheme: The Social Construction ofMarginality—Globalization's impact onthe disenfranchised
Orlando, Florida, USA
March 14, 2002
International Day of Action Against Dams and
For Rivers, Water, and Life
27 countries promoted 47 actions against
dams in their respective countries April 5-7, 2002
Tragedy in the Amazon: Yanomami Voices,
Academic Controversy & Ethics of Research
David Maybury-Lewis presented on
Cultural SurvivalCornell University, Ithaca, New York,USA
April 16-20, 2002
International Conference on Medical Plants,
Indigenous Knowledge and Benefit Sharing
The Hague, The Netherlands
April 26-29, 2002
Portuguese/African Encounters: An
Interdisciplinary Congress
Watson Institute for International Studies,
Brown UniversityProvidence, Rhode Island, USA
May 2-3, 2002 
Bolivian Revolution at 50: Comparative View
on Social, Economic, and Political Change 
David Rockefeller Center for Latin
American Studies, Harvard UniversityCambridge, Massachusetts, USA
May 11, 2002
Wake Up the Earth Festival
Boston, Massachusetts, USA
May 13 - 24, 2002
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues 
United Nations, New York, USA
May 17-19, 2002
Cultural Survival Spring Bazaar
Science Center Green, Harvard
University
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
June 26 - 27, 2002
Cultural Survival Teacher Training
Cambridge Public Library, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
July 14 - 19, 2002
World Civil Society Forum
Geneva, Switzerland
July 22 - 26, 2002
Working Group on Indigenous Populations 
United Nations
Geneva, Switzerland
August 10-11, 2002
Cultural Survival Bazaar
and Tibetan Movie Night
Tiverton, Rhode Island, USAPublic Events: Bazaars
BAZAAREducation & 
Outreach“Cultural Survival  is a place where I can express myself as a member of an indigenous
group, the Ainu of Japan, and accumulate more experience working for  the rights ofindigenous peoples.  CS helps me understand how an indigenous rights organization canbe connected  to indigenous communities, and what such an organization can offer them.My work here has reaffirmed my belief that indigenous issues are global issues.  The CSstaff has entrusted me with the responsibility of working independently, thinking critically,and actively contributing my experiences and ideas.” Kanako Uzawa
According to intern coordinator Pia Maybury-
Lewis, "Cultural Survival's internship program is asold as Cultural Survival itself."   At its founding in1972, Cultural Survival was staffed entirely by vol-unteers who were the predecessors of today'sinterns. In the past  30 years more than 1,400young people have contributed their time and skillsto running the organization.  This year, CulturalSurvival has welcomed 52 interns from 15 differentstates and 13 different countries. These internsare an integral part of our functioning and continueto enrich and enliven the organization with theirdiverse perspectives and experiences. They workin all departments, assume meaningful tasks, anddevelop important skills such as anthropologicalresearch, journalism, creating advocacy cam-paigns, and generating publicity.
While interns are unpaid, they are rewarded by
their personal achievements and the vital knowl-edge they gain. Cultural Survival also hosts thepopular weekly intern luncheon where indigenousvisitors to New England, along with scholars andactivists are the guests of honor.  We also frequet-ly arrange functions around their visits.  The seriesprovides a forum for indigenous leaders and spe-cialists to present pressing issues affecting theindigenous world to interns, staff, and associatesof Cultural Survival. The lunches provide an addi-tional means to assure that interns and staff retaina direct connection with the peoples and issuesthat are the focus of our mission.
Summer interns an d staff visit the S.H.A.R.E. farm in the the heart 
of the Cayuga region, upstate New York Internship Program
13
J. BrownEducation & 
OutreachThis year's speakers included:
Dr. Ken Pepion , Harvard University-
Harvard University's  Native American Program
David Wilkie - Pygmies of the Ituri Forest
Irene Staehlin , San Cultural Center - 
!Kung-San People of the Kalahari
Jennifer Clarke - Australian Law and Indigenous People
S.H.A.R.E. Farm board and advocates -
Frieda Jaques, Onondaga Clan Mother
Bernadette Hill, Huron Clan Mother
Luanne Jamieson, Seneca Faith KeeperJulie Uticone, President of S.H.A.R.EBrooke Olsen, SecretaryJack Rossen, TreasurerMeghan McCune, Student Representative
Claudia Santana - Indigenous Peoples of the Amazon
Lucia Clarke -The Roma in Italy
Prof. Mary Catherine Bateson , Harvard School of Education-   
Cross Generational Education
Bret Gustafson , Doctoral Candidate at Harvard University-
Bolivian Politics and Indigenous Movements
Prof. Irv Devore , Harvard University - Primate Societies
Prof. Tom Barfield , Boston University - 
Current Events in Afghanistan and the Middle East
Bernie Perley , Doctoral Candidate at Harvard University - 
Preserving the Languages of Canada's First Nations
Prof. David Maybury-Lewis , Harvard University -
The Backlash Against Cultural Survival
Prof. Doreen Stabinsky , College of the Atlantic - 
Genetically Modified Organisms: Food for Thought
Dr. Bart Ryan , Harvard University - Indonesia Update
Dr. Ted MacDonald , Harvard University - 
Awastigni Land Rights Case in Nicaragua
Dr. Lynn Theismeyer and Dr. Michio Umegaki , Keio University,
Japan - Discussion and Short Films from Continuing Projects in
Thailand and VietnamKatie Ahern , Australian Lawyer - Aboriginal Land Rights 
Moises Valafana , Kogi, Colombia - Colombia
14Intern Lunch Speakers SeriesInternship Program
In addition to the thought-provoking speakers, this year
interns had the opportunity to visit the S.H.A.R.E. farm, theCayuga land claim site in upstate New York run by advo-cates for Native American land rights. Between July 22 andJune 24, 2002, two staff members and 17 interns visited the70-acre organic farm that will eventually be turned over tothe Cayuga Native Americans. The participants weeded,painted, and mucked  a barn, as well as gained valuableinformation from various speakers.
Interns share a meal with Luanne Jamieson (Seneca Faith Keeper), Julie Uticone, Brooke
Olsen, Jack Rossen, and Frieda Jaques (Onondaga Clan Mother) at the S.H.A.R.E. farm
This year’s interns
represent 19 U.S. states and 13 countries
"I think that one of the most
memorable parts of the tripwas listening to Freida, theOnondoga Clan Mother, andLuanne, the SenecaFaithkeeper, talk about theissues that are affecting them(land claim, cultural revitaliza-tion, etc).  Their words wereinspiring, hopeful, and fulfillingin that they gave me the feelingthat what I was doing was real-
ly making a difference. "   
-Neil Ragsdale, CS intern
J. FrederickEducation & 
OutreachSpecial Projects
15Cultural Survival serves as a fiscal
sponsor while providing organizationaland administrative support to small,pro-indigenous organizations andindependent indigenous initiatives thatare well aligned with our mission.These projects assist indigenousgroups and ethnic minorities in buildingmore effective organizations, manag-ing natural resources, preserving theirlanguage and art forms, and becomingeconomically independent. 
David Wilkie of the Ituri Forest
Peoples’ Fund says "Prior to being
accepted as a Cultural Survival SpecialProject we were able to raise onlyenough money to keep a single class-room with one teacher supported ...thanks to the grant writing advice ofCultural Survival, the InternationalFoundation awarded the fund a grantof $25,000. ... Without CulturalSurvival's help the Efe and Lese of theIturi forest would not have a primaryschool or a clinic."
Cultural Survival's Special Projects
are  integrated with our CurriculumResource Program on IndigenousPeoples. Information gleaned from theprojects is frequently used to developour educational curricula. IndigenousEmpowermentXavante Education Fund, Brazil
Cultural Survival sponsors the fund, which provides financial support to Xavante
who want to learn the necessary skills to empower themselves and decrease theirdependence on outsiders for health care.  The fund supports Lino Tsere'ubudzi's edu-cation in becoming a nurse practitioner for the Xavante.  After five years of post-grad-uate training, he will become the primary healthcare-giver in his village.Suyá Project, Brazil
In collaboration with the Suyá of Mato Grosso, Brazil, Cultural Survival and other
organizations have established bilingual schools, provided funds for video equipmentfor the Suyá to document and publicize the invasions of their land and culture, helpedimprove the health of the Suyá through health monitors and communication with doc-tors, and established a pan-tribal Association of the Indian Lands of Xingu.  The  Suyáare still vulnerable to disease and threatened by attempts of others to invalidate theirland claims, continuation of support for these efforts is imperative.  Special Projects
Black Mesa Weavers for Life and Land, USA
Cultural Survival and the Diné (Navajo) of Black
Mesa, Arizona, USA, co-founded the project in 1998to better the economic and social conditions of theDiné through preservation of traditional sheep-herd-ing lifeways and the sale of wool and weaving prod-ucts. The project has identified and tapped into aninternational major niche market, worked closelywith the International Human Rights AdvocacyCenter at the University of Denver in Colorado, andformed partnerships with other groups working todevelop more international markets. They are cur-rently collaborating with Hopi groups to protect andpreserve the environment and the region's ecosystem.Americas
Center for Traditional Textiles of Cusco, Peru
The Center focuses on preserving traditional Peruvian weaving by documenting the
history of the art in various regions.  The Center also promotes awareness and edu-cation of the textile art by displaying collections and sponsoring weavers throughoutPeru to exhibit and teach art.  The Center accepts donations through CulturalSurvival to further its research and purchase textiles .
Garifuna Journey, Belize
After the award-winning 1994 documentary
detailing first-person accounts of Garifuna cul-ture, the project has co-curated a traveling exhi-bition involving traditional artifacts, video instal-lation, photography, original artwork, poetry, andscholarly essays. By recording elements of theirculture and educating others, the Garifuna, anindigenous people of African and Caribbeandescent, hope to maintain their own culturalpractices.
Maya Manche Scholarship Fund, Belize
Governmental support for the education of indigenous groups is lacking in southern
Belize.  However, the Kekchi believe that through education, they can overcome theirstatus as the poorest ethnic group in Belize.  By recognizing that high financial educa-tional costs are a fundamental barrier in creating Kekchi leaders and increasing self-determination, they have created a scholarship fund. Cultural Survival is assisting incollecting donations for the scholarship fund.Pumé Project, Venezuela
The Pumé of southwestern Venezuela, also known as
Yaruro, depend heavily on the land, living by huntingand gathering, fishing, and manioc cultivation.  The proj-ect and Cultural Survival developed the Pumé Fund forachieving legal land ownership and retaining aVenezuelan attorney to pursue land tenure rights.  Theyalso plan to establish a program in which medical sup-plies and visits by Venezuelan health professionals areregularly available to the Pumé.
Sna Jtz'ibajom (House of the Writer) Chiapas Writer's Cooperative, Mexico
The Teatro Lo 'il Maxil  has toured Mexico and the United
States.  With a mission to entertain and inform audiences,members produce plays about ancient Mayan history, folktales, and contemporary social issues.  The project has alsocreated a literacy program that has taught 5,500 men,women, and children, and has published anthologies of folk-tales and oral history, as well as two collections of plays.According to Tziak Tsa-pat Ts-it, "By working for the good ofthe Mexican community and providing knowledge of Mexicanculture to the world we strengthen our own people."  The proj-ect accepts donations through CS from those dedicated topromoting the right of indigenous self-expression.
16
Indigenous
EmpowermentSpecial Projects
Ainu School Project, Japan
The Ainu face discrimination by mainstream Japanese and consequently hide their
background while traditional aspects of their cultural practices are lost.  They need sup-port so they may better protect their group rights and culture. The project raises aware-ness of Ainu issues by documenting cultural practices and teaching others about diversi-ty.  The project will establish an  Ainu school in Tokyo to preserve the traditional language.
Orang Asli Assistance Fund, Malaysia
The project intends to strengthen Orang Asli organizations, education, legal actions,
health care programs, publicity, lobbying, and emergency assistance.  The communityeducation programs, taught by volunteer teachers, are based in four villages in the stateof Perak (plans call for programs in eight more locations).  Volunteers provide formal andinformal education for children ages three to 12, and informal education for youth groupsand adults with no prior formal education. In March 2001, Tijah Chopil, the school’sfounder, co-convened the National Conference on Biodiversity and IndigenousKnowledge, speaking on the Orang Asli's possible participation in the Malaysian Ministryof Health's program to integrate traditional medicine into governmental health services.
Philippine TAFT Project, Philippines
The project surpassed its numerous reforestation goals.  There are now five TAFT
Project sites.   The TAFT Project has also provided education for 12 Higaonon children.According to one leader, "The tribal community implements and administers these proj-ects, and is feeling a sense of empowerment for the first time in decades."  Donationsthrough Cultural Survival help pay for tree seedlings and food for residing families.
Tibetan Rug Weaving Project, Nepal
In Chungba Valley, geographic isolation prevents many children from receiving formal
schooling.  Cultural Survival has undertaken a plan to build a new residential school forarea children.  The project will create an endowment from rug sales to provide scholar-ships for children from middle school through high school.  Rug sales would also help cre-ate an adult learning and vocational training center for basic literacy, math, and account-ing.  Asia and Oceania
17Tibetan School Project, Tibet
In 1987, a school was established in the village of Katsel, Medrogonkhar. The project's
objectives are to provide educational opportunities, food, clothing, and basic health carefor the children of the Katsel school, as well as provide assistance to other rural Tibetanschools.  In addition, a medical dispensary, full-time nurse, and part-time doctor are avail-able to administer medical care for the students, staff, and villagers.  Totem Peoples’ Preservation Project,Siberia and Mongolia
The project seeks cultural preservation of
the eastern Siberian and Mongolian totempeoples, the Dukha, and retention of thedeclining reindeer population.  On October29, 2001, CS welcomed five visitors fromSiberia in a cultural exchange organized bythe Massachusetts-based NGO Sacred EarthNetwork.  Topics covered educating childrento love their culture, protecting sacred sites,exercising spiritual practices, pursuing eco-nomic activities, supporting traditional use ofnatural resources, and strengthening legisla-tion for the establishment of an ethno-culturalcenter.
Wangurri Garden Project, Australia
Australian Wangurri clan elder Timothy Buthimang is pursuing his vision: ensur-
ing that self-sufficient Aborigines are utilizing the land and sea.  His WangurriGarden Project has established fruit and vegetable gardens to support the move-ment of Aborigines back to their homeland, to alleviate the need to return to cen-tral communities for provisions, and to ease the adjustment to a bush life.  CulturalSurvival’s supporters contributed $2,760 following the  Action Update appeal inearly 2001. 
Wangurri Garden Project participantsDukha girl with a reindeerIndigenous 
EmpowermentDjenné Project, Mali
The Djenné Project is a CS research and advocacy initiative that seriously questions plans to build
a large dam at Talo along the Bani River in Mali.  Responding to local and international concerns,Cultural Survival commissioned a study by an expert team from the International DevelopmentOffice at Clark University in Massachusetts, USA.  The report revealed that the Talo Dam projectwould be detrimental to the natural environment with likely negative affects on 20,000 downstreamfarmers, fisher peoples and other residents.  It could also lead to the destruction of the DjenneMosque, the largest adobe structure in the world.  The African Development Bank, the primary proj-ect funder, responded to the report by placing a moratorium on construction allowing time for furtherstudy.  Unfortunately the Malian Ministry of Rural Development has rejected the Clark report find-ings and has not adequately responded to the five main issues raised therein: 1) lack of participa-tion and public acceptance by residents situated downstream in Djenné, 2) an additionalEnvironmental Impact Assessment to better explore potential adverse affects, 3) fair monitoring andaccountability by all stakeholders, not just direct beneficiaries, 4) a cost-benefit analysis taking intoconsideration downstream effects, and 5) the governmental protection provision of the DjennéMosque as a designated World Heritage site under UNESCO.  Members of the Clark team spentthe summer in Mali and their findings will inform the next phase of this special project.
Efe Medical Project, Democratic Republic of Congo
The Efe are the least Westernized of pygmy groups. Because they have no medical care of any
kind, simple infections result in prolonged pain and severe suffering.  In fact, an estimated 50 per-cent of children die before reaching adulthood. However, most cases are preventable. With a fundfor a medical dispensary in the Ituri forest at Akokora, the primary mission is mitigating the sufferingfrom malaria, yaws, tropical ulcers, and bacterial infections. The primary source of funding for theseinterventions comes from the sale of William Wheeler's landmark portrait of the Efe, entitled Efe
Pygmies: Archers of the African Rain Forest , available through Cultural Survival.
Ituri Forest Peoples’ Fund, Democratic  Republic of Congo
Efe and Lese farmers in the Ituri rainforest wish to ensure that  their children receive education
and primary health care. Responding to a lack of government assistance, they created a fund toestablish and run their own clinic and primary school.  They accept donations through CulturalSurvival: $50 cures 10 cases of malaria, $25 pays for a teacher's salary for one month, and $15buys one month's worth of school supplies.
Kasiisi/ Kanyawara School Building Project (KKSBP), Uganda
This project focuses on universal primary education for subsistence-farming families living around
Kibale National Park.  These families have invested in two schools, built six classrooms, and pro-vided secondary school scholarships for two children each year.  The project invites supporters to"come build blocks with Cultural Survival" and donations for the building project are acceptedthrough CS.
18Eyasi Basin Indigenous Peoples Fund, Tanzania
This project is a new initiative for Cultural Survival in 2002 and aims to raise and distribute funds
to the Wahadzabe and Wadatoga to aid them in their efforts to protect their way of life. 
Tomas, an Efe man, Congo
W.  WheelerSpecial ProjectsIndigenous
Empowerment AfricaEach year, Cultural Survival hosts forums and
conferences that inform various audiencesabout issues that profoundly affect the lives ofindigenous peoples.  Themes often touchupon issues of international scope such asmining, dams, language loss, or war.  Theselected speakers are indigenous leaderswho have direct knowledge of a particularissue.  These fora provide indigenous leadersthe opportunity to meet and discuss issues ofcommon concern with other leaders as wellas international specialists, students, and thegeneral public.  
On December 5, 2001, at the David
Rockefeller Center for Latin American Studiesat Harvard University, Cultural Survival pre-sented a Speakers Forum on Plan
Colombia. Participants included indigenous
leaders from Panama, Colombia, and Bolivia,as well as local scholars. Indigenous speak-ers included Kuna Clemente Wilson, Taina
Hedman, and Iguaibilinguina Hedman(Organizers for the Movimiento de laJuventud Kuna, Panama); Jesus Avirama
(representative of Coconuco and theRegional Council of Indigenous Peoples ofCauca, Colombia); and Aymara Maria
Eugenia Choque (author from Bolivia and
the Executive Director of Andean OralHistory). This consciousness-raising eventpresented to scholars and specialists differentperspectives of people involved in or affectedby Plan Colombia, including Colombian gov-ernment and military, civil society, small farm-ers, drug traffickers, and the United Statesgovernment and military. Indigenous Speakers Forum
19Clemente Wilson and Taina Hedman (Kuna) share their
opinions on Plan Colombia
J. BrownIndigenousEmpowermentThe members of Cultural Survival com-
prise a community of individuals andorganizations concerned with indige-nous issues. Members stay informedby reading our publications and con-tribute to the cause of indigenous rightsfinancially, intellectually, and throughtheir own activism. Members are ourlargest working network and includeindigenous leaders, university profes-sors, college libraries, educators andstudents, and former Cultural Survivalstaff and interns.
Membership is the means by which
we distribute most copies of theCultural Survival Quarterly (CSQ) .
Approximately 400 of our members areuniversity or public libraries.  Our mem-bership base has been steadily grow-ing over the past four years. In additionto receiving the CSQ and CS Voices ,
members will soon be invited to sub-scribe to CS Indigenous News , a week-
ly Cultural Survival e-mail publication.
Membership dues: $45/year for individual,
$60/year institution, $25/year student or senior
3,100 members
53% pay $45/year individual rate23% pay $60/year institutional rate22% pay $25/year student or senior rate2% choose to pay between $60 and $993% choose to pay between $100 and $4990.6% (20) choose to pay between $500 and $9990.5% (14) choose to pay more than $1000
87% in U.S.A.15% in Massachusetts13% in California8% in New York3%  each inWashington,Pennsylvania, Illinois2%  each in  Michigan,Oregon, Minnesota,Maryland, Arizona
Members in all 50
states (plus PuertoRico, D.C., Guam)Of our 3,100 members:15% are libraries5% are anthropologists1% are educators
20Membership
Membership Profile
The impulse for the founding of Cultural Survival arose during the 1960s with
the “opening up” of the Amazonian regions of South America and  other remoteregions elsewhere.  As governments all over the world sought  to extractresources from areas that had never before been developed, the drastic effectsthis trend had on the regions' indigenous peoples underscored the urgent needto defend the human rights of these "victims of progress." Cultural Survival wasfounded to help indigenous peoples in their struggles.  
Throughout the 1970s, Cultural Survival's original founders
David Maybury-Lewis (President), Evon Vogt, Jr. (Treasurer),Orlando Patterson (Clerk), and Pia Maybury-Lewis (ExecutiveSecretary) functioned out of a space made available by Harvard'sPeabody Museum. The organization was incorporated in 1972 asa tax-exempt NGO in Cambridge, Massachusetts. CS launched apublication program consisting of the Cultural Survival Newsletter
and a series of Special Reports. Cultural Survival also introducedits annual craft fairs, which display and sell indigenous arts andcrafts.
During the 1980s, Cultural Survival entered a new phase. It
received core support from the Ford Foundation along with other
outside funding.  This enabled usto expand our mission. Cultural Survival movedinto new and larger quarters and added addi-tional staff. A new initiative, Cultural Survival'sMarketing Program, was launched to helpindigenous groups receive a greater profit fromtheir sold goods.  However, after considerabledebate among the board and staff and due tocomplications with the supply, it was decided tono longer support this program.  In the 1998, Cultural Survival hired a new Director, Dr. Ian S. McIntosh, an
anthropologist with in-depth knowledge of indigenous issues in Australia andSoutheast Asia. The organization continued tosponsor basic research on indigenous peopleswith the aid of a network of indigenous collab-orators and pro-indigenous scholars who
insured that the very bestanalyses of indigenous issueswere available from CulturalSurvival. The results of thisongoing research were pub-lished in the Cultural Survival
Quarterly , which continues to
be the leading journal ofindigenous affairs in the UnitedStates, and in the organization's monograph series. In thisperiod, Cultural Survival also emphasized development of theEducation and Outreach Program, which informed studentsand the public at large about indigenous issues and their sig-nificance to the global community.  Meanwhile, the InternshipProgram continued to draw on talented and dedicated young
people from around the world to work with Cultural Survival as they had eversince its founding. 
In 2002, Dr.  Bart Ryan, an anthropologist and faculty member at  Harvard
University whose areas of specilization includes Islam and Southeast  Asia,was empolyed as Co-director.  Presently, Cultural Survival continues to demon-strate leadership in crafting innovative strategies to address indigenous con-cerns, albeit with greater emphasis on more innovative communication andinformation technologies. The Ethnosphere website  (www.cs.org) houses agrowing and continually renewed source of reliable, quality information onindigenous peoples. This  website draws together all the departments and pro-grams of Cultural Survival, and is the primary new strategy through which wewill support our programs and achieve our mission in the 21st century. TheEthnosphere site will be the primary source of record for anyone interested inindigenous people and the considerable problems they still face at the begin-ning of the 21st century.
21History Of Cultural Survival
Pia Maybury-Lewis, co-founder,
with a Xerente child, Brazil 1956David Maybury-Lewis, co-founder,with son Biorn visiting the XavanteIndians, Brazil 1958Who We AreFounders 
David & Pia Maybury-Lewis
Orlando PattersonEvon Z. Vogt, Jr.
Board of Directors
David Maybury-Lewis, President
Edward C. Henderson Professor of Anthropology Department of AnthropologyHarvard University
S. James Anaya
Samuel M. Fegtly Professor of Law James E. Rogers College of LawUniversity of Arizona
Wade Davis
Explorer-in-ResidenceNational Geographic
Sarah Fuller, Clerk
President and CEODecision Resources, Inc.
Pat Gercik
Managing DirectorM.I.T. Japan Program
Elizabeth Grady
Chair, Social Studies DepartmentCambridge Public Schools
Jean Jackson
ProfessorM.I.T. Anthropology Program
Richard Lee, Treasurer 
Katy Moran
Executive DirectorRenew The Earth
P. Ranganath Nayak
Management Consultant &  Philanthropist
Achola Pala Okeyo
Senior Gender Policy AdvisorUnited Nations Development ProgramJohn O'Connor 
Founder & PresidentGreenworks, Inc.
(John’s presence will be missed: he passed 
away Nov. 30, 2001)
Mary Anne Saul
Teacher, Social Studies DepartmentNorth Reading High School
Sylvia Shepard
Education Publishing Consultant
Irene M. Staehelin
Co-founder & Board Member!Khwa ttu San Culture Center 
John W. Terborgh
Center for Tropical ConservationDuke University
George E. Turnbull
Fox, Turnbull & Company
Rosita Worl (Tlingit Nation)
President Sealaska Heritage Foundation
Advisory Board
Harvey Cox
Victor S. Thomas Professor of DivinityHarvard Divinity School
Roberto Cardoso de OliveiraTheodore Downing
Research Professor of Social DevelopmentUniversity of Arizona
Philippa FriedrichJohn Marshall
PresidentDocumentary Educational Resources
Orlando Patterson
John Cowles Professor of SociologyHarvard University
Francesco PellizziMarguerite Robinson
HIID Institute Fellow EmeritusLouis B. Sohn
Director of Research and Studies of  the International Rule of Law CenterGeorge Washington University Law  School
Irene M. Staehelin
Co-founder & Board Member!Khwa ttu San Culture Center 
Lynn Stephen
Professor of AnthropologyUniversity of Oregon
John W. Terborgh
Director, Center for Tropical ConservationDuke University
Stefano Varese
Professor, Native American Studies University of California, Davis
Evon Z. Vogt, Jr.
Professor of AnthropologyDepartment of AnthropologyHarvard UniversityBoards
22Who We AreStaff &  Interns
GENERAL MANAGEMENT & 
ADMINISTRATION
Ian S. McIntosh ( Yerevan, Armenia ) & 
Bart J. Ryan ( Cambridge,  Massachusetts ), 
Managing Directors
Sofia Flynn, Bookkeeping/Personnel
Jamie Brown, Information Technology 
MEMBERSHIP
Mark Camp, Coordinator
PROGRAMS
Publications & Research
Cultural Survival Quarterly:Deidre d'Entremont, 
Editor and Art Director
Tara Tidwell, Managing Editor
Bartholomew Dean, Book Reviews
Editor
Sarah Hay, Advertising and Single 
Copy Sales
Kenneth Ramsey, Advertising
Mark Camp, Subscriptions
Cultural Survival Voices:
Mark Camp, Managing Editor
Deidre d'Entremont, Editor
Jamie Brown, Design
Sarah Hay & Kenneth Ramsey, 
Advertising and Distribution
Cultural Survival Series on
Ethnicity and Change:David Maybury-Lewis & TheodoreMacdonald, Jr., General Editors
Ethnosphere Initiative :
Larry Childs, Pilot Coordinator
Jamie Brown, Website DesignJon Mingle & Alexis John Hooi,
Indigenous News Editors
Rossana Andia, Zivile Maciukaite,Abra Lyman, Fidel Porcuna, SarahMurray, News Reporters
Lucia Clark, Research, Canada &
Europe
Andrew Mudge, Threatened Voices:
The First UN Permanent Forum onIndigenous Issues , Film Documentary
Producer
Belinder Dhanoa, Film Documentary 
Writer
Education & Outreach
Education Program:Lisa Matthews
Research Coordinator
Kenneth Ramsey
Outreach Coordinator
Internship Program, Public Events,
Bazaars: Pia Maybury-Lewis
Indigenous Tools & Services
Special Projects:Ian S. McIntosh, Coordinator
1.  Ainu School Project, Japan
Shizue Ukaji
2.  Black Mesa Project, United States
Carol Halberstadt
3.  Center for Traditional Textiles of Cusco, Peru
Nilda Callañaupa
4.  Center for AndeanEthnomusicology, Peru
Raul Romero5.  Djenné Project, Mali
Jean-Louis Bourgeois
6.  Efe Medical Project, D.R. Congo
William Wheeler
7.  Ersari Turkmen Vegetable DyeWeaving Project and Tibetan RugWeaving Project, Tibet 
Chris Walter
8. Eyasi Basin Indigenous PeoplesFund, Tanzania
Nic Blurton-Jones
9.  Garifuna Journey, Belize
Andrea Leland, Kathy Berger
10. Ituri Forest Peoples Fund, D.R.Congo
David Wilkie, Gilda Morelli, Bryan
Curran, Robert Bailey
11. Kasiisi/Kanyawara School Project,Uganda
Elizabeth Ross, Richard Wrangham
12. Philippine TAFT Project,Philippines
Datu Efren Mandipensa
13. Pumé Project, Venezuela
Pei-Lin Yu, Russell Greaves
14. Sna Jtz'ibajom, Chiapas Writers' Cooperative, Mexico
Robert Laughlin
15. Totem Peoples’ PreservationProject, Mongolia
Daniel Plumley
16. Wangurri Garden Project,Australia
Timothy Buthimang
17. Wara Collection Project, Brazil
Hiparidi Top'tiro
18. Xavante Education Fund, Brazil
Laura GrahamIndigenous Speakers Forum:
Ian S. McIntosh, Coordinator
Advocacy Campaigns:
Mark Camp, Coordinator
Interns
Rossana Andia, Anne Batchelder,
Sydney Beveridge, Juan MartinBotero, Miranda Bureau, OleksandrByelyakov, Jack Caughran, LuciaClark, Susan Charneco, Ga-YoungChoi, Christopher Cronin, Joanna Eng,Erin Fitz-Henry, Jennifer Frederick,Alexandra Garita, Kelly Gillooley,James Hannon, Alexis John Hooi,David Ibarrola, Leah Kabran, NoahKaufman, Rodela Khan, EdenKnudsen, Molly Krautmeyer, SethLaymon, Sarah Lawrence, JessicaLeight, Zivile Maciukaite, MichelleMalalis, Victoria McLoughlin, JonathanMingle, Charlotte Moore, Luz MariaMorendo Medrano, Sarah Murray,Marin O'Brien, Helen Palfreyman,Natalie Peretsman, AgnieszkaPortalewska, Neil Ragsdale, RebeccaRouse, Sarah Sandri, Mark Sanders,Claudia Santana, Sonia Sharman,Sarah Summers, Judith Schutter, MegTierney, Amy Todd, Louisa Trackman,Kanako Uzawa, Joel Weingarten,Sarah Weiss, Claire Wheeler, JamesWilliams, Sarah Wilson, JonathanVuotto
23Who We AreFoundations, Corporations
& Institutions
Donors ($20,000+ )
Anonymous Josephine Bay Paul & C. 
Michael Paul Foundation
National Geographic Society
Donors ($2,001-$20,000)
A.G. Edwards TrustBechtel FoundationChoban & AssociatesFiduciary Trust Company  
International
Nordlys Foundation, Inc.Peace Development FundSmithsonian InstituteSTA Travel/Council TravelSwanee Hunt Family  
Foundation
Donors ($500 - $1999 )
Bart's Water SportsThe Boston Family OfficeThe Charlotte Forsythe
Fund, a fund of the Headwaters Fund
Countertop SoftwareCultural IntrigueEagle Creek Inc.Easton FoundationHarvard University Divinity 
School
Harvard University
Graduate School of EducationHarvard University 
Department of 
Anthropology
Harvard University 
Peabody Museum
Headwaters FundIllinois Humanity CouncilLannan FoundationLippincott FoundationMerrill Family Charitable
Foundation
Mills Family FoundationThe Middle Passage 
Foundation
The Roy  A. Hunt FoundationTurtle ToursWinky Foundation
Donors ($100 - $499)
Amelia Earhart TheatreAscend CapitalThe Boston FoundationCambridge Trust CompanyChapel of All SaintsIllinois Humanity CouncilFair Share FoundationDisorder Of The Foot & AnkleIdyll, Ltd.Fair Share FoundationHarvard University/East 
Asia Regional Studies
Illinois Humanity CouncilL. A. BurdicksLa Guitarra Selecta, Inc.Occidental College LibraryRMF FoundationRollins College
Russell Family Private 
Foundation
Share It Now FoundationSt. Michaels Christian ServiceTulane UniversityUniversity of CaliforniaVanguard Public FoundationWeiss, Peck, & Greer LLC.
Individuals 
Donors ($20,000+)Maria Chabot
Donors ($2,001-$20,000 )
Alicia J. CampiHarry CohenJan CrawfordLida CrolRobert DryfoosNicholas G. Blurton JonesLinda A. KrolSusan KubanisDavid & Pia Maybury-LewisJohn O'ConnorBarbara RogoffKristina L. Simmons & 
Michael Sheridan            
Colin TurnbullJohn T. WatsonDonors ($500 - $1999)
Jean-Louis BourgeoisLouise BourgeoisNico Burssens Snoeck-Ducaju  & Zoon N.V.Melissa K. CollierElizabeth CooperAsho CraineJ. Bart CulverMark & Vicki DodgeRobert DryfoosKaren Ito EdgertonPeter EllisonDonald FrischmannMargaret GibsonBarbara L. GlaserLaurel GonsalvesPatricia E. HaseltineTorrence HuntJean E. JacksonGreg JamesNicholas G. Blurton JonesLucille & Lawrence KaplanLida A. KrolLedlie & Roxana LaughlinRichard LeeRichard F. LemanBryan LockwoodStephen H. LoringEdward F. Macnichol Jr.Nancy Maizels & Alan WeinerJesse MarkowErnst MayrConstance McAninchArlene McLarenBruce P. Merrill
Gerrish H. MillikenRosemary MuddP. Ranganath& 
Sandra Nayak
Michael O. NimkoffNancy S. NordhoffJerome & Janet RegierBarbara RogoffElizabeth RossMary K. RyanDan Scheib & Lynda A. KellyDan SchiavoPeter L. SheldonG. William SkinnerJanine SmithIrene StaehelinCynthia H. SunderlandGerrit StoverIrma TurtleJoan W. WoffordPhilip YoungPei Lin Yu
Acknowledgements
The following list gives special recognition to the foundations, individuals, universities, corporations, and others who have p rovided financial or in-kind support
amounting to $100 or more for our work and programs during the fiscal year 2001-2002. We also greatly appreciate the generosity  of our more than 3,000 members
who are too numerous to mention here.  Every contribution increases Cultural Survival's capacity to realize its mission.  Donat ions this year ranged from the basic
student membership of $25 to an anonymous contribution of £100,000 (aproximately $142,000).
24Who We AreDonors ($100 - $499)
Mary Adderley
Judith Aissen & 
James T. Clifford
Graham & JeanAlvordLouise Todd AmblerJanet K. AmighiRebecca ArnoldiElisha & Elizabeth
Atkins
Lotte BailynJanet BainJohn BalintKeith BallCarmen BarrosGrace BascopeRoger BatzBrent BerlinRose BetheJim & Diana BillippGail A. BindermanLinda C. BlackErika E. BourguignonDeborah J. BordeauDawn BowenMarkley H. BoyerVictoria R. BrickerBeverly BridgerDorian BrooksLisa D. BrooksCynthia & Franklin
Browning
Maria BullenLinda BurkettLouise M. BurkhardCristina E. CallanPeter CanbyFrancis A. CancianRobert CampbellPeter & Lucia CaseFay M. ChandlerMurray ChapmanJohn & Jean ChildsTheodore Coakley
Michael D.CoeCelemency CogginsElizabeth H. CokerWilliam C. ColemanJohn & Jeanne CoseoTheodore CraigJean CrandallMartha CrayArthur M. CrockerWilliam H. CrockerRon CrunhutElizabeth Csicsery-
Ronay
Susan & Tom CurrenCarrie Nicole DailyVernie DaleAndrew & Adrianne 
Davis
Alison E. DavisRobert DentanTerry B. EastmanRuth EckertElizabeth EddisonMait EdeyRisa S EllovichKirk & Karen EndicottBrenda EngelGlenn & Maria ErsoAnne & William EwingSigo FalkWilliam & Barbara
Fash
Phyllis Ann FastDorothy FedermanPatricia & T. LuxFeiningerMichael M.J. FischerDouglas FitzsimmonsJohn & Diane
Forsdale
Barbara FranksRobert FreidmanJohn FriesGabriel P. Frommer
William & Sarah FullerIvan GaylerTeresa GilmanMirra GinsburgHelen W. GjessingMichalene GlennonWalter GoldschmidtJanice GonsalvesByron & Mary Jo 
Good
Felicitas D. GoodmanLesli GordonPamela Giering
Gossman
James H. Goulder, Jr.Elizabeth GradyMargaret J. GrahamSidney M. GreenfieldLinda GreenhouseLouise GreggRon Grunhut & 
Carmen  Barros
Walter W. HainesElizabeth H. HarrisonEdith R. HedgesDagmar HelgagerCarol HendricksonSusan J. HerlinEva HershJohn HertzfeldDennis HolemanRichard A. HorvitzMeta HoughRosanne HowardRobert W. HoweW.W. HowellsDaniel B. HrdyAase & A.W.F. 
Huggins
John HuntJoan Ann HyraCheri & Keith 
JamesonDaniel E. Jameson
Carl R. JantzenJocelyn JerryMary N. KachadurianJohn E. KaemmerJack & Sara KellerGary & Glen KingDavid KohlbergLawrence KoplikAndrea KulinJames B. LaughlinRobert LaughlinSan San LeeWilliam B. LenoirElizabeth LeonardMargaret A. LeonardJames LevyConstance LewisLeonard LiebermanCher LindholmMatthew LindholmRach LinnNancy Yu-Ning LiuIrena LombrosoRobert LoneyM. Brinton LykesPatricia J. LyonElizabeth A. Mackay-
Gray
Blue MagruderJohn MaherGeorge E. MalloukAllen MaretJoan MarlerSandra Matteson Elaine K. MartinezErnest R. MayRoma MayurJanet U. McalpinJoseph & Susan 
McGee
Kerry C. McgrathAnn MerrittMatthew C. MichelsenGerrish H. Milliken
Kevin MillerMarvin MinskyJohn & Ellen MootKaren MossRosemary MuddAnna Marie MulvihillConnie MutelAnna NathansonEmmy Howe-NeseedSalomon NahmadCarl F. NelsonChristine Scott Nelson
& Carl F. Nelson
Jill E. NewhouseElizabeth NicholsJohanna NicholsDavid Teget NicholsonJean F. NutiniFelicia OldfatherSutti OrtizNancy OxfeldMichael PerloffPauline E. PetersRichard & Irene PipesDaniel R. PlumleyGudrun PolakTom V. PottsWelling T. PopeEsther Christopher 
Pullman
William B. RadcliffeDena O. RakoffDavid A.F. RaynoldsAna Maria G. ReedCelia ReichM. Janneke & Robert 
Resnick
Rachel Z. RitvoFred RobertsMarguerite S. 
Robinson 
Aldon N. RoatMargaret RodgersJohn P. Rogers
Barr & June 
Rosenberg
David RosensteinEllen Freeman RothKathleen RousseauRustum & Della RoyGloria A. Rudisch MDCatharine D. RushDavid RushJeremy SabloffPaul SachosPaul L. SaffoJane SagerTom SargentMary Anne SaulMaria SauzierFanette Sawyer Martha Russell ShareLou ScharpfGlenn SchiavoFred SchneiderPaul ScottJudith ShapiroDonald ShepardSusan ShermanParker ShiptonDaniel SilverChristopher SimpsonTeresa M. SmithPauline SpiegalMary G. SpragueSamuel StanleyKeith E. StanleyJane StarkeyCharles SteinMarilyn StewartMr. & Mrs. W. St. GoarGeorge StraussJudith StronachCynthia SunderlandJanet Taft & H. 
Rennyson  Merritt III
Robert TamkinKaren Taussig-Lux
Elmer TaylorWill TaylorJohn W. TerborghKathy TholinKatharine TrueThompsonElizabeth ThorndikeGregory & Helene 
Thornton
George TurnbullWilliam UrySandra UtechMarie De  
Vandoeuvres
Leslie VenselCharles VerharenEvon & Catherine
Vogt
Peter Von MertensRobert WalmsleyKay B. WarrenCynthia WeinsteinJames & Rosalind  
Weir
Tome WeisnerDolores WeltyLisa WersalCarol M. WhitneyDar WilliamsGeorge Carter WilsonDr. & Mrs. LM WinstonRobert L. WinzelerCameron W. WolfeMary Andrews WolffJosephine E. WoodPam WoodKay Harrigan WoodsLedie L. WoosleyPei Lin YuSusan E. ZarutskiePatricia ZilinskiSteven Zuckerman
Acknowledgements
25Who We AreCultural Survival Inc. is a nonprofit, tax-exempt
organization (23-7182593) and all contributions aretax deductible to the maximum extent of the law.Cultural Survival encourages contributions fromthe general public, foundations, corporations, andothers. We will be pleased to consult with any indi-vidual considering a gift to Cultural Survival.Please direct your inquiry toMark Camp, Membership Coordinator Cultural Survival215 Prospect StreetCambridge, MA 02139Tel.617-441-5412, Fax. 617-441-5417E-mail: mcamp@cs.orgWebsite: www.cs.org.
There are many ways you can support the work ofCultural Survival. Below are some suggestions:
Become a member
You can greatly help Cultural Survival by becom-
ing a member. Annual membership rates are $45for individuals, $25 for students and seniors, and$60 for institutions. You will receive a full-year sub-scription (four issues) to the award-winningCultural Survival Quarterly , along with advanced
mailings and discounts to special events. 
Year-End Appeal
A gift to the Year-End Appeal, our primary
fundraising campaign, supports programmatic ini-tiatives and organizational infrastructure. The cam-paign is held in late November, and is essential tolaying the foundation for the development ofseedling projects and special events in the upcom-ing year.Employee Matching Gift Program
Check with your employer to find out whether it
will match your charitable contribution.
Endowment Fund
Foundations, corporations, and wealthy individu-
als are encouraged to contribute generously tosupport the long-term sustainability of the organi-zation through contributions to our endowment.
In-Kind Contribution
Cultural Survival has benefited in the past from
in-kind contributions made in different areas suchas computers, office equipment, graphic designservices, and pro bono legal work. Printing dona-tions can greatly offset the expenses of producingCultural Survival Quarterly journal.
Internship Program and Volunteers
If you are unable to make a monetary contribu-
tion, donate your time and expertise as an internor a volunteer for a special event. You will learnabout current indigenous issues while helping theorganization achieve its goals.
Corporate Sponsor
Contact us about underwriting an event or
Special Project. Year round, Cultural Survivalseeks corporate and individual support for eventsranging from film series to annual gala events. OurSpecial Projects also require funding to continuetheir impressive work in various communitiesthroughout Africa, the Americas, and Asia.Memorial Gifts and Insurance Beneficiaries
You might designate Cultural Survival as a bene-
ficiary of your estate or life insurance policy.
Planned Giving and Bequests
Donor-advised accounts, remainder trusts, and
other forms of planned giving support the organi-zation while benefiting the donor as well. On spe-cial occasions, honor a friend or relative with a giftto the organization or to a Special Project.
Help Distribute Cultural Survival Voices
Newspaper
Cultural Survival depends on volunteers to dis-
tribute its newspaper. For example, teachers maydistribute them to their students, they may be leftin coffee shops or libraries, or they may be handedout at work. Contact Cultural Survival for 100 freecopies. How You Can Help
26Who We AreFinancial Summary
Revenue and Expense information will be available fol-
lowing our annual audit in October or November 2002.
27This financial report, Statement of Activities for yearended August 31, 2002, will be extracted from our audit-ed financial statements prepared by Feeley & Driscoll,P.C., Certified Public Accountants/Business Consultants.Copies of the full financial statement will be availableupon request.  Cultural Survival is very appreciative ofthe generous institutions and  individual  donors whosesupport makes our work possible.Annual Report 2001-2002 
Production team
Larry Childs, Editor 
Jennifer Burtner, AdviserAgnieszka Portalewska: Graphic DesignJudith Schutter: Publications Sydney Beveridge: Education   Louisa Trackman:  Outreach Michelle Malalis: Indigenous Tools & Services Amy Todd: Who We Are & Membership Tara Tidwell, Leah Kabran, & Mark Sanders:Copy Editors
28Photo Creditscover: photo collage (clock wise) facesof indigenous people from Thailand,New Guinea, India, Tanzania © DigitalStock Corporation page 2:  photo of Kayapo Indian fish-ing on the Xingu River in Brazil ©Thomas Kelley, Kathmandu, Nepalfrom CS Calendar 1992 © DharmaEnterprisespage 4: Indigenous man fromTanzania © Digital Stock Corporation page 5: photo collage (left to right)Indigenous people from Bali,Tanzania, Thailand, New Guinea, Indiapage 10: all photos © Jamie Brownpage 15: Indigenous person fromEcuador © Digital Stock Corporation  
page 20: Indigenous girl from Thailand© Digital Stock Corporation  page 22: Two indigenous men fromEcuador © Digital Stock Corporation  page 23: Indigenous man from India ©Digital Stock Corporation  page 24: Indigenous children fromNew Guinea © Digital StockCorporation  page 25: Indigenous woman fromEcuador at a market © Digital StockCorporation  page 26: Indigenous children fromEcuador © Digital Stock Corporation  
Contact information:Cultural Survival215 Prospect StreetCambridge, MA 02139 Tel. 617-441-5412Fax. 617-441-5417E-mail: csinc@cs.orgWebsite: www.cs.org.
Copyright © 2002 by Cultural Survival Inc.
