1
Cultural Survival // 2015 Annual Report
 annual Report
2015 This report covers the period from January 1, 2015 
to December 31, 2015 and financial information for 
September 1, 2014 to August 31, 2015.
Copyright © 2015 Cultural Survival
Cultural Survival
Main Office:
PO Box 381569
Cambridge, MA 02238 USA
t: 617.441.5400
f: 617.441.5417
culturalsurvival@cs.org
www.cs.org
Facebook.com/CulturalSurvival
Twitter @CSORG3
Cultural Survival // 2015 Annual Report
OUR VISION
Cultural Survival envisions a future that respects and honors 
Indigenous Peoples’ inherent rights and dynamic cultures, deeply and 
richly interwoven in lands, languages, spiritual traditions, and artistic 
expression, rooted in self-determination and self-governance.
OUR MISSION
Cultural Survival advocates for the rights of Indigenous Peoples 
and partners with Indigenous communities to protect their lands, 
languages, and cultures.
OUR HISTORY
The impulse for the founding of Cultural Survival arose during the 
1960s with the “opening up” of the Amazonian regions of South 
America and other remote regions elsewhere. As governments all 
over the world sought to extract resources from areas that had never 
before been developed, the drastic effects this trend had on the 
regions’ Indigenous Peoples underscored the urgent need to partner 
with Indigenous communities to defend their human rights. Cultural 
Survival was founded to help Indigenous Peoples in their struggles for 
human rights, sovereignty, and autonomy.
Throughout the 1970s, Cultural Survival’s founders David Maybury-
Lewis, Evon Vogt, Jr., Orlando Patterson, and Pia Maybury-Lewis 
functioned out of a space made available by Harvard’s Peabody 
Museum. The organization was incorporated in 1972 as a tax-exempt 
NGO in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Since its inception, Cultural 
Survival has been at the forefront of the international Indigenous 
rights movement. Cultural Survival’s work has contributed to a 
revolution of empowerment for Indigenous Peoples around the world.4
Cultural Survival // 2015 Annual ReportA MESSAGE FROM 
THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
Dear Friends:
It is my honor to share with you Cultural Survival’s 2015 Annual Report. As I look 
back on this year, I am humbled by how much progress we have made, and am 
grateful to our friends and supporters who have been an integral part of our 
achievements.
In 2015, you helped:
The Community Media Program to expand throughout Central America as Cultural 
Survival and local partners developed the first Central American network of Indigenous 
Community Radio Stations and planned the First Central American Indigenous 
Community Radio Conference in Panama in January 2016.
• Deliver the Indigenous Rights Radio Program (IRR) to over 1,200 radio stations in 
55 countries to inform Indigenous listeners on their rights through the production, 
distribution, translation, and broadcasting of programs in 30 languages. 
• Provide legal and journalistic support to Guatemalan community radio, Radio 
Juventud in Solola, as a judge ordered the return of seized equipment, setting a 
precedent for community radio stations all over the country.
• Indigenous radio producers to attend and speak on the record at the Inter-
American Commission on Human Rights regarding the freedom of expression in 
Honduras, El Salvador, and Guatemala as it relates to community radio.
Four Indigenous radio producers in India to travel to the Terra Madre conference 
to network and share knowledge about food, nutrition, and biocultural diversity!
Three of our programs work in partnership to achieve the goals of the United 
Nations (UN) Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples: ‘
Our COMMUNITY MEDIA PROGRAM provides important social, political, 
and cultural programming to over  1.1 million listeners in 15 different 
languages  in Guatemala, and develops critically needed programming with 
our network of community radio stations in El Salvador and Belize.  These 
stations also learn how to improve their operations through a series of training 
workshops and exchanges.
Our ADVOCACY PROGRAM  brings international attention to places where 
governments and corporations have violated these rights. Since 2013, we have 
partnered with the Maya Leaders Alliance (MLA) in Belize to help defend Maya 
land rights and prevent abuse of Maya lands  at the hands of U.S. Energy, 
a Texas-based petroleum company. In 2015, Cultural Survival sponsored four 
MLA delegates to attend the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues and 
nominated MLA for the Equator Prize, which they were awarded!
Our INDIGENOUS RIGHTS RADIO PROGRAM  expanded our innovative 
radio series that promotes the rights guaranteed by the UN Declaration on the 
Rights of Indigenous Peoples.  So far, our radio programs have been distributed 
free of charge to more than  1,500 radio stations in 60 countries, translated 
into 30 languages, reaching an estimated 10 million listeners!5
Cultural Survival // 2015 Annual ReportEvery  step of the way, Cultural Survival has engaged Indigenous Peoples in a 
dialogue to exchange information and ideas as well as transform Indigenous lives 
by supporting their understanding of their rights and how to apply them.
As a supporter of Cultural Survival, you have made possible the translation of 
the 2014 World Conference on Indigenous Peoples Outcome Document in eight 
Indigenous Nepalese languages and broadcast on 17 Indigenous community 
radio networks. These radio programs helped Indigenous Peoples learn 
about their international rights and how those rights are being discussed in 
international forums.
Moreover, Cultural Survival has shown its presence in our communities at the 
hardest of times. When the deadly April 25 and May 12 earthquakes struck Nepal 
and massive human and property loss occurred, Cultural Survival organized 
a targeted relief effort for the Kubu-Kasthali-Yakang, Ramechhap community 
radio services. Thanks to generous support, Radio Kairan, in Bamti-Bhandar-4, 
Ramechhap, was brought back on air in a matter of days. Radio has been the 
only means of getting information and news to villagers in the Himalayan region 
of the Ramechhap district. Getting the radio back on the air so quickly brought 
some needed cheer and valuable news to the Indigenous communities of Nepal 
in the wake of crisis.
There is a lot left to be done to empower the Indigenous Peoples worldwide, and 
Cultural Survival will continue to fight against exclusion, discrimination, illiteracy, 
and the poverty of Indigenous Peoples. We believe in the power of media and 
communication to address those challenges and to protect and maintain unique 
cultures, traditions, languages, and knowledge.
Sincerely,
 
Suzanne Benally  (Navajo and Santa Clara Tewa)
Executive Director
6
Cultural Survival // 2015 Annual ReportADVOCACY PROGRAM
We have seen that international advocacy work is so much 
more effective when we do it in partnership with Cultural 
Survival than when we do it on our own.  Cultural Survival 
executes an essential role in enabling Indigenous Peoples 
to engage in strategic advocacy at the international scale.  
Without such support, Indigenous Peoples’ advocacy efforts 
at that level will from the onset be handicapped.”
PABLO MIS, MAYA LEADERS ALLIANCE OF TOLEDO, BELIZE
In April 2015, Cultural Survival sponsored the participation of 4 Maya leaders from Belize at the United 
Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues (UNPFII) in New York. The leaders attended meetings 
with key UN bodies such as the World Bank, the UN Development Program (UNDP), the Special 
Rapporteur, and organized a press conference at the UN to share the news of their recent Caribbean 
Court of Justice victory. We also worked with board member Steven Heim to sponsor Ben Koissaba, 
Maasai of Kenya, to attend important meetings at the World Bank.  Cultural Survival hosted 5 side 
sessions during the 2015 UNPFII:
6Cultural Survival’s Advocacy Program supports grassroots Indigenous movements and 
supports Indigenous communities’ capacity building to demand and assert their rights 
outlined in the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. In 
2015, Advocacy Program activities included participation in international human rights 
mechanisms, research and reporting, convening dialogues, strategic communications, and 
advocacy campaigns. 
1.‘Indigenous Operationalization and Implementation UNDRIP’s Free, 
Prior, and Informed Consent’ 
2. ‘Securing Freedom of Expression for Indigenous Communities’
3. ‘Implementing Indigenous Rights through Radio’
4.‘Maya Land Rights in Belize, a Precedent for Indigenous Peoples 
Globally Location’ 
5.‘Universal Periodic Review: A Potent Process for the Realization of 
Human Rights in Indigenous Homelands ‘
7
Cultural Survival // 2015 Annual ReportAs part of the 2015 UN Human Rights Council’s 
Universal Periodic Review (UPR) process, Cultural 
Survival submitted 14 UPR reports, including a 
joint submission on Nepal with the Nepal National 
Coalition Against Racial Discrimination (NCARD) and 
a joint submission on Thailand with the Network of 
Indigenous Peoples in Thailand and Asia Indigenous 
Peoples Pact. On June 8, 2015, we hosted a UPR 
training in our Cambridge office with Joshua Cooper 
of the Hawai’i Institute for Human Rights and the US 
Human Rights Network, focusing on the review of 
the US. Twenty people attended the event. 
In July 2015, two Cultural Survival staff members 
attended the session on the Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples in Geneva. Our 
paper for EMRIP’s study on the Promotion and 
Protection of the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 
with Respect to their Cultural Heritage was 
well received. CS emphasized that community 
media (radio, television, digital media), 
produced by and for Indigenous communities, 
promotes and protects the cultural heritage of 
Indigenous Peoples, especially oral traditions 
and Indigenous languages, and can even halt 
language decline. Staff radio producer Rosy 
Gonzalez made an official intervention on this 
topic during the session and conducted several 
radio interviews with Indigenous leaders about 
the mechanism, in Spanish and English. 
Three of our campaign partners were awarded UNDP’s 2015 Equator Prize: the Maya Leaders 
Alliance of Belize, the Prey Lang Network of Cambodia and MASTA of Honduras. This award 
is given to grassroots organizations working on environmental issues in their communities. 
The winners received $10,000 and travel expenses to participate in the Paris climate talks in 
December 2015. SELECTED CAMPAIGN HIGHLIGHTS
PERU:  
Pluspetrol’s concession on Lot 192 expired at 
the end of August 2015 after 40 years and a 
new concession is being authorized to Canadian 
petroleum company Pacific Stratus, despite 
consultation and dialogue being officially broken 
off with Indigenous Peoples by the state after 
agreements could not be reached. Quechua 
and Achuar Communities held 12 days of strikes 
shutting down all oil operations until meetings 
with government resumed. Unfortunately, the 
concession will move forward for the next two 
years.
BANGLADESH: 
The Phulbari mine in Bangladesh continues 
to be stalled thanks to the vigilance of local 
communities who hold massive protests 
anytime company employees step foot in their 
village. The delay to the project has caused the 
company’s stock to continue declining, and the 
project is not likely to move forward in the near 
future.
7 Cultural Survival // 2015 Annual Report8
Cultural Survival // 2015 Annual ReportThe Community Media Program supports Indigenous Peoples’ right to freedom of 
expression through Indigenous community based radio. Our work in Guatemala 
building capacity for infrastructure and national legalization continues, and challenges 
include ongoing police raids on radio stations. Cultural Survival’s advocacy and support 
for community radio in Guatemala has led to greater regional involvement and the 
development of a regional network of Central American Indigenous radio stations. 
In January of 2015, both Radio Swan Tinamit 
and Radio Ixmukane were raided. At Radio 
Swan Tinamit, one volunteer was arrested at 
the time of the raid. Some of their equipment 
was confiscated and the police made threats 
that they would make more arrests if anyone 
else got involved.  In solidarity, Asociacion 
Sobrevivencia Cultural and Cultural Survival 
made visits to both radios following the raids 
to offer legal advice and support.
We met with the current Inter-American 
Commission for Human Rights Special 
Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression, 
Edison Lanza, on several occasions and he 
expressed support for the community radio 
movement in Guatemala. In April 2015, 
Cultural Survival and other Guatemalan 
organizations that support the community 
radio movement funded a trip to 
Guatemala for Edison Lanza to participate 
in an Indigenous Community Radios Forum. 
During his visit, he stressed his concern for 
the neglect of the passing of Bill 4087 in 
Guatemala, expressing its utility in preserving 
culture and identity. He mentioned that he 
and the past four Special Rapporteurs have 
made extensive recommendations to the 
Guatemalan government to modify their 
telecommunications law, and that he will 
continue to recommend that this action be 
taken.
Cultural Survival has been integral in 
sustaining Guatemala’s community-run radio 
stations, which are critical to government and 
corporate accountability related to ensuring 
Indigenous rights.  Indigenous people in 
Guatemala rely on community radio to keep 
their cultures, languages, and traditions alive 
as well as to inform their communities in their 
own languages, reaching even the poorest COMMUNITY MEDIA
The Indigenous 
Communications Caucus is a 
window that has been opened 
for the Indigenous Peoples of 
the world to create a network 
that allows us to join the global 
media scene in a way that’s 
true to our identities, and to 
demand our rights before State 
governments”
ANSELMO XUNIC AND CESAR GOMEZareas where radio may be the only affordable 
form of communication.  We are committed 
to our efforts to pressure the Guatemalan 
government to comply with the internationally-
supported right of communities to operate radio 
stations.
9
Cultural Survival // 2015 Annual ReportINDIGENOUS RIGHTS RADIO 
The Indigenous Rights Radio program 
continues to produce a diverse range of radio 
programs promoting the implementation 
of the UN Declaration on the Rights of 
Indigenous Peoples and uplifting the voices of 
Indigenous leaders by informing Indigenous 
listeners of specific rights and of strategies 
used by other Indigenous communities to 
exercise those rights. As of December 2015, 
Cultural Survival has produced a total of 
861 IRR programs and distributed these 
programs to 1,501 radio stations in 76 
countries.  Our programs have been listened 
to approximately 28,800 times on Soundcloud 
and downloaded 6,822 times. Our important 
role in disseminating information about 
international Indigenous rights at the global 
level has most recently been recognized by 
Vicky Tauli Corpuz, UN Special Rapporteur 
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, who 
has joined us in a partnership to produce an 
ongoing radio series on her work in the role of 
Special Rapporteur.Additionally, the Indigenous Rights Radio Program 
continues to build a cadre of expert Indigenous 
radio producers and journalists worldwide. These 
expert Indigenous media team members covered 
key international forums in 2015 including the 
United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous 
Issues in New York City, The Expert Mechanisim 
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples in Geneva, 
the Terra Madre in India, and the North American 
Continental Gathering of Indigenous Women in 
Guatemala where they gathered content and 
conducted interviews for new radio content.  
In August 2015, IRR Program Manager Danielle 
DeLuca attended the World Association of 
Community Radio Producers (AMARC) conference 
in Accra, Ghana and distributed radio content to 
250 community radio participants from across 
the globe. Danielle was a speaker on a keynote 
panel and made connections with many new 
organizations and radio stations.
This is a really important initiative.  Most of my tribe cannot 
read or write, so the radio is important to us.  It is a good tool 
because many people do not have access to the internet.  It’s 
also a powerful means of communication because all of us 
come from a culture of storytelling.”
ADAM OLE MWARABU (MAASAI), TANZANIA
1,501
radio stations
76
countries
10
Cultural Survival // 2015 Annual ReportBAZAARS
Seeing the artists really make a living out of doing their art and 
living their dreams through their art [was] the most rewarding 
part of my job.” 
BAZAAR PROGRAM MANAGER DAVE FAVREAU
The Cultural Survival Bazaars work to 
strengthen Indigenous cultures by providing 
a venue for the sale of art and crafts made 
by Indigenous artisans throughout the world. 
The sale of crafts perpetuates the artistic 
traditions which are culturally significant to 
many Indigenous communities, provides capital 
to Indigenous communities, and provides 
sustainable income to individual artisans and 
their families. 
Cultural Survival held three summer bazaars 
in Cambridge, Falmouth, and Tiverton, a fall 
bazaar in Amherst, and two winter bazaars 
in Cambridge and Boston.  Over 40 vendors 
participated in the bazaars, who collectively 
work with over 1000 Indigenous artists 
spanning five continents and 50 countries and 
generating more than $220,000 in real revenue 
for our vendors.  
10 Cultural Survival //  2015 Biennial ReportThe bazaars continue to support grassroots projects, relief efforts, and more.  For example: 
• In Nepal, the Bazaars provide income to over 100 artists and their families. This 
summer in particular, funds raised by Crafted in Kathmandu were used to help 
artists’ children return to school following the April 2015 earthquake.
• In a Maasai community in  Tanzania , “most of our sales are from the Bazaars,” says 
one of our vendors. The women in our vendor’s village “usually only get to make 
more beads when I go back in the end of the year and then they get some income 
from making the jewelry [that I sold for them]. I was so happy [after three years of 
selling jewelry] that we could expand the project so that the women could have 
work throughout the year. Now they are no longer waiting until I go back for them 
to get some money to support themselves and their families.”
• In Mexico , one artist sells his own work at the Bazaars as well as art from two 
different co-ops that support over 40 Wixarika-Huichol families who don’t have a 
market in Mexico.11
Cultural Survival // 2015 Annual Report
11 Cultural Survival //  2015 Biennial ReportTHANK YOU TO OUR SUPPORTERS!
We at Cultural Survival want to thank our donors for your continued support of the Indigenous 
communities we work with.  We couldn’t do it without you!
LIST OF DONORS
Patrons ($500-$999)
Rosamond W. Allen and Paul 
Landry
Louise T. Ambler
Dan Berger
Susana Raquel Berger
Bruce and Judith Billings
Elizabeth Colson
Jean Crandall
Bharat Das
William and Katy Durham
Dean and Sheryl Foster
Beebe Frazer
Rachel Gatwood
Sarah M. Grimm
Helen S. Halperin
Karin Holser
Lesley J. Kabotie
Elizabeth Keefer
Sarah KnoxLouise Lamphere
Richard M. Leventhal
Alan Mallach
Jesse W. Markow
Stephen P. Marks
Chris Mottes
Carol Newell
Denise Peine
Trisha Riedy
Edna Roberts
David Rosenstein
Lou Scharpf
Christopher Simpson
Jessica E. Straus
Nadav Tanners
Terry and Mary Vogt
Richard Wilk
Karen YustNEPAL EARTHQUAKE RELIEF
When a series of earthquakes devastated Nepal in April of 2015, Cultural Survival was able to 
raise $11,507  (mostly small, online donations). With these funds, we were able to assist several 
communities in a limited way in response to urgent requests from existing local partners: 
Community radio stations play a unique role in times of disaster because they can provide remote 
communities with important information. Several stations’ equipment was damaged or destroyed 
in the quake. Over the past two years, as part of our Indigenous Rights Radio Program, we have 
translated radio programs into multiple Indigenous languages spoken in Nepal and distributed 
those programs to dozens of radio stations. Cultural Survival partnered with Hindenberg Software 
Company to raise funds to help get radio stations back on the air.
Several Cultural Survival Bazaar artisans live in Nepal. Donations were used to provide emergency 
food, water, and tents to the artisans’ communities.
Cultural Survival board member Stella Tamang’s local organization served as a shelter for many 
families. Cultural Survival was able to contribute emergency food and water.
12
Cultural Survival // 2015 Annual Report
Benefactors ($1,000+)
Stephan Beyer
Bert E. Brown
Duane Champagne
Donna L. Ching and Richard F. 
Leman
Wendy Emrich
Sarah and William Fuller
Laura R. Graham and T.M. 
Scruggs
William and Jeanie Graustein
Steven and Katherine Heim
Nance HikesDonald Hindley
James and June N. Howe
Jean E. Jackson
Thomas F. King
George Martin
Rosemary Mudd
P. Ranganath and Sandra 
Nayak
Nancy S. Nordhoff
Susanna B. Place
Jerome C. and Janet RegierBarbara Rogoff
Peter L. Sheldon
Michael J. Sheridan and Kristina L. 
Simmons
Teresa M. and Anthony Smith
Thomas Sneed
Mary Gabrielle Sprague and William 
T. Hassler
Nancy Stetson
Dan S. and Beth Whittemore
Catherine M. Williams
IN MEMORIAM: PIA MAYBURY LEWIS
Cultural Survival deeply mourned the loss of our 
co-founder Elsebet “Pia” Maybury-Lewis, who 
passed away on August 4, 2015 at age 89 at 
her home in Cambridge, MA surrounded by her 
loving family and friends after a long battle with 
lung cancer. Pia was born in Jutland, Denmark 
on June 1, 1926.
Along with her Harvard anthropologist husband 
David Maybury-Lewis, Evon Vogt, Jr., and 
Orlando Patterson, Pia founded Cultural Survival 
in 1972. Pia and David witnessed the disastrous impacts of development projects on Indigenous 
communities firsthand while conducting anthropological field research with the Xerente and 
Xavante people in Brazil in the 1950s and 1960s.  As governments all over the world sought to 
extract resources from areas that had never before been developed, the drastic effects this trend 
had on the regions’ Indigenous Peoples underscored the urgent need to partner with Indigenous 
communities to defend their human rights. Pia and David founded Cultural Survival to publicize 
Indigenous rights abuses and assist Indigenous Peoples in their struggles for human rights, 
sovereignty, and autonomy.
Pia was often referred to as the “heart” of Cultural Survival. She started the internship program 
and mentored over 1,300 interns during her active years with the organization. For decades 
Pia and David opened up their Cambridge home and hosted students, interns, academics, and 
Indigenous leaders as a space for dialogue around international affairs, human rights, and social 
justice. Pia was also renowned for her culinary skills and for feeding hungry interns and students.
In 1979, Pia, along with longtime friend Chris Walters, began organizing the Cultural Survival 
Bazaars to showcase the art of Indigenous artists and educate the public about the struggles 
Indigenous people faced around the world. “This opened up the idea of selling arts and crafts of 
Indigenous people and spearheaded the Fair Trade movement,” Pia recalled in a 2012 interview. 
“Through this, I wanted to put CS on the map like the Red Sox [did for Boston], but we didn’t want 
to lose, as the Sox always did in those days!”
Pia will be remembered for a great deal of things, but for many she will live on in our hearts for her 
wit and her remarkable sense of humor.
13
Cultural Survival // 2015 Annual ReportBOARD OF DIRECTORS, STAFF AND INTERNS
Board of Directors
PRESIDENT AND CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD
Sarah Fuller , Executive Chairman of Millennium Prevention Inc.
VICE CHAIR 
Duane Champagne  (Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa from North Dakota) Professor, UCLA Native 
Nations Law and Policy Center
TREASURER
Steven Heim , Director of Social Research for Boston Common Asset Management 
CLERK
Nicole Friederichs  is a Practitioner-in-Residence at Suffolk University Law School
Evelyn Arce , Executive Director of International Funders for Indigenous Peoples (IFIP)
Alison Bernstein , Professor of History and Women’s and Gender Studies at Rutgers University 
Laura R. Graham , Professor of Anthropology at the University of Iowa
Jean Jackson , Professor of Anthropology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Lesley J. Kabotie (Crow), Owner of Kabotie Consulting
Stephen Marks , Professor in the Department of Global Health and Population at Harvard School of Public 
Health
Joseph Mutangah,  Principal Research Scientist for the Kenya Resource Center for Indigenous Knowledge
Stella Tamang  (Tamang tribe from Nepal) Founder, Bikalpa Gyan Kendra
Che Wilson  (Ngāti Rangi) from the North Island of Aotearoa-New Zealand, Managing Director, Intugen Ltd.
StaffSuzanne Benally  (Navajo and Santa Clara Tewa), Executive Director
Kaimana Barcarse  (Native Hawaiian), Radio Producer
Mark Camp , Deputy Executive Director
Jessie Cherofsky , Indigenous Rights Radio Program Associate
Avexnim Cojti  (Maya K’iche’),  Community Media Program Associate 
Danielle DeLuca , Advocacy and Indigenous Rights Radio Program Manager
David Michael Favreau , Bazaar Program Manager
Sofia Flynn , Accounting & Office Manager
Cesar Gomez  (Pocomam), Content Production & Training Coordinator, Community Media Program
María del Rosario ‘Rosy’ Sul  González (Kakchiquel Maya), Radio Producer
Michael Johnson (Arikara/Hidatsa/Ojibwe), Director of Development
Chelsie U’ilani Kūali’i  (Native Hawaiian), Indigenous Rights Radio Production Fellow
Jamie Malcolm-Brown , Communications & Information Technology Manager
Teresita Orozco Mendoza, Community Media Program Regional Coordinator 
Agnes Portalewska , Communications Manager
Angelica Rao , Executive Coordinator
Alberto ‘Tino’ Recinos  (Mam), Citizen Participation Coordinator, Community Media Program
Ingrid Sub Cuc (Kaqchikel/Q’eqchi), Community Media Program Assistant
Miranda Vitello , Development Associate
Ancelmo Xunic (Kachikel), Community Media Program Manager14
Cultural Survival // 2015 Annual ReportInterns and Volunteers
Gabriella Aguilar
Tyler Alderson
Asia Alsgaard
Laura Ann
Bianca Annoscia
Cori Baer
Nora Berson
Jessica Bourbeau
Don Butler
Febna Caven
Cory ChamperBianca Coppola
Pablo Garcia
Andrea Garza 
Erdmann
Alex Glomset
Brianna Gomez
Abigail Graham
Stephanie Guthridge
Stephanie Hon
Emma Kurihara
Polly LauerMichelle LaFortune
Isabelle Lefroy
Cass Madden
Yaira Matos
Akiko Maybury-Lewis
Erika Mayer
Madeline McGill
Carley Minkler
Ahalia Persaud
Crystal QuintanillaZoe Rand
Alexandra Richmond
Emily Sanders
Anuska Sarkar
Shaina Semiatin
Bonnie Tarrant
Caroline Tegeler
Penelope Turner
Alexis White-Mobley
Kristen Williams
14 Cultural Survival // 2015 Annual Report15
Cultural Survival // 2015 Annual ReportFINANCIAL REPORT
REVENUES FY 2015
Contributions and Subscriptions  895,019 
Grant Revenue  214,758 
Indigenous Crafts Bazaar Income  393,289 
Investment  Income  7,198 
Realized and Unrealized Gain 
(Loss) on Investments (1,345)
Sales of Publications  6,268 
Other income  2,562 
Total Revenues  1,515,187
EXPENSES FY 2015
Programs and Publications  1,180,158 
Fundraising  146,464 
General Administrative  145,935 
Total Expenses  1,472,557
Revenue FY 2015 Expenses FY 2015
895,019 
59% 214,758 
14%393,289 
26%7,198 
1%(1,345)
0% 6,268 
0%Revenue FY 2015
Contributions and
Subscriptions
Grant Revenue
Indigenous Crafts Bazaar
Income
Investment  Income
Realized and Unrealized Gain
(Loss) on Investments
Sales of Publications
Other income895,019 
59% 214,758 
14%393,289 
26%7,198 
1%(1,345)
0% 6,268 
0%Revenue FY 2015
Contributions and
Subscriptions
Grant Revenue
Indigenous Crafts Bazaar
Income
Investment  Income
Realized and Unrealized Gain
(Loss) on Investments
Sales of Publications
Other income1,180,158 
80%146,464 
10%145,935 
10%Expenses FY 2015
Programs and Publications
Fundraising
General Administrative
1,180,158 
80%146,464 
10%145,935 
10%Expenses FY 2015
Programs and Publications
Fundraising
General Administrative