Promoting the Right s, Voices, and V isions of the World’ s Indigenous PeoplesCultural     Sur vivalANNUAL REPOR T2008efore the day is over , an Indigenous person will be displaced or killed.
Before the month is over , an Indigenous homeland will be clear-cut,
strip-mined, or flooded. Before the year is over , dozens of Indigenous 
languages will vanish forever . 
Governments and powerful economic interests perpetrate this human and
cultural devastation. Cultural Survival works to reverse it.  W e partner with
Indigenous P eoples to protect their lands, languages, and cultures; educate
their communities about their rights; and fight against their marginaliza -
tion, discrimination, exploitation, and abuse--enforcing the principles set
forth in the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous P eoples.
Cultural Survival tackles these problems at all levels: from the grassroots
to national governments to the United Nations. W e help Indigenous commu -
nities get the knowledge and advocacy tools they need to defend their ways
of life. W e pressure governments to protect Indigenous lands, languages,
and cultures.  When they do not, we bring their cases to international 
commissions and courts.  W e also shine a spotlight on Indigenous P eoples'
issues so that they attract public and policy-maker attention and action. 
Cultural Survival also provides the public with the most comprehensive
source of information on the planet about Indigenous P eoples and their
issues. Our award-winning magazine, The Cultural Survival Quarterly , has
been published for more than 30 years, and the full archive is available on
our website.  In 2008, the website was extensively renovated and expand -
ed.  In addition to original material, it now includes links to many other
organizations and sources of information, and is visited by more than
200,000 people each year .  This year we also pioneered a monthly 
e-newsletter that reports timely news and solicits urgent action, support,
and membership from more than 14,000 people. 
CULTURAL SURVIVALMessage From The Executive Director
BANNUAL REPOR T
2008
TABLE OFCONTENTS
2-3 MESSAGE FROM THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECT OR
4-9 PROGRAMS & ACTIVITIES
10-11 PUBLICA TIONS & M EMBERSHIP
12 BAZAARS
13 INTERN PROGRAM
14-16 BOARD OFDIRECT ORS
17 STAFF
18 SUPPOR TERS
19 FINANCIAL REPOR T
20 INDIGENOUS RIGHTS INACTION
COVER PHOT O
Señora Silvia, Ngobe, who had never stood up to
government officials  before, took the floor at a
community meeting in Charco la P ava and
announced her  opposition to the AESdam being
built in her  community in P anama.  © Lucia Lasso
This report covers the period from 
September 1, 2007 to August 31, 2008.
Copyright © 2009 Cultural Survival, Inc
www.cs.org
2But the heart of our mandate is our partnership with Indigenous P eoples who are exercising
their right to self-determination, or who need outside help to protect their rights.  This year
we are especially proud of the accomplishments of our Guatemala Radio P roject which is
using community radio to rebuild Mayan communities devastated by 30 years of civil war and
genocide; our Endangered Languages R evitalization P roject which provides direct assistance
to the Euchee, Northern Arapaho, Sauk, and W ampanoag language programs, raises awareness
about the crisis facing American's heritage languages, and works to expand financial and
capacity-building support for all Native American language revitalization efforts; and the
urgent legal measures we have taken, including bringing a petition to the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights, to stop a hydroelectric dam in P anama that is destroying the
way of life of Ngöbe Indigenous communities.
We also are extremely proud of our partnerships with Cultural Survival's supporters.  Despite
the grave condition of the economy , in 2008, our members continued to stand solidly beside
the world's Indigenous P eoples by generously supporting Cultural Survival's work.  Indeed, our
December 2008 fund raising season was so strong that we met our fund raising goals in 
practically every category . 
We owe our gratitude to the public-spirit-minded shoppers who supported a good cause by
buying their holiday gifts at Cultural Survival's Indigenous craft bazaars; our dedicated staff
that pitched-in in dozens of ways to ensure that our fund raising appeals were successful; and
a strong magazine and a much improved website that significantly increased online giving.
But most of all, our gratitude goes out to our loyal donors. You made the real difference. You
are the owners and beneficiaries of Cultural Survival's success. Because of you, the world is
a better place for our planet's 370 million Indigenous people.
Ellen L. Lutz
ANNUAL REPOR T20083The project uses a network of small community radio stations to help Indigenous Guatemalans strenthen their cultures and
language and effectively participate in the country's new democracy .
Meeting Today's Greatest Challenge - Legalization
Ten years ago, the P eace Accords that ended over 30 years of civil war guaranteed Indigenous P eoples the freedom to use
community media. So far , the government has not made good on this promise. Nearly every radio and television outlet is
controlled by the government or by large corporations. Yet more than a thousand unlicensed stations broadcast through -
out the Guatemalan countryside: religious, partisan, commercial, and community-based. Any "man of influence" can have
the police raid a station, arrest the operators, and confiscate equipment simply because it is broadcasting without a
license. Therefore, legalization of our 168 community stations is our first priority , and this year much progress has been
made.  The P residential Commission on Human Rights (COPREDEH), directed by R uth del V alle, has resumed bi-weekly
roundtable meetings to discuss the critical role of community radio in Guatemala in the realization of Indigenous rights
and governmental participation.  Cultural Survival's lobbying coordinator , Tino Recinos, acts as a liason between the com -
munity radio associations, COPREDEH, and the Guatemalan congress to pass legislation legitimizing community radio. The
newest draft of the bill was presented by Tino to the Indigenous caucus in the Guatemalan Congress in the spring of 2009.
Monitoring and Evaluating Results: Asurvey of 140 stations was performed in January and February 2008. Survey teams
consisted of one volunteer from a community radio station, one Guatemalan communications student or professional,
and one international observer . Teams collected information about each station's broadcast schedule, income, expens -
es, volunteer skill levels, and equipment. The final report is available on our website.PROMOTING INDIGENOUS VOICES INGUATEMALA
Cultural Survival is partnering with Guatemalan 
nongovernmental organizations to strengthen this 
network of 168 community radio stations across the
country , many of which broadcast in one or more of
the country’ s 23 Indigenous languages. The stations
provide news, educational programming, health
information, and traditional music, all reinforcing
pride in Mayan heritage. W e provide the equipment
and organizational expertise; they provide the
people and the passion. And it’ s working: languages
on the brink of extinction have come back into 
common use; marimba music that was being
replaced with top-40 songs is being played again; and
people are wearing the distinctive traje that defines
where they come from and who they are. 
4CULTURAL SURVIVALPROGRAMS - GUATEMALA RADIO PROJECT
Cesar Gomez Moscut, (Pokomam), Guatemala Radio Project
Content and Training Coordinator, conducting a workshop in
Quetzaltenango.5ANNUAL REPOR T2008Creating New Content
This year , 60 volunteer staff members from 6 communi -
ty radio stations will participate in a series of workshops
where they will produce episodes of a social-issues
radionovela titled "Aura Marina," which revolves around
the adventures of a feisty young village girl. Made possi -
ble with funding from the New England Biolabs
Foundation, this year's episodes will focus on environ -
mental themes and will be recorded in Spanish and three
Indigenous languages. Ninty-one episodes of "Salud y
Vida," a health program, have been heard by more than
one million listeners in 168 villages in six languages
thanks to the Society of San Martin de P orres. One hun -
dred and thirty-five episodes of "Coffee Talk" about how
farmers can improve and receive a better price for their
coffee crop have been produced and distributed thanks
to Dean's Beans Organic Fair Trade Coffee and Equal
Exchange.
Training V olunteers: 
Cultural Survival conducts a variety of training programs for station volunteers in Guatemala to build the sta -
tions' ability for self-development.  V aluable skills abound among the 1,300 volunteers: 23 know how to repair
radio equipment (three of whom are electrical engineers), three have masters degrees in journalism, more
than 20 have degrees in communications, another 40 are communications students. Eight have taught com -
puter and Internet courses, one is a former congressman, one is a lawyer , two have MBAs, and three are pro -
fessional sports play-by-play announcers.  Cultural Survival is coordinating these skilled workers to train the
rest of the station volunteers in content production, radio theater scripting, broadcasting, lobbying, Internet
use, and journalism.  These trainings help to pave the way for the long-term sustainability of the project. 
Building local capacity: 
Cultural Survival is already collaborating with 10 Guatemalan NGOs to produce and distribute radio programs
about health, environmental protection, and organic agriculture. Local NGOs are on the ground and under -
stand of many of the issues facing Guatemalans, so the content they help the P roject to develop is insight -
ful and relevant, and their funding helps keep the stations viable. W e are now working to expand this infra -
structure to increase radio content while keeping the cost low and defraying it from the stations.  
Rosendo Pablo Ramirez (second from right) with Radio Qman
Txum volunteers in Todos Santos Cuchumatan, Guatemala. The Ngöbe people of Bocos del Toro, P anama are facing the loss of their way of life due to a government decision to
build a hydroelectric dam that will innundate their lands, homes, and farms.  The dam is being constructed by an affil -
iate of the V irginia-based AES Corporation.  It also will create environmental havoc in the buffer zone for the interna -
tional La Amistad Biosphere R eserve, a UNESCO protected W orld Heritage Site.  
After meeting with the Ngöbe and P anamanian officials in November 2007, when roadwork and river dredging were
well underway , Cultural Survival spearheaded an international human rights campaign to help the Ngöbe.  W orking with
Panamanian nongovernmental organizations and lawyers we helped bring the case to P anama's highest courts, a nec -
essary step before any international legal action can be taken.   
On January 3, 2008, AES-Changuinola and the government broke up a Ngöbe protest at the dam site with police who
attacked the protestors with clubs, injuring children and elderly people.  Fifty-four people were arrested. The police
then established a permanent base camp to support their 24-hour-a-day security cordon.
Cultural Survival responded by closely monitoring the situation, and after it became clear that P anama's highest court
was not going to act, prepared a petition to the Organization of American States' Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights (IACHR), which included a request that the commission call on P anama to halt all work on the dam until the
Ngöbe are properly consulted and their rights are respected.STOPPING THECHANGUINOLA DAMINPANAMA
6CULTURAL SURVIVALPROGRAMS - NGÖBECAMPAIGN
Amalia Miranda's children were among those beaten by police
after peacefully protesting at the AES dam site in Panama. Her
son's nose was broken, as was her daughter's arm. The police
arrested and jailed 13 other children, including two infants.
They also arrested 54 adults."I have a finca [farm plot] on the other
side of the river that I will not be able to
get to because of the dam. I won’t have
water for my animals. They are eroding
the soil so my crops won’t be able to
grow. My land is for my children and my
grandchildren. I need to save it for them.
The company has sent the police to
threaten me to sign their papers, but 
I won't sign." —Elin Abrego, Ngöbe, PanamaANNUAL REPOR T2008After we filed the petition in March, a P anamanian
colleague reported: "Somehow the Ngöbe still have
hope. They were jubilant when they received a copy
of the petition. This weekend they held a local 
congress and the copy went from hand to hand sever -
al times. Finally , they had proof that some of the visi -
tors that talked to them are actually fulfilling their 
promise of help."
In addition to sending out various action alerts and
mounting letter-writing campaigns, Cultural Survival
sent its documentation on the Ngöbe case to James
Anaya, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms
of Indigenous P eoples. He went to the area, 
interviewed the Ngöbe, and conducted a thorough
investigation. The rapporteur's subsequent report
denounced the abuses against the Ngöbe in 
connection with the dam. W e also persuaded several
corporate social responsibility "watch" groups to 
monitor AES-Changuinola's corporate practices.
In October , Cultural Survival's executive director
helped plan a hearing on P anama's violations of
Indigenous P eoples' property rights before the IACHR
and brought  Ngöbe and other Indigenous leaders from
Panama to W ashington, D.C. to testify . The 
Indigenous leaders also met with U.S. congressional
repesentatives and leading environmental organiza -
tions, who pledged their support to the Ngöbe.
At year end, the situation was still grave with con -
struction continuing and the Ngöbe people daily con -
fronting the destruction of their lands and river ,
intimidation to sell their homes to the company and
relocate, and no adequate process for dialogue about
the dam project or the Ngöbe people’ s future. The
IACHR had still not ruled on our petition. Cultural
Survival is continuing to keep a close eye on the case,
and seeking new avenues of pressure to ensure that
the Ngöbe peoples' rights are respected.
7In 2008, Cultural Survival’ s Endangered Languages Campaign
built a national network of nearly 1,000 Indigenous language
advocates and distributed copies of the UN Declaration on
the Rights of Indigenous P eoples to 200 members of the
National Indian Education Association.  W ith support from the
Grotto Foundation’ s Native Language R evitalization
Initiative, Cultural Survival laid the funding and content
groundwork to launch an online language revitalization
resource portal and social networking site for language advo -
cates in 2009. The website, called The Language Gathering,
will be a virtual network and online community devoted to
best practices in Indigenous language revitalization. 
“The Last W ord,” ( Cultural Survival Quarterly , 31.2) the
campaign’ s founding document (www .cs.org/elc), served as a
key campaign tool in raising the profile of Native language
revitalization: grassroots and national language advocates,
educators, and philanthropists received nearly 2,000 copies
of “The Last W ord” at the Mashantucket P equot Language
Reclamation Conference, the Minnesota Indigenous Language
Symposium, Native Americans in P hilanthropy’ s annual
Institute , the National Indian Education Association’ s annual
convention, the Tusweca Tiospaye Sioux Language Summit,
the United Nations P ermanent Forum on Indigenous Issues
(UNPFII), and the National Museum of the American Indian.Cultural Survival also sought out a new generation of lan -
guage advocates and practitioners and heightened its com -
mitment to its first major North American-based program.
Marcus Briggs-Cloud (Maskoke/Miccosukke), Ryan W ilson
(Oglala Lakota), Ryan R ed Corn (Osage), and Joseph Brown
Thunder (Ho-Chunk) joined the endangered languages cam -
paign team. 
Briggs-Cloud, a young educator fluent in both the Seminole
and Maskoke languages, presented a rousing rallying cry for
Indigenous P eoples’ language revitalization at the Eighth
Session of the United Nations P ermanent Forum on Indigenous
Issues on behalf of the Indigenous Youth Caucus.  Briggs-Cloud
subsequently joined Cultural Survival’ s board of directors.
Wilson is the president of the National Alliance to Save Native
Languages, with which Cultural Survival entered into a formal
memorandum of understanding, joining a coalition of over
100 tribal governments in supporting efforts to push for $4
million in federal appropriations for Native American lan -
guage immersion programs and schools. 
2009 campaign efforts will focus on direct fundraising for four
partner/advisor Native language programs: the Euchee
Language P roject, Northern Arapaho K-1 immersion school,
the Sauk Language master-apprentice program, and the
Wopanaak Language R eclamation P roject.PROGRAMS - ENDANGERED LANGUAGES CAMPAIGN
8CULTURAL SURVIVALREVITALIZNG NATIVELANGUAGES
“If our children learn to speak Euchee,
we can add another 60 years to the life
of the language. If we carry out our part
now, some future Euchee families may
be able to give the gift of Euchee as a
first language to their children .”
—Euchee Language Project, OK
Children at a newly opened Northern
Arapaho K-1 immersion schoolUniversal P eriodic Rev iew: Cultur al Surv ival Report Leads to Ainu Recognition:
After centuries of discrimination and forced assimilation, Japan's Ainu people have finally been recognized by
Japan's government. That milestone happened at least in part because of a report that Cultural Survival
submitted to the United Nations Human Rights Council. The council has instituted a policy of reviewing each
country's human rights record every four years, and as part of that process, we have been producing reports
on countrys’ treatment of their Indigenous P eoples. To accompany Japan's review in May 2008,  we asked the
council to call upon Japan to take further steps to ensure that the Ainu peoples' rights are respected. The
council urged Japan to review the land and other rights of the Ainu and harmonize them with the UN
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous P eoples. The following month, Japan's bicameral Diet (parliament)
adopted a resolution acknowledging that the Ainu are an Indigenous people with rights to their language,
culture, and religion. The Diet also officially recognized the Ainu's suffering as a result of discrimination and
poverty .  
In the spring of 2007, Executive Director Ellen Lutz and P rogram Council member Theodore Macdonald devoted
time to training Harvard College Student Advocates for Human Rights on how to produce reports for the Human
Rights Council. Using the benchmark created by the newly adopted UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples, the students gather information from Indigenous colleagues and partners in selected countries
scheduled for review and prepare reports on how well the government is protecting Indigenous P eoples' human
rights. Each report recommends steps the government needs to take to ensure that Indigenous P eoples' rights
are respected. So far , we have produced reports on Morocco, South Africa, Ecuador , Guatemala, Japan, Belize, and
New Zealand.
Cultur al Surv ival and the Organization of American States: 
The births of 18 percent of all children in Latin America are not
registered with their governments. Nonregistration, a phenomenon
that disproportionately affects Indigenous P eoples, leads to a lack of
"identity ," leaving many without access to state services, including
education, passports, or the ability to vote.  Indigenous people who
attempt to register often face discrimination, misrecording of their
names, and other barriers. In May , Cultural Survival contributed to a
regional effort to improve state protection of Indigenous P eoples' right
to identity by facilitating a consultation at the Organization of
American States (OAS) in which Indigenous leaders and
intergovernmental officials discussed ways to improve the situation in
an inclusive, multicultural manner .  
9ANNUAL REPOR T2008
OTHERCULTURAL SURVIVALACTIVITIES ANDACCOMPLISHMENTS
Brinky Tucker (left) dances next to Pequot/
Wampanoag historian Tall Oak (Everett G.
Weeden Jr.). Weeden coordinated the first
American Indian tribal delegation to
Bermuda in 2002. From CSQ 32.3 article on
Bermuda’s Indigenous population. 10CULTURAL SURVIVALCultural Survival Quarterly 
Our winter 2007-2008 issue marked a significant change in the Cultural Survival Quarterly . In the
past, every issue of the magazine had a central theme--an approach that had benefits, but also
liabilities. To give the magazine more flexibility and broader range, we initiated a new approach,
in which themes will be used occasionally , where major issues require a multiple-angle approach,
but most editions will be a general collection of articles. Our winter issue was the first of these
more general collections, with stories about Sudan, Ladakh, Namibia, Mexico, and Ecuador , among
others. Most notable was Executive Director Ellen Lutz's article about her work with the Ngöbe
people of P anama, who are being threatened with a hydroelectric dam project. In that article she
spoke about bringing previous issues of Cultural Survival Quarterly to the Ngöbe, and how the
example of other Indigenous P eoples inspired them to stand up for their own rights and fight the
dam company .
Our second issue of the year also featured an array of subjects, from the horrific situation of
Indigenous P eoples in Burma to the case of voluntarily isolated communities in P araguay to major
development projects in Brazil to the unique cuisine of Fiji and the giant kites of Guatemala.
The summer issue of the Cultural Survival Quarterly , which focused on critically endangered
Native American languages, was the founding document of Cultural Survival's Endangered Native
American Languages Campaign. It was distributed to tribes, supporters, and potential funders, as
well as members of Congress, and will serve as an important campaign tool in the coming years. 
Our summer issue was one of those thematic exceptions, focusing entirely on the subject of
climate change, its particular effects on Indigenous P eoples, and their unique contributions to
mitigating the problem. The issue was widely distributed to journalists, decision makers, and
others, in addition to our own membership. It has already sparked several mainstream newspaper
articles.
Our autumn issue introduced a new department on Indigenous spirituality , created in partnership
with the Ringing R ocks Foundation. The first installment was an excerpt from a talk by Lakota
healer Gary Holy Bull. This issue also heralded what we hope will be an increasing focus on
Indigenous writers describing their own cultures from their own point of view . The centerpiece of
the issue was a story from a Nyungar woman who reconnected with her roots and Australia. There
were also stories about displaced people in Nigeria, Indigenous P eoples of the Cordillera region of
the P hilippines, and a special section on the Lenape of P ennsylvania.COMMUNICA TIONS
ANNUAL REPOR T200811MEMBERSHIP
Cultural Survival's members continued to be the organization's greatest single source of support, 
providing more than half of our annual income. This year , 580 new members joined Cultural Survival.
Two hundred and sixteen of these members signed up at Cultural Survival Bazaars. As in past years, our
members come from many countries and a vast variety of backgrounds, but they share a passion for the
rights of Indigenous P eoples. Cultural Survival V oices
We produced two issues of Voices this year , one was on
the effects of climate change on Indigenous P eoples,
and the other a how-to guide for Indigenous P eople
who want to establish a community radio station. Both
issues were translated into French, Spanish, and
Russian, and posted on the Cultural Survival website.
Unfortunately , the grant that made Voices possible was
not renewed in the wake of the financial crisis, so the
publication will not appear in 2009.
Cultural Survival e-Newsletter
2008 saw the introduction of a new Cultural Survival
publication: the E-newsletter , which is sent to some
12,000 people each month. The newsletter provides
updates on Cultural Survival's programs and the
activities of the organization, along with previews of
coming publications, updates on previous stories, and
other information.
Cultural Survival W ebsite
In 2008, we resolved to completely revamp the
Cultural Survival website, with new software
platforms, new organization, and new information, all
aimed at making the site more current, flexible,
convenient, and attractive. W e hired one of the
country's premier web consultants, Free Range
Studios, to advise us on what needed changing, and
began implementing those changes in September (a
process that is still ongoing). W e are already seeing
increased activity within the site and increased
financial support coming from it.A Sami girl stitches reindeer hide. These herding
people are affected by climate change in a range
of subtle but serious ways. Photo by Phear Kath. 
Full story in CSQ 32.2 on climate change and
Indigenous Peoples. 
12The Cultural Survival Bazaar program celebrated its 30th year of bringing Indigenous arts and crafts, music,
and food to the New England public.  Money raised at bazaars has supported nonprofit work worldwide,
including education and microfinance in Uganda, literacy projects in Mexico, land and forest conservation, as
well as Cultural Survival's own projects.  
In 2008, Cultural Survival held nine bazaars, in Amherst, Boston, Newburyport, Stockbridge, P rovincetown,
and Cambridge, Massachusetts, and in Tiverton, Rhode Island. The bazaars raised over $530,000 for
Indigenous artisans and fair traders who work with Indigenous P eoples, and brought in a net income of over
$105,000, a twenty five percent increase from 2007, to Cultural Survival for operating support.  
The bazaars are also one of Cultural Survival's educational vehicles, reaching over 30,000 people each year
throughout New England.  The bazaar ’s advertising campaign reached over 2.6 million people through news -
paper , magazine, web, and print ads.CULTURAL SURVIVALBAZAARS
Roberto Cachimuel of Yarina performng at the Tiverton, RI bazaar (left). Children and shoppers 
learned about different cultures around the globe.
CULTURAL SURVIVALANNUAL REPOR T200813“Being an intern at Cultural Survival was an
enriching experience. My knowledge of
Indigenous rights in Guatemala definitely
became more nuanced. I learned a lot
about working for a non-profit. Even
though I was just an intern, I felt like I was
helping make a difference.”
—Adriana Campos, Guatemala Radio P roject intern, fall 2007
Cultural Survival's work could not be accomplished with -
out our interns. Interns are involved in all areas of the
organization's work and play a vital role in day-to-day
operations at Cultural Survival. This year we hosted 38
interns from universities around the country .
Guatemala Radio Project: Interns assisted in evaluating espisodes of all radio programs, helped
write quarterly reports and grant applications, set up speaking engagements about the project, and
coordinated logistics for our monitoring and evaluation survey . 
Fundraising and Events : Interns contributed to the success of our expanded bazaars program by 
educating the public about Indigenous issues and fair trade, setting up and breaking down the
bazaars, maintaining security , encouraging attendees to join Cultural Survival, assisting vendors and 
performers, selling rugs and crafts, handing out flyers, and directing traffic. Fundraising interns also 
conducted research and helped write grant proposals and reports to donors.
Publications and Research: Interns wrote or contributed to articles that were published in the
Cultural Survival Quarterly and wrote features and urgent appeals for the website. 
“Now that I have graduated from college and out in the human advocacy career world, 
I realize the research and networking I did around the Ng öbe case provided invaluable 
experience for a college undergrad. The staff at Cultural Survival put a lot of trust in me and
handed me responsibilities. Most internships don't give you that kind of applicable and 
formidable professional experience." —Terra W eaver , Cultural Survival intern, spring 2008INTERN PROGRAM
Lindsay Stailing talking to Bazaar attendees in Amherst, MA.Cultural Survival is governed by a board of directors that serves as the organization's legal
accountability mechanism and bears all the responsibilities of boards of directors in the United States
and in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. The board works through committees, including an
Executive Committee, a Finance Committee, a Fundraising Committee, and a Nominating Committee.
Aunique feature of our board is our P rogram Council, a board committee predominantly made up of
Indigenous board members who possess the knowledge, experience, and skills to assist the organization
to evaluate current programs, set policy on complex program-related issues, and identify potential new
programs and opportunities for growth.GOVERNANCE
BOARD OFDIRECT ORS
PRESIDENT AND CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD
Sarah Fuller is the president of Decision R esources, Inc., an international publishing and consulting firm. She 
previously served as vice president of Arthur D. Little, Inc., and president of Arthur D. Little Decision R esources.
VICE CHAIR 
Richard A. Grounds , Euchee, directs the Euchee Language P roject, in which first-language Euchee-speaking elders
teach community leaders and youth. He is active in international affairs regarding Indigenous P eoples' rights. He
received his doctorate in theology from P rinceton University , and served as co-chair of Cultural Survival's P rogram
Council from 2005-2008.
TREASURER
Jeff W allace is founder of North Star Management, a firm that manages and develops commercial buildings in Boston.
He holds a degree from Huxley College of Environmental Studies in Bellingham W Aand an MBA. His past experience
includes working for a venture capital firm and for an architect/developer before founding his company . 
CLERK
Jean Jackson is a professor of anthropology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . Her books, articles, and
teaching focus on medical anthropology , social and ethnic identity , gender issues, and Indigenous mobilization in
Colombia. She received her doctorate in anthropology from Stanford University .
Marcus Briggs-Cloud is Miccosukke of the Great Maskoke Nation of Florida, and is a son of the W ind Clan people and
grandson of the Bird Clan people.  He recently worked as a Maskoke language instructor at the University of
Oklahoma, and as a high school student counselor for the Indian Education Office in Norman, Oklahoma. He also has
served as Assistant Director of Youth P rograms and Maskoke Language Instructor for the P oarch Band of Creek Indians
of Alabama.  He currently is an Oxfam International Youth Action P artner and a National Steering Committee Member
of the United Methodist Student Movement. Marcus is pursuing graduate theological studies at the Harvard Divinity
School.  
14CULTURAL SURVIVALElizabeth Cabot has taught English literature and composition at Boston University , Stonehill College, and the
University of Massachusetts-Boston. She currently teaches English as a second language to adults. She holds a
Ph.D. from Boston University . 
Westy A. Egmont was the president of the International Institute of Boston for nine years. He previously served
as the director of the Greater Boston Food Bank and hosted and produced a public television program. He holds
a doctorate of divinity from Andover Newton Theological School. 
Laura R. Gr aham is a professor of anthropology at the University of Iowa. Her work focuses on lowland South
American Indigenous P eoples' activities in national and international arenas, especially the Xavante of central
Brazil (Ge) and the W ayúu (Arawak, also known as Guajiro) of V enezuela and Colombia. She is past chair of the
American Anthropological Association's Committee for Human Rights and chairs their Task Group on Language
and Social Justice.  From 1994-2005 she directed the Xavante Education Fund, a Cultural Survival Special
Project. She now coordinates the Xavante W arã Association's projects with Cultural Survival.   
James Howe is a professor of anthropology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . Aspecialist on the
Kuna of P anama, his research focuses on political and historical anthropology , indigenous-state relations, and
the impact of missionaries. He received his doctorate in anthropology from the University of P ennsylvania. 
Cecilia Lenk is the former vice president of information technology for Decision R esources. She has developed
numerous national and international Internet initiatives in the areas of science, health, and science education.
She received her doctorate in biology at Harvard University . 
Pia Maybury-Lewis is a co-founder of Cultural Survival. She was a member of the staff until 2009, managing
the intern and bazaar programs. 
Les Malezer , Native Australian of the Gabi Gabi Community , is the General Manager for the Foundation for
Aboriginal and Islander R esearch Action (F AIRA) based in W oolloongabba, Australia. He is also the Chairperson
for the international Indigenous P eoples’ Caucus. He was instrumental in lobbying governments to support the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous P eoples with the Caucus. 
P. Ranganath Nayak is the chief executive officer of Cytel Software. He has more than 24 years of senior-level
management experience in technology and management consulting, and holds a doctorate in mechanical engi -
neering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology .
ANNUAL REPOR T200815BOARD OF DIRECT ORS (continued)
Vincent O. Nmehielle, Ikwerre from the Niger Delta region of Nigeria, is an associate professor of law at the
University of the W itwatersrand Law School, Johannesburg, South Africa. He holds a doctorate in international and
comparative law from George W ashington University . 
Ramona L. P eters (Nosapocket of the Bear Clan), Mashpee W ampanoag, lives and works in Cape Cod,
Massachusetts, and is a nationally known artist who has revived her tribe's traditional pottery-making techniques.
She is a visual historian of her culture, fulfilling this role through various undertakings as a teacher , spokesperson,
curator , interpreter , consultant, and Indigenous rights activist. 
Dinah Shelton holds the Manatt/Ahn P rofessorship in International Law at George W ashington University Law
School. She previously taught international law and was director of the doctoral program in international human
rights law at the University of Notre Dame Law School. She also serves as a legal consultant to the United Nations
Environment P rogramme, UNIT AR, W orld Health Organization, European Union, Council of Europe, and Organization
of American States. She was awarded the 2006 Elisabeth Haub P rize for Environmental Law . 
Stella Tamang, Tamang tribe from Nepal, was Chair of the International Indigenous W omens Caucus at the third
session of the U.N. P ermanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, is the chair of the South Asia Indigenous W omens Forum,
and an advisor to the Nepal Tamang W omen Ghedung. She founded Bikalpa Gyan K endra in Nepal to contribute to
students' education and livelihood by combining academic learning with practical training. 
Martha Claire Tompkins serves as the principal of a personal investment management and acquisitions fund in
Houston, Texas. She has a degree from Sarah Lawrence College and studied with Cultural  Survival co-founder David
Maybury-Lewis at Harvard University .   
Rosita W orl, Tlingit, is a member of the Thunderbird Clan and House Lowered from the Sun of Klukwan, Alaska,
and a Child of the Sockeye Clan. She currently holds a joint appointment as an assistant professor of anthropology
at the University of Alaska Southeast and president of the Sealaska Heritage Institute. She earned a doctoral degree
in anthropology from Harvard University . In the 1980s, she was elected to the board of the Sealaska Corporation.
16CULTURAL SURVIVAL17CULTURAL SURVIVALJamie Brown, Graphic Design and IT Specialist
Mark Camp, Director of Operations
Mark Cherrington, Director of Publications
David Michael Favreau, Director of Marketing
Sofia Flynn, Financial Officer
Cesar Gomez Moscut (P ocomam), Guatemala Radio P roject Coordinator
Ellen L. Lutz, Executive Director
Agnes P ortalewska, P rogram Officer
Jennifer W eston (Lakota), P rogram and Communications Officer
Ryan W ilson (Lakota), R evitalizing Native American Languages Campaign DirectorSTAFFFoundations, Corpor ations, and
Organizations
Alliance for International R eforestation
American Eagle Outfitters
American Laser Center
Ameriprise Financial
Center for Biological Diversity
The Christensen Fund
The Community Foundation For Greater
Atlanta
Cottonwood Foundation
The Crawford Foundation
Dean's Beans Organic Coffee Co.
Eagle Creek Inc
Elliott Badgley Foundation
Goulston & Storrs, PC.
Headwaters Fund (Charlotte 
Forsythe Fund)
Institute of International 
Education
NewLink Communications
Open Society Institute
Organization Of American States
Owens Corning
Paul & V irginia Cabot Charitable Trust
The Plus V alia Foundation
Runaway Techology , Inc.
The Sociedad San Martin De P orres
St. Michael P arish
The Tides Foundation
Tierra V iva a los pueblos indigenas
Winky FoundationBenefactors*
Ryan Bobko
Elizabeth Cabot
Lorenzo Coppi
Asho Craine
Dean E. Cycon
Westy Egmont
Sarah Fuller
George P Johnson
William Graustein
Michael J. Harner
Rebecca Harris
Karin Holser
James Howe
Jean E. Jackson
Charles M. K eil
Amy K ocourek
Louise Lamphere
Richard F . Leman
Cecilia Lenk
Ellen L. Lutz
Sally E. Merry
P. Ranganath Nayak
Carmen P erez
Jerome C. R egier
James B. R ogers Jr
Peter L. Sheldon
Kristina L. Simmons
Teresa & Anthony M. Smith
Mary Gay Sprague
Allan Steinmetz
Martha Claire Tompkins
Philip D. YoungPatrons*
Rosamond W . Allen
Martha Barnes
Frederick Bay
Hanne Beck
Shirley Blancke
Helen Bourne
Jeremy Caney
William H. Crocker
J. B. Culver
Carol L. Ellis
Dean & Sheryl Foster
Walter W . Haines
Leo Harris
Just Give
Barbara Kapp
Jack K eller
Lynda K elly
Thomas F . King
W Kracke
Matthew Lindholm
Hal Litoff
Patricia J. L yon
Jesse W . Markow
Jill E. Newhouse
Michael O. Nimkoff
Nancy S. Nordhoff
Robin P erenchio
Carolyn P erson Taylor
John W . Phillips
Barbara R ogoff
David R osenstein
Dinah L. Shelton
William Skinner
Cynthia H. Sunderland
Charles C. V erharen
Kirsten W aerstad
Ryan W alker
Jack W oolSUPPOR TERS
* Benefactor - ($1,000.00 + )    Patron - ($500-$999)
ANNUAL REPOR T20071819CULTURAL SURVIVALProgram
Education
Fund Raising
General Administration
Publications
Total$544,378
$17,976
$89,957
$75,609
$322,576
$1,050,49652%
2%
9%
7%
30%FISCALYEAR2008
Expenses
Education
2%
Fund Raising
9%
General
Administration
7%
Program
52%
Publications
30%
AuditedGeneral Contributions 
and Subscriptions
Interest and Other Income
Grant R evenue
Bazaars and Events (net)
Publishing
Total$679, 057
$44,149
$154,252
$105,497
$20,927
$1,003,88268%
5%
15%
10%
2%FINANCIAL REPOR T
FISCALYEAR2008
Income
Interest & 
Other Income 5%
Publishing 
2%General Contributions 
& Subscriptions
68%
Bazaars 
& Events 
(net)
10%
Audited (Modified)Grant R evenue
15%ANNUAL REPOR T200820Cultur al Surv ival goes to Taiwan : Cultural
Survival's director of publications, Mark
Cherrington, was the keynote speaker for the
World Summit of Indigenous P eoples on April 13
in Taiwan. The summit, attended by Indigenous
representatives from 14 countries as well as
representatives from Taiwan's 13 Indigenous
tribes, focused on climate change as it relates to
Indigenous communities and the positive role
Indigenous people can play . Joining Cherrington
in the opening speeches were the vice-president
of Taiwan, Annette Lu, and Chinese Nationalist
Party legislator K ung W en-chi, a member of
Taiwan's Atayal tribe. The event was organized
by the Taiwan Indigenous Cultural Enterprise
Development Association, the Taipei County
government, and the Democratic P acific Union,
and also featured a tour of Indigenous villages
around the island of Taiwan. "It was a
tremendous opportunity to meet Indigenous
Peoples from around the world," Cherrington
said, "and to meet and learn about Taiwan's
Indigenous communities. Cultural Survival made
many new alliances."INDIGENOUS RIGHTS INACTION
Sakinu Ahronglong is wearing the traditional Paiwan clothing,
including the glass beads that have been a Paiwan hallmark for
hundreds of years in Taiwan. Read about Sakinu in CSQ 32.4 and his
efforts to revitalize Paiwan culture. Cultural Sur vival
215 Prospect S treet
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
Phone: (617) 441-5400
Fax: (617) 441-5417
culturalsurvival@cs.org
www .cs.org
Cultural Survival is a 501(c)(3)
federal t ax-exempt organization.