Join CJA on May 7, 2015  for our Annual Dinner, Celebrating 
Global Justice, to be held at the Julia Morgan Ballroom in San 
Francisco.  Tickets available online at www.cja.org/annualdinner.  
 
Celebrating Global Justice will honor Navi Pillay , former U.N. High 
Commissioner for Human Rights (2008 - 2014), for her tireless efforts 
to protect and promote human rights around the world, including 
support of LGBT rights and gender equality, and opposition 
to torture, capital  punishment and  gender-based violence.    
CJA will present the Judith Lee Stronach Award to Suleiman 
Ismail Bolaleh , the Chairman and a founding member of the Horn 
of Africa Human Rights Watch Committee (HORNW ATCH), 
which has led the movement for human rights and accountability 
in Somaliland.  Bolaleh’s work has been crucial in building CJA ’s 
cases against former Somali General Mohamed Ali Samantar 
and former Colonel Yusuf Abdi Ali.  (Continued on page 7)  Navi Pillay, Jara Family to Speak at Annual Dinner
Supreme Court Upholds Torture 
Decision Against Somali Warlord
UN Photo/David McCreery
After 11 years of pursuing justice, the U.S. Supreme Court let 
stand a ruling awarding CJA clients Bashe Y ousuf, Aziz Deria, 
Buralle Mahamoud, and Ahmed Gulaid $21 million in damages 
for torture, war crimes, crimes against humanity, and other human 
rights abuses committed by former Somali Prime Minister and 
Minister of Defense, Mohamed Ali Samantar. 
“I truly rejoice to know that Samantar cannot escape the 
pronouncement of the court of law, ” said CJA client Aziz Deria.  
“My late father Mohamed Iid, my younger brother Mustafa, 
and my cousin Yusuf were pulled from our family’s home and 
murdered under General Samantar’s orders just because of 
their clan. The Supreme Court’s decision today gives me hope 
that justice for all Somalis is possible. ” (Continued on page 3)  On March 20, 2015, a few weeks after the Supreme Court decision, 
Somaliland’s president presented CJA with the Presidential Commendation 
for achievements on behalf of victims of human rights violations
Ex-Salvadoran Military Officials Face 
Extradition, Deportation
On April 8, 2015, the U.S. government filed a request seeking the 
extradition to Spain of Colonel Inocente Orlando Montano for 
his role in the 1989 Jesuit massacre in which six Jesuit priests, a 
housekeeper, and her daughter were murdered in El Salvador.    
Col. Montano’s extradition will set the stage for the progression of 
CJA ’s Jesuits Massacre Case  in Spain, allowing for a trial to begin. 
“The extradition request for Col. Montano and the trial to follow 
will be the final effort to consolidate all that has been investigated 
and reported over the last 25 years - to unfold and reconstruct 
the story of the murders in a way that tells the complete truth and 
secures criminal accountability, ” said CJA International Attorney 
Almudena Bernabeu. 
In another step towards ending impunity, General Eugenio Vides 
Casanova, the former Defense Minister of El Salvador who had 
been found liable for the torture of Salvadoran civilians, was 
deported to El Salvador after living as a legal resident in Florida 
for over 25 years.  On April 8, 2015, he was met at the airport by 
families holding photos and stories of those who were tortured, 
killed, and disappeared under his command. 
“The deportation of Vides Casanova is a historic moment for the 
victims and survivors of human rights abuses during El Salvador’s 
civil war, ” said CJA Senior Legal Advisor Carolyn Patty Blum. 
“The removal from the United States of Vides Casanova, a general 
at the apex of power during years of horrendous repression, is 
unprecedented. ” ( Continued on page 4 )
In This Issue:
2 Message from CJA ’s Executive Director
3 Client Profile5 El Salvador Delegation
5 Remembering Robert E. White6 Pro bono Partner Profile
7 Jara v. Barrientos         THE CENTER FOR JUSTICE & ACCOUNTABILITY
Spring 2015 NewsletterBringing Human Rights Abusers to Justice.     
2Dear Friends of CJA:
From Somalia to El Salvador, the Center for Justice and Accountability is paving the way for 
justice and accountability.  
In this newsletter, you will read about CJA ’s important victory before the U.S. Supreme Court 
against former Somali Prime Minister and Minister of Defense, Mohamed Ali Samantar, who 
is living in Fairfax, Virginia ( see page 1, 3).  He has been denied immunity, letting stand a $21 
million judgment against him for torture, war crimes, crimes against humanity, and other 
human rights abuses.  
CJA also secured an important victory before the Board of Immigration Appeals that found 
former El Salvador Defense Minister General Vides Casanova eligible for removal for his role 
in ordering the torture and extrajudicial killings of civilians in El Salvador. Vides Casanova was 
subsequently deported to El Salvador ( see page 1, 4). Another Salvadoran military official, Colonel 
Inocente Orlando Montano, now faces an extradition hearing to determine if he will be extradited to Spain to face criminal charges 
for his role in the Jesuit massacre ( see page 1, 4).
Thank you to our pro bono counsel at Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP for their support in the Samantar case, and thank you 
for your support which made these victories possible.  
 
This year marks the 70th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz and other concentration camps.  From 1945 to 1946, the 
International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg tried Nazi Germany’s major war criminals.  Other trials followed in France, 
Germany, Israel, and the United States to prosecute or remove fugitive Nazi war criminals. 
On the first day of trial at Nuremberg, Levi Shalitan, editor of the Yiddish newspaper Undzer Veg  wrote:  “This trial shall be the 
last warning.  It must be proved that there is order and justice in our world. No one can again presume a world without justice and 
without judges. ” 
CJA is continuing the legacy of Nuremberg as our lawyers fight to ensure that perpetrators of human rights abuses, wherever they 
are found, are held to account before the court of law, and that our clients, their communities, and the victims and survivors of 
torture, crimes against humanity and other serious human rights violations find truth, justice and redress.  
C. Dixon Osburn
Executive Director
C. Dixon Osburn, Executive Director
CJA in the News
“
...the ruling published Wednesday 
by the Board of Immigration 
Appeals is ‘very significant, because 
for the first time it connects the 
concept of command responsibility 
to the ability to remove human 
rights abusers from the United 
States. ’ – CJA ’s Patty Blum, The 
Washington Post , March 13, 2015, 
commenting on a ruling finding 
General Vides Casanova removable  
from the United StatesWhether ultimately found inside 
United States borders, or captured 
abroad, the United States should have 
the requisite legal tools to bring those 
who commit crimes against humanity 
to justice.  – CJA ’s Dixon Osburn, The 
Hill, January 14, 2015
There’s lots of new evidence in this Senate report, the justice department should 
take another look. They shouldn’t be swayed by the political pressure they no 
doubt feel. - CJA ’s Kathy Roberts, Al Jazeera , December 11, 2014, commenting 
on the release of the Senate Torture Report.“
“
It’s been over 12 years 
since Vides Casanova 
and José Guillermo 
García (a former 
general) were exposed 
as being responsible for 
ordering the torture of 
civilians in El Salvador…
What we hope is that 
when he gets back to 
El Salvador, he faces 
criminal prosecution 
there.  – CJA ’s Almudena 
Bernabeu, NBC News , 
March 11, 2015“3In 2012, Samantar accepted liability and responsibility for 
damages for crimes committed against the civilian population 
of Somalia during the brutal Siad Barré regime, the military 
dictatorship that ruled the country from 1969 to 1991.  
After the collapse of the Siad Barré dictatorship, Samantar fled 
Somalia and ultimately settled in Fairfax, Virginia where he has 
lived for the past 18 years. 
 
U.S. District Court Judge Leonie Brinkema ruled in favor of 
CJA ’s clients after attorneys from CJA and pro bono co-counsel 
Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP presented evidence 
demonstrating the grievous injuries Samantar wrought and 
the malicious intent with which he committed these crimes.  
 
Despite his acceptance of liability, Samantar continued to assert 
immunity and for a third time petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court 
to hear his case, claiming immunity for acts he says were taken in 
his official capacity. The Supreme Court’s ruling follows closely on 
the heels of an affirmation by the U.S. State Department that the 
Somali Federal Government does not seek immunity for Samantar. 
“Thousands of Somalis suffered under the Siad Barré regime and 
in the years since its collapse, ” said CJA Legal Director Kathy 
Roberts, “The decision of the Somali Federal Government not to 
seek immunity for Samantar, and the U.S. Supreme Court’s denial 
of Samantar’s final appeal, together send a strong message that the 
perpetrators of such atrocities will not be cloaked with impunity. ” 
  
CJA ’s case marks the first time that any Somali government official 
has been held accountable for the atrocities perpetrated under the 
Siad Barré regime, and the Supreme Court’s most recent decision 
draws to an end an 11-year quest in U.S. courts for justice for those 
harmed by General Samantar and soldiers under his command.   
 
A few weeks after the Supreme Court’s decision, Somaliland’s 
president, Ahmed Mohamed Mahamoud Silanyo, presented 
CJA with a commendation for its “extraordinary commitment to 
human rights. ” Supreme Court Upholds $21 Million in 
Damages for CJA Clients (cont. from p. 1)  
Reburial ceremony for victims of the Siad Barré regime, the brutal dictator -
ship that ruled Somalia for 22 years. General Samantar was the Prime 
Minister and Defense Minister during Siad Barré’s regime.Client Profile  
Cecilia Moran-Santos: Bringing Colonel 
Carranza to Justice
In 1980, the national police in El Salvador jailed and brutally tortured 
Cecilia Moran-Santos, then a 27-year-old government statistician. 
The government charged her with being a “subversive” and denied 
her access to an attorney.  In 2005, CJA and pro bono co-counsel Bass, 
Berry & Sims filed suit against Colonel Nicolas Carranza on behalf  
of Moran and four other plaintiffs. Carranza, who was El Salvador’s 
Vice Minister of Defense in 1980, was found liable for crimes against 
humanity, torture and extrajudicial killing and ordered to pay $6 
million in damages.  
Why was this case important for you?
The importance of the case is not only a personal thing. For me, 
this case goes far in my seeking for justice. I lost almost three years 
of my life in prison and my family suffered a lot as they were forced 
to flee to avoid repression. It is important to bring these people to 
the courts so they can understand that nobody is above the law. I 
cannot tolerate such a level of impunity. They need to feel at least 
the shame of the wrong things they did and hear about all the 
suffering they caused.
What was it like to be a part of this case?
To be involved in the case was a very hard experience because 
seeing and hearing the stories of each of the plaintiffs was sad and 
painful. I had to live again the pain of the torture; I could hear the 
cry of the others I heard in the National Police Headquarters. Each 
picture, each testimony put me again in the streets of San Salvador, 
in the places the plaintiffs or the witnesses were describing and 
feeling the agony of those moments.
I invited some of my compañeras that were with me in Cárcel de 
Mujeres (the Women’s Prison) to attend the trial, but everybody 
was so afraid. More than 20 years had already passed and some of 
them told me that the only thing they wanted was to forget. They 
already built a new life far away from El Salvador. And some others 
were still afraid for their family living in El Salvador.
I was also afraid of that. My mother, my father and two of 
my sisters were living in El Salvador. (Continued on page 4)  Cecilia Moran-Santos being interviewed after the Carranza trial in 2005.4When I heard the result of the trial, I felt 
inmensamente feliz! It was the first night 
that I could sleep very well. No more 
nightmares! I could feel that my friends 
and compañeras were vindicated with that 
result. I said: ‘Now I can trust the justice 
system. Colonel Carranza and his family 
can feel now that they are 
not above justice. ’ It took 
many years, but now he 
has faced the shame of his 
past. 
How did this case impact 
you and others?
It impacted me so much 
when the jury declared 
him guilty of the “delitos 
de lesa humanidad” 
(crimes against humanity) 
and sent a message to those that are still in 
power and violating human rights. And it 
gave us – the citizens of the world – the 
power to take these perpetrators to trial. I asked them if they want me not to testify  
but everybody said that we have the right to 
look for any justice — if they cannot do it in 
El Salvador, we have to do it here. My father 
asked me how it felt to 
reopen my wounds. I 
said that I need to do 
it and turn the page of 
that part of my life.
I had the moral 
support of my family, 
my friends, and my 
compañeras; everyone 
said that I have to do it 
in the name of all the 
people who cannot do it 
anymore because they are dead.
When you first heard the verdict against 
Carranza, what was your reaction?Cecilia Moran-Santos 
Profile (cont. from p. 3)
The deportation of Vides Casanova followed an immigration 
appeals board decision, which upheld his removability from 
the United States for assisting and participating in the torture 
of civilians, including CJA clients Dr. Juan Romagoza Arce and 
Daniel Alvarado.  
Bernabeu said, “The deportation of General Vides Casanova and 
the extradition request for Colonel Montano represent important 
steps toward justice for the many victims of the Salvadoran military.  
We at CJA are humbled by our work alongside these victims to 
bring about these results. ” 
 Families await Gen.Vides Casanova’s arrival at the airport in El Salvador.When I heard the 
result of the trial, I felt 
inmensamente feliz! It 
was the first night that 
I could sleep very well. 
No more nightmares! I 
could feel that my friends 
and compañeras were 
vindicated with that result. 
Cecilia Moran-Santos at CJA ’s Annual Dinner 
in 2008. 
What CJA Does
The Center for Justice and Accountability is an international human rights organization dedicated to deterring 
torture and other severe human rights abuses around the world and advancing the rights of survivors to seek 
truth, justice, and redress. CJA uses litigation to hold perpetrators individually accountable for human rights 
abuses, develop human rights law, and advance the rule of law in countries transitioning from periods of abuse.
CJA uses two civil laws to hold perpetrators of international human rights abuses accountable in the United 
States: the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) and the Torture Victim Protection Act (TVPA). We also pursue criminal 
human rights cases before the Spanish National Court which has initiated investigations into abuses around the 
world. CJA leverages resources by partnering with pro-bono law firms and expert witnesses to help litigate our 
cases. For more information, visit www.cja.org.Col. Montano, General Vides Casanova 
Face Accountability for Human Rights 
Violations Committed During El 
Salvador’s Civil War (cont. from p. 1)  5violently repressed those aspirations. 
White urged that human rights must be the 
key underpinning of U.S. foreign policy. 
This was quintessential Robert White.  
Not five days after White’s telegram, 
Archbishop of El Salvador Óscar Romero 
was assassinated by a right-wing death 
squad. By the end of the year, the 
Salvadoran military had murdered over 
10,000 civilians, scores disappeared and 
thousands were tortured in secret military 
cells. 
White spent his time as ambassador holding 
meeting after meeting with El Salvador’s 
top military commanders to confront them 
with these atrocities and insist that they halt 
this course. Near the end of 1980, White 
was one of the first at the crude roadside 
grave of four American churchwomen 
slaughtered by Salvadoran security forces. 
When White refused to fabricate progress 
in the Salvadoran investigation of that 
vicious crime, he was forced out of the 
Foreign Service, where he had enjoyed a 
distinguished career of more than 25 years.  
From his “civilian” perch, White continued 
to write and talk about El Salvador and 
all of Central America, to advocate for 
change in U.S. foreign policy and for social 
change in the region. We at CJA came to 
know him well. From our earliest days as an organization, as we crafted a litigation 
strategy to insist on justice for the victims 
of the crimes of the Salvadoran military, we 
turned to Ambassador White. 
White agreed to testify in all three of CJA ’s 
civil cases for accountability against El 
Salvador’s top military commanders and 
architects of some of its most heinous 
abuses. He also testified for the Department 
of Homeland Security in their removal 
cases against the Salvadoran Ministers of 
Defense during the 1980s, the defendants 
in one of these cases.
He was a unique witness: he had the 
gravitas of a diplomat, the learnedness 
of a scholar, the keen eye of a witness to 
a terrible history. He touched jurors and 
judges in a special way - never did they 
listen more intently than when Bob White 
was on the stand.
Ambassador Bob lived a rich, full, and 
noble life. He will be deeply missed. On March 19, 1980, then-U.S. ambassador 
to El Salvador Robert White sent a 30-page 
telegram to the Secretary of State Warren 
Christopher. He had been in El Salvador for 
less than two weeks but he quickly assessed 
the situation: El Salvador was a country 
where the disparity between rich and poor 
was one of the worst examples of income 
inequality in the world; where a grassroots 
movement to address this disparity and 
the need for land reform, labor rights, 
victims’ rights, and the restoration of 
democracy was capturing the imagination 
of its people; and where the military Remembering 
Ambassador Robert E. 
White (1927-2015)  
He was a unique witness: he had 
the gravitas of a diplomat, the 
learnedness of a scholar, the 
keen eye of a witness to a terrible 
history.
by Carolyn Patty Blum, CJA Senior Legal Advisor
In November 2014, CJA sent a human rights delegation to El Salvador 
to commemorate the 25th anniversary of the Jesuits Massacre. CJA has 
a criminal case in Spain against former members of the Salvadoran 
military’s high command for their role in the Jesuits Massacre. CJA Sends Delegation to El Salvador  
Delegates in front of a pixel portrait of Archbishop Óscar Romero on the wall 
outside the entrance to El Salvador’s Foreign Ministry.Delegates participate in a candlelight vigil on November 15, 2014
Delegates meet with El Salvador’s vice presidentMytili Bala , Robert L.   
   Bernstein International 
   Human Rights Fellow
Amy Belsher, Berkeley Law 
   Public Interest Fellow
Almudena Bernabeu ,
   International Attorney/
   Transitional Justice Program     
   Director
Carolyn Patty Blum , Senior
   Legal Advisor
Scott Gilmore , Staff Attorney
Rachel Hill , Director of    
   Development
Marjon Momand ,
   Development &    
   Communications Associate
C. Dixon Osburn , Executive   
   Director
Kathy Roberts , Legal Director
Nushin Sarkarati , Staff 
   Attorney
Joninna Simpson , Finance &  
   Operations Director 
Susana Solis , Office Manager
Mariel Bird is a 3L  at the 
University of California, 
Berkeley, School of Law (Boalt 
Hall). She has a special interest 
in the fields of international 
criminal law and transitional 
justice, which was first piqued 
during a year-long Fulbright 
fellowship in South Africa. 
Since beginning law school, 
Bird has worked at the U.N. 
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and 
the U.S. Department of State’s U.S. Mission to the United Nations.  
Following her graduation, Bird will clerk for the Honorable John T. 
Noonan for the Ninth Circuit, Court of Appeals, and the Honorable 
Haywood S. Gilliam, Jr. for the Northern District of California.  
Gabriela Mendez is a 2L at the 
University of San Francisco School 
of Law. She recently traveled to 
Lesotho, Africa where she drafted a 
report comparing the legal system in 
Lesotho to the one in the U.S. and 
included recommendations on how 
to improve both systems. Over the 
past ten years she has worked on 
advocating against genocide and 
for the rights of refugees. She has 
also advocated for the rights of low-income high school students 
and English language learners in the United States, as well as 
immigrant and migrant workers. Christina Hioureas is a Senior Associate with Chadbourne & Parke’s 
International Arbitration and Public International Law practice. 
Hioureas, together with her colleagues from Chadbourne, serves as 
CJA ’s pro bono partner in Ahmed v. Magan and Jara v. Barrientos .
Christina Hioureas always had a strong interest in the rule of law 
and human rights, instilled in her by her father, who left Greece 
during its military dictatorship. She found the perfect intersection 
for pursuing her passions through her work in international 
arbitration and public international law at Chadbourne, her work 
as a delegate to the United Nations Sixth Committee to the General 
Assembly (Legal Affairs), and her pro bono involvement with CJA.
“CJA ’s cases and policy work empower individuals to seek truth and 
accountability for war crimes to which they were subjected, while 
at the same time send the message that the United States will not 
be a safe haven for those who violate international human rights, ” 
Hioureas said. 
Hioureas had first-hand experience with the impact of CJA ’s 
cases while serving as pro bono co-counsel in CJA ’s case Ahmed 
v. Magan . In November 2012, a federal court found Colonel Abdi 
Aden Magan, the former investigations chief of the Somali National 
Security Service (NSS), liable for the torture, cruel treatment, and 
arbitrary detention of CJA client Abukar Hassan Ahmed, and 
awarded $15 million in damages in August 2013.  
Hioureas was greatly inspired by the story of CJA client Ahmed, 
a former constitutional law professor and human rights advocate 
in Somalia. “He is a bold individual who, despite the oppressive 
political environment and direct threats to his safety, stood up 
for his political beliefs and advocated for the rights of others, ” 
Hioureas said, highlighting Ahmed’s tenacity and commitment to 
human rights. “Despite being repeatedly targeted and brutalized 
for his political beliefs and clan affiliation, Ahmed refused to give 
up teaching constitutional law and, once he had obtained political 
asylum in the U.K., sought justice against the person who had 
committed these atrocities. ” 
CJA continues to motivate and inspire Hioureas, as she continues 
her work with us in Jara v. Barrientos  (see page 7 for more details). 
Hioureas said, “The case is incredibly important to obtaining justice 
for the Jara family and to shed light on the human rights violations 
that were committed under the Pinochet regime. ” Pro Bono Partner Profile  
Christina Hioureas with CJA client Abukar Hassan Ahmed
Christina Hioureas, Chadbourne & 
Parke LLPCJA Welcomes Spring Legal Interns 
6William Aceves, Vice Chair
Farah Brelvi,  Secretary
Lokelani Devone , Treasurer
Tyler Giannini
Mina Titi Liu
James Mintz
Joey Neugart
C. Dixon Osburn , President
Jane Rocamora
Wilma Wallace, Chair
Chester Atkins
Carlos Castresana Fernandez
Russell Cohen
Sandra Coliver
Benjamín Cuéllar
James Eisenbrandt
Gerald Gray
Jennifer Green
Genevieve Jenkins
Paul Hoffman
Naomi Roht-Arriaza
Steven Schneebaum
Amitai Schwartz
Michael S. Sorgen
Ralph G. Steinhardt
Michael Traynor
Hon. Rebecca Westerfield (ret.) JAMSBOARD OF DIRECTORS
ADVISORY COUNCILCJA STAFF7
Family of Víctor Jara Continues to Seek 
Justice Against Accused Killer
On February 17, 2015, CJA and co-counsel Chadbourne & Parke 
LLP filed a brief in our case against former Pinochet Lieutenant 
Pedro Pablo Barrientos Nuñez, accused of torturing and killing 
Chilean folksinger and activist Víctor Jara.  The brief stated that 
our clients, the Jara family, do not oppose Barrientos’s request to 
lift the default judgment in the case, opening the door to a full trial 
against the Pinochet henchman.
CJA filed a civil suit against Barrientos in September 2013. A U.S. 
federal court issued a default judgment against the Florida resident 
after he failed to appear before the court, finding Barrientos liable 
for torture, extrajudicial killing and crimes against humanity 
committed during the mass detention of thousands of intellectuals, 
political leaders and perceived supporters of the Allende 
government at Chile Stadium immediately after General Augusto 
Pinochet’s coup in 1973. 
Barrientos asked the court to lift the default judgment 
claiming that he did not understand the consequences of 
the legal proceedings against him. The family of Mr. Jara 
welcomed the removal of the default judgment in order to 
have the case proceed to a full trial and better bring to light the events that transpired surrounding their loved one’s death.  
Mr. Jara was detained, tortured, and killed at the infamous Chile 
Stadium during General Augusto Pinochet’s coup. 
“With this case, we hope to shed light on what happened at Chile 
Stadium in the first days of Pinochet’s coup, as these events have 
remained shrouded in mystery for over 40 years, ” said CJA Legal 
Director Kathy Roberts. “CJA ’s case, along with the work of Chilean 
prosecutors who have indicted Barrientos, will finally provide 
judicial acknowledgement to the victims of Chile Stadium. ”  “With this case, we hope to shed light on what 
happened at Chile Stadium in the first days of 
Pinochet’s coup, as these events have remained 
shrouded in mystery for over 40 years. ”We will also hear from special guests Joan Jara, Amanda Jara, 
and Manuela Bunster , CJA ’s clients in our case Jara v. Barrientos . 
Joan Jara is the widow of Víctor Jara, a Chilean folksinger 
and poet  who was killed at Chile Stadium by members of the 
Chilean Armed Forces in the days following the infamous 
coup d’ état of General Augusto Pinochet in September 1973.   
 
CJA will present the Partner in Justice Award to Chadbourne & 
Parke LLP , which has provided outstanding pro bono support to 
CJA in our Jara v. Barrientos  case.  Lead
Chadbourne & Parke LLP
Dominican Sisters of San Rafael
Paul Sack  
 
Presenting
Wilson Sonsini Goodrich &        
   Rosati Foundation
Underwriter
Sandra Coliver & Open Society   
   Institute
DLA Piper
Joan Haratani
Maja Kristin
Ramey Wine Cellars
Patron
Clinton Reilly Holdings
Dentons US LLP
Lokelani Devone & Annette  
   Brands
Latham & Watkins LLP
The Mintz Group
Mina Titi Liu & Charles Eric    
   Rosenblum
Joey & Lucy Neugart
Topel Winery
Beth Van Schaack & Brent Lang
Advocate
Baker Botts LLP
Beveridge & Diamond PC
Farah Brelvi & David Ball
Keker & Van Nest LLP
Sard Verbinnen & Co.
Wilma Wallace & Richard  
   Meyers
  Thank you to our sponsors*  
Defender
Clara Basile
Thomas & Caitlin Brown
Jerrold Mark Dion
Susan and Gary Halling
Jerry Gray & Coleen Higa
Hafner Vineyards
Richard Hill & Susan Levine
Berta and Allen Low
Pamela Merchant & Kirby Sack
Ann Merrill
C. Dixon Osburn & Jeremy Hodder
Kathy Roberts & Aaron Loeb
Jane Rocamora
Ropes & Gray LLP
Gerald Rosenstein
Rosen Bien Galvin & Grunfeld LLP
Martin Tannenbaum & Alex Ingersoll
Michael Traynor
Phil & Kate Villers
Hon. Rebecca Westerfield (ret.) JAMS
 
Partner
William & Seema Aceves
Elizabeth Farnsworth
Rachel Hill
Paul & Florence Roberts/Moonrush Jewels
Peter Sanders
Janet & Victor Schachter
Van Der Hout, Brigagliano & Nightingale, LLP
Additional Sponsors
The Chancellor Hotel
Erin Gillespie Design
The Recorder
*at time of publicationCJA Annual Dinner on May 7  (cont. from p. 1)
Former Guatemalan Attorney General Claudia Paz y Paz receiving the Judith 
Lee Stronach Award at CJA ’s 15th Anniversary Dinner in 2013.
CJA travelled to Somaliland and received the Special Presidential Commendation after achieving a significant victory before the U.S. Supreme Court 
for victims of the Siad Barré regime, the brutal dictatorship that ruled Somalia for 22 years. (From L to R: CJA client Aziz Deria; Staff Attorney Nushin 
Sarkarati; CJA partner and HORNWATCH Director Suleiman Bolaleh; Legal Director Kathy Roberts; Fathiya Jahuur, Lead Commissioner on the 
Somaliland National Human Rights Commission; and Najib Hassan).One Hallidie Plaza, Suite 406
San Francisco, CA 94102PRESORTED
STANDARD MAIL
US POSTAGE
PAID
OAKLAND, CA
PERMIT NO. 1097
www. cja.org