 
 
 
870 Market Street, Suite 688  San Francisco, CA 94102  tel 415 544 0444  fax 415 544 0456  info@cja.org  cja.org  
 For Immediate Release  
February 11, 2008       
 
Contact: Moira Feeney, Esq., Media Coordinator 
415-544-0444 x302; mfeeney@cja.org 
 
TRIAL AGAINST PERUVIAN HUM AN RIGHTS ABUSER CONCLUDES 
IN MIAMI 
  
PERPETRATOR HURTADO TAKES THE FIFT H, REFUSING TO FACE VICTIMS 
  
Monday, Feb. 11, 2008, Miami, FL :  A trial on damages was held today in federal court against former 
Peruvian Major Telmo Hurtado Hurtado for his role  in the infamous Accomarca Massacre of 1985 in 
Peru.  
 
Major Hurtado appeared in court by order of the judge  in a prison jumpsuit and shackles.  He is currently 
being held in an immigration detention center while he  fights deportation to Peru.  Major Hurtado refused 
to participate in the proceedings and invoked his righ t not to testify under the Fifth Amendment.  Hurtado 
refused to listen to the testimony of the two plai ntiffs, who are both survivors of the massacre and 
traveled to the U.S. to have their day in court. 
 
The plaintiffs, Te贸fila Ochoa Lizarbe and Cirila Pulid o Balde贸n, who were 12 years old at the time, gave 
emotional testimony about the massacre where Major Hurtado and his men murdered 69 civilians in the 
remote mountain village of Accomarca.  The plaintiffs each testified that they survived by hiding from the soldiers.  Despite Ms. Ochoa Lizarbe's own escape, her mother, four brothers and a sister were killed.  
Soldiers also murdered Ms. Pulido Balde贸n's mother a nd brother. The plaintiffs testified about life after 
such a devastating loss and their on-going struggle to heal. 
 
In addition to the plaintiffs, Eduardo Gonzalez of the International Center for Transitional Justice and one 
of the authors of the Peruvian Truth Commission Re port also testified.  Mr. Gonzalez described how 
military patrol units, including the unit led by Major Hurtado, forced the villagers of Accomarca from 
their homes.  The units took many of the women to  a nearby field and raped them, then forced these 
unarmed civilians into a building, opened fire on the building, and ultimately burned it to the ground with 
the villagers inside.   
  
"Operation Huancayoc," Gonzalez explained, conduc ted during the civil war between the government 
forces and insurgent groups, including Shining Path, was a military plan to "capture and destroy the 
terrorist elements present in the Quebrada de Huancayoc," a district of Accomarca in the Ayacucho region of Peru. 
  
Former Peruvian Senator Javier Diez Conseco testif ied regarding the chilling statements that Major 
Hurtado made to a Senate investigative commission in  1985 in defense of his role in the massacre.  
Hurtado admitted that he threw a grenade into a building containing women, children and elderly villagers, and that he felt his actions were justified under orders he r eceived to "capture and destroy" the 
enemy. 
 The hearing was before Federal District Court Judge Adalberto Jordan to determine the amount of 
damages to be awarded to Ms. Ochoa Lizarbe and Ms . Pulido Balde贸n in the lawsuit that they brought 
against Major Hurtado for torture, extrajudicial k illing, war crimes and crimes against humanity.  Judge 
Jordan previously granted a default judgment against Major Hurtado.  
   
Major Hurtado came to the U.S. in 2002 after an amnesty law protecting him from prosecution in Peru 
was nullified.   
  
The plaintiffs are represented by The Center for Justice and Accountability (CJA), a San Francisco-based 
human rights organization dedicated to ending tort ure and other severe human rights abuses around the 
world and advancing the rights of survivors to seek tr uth, justice and redress.  CJA uses litigation to hold 
perpetrators individually accountable for human ri ghts abuses, develop human rights law and advance the 
rule of law in countries transitioning from periods of abuse.  www.cja.org .   
  
For more information and background on the case, please visit http://www.cja.org/cases/hurtado.shtml . 
 