 
 
 
870 Market Street, Suite 688  San Francisco, CA 94102  tel 415 544 0444  fax 415 544 0456  info@cja.org  cja.org  
 PRESS RELEASE 
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 
 
Contact: Pamela Merchant, Executi ve Director, 415-544-0444 ext. 307, 
pmerchant@cja.org   
 
TRIAL AGAINST BOSNIAN SERB  ALLEGED WAR CRIMINAL AND 
TORTURER BEGINS OCTO BER 22 IN ATLANTA 
San Francisco, October 16, 2001 - On October 22nd, four Bosnian Muslims who were 
tortured in Bosnia in 1992 will have their day in court - in a federal courtroom in Atlanta, 
Georgia. The man they are suing, Nikola Vukovi c, has lived in the Atlanta area since 
1997. According to his lawyer, Vukovic will not be at his trial. His family says he is now 
in Bosnia.  
The lawsuit is based on U.S. laws that auth orize federal courts to hear tort claims, 
brought by citizens and non-citizen s alike, against pe rpetrators of egre gious human rights 
violations who have come to the United States. 
"This case comes at a particularly importa nt time," said Sandra Coliver, Executive 
Director of the Center for Justice and Accountability, a human rights law group that 
represents the four torture survivors. "Our country and the world are focused on the 
urgent need to ensure justice and accountabi lity for terrorists who have committed crimes 
against humanity. This case highlights the capacity of U.S. courts to hold such 
perpetrators accountable under in ternational and U.S. law. Th e case also underscores the 
U.S. legal system's commitment to justice for victims of crimes against humanity, whoever they are, be they Muslims from a ny part of the world, or our own citizens." 
Coliver continued, "If Vukovic did indeed flee the country, that is in itself a small 
victory. One reason for bringing this case was to send a clear message to perpetrators of 
such crimes, and would-be perpetrators, that they will not find a safe haven in the U.S. Moreover, we will seek a judgment that makes cl ear that the plaintiffs are entitled to any 
money Vukovic has or will earn  during the rest of his life,  beyond what he needs for the 
basic support of his family." 
The lawsuit charges Vukovic, a Bosnian Se rb, with beating and torturing the four 
plaintiffs and others following the April 1992 Bosnian Serb military takeover of Bosanski 
Samac in northern Bosnia-Herzegovina. All four plaintiffs are Bosniaks (Bosnian citizens 
of Muslim Slavic ancestry). Each of them was seized, held for several months, and 
subjected to repeated abuses in converted schools and warehouses in Bosanski Samac. 
Three of the four spent additional periods of up to two years in concentration and labor camps, all part of the Serbian campaign of "e thnic cleansing." Their assets were seized, 
including their homes and businesses, and their families were forced to flee. Two of them received political asylum in the U.S. with th eir families, one lives in Belgium, and the 
other in Germany. 
The plaintiffs and other witn esses will present evidence at trial that Vukovic, acting in 
concert with other soldiers: be at them and others with metal pipes, baseball bats and 
chairs while taunting them with ethnic slurs; "branded" one of the plaintiffs by slicing his 
forehead with a knife while riding him like a horse and shouting a busive and degrading  2 of 2 
 
ethnic slurs, and then forced plaintiff's bleeding head into a receptacle used as a toilet; 
repeatedly subjected plaintiffs and others to mock executions and rounds of "Russian 
Roulette"; forced them to witness killi ngs, torture, rapes and other atrocities.  
U.S. judges and juries have found several modern day perpetrators liable for grave human 
rights abuses, including former Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos. After Marcos was voted out of office, he moved to Hawaii; even tually his estate was ordered to pay nearly 
$2 billion in damages.  
CJA is joined in the case by the ACLU of Georgia. Lead counsel is volunteer CJA Attorney Paul Hoffman of the Venice-based  law firm of Schonbr un, DeSimone, Seplow, 
Harris & Hoffman. Joshua Sondheimer, CJA's Litigation Director, Gerald Weber, the 
Legal Director of the ACLU of  Georgia, and ACLU staff a ttorney, Robert Tsai, are co-
counsel in the trial. The San Francisco law firm Brobeck, Phleger and Harrison is 
assisting on the case.  
CJA was established in 1998 to provide redre ss to victims of human rights abuses and to 
pursue human rights violators found in the United States. CJA represents victims of human rights abuses in actions  against perpetrators who liv e in or visit the U.S. In 
addition to the Bosnian case, CJA has cases  pending against perpetrators from El 
Salvador and Chile. CJA, together with other human rights groups, recently won a $66 
million judgment against an Indonesian genera l for atrocities committed in East Timor. 
Trial is scheduled to commence on October 22, 2001, in U.S. District Court in Atlanta, 
before Senior Judge Marvin H. Shoob. Th e case is captioned Mehinovic, et al. v. 
Vukovic, N.D. Georgia No. 1:98-CV-2470 WHS. 
For more information on the case, to obtain a press kit, to receive email updates regarding 
the trial or to arrange interviews with any of the principals, please contact: Sylvia Romo 
at Tel: 415-544-0444, x302, Fax: 415-544-0456, Email: sromo@cja.org . 
 