 
 
 
870 Market Street, Suite 688  San Francisco, CA 94102  tel 415 544 0444  fax 415 544 0456  info@cja.org  cja.org  
 For Immediate Release July 7, 2006  Contact: Elizabeth Chertoff  Media Coordinator      (415) 544-0444 ext.303 
echertoff@cja.org   
JUDGE IN GUATEMALAN GENOCIDE CASE ISSUES ARREST WARRANTS 
AND FREEZES ASSESTS OF RIOS MONTT AND OTHER DEFENDANTS   
Madrid, Spain; July 7, 2006 : Spanish National Court Judge Santiago Pedraz today issued 
arrest warrants for the eight defendants named in the Guatemalan Genocide case, including former president Efraín Rios Montt.  The judge also issued an order to freeze 
the defendants’ assets.  
Judge Pedraz took this action after returning from Guatemala where he had expected to 
interrogate the defendants but was thwarted  by their last minute legal maneuvers. The 
eight defendants named on the arrest warrant s are Ríos Montt, Oscar Humberto Mejía 
Victores, Ángel Aníbal Guevara Rodriguez,  Donaldo Álvarez Ruiz, German Chupina 
Barahona, Pedro García Arredondo, Benedicto Lucas García, and Romeo Lucas García, 
who reportedly died in May but remains a de fendant until the judge receives official 
notification of his death. 
On June 24 Judge Pedraz, prosecutor Jesús Alonso, and two private prosecutors, including Center for Justice and Accountab ility (CJA) attorney Almudena Bernabeu, 
traveled to Guatemala to take testimony from  the defendants. Upon their arrival, lawyers 
for the defendants filed several appeals forc ing the Guatemalan Constitutional Court to 
indefinitely suspend the proceedings.  
In the order issuing the arrest warrants, Judge  Pedraz stated that hi s decision is based on 
the “obstructionist attitude of the defendants and because there is sufficient evidence that 
the crimes of genocide, terrorism, torture, murder and illegal detention were committed 
by the defendants.”  
In 1999 Nobel laureate Rigoberta Menchú Tu m and other victims filed a criminal 
complaint in the Spanish National Court (SNC) against the senior Guatemalan 
government officials charging them with terro rism, genocide and syst ematic torture. CJA 
joined the complaint in 2004 on behalf of tw o torture survivors. The case, known as the 
Guatemalan Genocide Case, is modeled on the Pinochet case which was also brought 
before the SNC. 
CJA Attorney Bernabeu, a private prosecutor in the case, states, “Judge Pedraz’s order 
represents a historic step toward accountability  and justice for the tens of thousands of 
victims of the Guatemalan Genocide. We look forward to the execution of this order and  2 of 2 
 
the prosecution of these defendants for the atrocities committed in Guatemala in the 
1980s.” 
CJA is a San Francisco-based non-profit orga nization which works to deter torture and 
other severe human rights abuses through im pact litigation, educa tion and outreach. CJA 
is the only U.S. based human rights legal or ganization solely devoted  to seeking justice 
and accountability on behalf of torture survivor s against their perpetra tors in the courts. 
 