 
 
870 Market Street, Suite 680  San Francisco, CA 94102  tel 415 544 0444  fax 415 544 0456  info@cja.org  cja.org  
  
CONTACT: Lisa Cohen , 310-395-2544   
 
 
FORMER SOMALI NATIONAL SECURITY SERVICE CHIEF  
FOUND LIABLE FOR TORTURE  
(COLUMBUS, OHIO, November 20, 2012 ) –  
Today, the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Ohio found  the former investigations c hief of 
the Somali National Security Service  (NSS) , Colonel Abdi Aden Magan, liable for the torture and 
arbitrary detention of  constitutional law professor  and human rights advocate , Abukar Hassan Ahmed. 
The court’s  decision in Ahmed v. Magan is historic in that it  is the first judgment  ever in a court of law  to 
hold a me mber of the notorious and widely feared  Somali NSS accountable  for human rights violations  
committed  under  the brutal military dictatorship  that ruled Somalia for 20 years, the Siad Barré  regime .  
Today’s ju dgment holds  that Colonel Magan is responsible for Professor Ahmed ’s arbitrar y detention , 
torture, and cruel  treatment  at the hands of NSS officers, who acted on Colonel Magan’s orders. In his 
ruling, Judge Smith found that  that Professor Ahmed wa s detained , subjected to cruel treatment,  and 
tortured  by NSS officers under  orders from  Colonel Magan.  Professor Ahmed bears lasting physical and 
psychological scars  from his torture to this day .  After the Siad Barre regime collapsed in 1991  Colonel 
Magan fled the country and sou ght safe haven in Ohio.   This civil case was filed under two federal 
statutes, the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) and the Torture Victim Protection Act , by the Center for 
Justice and Accountability (CJA) and pro bono  co-counsel Latham & Watkins, LLP on behalf  of 
Professor Ahmed .   
For Professor Ahmed, a former Amnesty International Prisoner of Conscience, the decision comes after 
years of seeking recognition and redress for the torture he endured while wrongly and arbitrarily detained 
and tortured for his insistence on promoting human rights.  After the fall of the Siad Barr é regime in 
1991, Professor Ahmed spent about twenty years searching for Colonel Magan and was shocked to 
discover that the man who had interrogated him and ordered h is torture was living comfortably in 
Columbus, Ohio.   
In the words of CJA client Professor Ahmed, “The court’s decision today is of great consequence not only 
for me but  also for the many other Somalis who were tortured or even killed by NSS officers .  In order for 
Somalia to heal after 20 years of military rule, i t is essential  to confront and hold accountable individuals  
like Colonel Magan.” Professor Ahmed is a legal adviser to the New Somali Government,  participating in 
drafting  the Somali Human Rights  Bill and working to ensure that the new government’s laws comply 
with human rights . 
“Today’s judgment sends a clear message that  torturers will not find safe haven in the United States,” said 
CJA Staff Attorney Kathy Roberts, adding,  “The decision  not onl y acknowledges Colonel Magan’s  
crimes against Professor Ahmed, but it also sheds light on the role of the security services  in suppressing 
dissent against the Barr é regime. This mark s a crucial step in the march  against impunity for  those who 
committed  serious human rights abuses  during that dark chapter of Somalia’s history .”    
Christina Hioureas, an attorney from Latham & Watkins added:  “We are  proud to partner with CJA on 
this important case .  We are honored  to represent Professor Ahmed, a bold individ ual, who had the  
 
 courage to stand up to the man responsible for his arbitrary detention and brutal torture.  We are thrilled 
with the Court’s decision  to hold Mr. Magan accountable for the atrocities he committed in violation of 
international law.  W e coul d not be more please d with such an excellent result for our client.”   
CJA is a San Francisco -based human rights organization dedicated to deterring torture and other severe 
human rights abuses around the world and advancing the rights of survivors to seek  truth, justice and 
redress.   CJA uses litigation to hold perpetrators individually accountable for human rights abuses, 
develop human rights law, and advance the rule of law in countries in transition from periods of abuse.   
 
Latham & Watkins is a global law firm with approximately 2,000 attorneys in 31 offices, including Abu 
Dhabi, Barcelona, Beijing, Boston, Brussels, Chicago, Doha, Dubai, Frankfurt, Hamburg, Hong Kong, 
Houston, London, Los Angeles, Madrid, Milan, Moscow, Munich, New Jersey, New York, Or ange 
County, Paris, Riyadh, Rome, San Diego, San Francisco, Shanghai, Silicon Valley, Singapore, Tokyo and 
Washington, D.C. Since 2001, Latham has provided almost 2 million hours of free legal services . 
 
For additional information about the case, please se e CJA’s website: www.cja.org .  
 