 
 
 
One Hallidie Plaza, Suite 406   San Francisco, CA 94102  tel 415 544 0444   fax 415 544 0456  info@cj a.org   cja.org  
 For Immediate Release      Contact:  Lisa Cohen, 310 -395-2544   
December 9 , 2014            lisa@lisacohen.org  
 
 
 
Torture Report Summary Critical Step Forward  for Justice  
 
The Center for Justice and Accountability  (CJA)  today praised Senator Dianne Feinstein's  (D-
Calif.)  leadership on the Senate Intelligence Committee for publishing a powerful executive 
summary of its findings based on a 6,000 -page report on  CIA interrogation and detention 
practices after 9/11.    
 
CJA's Executive Director, Dixon Osburn, said, "Justice requires truth and transparency.   The 
publication of the Senate Intelligence Committee’s report executive summary will give 
Americans a better understanding of the extent to which the CIA engaged in tort ure, and cruel, 
inhuman or degrading treatment in violation of U.S. and international law.   The Committee 
should release the entire report so that no doubts remain, and so that there can be a public and 
thorough consideration of next steps."  
 
CJA represent s more than 200 clients worldwide who have faced torture, genocide, and other 
severe human rights abuses from the atrocities committed by the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia to 
the crimes against humanity  committed under the Pinochet regime in Chile. CJA is commit ted to 
advancing the rights of survivors to seek truth, justice and redress.     
 
Osburn said, " Government -sanctioned mass violence can profoundly affect the politics and the 
people of a nation in unexpected ways.   The Senate Intelligence Committee’s execu tive summary 
confirms that CIA  abuses, including torture, were far more widespread than previously known , 
including  water -boarding, a technique of controlled suffocation that was used extensively by the 
Spanish Inquisition , the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia , and  more recently by Somali soldiers under 
the command of General Mohamed Ali Samantar , who was forced to admit responsibility for this 
and other international crimes in CJA’s case against him in U.S. federal court.  The executive  
summary published today will  help Americans confront the reality of the torture committed in 
their name.  It should never be repeated again."  
 
About the Center for  Justice and Accountability  
  
CJA is a San Francisco -based human rights organization dedicated to deterring  torture and o ther 
severe human rights abuses around the world and advancing the  rights of survivors to seek truth, 
justice and redress. CJA uses  litigation to  hold perpetrators individually accountable for human 
rights abuses, develop  human rights law, and advance  the rule of law in countries transitioning 
from periods of abuse.  www.cja.org   
 
## 
 