Back in 2006, NARF was asked
to prepare a report on theimpact of the Voting Rights Act(VRA) in Alaska.  This opened anew chapter in NARF’s work.While NARF had litigated someVRA cases in the Dakotas in the1980s, voting cases are highlytechnical and highly specializedand when certain litigatorsmoved on, the work naturallyslowed in this area.  However, asNARF delved into this issue, itdiscovered that Alaska had beenviolating the VRA since the veryday it passed in 1975.  For morethan 30 years, the needs of theindigenous language speakers inAlaska (Yup’ik, Inupiaq, andGwich’in among others) hadbeen ignored.  All elections wereall English, all the time despite aclear requirement in the VRA to translate all votingmaterials into Native languages. As a result, voterregistration and turnout were low, and many ofthose who were voting would later tell us they didnot really understand what they were voting for.This article looks back and examines the renais-sance in NARF’s voting work, and shares its plansfor the future. 
The first major voting case NARF brought during
this renaissance was the Nick v. Bethel case.  We
have detailed this case in previous articles and sowill not repeat the full case history here.  Sufficeit to say, this was the first salvo in an overhaul ofAlaska’s electoral system and NARF’s first step.
VOLUME 41, NO. 1 WINTER/SPRING 2016NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF Expands its Work to Protect 
and Advance the Indian Vote
NARF Expands its Work to Protect and Advance
the Indian Vote ...................................... page 1
Case Updates Indigenous Peoples and the Paris Climate
Change Agreement ................................ page 7
Pamunkey Tribe’s federal recognition 
finalized .................................................. page 9
Tribal Supreme Court Project update ...... page 9
National Indian Law Library ................ page 13Calling Tribes to Action! ...................... page 14NARF .................................................... page 15NARF Board .......................................... page 16
All Alaska photos by Jenni Monet.The plaintiffs, four individual voters and four
tribal councils, represented the thousands of vot-ers who had been denied the Yup’ik translationsof voting materials required by the VRA.  Theywon a preliminary injunction in July 2008 and,seeing the writing on the wall, the State of Alaskasettled with the Plaintiffs in January 2010.  Thesettlement included what the plaintiffs thoughtwas comprehensive relief in the form of translatedmaterials from registration to casting a ballot.Little did they know, their neighbors would haveto bring the exact same case for the exact samelanguage asking for the exact same relief justthree years later. 
In July 2013, NARF and co-counsel Morgan,
Lewis & Bockius LLP and Armstrong TeasdaleLLP , acting on behalf of two tribal councils andtwo Alaska Native voters, filed suit in federalcourt charging state elections officials with ongo-ing violations of the federal Voting Rights Act(VRA) and the United States Constitution. Thecase, called Toyukak v. Treadwell, claimed state
officials failed to provide language assistance tocitizens whose first language is Yup’ik, the 
primary language of many Alaska Natives in theDillingham and Wade Hampton census areas.Notably, these two census areas are directly northand south of the Bethel Census Area that hadbeen litigated in the first case.  In essence, theState of Alaska had limited the relief agreed to inthe Nick case to just the Bethel Census Area inthe case, despite identical language needs in theadjacent census areas. 
Trial was held from June 23 to July 3, 2014 and
the court rendered an oral decision on September3, 2014.  The Court held that the Defendants hadin fact violated Section 203 of the VRA in all thecensus areas at issue.  The Court further foundthat the Defendants had improperly relied onwhat they called “outreach workers” in villages totranslate the entire Official Election Pamphletthemselves, even though these workers had neverbeen asked to do so and there was no evidenceshowing they could do this.  The Court foundthat the end result was an absence of all pre-elec-tion information such as candidate statements,
PAGE 2                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 3NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
ballot measures, pro and con statements for ballot
measures and all other information available toEnglish speaking voters before an election.  Afterbriefing, the Court ordered broad remedial reliefincluding the written and audio translation of allpre-election materials distributed in English,posting of bilingual translators at all pollingplaces, and also ordered Defendants to reportback to the Court on their progress after theNovember 2014 election, which was submittedshortly before Christmas 2014.
In 2015, NARF and the plaintiffs spent several
months in an extended negotiation with the Stateof Alaska to settle the case.  On September 30,2015, the Court approved a settlement agreementwith the Defendants that provides broad relief inthe form of a comprehensive language assistanceprogram, including the appointment of federalobservers through the 2020 elections, translationof all pre-election information into the Yup’ikand Gwich’in languages, the creation of a newstate-level position specifically devoted to languageassistance, and court oversight and reportingthrough 2020.  In addition, apart from the case,
the new Alaska Native Lieutenant Governor hasreplaced the leadership at the Division ofElections and NARF is optimistic its work in thisarea will have lasting, positive impacts. 
Next, on January 20, 2016, in Brakebill, et al. v.
Jaeger, seven Native Americans from North
Dakota filed suit under the Voting Rights Act andthe U.S. and North Dakota Constitutions chal-lenging North Dakota’s recently enacted voter IDlaw on the grounds it disproportionately burdensNative Americans and denies qualified voters theright to vote. This is one of those laws passedafter the Shelby County v. Holder decision by the
Supreme Court gutted the VRA.  
The Brakebill plaintiffs are challenging North
Dakota House Bills 1332 and 1333, which requireNorth Dakota voters to present one of only fourqualifying IDs with a current residential addressprinted on it in order to vote. Before enactmentof these laws, North Dakota required a poll clerkto request an ID, but a voter without one could
still vote if the clerk vouched for their qualifica-
tions or the voter signed an affidavit of identity.While other states also have voter ID require-ments, North Dakota is the only state without afail-safe provision, such as provisional ballotingthat allows a voter to produce their ID within afew days of the election or an affidavit of identity.Additionally, North Dakota’s list of acceptable IDsis much more limited than other states, whichallow U.S. passports and military IDs to be used.   
Many Native Americans living on Indian reser-
vations in North Dakota do not have qualifyingIDs, such as driver's licenses or state ID cardscontaining a residential address.  Thus, in boththe primary and general election in 2014, manyqualified North Dakota Native American voterswere disenfranchised because their IDs did notlist their residential address. 
The lawsuit alleges that North Dakota’s new
voter ID requirements arbitrarily and unneces-sarily limit the right to vote and disproportion-ately burden Native American voters in NorthDakota. The burdens are substantial for a numberof Native Americans who cannot afford to drive tothe nearest driver’s license site (“DMV”). Thereare no DMV locations on any Indian reservationsin North Dakota, and for many Native Americans,
a DMV location may be over 60 miles away.  ManyNative Americans live below the poverty line, anddo not have dependable access to transportationor cannot afford travel to a distant DMV location.
The State of North Dakota moved to dismiss the
case for failure to state a claim, but the Courtdenied the motion on April 5, 2016 and deniedthe Motion for Reconsideration shortly there after.
The Court has now set a schedule and briefing on amotion for a preliminary injunction will begin inJune, and plaintiffs have requested a ruling priorto the 2016 general election.
In addition to these two cases, NARF expects a
significant increase in litigation to protect theNative vote.  This is because in 2013, the U. S.Supreme Court in the Shelby County case inval-
idated Section 4 of the Voting Rights Act whichrequired preclearance (or pre-approval) by theU.S. Justice Department of changes in state voting laws in certain states with histories of dis-crimination.  Make no mistake, this decision gutteda critical provision of the VRA that protected voters before discrimination occurred. The 
preclearance process had prevented several dis-criminatory changes from being implemented in
PAGE 4                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 5NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDAlaska alone, and was a key tool to
protect the Native vote.  NARF hasfought hard to prevent this andfiled an amicus brief in that case.  
Once the damage was done
however, NARF shifted gears andon behalf of Bristol Bay NativeCorporation and the AlaskaFederation of Natives, developeda Congressional amendment tothe Voting Rights Act that wouldprotect Alaska Natives andAmerican Indians from the kindsof voting discrimination theyhave faced across the countrysince 2013. This is colloquiallycalled “the Shelby Fix,” in refer-ence to the fact that it is meant toundo the damage done by theShelby case. In addition, SenatorMark Begich introduced theNatiVRA (S.2399) in an attemptto remedy some of the longstand-ing issues such as the lack of lan-guage assistance, lack of pollingplaces, and lack of early voting,but it did not pass before expira-tion of the 2013-2014 congres-sional term. 
On June 24, 2015, Senator
Leahy and approximately 30 co-sponsors introduced the VotingRights Advancement Act, a broad-based bill that prevents specificpractices wherever they may occur in the coun-try.  That bill also includes a new Section 2 called“Voting on Indian lands” that mandates equalaccess to early voting, absentee voting and in-person polling locations on all Indian lands,which is very broadly defined in the bill.  NARFhelped author these sections in response to com-ments and complaints from Indian reservationsand Native villages.  Senator Murkowski (AK)signed on as the first Republican co-sponsor onSeptember 10, 2015.
Additionally, in August 2015, Senator Tester
introduced S 1912, a voting bill specificallydirected at election problems in Indian Country.
NARF submitted some comments and suggestedchanges to the bill to ensure that while Tribeshave an opportunity to designate polling loca-tions, states should not be permitted to shifttheir expenses and burdens for these mattersonto the Tribes.
Facing an increase in voting rights litigation
and uncertain if a remedial bill would pass any-time soon, in January 2015 NARF proposed anambitious new project: to gather voting rightsadvocates, lawyers, experts, and tribal advocatesinto one room to discuss current problems withvoting in Indian Country and begin to develop
PAGE 6                                                                          NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
solutions to these problems.  The meeting was
held May 27-28, 2015 in Washington, DC.  It wasconvened in part because the 2016 election cyclepromises to be an unusually important one at thenational, state and local levels. The national elec-tions include the selection of a new President,and 34 Senate seats.  Six of these Senate seats arein states with significant (and potentially deter-minative) American Indian/Alaska Native (AIAN)populations: Alaska, Arizona, California, NorthDakota, Oklahoma, and South Dakota. There arealso eleven gubernatorial races in 2016, three ofwhich are in states where the Native vote mayplay a significant role (North Dakota, Montanaand Washington). 
In addition, in the wake of the U.S. Supreme
Court’s decision in Shelby County, numerous
state legislatures have passed new election lawsthat impose significant barriers to AIAN voters.Currently, individuals and organizations workingon AIAN voting rights issues do so independent ofone another with no coordinated strategy in placeto address voting rights issues in Indian Country.To date, this work has been generally (but notexclusively) reactive – in response to an immediatethreat – rather than proactive or planned in
advance of a specific election. That is what thisproject hopes to change. 
This meeting was conceived and planned specif-
ically to address the shifting and increasinglycomplex issues surrounding AIAN voting. Theparticipants spent two full days and developed alist of more than 100 challenges currently facedby Indian voters. They quickly realized this prob-lem was much more expansive and complex thanhad been imagined by any one of us and thus theone meeting has turned into an ongoing projectcalled the Native American Voting RightsCoalition (NAVRC).  It meets on a monthly basis,as do its subgroups on redistricting, litigation,capacity building and data gathering. The NAVRCis actively working on a multi-pronged strategicplan for the 2016 elections, and has alreadyformed 8 new partnerships to address some of theissues, including the first comprehensive, multi-state survey of Indian voters.  
NARF is committed to litigating, advocating
and organizing to protect and advance the Native vote. ❂
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 7NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDCASE UPDATES
The state members of the United Nations
met in Paris for COP 21 (Conference of theParties 21) for two weeks and arrived atthe first ever universally binding accord onclimate change – the Paris Agreement.This Agreement was adopted under theUnited Nations Framework Convention onClimate Change (UNFCCC), and achievesthe universality which was missing fromthe last attempt at such an agreement –the Kyoto Protocol.  The InternationalIndigenous Peoples Forum on ClimateChange (IIPFCC or indigenous caucus)has been involved in the UNFCCC processfor years.  The IIPFCC has representativesfrom indigenous peoples from around theworld.  Starting in Copenhagen in 2009,the Native American Rights Fund (NARF) has represented first the National TribalEnvironmental Council (NTEC) and morerecently the National Congress of AmericanIndians (NCAI) in this process.  
In preparation for Paris, the Norwegian govern-
ment donated funding to the United NationsDevelopment Program (UNDP) to enable greaterindigenous participation in the process.  Regionalconsultations of indigenous peoples took place inseven regions of the world and the funding wasalso used to bring dozens of indigenous represen-tatives from around the world to Paris.Numerous representatives from Tribes in theUnited States attended and were crucial in lobby-ing for language concerning indigenous issues inthe Agreement itself and the Decision adopting it.(The Agreement deals with overarching commit-ments, durable provisions, and standard provi-sions for an agreement.  The Decision coversdetails of implementation, provisions likely tochange over time, provisions related to pre 2020actions and interim arrangements pending entryinto force of the Agreement.)Language in the Agreement
The indigenous caucus pushed for inclusion of
several issues in the Agreement.  One of the mostimportant asks was a provision in the operativesection of the Agreement recognizing that cli-mate change policies and procedures had torespect, protect, promote, and fulfill the rights ofindigenous peoples within a broad human rightsframework.  The caucus worked on this effortwith a broad inter-constituency group.  While thegoal was to get language in the operative sectionof the Agreement, the effort only resulted in aprovision in the preamble.  It states as follows:
Acknowledging that climate change is a com-
mon concern of humankind, Parties should,when taking action to address climate change,respect, promote and consider their respectiveobligations on human rights, the right tohealth, the rights of indigenous peoples, localcommunities, migrants, children, personswith disabilities and people in vulnerable situ-ations and the rights to development, as wellas gender equality, empowerment of womenand intergenerational equity.
Indigenous Peoples and the Paris Climate Change
Agreement
PAGE 8                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDThis is far from perfect, being in the preamble,
using “should” instead of shall, using “consider”instead of “protect and fulfill,” not using our pre-ferred language of “human rights, including therights of indigenous peoples,” and in referring torespective obligations.  Nevertheless, it is impor-tant that the rights of Indigenous Peoples havebeen recognized in a universal, legally bindinginternational climate change agreement.  It pro-vides a basis to build on going forward.
A second issue of primary importance to the
indigenous caucus was the recognition of theimportance of indigenous peoples’ knowledge inrelation to climate change.  Article 7.5 of theAgreement provides that adaptation action“should be based on and guided by the best avail-able science and, as appropriate, traditionalknowledge, knowledge of indigenous peoples andlocal knowledge systems….”  While the caucushad pushed for a broader scope for indigenouspeoples’ knowledge, calling for it also to beincluded in the mitigation section, and for thedeletion of the limiting phrase “where appropri-ate” it is a milestone, to have the importance ofthe knowledge of indigenous peoples recognizedin a universal legally-binding instrument. 
The caucuses also pushed for a more aggressive
mitigation goal than the no more than 2°Cincrease the developed countries advocated for.Their effort, coinciding with the efforts of theinter-constituency group and many developingcountries led to language in the Article 2(b) tohold “…the increase in the global average temper-atures to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levelsand to pursue efforts to limit the temperatureincrease to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels….”
Language in the Decision
An identical paragraph relating to human
rights and the rights of indigenous peoplesappears in the preamble of the Decision.  There is also a preambular paragraph in the Decisionstating as follows:
Agreeing to uphold and promote regional 
and international cooperation in order tomobilize stronger and more ambitious climateaction by all Parties and non-Party stakehold-
ers, including civil society, the private sector,financial institutions, cities and other subna-tional authorities, local communities andindigenous peoples.
Paragraph 135 provides:
Recognizes the need to strengthen knowl-
edge, technologies, practices and efforts oflocal communities and indigenous peoplesrelated to addressing and responding to climate change, and establishes a platform
for the exchange of experiences and sharingof best practices on mitigation and adaptationin a holistic and integrated manner.
Going Forward
Without the presence of Indigenous Peoples’
representatives, the Agreement and Decisionwould have had no reference to IndigenousPeoples.  While the indigenous caucus did notachieve all that it sought, it did achieve some verysignificant references which can be built ongoing forward. The task facing IndigenousPeoples is to ensure that the provisions supportingtheir rights are implemented on the ground.
The Paris Agreement opened for signature on
April 22, 2016.  To mark the first day of that theAgreement was open to signing, the UN held asigning ceremony where world leaders and gov-ernment representatives signed the Agreementand were given the opportunity to deliver nationalcomments.  175 countries signed on April 22.Fifteen of the signers also ratified the Agreementthe same day and one more on the 29th.  In orderto enter into force, 55 countries that produce atleast 55% of the world’s greenhouse gas emis-sions must adopt the Agreement within their ownlegal systems through ratification, acceptance,approval, or accession.  These steps are beyondmere signing and will take more time to accomplish.  For the United States, signing the agreement will be done through executiveaction without Congressional approval. The State Department is currently going through this process, but has not announced a precisetimeline.NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 9NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
The Pamunkey Indian Tribe, located on the
Pamunkey Homeland in Virginia, has a rich andwell-documented history. Established no laterthan 1646, the Tribe’s Reservation is located nextto the Pamunkey River, and adjacent to KingWilliam County. The Reservation comprisesapproximately 1,200 acres and is the oldestinhabited Indian reservation in America. NARFhas represented the Tribe since the mid-1970sand in this effort since 1988; and now is co-coun-sel with former NARF attorney Mark Tilden.
In an historic day for the Pamunkey Indian
Tribe, on July 2, 2015, after decades of researchand participation in the federal acknowledgmentregulatory process, the Assistant Secretary –Indian Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interiorpublished a Final Determination acknowledgingthat the Tribe exists as an Indian tribe within themeaning of Federal law.  However, a request forreconsideration was filed by Stand Up forCalifornia! on October 6, 2015, with the IndianBoard of Indian Appeals (IBIA), an independentappellate review body within the Department’sOffice of Hearings and Appeals.  On January 28,2015, the Pamunkey Indian Tribe’s Final
Determination became effective as a result of theIBIA’s final dismissal of the request for reconsid-eration.  The IBIA ruled that Stand Up forCalifornia!, an organization that focuses on gam-bling issues affecting California, failed to showthat it is an “interested party” to the FinalDetermination within the meaning of the Federalacknowledgment regulations, and was thereforenot entitled to seek reconsideration of the FinalDetermination.Pamunkey Tribe’s federal recognition finalized
The Tribal Supreme Court Project is part of the
Tribal Sovereignty Protection Initiative and isstaffed by the National Congress of AmericanIndians (NCAI) and the Native American RightsFund (NARF). The Project was formed in 2001 inresponse to a series of U.S. Supreme Court casesthat negatively affected tribal sovereignty. Thepurpose of the Project is to promote greater coor-dination and to improve strategy on litigationthat may affect the rights of all Indian tribes. Weencourage Indian tribes and their attorneys tocontact the Project in our effort to coordinateresources, develop strategy and prepare briefs,especially at the time of the petition for a writ ofcertiorari, prior to the Supreme Court acceptinga case for review. You can find copies of briefs andopinions on the major cases we track on theNARF website (www.narf.org/sct/index.html). The Court has still not issued a decision in
Dollar General v. Mississippi Band of ChoctawIndians, and has not granted review in any new
Indian law cases for consideration next term.However, on April 19, 2016, the Court heard oralargument in U.S. v. Bryant, a challenge by theUnited States to the decision of the Ninth Circuit(in direct conflict with the Eighth and TenthCircuits) which held that it is constitutionallyimpermissible (violation of Sixth Amendmentright to counsel) to use uncounseled tribal courtconvictions to establish an element of the offenseas a habitual domestic violence offender in a sub-sequent prosecution under 18 U.S.C. § 117(a).Based on the limited questions from the Court(Thomas, Alito and Kagan did not ask any ques-tions), it appears that the Court should issue afavorable result for the United States and 
Tribal Supreme Court Project update 
PAGE 10                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDIndian tribes. The transcript is available at
http://sct.narf.org/ caseindexes/us_v_bryant.html. 
There are also no new developments on
President Obama’s nomination of Chief JudgeMerrick Garland, United States Court of Appealsfor the D.C. Circuit, to fill a vacancy on the Courtcreated by the sudden death of Justice AntoninScalia. The Republican leadership in the U.S.Senate has determined that the Senate JudiciaryCommittee will not hold any confirmation hear-ings prior to the November 2016 national elec-tions. Garland has a very limited record on issueseffecting Indian tribes, having only participatedin five Indian law cases during his tenure on theD.C. Circuit, authoring only two opinions. Hisvote against tribal interests in San Manuel v.
NLRB raises specific concerns for Indian tribes,
especially as the Court considers the petitionsfiled in Little River Band v. NLRB and Soaring
Eagle Casino v. NLRB. 
With the Court operating with eight Justices,
only a handful of petitions have been grantedreview next term thus far, and the issuance ofopinions has slowed with mainly unanimousopinions being announced. However, JusticeScalia’s absence will likely affect many of themajor cases currently pending before the Court.By way of reminder, if a tie vote (4-4) occursamong the Chief Justice and the other sevenremaining justices, there are several potentialoutcomes: (1) an evenly divided Court results inaffirmance of the lower court decision with noopinion issued by the Court; (2) the Court couldschedule the case for re-argument next term (inanticipation that Chief Judge Garland would be
confirmed by that time); or (3) the Court couldissue a decision on narrow or procedural groundsto avoid setting precedent.  
Indian Law Cases Decided by the Supreme Court
Nebraska v. Parker – On March 22, 2016, the
Court issued a unanimous (8-0) opinion writtenby Justice Thomas which affirmed the decisionsof the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuitand the U.S. District Court for the District ofNebraska which had held that an 1882 Act ofCongress did not diminish the Omaha IndianReservation. The State of Nebraska and theVillage of Pender had challenged whether theestablishments in Pender which serve alcoholicbeverages are subject to the Omaha Tribe’s liquorlicensing and tax regulations. The Court declinedthe invitation of the State and Village to departfrom its long-standing Solem test to evaluate
whether a surplus land act diminished a federalIndian reservation and to adopt a test of de facto
diminishment based on whether an area has lostits “Indian character.” The Court reiterated thefirst prong of the Solem test that only Congress
can diminish the boundaries of an Indian reser-vation and that its intent to do so must be clearfrom the statutory text and history. In this case,the Court found that the 1882 Act bore none ofthe textual “hallmarks of diminishment” and thehistory surrounding its passage does notunequivocally support a finding of diminishment.However, at the conclusion of the opinion, theCourt cited to City of Sherrill and stated:
“Because petitioners have raised only the singlequestion of diminishment, we express no viewabout whether equitable considerations of lachesand acquiescence may curtail the Tribe’s power totax the retailers of Pender in light of the Tribe’scentury-long absence from the disputed lands.” 
The Project worked closely with the attorneys
for the Omaha Tribe and prepared two amicusbriefs in support: (1) Amicus Brief of the NationalCongress of American Indians (joined by twointertribal organizations and twenty Indiantribes) focused on the negative impacts of a de
facto diminishment rule; and (2) Amicus Brief of
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 11NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDHistorical and Legal Scholars clarifying the legal
and historical circumstances surrounding treaty-making and allotment statutes. 
Sturgeon v. Masica – On March 22, 2016, the
Court issued a unanimous (8-0) opinion writtenby Chief Justice Roberts which vacated an Indian-law related decision of the U.S. Court of Appealsfor the Ninth Circuit which had held that theAlaska National Interest Lands Conservation Actof 1980 (ANILCA) did not prevent the NationalPark Service from imposing its generally applica-ble regulations on non-federal lands within con-servation system units in Alaska. The Court heldthat the Ninth Circuit’s interpretation was incon-sistent with both the text and context of ANILCA,but the Court declined to provide its own inter-pretation and remanded the case back to thelower courts for consideration of whether (1) theNation River qualifies as “public land” for pur-poses of ANILCA; (2) whether the Park Servicehas authority under ANILCA over both “public”and “non-public” lands within the boundaries ofconservation system units in Alaska. 
Menominee Indian Tribe Of Wisconsin v.
United States – On January 25, 2016, the Court
issued its decision in Menominee Indian Tribe v.
United States to resolve a conflict between the
U.S. Courts of Appeals for the DC Circuit and theFederal Circuit regarding the appropriate stan-dard for obtaining equitable tolling of the statuteof limitations for filing claims against the IndianHealth Service for unpaid contract support costs.In a unanimous (9-0) opinion written by JusticeAlito, the Court held that equitable tolling is notavailable to preserve contract claims that werenot timely presented to a federal contracting offi-cer because there were no extraordinary circum-stances beyond the tribe’s control. 
Background: On June 30, 2015, following the
recommendation of the United States to grantcert, the Court granted review of a decision by theU.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Colombiawhich held that the Tribe did not establish thenecessary grounds for obtaining equitable tollingof the statute of limitations for filing claimsagainst the Indian Health Service for unpaid con-tract support costs. The Tribe maintains that thisdecision is in direct conflict with the Federal
Circuit’s 2012 decision in Arctic Slope Native
Ass’n Ltd. v. Sebelius (ASNA). In its response, the
United States recommended that the Court grantcert to address “the uncertainty created by theFederal Circuit’s erroneous decision in ASNA—and the increasing volume of untimely claimsinspired by it—[which] have con-founded thegovernment’s attempts to achieve orderly resolu-tion of the ongoing litigation over tribal contractsupport costs. . . . This Court’s review is warrantedto resolve that conflict, as well as to ensure thatthe proper equitable tolling framework is appliedto Contract Disputes Act claims generally.” 
Petitions Granted 
United States v. Bryant – On April 19, 2016, the
Court heard oral argument on review of a peti-tion filed by the United States seeking reversal ofa decision by the U.S. Court of Appeals for theNinth Circuit which had held that tribal courtcriminal convictions for domestic violence maybe used in federal court prosecutions as a habitualoffender under 18 USC §117 only if the tribalcourt guarantees a right to counsel. The NinthCircuit concluded that it is constitutionallyimpermissible to use uncounseled convictions toestablish an element of the offense in a subse-quent prosecution under § 117(a), which createda direct conflict with the Eighth and TenthCircuits. The case presents an extremely impor-tant issue for the safety of Native victims ofdomestic violence, and raises the question ofindigent counsel in tribal court systems. 
The opening brief of the United States was filed
on January 28, 2016. The Project worked with theSolicitor General’s office and prepared three ami-cus briefs in support of the United States: (1)Amicus Brief of the National Congress ofAmerican Indians on discussing the reliability oftribal court decisions and deference to Congress;(2) Amicus Brief of the National IndigenousWomen’s Resource Center focused on the severeproblem of escalation of repeat domestic violenceoffenders; and (3) Amicus Brief of former U.S.Attorneys supporting the need for the habitualdomestic violence statute as an important prose-cutorial tool to protect Indian women and PAGE 12                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDchildren within Indian country. The response
brief was filed on March 7, 2016. Four amicusbriefs in support of respondent were filed: (1)Criminal Justice Organizations and Scholars; (2)National Association of Criminal DefenseLawyers; (3) Citizens Equal Rights Foundation;and (4) Professor Barbara Creel and The TribalDefender Network. 
Dollar General Corporation v. Mississippi Band
of Choctaw Indians – On December 7, 2015, the
Court heard oral argument in Dollar General v
Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians which chal-
lenges Tribal Court jurisdiction over tort claimsbrought by a tribal member against a non-Indiancorporation doing business on trust lands leasedfrom the Tribe. The Question Presented is:“Whether Indian tribal courts have jurisdiction toadjudicate civil tort claims against nonmembers,including as a means of regulating the conduct ofnonmembers who enter into consensual relation-ships with a tribe or its members.” During argu-ment, the scope of tribal inherent sovereignauthority over non-Indians and the source ofCongress’ authority over Indian affairs were takenup by the Court where at least four Justices open-ly questioned the protections in place for non-Indians in tribal courts, and the source ofCongress’ authority in these matters under theU.S. Constitution. It is difficult to discern fromoral argument how the Justices may vote and ulti-mately decide this case, but the outcome has sig-nificant implications for all of Indian country. 
Background: On June 15, 2015, contrary to the
recommendation of the U.S. Solicitor General todeny cert, the Court granted review. The DollarGeneral store is located on tribal trust land with-in the reservation. The store agreed to participatein a youth job training program operated by theTribe. A tribal member who participated in theyouth program and his parents brought an actionin Tribal court alleging that the young man wassexually assaulted by the store’s manager. TheSupreme Court of the Mississippi Band ofChoctaw Indians, the U.S. Federal District Courtfor the Southern District of Mississippi, and theU.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit had allupheld the Tribal Court’s jurisdiction over thetort claims against Dollar General. Petitioner Dollar General filed its opening brief
on August 31, 2015. Four amicus briefs were filedin support of Dollar General: (1) Amicus Brief ofthe State of Oklahoma (joined by Wyoming, Utah,Michigan, Arizona and Alabama); (2) AmicusBrief of the Association of American Railroads;(3) Amicus Brief of the Retail Litigation Center,Inc.; and (4) Amicus Brief of the South DakotaBankers’ Association. Dollar General and itsamici aggressively attack the fairness of tribalcourts and tribal law to non-Indians and are ask-ing the Court to ignore its precedent, reverse thelower courts, and establish either: (i) anOliphant -style civil jurisdiction rule ( i.e., no tribal
civil jurisdiction over non-Indians); or (ii) a rulethat Tribes have no civil jurisdiction over tortscommitted by non-Indians; or (iii) a rule requir-ing “express and unequivocal” consent by a non-Indian to the jurisdiction of the Tribal court orCongressional authorization of such jurisdiction. 
The Project worked closely with the attorneys
for the Tribe to develop and coordinate a robustamicus brief strategy in support of Tribal courtjurisdiction. The Tribe filed its response brief onOctober 15, 2015, and eight amicus briefs in sup-port of the Tribe were filed on October 22, 2015:(1) Amicus Brief of the United States; (2) AmicusBrief of the State of Mississippi (joined byColorado, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oregonand Washington); (3) Amicus Brief of NCAI(joined by USET, ITAA, CTAG, and 58 federally-recognized Indian tribes); (4) Amicus Brief ofNational American Indian Court JudgesAssociation (joined by numerous Tribal and Inter-tribal Court Systems); (5) Amicus Brief of theOklahoma Tribes; (6) Amicus Brief of theNational Indigenous Women’s Resource Center(joined by over 100 Domestic Violence and SexualAssault Organizations); (7) Amicus Brief ofHistorical and Legal Scholars; (8) Amicus Brief ofthe American Civil Liberties Union. Each amicusbrief is focused on its own unique message, withan overall presentation to the Court of the inher-ent nature of Tribal sovereignty and the scope ofTribal governing authority over non-Indianswithin the reservation. ❂NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 13NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNational Indian Law Library
Free Weekly 
Indian Law Updates
Each week, The National Indian Law
Library provides free updates on Indian lawthrough the Indian Law Bulletins.Researchers in the library uncover the lat-est legal developments and information rel-evant to Native Americans, including recentcases, legal news and scholarship, federallegislation, and regulatory action fromagencies and departments such as theEnvironmental Protection Agency, theBureau of Indian Affairs and theDepartment of Education.  The updates aredistributed via email, on our blog, and onthe NARF Facebook page.
To receive the Indian Law Bulletins by email,
please sign up through the NILL website:http://narf.org/nill/bulletins/index.html 
Free Searchable Database of Indian Law 
and News
Content from the Indian Law Bulletins is
archived on the NILL website each week, effec-tively creating a searchable database of NativeAmerican law and news.  To begin researching atopic, type your search term into the GoogleSearch box on the right side of the Indian LawBulletins page.  Topics include Child Welfare,Education, Economic Development, Environment& Energy, Land & Water, Recognition &Enrollment, and Sovereign Immunity. Yourresults will be organized under nine differenttabs that represent individual bulletins.  
Most cases, legislation and regulatory actions
are available in full-text.  Many news and lawreview articles are also available online.  If theitem you would like to see is not availableonline, you can use the Research Help link(http://www.narf.org/nill/asknill.html) to requestit from the library.Free Access to Tribal Codes and Constitutions
at our Tribal Law Gateway 
Find tribal law by name of tribe or search 
the Gateway using terms for law on a topic. Over 100 tribal codes and constitutions areavailable in full-text and content from over onehundred more are available by request. Justbrowse the detailed table of contents providedand use the askNILL request form to receive an
emailed copy of the content you need.  TheTribal Law Gateway is constantly being updatedand improved and we believe the best place to start if you are looking for tribal law. In aneffort to make the Gateway more practical, weare now adding audio clips to help with tribalname pronunciation on each individual tribalnation page.
Support the National Indian Law Library
Your contributions help ensure that the
library can continue to supply free access toIndian law resources and that it has the financialmeans necessary to pursue innovative andgroundbreaking projects to serve you better.Please visit http://www.narf.org/nill/donate.htmlfor more information on how you can supportthis mission. 
❂Justice Through Knowledge!
PAGE 14                                                                          NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Ak-Chin Indian Community
American Indian Youth Running Strong, Inc.
Asa’carsarmiut Tribal Council
Chickasaw Nation
Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians
First Nations Development Institute
Fond du Lac Band of Lake Superior Chippewa
Isleta Pueblo
Klamath Tribes
Mohegan Sun
National Indian Gaming AssociationNottawaseppi Huron Band of the Potawatomi
Poarch Band of Creek Indians
San Manuel Band of Mission Indians
San Pasqual Band of Mission Indians
Seminole Tribe of Florida
Seven Cedars Casino/Jamestown S’Klallam
Shakopee Mdewakanton Sioux Community
Suquamish Tribe
Tanana Chiefs Conference
Yavapai-Prescott Indian Tribe
Yoche Dehe Wintun NationIt has been made abundantly clear that non-
Indian philanthropy can no longer sustainNARF’s work.  Federal funds for specific projectshave also been reduced.  Our ability to providelegal advocacy in a wide variety of areas such asreligious freedom, the Tribal Supreme CourtProject, tribal recognition, human rights, trustresponsibility, tribal water rights, Indian ChildWelfare Act, and on Alaska tribal sovereigntyissues has been compromised.  NARF is nowturning to the tribes to provide this crucialfunding to continue our legal advocacy onbehalf of Indian Country.  It is an honor to listthose Tribes and Native organizations whomhave chosen to share their good fortunes withthe Native American Rights Fund and the thou-
sands of Indian clients we have served.  
The generosity of tribes is crucial in NARF’s
struggle to ensure the freedoms and rights of allNative Americans. Contributions from thesetribes should be an example for every NativeAmerican Tribe and organization. We encourageother Tribes to become contributors and partners with NARF in fighting for justice forour people and in keeping the vision of ourancestors alive. We thank the following tribesand Native organizations for their generous support of NARF for our 2016 fiscal year –October 1, 2015 to September 30, 2016:
CALLING TRIBES TO ACTIONNARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 15NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDTHE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF Annual Report: This is NARF’s major report on its programs 
and activities.  The Annual Report is distributed to foundations, majorcontributors, certain federal and state agencies, tribal clients, NativeAmerican organizations, and to others upon request. Ray RamirezEditor, ramirez@narf.org.  
The NARF Legal Review is published biannually by the Native 
American Rights Fund.  Third class postage paid at Boulder, Colorado.Ray Ramirez, Editor, ramirez@narf.org.  There is no charge for sub-scriptions, however, contributions are appreciated.
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund is a nonprofit, charitable
organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws of the District ofColumbia.  NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the provi-sions of Section 501 C (3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and contribu-tions to NARF are tax deductible.  The Internal Revenue Service hasruled that NARF is not a “private foundation” as defined in Section
509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Main Office: Native American Rights Fund, 1506 Broadway, Boulder,
Colorado  80302 (303-447-8760) (FAX 303-443-7776).  http://www.narf.org 
Washington, D.C. Office: Native American Rights Fund, 1514 P Street,
NW (Rear) Suite D, Washington, D.C. 20005 (202-785-4166) (FAX 202-822-0068).
Alaska Office: Native American Rights Fund, 745 W. 4th Avenue, Suite
502, Anchorage, Alaska 99501 (907-276-0680) (FAX 907-276-2466).
Workplace Campaigns: NARF is a member of America’s Charities, a
national workplace giving federation. Giving through your workplace isas easy as checking off NARF’s box, #10350 on the Combined FederalCampaign (CFC) pledge form authorizing automatic payroll deduction.  The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is the oldest and
largest nonprofit national Indian rights organization in the coun-try devoting all its efforts to defending and promoting the legalrights of Indian people on issues essential to their tribal sover-eignty, their natural resources and their human rights. NARFbelieves in empowering individuals and communities whoserights, economic self-sufficiency, and political participation havebeen systematically or systemically eroded or undermined. 
Native Americans have been subjugated and dominated.
Having been stripped of their land, resources and dignity, tribestoday are controlled by a myriad of federal treaties, statutes, andcase law. Yet it is within these laws that Native Americans placetheir hope and faith for justice and the protection of their way oflife. With NARF’s help, Native people can go on to provide leader-ship in their communities and serve as catalysts for just policiesand practices towards Native peoples nationwide. From a histori-cal standpoint Native Americans have, for numerous reasons,been targets of discriminatory practices.
Since its inception in 1970, NARF has represented over 250
Tribes in 31 states in such areas as tribal jurisdiction and recog-nition, land claims, hunting and fishing rights, the protection ofIndian religious freedom, and many others. In addition to thegreat strides NARF has made in achieving justice on behalf ofNative American people, perhaps NARF’s greatest distinguishingattribute has been its ability to bring excellent, highly ethicallegal representation to dispossessed tribes. NARF has been suc-cessful in representing Indian tribes and individuals in cases thathave encompassed every area and issue in the field of Indian law.The accomplishments and growth of NARF over the years con-firmed the great need for Indian legal representation on a nation-al basis. This legal advocacy on behalf of Native Americans con-tinues to play a vital role in the survival of tribes and their way oflife. NARF strives to protect the most important rights of Indianpeople within the limit of available resources. 
One of the initial responsibilities of NARF’s first Board of
Directors was to develop priorities that would guide the NativeAmerican Rights Fund in its mission to preserve and enforce thelegal rights of Native Americans.  The Committee developed fivepriorities that continue to lead NARF today:
• Preservation of tribal existence
• Protection of tribal natural resources• Promotion of Native American human rights• Accountability of governments to Native Americans• Development of Indian law and educating the public about
Indian rights, laws, and issuesUnder the priority of the preservation of tribal existence, NARF
works to construct the foundations that are necessary to empowertribes so that they can continue to live according to their Nativetraditions, to enforce their treaty rights, to insure their indepen-dence on reservations and to protect their sovereignty. 
Throughout the process of European conquest and coloniza-
tion of North America, Indian tribes experienced a steady dimin-ishment of their land base to a mere 2.3 percent of its originalsize.  Currently, there are approximately 55 million acres ofIndian-controlled land in the continental United States and about44 million acres of Native-owned land in Alaska.  An adequateland base and control over natural resources are central compo-nents of economic self-sufficiency and self-determination, and assuch, are vital to the very existence of tribes.  Thus, much ofNARF’s work involves the protection of tribal natural resources.
Although basic human rights are considered a universal and
inalienable entitlement, Native Americans face an ongoing threatof having their rights undermined by the United States govern-ment, states, and others who seek to limit these rights. Under thepriority of the promotion of human rights, NARF strives to
enforce and strengthen laws which are designed to protect therights of Native Americans to practice their traditional religion,to use their own language, and to enjoy their culture.  
Contained within the unique trust relationship between the
United States and Indian nations is the inherent duty for all levels of government to recognize and responsibly enforce themany laws and regulations applicable to Indian peoples.  Becausesuch laws impact virtually every aspect of tribal life, NARF main-tains its involvement in the legal matters pertaining to account-
ability of governments to Native Americans.
The coordinated development of Indian law and educating the
public about Indian rights, laws, and issues is essential for the
continued protection of Indian rights.  This primarily involvesestablishing favorable court precedents, distributing informationand law materials, encouraging and fostering Indian legal educa-tion, and forming alliances with Indian law practitioners andother Indian organizations. 
Requests for legal assistance should be addressed to the
Litigation Management Committee at NARF's main office, 1506Broadway, Boulder, Colorado 80302.  NARF’s clients are expected topay whatever they can toward the costs of legal representation. 
❂NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Moses Haia, Chairman .............................................................................................. Native Hawai ian
Robert McGhee, Vice-Chairman ........................................................ Poarch Band of Creek IndiansKurt BlueDog ...................................... Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate of the Lake Traverse ReservationTex G. Hall ........................................................................................................ Three Affil iated Tribes
Gary Hayes ………………………………………………………………. Ute Mountain Ute TribeJulie Roberts-Hyslop …………………………………………………… Native Village of TananaJefferson Keel .......................................................................................................... Chickas aw Nation
Stephen Lewis ……………………………………………………... Gila River Indian Community Anita Mitchell.......................................................................................................... Muckles hoot Tribe
Larry N. Olinger .................................................................. Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla IndiansRichard Peterson .................................................................................. Tlingit & Haida Indian TribesPeter Pino ………………………………………………………………………………. Zia PuebloMichael Smith ........................................................................................................ Chickasaw  Nation
Executive Director: John E. Echohawk .................................................................................. Pawnee
NARF LEGAL REVIEW • VOLUME 41, NO. 1 • WINTER/SPRING 2016Native American Rights Fund
1506 Broadway
Boulder, CO 80302Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage
PPAAIIDD
Boulder, Colorado
Permit No. 589
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER
