Rising from the center of the southeastern
Utah landscape and visible from every direc-tion are twin buttes so distinctive that in eachof the native languages of the region theirname is the same: Hoon’Naqvut, Shash Jáa,Kwiyagatu Nukavachi, Ansh An Lashokdiwe,or “Bears Ears.” For hundreds of generations,native peoples lived in the surrounding deepsandstone canyons, desert mesas, and mead-ow mountaintops, which constitute one ofthe densest and most significant culturallandscapes in the United States. Abundantrock art, ancient cliff dwellings, ceremonialsites, and countless other artifacts provide anextraordinary archaeological and culturalrecord that is important to us all, but mostnotably the land is profoundly sacred to manyNative American tribes, including the UteMountain Ute Tribe, Navajo Nation, UteIndian Tribe of the Uintah Ouray, HopiNation, and Zuni Tribe.
- Presidential Proclamation – Establishment
of the Bears Ears National Monument (Dec. 28, 2016) Bears Ears has been home to Native peoples since
time immemorial and is cherished by Native peo-ples for its cultural, spiritual, and archaeologicalimportance. Our presence, much in evidencetoday, covered the whole region and is manifestedin migration routes, ancient roads, great houses,villages, granaries, hogans, wickiups, sweatlodges, corrals, petroglyphs and pictographs, tipirings, and shade houses. Bears Ears containshundreds of thousands of objects of historic andscientific importance, many traditional culturalproperties, and many sacred sites.
VOLUME 42, NO. 2 SUMMER/FALL 2017NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Protecting Bears Ears National Monument
Protecting Bears Ears 
National Monument .............................. page 1
Case Updates .......................................... page 5National Indian Law Library .................. page 9Call to Action ........................................ page 10NARF .................................................... page 11NARF Board .......................................... page 12
Bears Ears Fall Sunset. Credit Tim PetersonTribes in the region continue to use the Bears
Ears region to collect plants, minerals, objects,and water for religious and cultural ceremoniesand medicinal purposes. Native people hunt, fish,and gather within Bears Ears, and they provideofferings and conduct ceremonies on the land. In fact, Bears Ears is so culturally and spirituallysignificant that some ceremonies use items that can only be harvested from Bears Ears. Bears Ears is in every way a home to the region’sNative people. 
Sadly, as they began planning to protect this
landscape to which they hold such a deep con-nection, many Native Americans in the area alsoexpressed a fear that speaking out about the significance of the land would lead to anotherloss–something else taken away from Native people. However, doing nothing was not anoption. Looting, vandalism, and developmentwere well underway. The desecration of theselands already was happening. Something had tobe done to protect what was left. 
In 2010, the grassroots nonprofit organization,
Utah Diné Bikéyah (UDB) was formed to helpcoordinate the Bears Ears Proposal, whichsought protections for the Bears Ears region.UDB spent the next several years developing acomprehensive cultural mapping of the area.
Using that information, detailed maps were prepared to show why 1.9 million acres should beset aside as a cultural landscape. Their workshowed that the Bears Ears landscape is one dis-crete unit, bound together in numerous ways,and blending perfectly with other protected federal and tribal lands. 
Around the same time, more tribes in the region
began to express their support for the Bears EarsProposal. The Hopi sent a letter of support, the UteMountain Ute Tribe, the Ute Indian Tribe, theHualapai Tribal Council, the Pueblo Council ofGovernors, and others expressed support for theBears Ears Proposal and the protection of the sacredlandscape. And, in late 2014, after a series of townhall meetings and open houses, the Bears EarsProposal won 64% of support from San JuanCounty residents. The San Juan CountyCommissioners, however, chose to adopt an alterna-tive proposal that received less than 1% of support.
In January 2015, the San Juan County commis-
sioners refused to work with UDB. So, tribal rep-resentatives contacted Utah Congressmen Bishopand Chafetz, explained their exclusion, andrequested to be included in RepresentativeBishop’s ongoing Public Land Initiative.Subsequently, in February, the San Juan CountyCommissioners did agree to a series of meetingwith the Navajo Nation, Ute Mountain Ute Tribe,and UDB. However, only one month later, the SanJuan Commissioners urged the Utah StateLegislature to pass HB 3931, which underminedthe Bears Ears Proposal by designating largeareas of the region as “Energy Zones” that wouldbe fast-tracked for grazing, energy, and mineraldevelopment. Although the meetings betweenthe county and Tribes did continue, they did notproduce any results. And, for the final meeting,tribal representatives were told that they did notneed to attend because the county commission-ers did not require any further information fromthem. A final proposal was adopted by the countycommissioners in August 2015, without inputfrom the Tribes.
Having been completely frozen out of the local
land management process, the Hopi Tribe, Navajo
PAGE 2                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Kids and Secretary Jewell at Bears Ears
Summer Gathering 2016. Credit Blake McCordVOLUME 42, NO. 2 PAGE 3NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNation, Ute Mountain Ute Tribe, Pueblo of Zuni,
and Ute Indian Tribe, formally united to createthe historic Bears Ears Inter-Tribal Coalition toprotect and preserve the homeland area they allcare so deeply about. This was the first time thata coalition of sovereign, Native tribes had workedtogether for land protections. The Coalition proposed a National Monument designation for1.9 million acres of ancestral land. With morethan 100,000 archaeological sites, 1.9 millionacres of land, and only one full-time law enforce-ment officer, the area represented the country’smost significant unprotected cultural landscape. 
In January 2016, Congressman Bishop released
his Public Land Initiative (PLI) that included pro-tection for 1.39 million acres of Bears Ears. Whileit did include land protections, it did not includetribal management of the area, which was a keytenet of the tribe’s Bears Ears Proposal. The BearsEars Inter-Tribal Coalition did not support thePLI for several reasons, but one of the reasonswas that the PLI Bill would have taken Ute triballand and given it to the state of Utah. The BearsEars Inter-Tribal Coalition continued to petitionfor their Bears Ears Proposal, and, in July 2016,federal officials, including Secretary of InteriorSally Jewell, met with Utah Governor Herbert’soffice and made an official visit to the Bears Earsregion. During that visit, Jewell attended a publicmeeting to hear comments from local residents.At that meeting, thousands of people attended,and more than 50 people commented. A majorityof attendees spoke in favor of the Bears Ears designation.
In December 2016, Congress adjourned without
voting on Bishop’s PLI. With this lack of legisla-tive action, President Obama released his BearsEars National Monument proclamation onDecember 28, 2016. The form of Obama’s monu-ment was a compromise between Bishop’s PublicLand Initiative and the Coalition’s Bears EarsProposal. At 1.35 million acres, the Monument’sboundaries were closely aligned to those of thePLI, but the proclamation also included a man-agement plan that empowered tribal leaders toprovide guidance and recommendations on careof their ancestral lands. The designation was theculmination of local activism, coordinated out-reach, and collaborative land-use management. 
President Obama proclaimed the Monument pur-
suant to his authority under the Antiquities Act,just as all presidents since Theodore Roosevelthad established national monuments. It was theculmination of more than six years of active efforton the part of five Native nations, local tribal people, and their allies to obtain protections for a region that is a sacred source of spiritual tradi-tions and place of origin.
On April 26, 2017, President Trump attacked 
this important designation. Trump signed anexecutive order directing Interior Secretary RyanZinke to conduct a review of the Bears EarsNational Monument to determine if it was createdwithout “public outreach and proper coordina-tion.” However, the suggestion that the monu-ment’s designation lacked outreach and coordi-nation is disingenuous. The Bears Ears NationalMonument was created after years of advocacyand many public meetings in the region and inWashington, DC. The effort to protect Bears Earswas very long, very public, and very robust. 
That lengthy process over many years, sits in
stark contrast to Secretary Zinke’s cursory 3-month review that introduced no new facts or
2016 Summer Gathering Sunray Tipi.
Credit Tim Petersonanalysis and completely ignored public senti-
ment. On August 24, 2017, Zinke submitted tothe White House recommendations to shrinkmonuments, including Bears Ears. DespiteZinke’s claim to be giving the people their voiceback, his recommendation to shrink the monu-ments ignored an outpouring of public supportfor Bears Ears and other monuments. More than95% of comments received by the Department ofthe Interior supported keeping the national mon-uments, including 65% of comments from Utahresidents. It did not matter. The only voices thatwere heard were those calling for increased devel-opment, increased exploitation, and reduced protections for a national treasure.
Now, President Trump sits with Zinke’s recom-
mendations in hand. However, the recommenda-tions are pointless. Although Trump has statedthat he will shrink the Monument, he does nothave the authority to take such action. Under theAntiquities Act, the president may create nationalmonuments. That is all. He or she may notdiminish or revoke existing monuments—onlyCongress has that ability. Beginning withTheodore Roosevelt, presidents have designatedmore than one hundred monuments throughoutour country. No president has ever previouslysought to abolish one by Executive Order becausethe Antiquities Act does not authorize the presi-dent to do so. If this unprecedented and unlawfulaction is allowed, the 129 national monumentsacross the United States will be at risk. The his-toric and cherished national monument systemwill be destabilized. Congress clearly did notintend for that result. It enacted the AntiquitiesAct to preserve America’s historic and scientificheritage for the benefit of current and future gen-erations. Congress reserved to itself the authori-ty to revoke or modify those monuments, andgranted the President only the power to createthem. The Native American Rights Fund (NARF)stands ready to defend that legal reality. NARFrepresents three of the five tribes in the Inter-Tribal Coalition—the Hopi Tribe, Pueblo of Zuni,and Ute Mountain Ute Tribe. 
Currently, members of Congress are trying to
push through legislation to give the president theauthority he seeks, ignoring standard legislativeprocedure as they maneuver bills through with-
out comment or debate. If the diminishment orabolishment of the Bears Ears NationalMonument is allowed to proceed, the Bears Earsarea will be subject to the devastating damage ofoil and gas drilling, uranium and potash mining,mineral exploration, uncontrolled off-road vehi-cle use, widespread vandalism and looting, andgrave robbing. Furthermore, invaluable archaeo-logical, paleontological, and faunal informationwill be lost to science and history. However,NARF is ready to fight for the Native nations whohave spent years to protect their sacred, ancestrallands and the millions of people who declaredtheir support for our national monuments. Wewill not allow the rights of our Native nations andour local people to be willfully pushed to the sidefor the benefit of corporate interests. We willstand firm for justice. ❂
PAGE 4                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Girl, Bears Ears Summer Gathering.
Credit Blake McCordVOLUME 42, NO. 2 PAGE 5NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDCASE UPDATES
With growing concerns over voter suppression
and voting rights violations, the Native AmericanRights Fund (NARF), along with partners fromthe Native American Voting Rights Coalition, willbe holding several field hearings in upcomingmonths across Indian Country. The goal of thehearings is to identify and document the obsta-cles indigenous voters continue to face. OnSeptember 5, the Coalition held its first hearingin Bismarck, ND.
The hearing, which included testimony from trib-
al members, elected officials, and communityadvocates, documented persistent suppression ofthe Native vote in the Midwestern region encom-passing North Dakota, South Dakota, Wyoming,and Montana. Testimony from the hearing identi-fied a number of barriers to equal voting rights—for example, unreasonably long distances to pollsand inability to access transportation keep Nativesfrom voting. Panelists also told of a distrust ofstate, county, and local officials as well as openhostility from poll workers. Additionally, uncer-tainty about voter eligibility due to recent lawchanges has chilled Native voting due to fear ofbeing turned away at the polls. As Jacqueline DeLeón, Voting Rights Fellow for the NativeAmerican Rights Fund explains, “Tribal membersshould not have to expend precious resources get-ting to distant polls all the while doubtingwhether or not they will be allowed to vote. I wasshocked by the wide range of arbitrary and unrea-sonable requirements that make NativeAmericans feel unwelcome or keep them fromvoting altogether. This is true voter suppression.”
In addition to systemic obstacles, testimonydetailed more specific examples like:
• Dismal conditions at reservation voting polling
locations, one of which included a dirt floorchicken coop that did not have restrooms.
• Restrictions on the number of voter registra-
tions that one can submit to the county clerk’soffice, requiring repeated trips to the office.
• County employees chastising organizers submit-
ting voter registrations for being a “nuisance”and “making more work” for the county office bysubmitting Native American registrations.
• Notifications sent to reservation residents that
incorrectly informed them they are no longerresiding in the district where they had regis-tered and failing to identify the correct district.
• Being turned away at the polls because a tribal
identification card did not include a street address.
• Poll workers who fell silent whenever a Native
American entered the polling location.
NARF plans a series of hearings all across Indian
Country to highlight these problems and findsolutions. If you have experienced challenges orbarriers to voting, or experienced voter intimida-tion or other suppressive tactics, but cannot makeit to one of NARF’s hearings, please email yourexperiences to vote@narf.org, and we will includethem in our growing record.Voting Rights Hearing Documents Voter Suppression
PAGE 6                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDCourt Rules No Compensation for Klamath Irrigators 
Due To Superior Tribal Rights
On September 29, U.S. Court of Claims Judge
Marian Blank Horn resoundingly re-affirmed thesuperiority of the senior water rights of theKlamath Tribes and downriver Klamath Basintribes over other water interests in the KlamathBasin.
In the case, the Klamath Reclamation Project
irrigators sought nearly $30 million in compen-sation from the United States governmentbecause of the Bureau of Reclamation’s curtail-ment of Project water deliveries during a severedrought in 2001. The irrigators argued that thegovernment’s actions constituted a “taking” oftheir property under the Fifth Amendment to theUnited States’ Constitution, by depriving them oftheir alleged rights to use Klamath Project water.In accordance with briefs filed by the NativeAmerican Rights Fund (NARF) on behalf of theKlamath Tribes, the court denied the irrigators’claims, ruling the irrigators were not legally enti-tled to receive any Project water in 2001, becausethe water was needed to fulfill the senior waterrights of the tribes. Klamath Tribes ChairmanDon Gentry stated, “We are pleased with the deci-sion. This affirmation of the Tribes’ water rightsshould be another positive step towards the heal-ing and restoration of our tribal treaty fisheries.”NARF Staff Attorney Sue Noe noted, “The Projectirrigators took the position that the tribal waterrights were irrelevant to their claims. Thankfully,the Court has made clear that the days of juniorwater users ignoring the senior tribal rights is over.”In 2001, a massive drought struck California and
Oregon’s Klamath River Basin. During thedrought, the United States government followedfederal and Oregon law, which required thatwater levels be maintained to protect imperiledcoho salmon in the Klamath River and twospecies of sucker fish in the Upper Klamath Lake.The sucker fish, known in the Klamath languageas c’waam (Lost River suckers) and qapdo (short-nose suckers), are of enormous importance to thecultural, economic, and spiritual well-being ofthe Klamath Tribes. Salmon, historically animportant treaty resource for the Klamath Tribes,have been blocked by dams from reaching theUpper Klamath Basin since the early 1900s.
The Klamath Tribes have resided in the Klamath
Basin for millennia, sustaining themselves uponthe Basin’s fish and other water-dependentresources. In an 1864 treaty with the UnitedStates, the Klamath Tribes relinquished millionsof acres of their aboriginal homeland butretained, among other things, a guarantee oftheir right to take fish in the Klamath IndianReservation’s streams and lakes. The KlamathTribes’ water rights have been previously con-firmed to hold a “time immemorial” priority date,which makes them senior to all other waterrights in the Basin. The seniority of these tribalwater rights has been repeatedly and consistentlyrecognized by the courts and, more recently, thisseniority was again recognized by the State ofOregon in its Klamath Basin Adjudication. JudgeHorn’s decision confirmed yet again the seniorityof the rights and their superiority under theWestern water law doctrine of prior appropriationin which water users with junior rights are notentitled to receive any water until all seniorrights have been fully satisfied—first in time,first in right. “A ruling for the junior Project irri-gators would have turned Western water law onits head,” declared Noe.
VOLUME 42, NO. 2 PAGE 7NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
The Tribal Supreme Court Project is part of the
Tribal Sovereignty Protection Initiative and isstaffed by the National Congress of AmericanIndians and the Native American Rights Fund.The Project was formed in 2001 at the request ofa number of tribes, in response to a series of U.S.Supreme Court cases that negatively affectedtribal sovereignty. The purpose of the Project isto promote greater coordination and to improvestrategy on litigation that may affect the rights ofall Indian tribes. We encourage Indian tribes andtheir attorneys to contact us in our effort to coor-dinate resources, develop strategy and preparebriefs, especially at the time of the petition for awrit of certiorari , prior to the Supreme Court
accepting a case for review. You can find copies ofbriefs and opinions on the major cases we trackon our website (https://sct.narf.org). 
On Monday, September 25, 2017, the Court held
its long conference, during which the Justicesconsidered nearly two-thousand petitions filedduring its summer recess. Included among themwere four Indian law petitions pending before thecourt: Washington State Department of
Licensing v. Cougar Den (tax), Hackford v. Utah
(reservation diminishment), Upstate Citizens For
Equality v. United States (tribal trust land acqui-
sition), and Williams v. Poarch Band of Creek
Indians (sovereign immunity). On October 2,
2017, the Court held its first session, marking thebeginning of October Term 2017 (OT17). At thattime, the Court issued orders denying review in
Hackford v. Utah and Williams v. Poarch Band ofCreek Indians. It also rescheduled consideration
of the Upstate Citizens for Equality v. UnitedStates petition for its October 6 conference, andcalled for the views of the Solicitor General(CVSG) in Washington State Dep’t of Licensing v.
Cougar Den.
On October 10, 2017, the Court issued an order
list from its October 6 conference, where threeIndian law petitions were considered: UpstateCitizens for Equality v. United States, its sistercase Town of Vernon v. United States (tribal trust
land acquisition), and French v. Starr (tribal
court jurisdiction). It denied review in French v.
Starr , and held over consideration of the two
other petitions.
The October Term 2017 is shaping up to be a
potentially significant one for Indian law. In addi-tion to being the first full term of AssociateJustice Neil Gorsuch, a number of pending peti-tions involve important Indian law issues, as wellas subjects the Court has not addressed in a longtime, such as treaty rights (Washington v. UnitedStates) and Indian reserved water rights(Coachella Valley Water District v. Agua CalienteBand of Cahuilla Indians, and its sister caseDesert Water Agency v. Agua Caliente Band ofCahuilla Indians).Tribal Supreme Court Project
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDPetitions for a Writ of Certiorari Granted
Patchak v. Zinke – On May 1, 2017, the Court
granted review of a petition filed by DavidPatchak, a non-Indian landowner seeking reviewof a decision by the U.S. Court of Appeals for theD.C. Circuit, which upheld the Gun Lake TrustLand Reaffirmation of 2014. That statute reaf-firmed the Department of the Interior’s decisionto take the land in question into trust for the GunLake Tribe and removed jurisdiction from thefederal courts over any actions relating to thatproperty. Mr. Patchak, who had previously suc-cessfully argued before the Supreme Court in2012 that he had prudential standing to bring anAdministrative Procedure Act action and aCarcieri challenge to the acquisition of trust landfor the benefit of the Match-E-Be-Nash-She-Wish
Band of Pottawatomi Indians/Gun Lake Tribe,argues that the statute is unconstitutional. TheCourt has granted review of Question 1 present-ed in the petition for cert:
Petitioner filed a lawsuit challenging the
Department of Interior’s authority to take intotrust a tract of land (“the Bradley Property”) nearPetitioner’s home. In 2009, the District Courtdismissed his lawsuit on the ground thatPetitioner lacked prudential standing. After theCourt of Appeals reversed the District Court, thisCourt granted review and held that Petitioner has
standing, sovereign immunity was waived, andhis “suit may proceed.” Match-E-Be-Nash-She-Wish Band of Pottawatomi Indians v. Patchak,132 S.Ct. at 2199, 2203 (2012) (“Patchak I”).While summary judgment briefing was underwayin the District Court following remand from thisCourt, Congress enacted the Gun Lake Act—astandalone statute which directed that any pend-ing (or future) case “relating to” the BradleyProperty “shall be promptly dismissed,” but didnot amend any underlying substantive or proce-dural laws. Following the statute’s directive, theDistrict Court entered summary judgment forDefendant, and the Court of Appeals affirmed.
1. Does a statute directing the federal courts to
“promptly dismiss” a pending lawsuit follow-ing substantive determinations by the courts(including this Court’s determination that the“suit may proceed”)—without amendingunderlying substantive or procedural laws—violate the Constitution’s separation of powersprinciples?
Mr. Patchak filed his brief in July 2017 and the
United States and the Tribe filed their responsebriefs on September 11, 2017. The case will beargued on November 7, 2017. ❂
PAGE 8                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNational Indian Law Library
Providing personal research assistance
Each year, the librarians at the National IndianLaw Library (NILL) respond to informationrequests from individu-als and groups through-out Indian Country,Washington, DC, and allfifty states. In Fiscal Year2017, NILL ’s librariansanswered approximately850 research questionsfrom the public, includ-ing tribal officials, stateand federal governmentofficials, attorneys, jour-nalists, students, acade-mics and individualsresearching personal legal issues. NILL is theonly library serving the public with extensiveexpertise and resources relating to Indian law,providing services that other tribal and publiclibraries are unable to provide.
Some recent research projects include:
• Locating sample tribal-state Memorandums of
Understanding regarding child welfare for atribal official
• Assisting a law student with accessing Court of
Claims documents for a research paper
• Researching tribal employment and contract-
ing laws for a recruiting start-up company
• Helping an educator locate information on the
history and relationship of American Indiansand national parks
• Providing literature and sample constitutions
to a tribe working to revise their own consti-tution
Delivering self-help resources via our website
The NILL website has about 20,000 visitors and45,000 page visits each month. Using our IndianLaw Research Guides (https://www.narf.org/nill/
resources) on topics such as tribal enrollmentand indigenous peacemaking, many patrons are able to find answers to their questions on their own. In addition, our Tribal LawGateway (https://www.narf.org/nill/triballaw)puts researchers in touch with tribal lawresources available on our website and else-where. Our library catalog (http://nill.softlinkliberty.net/liberty) allows patrons to access NILLmaterials online or by requesting a copy of printmaterials. 
Keeping Researchers up-to-date with our Indian
Law BulletinsNILL provides free updates on Indian lawthrough the Indian Law Bulletins. Five thou-sand patrons receive the free weekly updates byemail, while others access them through theNILL blog or NARF’s Facebook page. The IndianLaw Bulletins are the only regularly publishedupdates on Indian law covering tribal courts,federal and state courts, federal agencies, U.S.legislation, law review articles, and news.
To receive the Indian Law Bulletins by email,
please sign up through the NILL website athttps://www.narf.org/nill/bulletins
Support the National Indian Law Library
Your contributions help ensure that the librarycan continue to supply free access to Indian lawresources and that it has the financial meansnecessary to pursue innovative and ground-breaking projects to serve you better. We are nottax-supported and rely on individual contribu-tions to fund our services. Please visithttps://www.narf.org/nill/donate for more infor-mation on how you can support this mission.
Connecting Researchers with Resources
VOLUME 42, NO. 2 PAGE 9NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Library Director
David SeldenPAGE 10                                                                          NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Aleut Community of St. Paul Island
AMERIND Risk 
Chickasaw Nation
Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma
Comanche Nation 
Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians 
Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation 
Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe of Indians 
Gila River Indian Community
Kenaitze Indian Tribe
Keweenaw Bay Indian Community
Little Traverse Bay Bands of Odawa Indians
Muckleshoot Indian Tribe
National Indian Gaming Association
Nottawaseppi Huron Band of the Potawatomi Indians
Pauma Band of Mission Indians
Pechanga Band of Luiseño IndiansPenobscot Indian Nation 
Poarch Band of Creek Indians
Ponca Tribe of Nebraska
Pueblo of Acoma 
Pueblo of Isleta
Quinault Indian Nation 
Sac and Fox Nation
San Manuel Band of Mission Indians
Seminole Tribe of Florida
Seven Cedars Casino/Jamestown S'Klallam
Shakopee Mdewakanton Sioux Community
Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate of Lake Traverse Reservation 
Soboba Band of Luiseno Indians
Southern Ute Indian Tribe 
Tulalip Tribes
White Earth Nation 
Yocha Dehe Wintun NationIt has been made abundantly clear that non-
Indian philanthropy can no longer sustainNARF’s work. Federal funds for specific projectshave also been reduced. Our ability to providelegal advocacy in a wide variety of areas such asreligious freedom, the Tribal Supreme CourtProject, tribal recognition, human rights, trustresponsibility, tribal water rights, Indian ChildWelfare Act, and Alaska tribal sovereignty issuesis compromised. NARF is now turning to thetribes to provide this crucial funding to contin-ue our legal advocacy on behalf of IndianCountry. It is an honor to list those tribes andNative organizations who have chosen to sharetheir good fortunes with the Native AmericanRights Fund and the thousands of Indian clients
we have served. 
The generosity of tribes and Native organiza-
tions is crucial in NARF’s struggle to ensure thefreedoms and rights of all Native Americans.These contributions should be an example forall. We encourage other tribes and organizationsto become contributors and partners with NARF in fighting for justice for our people andin keeping the vision of our ancestors alive. We thank the following tribes and Native organizations for their generous support ofNARF for the 2017 fiscal year (October 1, 2016to September 30, 2017):
CALL TO ACTIONVOLUME 42, NO. 2  PAGE 11NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDTHE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF Annual Report: This is NARF's major report on its programs
and activities. The Annual Report is distributed to foundations, majorcontributors, certain federal and state agencies, tribal clients, NativeAmerican organizations, and to others upon request. 
NARF Legal Review is published biannually by the Native American
Rights Fund. Third class postage paid at Boulder, Colorado. There is nocharge for subscriptions, however, contributions are appreciated.
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund is a nonprofit, charitable
organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws of the District ofColumbia. NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the provi-sions of Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and contribu-tions to NARF are tax deductible. The Internal Revenue Service hasruled that NARF is not a "private foundation" as defined in Section509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.Boulder, CO (Main) Office:
1506 Broadway, Boulder, CO 80302-6217(303)-447-8760; FAX (303)-443-7776 www.narf.org 
Washington, DC Office: 
1514 P Street, NW (Rear) Suite D, Washington, DC 20005-1910(202) 785-4166; FAX (202) 822-0068
Anchorage, AK Office:
745 W. 4th Avenue, Suite 502, Anchorage, AK 99501-1736(907) 276-0680; FAX (907) 276-2466The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is the oldest and
largest nonprofit law firm defending and promoting the legalrights of Indian people on issues essential to their tribal sover-eignty, their natural resources, and their human rights. NARFempowers individuals and communities whose rights, economicself-sufficiency, and political participation have been eroded orundermined. 
The United States has tried to subjugate and dominate Native
peoples, yet we still exist today as independent quasi-sovereignnations, each having a unique relationship with the federal gov-ernment. Tribes today are governed by a myriad of federaltreaties, statutes, and case law. Yet it is within these laws thatNative Americans place their hope and faith for justice and theprotection of their way of life. 
Since its inception in 1970, NARF has represented over 250
tribes in 31 states in such areas as tribal jurisdiction and recog-nition, land claims, hunting and fishing rights, the protection ofIndian religious freedom, and many others. In addition to greatstrides achieving justice on behalf of Native American people,perhaps NARF’s greatest distinguishing attribute has been itsability to bring high quality, highly ethical legal representationto dispossessed tribes. This legal advocacy continues to play avital role in the survival of tribes and their way of life. NARFstrives to protect the most important rights of Indian peoplewithin the limit of available resources. 
One of the responsibilities of NARF’s first Board of Directors was
to develop priorities to guide the organization in its mission topreserve and enforce the legal rights of Native Americans. Thecommittee developed five priorities that continue to lead NARFtoday:
• Preserve tribal existence
• Protect tribal natural resources• Promote Native American human rights• Hold governments accountable to Native Americans• Develop Indian law and educate the public about Indian rights,
laws, and issues
Under the priority to preserve tribal existence, NARF works to
construct the foundations that are necessary to empower tribesso that they can continue to live according to their Native tradi-tions, to enforce their treaty rights, to insure their independenceon reservations, and to protect their sovereignty. Throughout the process of European conquest and colonization
of North America, Indian tribes experienced a steady diminish-ment of their land base to a mere 2.3 percent of its original size.An adequate land base and control over natural resources arecentral components of economic self-sufficiency and self-deter-mination, and are vital to the very existence of tribes. Thus,much of NARF’s work involves protecting tribal naturalresources. 
Although basic human rights are considered a universal and
inalienable entitlement, Native Americans face the ongoingthreat of having their rights undermined by the United Statesgovernment, states, and others who seek to limit these rights.Under the priority of promoting human rights, NARF strives toenforce and strengthen laws which are designed to protect therights of Native Americans to practice their traditional religion,to use their own language, and to enjoy their culture. 
Contained within the unique trust relationship between the
United States and Indian nations is the inherent duty for all lev-els of government to recognize and responsibly enforce themany laws and regulations applicable to Indian peoples. Becausesuch laws impact virtually every aspect of tribal life, NARF main-tains its involvement in the legal matters holding governmentsaccountable to Native Americans.
A commitment to develop Indian law and educate the public
about Indian rights, laws, and issues is essential for the contin-ued protection of Indian rights. This primarily involves estab-lishing favorable court precedents, distributing information andlaw materials, encouraging and fostering Indian legal education,and forming alliances with Indian law practitioners and otherIndian organizations. 
Requests for legal assistance should be addressed to the
Litigation Management Committee at NARF's main office at1506 Broadway, Boulder, CO 80302. NARF’s clients are expectedto pay whatever they can toward the costs of legal representa-tion. 
❂NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Moses Haia, Chairman .............................................................................................. Native Hawai ian
Robert McGhee, Vice-Chairman ........................................................ Poarch Band of Creek IndiansKurt BlueDog ...................................... Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate of the Lake Traverse ReservationTex G. Hall ........................................................................................................ Three Affil iated Tribes
Gary Hayes...................................................................................................... Ute Mountain Ut e Tribe
Julie Roberts-Hyslop...................................................................................... Native Village of Tan ana
Jefferson Keel .......................................................................................................... Chickas aw Nation
Stephen R. Lewis.................................................................................. Gila River Indian Community Anita Mitchell.......................................................................................................... Muckles hoot Tribe
Larry N. Olinger .................................................................. Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla IndiansRichard Peterson .................................................................................. Tlingit & Haida Indian TribesPeter M. Pino .................................................................................................................. .... Zia Pueblo
Michael C. Smith .................................................................................................... Chickasaw Nation
Executive Director: John E. Echohawk .................................................................................. Pawnee
NARF LEGAL REVIEW • VOLUME 42, NO. 2 • SUMMER/FALL 2017Native American Rights Fund
1506 Broadway
Boulder, CO 80302Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage
PPAAIIDD
Boulder, Colorado
Permit No. 589
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER
