PeruAugust 1996Vol. 8, No. 5 (B)PERUPRESUMPTIONOF GUILTHumanRights Violations and the Faceless Courts in PeruI. SUMMARY ANDRECOMMENDATIONSSummaryThe incarceration of hundreds of innocentprisoners charged or convicted of terrorist crimes they did not commitis now an open secret in Peru. While there may be disagreement about thenumbers unjustly prosecuted by Peru's "faceless courts," no one in Peru,including the architect of the court system, President Alberto Fujimori,denies that the problem exists. Those caught up in the system are presumedguilty and have minimal opportunities to demonstrate their innocence. Inrecent years, the Minister of Justice, the former prosecutor for terrorism,Fujimori himself, and many lawmakers have proposed the creation of specialmechanisms such as a review commission to remedy defects in the trials,at least in those cases where there are compelling reasons to believe inthe defendant's innocence. Yet nothing has been done to establish any suchmechanism. In the meantime, faceless military and civilian courts, conductingsecret trials behind prison walls, continue to sentence Peruvians to decadesof imprisonment in life-threatening conditions without offering them thebasic judicial process guarantees required by international human rightslaw.Extrajudicial executions and disappearancesby Peru's military and police have been dramatically reduced in the pastthree years, demonstrating the effectiveness of international pressureover a government which was officially engaging in these atrocities. Thisis a welcome development, even if the arbitrary deprivation of life bythe authorities has simply been supplanted by the arbitrary denial of liberty.Nonetheless, violent state-sponsored abuse continues as police regularlyengage in torture as an interrogation tool; a practice which is facilitatedby lengthy periods of police detention allowed under anti-terrorism proceduresand by routine acceptance of coerced confessions as evidence in the facelesscourts.Torture is not only practiced in casesinvolving terrorism. This was vividly brought home by the death in custodyof student Jhoel Huamán García in Cerro de Pasco on May 26,1995, and of engineer Mario Jesús Palomino Garcia, in Breña,Lima, on March 22, 1996. Both were arrested arbitrarily in the street bypolice, taken to police stations, and reportedly beaten to death. In bothcases, relatives of the victims and human rights groups have been physicallyattacked and received death threats after pressing for criminal investigations.On February 18, 1996, three masked men broke into the home of Dr. EdithLuquillas González, a member of the Committee for the Defense ofHuman Rights in Pasco working on the Huamán case, and threatenedher sisters who were alone in the house at the time. Shortly before theattack, one of the officers accused of Huamán's murder had beenreleased from prison. Enrique Palomino, a brother of Mario Palomino, hadhis home shot up in March 1996; and on April 11 men with military-stylehaircuts tried unsuccesfully to break in.Although the inflicting of physical abuseis outlawed in Peru, torture-the intentional infliction of severe painby a government agent or with that agent's acquiescence-is not specificallypenalized, as required by the United Nations Convention Against Tortureand Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment and Punishment, which Peruhas ratified. The scandal caused by these recent torture deaths led toseveral parliamentary proposals for a law specifically criminalizing torture.On April 11, 1996, Popular Christian Party congressman Antero Flores Aráozintroduced a bill which provides a minimum twenty-year sentence for thoseresponsible for causing death by torture. The bill had not passed committeestage at the time of writing.Meanwhile, the violence and terrorist tacticsemployed by armed opposition groups in Peru-predominantly by the now-dividedShining Path-continue to rob Peruvians of their most fundamental humanright: the right to life. According to the National Coordinating Committeefor Human Rights (Coordinadora Nacional de Derechos Humanos, hereinafterthe Coordinadora), a respected umbrella group of non-governmental humanrights organizations, Shining Path was responsible for 222 selective assassinationsin 1995, considerably more than the 173 cases documented in 1994. Theseviolations of basic international humanitarian standards far outnumberthose committed by the Peruvian military and police. Whatever effect thehuman rights movement has had in improving the climate of respect for humanrights in Peru in the last few years, none of it has influenced the behaviorof theShining Path. The calculated cruelty which has characterized theShining Path's ideology and strategy throughout the conflict is deeplyrepugnant and in direct contradiction to international humanitarian law.President Fujimori set up the facelesscourts shortly after closing the Congress and placing the judiciary underexecutive control on April 5, 1992. Although many steps have been takenin the intervening years to restore some aspects of a balance of power,Peru's democratic institutions are far weaker today than four years ago.Of particular concern is the continued failure to assure the basic independenceof the judiciary. Outside of Lima, all of Peru's judges and prosecutorscontinue to serve on a provisional basis, subject to the whims of the executive.Recent steps to reorganize the judiciary further undermine its independence.The only bright spots in the recovery of democratic institutions in thelast year have been the long delayed appointment of the Defensor del Pueblo,or Human Rights Ombudsman and the reactivation, after a suspension of morethan three years, of the Court of Constitutional Guarantees (Tribunalde Garantías Constitucionales), the ultimate arbiter of constitutionaldisputes. Human Rights Watch/Americas believes the Human Rights Ombudsmancan play a crucial role in helping to generate a new climate of respectfor human rights in Peru, although his power to do so has been restrictedby a limited budget and authority.As President Fujimori initiates the secondyear of his second term in office, we urge him to commit his governmentto redress the injustice he himself has acknowledged. Two steps are vitalto bring to an end the extraordinary anti-terrorism measures which he hadalways vowed would be temporary. Fujimori should align his government behinda reform of anti-terrorist legislation to restore full due process rightsand to establish an independent commission to redress the wrongs visitedon defendants by the faceless courts. In addition, President Fujimori shoulddemonstrate a commitment to allowing the reestablishment of a judicialpower which will act as a check on political power.Several government spokespersons have announcedto the international community that the process of reviewing terrorismand treason cases is already underway, although there is no evidence thatany action has been taken. The note verbale presented by the PermanentMission of Peru to the United Nations office in Geneva on August 12, 1994,during the 46th Session of the U.N. Sub-Commission on the Prevention ofDiscrimination and Protection of Minorities, stated that Peru's Congresshad already passed a law submitted by the executive creating a commissionto review cases. This was false: almost two years later Congress stillhas not passed any such law.In a similar vein, Justice Minister CarlosHermoza Moya stated, in his address to the President of the United NationsCommission of Human Rights, at its 52nd Period of Sessions in Geneva (March18-April 26, 1996), that "...[t]he government is reviewing those trialsof citizens in which there may have been errors in the appreciation ofthe crimes of which they were accused or in the evidence presented. Allbecause pacification requires a propitious climate for a true nationalreconciliation."More recently, in an interview in Washington,D.C. in May this year, President Fujimori said, "We recognize that sucha situation exists and we are doing all we can. We would like to have amechanism soon to allow us to bring justice to those who are unjustly indetention. We don't doubt that such people exist..."Such statements appear to be geared forexternal consumption, where criticism of the faceless court system hasbeen persistent. Meanwhile, the faceless courts which gave rise to theinjustices in the first place continue to function, despite governmentpromises last year to return terrorist cases to ordinary courts. Inevitably,the faceless courts will generate more cases. Unless action is taken soon,the numbers of innocents imprisoned will continue to grow, and they arealready scandalously high.According to a 1994 census conducted byPeru's National Penitentiary Institute (INPE), 5,003 individuals are currentlyin prison either charged or convicted of treason or terrorism (the twocategories under which politically-motivated crimes are catalogued), justunder one quarter of the total prison population. Sixty-six percent ofthese prisoners are officially described as belonging to the CommunistParty of Peru - Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso),and ten percentto the much smaller Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MovimientoRevolucionario Túpac Amaru, MRTA). The remaining twenty-fourpercent are described as having "undetermined" affiliation, which evidentlymeans that they belong to neither of the above groups. Within prison walls,authorities carefully segregate those prisoners considered to be withoutaffiliation from those of known militancy. It is reasonable to assume thatthe category defined in the statistics as "undetermined" corresponds roughlywith the number of prisoners who are innocent or who collaborated withthe guerrillas against their will. The Coordinadora is assisting with thelegal defense of 607 prisoners they consider to be innocent. However, theyare convinced that there are many cases of possibly innocent detaineesfor which they have no information. Allowing for human error in assessingprobable innocence and for undetected cases, the number of innocent prisonerscould scarcely be less than 500, and it may be considerably higher.Section IV of this report is devoted toan account of the arrest and trials of sixteen prisoners who appear tohave been unjustly convicted. We have selected the cases to illustratedifferent due process violations associated with the counter-terroristtrials. Procedures in both the secret military tribunals which try casesof treason (traición a la patria), and the civilian facelesscourts which try terrorism cases violate elementary international due processobligations. We have analyzed these violations in detail in earlier reports.The cases described here include people tortured into incriminating themselveswhile held incommunicado, or falsely incriminated by others who were themselvestortured or coerced, or who volunteered false information maliciously orthoughtlessly. All of these defendants were prevented by law from questioningtheir accusers. Often they were simply the victims of verdicts reachedwithout a careful consideration of the evidence presented, or where therehad been no effort made to confirm unsubstantiated allegations.We are disturbed by the view commonly expressedby government officials that due process restrictions are a necessary priceto pay to deal effectively with terrorism. Some variant of this argument,that it is impossible to make an omelette without breaking eggs, is usedby governments of every hue to justify human rights violations. Certainlygovernments are obliged to protect citizens against arbitrary violence.But it is self-defeating, as well as immoral, to arbitrarily deprive innocentcitizens of their liberty as a collateral cost of achieving that aim. Moreover,even those who participated in heinous crimes are entitled to due processunder international human rights treaties ratified by Peru.The human stories which lie behind thecases documented in this report are tragic and compelling: the odysseyof relatives through the cold and unfamiliar world of the courts; the searchfor money to pay a lawyer often reluctant to take on a case which carrieswith it a powerful stigma in today's Peru; the lawyers who prove corruptor incapable; the race against time to track down witnesses and collecttestimonies; the abandoned wives, husbands, and children; the broken careers,reputations, and friendships; the draconian prison regimen which must beendured for years even by those who are eventually acquitted; and aboveall, the wounding experience of being treated arbitrarily like a criminaland an enemy.RecommendationsHuman Rights Watch/Americas makes the followingrecommendations to the government of Peru:* The governmentshould establish an independent judicial review board to examine the sentencesof all persons currently imprisoned under DL 25475 (the terrorism law)and DL 25659 (the treason law), giving priority to cases where there arestrong indications of innocence, including those cases documented in thisreport.* The judicialreview board should establish criteria for the evaluation of evidence andreject verdicts based on testimony by repented guerrillas or other witnesseswhich has not been independently corroborated during the trial. All evidencegathered by torture should be dismissed.* The boardshould be empowered to recommend the reduction of penalties which are disproportionatein relation to the gravity of the offense as well as to reverse the convictionsof those imprisoned without credible evidence against them.* Immediatesteps must be taken to end the use of torture. Peru's criminal code shouldbe reformed to specifically criminalize torture and assign stiff penalties.Those who engage in torture should be prosecuted and punished. Judges shouldbe prevented by law from accepting as evidence statements made under torture.* The governmentshould end military jurisdiction over civilians, reform the anti-terroristlaw, and ensure that the principle of judicial accountability is respectedby abolishing the faceless courts, and ensuring that terrorism trials arepublic. Until that objective is accomplished, the government should takethe following measures as a matter of urgency:* restorethe power of the examining judge to order the release of the suspect whenthe judge is convinced that there are no grounds for prosecution, withoutit being necessary for the defendant to remain in prison until the decisionhas been ratified by the full court;* in caseswhich will proceed to trial, restore the capacity of the judge to determinewhether detainees should be remanded in custody or be allowed to attendtheir trial at liberty, as provided for in the International Covenant onCivil and Political Rights (Article 9[3]) and the American Convention onHuman Rights (Article 7[5]);* releaseimmediately persons declared innocent by a military judge, or on appealby the Consejo de Guerra. To keep them incarcerated until the verdict isconfirmed by the Supreme Council of Military Justice constitutes arbitraryimprisonment;* ensure thatjudges, rather than police, determine the circumstances in which detaineesare held incommunicado. Judges must strictly supervise incommunicado detentionto prevent ill-treatment and should impose incommunicado detention onlywhen strictly necessary to protect the investigation;* ensure thatindividuals prosecuted for serious offenses like terrorism and treasonbe tried by qualified and competent judges, with appropriate training andexperience in criminal law;* allow defenselawyers the right to cross-examine prosecution witnesses. Testimonies whichhave not been subject to cross-examination should be inadmissable, andpolice or army witnesses should be required to attend court for questioningby the judge if the defense requests it;* end thehumiliating, intimidating, and senseless practice of making defense lawyerswear hoods before and during trials in military courts.* Prisonerswho were unjustly convicted and imprisoned for treason or terrorism shouldbe compensated.* All prisoners,irrespective of the gravity of their offense, should be allowed to receiveweekly visits from their families.Human Rights Watch/Americas calls on theShining Path and MRTA to halt immediately all actions which violate CommonArticle 3 to the four 1949 Geneva Conventions and other norms of internationalhumanitarian law. Political assassinations, outrages against the personaldignity of captives, indiscriminate attacks on civilians, and hostage-takingare strictly prohibited by the laws of war and should halt immediately.The Shining Path, which hasheretofore rejected the very notion of individualrights, should make a public declaration of its determination to adhereto the standards of international humanitarian law, and specifically renouncethe use of violence against civilians under all circumstances.The Clinton Administration should redoubleits pressure on the Fujimori government to end the use of faceless courtsin Peru, to restore the independence of the judiciary, and to review thecases of all those tried by faceless courts, giving urgent priority tothose deemed innocent by local human rights organizations. To that end,the U.S. government should:* oppose thepending loan at the World Bank for the judiciary and use its influencewith other governments to block the loan. World Bank or other internationalassistance to Peru's judiciary should be conditioned on a restoration ofthe independence of the judiciary and an end to practices which blatantlyviolate due process norms;* sponsora resolution at the upcoming meeting in Geneva of the U.N. Subcommissionfor the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities to condemnthe due process violations associated with the faceless courts and thedenial of justice represented by the 1995 amnesty law;* supportthe naming of an independent expert by the United Nations Human RightsCommission when it meets in Geneva during the first quarter of 1997. Theexpert's mandate should include monitoring and publicly reporting on Peru'shuman rights situation.II. BACKGROUNDSince the enactment of Peru's anti-terroristlaw (Decree Law 25475) and treason law (Decree Law 25659) in June and August1992 respectively, Peruvian special courts have sentenced and imprisonedthousands of people for offenses related to terrorism.1The laws were introduced at a moment ofnational trauma because of escalating terrorist violence, especially aroundLima, where one third of the population lives. The justice system had failednotably to confront terrorism effectively. President Alberto Fujimori'scoup of April 5, 1992, by which he dissolved Congress, purged the courts,and curbed the press, opened the way for the introduction of tough anti-terroristmeasures with a minimum of opposition.2Since that date, some (but not all) ofthe basic institutions of Peruvian democracy, such as the Congress, havebeen restored. In presidential elections held on April 9, 1995, PresidentFujimori was re-elected peacefully with a comfortable margin. Terroristviolence, although by no means eliminated, has declined sufficiently formany Peruvians to refer to the past as the "bad days" and think of thefuture with a degree of optimism unthinkable five years ago. Violent humanrights violations by state agents declined significantly in 1994 and 1995,compared withprevious years. While to some extent this lower level of humanrights abuse may be attributable to a reduced insurgent threat, it undoubtedlyreflects as well a shift in tactics by the authorities, whereby prolongedarbitrary detention under the faceless courts has taken the place onceoccupied by disappearances as a way of eliminating political enemies.This notable reduction in the level ofpolitical violence in Peru has been accompanied by an increase in humanrights violations in the administration of justice. While hundreds of Peruviansare unjustly imprisoned by the faceless courts, victims of egregious humanrights violations, such as torture, arbitrary execution, and disappearanceby government forces have had to sacrifice any hope of obtaining justicethrough the courts because of an amnesty law enacted in June 1995. Thelaw, which prevents the courts from investigating human rights violationscommitted by police or military forces during the war against the terroristgroups, also freed the handful of soldiers who had been convicted, includingmembers of a government death squad responsible for a string of politicalmurders and disappearances.Moreover, while extrajudicial executionsand disappearances have been greatly reduced, other violent human rightsabuses, such as rape and torture, may have actually increased with theintroduction of lengthy police detention periods under the faceless courts.The terrorist laws decreed in 1992 establishedthat persons accused of crimes of political violence, whether defined asterrorism or treason, would be tried by secret or faceless prosecutorsand judges-terrorism in faceless civilian courts and treason in secretmilitary tribunals. The decrees also extended permissible periods of policedetention, severely restricted the right to defense, and established anew punitive prison regime for terrorism and treason convicts.In an earlier report on the courts, weconcluded:Since 1992 faceless courts have amasseda breath-taking record of human rights violations. To enumerate the particularsis to descend into a citizen's nightmare, where no rule is inviolable,no right guaranteed, no precedent honored. In Peru, the arbitrary permeatesevery stage of the judicial process: from arrest to charge, investigation,trial, sentencing and appeal.3The arbitrariness of the courts and theirsystematic violations of elementary rights of defense and due process havebeen criticized by several United Nations human rights bodies, as wellas the Inter-American Commission onHuman Rights.4The non-governmental international human rights community has been equallyunanimous incondemning them.5No one can state precisely how many innocentprisoners there are. In 1996 the Coordinadora reported that it had givenlegal assistance to a total of 1,390 unjustly accused persons since 1992,of whom 607 remained in prison as of December 1995 and twenty-three werestill wanted for arrest. The Coordinadora stressed that the figure wasincomplete and only reflected the cases which were brought to it.6In November 1995, seven human rights organizations,as well as church groups and independent lawyers, jointly published a volumeentitled The Innocents Have Names, which gave details of 300 casesthey were defending.7 This number is no morethan a selection of the cases known to these organizations and individuals,and the preface to the book points out that the total number could be muchhigher, given that the majority of those affected come from the poorestsectors of Peruvian society without ready access to human rights organizationsor church groups, and live in remote and inaccessible rural areas. In recentmonths the Coordinadora has spoken of upwards of 700 cases. In the earlyyears of the terrorist law, the authors comment, talking of innocent terroristprisoners would have been to invite instant accusation of being in sympathywith the subversives. However, that perception has changed. Television,radio, and print media have carried compelling stories of the traumaticpersonal consequences of faulty judicial decisions. Both the Catholic andEvangelical churches have devoted programs of assistance to innocent prisoners.A. Reforms in 1995-1996The government, too, is at least awarethat injustices have been committed, even though it has lacked the politicalwill to remedy the situation. President Fujimori recently acknowledgedthe plight of innocents convicted of terrorism in an interview with theNational Broadcasting Corporation (NBC) during a visit to Washington onMay 22, 1996. Fujimori was asked by NBC:The human rights organization Human RightsWatch, which is an independent organization, finds that since the inceptionof your government in Peru, there has been a clear reduction of cases offorced disappearance of civilians, but, nonetheless, due to the facelesscourt system, there are about four hundred innocent civilians in detention.To which President Fujimori replied:The Repentance Law system was misappliedby civilian and military judges and prosecutors in some cases in whichthese unjust detentions took place. We are following up on this matter.We recognizethat such a situation exists and we are doing all we can. Wewould like to have a mechanism soon to allow us to bring justice to thosewho are unjustly in detention. We don't doubt that such people exist. Inany fight against terrorism this type of situation can take place. Don'tforget that we have withstood twenty-three years of terrorism, with carbombs like the one in Oklahoma taking place, on average, once a week.8This statement contrasts with previousstatements of government officials: "Unfortunately, unfair arrests andirregularities...have occurred," acknowledged then-Special Prosecutor forTerrorism Cases Daniel Espichan in September 1994, "but one can't cry overspilled milk."9 This slightly more flexible stanceon the president's part is no doubt the product of years of dogged workby Peruvian and international human rights organizations, both of whichhave developed a concerted campaign for justice for the victims of thefaceless courts.The newly elected Defensor del Pueblo,Jorge Santistevan, expressed concern about the innocent prisoners in arecent interview shortly after assuming his position:I would say that there are at this moment,in my mind, three ways in which we could address (this problem). First,we could look for a way, within the (existing) procedures, that a normcould be found to create some mechanism of revision, because we cannotignore that the trials that have taken place and are still taking place,have been under exceptional circumstances. In the second place, and overlappingpartly with the first, the various legislative proposals which have beenmade must be analyzed to see how we could push them forward, or arriveat a novel proposal. In the third place, we could search for a formula,which with great diplomacy and discretion, could form the basis for somekind of pardon, which, although it solves only part of the problem, couldat least restore liberty to people who have lost it without justification.10In response to domestic and internationaloutcry about the injustices inherent in the faceless court procedures,the government during 1995 amended several aspects of the anti-terroristlaw which had attracted particular criticism. These steps included thefollowing:* January6, 1995: Supreme Decree 01-95-JUS prohibited the police from presentingdetainees charged with terrorist offenses to the news media, although thepolice were allowed to continue this practice in the case of detaineescharged with treason. The practice of presenting detainees to the presswearing black-and-white-striped prison garb violates the presumption ofinnocence.* April 21:Law 26447 restored the right of access to a lawyer from the moment of detentionand also mandated the presence of the public prosecutor during the policeinterrogation.11This law also raised the age at which juvenilescould be charged as adults in terrorism cases from fifteen years to eighteen,bringing it into line once more with the norm regulating ordinary criminaloffenses. As a result numerous cases of minors facing prosecution by facelesscourts were transferred to juvenile magistrates, and out of the penitentiarysystem to juvenile detention centers.12Law 26447 also provided for the terminationof the faceless civilian court system from October 15, 1995, without eliminatingthe military faceless courts. As this deadline approached, however, therewas a flurry of parliamentary activity on the government benches to getit postponed. At the last moment, on October 13, 1995, a bill was passedextending the faceless courts until October 16, 1996.* July 21,1996: Law 26508 established that beneficiaries of the Repentance Law whocommitted terrorist crimes after benefitting from the law would be triedfor treason by military courts, and if found guilty given life imprisonment.13* March 28,1996: Congress passed legislation whereby prisoners acquitted and freedby military or civil courts, whose cases had been reopened following thereversal of the acquittal by the Supreme Court, would not be liable tore-arrest but might stand trial by summons. During 1995 the Supreme Courtordered retrials of hundreds of prisoners who had been acquitted by lowercourts, following judicial reviews mandated by the anti-terrorist law.In the great majority of cases the new hearings were ordered to correctpurely formal or technical flaws in the original trials, such as the failureto record the code number of the magistrates at the beginning of the sessions.14Many former prisoners were re-arrested in 1995, pending new trials.B. Continuing Due Process LimitationsMost of the reforms described above arewelcome, if long overdue, improvements. However, they have not affectedthe basic due process shortcomings of the faceless court system. Featuresof this system which remain unaffected and which contribute to unjust prosecutionsand convictions, include:* the vaguedefinition of terrorism and the disproportionate penalties assigned.The anti-terrorism law gives imprecise catch-all definitions of terrorismand violates freedom of expression by criminalizing acts such as "provokinganxiety," "affecting international relations," or seeming to excuse thebehavior of terrorists (apología del terrorismo). Both theterrorism laws and the treason law violate the principle that the punishmentshould fit the crime. Under the treason law, for instance, a teacher whoespoused the ideals of the Shining Path and a terrorist who had killeddozens with a car-bomb could receive the same sentence: life imprisonment.* excessiveconcentration of powers in the hands of police. The police continueto enjoy excessive powers in the early period of detention in terrorismand treason cases. In terrorist cases the normal period of twenty-fourhours for which the police may hold a suspect before presenting him orher to a judge is extended to fifteen days.15Although in theory the presence of the prosecutor and defense attorneyduring police interrogations should safeguard against coercion, intimidation,and torture, in practice such safeguards are more formal than real. Inseveral cases documented in this report prosecutors did not attend policeinterrogations or searches and simply appended their signatures at thebase of the declaration, or allowed the police to do it for them. Recordsof police interrogations rarely show any interventions by defense attorneyson behalf of their clients.The maximum period allowed for incommunicadodetention in terrorism cases is the same as in ordinary criminal cases:ten calendar days (Code of Penal Procedure, Article 133). Incommunicadodetention may not prevent access to the prisoner by the prosecutor, thejudge, and the defense attorney (Law 26447). However, unlike in ordinarycriminal cases, Law 25475 gives the police power to impose incommunicadodetention unilaterally, without consulting the judge, although the policeare required to inform the representative of the Public Ministry and thejudge about the measure.16 The high incidenceof torture and other ill-treatment during incommunicado detention in terrorismand treason cases makes clear that the judges are not exercising adequatesupervision. Absent effective judicial oversight, incommunicado detentionis an invitation to police abuse. Moreover, incommunicado detention shouldnot be the rule, but rather should be imposed only following a reasoneddetermination by the judge to protect the integrity of the investigation.Police can determine whether evidence issufficient to charge, what charge to make and whether the defendant willbe tried by a civilian or a military court. Police evidence in virtuallyevery case we have studied has been acquired from interrogations oftenuncorroborated by any material evidence.* The rightof defense in faceless court proceedings is severely restricted by lackof adequate access to court files and timely information on sentences andthe progress of cases; excessively rapid hearings in which the defensehas no time to prepare; inadequate time and improper conditions for interviewingclients in prison; the prohibition of questioning in court of members ofthe police or army, the failure of courts to adequately cross-examine witnessesfor the prosecution, including arrepentidos, and the prohibition on defenselawyers conducting independent cross-examinations of these witnesses.17In past years, lawyers have themselvesbeen intimidated, harassed or accusedof being guerrilla sympathizers. Defense difficulties are examined in furtherdetail in Section III.* Manyof the faceless judges appear to lack experience in assessing evidencein a criminal procedure. Judges for the faceless civilian courts aredrawn from all branches of the judicial service, including courts specializingin land disputes, civil cases, and agrarian law. Judges' lack of qualificationsare evident in a tendency to rely entirely on the results of the policeinvestigation without further inquiry. Faceless courts are also notoriouslysubject to pressure from the executive. Lawyers interviewed by Human RightsWatch/Americas in April commented that following a statement widely reportedin the press by a slum community leader claiming that released terroristswere active in his neighborhood, instructions were sent to the courts totighten up their verdicts and that this was reflected in a dramatic increasein convictions.* The mostsevere restrictions on due process occur in military courts, whichunder the treason law are given jurisdiction over terrorist crimes consideredso serious as to constitute treason. Not only are the judges active-dutyofficers dependent on their superior command and empowered to sit in judgmentover their battlefield enemy, proceedings are summary (a verdict must bepassed within ten days of a formal charge), meaning that many verdictsare based on the findings of police reports, without any further investigation.* Secrecyis the rule in faceless court proceedings. In both civilian and militaryproceedings, judges and prosecutors are identified by codes. Supreme Courtjudges also identify themselves by secret codes when handling treason cases.Hearings take place in specially equipped courtrooms inside the high securityprisons (or military bases in treason cases). They are small rooms witha single door and a large one-way mirror along one wall. In an adjoiningroom on the other side of the mirror sit the judges, prosecutor, and courtsecretaries. They communicate with the defendants and their counsel onthe other side of the mirror through voice-distorting microphones. In themilitary proceedings the judges and court officials (and sometimes thedefense counsel as well) are hooded. Only the defendant and the attorneyare admitted to the trial.All these measures, which are ostensiblydesigned to protect the security of judges and court personnel, erode thepublic accountability of judges dealing with terrorism cases. Incompetentor corrupt judges cannot be identified and sanctioned, nor can the effortsof good ones be publicly recognized. Public debate about the grounds forprosecutions, convictions or acquittals is impossible. Undoubtedly secrecymeasures are largely responsible for the public's ignorance of the yearsof injustices perpetrated in its name, which would not have come to lightat all were it not for the courageous efforts of defense attorneys, humanrights advocates, and a handful of journalists.C. Proposals for Judicial ReviewAs public concern about unjust imprisonmentfor terrorism has mounted, the case for a mechanism to review convictionshas won more converts among politicians on both the government and oppositionbenches. PresidentFujimori has himself talked publicly of the creationof a commission to review cases. Yet despite a flurry of draft laws sincethe proposal was first mooted two years ago, nothing has been done.Since November 1994 seven legislative proposalshave been presented to Congress, two from the government benches, threefrom members of opposition parties, one from the Ministry of Justice, andone from the vice-president of the congressional Justice Commission.18Most of these proposals are premised on the view that numerous people havebeen unfairly convicted on the basis of false incrimination by repentantterrorists. Although the mechanisms differ, most of the draft laws contemplatethe formation of a special commission to select cases, which would be thenpassed to the Supreme Court for a judicial review or would benefit froman amnesty or presidential pardon. Plans for a review commission announcedby the presidents of the Justice Commission and the President of Congressin May 1994 never came to fruition.19 There hasnever been an adequate official explanation for these delays.In April 1996, Luz Salgado Rubianes, thepresident of the congressional Commission of Human Rights and Pacification,told Human Rights Watch/Americas that the commission was already engagedin reviewing cases. According to statistics she showed us, the commissionhad reviewed 148 cases since August 1995. The commission's work did not,however, consist of a review of unfair convictions, but rather of examiningprocedural problems, such as complaints from prisoners without defensecounsel.20 In an apparent example of politicalinterference with judicial independence, Salgado explained that the congressionalcommission also "advised" the Supreme Court in cases in which appellantshad asked for a recurso extraordinario de revisión, a lastditch appeal which may be lodged in exceptional circumstances before theSupreme Court or the Supreme Council of Military Justice.21D. Lack of Judicial IndependenceAs noted above, the structural independenceof the judiciary was ended when President Fujimori seized dictatorial powerin April 1992. Massive purges of judges and prosecutors sent an unmistakablemessage that court officers' careers depended on the executive branch.As some democratic institutions have been slowly restored in Peru, theNational Magistrates Council (Consejo Nacional de la Magistratura)has undertaken the job of reviewing the qualifications of provisional judgesand prosecutors throughout the country, in order to determine whether theirtenure should be restored. This process has been completed in Lima, butnot in the rest of the country.The process of restoring judicial independenceappears to have been dealt a setback on June 16, 1996, when the Congress-ina late night session without prior debate-approved Law 26623, creatinga Council of Judicial Coordination (Consejo de Coordinación Judicial)to guide judicial reform. Although the law is designed to accomplish muchneeded reform, its positive impact is marred by the concentration of powerduring a transitionperiod, to last until December 1998 and possibly tobe extended, in the hands of two individuals. One of these individuals,retired Naval commander José Dellepiane, currently serves as theExecutive Secretary of the Executive Commission of the Judiciary (ComisiónEjecutiva del Organismo Judicial). The second individual will representthe Public Prosecutor's Office. These two individuals will have tremendouspowers, including the authority to fire judges and prosecutors, therebyundermining the work of the National Magistrates' Council. The concentrationof powers to reorganize the judiciary in two individuals, one of them alreadyknown for close ties to the executive branch and the armed forces, is astep away from badly needed judicial independence in Peru. In the wakeof the promulgation of the law, jurists Arsenio Oré Guardia andJavier de Belaúnde resigned from the Academia de la Magistratura,a new institution created by Peru's 1993 Constitution to professionalizejudges, in protest.III. LIMITATIONSON THE RIGHT TO DEFENSEWhile formal access to defense counselis guaranteed by law even during police custody, in practice defense isreduced to little more than a formality, particularly in the military courts.Four features of civilian and military faceless courts severely limit thepossibility of an effective defense; the summary nature of court investigationsand trial proceedings, prohibitions on the questioning of police and theuse of secret witnesses, obstacles to access to trial files, and the anonymityof the judges.A. Summary InvestigationsArticle 13 of Law 25475 establishes a rigidlimit of thirty days extendable to fifty days for the trial investigation,compared with the four months stipulated by the Code of Criminal Proceduresfor ordinary criminal investigations. The truncated investigation meansthat defense attorneys have great difficulty collecting evidence, whichoften involves travel to rural areas to interview their clients or potentialwitnesses. Time is insufficient for the courts to conduct a proper criminalinvestigation; terrorist cases typically involve conspiracies in whichmore than ten defendants may be involved and police investigators haveto deal with terrorist groups' strategies to conceal evidence.22In view of this, it is little surprise that, faced with a choice to givedefendants the benefit of the doubt, or convict, the courts more oftenthan not choose to convict.B. Prohibition of Cross-Examinationof State AgentsArticle 13 of Law 24575 also prohibitsthe appearance as witnesses of police or military personnel who participatedin the interrogation. This legal prohibition rules out effective questioningof police evidence.23 This limitation makes itvirtually impossible to prove torture or coercion by police in obtainingconfessions or incriminating evidence.24 Likethose of the judges, the identities of secret witnesses, often individualsclaiming to be repentant terrorists, are kept from the defense throughoutthe trial, and defense counsel is not allowed to see, interview or cross-examinethem. Since the legal norms attach greater weight to security and rapiddecisions than to fairness, judges do little more in most cases than carryout a perfunctory investigation.C. Summary Courtroom ProceduresThe courtroom procedures which apply whenthe case comes for oral trial before the faceless court also differ fromnormal procedures. Under ordinary criminal procedure, witnesses, includingpolice and forensic experts, are questioned in court by the trial judges.Under the faceless court system only the defendants and their counsel appear,which makes it virtually impossible for any contradictions or doubtfulpoints in the evidence to be clarified at the trial stage. According tolawyers consulted by Human Rights Watch/Americas, hearings are often rushedthrough in the space of two hours in assembly-line fashion, the judgeshanding down a verdict ten minutes after defense counsel has rested itscase.25 The lawyers allege that judges are carelessin the evaluation of evidence, and sometimes appear not to have even readthe case file. Some lawyers believe that judges have drafted their verdictbeforehand and do not bother to sift the evidence presented in court atall.26D. Anonymity of JudgesSince judges are identified only by a code,are at all stages invisible to defendants and their counsel, and trialproceedings are conducted in private, there are no safeguards to ensureaccountability for decisions, nor mechanisms by which lawyers can impugnthem. This also makes impossible the mechanism of impeachment that guaranteesthe impartiality of the tribunal. Indeed, as they present their case orallyin court, defense attorneys have no way of knowing that the judges areeven present, let alone actually listening, since they are hidden behinda mirror. According to an anecdote defense lawyers told Human Rights Watch/Americas,a prison visitor at the prison of Miguel Castro Castro in Lima enteredthe courtroom by mistake by the judges' entrance and found himself on thejudges' side of the one way mirror, from where he watched the defense attorneyearnestly pleading in defense of his client. Looking around him he discoveredthat the seats where the judges should have been sitting were empty.27E. Military Faceless CourtsLimitations on the right to defense areeven more severe in the military faceless courts. The difficulty of accessto the trial documentation, which affects lawyers in civilian facelesscourts as well, is particularly serious in military courts. Frequentlyrequests to view the file have to be made months in advance. Photocopyingis strictly prohibited. Lawyers are frequently given only a day's noticeabout an important hearing, and often verdicts are passed without thembeing notified at all.Security procedures to which lawyers aresubjected in the military bases where trials are conducted are humiliating.In the naval base at Callao the lawyers are first identified at the check-inbooth, where they have to board a windowless four-seater bus in which theyare taken, in pitch darkness for five or ten minutes, to the trial area.The trial is conducted by judges wearing ski-masks. In the Peruvian airforce base at Surco, lawyers are also hooded by military personnel, andif they refuse are prohibited entry. They are guided to a waiting vehicleby soldiers, and taken to the trial area. On arrival there they are askedif they need to read a document, in which case the hood is removed. Ifnot, the procedure is carried out with the hood in place. While presentingtheir defense, lawyers are made to stand facing a large cupboard or bookshelf,to prevent them from seeing the judges. The same hooding procedures areused when the lawyers exit the base.28 The hoodingof defense lawyers is gratuitous and conflicts with the requirement ofthe Organic Law of the Judiciary, (Article 289;8) that defense lawyersbe granted the facilities and considerationwhich their function requires.Since its effects may be to intimidate the defense, hooding lawyers isin blatant violation of due process norms.While prisoners acquitted by civilian facelesscourts normally go free pending appeal, this is not the case with militarytribunals. Normally prisoners have to wait until their acquittal has beenconfirmed by the Supreme Council of Military Justice, a process that cantake months. Defense lawyers consulted by Human Rights Watch/Americas statethat this practice is not mandated by any existing law. In fact, Article631 of the Code of Military Justice states that "the referral of the caseto the Supreme Council of Military Justice shall not impede the releaseof the defendant under the vigilance of the authority, if the sentenceis absolution."From a human rights perspective the continueddetention of a person cleared by a court of a criminal offense is alsoarbitrary. By acquitting the defendant the court has deterimined that thecriminal charges against him or her are unfounded. In the absence of asuperceding conviction or other valid reason, the defendant should be released.In addition to the power to veto releases,the Supreme Council may also convict a person already acquitted in thetwo lower courts. A norm in the Code of Criminal Procedures, which regulatescivilian proceedings, prohibits the Supreme Court from convicting peoplealready found innocent, although it can order a new trial. The militaryjustice code, however, has no such norm, and has convicted defendants repeatedlyacquitted by lower courts. One such case is described below.IV. CASES OFUNJUSTLY CONVICTED PRISONERSThe cases summarized below tell differentstories about the realities of anti-terrorist trials in today's Peru. Webelieve that there are strong indications that these prisoners are innocentof the charges on which they were convicted. Each group of cases illustratesa particular aspect of trial procedures which violate due process. Wherepossible, we have included information about their lives and activitiesprior to their arrest.A. Luis Alfonso Moncada VigoLuis Alfonso Moncada Vigo, falsely accusedof treason by two repentant Shining Path members, was acquitted by a militaryfaceless court. Although his acquittal was confirmed on appeal, it wasinexplicably overturned by the Supreme Council of Military Justice.A final year law student at the Universityof San Marcos, Luis Moncada was arrested on October 25, 1994. DINCOTE policecharged him with treason,29 solely on the basisof the declarations of two repentant terrorists, and referred his caseto the military judge of the Peruvian Air Force. On April 8, 1995, thefirst instance air force court acquitted Luis Moncada for lack of evidence,pointing out that his identification by the arrepentidos had not been corroboratedand was contradicted by numerous other witnesses, and that the search ofhis home had turned up nothing. However, Luis Moncada was kept in prisonpending confirmation of this verdict by the Supreme Council of MilitaryJustice.In May the Higher War Council, an appellatecourt of the Peruvian Air Force, confirmed the acquittal. The prosecutorof the Supreme Council of Military Justice, however, ordered the investigationreopened on the grounds that the court had failed to clarify an alias attributedto Moncada. The case went back to the second instance court, which pointedout that the objection was mistaken and repeated its earlier acquittalverdict. Then, in a shock decision of which Moncada's lawyers were noteven informed, on January 17, 1996, the Supreme Council of Military Justiceinexplicably reversed the decision and sentenced Moncada to twenty yearsof imprisonment for treason.Moncada's defense attorney learned of theverdict by reading about it in the press on the following day, and toldHuman Rights Watch/Americas that he was not officially notified of thesentence until April 12, 1996-some three months later-after insistent requests.In the verdict the Supreme Council of Military Justice found Moncada guiltyof robbing the National Bank in El Agustino in December 1993, a chargewhich even the police had not made against him, and against which, therefore,he had had no opportunity to defend himself.30Moncada is currently serving his time in the Miguel Castro Castro prisonin Lima.Moncada, twenty-seven, is the youngestof eight siblings, and until the age of sixteen he lived with his father,a farmer from Cajamarca. "At home we were always a family which set bigstore on personal liberty. During the government of President Velasco,we were practically thrown into the street. They expropriated almost halfof our land. It left us with a deep aversion to dictatorial governmentand arbitrariness," Moncada's brother Gilberto, an economist, told HumanRights Watch/Americas.31At the time of his arrest, Moncada wasbusy working on his final year voluntary practice in a legal clinic forthe poor. To help finance his studies he had been working as an officeassistant, and later computer operator, in the office of the statisticalmagazine Cuánto, of which his brother Gilberto was generalmanager. Another money-making venture had been a fumigation service helaunched with a friend. On top of that, as a keen soccer player, Moncadawas coaching the children in the tower block where he shared an apartmentwith his sister.The family had good reasons to be unsympatheticto terrorism. Gilberto Moncada had lived close to Channel 5 television,the site of frequent bomb attacks in 1990-1991, and on one occasion hadhad to shut himself in his bathroom to avoid flying bullets. Gilberto Moncada'ssister was widowed when her husband, a police officer who had asked fora transfer to Iquitos as a respite from the violence of Lima, was killedin October 1992 in an air force plane crash.Moncada's problems began with an unexpectedknock on his apartment door. At about 8:30 a.m. on August 3, 1994, plainclothespolice, mistaking Moncada for a terrorist suspect, lured him from his apartment,abducted him in the street, hooded him and took him to a garage, wherethey beat him and, after removing his hood, took several mugshots of himagainst a wall. They interrogated him about the identities of two peoplehe had never seen before, and confronted him with another person whom hedid not know and who likewise was unable to identify him. Realizing theirmistake, the police then let him go, after warning him not to denouncewhat had occurred. Moncada, however, paid no attention and made an officialcomplaint about the conduct of the police on the following day.Two months later, the police arrested Moncadaagain, this time knowing exactly who he was. They asked him why he haddenounced his earlier abduction. They escorted him back to his apartment,which they searched, but found nothing incriminating. However, the caseagainst Moncada had already been concocted. Two men who had turnedthemselves in and applied under the Repentance Law for leniency had signedstatements implicating Luis Moncada in the Shining Path, as "compañeroRicardo." One of the arrepentidos claimed that a guerrilla who had passedon to him information about the movements of two people targeted for assassination,claimed to have received the information from compañero Ricardo.32He also claimed that Moncada participated as a look-out in a 1992 raidon the Continental Bank in La Victoria.However, during questioning by the judge,both of these witnesses changed their story. The first, who had said hehad known compañero Ricardo as Luis Moncada since 1992, now claimedthat he knew of his militancy only through third parties. The second nowclaimed that he had received the assassination intelligence directly fromMoncada in his hand-writing, rather than through a third party, as he hadmaintained originally. Finally, he was unable to remember which bank hadbeen raided, in what part of Lima it was or even in which year the attackhad occurred.33Although the identity of the two witnessesis a closely guarded secret, several of the other detainees in the caseare also San Marcos students. It is very possible that the denunciationof Moncada was an act of revenge by student Shining Path militants.34For Moncada was known to have taken a firm position against terrorist groupsin the university, and describes himself in a statement to the police asa supporter of President Fujimori. Indeed, he had written to the presidentonly a month before his arrest requesting funds to repaint the law clinicand replace its antiquated typewriters.B. Luis Alberto Cantoral BenavidesIn some cases prisoners have been absolvedby each level of the military court system only to be handed over to civilianfaceless courts to be tried for terrorism based on the same facts. Thispractice violates the right to not be tried twice for the same offense,protected in Article 8 (4) of the American Convention on Human Rights andin Article 14(7) of the International Covenant On Civil And Political Rights.35Luis Alberto Cantoral Benavides was acquittedof treason by the Supreme Council of Military Justice, but due to a mix-upwas not released. In one of the few verdicts in which the Supreme Councilhas granted an extraordinary appeal for a review, it confirmed its ownacquittal but accepted the military prosecutor's argument that new evidencewarranted reopening the case in a civilian faceless court.DINCOTE arrested Luis Alberto CantoralBenavides and his twin brother Luis Fernando in their home on February6, 1993, while searching for another brother, José Antonio, whowas wanted for treason. Although no information indicated that the twinswere members of the Shining Path, both were charged with treason. In August1993, the Supreme Council of Military Justice sentenced Luis Fernando totwenty-five years, but absolved Luis Alberto and ordered him released.However, a faceless navy judge mistakenly ordered Luis Fernando releasedinstead of Luis Alberto, who was kept in prison. Six weeks later, the SupremeCouncil of Military Justice ordered the casetransferred to the civiliancourts on the grounds that new evidence had emerged which the militarycourt had not considered.This "new evidence" consisted of policehand-writing tests done on documents found in the Cantoral home which policeaccused Luis Alberto of writing. These documents and the handwriting analysishad been in police custody previously, but for unknown reasons, was notpresented during the treason trial.36 Cantoral'slawyers impugned the tests, claiming to have shown conclusively that theonly document found which was legible enough to permit analysis was notwritten by Cantoral. On October 10, 1994, a faceless chamber of the SupremeCourt sentenced Cantoral to twenty years of imprisonment. The court exceededits authority by pronouncing on facts, such as the ownership of the documents,which had already been considered by the military court, which had concludedthey did not belong to Cantoral. The Supreme Court also mistakenly referredto Luis Alberto as being known by an alias which in fact was attributedthroughout the trial not to him, but to his other brother José Antonio.On October 6, 1995, the Supreme Court rejected an appeal and confirmedthe sentence.Human Rights Watch/Americas, jointly withthe Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL) and the Lima-basedFundación Ecuménica para el Desarrollo y la Paz (FEDEPAZ),whose lawyers are representing Cantoral, have submitted the case to theInter-American Commission on Human Rights, on the grounds that the dueprocess violations in his case violate the American Convention on HumanRights, ratified by Peru.C. Donato Alejandro Tolentino Argandoña,Alfonso Rosely Chacón, and Pedro Vega ValleThese three cases illustrate the patternof convictions based solely on uncorroborated testimony obtained undertorture.By far the most common type of evidencepresented by the police against terrorist suspects are affidavits and "recognitions"by other suspects, often unsupported or contradicted by other evidenceand later retracted by those who supposedly volunteered them. Althoughjudges should consider each case on its merits, they almost always believethe police version and are uniformly suspicious of subsequent retractationsor corrections by prosecution witnesses, to the point of ignoring thementirely.In any review of verdicts of the anti-terroristcourts, whether civilian or military, all evidence in the form of denunciationsby suspects or terrorist defendants must be carefully scrutinized. Particularattention must be paid to cases in which suspects have been convicted onthe basis of testimonies that conflict with established facts, those thatare vague or unsubstantiated, or where there are grounds to believe thatthe suspect or the accuser was ill-treated or coerced into giving the information,or where it was given without the prosecutor or defense attorney beingpresent. The following cases are illustrative.Teacher and trade unionist Donato AlejandroTolentino Argandoña was convicted by a military tribunal tothirty years of imprisonment for treason on the basis of the testimonyof a criminal suspect who later wrote to the military justice authoritieswithdrawing his allegations and insisting that they were extracted undertorture. Eye-witnesses of the crimes of which Tolentino had been accusedby this witness failed to give credence to any of the allegations. Neitherof these factors was given any weight by the military courts, which haveconfirmed Tolentino's sentence and refused a petition for reconsideration(recurso de revisión).Tolentino and his wife, Elsa, are bothteachers, and for years have worked in a public elementary school in Barranca,a Lima suburb. Tolentino was also well known locally as a teachers' unionleader, and from 1987 to 1989 was Secretary General of the Barranca branchof the Primary Education Workers Union (Sindicato Unico de Trabajadoresde la Educación Primaria, SUTEP). The couple has five children.At about 9:30 a.m. on November 7, 1993,three plainclothes police detained Tolentino while he was doing the family'sweekly shopping in the Barranca market. They tortured him for several daysbut he refused to confess to any wrongdoing. After blindfolding him andleaving him in a cell for a few hours, the police took him in a van toa Barranca beach with another detainee, a youth. He heard the youth beingbeaten. Then they stripped Tolentino of his clothes, tied his hands andfeet behind his back, and beat him. One kick in the pit of his stomachmade him momentarily lose consciousness. They fired a revolver close tohis head and an officer gave orders to rape his wife and daughters whomthey pretended were in the van.37 Unable to forcehim to confess to various terrorist crimes, they took him back to the policestation, but refused him access to a lawyer or any food.The next day they took him to the beachagain; this time they tied his hands and feet behind his back with an innertube and a rope, dragged him to the water's edge and submerged his head,beating him on the stomach and head to compel him to say yes to their questions.He again refused. Later he heard two other detainees being beaten and agreeing,amid their screams, to implicate him. The police threatened to kill himif he did not relent and confess. By this time his legs were too weak tosupport his weight and he had lost sensation in his arms. The police pulledhim out of the water, and massaged his legs and arms.Back at the police station, they continuedto deny him access to a state-appointed lawyer or give him any food orwater, and he was kept awake in his cell at night. On the following dayhe was taken to the city of Huaraz and confronted with a terrorist suspect.The suspect, whom he had never seen before, did not recognize him either.Then they returned him to Barranca. On November 15, along with other detainees,he was forced to sign a statement, pre-dated November 7.While holding Tolentino incommunicado andwithout access to a defense attorney, police produced a suspect, AmancioUrbano Rivera, who told them in Tolentino's presence that Tolentino hadrecruited him to the Shining Path and had participated in several terroristattacks. According to police logs, Urbano Rivera was detained drunk inthe street in the early hours of November 7 (the day of Tolentino's arrest),wildly threatening motorists with a revolver, and stealing their moneyand possessions. Urbano was arrested after a clash with police in whichhe was shot in the leg.A few days after the interview with Urbano,police confronted Tolentino with a youth also accused in the case, OrestesCornejo Manchego, who turned out to be the same person whom he had heardbeing beaten at the beach. The youth maintained that he knew Tolentinoby sight but denied they had ever been together or participated in ShiningPath activities.A state-appointed attorney attended thisinterview on Tolentino's behalf, but the prosecutor failed to respond tothe lawyer's request for another interview to clarify several points. Instead,the police tried to extort money from Tolentino as a condition for hisrelease. During the oral hearing by the military court, the judge againrefused to grant the lawyer's request to re-interview this witness, adducinglack of time. The hearing itself lasted only half an hour.Tolentino was also accused by a witnessof participation in the near-fatal attack on the life of a school directorin September 1993. The son of the school director claims to have seen Tolentinothrow a banner through the school window and hurl insults before runningoff. There are, however, strong doubts as to whether the director's soncould have identified the person who threw the banner from where he wasstanding. The banner itself was never produced in the trial, and two teacherswho were eye-witnesses denied seeing either the banner or Tolentino (whomthey both knew) at the scene. One of these witnesses spoke to the schooldirector before he lost consciousness andhe said he had been attacked by"mountain people" (sujetos de tipo serrano), and did not mentionTolentino, whom he also knew well. After making a visit to the home ofthe school director and talking to his wife, Tolentino's wife is convincedthat the director's son was pressured by police into signing the statementimplicating her husband.38On December 17, 1993, the special militaryjudge of the army sentenced Tolentino to thirty years of imprisonment fortreason, holding him responsible for a Shining Path assassination squad,for involvement in the attack on the school director, and for the burningof three vehicles. His lawyer was not present at the sentencing. Duringhis trial Tolentino's whereabouts were unknown. He was taken on about December1 to a military detention center and his wife was unable to trace him untilDecember 20, when the International Committee of the Red Cross locatedhim in the basement detention center at the Ministry of Justice.39On January 8, 1994, Amancio Urbano Rivera,the prosecution witness, wrote from jail to the Supreme Council of MilitaryJustice to say that his accusation against Tolentino was untrue, and allegingthat he had been tortured into making it, but the court ignored his retraction.40The accusations involving Tolentino inthe burning of three vehicles in separate incidents are all based on Urbano'saffidavits, and in each case, witnesses on the scene, including the driversof the vehicles in question, have either denied Tolentino's participationor were unable to recognize him as one of their attackers.Rural schoolteacher Alfonso Rosely ChacónRodríguez was also convicted on the basis of a denunciationallegedly made under torture and later retracted. Chacón works alonein a tiny primary school in the village of El Chirimoyo, Cajabamba province,in the department of Cajamarca. Chacón was reportedly a pillar ofhis community, a regular participant in religious and community meetingsand a staunch supporter of Cambio 90, President Fujimori's electoral alliance.On April 1, 1992, police discovered that the main road close to the schoolhad been mined with explosives connected to an electrical detonator. Combingthe area they encountered Chacón arriving at the school and arrestedhim.The police found some nails, rusty tins,some electrical cable and two books of popular songs in his house, butapart from this had no evidence against the schoolteacher. Later, however,Santos Gilberto Robles Paredes, a defendant in another case who had beendetained since August 1991, denounced Chacón as "comrade Casana,"claiming to have heard from a third party in a bar that the teacher hadparticipated in an attack on a police post in Cauday and a bomb attackon a bank in Cajabamba. However, inquiries with the Cauday police revealedthat their post had never been attacked. The attack on the bank occurredon December 31, 1991, when Robles was already in prison; he could not,therefore, have been drinking in a bar after the bombing. On April 22,1993, Robles sent a sworn statement to Amnesty International and the newspaperLa República in which he claimed that a police official,JoséMiguel Borja Vera, had offered to release him and to give himlarge sums of money if he accused people from a list he showed him.41He alleged also that the police tortured him.In February 1993, a Chiclayo faceless courtsentenced Chacón to ten years of imprisonment. After a lengthy appealprocess the Supreme Court annulled the verdict for a technical reason entirelyunrelated to the soundness of the evidence. The case went back to the highercourt of Lambayeque, which repeated the arguments supporting the initialverdict but increased the sentence to fifteen years, without grounds orexplanation. The verdict was appealed once more to the Supreme Court, andthe court prosecutor determined that the evidence was unsound and recommendedthe verdict be annulled. A final decision by the Supreme Court was stillawaited when this report went to press.42Pedro Telmo Vega Valle is a shantytown leader from the district of Villa María del Triunfo in thesouth of Lima, who was convicted of treason by a military court for allegedlyparticipating in a Shining Path car-bomb unit and helping to set up anilluminated hammer and sickle display on a nearby hill in October 1992.Vega was denounced by two fellow-defendants, Enrique Piñeda Gonzálezand Santiago Aguero Obregón. Throughout the trial both men maintainedthat they had been tortured into incriminating Vega and did not in factknow him until they met in custody. In an April 27, 1993 statement Piñedasaid he had been taken down to the sea and beaten until he agreed to namesand events that the police fed him. His captors threatened to kill himif he did not sign blank papers which would be used to involve Vega andothers. Vega, a former young Christian and catechist as well as a democraticcommunity leader, is now serving a twenty-five-year prison sentence inCachiche, Ica.43D. José Luis GutiérrezVivancoIn this case, even the unlikelihood ofa hardened terrorist with a disabling congenital heart condition was insufficientto shake the credence given by special judges to a suspect who incriminatedhim. José Luis Gutiérrez Vivanco is a twenty-five-year oldbiology student from San Marcos University. He has suffered all his lifefrom a congenital heart malformation consisting of a single ventricle andhyperplasia of the pulmonary artery and mitral valve. This condition, anenlargement of the tissue of the arteries and valve, causes drasticallyreduced heart function, and symptoms such as nausea, breathlessness, bluenessof the skin (cyanosis) and headaches at mild physical exertion. The officialmedical reports describe the prognosis as "bad." Gutiérrez has tobe regularly hospitalized for tests and blood transfusions and was undertreatment in April 1996, when Human Rights Watch/Americas visited him inLima's 2 de Mayo hospital.Gutiérrez was arrested on August27, 1992, apparently as a result of his relationship with a girl whom hehad recently started dating. (Like Gutiérrez, the girl was subsequentlyconvicted of terrorism.) DINCOTE agents beat Gutiérrez during hisarrest so badly that he had to be transferred to the police hospital shortlyafter arriving at the DINCOTE headquarters. From there, he was transferredto the 2 de Mayo hospital, where doctors diagnosed chronic cardiac insufficiencyand severe hypoxia. Given his condition, the police decided not to takea statement from him.DINCOTE accused Gutiérrez of participatingin a string of terrorist attacks, two of which occurred in different partsof Lima with an interval of only fifteen minutes between them. The witnesseswho testified against him contradicted one another as to which incidentshe had been involved in, and what his alias was. None of the eyewitnessesor victims of the attacks remembered seeing Gutiérrez at the time.Only two of the witnesses admitted to knowing him. One was his girlfriend,and the other, Alejandro Lázaro Gago, altered his story and laterclaimed that Gutiérrez was not the terrorist known as "Carlos" hehad originally claimed him to be.The court considered that the testimoniesshowed that Gutiérrez was guilty. As for the medical evidence, thecourt argued that it "could not serve as a legal basis to exempt him ofall responsibility for the crime imputed to him." He received a twenty-yearsentence and on February 28, 1996, the Supreme Court declared it sound.Gutiérrez's need for regular transportation and care in the hospitalhas created problems with the prison authorities who say they do not havethe staff or transportation to cope with his needs.44E. Mirtha Ira Bueno HidalgoMirtha Ira Bueno Hidalgo, whose acquittalby a trial court was confirmed at the appellate level, was ordered to standtrial again by the Supreme Court on the grounds that the trial court hadfailed to weigh the evidence satisfactorily. Without presenting any newgrounds or evidence against her, the appellate court then sentenced herto twelve years of imprisonment.With a legal system heavily biased againstthe defendant, everyday circumstances can put an innocent person on thewrong side of the law. A dedicated law student in her early twenties, MirthaIra Bueno Hidalgo fell asleep on the bus in the early morning and wokeup in the wrong part of town. While waiting for transportation to takeher back to her destination she was arrested on suspicion of hanging postersfor the Shining Path. Bueno was absolved and released, but almost two yearslater the Supreme Court unaccountably ordered her arrested and tried again.A faceless court then convicted her of terrorism.On the day of her initial arrest, August10, 1990, Bueno was in her third year at the San Marcos University LawSchool. She was a conscientious student with above-average grades, whodid not like missing assignment deadlines. Urgently needing some law booksthat day, she decided to get up very early as she had done in the past,to borrow them from a fellow-student who left home early for work. On theminibus ride to the Breña district where her friend lived, Buenonodded off and awoke with a start to find herself some distance from herdestination, in the Avenida Argentina. She got off the bus at a spot wherethe police were searching for a group of youths who had been sticking upposters in the early hours for the Shining Path. Police promptly arrestedBueno without explanation, covered her head and took her for interrogationto a police station.45Although Bueno carefully explained thereasons for her presence in the neighborhood, the police did not believeher and accused her of carrying Shining Path leaflets. She denied thatshe had ever had the leaflets, and a police handwriting expert was unableto determine their authorship with confidence. The "discovery" of the leafletswas, in any case, highly irregular: the public prosecutor was not presentwhen the record was drawn up, nor was it signed by Bueno.Police also performed handwriting testson purportedly subversive manuscripts seized during a subsequent searchof Bueno's home. After comparing the documents with samples of the suspect'sspontaneous writing, theexperts concluded this time that Bueno had indeedwritten them. The "subversive" documents were, in fact, handwritten quotesfrom The Rebellion of the Masses by the Spanish conservative politicalphilosopher José Ortega y Gasset, a far cry from a revolutionarytract. In fact, Bueno was working on an assignment on his ideas at thetime. There was no other evidence against her.Bueno and her two fellow defendants inthe case, Valentín Meza Chávez and Victor Hugo Mezarina Ruíz,were duly acquitted by the Higher Court of Lima, but in late 1994 the SupremeCourt ordered a re-trial because of failure to complete a paperwork formality.On November 12, 1995, Bueno was re-arrested and imprisoned in Santa Mónicaprison. On March 26, 1996, the Special Chamber of the Higher Court of Lima(Sala especial de la Corte Superior de Justicia de Lima) sentencedher to twelve years of imprisonment for terrorism. The court adduced nonew grounds or evidence to justify the change of verdict.46F. Julio Rondinel CanoJulio Rondinel Cano, a student of psychology,also found himself in the wrong place at the wrong time when the bus whichwas taking him home from a parents' meeting broke down between 8:30 and9:00 p.m. on the corner of Mieggs and Dueñas streets in Lima.According to the police report, there hadbeen a noisy Shining Path demonstration at that time in the area. Whenthe police arrived, the participants scattered amid gunshots and firecrackerexplosions. Rondinel has consistently maintained that he was detained inthe street after getting off the bus. The police, however, claimed to havedetained him in a private house into which he had fled, and that the ownerrecognized him in a police lineup. The identification was questionablefrom several angles: there was a power failure at the time, and it waspitch dark; two other people who the police claimed had entered the houseand were detained at the same time as Rondinel were never identified; threelodgers present at the time saw nothing of the three arrests. Most tellingof all was the evidence of the bus driver who confirmed that his vehiclehad indeed broken down at the time and place that Rondinel had stated.Rondinel could not have known this if he had been in the house.Rondinel was acquitted in April 1994, andreleased, but the Supreme Court quashed the verdict and ordered a retrial.Rather than face indefinite imprisonment, Rondinel has not presented himselfto the authorities.47G. Demetrio de la Cruz SandovalThe speed and anonymity of trials underthe faceless court system, as well as extremely lax standards for evaluatingevidence, make the detection of malicious accusations by police or militaryofficials difficult. Several cases have been uncovered, however, in whichthe courts have been used to settle scores or exact revenge on enemies,to extort money or to silence critics or political opponents. Demetriode la Cruz Sandoval, a twenty-one-year-old peasant from the province ofPaucar de Sara, Ayacucho department, was sentenced by a military courtfor a crime he did not commit because he failed to pay the ransom demandedby a military officer for the release of his brother-in-law.De la Cruz, who is married and the fatherof two children, had played an active role in the rondas campesinasin the community of Chacari, where the family had been living since early1993.48 On February 20, 1994, de la Cruz wentto the military base at Vilcashuamán to inquire about the situationof his brother-in-law who was detained there. A non-commissioned officer(sub-oficial), Williamas Palacios, allowed de la Cruz to speak to his brother-in-law, and afterwards told him to return and to bring his wife and twohorses for him. On the following day, de la Cruz returned, accompaniedby his brother-in law's wife, but without the horses. Palacios was angryand detained both of them at the base, accusing de la Cruz of participatingin a massacre in the village of Pirhuabamba committed by the Shining Pathin October 1993. While at the base, soldiers allegedly tortured de la Cruzand made him sign a statement incriminating himself, without the presenceof the prosecutor or a defense attorney, both of which are required bylaw. During the night after their arrival at the base, soldiers took awayde la Cruz's brother-in-law's wife, refusing to heed her pleading to bereleased because she was a mother. He later heard her shouting and sobbingand fears that she was raped. Both she and her husband were later released.In his defense, de la Cruz insisted thatat the time of the massacre he and his wife were in the community of Chacari,attending the wedding of a friend. Both the friend and two members of therondas campesinas who were also present at the wedding confirmed this.Later that afternoon, de la Cruz joined the other ronderos in respondingto the emergency.Two survivors of the Pirhuabamba massacre,in which fifteen peasants were killed, identified de la Cruz as one ofthe Shining Path guerrillas who chased them when they were attempting toescape. However, de la Cruz's defense lawyers say they have establishedthat the two fled from different locations, making it impossible for asingle person to have pursued both of them. Furthermore, many witnessesof the incident concurred that the attackers had been wearing ski-masksand could not be easily identified.In April and October 1995, police agentscaptured five self-confessed members of a Shining Path gang which allegedlycarried out the Pirhuabamba killings. In their declarations to the policeand the military prosecutor, none claimed to know de la Cruz, much lessconfirm his participation in the massacre. Furthermore, a fifteen-year-oldboy, Róger Suárez Soto, whose parents died in the massacreand who was himself kidnaped by their killers and lived with them untiltheir arrest on October 4, 1995, stated that he did not see de la Cruzparticipate, and in fact did not even know him.On September 20, 1994, the Special MilitaryJudge of the Second Zone in Ayacucho sentenced de la Cruz to ten yearsin prison for treason. The army military court doubled the sentence onappeal to twenty years. De la Cruz's defense petitioned for the sentenceto be annulled by the Supreme Council of Military Justice, and asked forpermission to address the court. The court failed to reply to this requestand the lawyers learned after the event that on October 14, 1995, the SupremeCouncil had confirmed the twenty year sentence. The court delivered itsverdict well after the date that the identities of the real Pirhuabambakillers were known.H. Aurelio Ventura Mendoza and EfraínTerazona TinocoAlthough prosecutors are required by lawto be present during police interrogations, this is often not the case.The official stamp and signature of the prosecutor has appeared on detainees'police depositions, even though theprosecutor has been absent when thestatement was taken. In both cases described below judges declined to investigatethese fraudulent signatures.Aurelio Ventura Mendoza, forty-seven,a peasant from the hamlet of Cerro Chugo in Cajabamba province, was arrestedin Cajamarca on May 4, 1995, after being pointed out to police as a ShiningPath member by a former president of the local ronda campesina. Accordingto the Instituto de Defensa Legal, which is defending Ventura, the denunciationwas a malicious act of revenge by the former ronda president, whom Venturahad reported to the police in 1993 for cattle theft. Ventura was also accusedof the murder of his own son Jaime, and of burning to the ground his ownhome in October 1992. This crime was in fact committed by four membersof the Shining Path whom Ventura had denounced to the police at the time.A faceless civilian court in Chiclayo sentenced Ventura in January 1996to twenty years of imprisonment, citing a statement he had given to policein which he admitted being forced to join the guerrillas. In June 1995,however, Ventura protested to the judge that he had been forced by thepolice to sign it "on threat of punishment" and that the provincial prosecutor(fiscal provincial) was not present. This was confirmed by the prosecutorhimself, Julio Cabrejo Delgado, who called for the charges to be dismissed.The prosecutor's stamp and signature, nevertheless, appear at the bottomof the deposition in question, indicating that the police probably forgedthem. Nonetheless, the court convicted Ventura without investigating thepolice wrongdoing.49A Lima faceless court convicted EfraínTarazona Tinoco, a twenty-nine-year-old electrician, of terrorism andsentenced him to twenty years in prison after police allegedly planteda flier with the words "DEVELOP THE GROWING POPULAR PROTEST" among hispersonal effects during a search of his home. The police persuaded Tarazonato sign the search record by threatening to arrest his mother. Both Tarazonaand his relatives testified that the provincial prosecutor was not present.While being questioned later by police he had a glimpse of the record andnoticed to his surprise that the provincial prosecutor's signature wason it.50I. Jesus Alfonso Castiglione Mendoza,Santosa López Flores, Juan Teodisio Ibarra Padilla, EmeteriaQuispe Chilce, and Eduardo Ccanaza Nina: convicted for unwitting "collaboration"Effective and just anti-terrorism lawsmust ensure that those who collaborate with terrorists unknowingly arenot punished as if they had knowingly committed a crime. The laws mustalso be capable of distinguishing between those who collaborate becausethey are coerced or out of fear, and those that do so because they identifywith terrorist goals. Likewise, the terms of the law must discriminatecarefully between levels of criminal responsibility by fixing the penaltiesin strict accordance with the gravity of the offense. One of the most seriouscriticisms of Peruvian anti-terrorist laws and jurisprudence has been itsfailure to accomplish any of these objectives satisfactorily.Journalist Jesus Alfonso CastiglioneMendoza was a victim twice over. First, his name was fraudulently usedby a Shining Path member to rent a room in Huaraz, department of Ancash,from which the group planned an attack on a local prison. Then, after theattack, in which one policeman died and eight guerrillas escaped, Castiglionewas accused and convicted of assisting the guerrillas by providing theroom. Although the guerrilla who impersonated Castiglione told the policethat he did not know him, and had used his name without Castiglione's knowledge,on August 19, 1994, a Lima faceless court sentenced Castiglione to twentyyears. His lawyers appealed, and after a long delay the Supreme Court quashedthe verdict and ordered a new hearing. On November 21, 1995, despite powerfulevidence of his innocence presented by his lawyers, another Lima facelesscourt pronounced himguilty and confirmed the twenty-year sentence. Castiglione,after listening to the sentence, said in a broken voice: "I am innocent,this is an injustice, gentlemen, you are wrong."51Castiglione, who was an independent candidatein the municipal elections in Huaraz in February 1993, received death threatsfrom the Shining Path during the campaign and was provided police protection.Participation as a candidate in an election at that time could be consideredan act of defiance against the Shining Path, which boycotted the campaignand murdered and harassed candidates.52 In anopen letter to President Fujimori written from prison, Castiglione, whois a practicing Buddhist, declared himself opposed to terrorism whateverits political ideology. "Its methods and actions are always to be condemned,because they violate human rights, above all the fundamental right to life,"he wrote.53Castiglione has been adopted by AmnestyInternational as a prisoner of conscience. He has been made an honorarymember of International PEN and in May 1996 was awarded by Human RightsWatch the Hellman-Hammett prize for politically persecuted or unjustlydetained journalists.Santosa López Flores, a peasantfrom Huaraz who lived alone with her elderly mother, stumbled on a terroristcell when she was watching over a neighbor's house and noticed someonecoming out of the door carrying a white sack. Thinking that someone wasrobbing the house, she challenged the person to show her what was in thesack. Then a second person appeared and the two, after opening the sack,threatened her not to tell anyone what she had seen. In the weeks thatfollowed, the two returned on several occasions to her home. Then othersfollowed. A Shining Path cell began using her home regularly as a meetingplace and deposit for illegal materials. López was too scared totell the police. After her arrest she collaborated fully with them anddescribed in detail everything that had happened to her. She was treatedwith scepticism and scorn and received sexist taunts from the judges.54Although Santosa's predicament should have been evident to the court, giventhe conflictive reputation of Huaraz, it sentenced her in 1995 to six yearsof imprisonment for terrorism. Her mother was left alone to fend for herself.Juan Teodisio Ibarra Padilla, atwenty-five-year-old maker of wooden fruit boxes, worked from a small shopin La Victoria, Lima, an area where the Shining Path had a strong presencefor several years. One night in June 1992 he noticed some strangers unloadingcrates from a truck half a block down the street. One of the strangersaccosted him, pinned him to a wall, and warned him to say nothing aboutwhat he had seen, threatening to kill him if he went to the police. Ibarrathought the men were common criminals and kept quiet, not even tellinghis family what had happened. Two days later, soldiers combing the areafor terrorists called on Ibarra and asked him if he had seen anything suspiciousover the past few days. He told the lieutenant who interviewed him whathad happened and took the soldiers to the spot where the strangers hadleft the crates. The soldiers discovered polyethylene sacks containingexplosives.The soldiers treated Ibarra immediatelyas a suspect and took him to an army base and from there to DINCOTE, wherehe recognized two women, one who had been accompanying the man who hadthreatened him. He also recognized another women, a confessed Shining Pathmember. The police investigation determined that the proximity to Ibarra'sworkshop of the drop chosen by the guerrillas had been purely coincidental.Nevertheless, on June 18, 1993, a Lima faceless court gave Ibarra a twenty-yearprison sentence, even though it acknowledged that Ibarra "[d]id not knowthat the boxes they left him to guard contained dynamite and acted outof fear of their threats." The lieutenant who had visited Ibarra failedto record that the suspect had, in fact, informed for the police.55Emeteria Quispe Chilce, a robustand energetic woman in her mid-thirties, is serving a twenty-year prisonsentence for terrorism in Lima's Santa Mónica prison for women.Quispe had worked for years as a street vendor in the Lima slum districtof La Victoria. Originally from the Ayacucho province of Victor Fajardo,she came to Lima in her late teens with her older brother, Maximiliano.56Quispe and her brother worked in the marketin La Victoria. Quispe sold soft drinks and snacks off a cart at the bus-stop,getting up every day at 3:00 a.m. to purchase her wares from the wholesalerand catch the early morning trade. She and Maximiliano rented a small hometogether. Then she fell in love, and in 1986 her first daughter, Juanita,was born. Quispe had two more children in 1989 and 1993, Humberto and Haydée.But on two occasions her partners abandoned her, leaving her alone withher children. She was coping alone with them when the two oldest came downwith cholera.At about that time, in August 1993, a regularcustomer, a student who introduced herself as "Victoria," approached Quispein the market and helped her carry her things back home. She asked Quispeif she would rent her a room on the ground floor of her house where shecould study with some friends. Quispe, who trusted the girl and neededthe money and the help, agreed. For three months "Victoria" would visitQuispe, sometimes in the company of friends, and occupy the room. Quispelater told the police that the arrangement ended in October, when "Victoria"said that she did not want to continue using the room because of the frequentpolice raids in the neighborhood.On March 30, 1994, a terrorist bomb explodedin the Peruvian Telephone Company in the center of Lima, causing considerabledamage. Following the blast, police arrested two suspects, Guillermo QuispeChipana and Nery Juana Alvarez Chávez, and handed them over to DINCOTE.Under interrogation, both of these suspects told police that Emeteria Quispewas one of a group of Shining Path supporters who had provided membersof the organization with food, lodging, and money. Police arrested EmeteriaQuispe the following day (March 31) and later detained nine other allegedguerrillas. A military tribunal sentenced Guillermo Quispe Chipana andNery Juana Alvarez Chávez to life imprisonment for treason. On June15, 1995, a faceless tribunal of the Lima Superior Court sentenced EmeteriaQuispe and all but one of her co-defendants to twenty years of imprisonmentas accomplices.The only evidence in the court file implicatingQuispe is the initial identification made by the two witnesses againsther, both of whom subsequently retracted their statements before the judge,affirming that they had been forced to sign their declarations after beingthreatened and mistreated. They insisted to the judge that they did not,in fact, know Quispe at all. In a summing up, the court maintained thatQuispe had admitted in her declaration to the police to being a ShiningPath militant "in her capacity as a support person." In fact, all thatshe admitted to washaving rented the room out to "Victoria." Furthermore,she denied participating in or knowing what took place in the meetingsheld on the first floor, or to having previously met any of her co-defendants.The court cited no evidence to disprove these claims, nor does the fileindicate that the prosecutor made any serious effort to find any.57In 1989 the community of Ajanani Chicoin the province of Azangaro, Puno Department, where Eduardo CcanazaNina lives, was targeted by the Shining Path for a recruitment drive.Guerrillas assembled all the villagers in the school and distributed stolensheep as gifts, while making the peasants chant slogans praising "PresidentGonzalo."58 Ccanaza was detained in a routinearmy check and later accused of having received two head of sheep and chantingterrorist slogans. There was no evidence to suggest that his involvementwith the Shining Path went any further than that, and he testified thatafter this single contact the guerrillas did not return to the village.For this a faceless court convicted him of terrorism and sentenced himto twenty years in prison. In August 1995, the Supreme Court reduced thepenalty to ten years.59V. ABUSESBY ARMED OPPOSITION GROUPS"Shining Path leaders exalt the cold-bloodedmurder of their ideological foes in open defiance of human rights values"we wrote in our last report on Peru.60 Suchabuses are not combat-related excesses but an integral part of the ShiningPath's strategy, which has always favored the selective elimination oftheir political opponents, carried out by so-called "annihilation commandos"(comandos de aniquilamiento), and indiscriminate attacks on civiliantargets, designed to cause terror and panic in the civilian population.As political circumstances have changed, so have the targets chosen forattack, but the tactics have remained the same: selective murder tailoredto ram home a political message and terrify would-be opponents. In recentyears, apart from the Shining Path's traditional enemies: members of peasantcivil defense groups (rondas campesinas), elected local governmentofficials, community leaders, grassroots activists and trade unionists,victims have included arrepentidos (former guerrillas who have renouncedthe Shining Path and cooperated with the police) and even members of opposedtendencies within the organization itself. Since our first report on Peruin 1984, Human Rights Watch/Americas has reported on violations of thelaws of war by the armed opposition as well as government forces.61Terrorist groups are believed responsiblefor 252 political assassinations in 1995, of which 222 are attributed tothe Shining Path, four to the MRTA, while the authorship of twenty-sixis unclear. Selective killings more thanmatched in number those killedin combat (250, of whom 191 were guerrilla combatants).62While the numbers have diminished significantly since 1992, when 946 politicalassassinations were attributed to the Shining Path, the decline clearlyreflects an overall reduction of armed activity rather than any changein tactics by the guerrillas.Government successes against the ShiningPath and especially the arrest of its leader Abimael Guzmán andleading cadres in 1992 has led to a bitter struggle within the organization.Guzmán, in a series of letters from prison, has ordered his followersto relinquish violent action and press for a "peace accord" with the government.A former Guzmán aide-de-camp, Oscar Ramírez Durand, "Feliciano,"has accused Guzmán of capitulation and continues to lead a faction,known as Sendero Rojo (Red Path), dedicated to violent harassmentand the overthrow of the state. One of the first political assassinationscommitted by the Shining Path in 1995 was the murder of Lima Shining Pathcadre Manuel Cajavilca Cuete, whose body was found on January 22 on wastelandnear the Panamericana Norte highway, thirty kilometers from Lima. On thebody was a placard with the words "Snitch, defender of the Peace Agreement."63While relative calm has returned to muchof Peru's countryside, terrorist groups believed to be under Feliciano'scommand remain entrenched in the Upper Huallaga Valley, and the Departmentsof Piura, La Libertad, and parts of Ayacucho. Most MRTA actions have beenconcentrated in the central jungle region in the department of Junín.Recently, there are signs that the Shining Path faction led by Felicianois once again organizing and attempting to recover a toe-hold in workingclass districts of Lima.Some of the most brutal abuses in 1995occurred in the Department of San Martín, and the adjoining departmentof Huánuco, in the Upper Huallaga, a center of coca cultivationand the production and trafficking of cocaine paste. Killings in this regionhave become a daily occurrence, reportedly due to wars between rival gangsof drug-traffickers competing for shares in a contracting market. A Peruvianhuman rights investigator who visited the area in January 1996 reported:The people say that the authorities havedone virtually nothing to stop the wave of crimes and violence which hasshaken the town. They (the authorities) live virtually ensconced insidethe army base, obviously out of fear of the Shining Path. Here the judge,the prosecutor, the governor, the mayor and his officials, the police andthe army have their homes and offices. No one ventures outside withouta heavy police escort.64Most of the killings took place in villagesalong the stretch of highway between Tingo María and Tocache, whichruns parallel with the Huallaga river and intersects areas through whichthe Shining Path is known to operate.In February 1995, Red Path members assassinatedtwelve people, reported to be former guerrillas who had recanted, in Aucayacu,a town of some 16,000 inhabitants some forty kilometers north of TingoMaría.A journalist living in the zone describedthe guerrilla column as:[m]ade up of people from the area and outsiderswho come from Ayacucho or Huancayo. In the most recent incursions as manyas a hundred have arrived, among them children and old people. That meansthat they have recruited whole families who may be with them against theirwill.Everyone knows that the Senderistas areentering the villages to search out their former leaders, who now reallydon't want anything to do with them, and flee as soon as they know theterrorists are coming.65On October 4 and 5, 1995, some two hundredmembers of this group were reported to have entered twelve villages inthe area, and to have killed at least twenty people, as well as burningtheir homes and killing their animals. In Pucayacu, about fifty kilometersnorth of Tingo María, the Senderistas rounded up peasants and hackedto death with machetes eight who had been identified as ronderos,repentant guerrillas, or local leaders.On October 1, 1995, a Shining Path columnmurdered with machetes four peasants in the village of Situlli, Progresoprovince. Fifty guerrillas armed with assault rifles blocked the road toTocache and intercepted the villagers on their way to their fields. Thefour victims were hacked to death after a mock trial in which they wereaccused of collaborating with the army.66The killings continued in 1996. On January7, Shining Path members killed with a machete Luis Rigoberto Ramírez,aged seventy-two, and his eighteen-year-old daughter, Lisbeth RamírezLozano, in a village two kilometers from Nuevo Progreso, Tocache. On February9, terrorists attacked the village of Río Frío, near Angasyacuyin the province of Crespo and Castillo where they allegedly executed thechairwoman of the Río Frío Glass of Milk Committee, RoraHuamán Meza, and her two sons, Hugo Morales Huamán and EliMorales Huamán.67On May 12, 1995, about twenty Shining Pathguerrillas entered the community of San José de Belén, Huancavelica,whose inhabitants had recently returned after leaving the zone for therelative safety of the city of Huancayo. The guerrillas demanded paymentof a war tax of 1000 soles (approximately $450), which the villagerswere unable to pay. A survivor told how the guerrillas then murdered sixof the villagers and burned their homes. Among the dead were Luis HuarcayaPriona, Marcelina Mendoza Antonio, Andrés Mendoza Hilario, BernaninaCcente, Adrián Asto Huarcaya and Yessica Asto Huarcaya.68Urban community leaders have also beentargeted for assassination by the Shining Path. Victims in 1995 includedformer mayor of Pativilca Humberto Olivares Villar and his wife, MaríaZenaída Casas, killed on July 10, reportedly because Olivares hadrefused to heed pressure from the Shining Path to resign from his roleas president of the civil defense committee of El Porvenir, a poor residentialcommunity in Barranca, a Lima district.69Assassinations and death threats were reportedin other poor residential areas in Lima, such as Raucana, Villa El Salvador,and Huaycán, where for years the Shining Path has tried to wrestcontrol from elected community leaders. There were disturbing signs ofa resurgence of terror tactics in what appeared to be an effort to regainafoothold in these communities, which once had been Shining Path strongholds.A Shining Path assassination squad is reported responsible for the killingon June 30, 1995, of Pedro Díaz Maldonado, General Secretary ofthe FAM aluminum factory union in Até Vitarte, who had opposed ShiningPath infiltration of the union.On March 6, 1996, Red Path settled accountswith an old Shining Path foe, Pascuala Rosado Cornejo, founder and leaderof the self-help community of Huaycán. Rosado's popularity causeda rout of the Shining Path in May 1991, when the community voted in anassembly to continue the self-help strategy she championed, and electeda committee determined to clean up and develop the neighborhood, whichhad acquired a reputation as a "red zone." Rosado organized a self-defensecommittee to combat local crime. Following an assassination attempt in1992 and repeated death threats, Rosado left the country in May 1993 andlived for two years in Chile. Since her return to Peru in December 1995,Rosado had avoided political activity and had been living as an ordinarycitizen in Huaycán. The two men and one woman who participated inher killing shot Rosado in the head in the street and scattered leafletsaround the body. The leaflets called for a continuation of the "peopleswar" and read: "SMASH the LOD!" (the Spanish acronym means "right-wingopportunistic line").70The names of five other Huaycánleaders including Leonidas Centeno Pacheco, Pedro Arévalo Torres,and Javier Ramón Figueroa were mentioned on the leaflets found nearRosado's body. Like Rosado they had been provided police protection becauseof continuous threats, but the police guard was withdrawn in October 1995.71The widow of a former leader of the communityof Raucana, Simeón Máximo Cahuana Huamán, who wasmurdered by the Shining Path on April 15, 1994, told Human Rights Watch/Americasthat she received death threats shortly after returning to Raucana in March1996, after a long absence. A colleague of Cahuana, Carlos Lavalle wasalso killed in 1994; like Cahauna he also had been repeatedly threatenedbeforehand.72Michel Azcueta, mayor of Villa El Salvador,also received veiled warnings which appeared in an issue of the pro-ShiningPath newspaper, El Diario Internacional, in which he was accusedof implementing a security plan "inspired by fascism" (inspirado delfascismo) and which amounted to "a new version of the urban rondas"(una nueva modalidad de rondas urbanas").73The Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement(MRTA) was responsible for four targeted assassinations in 1995; threeof the victims were civilians.74 In December,police foiled an MRTA plan to kidnap leading parliamentarians and barterthem in exchange for MRTA leaders currently in prison. A National Policeraid on a house in the residential district of La Molina in the early hoursof December 1 was followed by a long gun battle in which three MRTA guerrillasand one policeman were killed. The guerrillas holed up in a neighboringhouse, where they took two women and three children hostage and barricadedthemselves in, before eventually surrendering and releasing the hostages.Among those captured was MRTA leader Miguel Rincón Rincón,and Lori Helene Berenson, a U.S. citizen, who had been arrested beforehand.Her case is discussed below.VI. U.S. POLICYEver since the Commission of InternationalJurists, created by the Clinton administration to study the Peruvian judicialsystem after Fujimori's 1992 coup, delivered its report in March 1994,U.S. officials have toned down public criticism of the faceless courts.Evidently, the administration was discouraged by the hostile receptiongiven the report by President Fujimori and his government. Nonetheless,several limited reforms of the system were introduced both before and afterits publication, showing that the initiative was an important source ofpressure on the Fujimori government.Yet instead of maintaining this publicpressure, the State Department has retreated into quiet diplomacy, whichofficials claim to be more effective. There is little evidence, however,that U.S. quiet diplomacy regarding the faceless courts has had any effectin Peru. If failed quiet diplomacy is not followed up by public pressure,it has little or no impact. The Clinton Administration has made some positivestatements on human rights in Peru and has taken some useful initiatives,but these efforts have fallen short of a concerted effort to convince PresidentFujimori that it is in his interest to end the abuses described in thisreport. The fact that an American citizen, Lori Helene Berenson, has becomea victim of these unfair trial procedures, gives the Clinton Administrationan important opportunity to press the Fujimori government. Washington shouldseek to build a coalition of Peru's international donors in favor of endingthe abuses represented by the faceless courts in Peru and use every forumavailable, from the United Nations to the World Bank, to press urgentlyfor the necessary changes.The Clinton Administration has severalassistance channels to Peru which could be used as a lever for change.In fiscal year 1997, the administration has requested $25 million in assistancefor counternarcotics programs, much of this for the police. In addition,the administration proposes in its fiscal 1997 budget request, to providea small amount of assistance to the Peruvian navy, reversing a ban on militaryaid in effect since 1992 because of human rights abuses. Human Rights Watch/Americasand the Washington Office on Latin America (WOLA) have urged U.S. lawmakersto prohibit this military aid, bearing in mind that the navy has been involvedin egregious human rights violations in 1995, which remain unpunished.The administration also has provided an estimated $100,000 worth of armssales to the Fujimori government in fiscal year 1996 and has indicatedplans to make a similar sale in 1997.75In addition, the Clinton Administrationhas failed to use its voice and vote at international financial institutions,to oppose loans to Peru which are not exclusively dedicated to meetingbasic human needs. Such action would be consistent with U.S. law, whichrequires the administration to contest loans to countries whose governmentsengage in "a pattern of gross violations of internationally recognizedhuman rights."76 The deprivation of libertythrough systematic due process denial to thousands of individuals, in ourview, constitutes precisely such a pattern.The Clinton Administration has taken thehighly commendable step of using AID funds to support human rights workin Peru, to the best of our knowledge unprecedented in Peru. The UnitedStates is contributing AID funds to the Instituto de Defensa Legal (IDL),the Peace Study and Action Center (CEAPAZ), the Episcopal Commission forSocial Action (CEAS), and to the Obra Recolectana de Acción Social,a church-based prisoner aid group established by former prison chaplain,Father Hubert Lanssiers, who has been appointed by President Fujimori asa link between the government and the human rights NGOs. The Obra Recolectanade Acción Social, which is administered by Catholic Relief Services(CRS) and has operated for approximately one year, contributes to the costofproviding free legal counsel for people unjustly accused of terrorism.77Between them these four organizations have taken up 1,078 cases since theinception of the program and have obtained the release of 274 prisoners.78In addition USAID has contributed $50,000in seed money to the office of the Defensor del Pueblo, which, at the timeof writing had recently moved to a four-story office building in downtownLima, and had a small staff of four or five people.A. The Lori Berenson CaseIn December 1995, the arrest and trialby a military court of a U.S. citizen, twenty-six-year-old Lori HeleneBerenson, unexpectedly focused public attention in the U.S. on the issueof the Peruvian faceless courts, with long reports and opinion columnspublished in major U.S. newspapers.79 Berensonwas detained on November 30 while returning home by bus after a visit tothe Congress. Hours after her arrest, police carried out the raid on thesafehouse in La Molina described above. On December 3, Fujimori accusedBerenson in a television broadcast of helping MRTA guerrillas by rentingthem a house in the La Molina neighborhood and supplying them with food.DINCOTE stated that she had repeatedly entered Congress posing as a journalistto gain information the group needed to carry out the kidnapings. Duringa press conference staged by DINCOTE before her trial, in which she wasled on stage in handcuffs and shackles, Berenson defended the MRTA andshouted out her convictions about poverty and injustice in Peru.80On January 11 a faceless military tribunal convicted her to life imprisonmentfor treason following a summary trial which, like all of those held beforefaceless courts, lacked the most fundamental guarantees of due process.Acting Department of State spokesman GlynDavies stated on that day:The United States deeply regrets that Ms.Berenson was not tried in an open civilian court with full rights of legaldefense, in accordance with international juridical norms...The UnitedStates remains concerned that Ms. Berenson receive due process. We haverepeatedly expressed these concerns to the Government of Peru. We callupon the Peruvian government to take the necessary steps in the appealsprocess to accord Ms. Berenson an open judicial proceeding in a civiliancourt. The United States will continue to follow this case closely.81Berenson lost her appeals within the militarycourt system, and Washington's plea for an open hearing by a civilian courtwas ignored. In May, President Fujimori was received by President BillClinton during a private visit to Washington. During a White House pressbriefing on May 21 prior to the meeting, Press Secretary Mike McCurrytoldreporters that "[t]he President will also raise the case of Lori Berensonand ask President Fujimori to reconsider her case and afford her the dueprocess we believe that she is entitled to in a civilian court in Peru."82After the meeting, Fujimori denied that Clinton had asked him to give Berensona trial by a civilian court:...(Clinton) did not make any request.He wanted to know about the case, to know the facts and that was what wespoke about...I told him that...Ms Berenson got a fair trial under Peruvianlaw, which makes no distinction between Peruvian citizens and foreignersin cases of terrorism.83President Clinton is to be commended forraising the Berenson case during the Fujimori meeting. However, it is notclear whether he simply raised a question, as President Fujimori suggested,or whether he pressed for Berenson's right to a fair trial be satisfied.B. RecommendationsWe urge the Clinton administration to redoubleits pressure on the Fujimori government to end the use of faceless courtsin Peru, to restore the independence of the judiciary, and to review thecases of all those tried by faceless courts, giving urgent priority tothose deemed innocent by local human rights organizations. To that end,Washington should:* oppose thepending loan at the World Bank for the judiciary and use its influencewith other governments to block the loan. World Bank or other internationalassistance to Peru's judiciary should be conditioned on a restoration ofthe independence of the judiciary and an end to practices which blatantlyviolate due process norms;* sponsora resolution at the upcoming meeting in Geneva of the U.N. Subcommissionfor the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities to condemnthe due process violations associated with the faceless courts and thedenial of justice represented by the 1995 amnesty law;* supportthe naming of an independent expert by the United Nations Human RightsCommission which meets in Geneva during the first quarter of 1997. Theexpert's mandate should include monitoring and publicly reporting on Peru'shuman rights situation.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSHuman Rights Watch/Americas Research AssociateSebastian Brett wrote this report and Anne Manuel, deputy director, editedit. Andrew Moore provided research assistance and Steven Hernándezcoordinated the production. Much of the material was collected during amission to Peru in April 1996, as well as information provided to us inrecent months by groups and individuals throughout Peru. We are particularlygrateful for the help of the legal staff of the Coordinadora Nacional deDerechos Humanos and its member organizations, including the AsociaciónPro-Derechos Humanos, the Instituto de Defensa Legal, the Comisiónde Derechos Humanos, the Fundación Ecuménica para el Desarrolloy la Paz and the Centro de Estudios y Acción para la Paz.WHAT YOU CANDOThe Fujimori government is concerned aboutits international human rights image. International pressure on behalfof individual prisoners has in many cases led to their release. In addition,pressure from the international community has been largely responsiblefor the limited, but beneficial reforms to the faceless court system describedin this report. Those wishing to express concern over the injustices perpetratedby the faceless court system or on behalf of individual prisoners shouldwrite or telephone the following:Ambassador Ricardo Luna, Embassy of Peru,1700 Massachusetts Ave. NW, Washington, D.C., 20036. Phone: 202-833-9860,fax: 659-8124. Please send politely worded appeals to the Peruvian authorities,requesting the following: an end to the use of faceless courts and thetrial of civilians in military tribunals; the establishment of a specialreview board to study the sentences of all those imprisoned under the terrorismand treason laws, giving priority to cases where there are strong indicationsof innocence; urgent measures to end the use of torture by police and military,with clear and effective mechanisms to prosecute perpetrators. Appealson behalf of individual prisoners mentioned in this report are also stronglyrecommended.To President Clinton: The White House,1600 Pennsylvania Ave., NW, Washington, D.C. 20506 and Ambassador JeffreyDavidow, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, U.S.Department of State, Washington, D.C., 20520: Please send politely wordedappeals to President Clinton and Amb. Davidow, urging the administrationto redouble its efforts to press Peru to abandon the use of faceless courtsand resolve the situation of those unfairly imprisoned or convicted. Urgethe President and the State Department to take the lead at the August 1996session of the United Nations Subcommission for the Prevention of Discriminationand Protection of Minorities in Geneva in sponsoring a resolution condemningthe due process violations associated with the faceless courts as wellas the denial of justice produced by the June 1995 amnesty law. Urge theadministration to also take the lead when the United Nations Human RightsCommission meets in Geneva in the first quarter of 1997 in pressing forthe naming of an Independent Expert to examine the human rights situationin Peru.To Jan Piercy, U.S. Executive Directorat the World Bank, World Bank, 1818 H St. NW, Room D13-004, Washington,D.C., 20433; Lionel C. Johnson, Deputy Assistant Secretary for InternationalDevelopment, Debt and Environment Police, Department of the Treasury, Washington,D.C. 20220: Please send politely worded letters to these U.S. officialscalling on the administration to use its voice and vote to oppose the loanpending at the World Bank for the judiciary in Peru until the facelesscourts are abolished and judicial independence restored.To Members of Congress (name of Memberof Congress, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C., 20515, orname of Senator, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C., 20510.) Please send politelyworded appeals to your representative and/or Senator to contact the Peruvianauthorities and/or the State Department or White House and raise the issuesdescribed above.For more information, contact Anne Manuelat (202) 371-6592, x. 109.Human Rights Watch/AmericasHuman Rights Watch is a nongovernmentalorganization established in 1978 to monitor and promote the observanceof internationally recognized human rights in Africa, the Americas, Asia,the Middle East and among the signatories of the Helsinki accords. It issupported by contributions from private individuals and foundations worldwide.It accepts no government funds, directly or indirectly. The staff includesKenneth Roth, executive director; Cynthia Brown, program director; HollyJ. Burkhalter, advocacy director; Barbara Guglielmo, finance and administrationdirector; Robert Kimzey, publications director; Jeri Laber, special advisor;Lotte Leicht, Brussels office director; Juan Méndez, general counsel;Susan Osnos, communications director; Jemera Rone, counsel; and JoannaWeschler, United Nations representative. Robert L. Bernstein is the chairof the board and Adrian W. DeWind is vice chair. Its Americas divisionwas established in 1981 to monitor human rights in Latin America and theCaribbean. José Miguel Vivanco is executive director; Anne Manuelis deputy director; James Cavallaro is the Brazil director; Joel Solomonis the research director; Sebastian Brett, Sarah DeCosse, and Robin Kirkare research associates; Michael Bochenek is the Leonard Sandler fellow;Steve Hernández and Paul Paz y Miño are associates. StephenL. Kass is the chair of the advisory committee; Marina Pinto Kaufman andDavid E. Nachman are vice chairs.Gopher Address://gopher.humanrights.org:5000Listserv address: To subscribe to the list,send an e-mail message to majordomo@igc.apc.org with "subscribe hrw-news"in the body of the message (leave the subject line blank).1 See AmericasWatch, Human Rights in Peru One Year after Fujimori's Coup, (NewYork: Human Rights Watch, 1993); and Human Rights Watch/Americas, "Peru:The Two Faces of Justice," A Human Rights Watch Short Report, Vol.7, No. 9.2 Americas Watch,in a report covering this period, wrote: "Perhaps the most profound changein the human rights landscape in Peru since last April 5 has been the transformationof a corrupt and ineffective judiciary into a highly politicized weaponof the executive branch deployed not only against suspected members ofthe armed opposition, but also against the unarmed opposition and varioussectors of civil society." Americas Watch, Human Rights in Peru OneYear After Fujimori's Coup, p. 19.3 Human RightsWatch/Americas, "The Two Faces of Justice," pp. 7-8.4 The United NationsHuman Rights Committee, during its forty-third, forty-fourth and forty-fifthsessions in 1992 considered the periodic report sent by Peru to the Committeepursuant to its obligations as a signatory of the International Covenanton Civil and Political Rights, Article 40(1). The Human Rights Committeeindicated, following discussions with the Peruvian representative, thatthe legal and judicial system was in a state of "disarray" due to the suspensionof several parts of the Constitution. The committee also noted due processviolations including the de facto suspension of habeas corpus and amparorights and retroactive application of new legislation drawn up for specificcases. Moreover, the committee stated that its concerns had not been adequatelyaddressed in the oral presentations or in an addendum to the report submittedby Peru. (United Nations, Report of the Human Rights Committee: GeneralAssembly Official Records,Forty-Seventh Session,Supplement No. 40(A/47/40)[New York: United Nations, 1994], pp. 7, 80, 82, 84)In 1994 and 1996 the U.N. special rapporteuron torture produced special reports on Peru. In 1994, the special rapporteurnoted that the anti-terrorist decrees establishing the court system "facilitated"the use of torture. (United Nations, Economic and Social Committee, Commissionon Human Rights, Question of the Human Rights of All Persons Subjectedto Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment, In Particular: Torture or OtherCruel or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, Report of the SpecialRapporteur, Mr. Nigel S. Rodley, submitted pursuant to Commission of HumanRights resolution 1992/32, E/CN.4/1994/31, p. 90, para. 427).In 1996, the special rapporteur reiteratedthis concern, concluding that the government had failed to address theissue. (United Nations, Economic and Social Committee, Commission on HumanRights, Question of the Human Rights of All Persons Subjected to AnyForm of Detention or Imprisonment, in Particular: Torture or Other Cruelor Degrading Treatment or Punishment, Report of the Special Rapporteur,Mr. Nigel Rodley, submitted pursuant to Commission of Human Rights resolution1995/37, E/CN.4/1996/35, p. 28)Peru's courts also became the subject ofa report by the special rapporteur on independence of the judiciary, whichfound that the wholesale dismissal of judges following the 1992 coup compromisedjudicial independence. (United Nations, Economic and Social Council, Commissionon Human Rights, The Independence and Impartiality of the Judiciary,Jurors and Assessors and the Independence of Lawyers: Report on the Independenceof the Judsciary and the Protection of Practicing Lawyers, prepared byMr. Louis Joinet pursuant to resolution 1991/35 of the Sub-Commssion onPrevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities E/CN.4/Sub.2/1992/25, p. 26, para. 132, 135)The Inter-American Commission on HumanRights published a special report on Peru after the 1992 coup as well.The commission decried as "[p]articularly disturbing" the new system of"secret justice" in which the impartiality and independence of judges couldnot be determined. Along with the suspension of habeas corpus and the summarydismissal of judges, the commission concluded that "this process is creatingthe institutional and legal conditions to justify arbitrary rule." (Organizationof American States, Report on the Situation of Human Rights in Peru,[Washington, D.C.: General Secretariat of the Organization of AmericanStates, 1993], pp. 19, 24)In its 1992-1993 annual report, the commissiondetailed violations of the right to defense before the faceless courts,including the case of Miguel Fernando Ruiz-Conejo Marquez, in which thecourt did not notify his attorney in Lima of his trial in Puno until twodays after sentencing the defendant to life imprisonment. The commissionalso reported the case of two defense attorneys who, having representedseveral Shining Path members, were themselves charged with collaboratingwith terrorists and summarily convicted and sentenced to thirty years ofimprisonment. (Organization of American States, Annual Report of theInter-American Commission on Human Rights, 1992-1993 [Washington, D.C.:General Secretariat of the Organization of American States, 1993] p. 200)In its 1993 annual report, the commissionstated that "the lack of an independent judiciary is one of the main reasonsfor the decline of the enjoyment and exercise of human rights in Peru."( Organization of American States, Annual Report of the Inter-AmericanCommission on Human Rights, 1993, [Washington, D.C.: General Secretariatof the Organization of American States, 1994] p. 506-507)The most thorough examination of the facelesscourts in relation to Peru's international human rights obligations todatehas been the report of the Commission of International Jurists, publishedin 1994. Established by the Clinton Administration in 1993 as a resultof an agreement with the Fujimori government, the jurists commission recommendedending the use of faceless courts nd military trials of civilians. (Report of the Commission of International Jurists on the Administrationof Justice in Peru [Washington: Internet, March 31, 1994], p. 52)5 In its recentreport on Peru, Amnesty International stated that anti-terrorist laws creatingfaceless courts "fall short of international fair trial standards and facilitatethe imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. The organization also believesthat the anti-terrorism laws deny the right to a fair trial of all thosedetained and put on trial for terrorism-related crimes." (Amnesty International,Peru: Prisoners of Conscience, [AI Index AMR 46/09/96], May 16,1996. p.6)6 CoordinadoraNacional de Derechos Humanos, Informe sobre la Situación de losDerechos Humanos en el Perú en 1995, (Lima: CoordinadoraNacional de Derechos Humanos, 1996) p. 30.7 APRODEH et al,Los Inocentes Tienen Nombre: 300 Historias de Prisión Injustaen el Perú, (Lima: Grafimace S.A., 1995).8 NBC officialtranscript.9 Human RightsWatch, World Report 1995 (New York: Human Rights Watch, 1994), p.117.10 Jorge Santistevan;"El problema de los inocentes me empieza a quitar el sueño," Ideele,No. 86, May 1996, pp.16-18.11 "The [publicprosecutor's] function is to monitor police activity and ensure that theprocedures indicated in the law for the conduct of the prosecution areconducted correctly: in this respect, [the prosecutor] must direct thepreliminary investigation in relation to the evidence appropriate to pursue,and control the permanent risk of police abuses or excesses, safeguardingthe basic rights recognized in the Constitution and international humanrights law." Ronald Gamarra, Terrorismo: Tratamiento Jurídico(Lima: Instituto de Defensa Legal, 1996), p. 203. (Human Rights Watch/Americastranslation)12 According tothe Coordinadora, 209 minors had been detained in ordinary jails and maximumsecurity prisons for terrorism and treason as of April 1995. Approximatelyfifty of these cases remain to be turned over to the juvenile system duein part to the difficulty of locating birth certificates as evidence. (CoordinadoraNacional de Derechos Humanos, Informe 1995, pp. 35-36)13 Decree Law25499, known as the Repentance Law, was implemented in May 1992 and remainedin force for thirty months. Hundreds of people were arrested on the testimonyof individuals who had surrendered under its aegis, called arrepentidos(repentants). Those who surrendered and provided names of guerrillas receivedreduced or suspended sentences-unless the arrepentido had been a leader.Although this law undoubtedly multiplied the number of arrests, from theperspective of due process it has been a disaster. Many prisoners whosecases Human Rights Watch/Americas has studied were convicted after beingidentified by arrepentidos. Such identifications were often vague, lackingin verifiable details, and based on hearsay or third party accounts. Oftenthey were the only evidence against the defendant. Although the arrepentidosfrequently retracted their statements later alleging they were made undertorture, judges routinely ignore these retractions. Furthermore, they commonlyfail to weigh defense evidence, such as alibis. Almost invariably the accusationhas been given more weight than the defendant's protestations of innocence.Since the defense could not know the identify of the arrepentido or questionhim or her directly, or even read his or her testimony in some cases, thislaw produced many injustices. Although the Repentance Law has been repealed,many prisoners continue to serve sentences which were imposed under theseunjust circumstances, underlining the urgency of a prompt judicial reviewof these cases.14 Under the facelesscourt system the identity of the judge or prosecutor is indicated on legaldocuments with a numerical code. The failure to record the code has littleconceivable bearing on the outcome of the trial, since the identity ofthe judge is secret anyway.15 In treasoncases, this period can be extended another fifteen days up to a maximumof thirty days with permission from the military judge. (Decree Law 25744,Article 2[a])16 Gamarra, Terrorismo,p. 225.17 In the caseof Alfredo Pablo Carrillo Antayhua, a 17-year-old sentenced to life imprisonmentfor treason by an air force court, The United Nations Working Group onArbitrary Detentions found the Peruvian government responsible for hisarbitrary detention. Among the grounds given were "[s]erious infractionsof international norms regarding the right to an impartial trial, whichconfer on the detention an arbitrary character, according to Category IIIof the principles applicable for theexamination of cases submitted at theWorking Group."The specific violations of due processmentioned by the Working Group included failure to ensure the presenceof a lawyer during the investigation, and the fact that the detainee ".... [d]id not have an opportunity to cross-examine the prosecution witnesswho incriminated him in the homicide of a police official. In fact, the[witness] ... only made a statement in the police station and not beforethe judge. The defense's petition, during the trial stage, for the witnessto be summoned was never granted, and, in fact, he never appeared."Decision No 13/1995 (Peru), published inUnited Nations Economic and Social Council, Commission on Human Rights,Fifty-Second Session, Decisions Adopted by the Working Group on ArbitraryDetention, E/CN.4/1996/40/Add.1, 31 October, 1995. Original in Spanish,HRW/Americas translation (official English version unavailable).18 Amnesty International,"Peru: Prisoners of Conscience." Amnesty International has adopted 122prisoners of conscience (political prisoners who have neither used noradvocated violence) in Peru. See also "Comisión Revisora," Ideele,No. 81, November 1995, pp. 13-14.19 Amnesty International,"Peru: Prisoners of Conscience," pp. 8-11.20 Human RightsWatch/Americas interview with Luz Salgado Rubianes, Lima, April 16, 1996.21 The reviewmechanism exists both in civilian and military jurisdiction, although thecircumstances in which it may be lodged are strictly limited. In civiliancourts the defense has to come up with significant new evidence for theappeal to be admissible; in military courts, since a November 1993 reform,the grounds are more flexible: if it can be argued that the trial courtfailed to give due weight to existing evidence, an appeal may be admitted.The Instituto de Defensa Legal reports that the Supreme Court has not granteda single review petition, although many have been presented; in militarycourts four appeals have been upheld. Two prisoners, Ada Navin and ClavioPeralta, who had been convicted in the same case, were released; the othertwo cases were referred to civilian courts. (Letter to Human Rights Watch/Americasfrom the Instituto de Defensa Legal, July 4, 1996)22 Gamarra,Terrorismo, p. 256.23 Law 25475 violatestwo key dispositions of Article 14 of the International Covenant of Civiland Political Rights. Article 14 (3) states that "In the determinationof any criminal charge against him, everyone shall be entitled to the followingminimum guarantees, in full equality...(b) to have adequate time and facilitiesfor the preparation of his defense and to communicate with counsel of hisown choosing;...(e) to examine, or have examined, the witnesses againsthim and to obtain the attendance and examination of witnesses on his behalfunder the same conditions as witnesses against him." (The InternationalBill of Human Rights, United Nations, Office of Public Information,New York, 1978)24 The law specificallyprohibits cross-examination of police who participated in the interrogation,not those who may have participated in the detention, even though it ismore likely that state agents involved in the interrogation phase are thosewho will engage in acts of torture to extract confessions. (Gamarra, Terrorismo,pp.260-261)25 Human RightsWatch/Americas interview, Coordinadora Juridical Committee, April 16, 1996.26 The Commissionof International Jurists, appointed by the Clinton administration to undertakea special study of the administration of justice in the aftermath of Fujimori'scoup, concluded that these restrictions make the task of defense attorneys"all but futile and relegates defenders... to playing a largely symbolicrole in the trial proceedings," Report of the Commission of InternationalJurists on the Administration of Justice in Peru (Washington: Internet,March 31, 1994), p.33.27 Human RightsWatch/Americas interview with Coordinadora Juridical Committee, Lima, April16, 1996.28 Letter to HumanRights Watch/Americas from the Instituto de Defensa Legal (IDL), April23, 1996.29 DINCOTE (DirecciónNacional Contra el Terrorismo) is Peru's anti-terrorism police force, alsoabbreviated as DIVCOTE or JECOTE outside Lima.30 Letter to HumanRights Watch/Americas from the Instituto de Defensa Legal, July 4, 1996.31 Human RightsWatch/Americas interview, Lima, April 12, 1996.32 The two reportedlytargeted for assassination were a San Marcos University professor, andthe former State Prosecutor for Terrorism, Dr. Daniel Espichán.33 The arrepentidosappear in the case file under the codes A1A000191 and A2A000199.34 The prosecutorfor the Higher War Council of the Peruvian Air Force, upholding the lowercourt's acquittal, stated this explicitly: "[....] the arrepentidos knewMoncada as a student activist and that he rejected the presence of theterrorist groups on the campus, which gives grounds to presume why theygave his name as a member of the organization."35 "An accusedperson, acquitted by a nonappealable judgment, shall not be subjected toa new trial for the same cause." Human Rights Watch/Americas and CEJILare currently litigating two cases in which this principle is violatedby Peru before the Inter-American system of human rights. The case of MaríaElena Loayza, who was detained, tortured, raped, tried and acquitted inmilitary court only to be tried again by a civilian faceless courts basedon the same evidence, is currently before the Inter-American Court of HumanRights. The Cantoral Benavides case is being studied by the Inter-AmericanCommission on Human Rights for possible submission to the Court.36 Los InocentesTienen Nombre, p. 224.37 Human RightsWatch/Americas interview with Tolentino's wife, Elsa María StanaccoMaguiño, Lima, April 15, 1996.38 Human RightsWatch/Americas interview with Elsa María Stanacco Maguiño,Lima, April 15, 1996.39 This accountof Tolentino's arrest and trial is based on his hand-written testimony,dated May 8, 1994, and on an interview with his wife, Elsa MaríaStanacco Maguiño, conducted by Human Rights Watch/Americas in Limaon April 15, 1996.40 The signedand fingerprinted note says: "I, Amancio Urbano Rivera, 38 years of age,am writing to you to retract the charges I made accusing Mr. Donato AlejandroTolentino Argandoña of terrorism. I made the charges because I hadbeen subjected to physical and psychological torture."Amancio Hurbano Rivera con 38 añosde edad me dirijo ante Usted para retractarme de los cargos de acusaciónpor terrorismo hechos al señor Donato Alejandro Tolentino ArgandoñaLos cargos realisados los hice por sometimiento de torturación físicay psicológica".On February 9, 1995. The Supreme Councilof Military Justice sentenced Urbano Rivera to twenty years in prison fortreason.41 Amnesty receivedthe letter in March 1994. Robles wrote that "every time the colonel setout to arrest someone he got me out of the prison and took me to the placeof arrest or to Command headquarters, and forced me to accuse the peopleand gave me money and food and got me drunk and made me sign documents,making out that it was for the sake of my freedom." (Amnesty International,Peru: Prisoners of Conscience, p. 16)42 FundaciónEcuménica para el Desarrollo y la Paz (FEDEPAZ), "Informe sobrela Situación Jurídica de Alfonso Rosely Chacón Rodríguez,Inocente Profesor Condenado a Diez Años de Pena Privativa de laLibertad," Manuscript, Lima, April 12, 1996.43 FEDEPAZ, "Informesobre la situación jurídica de Pedro Telmo Vega Valle, DirigenteVecinal Condenado Injustamente por un tribunal militar por el delito detraición a la patria a veinticinco años de pena privativade la libertad," Lima, April 10, 1996.44 Data from theAsociación Pro Derechos Humanos (APRODEH) and interviews with Gutiérrezin the 2 de Mayo hospital and with María Vivanco González,Gutiérrez's mother, Lima, April 16, 1996.45 Human RightsWatch/Americas interview with Rosa Quedena, (FEDEPAZ), Bueno's defenseattorney, Lima, April 9, 1996.46 In fact, thesentence included an extraordinary anomaly: it called for judgment to bereserved for the time being in the case of Meza Chávez, althoughthe Special Chamber had in fact acquitted Meza Chávez the previousOctober. Bueno's lawyers are convinced that this mistake would have beenimpossible if the judges had read the file before pronouncing a verdict.Interview with Dr. Rosa Quedena, FEDEPAZ, Lima, April 9, 1996.47 FEDEPAZ, Informesobre el caso de Julio Rondinel Cano, Lima, March, 1996.48 Rondas campesinasare community-based civil defense patrols, which have traditional rootsin the north, where they have long substituted for ineffective centralgovernment law enforcement. In the south, some communities formed civildefense committees in the mid-1980s-first at the army's behest and latersome of them voluntarily-to defend against Shining Path incursions. Inrecent years, the army has also encouraged-and sometimes forced-peasantsto form committees, which are then used in joint army-civil defense operations,to attack guerrilla columns. Some rondas have been implicated in humanrights violations, acting either alone or with the army.49 Manifestaciónde Aurelio Ventura Mendoza; Reapertura de la Instructiva del EncausadoAurelio Ventura Mendoza, Cajamarca, 5 de junio de 1995; Dictamen del Dr.Julio Cabrejo Delgado, Fiscal Provincial Provisional, Primera FiscalíaProvincial Mixta, Cajamarca; Sentencia, Tercer Juzgado Penal, Cajamarca,Instrucción No. 93.95, Chiclayo, 26 de enero de 1996.50 AsociaciónPro Derechos Humanos (APRODEH), "Casos de Personas Condenados que SonInocentes y Cuya Revisión de Procesos está Solicitando APRODEH,"Lima, 1995, pp. 19-21.51 La República,November 23, 1996, cited by Office of the Human Rights of Journalists (OFIP,Lima) communication by Internet at anpofip@attmail.com.52 Shining Pathhit squads assassinated more than fifteen candidates, family, and helpersin January 1993 during the municipal election campaigns, according to pressreports of that time. Press summaries provided to Human Rights Watch/Americasby the APRODEH documentation center.53 Los InocentesTienen Nombre, p. 251.54 Accordingto the Instituto de Defensa Legal, which defended Santosa López,a faceless magistrate made the following jibe: "obviously they (the terrorists)were going to your house for you to sleep with them. They were your lovers.Don't lie to us, don't pretend that they threatened you...." (Letter toHuman Rights Watch/Americas, April 23, 1996)55 APRODEH, "JuanTeodisio Ibarra Padilla (35), Vendedor de Cajones de Fruta Condenado a20 años," Lima, undated manuscript.56 Maximilianodescribed her birthplace as a "small town surrounded by four mountains.When it doesn't rain, there is no produce and the people practically dieof hunger. So they go to look for work in the capital." In the Quispes'case there was another reason. Their father left home when Emeteria wasthree and went to live with another woman. Their mother found another man,but he rejected and ill-treated them. (Human Rights Watch/Americas interviewwith Maximiliano Quispe Chilce, Lima, April 17, 1996)57 Case documentsprovided by the Instituto de Defensa Legal; and letters to Human RightsWatch/Americas from Quispe's defense attorney, Dr. Norma Rojas.58 PresidentGonzalo is the nom-de-guerre of Abimael Guzmán, the founder andleader of the Shining Path, in prison since his arrest in September 1992.59 FEDEPAZ, "Informesobre el caso de Eduardo Ccanaza Nina," Lima, February 1996.60 Human RightsWatch/Americas, "Peru: Two Faces of Justice," p. 50.61 The standardsset forth in Common Article 3 of the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 explicitlyaddress internal armed conflicts. Article 3 is the standard which applieswhere guerrilla forces do not exercise formal, consistent control overpopulation or territory, as is the case in Peru. Common Article 3 prohibitsmistreatment of individuals taking no active part in hostilities, includingcombatants who have laid down their arms or have been placed hors decombat for any reason. Strictly prohibited are: violence, includingmurder, mutilation or torture; humiliating or degrading treatment; andthe passing of sentences and carrying out of executions without previousjudgment by a regularly constituted court affording guarantees of due process.The application of Common Article 3 doesnot affect the legal status of parties to a conflict, nor does it conferany special status on the armed opposition.62 Coordinadora,Informe, 1995, p.7463 IsaíasRojas Pérez, "Sendero(s) Luminoso(s): Guerra de Supervivencia, Ideele,No. 82-83, December 1995, p. 103.64 See IsaíasRojas Pérez, "El Alto Huallaga: Valle de Violencias," Ideele,No. 84, February-March 1996.65 Venancio Sarasara,"Alto Huallaga: Abusos de Todas Partes," Ideele, No. 82-83, December1995, pp. 111-113.66 La República,October 2, 1996. For analysis of the violations of international humanitarianlaw these mock trials represent, see Human Rights Watch/Americas, "Peru:The Two Faces of Justice," pp. 46-50.67 Note Verbaledated April 1,1996, from the Permanent Mission of Peru to the United Nations,addressed to the Secretary General. U.N. General Assembly, Human RightsQuestions, Including Alternative Approaches fro Improving the EffectiveEnjoyment of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, April 2, 1996, A/50/912.The killings were reported in the Peruvian daily newspapers Expresoand Comercio on February 11, 1996.68 Human RightsWatch, World Report 1996, p.116.69 La República,July 11, 199570 IsaíasRojas,"Sendero Luminoso: Fantasma que Quiere Guerra," Ideele, No.85, April 1996, p. 57; and Human Rights Watch/Americas interview with IsaíasRojas, IDL, April 17, 1996.71 Human RightsWatch/Americas interview with Leónidas Centeno Pacheco, Lima, April17, 1996; and "Amenazan matar a dirigente vecinal, es el sucesor de PascualaRosado en Huaycán," La República, April 15, 1996.72 Human RightsWatch/Americas interview, Lima, April 17, 1996.73 El Mundo,March 12, 1996.74 Coordinadora,Informe, 1995, p.77.75 U.S. Departmentof State, Congressional Presentation Document, Fiscal Year 1997,p. 456.76 Section 701(a), International Financial Institutions Act.77 Human RightsWatch/Americas telephone interview with Jeff Borns, ODIT Chief, U.S. Agencyfor International Development, Lima, May 31, 1996.78 Official A.I.D.Statistics, undated.79 See for example,Calvin Sims, "In Peru, Un-American Justice," New York Times, January14, 1996; "Peru Mocks Due Process," New York Times, January 16,1996; and Pam Belluck and Calvin Sims,"A Puzzling Path: from P.S. 40 toPrison in Peru," New York Times, February 12, 1996.80 Unlike theMRTA members arrested during the raid in La Molina, Berenson was allowedto wear street clothes, rather than a striped prison uniform. Accordingto Berenson's parents, their daughter's strident appearance before televisioncameras was in part due to the fact that a seriously wounded woman whohad been arrested in the shootout in La Molina was placed in her cell anddenied medical attention for several days prior to the press conference,leaving Berenson in a desperate rage. (Human Rights Watch/Americas interview,Mark and Rhoda Berenson, Washington, D.C., June 20, 1996.)81 U.S. Departmentof State, Office of the Spokesman, Statement by Glyn Davies, Acting Spokesman,January 11, 1996.82 The WhiteHouse, Office of the Press Secretary, Press Briefing by Mike McCurry, May21, 1996.83 Peter Bate,"Inflexibilidadde Fujimori sobre caso Berenson ante Clinton," Reuter, Washington, May21, 1996. (Human Rights Watch/Americas translation)