Violence Instead of Vigilance: Torture and Illegal Detention by Uganda’s Rapid Response Unit | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportMarch 23, 2011Violence Instead of VigilanceTorture and Illegal Detentionby Uganda’s Rapid Response UnitViolenceInstead of VigilanceTorture and Illegal Detentionby Uganda’s Rapid Response UnitSummaryRecommendationsTo thePresident and Government of UgandaTo theUganda Police Force, Particularly the Police Standards Unit and theCriminal Investigations Department of PoliceTo theUgandan JudiciaryTo theParliament of UgandaTo theUganda Human Rights CommissionTo theUnited States, the United Kingdom, and Other Concerned Governments,Especially Development Partners in the Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS)To theUnited Nations Human Rights Council (UNHRC) and the African Commissionon Human and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR)MethodologyI.BackgroundOperation WembleyViolentCrime Crack Unit (VCCU)RapidResponse Unit (RRU)II.Applicable International and National LawIII. RRUAbusesExtrajudicialKillingsThe Killingof Frank SsekanjakoThe Killingof Henry BakasambaThe Killingsin KyengeraOtherKillingsTortureForcedConfessionsIllegal and IncommunicadoDetentionTheft ofSuspects’ Property, Extortion, and Theft of EvidencePublicParading of Criminal SuspectsTrials ofCivilians before Military CourtsOpportunitiesto Address Abuses by Rapid Response UnitCommitmentsto Address Abusive RRU PracticesThe Role ofthe Police Standards Unit (PSU)The Role ofthe Uganda Human Rights Commission (UHRC)Uganda’sDuty to Provide Lawyers to DefendantsAnnex 1: Letter from HRW to PoliceAnnex 2: Police Letter to HRWAcknowledgmentsSummaryAt RRU [Rapid ResponseUnit] station … they don’t want to listen. They want you to acceptthat you’ve stolen something. With the pain of beating, you accept.–Former suspect detained by RRU and charged withaggravated robbery, Kampala, November 19, 2009On August 20, 2010, robbers broke into the house of anaffluent woman in Makindye, Kampla, held machetes to her guard’s neck,and allegedly stole property and money. Police questioned several people,including Frank Ssekanjako, a 22-year-old who was renting a room near the crimescene. He was arrested, along with three others. Eyewitnesses who sawSsekanjako in detention in Kabalagala police station two days after his arrestsaid that he was concerned about the allegations against him but seemed in goodhealth and spirits.On August 23, three officers from Uganda Police’sRapid Response Unit collected Ssekanjako and another suspect allegedly in orderto recover stolen property. What happened next is a matter of dispute. The RRUofficers told Human Rights Watch that Ssekanjako complained of stomach pain inthe car, so they took him to the hospital where he died a few minutes later. Butthe official post-mortem report suggests otherwise, as do multiple eyewitnesseswho described how the officers beat Ssekanjako and other suspects  forover an hour at the scene of the alleged robbery with plastic pipes and a largeentolima, or wooden club, until he stopped moving or making any noise.Reportedly, officers then dragged the men to the car,dropped off two suspects at Kabalagala police station to give statements andtook Ssekanjako to the hospital, where he was later pronounced dead. Accordingto the post-mortem report Ssekanjako’s injuries were “fresh”and included eight puncture abrasions on the right foot, bruising on the back, aswollen right shoulder, bruising on the right and left upper arms and leftflank, and abrasions on the left thigh and elbow. No cause of death wasdetermined. Three officers have been arrested and are awaiting trial.Ssekanjako’s family has yet to receive information, documents, or medicalevidence related to his death—including copies of photos that police tookof his body—and say interacting with police about the investigation hasbeen very difficult. “Either the police were negligent or they werepurposefully trying to kill [Ssekanjako], but my mother has a right to knowwhat happened,” Ssekanjako’s brother told Human Rights Watch.“You go to police and expect vigilance and instead get violence”Over the last decade, a range of security units within thepolice and the military in Uganda have earned notorious reputations for usingbrutal and unlawful interrogation methods. Confronted with mounting evidence ofabuse, government officials have often denied allegations or made piecemealreforms, such as changing a unit’s name or commander. In this climate oftacit tolerance of brutal methods, victims have been reluctant to speak outabout their ill-treatment and abuse, fearing reprisals.At the same time, Uganda has worked to enhance its reputationas country that respects human rights, for example, by becoming a member of theUnited Nations Human Rights Council (UNHRC). There are also increased effortsto professionalize Uganda’s security forces via international trainingsand participation in African Union (AU) and United Nations peacekeepingmissions. But despite these measures of external engagement the governmentstill fails to protect human rights domestically, or to take significant stepsto address the problem of systemic and pervasive torture and prolonged illegaldetention.Human Rights Watch has documented hundreds of cases oftorture by various security units in Uganda over many years. This reportdetails extrajudicial killings, torture, illegal detention, forced confessionsand other abuses by the Rapid Response Unit (RRU) of the Uganda Police Force.RRU is the legacy of Operation Wembley, a short-lived security unit thatquickly earned a reputation for torture, including water-feeding, genitalmutilation, and stabbing, whipping or beating detainees.  While the nameand command structure of the unit has changed, abusive practices continue andare rarely exposed, acknowledged, challenged, or punished.During more than 13 months of research, Human Rights Watchcarried out over 100 interviews in regions where RRU is most active—Kampala,Mbale, Jinja, Masaka, and Mbarara. Drawing on interviews with victims of abuses,as well as current and former RRU employees, researchers documented serioushuman rights violations by RRU since its formal establishment in 2007. RRUofficers routinely use unlawful force during arrest, including beating suspectsand, in one instance that Human Rights Watch documented, shooting a handcuffedsuspect. RRU personnel were allegedly responsible for at least six extrajudicialkillings in 2010 alone, frequent use of torture during interrogations to extractconfessions, and prolonged illegal and sometimes incommunicado detention ofsuspects at RRU headquarters in Kireka, Kampala, and other locations.This report builds on previous Human Rights Watch workpublished over almost a decade. State of Pain: Torture in Uganda,published by Human Rights Watch in March 2004, was broad in scope, examiningillegal detention and torture by several security agencies, including OperationWembley. In 2009, Human Rights Watch published Open Secret: IllegalDetention and Torture by the Joint Anti-terrorism Task Force in Uganda, adetailed and in-depth account of torture and illegal detention by the JointAnti-terrorism Task Force (JATT), a security organization led by militaryintelligence, which was also featured in State of Pain. Unfortunately,despite government officials’ commitments to investigate and make changesto eradicate brutality and detention without charge, evidence of abusescontinues to mount.RRU’s predecessor, Operation Wembley, was formed inJune 2002 on the executive order of President Yoweri Museveni to combat armedurban crime. Commanded by a then-military colonel and comprised of soldiers andother ad-hoc operatives untrained in law enforcement, Operation Wembley becamesynonymous with brutal forms of torture against alleged armed robbers. In late 2002,Operation Wembley’s name was changed to the Violent Crime Crack Unit(VCCU) and was led by a police commander, but the military involvement in thelaw enforcement operations continued. Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) andthe Uganda Human Rights Commission documented extensive abuses by the VCCU. InJuly 2007, the unit again changed its name to Rapid Response Unit andofficially moved under the command control of the police. According tointerviewees, over half of the original operatives affiliated with Wembleyremain active in RRU, although it is unclear precisely how many.Ugandan police claim RRUis mandated to investigate “violent crime,” usually offensesaffiliated with the use of firearms. However since the unit was established,RRU officers and affiliated personnel have carried out arrests for a wide rangeof crimes, from petty theft to terrorism. Known for practices that flout basiclegal safeguards in Ugandan and international law—such as ignoring lawsregulating the right to arrest and detain persons, and extracting confessionsby coercion—RRU appears to be the preferred unit of authorities seeking arrestsand confessions by any means. RRU also continues Operation Wembley’spractice of handing over civilian suspects to the military courts forprosecution, even though Uganda’s Supreme Court and its internationalobligations prohibit the trial of civilians before military courts.Although under police command, RRU has sometimes used soldiersand untrained informants to carry out law enforcement operations. RRU personneltypically operate in unmarked cars, wear civilian clothes with no identifyinginsignia, and carry a range of guns—from pistols to larger assaultrifles. The unit’s members have on occasion transported suspects in thetrunks of unmarked cars.Of the 77 interviewees arrested by RRU, 60 said that RRU personnelhad beaten or tortured them at some point in their custody. The most commonform of torture was repetitive beatings on the joints, such as knees, elbows,ankles, and wrists during several sessions over many days while handcuffed instress positions. RRU personnel beat detainees with batons, sticks, bats, metalpipes, padlocks, table legs, and other objects. Detainees reported that torturehad left them with swollen or fractured limbs, unable to walk or lift objects,and with ongoing chronic pain. In some instances, RRU personnel inserted pinsunder suspects’ finger nails or in rare instances administered electricshocks. Suspects often said they were forced to sign confessions under duress followingtorture. In May and August 2010, for example, media reported that RRUoperatives had killed two suspects in their custody due to torture while tryingto extract information about robberies.From their detention at the Kireka facility, civilian suspectsare handed to military courts to face trial. Although military courts have regularlyheard testimony that the accused has been tortured, the military officers who act as judges in military courts have admitted intoevidence confessions extracted through torture and have not instructed anyone totake steps to address the allegations. Neither the judiciary nor the regularpolice have tried to assess the quality of RRU’s investigativemethods.  As a result, suspects often spend long periods in pre-trialdetention, in some instances, because their trials cannot proceed due to lackof evidence, or judges rely upon coerced confessions as the main form ofevidence.The absence of alawyer when a suspect is interrogated, a standard safeguard against abuse, has allowedtorture to persist in Uganda. All suspects have the legal right to counsel inUganda; in practice, defendants do not receive a state-provided lawyer untiltheir case is at trial and often spend years in detention before they ever meeta lawyer. During this time, evidence of the serious ill-treatment and torture usedto elicit confessions often vanishes, and the defendant becomes demoralized bythe long remand time, desperate for the case to be resolved, and skeptical therewill be a fair trial. For the vast majority of suspects arrested by the RRU,they will be tried before military courts, where they are judged, prosecutedand defended by members of the military and where the lack of sufficientguarantees of independence and impartiality makes the outlook for suspects evenbleaker.In 2010, police took asignificant step in the fight against RRU impunity. Three RRU officers werearrested for the murder of Frank Ssekanjako, the 22-year-old suspect who theyallegedly brutally beaten to death in August 2010. These arrests could mark aturning point in addressing abuses by RRU. However, Human Rights Watch hasinvestigated this case in detail and remains concerned that police have failedto collect statements from key witnesses to determine the circumstances of hisdeath, or to document the full range of violence used against Ssekanjako and hisco-accused that day. These shortcomings raise doubts about the quality ofevidence that will be presented at trial, if and when it occurs. The three RRUofficers have also been charged only with murder and not for the severebeatings meted out to the co-accused the same day. Ssekanjako’s familymembers, who have demanded justice, have also faced intimidation that has ledthem to doubt the police’s commitment to ensuring criminal accountabilityfor his murder.  And while taking action in response to a detainee’sdeath is laudable, real reform will only come if RRU personnel facerepercussions for other instances of brutality and beatings that can result in deathsin custody.Uganda’s government must comply with the provisions ofits own constitution and fulfill its core obligations under international humanrights law—in particular the absolute prohibition on torture and cruel,inhuman, and degrading treatment—by systemically addressing persistentallegations of torture and illegal detention by security services. Human RightsWatch welcomes commitments made by the inspector general of police to remedyabuses by RRU personnel. In November 2010, a new commander was appointed tohead RRU who has established a toll-free phone line for complaints and a humanrights desk within RRU headquarters. These measures are encouraging. But theyneed to be accompanied by a demonstrable no-tolerance policy ofill-treatment— including prosecutions and punishment for anyviolators—if meaningful change is to occur and abuses are to end. Officersimplicated in abuse cannot only face administrative sanction or short-termsuspension. While trainings in human rights are important, they will be ineffectiveif senior officials ignore or order beatings of suspects.In carrying out its responsibilities to investigate andprosecute crime, Uganda’s government must ensure that suspects enjoy theprotections of due process and the right to counsel and fair trial that arecurrently lacking in practice. Commanders should not wait until a suspect diesduring an interrogation to take action. High ranking police and militarycommanders should publicly and unambiguously articulate a no-tolerance policy regardingtorture and illegal detention, and prosecute and punish members of their forceswho abuse suspects.To achieve this, Human Rights Watch recommends thatUganda’s Parliament pass the newly tabled Prevention and Prohibition ofTorture Bill, which the president should sign into law without delay. Theprosecutor’s office should then use this law to proactively prosecutecases of torture by members of police and military. The government should alsourgently create a functional legal aid system and identify appropriate fundingso that all suspects access an independent lawyer from the start of theirdetention. Without such concerted action, the government is indicating itstolerance for the abuses documented in this report and implying its tacitacquiescence, which belies its stated commitment to the rule of law.RecommendationsTo the President and Government of UgandaIssue direct orders to police to cease illegal detentionand torture of suspects, and respect criminal procedure at each stage ofany criminal investigation.All individuals arrested should be brought to recognized,lawful locations where their detention can be monitored.End impunity for human rights violations by anyoneemployed or affiliated with Rapid Response Unit (RRU), includingviolations of the right to life, bodily integrity, liberty and securityand fair trial, such as the right to be charged before a judge within 48hours of arrest and the right of access to a lawyer.Improve safeguards in police custody, includingguaranteeing the right of access to a lawyer from the outset of detention,presence of counsel during all interrogations, and access to familymembers throughout detention.Ensure that coerced confessions,particularly those extracted under torture, are not admitted as evidenceagainst persons at trial, and that prosecutors and judges are able to investigatetorture and illegal detention by any branch of the military and domesticintelligence services free from obstruction or interference.Release prisoners who have been convicted inunfair trials, or appropriately retry them in accordance with internationalfair trial standards.Provide timely and adequate remedies,including compensation, for persons arbitrarily arrested, tortured, and otherwisemistreated in detention.Ensure that police,military and intelligence officers committing torture or other humanrights violations against persons in their custody are appropriately andfairly prosecuted.Ensure that the Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Bill2010, recently tabled in parliament, is passed and signed into law withoutdelay.Ensure that commissioners for the Uganda Human RightsCommission are appointed in a timely manner so that torture complaints canbe heard without delay.Devise a functional legal aid system to ensure thatdefendants have access to a lawyer, provided by the state if they cannotafford one, from the time of arrest and not only at trial.Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention againstTorture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment(Convention against Torture), which would allow the Subcommittee onPrevention of Torture of the UN Committee Against Torture to visit Uganda.Abolish the death penalty and ratify the Second OptionalProtocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights(ICCPR).To the Uganda PoliceForce, Particularly the Police Standards Unit and the Criminal InvestigationsDepartment of PoliceImmediately release or charge witha cognizable criminal offense before a civilian court all those currentlyheld without charge in Kireka’s RRU headquarters, any military barracks,or any other locations—gazetted or ungazetted. Release those whohave been on remand where no steps have been taken to investigate thecharges or bring the case to trial.Focus on the conduct of officers, special police constables,and informants working for the Rapid Response Unit anywhere in Uganda.Carry out more regular spot checks on any detention facility run by RRU officers,interview suspects out of earshot of RRU officers, investigate allegationsof ill-treatment and torture, and ensure that the Criminal InvestigationsDepartment takes forward cases of torture and murder by RRU officers.Raise instances of incommunicado and illegal detention by RRU withcommanders and press them to end the practice.Ensure the Uganda Human Rights Commission has full andunhindered access to the Kireka facility and other locations where thereare allegations of unlawful detention, and ensure they can conduct suchinvestigations and visits without prior notice.Immediately stop parading suspects before media.Immediately stop handing over civilian defendants fortrial before military courts.To the Ugandan JudiciaryUse judicial powers to appoint a judicial agent to visit,without prior notice, the RRU facility in Kireka, prisons, policestations, military barracks, and any other facility where state securityforces are allegedly holding or treating persons in violation of theirrights.Ensure that civilian defendants are tried by civiliancourts, in accordance with Uganda’s constitutional court ruling.Ensure that confessions made under duress are not used asevidence in trials, as required by the Evidence Act. Limit the use ofconfessions as a basis for pretrial detention or conviction to confessionsfreely made in the presence of counsel and ratified within 24 hours beforea judge and the defendant’s counsel.To the Parliament of UgandaCriminalize torture as an offense, in compliance with theConvention against Torture, by passing into law the Prohibition andPrevention of Torture Bill 2010. To the Uganda Human Rights CommissionActively pursue investigations and visits to any location,including the RRU facility at Kireka and other RRU-run facilitiesthroughout Uganda, especially where there are credible allegations ofunlawful detention or torture. If denied access to specific areas or tospecific detainees, continue to raise the issue publicly.Actively locate and interview former RRU suspects inprisons to determine their treatment in RRU custody and raise findingswith senior police commanders.Report publicly and in a timely manner on findings relatedto individual acts of torture and illegal detention, and pass evidence tothe director of public prosecutions for criminal prosecution.Tothe United States, the United Kingdom, and Other Concerned Governments, EspeciallyDevelopment Partners in the Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS)Urge thegovernment of Uganda to investigate human rights abuses by RRU and hold fairand credible trials for anyone suspected of criminal acts such as torture.Promote legislative and judicial oversight of the police.Closely monitor any assistance to police to ensure thathuman rights standards are strictly observed in all settings.Ensure that human rights training is an integral componentof capacity building or of training projects for police and/or securityforces. Such training should include a strong component designed to stopthe use of torture and other cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment as aninterrogation technique or punishment. Base any continuation of trainingand/or provisions of equipment on police taking concrete action toinvestigate abuses and hold perpetrators accountable.Condemn torture and illegaldetention when it occurs, and consistently raise concerns with Ugandangovernment officials, especially the inspector general of police and the directorof public prosecutions, until action is taken to hold perpetrators oftorture, extrajudicial killings, and illegal detention responsible.Useevery available opportunity to press for an end to impunity forperpetrators of human rights abuses, including by members of the policeand military. Urge respect for international due process and fair trialstandards and press for impartial inquiries into,and accountability for, cases of illegal detention, torture, extrajudicialkillings and ill-treatment in detention.Ifcooperating with Uganda on counterterrorism and law enforcementactivities, take all necessary measures to ensure that torture andill-treatment of suspects is not used, raise concerns for theill-treatment and illegal detention of suspects with authorities and pressfor accountability. Stop cooperating with abusive units.Support Uganda governmentefforts to devise a functional legal aid system to ensure that defendantshave access to a lawyer from the time of arrest, not only at trial.To the United Nations Human Rights Council (UNHRC) and the AfricanCommission on Human and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR)The UN special rapporteur on torture and the AU special rapporteur on prisons and conditions of detentionin Africa should request permission to visit Uganda. The Kireka facilityand military barracks should be among the detention centers visited. MethodologyThis report is based on research carried outin Uganda from November 2009 to January 2011, involving interviews with 108individuals with knowledge of the operations of Rapid Response Unit (RRU) andits predecessors, the Violent Crime Crack Unit (VCCU) and Operation Wembley.Human RightsWatch interviewed 77 current and former detainees who had been held in variousplaces throughout the country, but predominantly in Kampala, Mbale, Soroti,Masaka, and Mbarara regions. Human Rights Watch researchers focused on recentcases since 2007, when RRU was officially established and placed under theauthority of the police. Particular efforts were made to quote testimonyrelated to incidents that took place in 2009 and 2010.Some interviewees had been arrested anddetained by RRU, VCCU, or Operation Wembley and then released without charge.In other cases, individuals were on remand awaiting trial, or were convictedand serving sentences at the time of the interview. In prisons, Human RightsWatch identified prisoners likely to have been arrested by Operation Wembley, VCCU,or RRU agents based on the court in which they were being charged (mostcommonly the military courts) or the criminal charges against them (oftenaggravated robbery and illegal possession of firearms). In some instances,interviewees were selected based on the recommendation of prison officialsfamiliar with their cases. Human Rights Watch spoke to prisoners out of earshotof officials, but also interviewed prison wardens and officers in charge ofprisons, many of whom voiced concern about the years of remand time facing civiliansbefore military courts.Interviews with former RRU detainees wereconducted with each person individually, except in two cases when Human RightsWatch interviewed two together. Pseudonyms have been used for interviewees toprotect their identities. Sixty-nine were civilians, five were current orformer soldiers, one was a member of a Local Defense Unit, one was a special policeconstable, and another a former prison warden. Interviews with current andformer suspects were generally conducted in English, though in some instanceswith an interpreter from Luganda, Runyoro Rutoro, Runyankole Rukiga, Lusoga,Kiswahili, Iteso, and Karimojong.Human Rights Watch tookevery precaution to verify the credibility of interviewees’ statementsand to corroborate their accounts with other knowledgeable sources. Uganda’sgovernment frequently challenges the credibility of evidence and allegations forwardedby human rights organizations that detail prolonged incommunicado detention andtorture by police and security, despite a range of actors producing similarfindings over more than a decade.Human Rights Watch focused its efforts on determining theveracity of accounts. Wherever possible, Human Rights Watch corroborateddetails with others who had been released from RRU custody and interviewed themindividually and separately. In some instances of allegations of ill-treatment,Human Rights Watch documented physical scars consistent with the allegedimplements used.  In instances where the method of torture left minimalphysical evidence, scores of current and former detainees interviewed ondifferent days and in different locations described identical or nearlyidentical treatment by RRU personnel, in some instances using the same names ofthose allegedly responsible.Human RightsWatch made multiple and varied attempts to identify current and former officersof RRU and its predecessor units, and sought out interviews with them about thehistory, daily operations, and abuses that occurred during their employment.Some former officers approached by Human Rights Watch declined to beinterviewed because they said they feared reprisals from colleagues in theunit. Five ultimately agreed to speak about their work.Human Rights Watch observed trials at theGeneral Court Martial in Kampala on 25 days in 2010 and 2011 and tookparticular note of civilians who were on trial and alleged that they had beenarrested by Operation Wembley, VCCU, or RRU. In 11 instances, Human RightsWatch was able to observe the partial trials of individuals who had beenpreviously interviewed about their arrest and pre-charge detention period.Human Rights Watch conducted additionalinterviews with four private lawyers who had represented RRU suspects, and fivefamily members of current or former suspects who witnessed the arrests or triedto visit suspects in RRU detention. Human Rights Watch also interviewedjournalists and civil society members working on public law and order.In 2010, Human Rights Watch made more than tenattempts to gain access to suspects held in Kireka through phone calls and textmessages to RRU commanders and others in the police. Permission was nevergranted or denied, but was promised and then never fulfilled. On November 30,2010 Human Rights Watch wrote a letter to the inspector general of policeinquiring about a range of issues related to the contents of this report (seefirst annex). He did not reply to that letter. In a meeting on January 24,2011, the inspector general of police assigned two officers to provideresponses to the questions. One officer, the new commander of RRU, furnishedsome answers (see second annex); the other officer never provided any responsesto any of the questions despite phone calls, text messages and emails remindinghim and his colleagues to do so.Locally in Uganda, RRU is most often referredto as “Rapid Response Unit” or RRU, not the Rapid ResponseUnit. Throughout the report, we have been consistent with local usage.I. BackgroundThe Rapid Response Unit was previously knownas Operation Wembley and, later, the Violent Crime Crack Unit (VCCU).However, changes in name and leadership over time have not altered the fact theunit is responsible for carrying out arbitrary arrests, as well as detentions,torture and extrajudicial killings in violation of national and internationallaw.OperationWembleyIn June 2002, President Yoweri Musevenicreated Operation Wembley (or “Wembley”) as an autonomous ad hocunit to combat armed crime.[1]Led by then- Colonel Elly Kayanja—an active member of themilitary and deputy director of the Internal Security Organization— Wembleywas initially staffed by people from various units of the security services.These included the military’s intelligence branch known as theChieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI), the Criminal InvestigationDepartment (CID) of police, the External Security Organisation (ESO), theInternal Security Organisation (ISO), as well as people who had workedinformally as informants for military intelligence and the president’soffice.[2] Several crediblesources told Human Rights Watch that most Wembley personnel were“repentant criminals” and former child soldiers who had fought inthe National Resistance Army, a rebel group that President Museveni led beforehe took power in 1986, who needed work.[3]In 2002, President Museveni said that Wembley wasestablished to counteract the inefficacy of the civilian judicial system inprosecuting and punishing crimes. In 2002, the government-owned New Visionnewspaper quoted him as saying:The robbers, the police, and the judiciary were relatedjust like the palate and the tongue. The police would make the statementspoorly and the thirsty magistrates would release the robbers to continueterrorizing people.[4]The legal basis for Wembley was not clear since the Ugandan Constitutionstates that intelligence organizations must be established by an act ofparliament, which Operation Wembley was not.[5] Wembley alsohad no clear legal authority to carry out arrests and detentions. When itdetained people, it took most suspects to a house on Clement Hill road inKampala, which the minister of internal affairs had never designated a legalplace of detention, as required by law.Within its first month of operation, the government-ownednewspaper New Vision reported that Wembley had killed 20 suspects.[6]Others recorded 83 suspectskilled.[7] After its first two months, Wembley had arrested and detained over430 individuals.[8] Suspectsarrested and detained by Wembley routinely reported that they had been severelytortured during interrogations. One detainee who has been in detention awaitingtrial since his arrest in 2002 told Human Rights Watch:At Clement [the offices of Operation Wembley at the time],there was beating every day. At night, they’d come and beat us…. Theywould tie us, lay us on the ground, and pour water on us. On Sunday, they wouldcome in the morning and beat us…. They used sticks and whips. They beatall of us … morning and evening, we were beaten twice a day…. Ilost a front tooth from being hit with a gun butt. The marks on my chest arefrom whips to the chest. I was admitted to Mbuya [military hospital] to suckout pus. They beat us terribly. I couldn’t walk. My body was rotting…[9]Another former Operation Wembley detainee who has been onremand for over eight years, described Wembley members forcing him to drinklarge amounts of water, a practice known as “Liverpool.”[10]Members of the judiciary and NGOs condemned OperationWembley for its unofficial shoot-to-kill policy and the use of torture andother ill-treatment.[11]Operation Wembley also engaged in other illegal practices, such as detention inunauthorized locations euphemistically known as “safehouses”;detention without charge; denial of access to family, lawyers, or doctors;denial of bail; and trial of civilians by military courts martial.[12]Despite the amassed evidence of Wembley’s brutaltactics, the current inspector general of police, Major General Kale Kayihura,subsequently credited Wembley with reducing crime rates, telling media,“It is because of police incapacity that when Kampala was taken over byarmed thugs in the late 1990s, Brigadier Kayanja’s Operation Wembley wasthe salvation.”[13]Violent Crime CrackUnit (VCCU)The government appears to have ended Operation Wembley in late2002 and shifted its duties to the newly created Violent Crime Crack Unit(VCCU).[14]  Thisunit was mandated to be led and staffed only by the police. However, ColonelKayanja remained at the helm until February 2003, when David Magara, his deputyand newly appointed assistant commissioner of police, took over.[15]While some have creditedMagara with improving the conduct of operations, the VCCU was in many respects ade facto continuation of Operation Wembley, with the same personnel andtactics.[16] Several sources, including the Uganda HumanRights Commission, indicated VCCU staff continued to include soldiers andintelligence agents who had worked for Wembley.[17]In 2003 and 2004, VCCU arrested at least one thousandpeople, still without a specific mandate in law to conduct arrests.[18]Reports of torture by VCCU endured,[19] and theUganda Human Rights Commission asserted that allegations of torture againstVCCU continued at the same rates as those against Operation Wembley.[20]Torture and interrogation methods also appear to have stayed the same.[21]A former VCCU detainee, echoing Operation Wembley detainees, described how VCCUoperatives put a hose in his mouth and forced him to drink during aninterrogation.[22] Onedetainee on remand for four years said that in 2005, VCCU operatives subjectedhim to a mock execution, making him and his co-accused lie down in a field atnight before firing three shots at them.[23] A VCCUdetainee who was on remand for two-and-a-half years said that agents suspendedhim from a pole and then beat him.[24]In 2004, in a first step towards ending impunity, policearrested one VCCU operative for the death of a suspect in detention. Aco-accused filed a complaint with the Human Rights Commission alleging that shehad been tortured and her money stolen.[25]According to police sources, the operative was eventually convicted ofmanslaughter although the duration of his criminal sentence remains unclear.[26]Despite this case, reports of torture continued. [27]A representative of theUganda Human Rights Commission said at the time, “This is the group thattaints the name of the regular police force because most of the torture takesplace in VCCU.” VCCU head David Magara urged the commission to conductits own investigations.[28]Rapid Response Unit(RRU)In July 2007, police announced that despite its reputation, VCCUwould be converted into Rapid Response Unit (RRU).[29]It would be one of three new units in the Criminal Investigations Directorate(CID), along with Crime Intelligence and Crime Investigations.[30]According to news reports, RRU was to respond urgently to crime scenes. Itwould also have a broader role in crime control, targeting armedrobbers, and responding to general crime.[31]However, in 2009 the Ministry of Public Service indicatedin an official report on police structures that RRU “is an emergency unitset up to curb violent crime, track and arrest violent crime offenders.”[32]Theprecise mandate of RRU remainsunclear in practice. Since 2007, media reports have documented RRU agentscarrying out numerous and varied tasks including patrolling duringby-elections;[33] arresting journalists for covering specificstories;[34] investigating financial fraud;[35] counterfeiting;[36] impersonation;[37] stealing vehicles, money, livestock, and fuel—allwithout allegations that suspects were carrying weapons;[38] as well as instances of issuing fake checks,[39] stealing from empty hotel rooms prior to the 2007Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Kampala,[40] and cases of alleged terrorism.[41]Once again, theunit’s name change did not significantly alter its pattern of abuses, andat least some Wembley and VCCU personnel transitioned to RRU. Human RightsWatch interviewed five people who said they worked for Wembley, VCCU, and RRU,all of whom confirmed that changes in name did not constitute a substantialshift in personnel.[42] One former Wembley operative said that hisexperience was typical; after serving in Wembley and VCCU with no training atall, in 2007 he was given two months of training in law enforcement and wasmade a special police constable and then continued on with RRU.[43] Knowledgeable sources indicate that currentlyroughly 25 original Wembley operatives are still employed at RRU.[44] Human Rights Watch found no evidence that policeauthorities vetted current RRU personnel to assess whether they had beenimplicated in past abuses before recruiting them into the unit.[45] In September 2007, a Uganda Human RightsCommission report stated that the VCCU/RRU topped its list of human rightsviolators, stating that, “Torture is common among suspects detained byVCCU/Rapid response unit (RRU), who bore marks consistent with torture.”[46]   In 2009, the commission again notedthat it continued to receive reports of torture by RRU.[47]In October 2009, the inspectorgeneral of police, Major General Kale Kayihura, reportedly dismissed around 50officers from RRU, including its top three commanders. There was no explanationas to why these specific officers warranted termination, and it is not clearthat their conduct in operations was a factor.[48] Kayihura also removed the new RRU chief, who hadonly been in office for seven months, and his two deputies. According to media,they were removed after President Museveni rebuked them for detaining a suspectfor 10 days without charge in a highly publicized case involving a governmentofficial.[49] Magara was reappointed and then replaced by a newcommander who again remained for less than one year. On November 18, 2010, thepolice chief appointed yet another police commander, Joel Aguma, to lead theunit.[50] Aguma has committed to making reforms to addressand curtail abuses.[51]According to several well-placed individuals interviewed forthis report, the continuation of abuses despite these leadership changes islikely due to the fact that RRU is, at its core, run by some who operateoutside the law and are either active military or former Wembley operativesspecifically tasked to ensure they get confessions by any means necessary. Otherpersonnel maintain close personal ties and direct access to senior officialswithin the government and security forces.[52] These individualscan circumvent command hierarchy, take orders on an ad hoc basis, and enjoyprotection from scrutiny or investigations when it is politically expedient.Criminal suspects arrested by regular police are sometimestold they will be taken to RRU’s headquarters in Kireka if they do not confess—asign that RRU’s notorious reputation for abuse is hardly a source ofshame among police.  In popular vernacular in Uganda and amongst currentand former suspects interviewed by Human Rights Watch, the term“Wembley” still refers to RRU, indicating a popular understandingthat the tough-on-crime, shoot-to-kill reputation of Operation Wembley lives onin the unit. This popular understanding appears, to some extent, to bewell-founded. According to one intelligence agent who has worked in conjunctionwith RRU:Since Wembley [in 2002],little has really changed there. It is the same people doing the same things.They just keep changing the name and bringing in new commanders, but those new policecommanders never have the power to change the problems there. Those Wembleyguys still run the place.[53]II. Applicable International and National LawUganda is a party to a number of international and regionaltreaties that impose legal obligations on Uganda regarding the conduct of lawenforcement personnel and treatment of detainees. These include theInternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),[54]the United Nations Convention AgainstTorture and Other Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Conventionagainst Torture),[55] and theAfrican Charter on Human and People’s Rights (ACHPR).[56]The rights that these treaties protectinclude the absolute prohibition on use of torture or other forms of inhuman ordegrading treatment on any detainee, the right of detainees to be held inhumane conditions and treated with dignity, the right to liberty and security,which includes a prohibition on arbitrary detention, and the right to dueprocess and a fair trial.Various instruments further elaborate the standards withwhich Uganda is expected to comply as a party to these treaties. These include theStandard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners,[57]Body of Principles for the Protection of AllPersons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment,[58]BasicPrinciples on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials,[59] the UN Basic Principles on the Role ofLawyers,[60] the UNPrinciples on the Effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture andOther Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,[61] and African Union Principles andGuidelines on the Right to a Fair Trial and Legal Assistance in Africa.[62]Court decisions reinforce these core rights, which are alsoincorporated into, and reflected in, Uganda’s Constitution.  Forexample, under the constitution, a criminal suspect must be kept in a placethat is authorized by law.[63] Theaccused person is not to be subject to torture or cruel, inhuman or degradingtreatment, although torture is not currently criminalized in law.[64]There are references to the prohibition of torture in various laws, such as theAnti-Terrorism Act. However, despite evidence that torture has occurred duringinterrogations of terrorism suspects, there has never been a prosecution fortorture under this provision.[65]According to the director of public prosecutions, Richard Buteera, perpetratorsof torture can be charged with grievous bodily harm or assault as defined inthe Penal Code, although this has rarely occurred.[66]In 2005 the UN Committee Against Torture (CAT) called on thegovernment to amend the domestic criminal law in accordance with the Conventionagainst Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment(Convention against Torture),[67] towhich Uganda is a party.  In July 2010 the government finally tabled abill in parliament that would introduce these changes. The bill is stillpending.[68]An accused person also has a constitutional right to beinformed of the reason for his or her arrest and detention, and of the right toa lawyer.[69] Within48 hours of arrest or detention, a suspect must be brought before a court to becharged with a crime.[70] Forserious offenses tried before the High Court, the state must provide legalrepresentation in courts, though it is not specifically stipulated when in theprocess that right must adhere.[71] Inpractice, state-paid attorneys are not provided until the case is actually attrial, despite the fact that an accused person will normally have spent wellover two—and sometimes several—years in detention by that time.[72]Detainees are also entitled to have access to family members, a lawyer, and adoctor and medical treatment.[73] A detainee’s family must be informedof the detention at the request of the person in custody.[74]The Ugandan Constitutionalso provides for a right to bail. The Supreme Court affirmed a constitutionalright to bail in 2009 for all civilians, whether before military or civiliancourts.[75] In practice, accused persons are rarely releasedon bail. Instead, in the civilian court system, defendants are detained for anindeterminate period of time until the case is sent—referred to locallyas being “committed”—to the High Court for trial.[76] This delay is partly due to the huge backlog ofcases in the courts, but also gives the prosecution time to fully investigatethe case against the accused. In practice defendants accused of serious crimes areprevented from exercising their right to bail during the investigative stage—whichusually lasts for at least six months—because they are broughtperiodically before a magistrate’s court, which does not havejurisdiction over the case, and so cannot hear a bail application.[77]If a detainee can afford a private lawyer, he or she canapply for bail before the High Court—an option that is prohibitivelyexpensive for most defendants. The court is obliged to grant bail on reasonableconditions for persons held beyond the six months, although this is also notalways the case in practice.[78] Accessto bail is also very difficult when suspects come before the military court.  Militarydefense lawyers have never met their clients until just before a hearing,rarely consult their clients, and therefore are unlikely to raise matters at theirclient’s request.[79]III. RRU AbusesThe beatings started at 9 a.m. and went until 3 p.m. ThatRRU man got out a baton and beat me in the knee joints. He asked me to tell himwhere my boss is, saying that we rob together. He beat my joints for hours. Iwas seated and handcuffed. When he was not satisfied with my answers, he took ahammer and hit me on my back with it. He hit me on my backbone, from the bottomup to my shoulders. I said that the other man was a thief because I was in somuch pain. He said, “If you don’t tell the truth, I’ll killyou….If you don’t admit you know this man, we’ll killyou.”Later, they tied usagain, and told us to hold our hands under our thighs, and handcuffed us, bentover. There was a pole behind the house. That’s where we were tied. Itwas between our legs; the pole was between our legs, and our arms wereunderneath. We couldn’t move, but we sat on the ground. They used batonsto beat us on the wrists, shoulders, elbows, and knees. They were beating usone person at a time. One man they called “Commander” pointed hispistol at me and ordered another one to beat me on the joints. I still havemarks from the beating. Two guys were beating me….When one got tired, theother continued. Seven days after being beaten, when I was recovering, I wastaken to the office for a statement. A man brought out a baton…. He said,“Tell me how you stole, what you stole.” He beat me, so I said,“We got it from where the person was shot dead.” He told me to makea statement and to admit at court. Because I was tired and scared, I said OK.He beat me four times in the process of writing my statement. They forced me toaccept everything. At court, I denied the charges.—Former RRU detainee, charged with murder, aggravatedrobbery, and unlawful possession of a firearm, on remand for two months at timeof interview, Kampala, June 25, 2010.Extrajudicial KillingsHuman Rights Watch has obtained information on some cases inwhich RRU personnel have been implicated in extrajudicial killings. Anextrajudicial killing is a deliberate unlawful killing by security forces. Thepractice of extrajudicial killings violate basic human rights, including theright to life, the right to liberty and security of the person, the right to afair and public trial, as well as the prohibition on torture and cruel,inhuman, and degrading treatment or punishment.[80]Abusive behavior by security forces persists whenperpetrators are not held accountable for their actions. Eliminating abusiveactions requires more than new policies and senior officials committed toreform; it requires that would-be perpetrators know that they will go to prisonand their careers will end if they order or participate in abuses such astorture and extrajudicial killings. Given the long history of abuse ofdetainees by Operation Wembley, VCCU and now RRU, the police must pay specificattention to this unit, hold perpetrators accountable, and end the longstanding practices that have led to deaths in custody.It is not known how many suspects may have died in RRU custodysince it officially came under police control in 2007.  Reports ofkillings have occasionally surfaced in the press. Family members of suspects,fearful of reprisals by security operatives, rarely seek information regardingthe whereabouts of  those arrested by RRU and may believe the person is inprison or detained elsewhere, such as military barracks.The Killing of Frank SsekanjakoIn August 2010, RRU officers allegedly brutally beat todeath Frank Ssekanjako, a 22-year-old robbery suspect from Wakiso district in CentralUganda.On the evening of Friday, August 20, 2010, eyewitnesses sawpolice officers affiliated with Kabalagala police post arrest Ssekanjako andothers for alleged robbery. Earlier that day, robbers had broken into the houseof an affluent woman in Makindye, Kampala, held machetes to her guard’sneck, and allegedly stole some property and money. Local police and the local communitychairman questioned several people, including Ssekanjako, who was renting aroom near the crime scene. On Sunday, some suspects were released on policebond. Eyewitnesses who saw Ssekanjako and his co-accused in detention that daydescribed them as being in good health and spirits, and though concerned aboutthe allegations against them, hopeful the matter would be resolved quickly.[81]On August 23, two RRU officers and an RRU driver were sentto Kabalagala police station to collect two of the suspects.[82]The RRU officers maintain that someone affiliated with the Presidential GuardBrigade had called the RRU deputy commander, requesting intervention andsupport.[83] The RRUdeputy commander then ordered the three to recover the stolen property bycollecting Ssekanjako and his co-accused from police custody. The officersdrove Ssekanjako and his co-accused to the location of the robbery. RRUofficers who collected Ssekanjako told Human Rights Watch that he complained ofstomach pain while in the car, so they took him to the hospital where he died afew minutes later.[84]This explanation is inconsistent with multiple eyewitnessaccounts and the official post-mortem report. Eyewitnesses described in starkdetail how Ssekanjako and co-accused were brought back to the scene of thealleged robbery by the two RRU officers and their driver and beaten severely forover an hour with plastic pipes and a large wooden club, known locally as an entolima.[85]At one point, when Ssekanjako was hit repeatedly on the head and blood flowedfrom wounds on his ankles, knees and flanks, he said, “Why don’tyou shoot me, so I die?” This angered the officers, who responded byseparating Ssekanjako from the others by some distance, saying, “You wantto die with a bullet? No, you will die of beatings.” The beatingscontinued.[86]Eventually, Ssekanjako stopped making any noise, his eyeswere wide open and he could not move or walk.[87]Eyewitnesses said that they suspected that he was dead.[88]This prompted one of the co-accused to admit to the robbery in order to stopthe beatings. Officers dragged the suspects to the car, but allegedly protestedto the family of the woman who owned the house, and who witnessed the physicalstate of the three suspects, that they did not have money for petrol. Twoeyewitnesses told Human Rights Watch those family members handed RRU officersmoney, with the bleeding suspects still slumped in the dirt by the car.[89]Eventually RRU officers dropped other suspects at Kabalagala police station togive statements, and took Ssekanjako to Mulago hospital, where he was later pronounceddead.The post-mortem report indicates that Ssekanjako had“eight puncture abrasions on the right foot, six linear tramline bruisingon the back associated with linear abrasions, swollen right shoulder, diffusebruising of the right and left upper arms, three linear abrasions over the leftthigh, an abrasion 4 x 1 cm over the left elbow, multiple bruising of the leftflank, injuries are fresh.”[90] Nocause of death was determined.Police eventuallyarrested two RRU personnel, Muhammad Kavuma and Ramhadhan Dhikusoka. Accordingto media reports, a third RRU officer, Hussein Dhikusoka (no relation) brieflyevaded arrest after allegedly telling health workers that an angry mob hadkilled Ssekanjako.[91]The three are under arrest and currently awaiting trial, althoughpolice have yet to collect significant evidence related to the case.[92]Three suspects were severely beaten that day and yet police have not helpedthem all to complete paperwork to certify their physical state after thetorture. One has never made a statement to police regarding what occurred andhe told Human Rights Watch he feared to interact further with police because ofhis sever beating that day. Multiple people in the community witnessed theevents that day, heard the suspects screaming, and have valuable evidence thatplace the officers at the scene. The woman who owns the house that was robbedand was at the scene of the beatings was briefly detained and is now free on policebond. Community members indicate that she has now left the country, making itunlikely that she will be prosecuted for events that day, or that she will eventestify as a witness to what occurred. Furthermore, no one has been charged forthe household robbery that precipitated the original arrests.Ssekanjako’s family has also faced numerous challengesand intimidation in pushing the police to investigate and take action. On theday of Ssekanjako’s burial, police gave the family“compensation” in the form of fuel for transport of the body,500,000 Uganda shillings (US$230) cash, and some food. Later, after family membersreported the death to a newspaper, they received phone calls from police sayingthat Ssekanjako was a thief and that family members should not return to thepolice. His brother told Human Rights Watch:Police told me, ‘Despite what we did for you, youkeep complaining. We don’t want to see you again. Every police officerhere is waiting for you if you return here. Don’t come back.’ Itook that as a threat. It made me feel that the police thought that my brotherdeserved to die.[93]Police have also failedto give the family information, documents, or medical evidence related toSsekanjako’s death. The family submitted multiple requests beforereceiving a copy of the post-mortem and death certificate, and has never receivedcopies of photos that police took of his body.  Police doctors have yet toofficially determine the cause of Ssekanjako’s death, and toxicology andhistological tests have still not been completed because doctors at themortuary claim they could not afford the chemicals needed to run thetests—even though Ssekanjako’s family gave them 80,000 Ugandashillings ($40) to buy materials.[94]Ssekanjako’s brother told Human Rights Watch:I feel assured that the officers were arrested, but policehave been so hard to work with. I get suspicious because police are souncooperative at each step. Either the police were negligent or they werepurposefully trying to kill [Ssekanjako], but my mother has a right to knowwhat happened. You go to police and expect vigilance and instead get violence.[95]Ssekanjako’s deathalso illustrates that RRU becomes involved in alleged criminal investigationsfor reasons that are not evident. In this instance, police had shownwillingness to investigate the alleged robbery and take action by makingarrests and detaining suspects in Kabalagala police station. No one, includingthe regular police or the RRU personnel, has claimed that a gun was involved inthe robbery, the usual basis for RRU involvement.Ssekanjako’s death is unique in that his family activelypursued investigations, could afford the cost of the logistics to follow thematter up and complained to journalists and officials, despite multipleobstacles. The case, if well-handled, could be the first in which RRU officersare ultimately held accountable for murder of a suspect and act as a potentialdeterrent to others in the unit. If poorly handled, this case might welldiscourage victims of crime from coming forward and further embolden RRU.[96]The Killing of HenryBakasambaIn May 2010, mediareported that RRU beat Henry Bakasamba during questioning about the theft of 80million Ugandan Shillings [$34,000] from a foreign exchange bureau and that hesubsequently died at Kireka from his injuries.[97] According to eyewitnesses at the crime scene,Bakasamba was initially arrested by “informants,” people who workwith police but are not members of the police force themselves.[98] Two employees of the exchange bureau were also arrestedafter allegedly being implicated by Bakasamba.  All three were taken toCentral Police Station in Kampala, and from there to Kireka. One eyewitnesstold Human Rights Watch he saw Bakasamba in RRU custody, his hands and feetshackled to a pole, being repeatedly beaten on the joints. Other detainees latersaw Bakasamba taken into a room for interrogation. One told Human Rights Watchthat, an hour later, “I heard people outside saying that the man haddied. I was very scared that I would be killed too but we didn’t knowwhat to do.”[99]The Uganda Human Rights Commission said it was investigatingthe death.[100] Accordingto media reports, police arrested two police officers who were detained inNsambya police barracks: three other RRU agents allegedly evaded arrest. It isnot clear if anyone was ever charged in this case. Human Rights Watch could notfind any names in prison records that media had mentioned, and a summary of RRUofficers charged in courts of law that police provided Human Rights Watch didnot include mention of this case. Police did not reply to Human RightsWatch’s question posed in a letter to the inspector general of policeregarding police action taken in regards to Bakasamba’s death.After Bakasamba’s death, other suspects in the casewere released on police bond. No one was ever charged in the robbery of themoney from the exchange bureau and no money was ever returned to the owners. Onesource within government with knowledge of this case told Human Rights Watchthat it had been mishandled by police who sought to cover up RRU’sinvolvement in the death. A police officer who had also looked into theincident told Human Rights Watch he believed that Bakasamba had become aliability for police, including some RRU officers, who had stolen money theyhad recovered from his robberies. Since police considered Bakasamba to be a“hardcore criminal” and a “thief for hire,” the policeofficer said it was possible that he had been beating severely to keep himsilent.[101]The Killings inKyengeraIn January 2010, at least four people were shot dead in publicon the Masaka Road in Kyengera, outside Kampala.[102]Police sources told media that the men— later identified by police asJames Angulu, Jude Oceli, retired Lieutenant Kiiza, and retired Warrant OfficerMusanje—were attempting to rob a supermarket and were being tailed byplain clothes RRU operatives. Cornered, the men shot at the officers whoreturned fire.[103]Multiple eyewitnesses who spoke to Human Rights Watch and media contradict thatversion of events, but no investigations into these killings have taken place.[104]Since the incident occurred in the evening on a busyroadway, there were many eyewitnesses. One man, who runs a shop nearby, toldHuman Rights Watch:I saw a vehicle comingfrom the direction of Kampala, and I saw a man near me, shooting his gun at thevehicle, deflating the tires. When the four men jumped out of the car, the manshot them all. I read in the papers later about an attempt to rob the market,but that’s not true. There was no exchange of bullets. As soon as theguys came out, they were shot dead. Those policemen with guns quickly took awaythe dead bodies, and the towing vehicle came and took away the car. The wholecircus didn’t take much time.[105]Other eyewitnesses corroborated the claim there was noexchange of gunfire. One Kyengera resident told Human Rights Watch:They were shot dead. Were these people attempting to robthe supermarket? No, no one should tell lies. They were being trailed and thechance to kill them was in front of the supermarket. This is a story that iswell known among the people of Kyengera.[106]One person quoted by the government-owned New Visionnewspaper, stated, “One is presumed innocent until proven guilty. Howcould the police, who are in charge of keeping law and order, shoot at peoplewithout establishing whether they were guilty?”[107]Police did not reply to Human Rights Watch’s questionposed in a letter to the inspector general of police regarding specific policeaction taken after this shooting.Other KillingsMany other people who hadat some time been held in RRU detention told Human Rights Watch they hadwitnessed fellow detainees die, but did not know the full names of thosekilled.Three witnesses formerly detained by RRU who were interviewedindividually, in different locations, all told Human Rights Watch that RRUofficers in Kireka beat to death a detainee known only as “Okello”in May 2010.[108]According to one former detainee, Okello had been arrested for allegedlystealing money and was beaten severely over two days.Other former detainees interviewed by Human Rights Watchalleged that at least six other detainees were also killed, but Human RightsWatch could not further corroborate the killings. One man said that hewitnessed the extrajudicial killing of a co-detainee in Mabira forest in July2009 while RRU officers were transferring him from Soroti military barracks.[109]He alleged that another RRU detainee died in2009 after he sustained injuries while being sodomized with a gun.[110]Another former RRU detainee said he knew of a man who died as a result ofsevere beating in 2010.[111]Another also said he knew of a fellow detainee who had been beaten to death in2010.[112] Yet anothersaid she witnessed beatings that resulted in the death of two other detaineesin May 2010.[113]Former detainees also told Human RightsWatch of deaths at the hands of VCCU and Wembley agents.[114]TortureNearly all the detainees experienced acts of violence whenthey were being arrested. They claimed that they were punched, kicked, hit withgun butts, and had guns pointed at them at close range or inserted in theirmouths.[115]Abuse continued once suspects were in custody. The aim of theinterrogations was to extract information or confessions about robberies withparticular emphasis on the whereabouts of firearms or money.[116]Interrogations accompanied by severe beatings took place in multiple locations,including during transportation between locations, at RRU headquarters inKireka, and in uniports—temporary aluminum shelters—run by RRU butlocated within police compounds outside Kampala.Of the 77 interviewees arrested by RRU, 60 said that RRUofficers, constables, or informants beat or tortured them at some point duringtheir custody. The most common form of torture was repetitive beating on thejoints—knees, elbows, shoulders, ankles, and wrists—during severalsessions over many days while handcuffed in stress positions. RRU personnelbeat detainees with various objects, including batons, sticks, bats, woodenclubs, metal pipes, padlocks, glass soda bottles, and table legs. In threeinstances, detainees said they received electric shocks.[117]Detainees interviewed in eastern, western, and centralUganda during more than a year of research described the same method ofrestraint and beatings during interrogations: suspects are frequently made tosit with their legs in front of them, bent at the knees, with their handshandcuffed under their legs. Sometimes suspects are placed in this positionaround a pole. They are then beaten repeatedly on the joints. One formerdetained said:I saw many people being beaten in that position, where theytie your hands under your knees around the veranda pole. You can spend all dayin that position. When you are inside, you can hear the crying of peoplethroughout the building.[118]Torture was frequently carried out on several detainees simultaneously,or within sight or earshot of others. In some instances, RRU operativescoordinated to take turns to beat suspects over the course of several days.There were usually two shifts for beatings, one in the morning and again atnight.[119]A former RRU detainee who had been on remandfor two-and-a-half years described torture he experienced in 2007:They tortured me several times. They would take me from mycell and take me behind the offices. Many would take part in torturing. Therewere five consecutive days of them beating me. At night, around 11 p.m., and inthe morning, around 10 a.m. They tied cloth on my mouth and handcuffed me sothat I wouldn’t obstruct the beating or bring my hands down. My hands weretied up. They used broken timber that had four corners, like a table leg, tobeat me.[120]Victims of beatings said they had difficulty walking orlifting heavy objects, sometimes for many months, after the event.[121]One detainee who had been beaten three months earlier said, “They hit mein the chest, and I still have pain there and in my joints. Everything stillhurts because the beatings were heavy and long.”[122]Three persons arrestedin 2010 in western Uganda each said that an RRU operative who used electricshock on them during questioning went by the name “Amoni”.[123] It is not clear if the name “Amoni”is a pseudonym.[124]Onevictim also said that “Amoni” used a hammer to strike his spine anda knife to cut his back.[125]Anotherindividual in eastern Uganda who had been on remand for a year said that an RRUagent named Kizza cut his stomach and thighs with a knife. Human Rights Watchresearchers saw scars on his body consistent with this account.[126]Female detainees were not spared brutality. One woman, whowas detained in Kireka for five months without charge, told Human Rights Watchthat she witnessed eight women being tortured by RRU agents, who also forced needlesunder her fingernails during interrogations. She showed Human Rights Watchmultiple black pin-like scars on her fingertips.I cannot recall the number of times they pierced my nails…. My nails were destroyed. They were black, swollen, and painful. Theneedles were inserted under the nail, on both my hands and feet. They piercedevery nail.[127]Forced ConfessionsDetainees often alleged that RRU personnel forced them toadmit to crimes or sign statements under duress while they were beaten orthreatened with further violence. RRU personnel did not inform detainees of thecontents of the statements or allow them to read them. If detainees questionedwhat they were signing, RRU personnel threatened or beat them further.[128]In one instance, RRU personnel promised a detainee that he would be released ifhe signed the statement.[129]Three detainees said they each signed severalstatements without knowing their contents.[130]One suspect, having endured two days of serious beatingswhile being questioned, said that his interrogator forcibly applied histhumbprint to a statement.[131] Otherssaid that the interrogator would have his baton with him when he was writing upa statement so that he could coerce detainees into signing.[132]One man described his experience:I made a statement and was put in a car by [myinterrogator] and taken to Kireka. He wrote the statement, and he said,“Sign here.” He had a baton. I delayed in picking up the pen, andhe hit me with the baton. I didn’t write the statement, but I signed it.I don’t know what’s in the statement because I never read it, andhe never read it to me.[133]Two detainees suspected of robbery who had been tortured by RRUwere brought to a local police station to make statements, but were soprofoundly injured they could not sit up or hold a pen. A RRU operative told afemale police officer to write the statements. One of the suspects told HumanRights Watch:[RRU operative] ordered[the policewoman] to make us sign the statement, but I couldn’t hold thepen because of the beatings on my arms. The RRU man held my hand with the penin it and scribbled something on the paper. I have no idea what was in thestatement. I had lost sense by then. Finally, the RRU man went away. I felldown on the ground and so did [the other suspect]. There was confusion then. Iheard the policewoman yell, ‘Suspects are dying!’[134]Police eventually took the two to Mulago hospital. One ofthe suspects left the hospital a day later, fearful that he would receive morebeatings when he recovered. The other could not leave for several more daysbecause of his injuries. In his medical records, seen by Human Rights Watch, thepolice surgeon lists 13 wounds varying in size from 2 x 2 centimeters, to alarge wound on his upper arm more than 15 centimeters in length.[135]There was never any follow up on the robberycase and neither man was ever charged with a crime. It may be that the physicalstate of the suspects caused police to drop the investigation into the robbery.During trials before military courts, Human Rights Watchwitnessed that even when a defendant argued that his statement was made under RRUcoercion, it was admitted into evidence.[136] Duringone trial, a defendant showed the court how he had been held in the stressposition in a manner consistent with descriptions relayed to Human Rights Watchby other RRU suspects, and lifted his shirt and trouser legs to reveal scars.[137]However, the court ruled that there was“no evidence [that] the statement was not given voluntarily.”[138]Under the Ugandan Evidence Act, admissionsof guilt extracted by torture are to be considered irrelevant during trial.[139]However, the Evidence Act applies only tocivilian courts and not to military courts, where the vast majority of RRUsuspects are prosecuted.[140]Illegal and IncommunicadoDetentionAll the detainees whom Human Rights Watch interviewed werenot brought before a magistrate within the 48 hours mandated by theconstitution. In most cases, they lacked access to family or lawyers, asprescribed by law.[141]Under the constitution,all places of detention must be designated by an administrative act of theminister of internal affairs, and the locations of legal places of detentionmust be published in a government gazette.[142] Police argue that Kireka hasbeen “gazetted,” but have never furnished the gazette or any otherevidence to support this assertion, despite multiple requests from Human RightsWatch for such information.[143] Some have argued that because Kireka isofficially under the jurisdiction of the Criminal Investigations Department, itis now a regular police post and therefore can be a lawful place of detentionfor the 48 hours permitted by the constitution. Its status as a location oflegal detention remains unclear.Suspects repeatedly report being denied access to familymembers and attorneys during their detention in RRU’s Kirekaheadquarters. As a party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) Uganda should ensure that everyone charged with acriminal offense can exercise their right to defend themselves in person orthrough legal assistance, including in pre-trial detention.  This is alsoset out in the UN Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers which provides that“all arrested, detained or imprisoned persons shall be provided withadequate opportunities, time and facilities to be visited by and to communicateand consult with a lawyer, without delay, interception or censorship and infull confidentiality.” The African Union Principles and Guidelineson the Right to a Fair Trial and Legal Assistance in Africa similarly providesthat an arrested person shall have prompt access to a lawyer, and shall not beobliged to answer any questions or participate in any interrogation without hisor her lawyer being present.[144]One detainee who had been in custody for five months inKireka said, “I am sad that I don’t know how my people and placeare doing. I have ten children and two wives. I don’t know the life of mypeople now and I have no way to communicate to them.”[145]A soldier testified during his trial thatwhile he was detained Kireka, he asked RRU officers, “Let me call alawyer and let my people know where I am.” He added: “I refused towrite a statement until I had a lawyer. They said, ‘Here at RRU, wedon’t do that.’”[146]Democratic Party mobilizer, Annet Namwanga was also detainedincommunicado in the Kireka facility. Namwanga was arrested on January 18, 2011from her work, held in the headquarters of the Joint Anti Terrorism Taskforce(JATT) in Kololo, Kampala until January 25 and then transferred to Kireka.[147]She was not able to see family or her lawyer until she was brought to court onFebruary 4, 2011.[148]The issue of incommunicado detention of suspects in Kirekaalso emerged after the July 11, 2010 bombings in Kampala, in which 76 peopledied. Suspects in the bombings were held in a range of facilities, includingKireka.[149] Mostnotably, human rights activist Al-Amin Kimathi of the KenyanMuslim Human Rights Forum, and Kenyan lawyer Mbugua Mureithi were arrested onSeptember 15, 2010, shortly after arriving from Kenya at Entebbe airport, andwere taken to RRU headquarters in Kireka.[150] Mureithi was deported back to Kenya on September 18, but Kimathiremained in detention in Kireka without access to a lawyer. He was eventuallycharged with terrorism on September 20, 2010, and transferred toKampala’s Luzira prison.[151]He spent six days in Kirekawithout access to a lawyer.On December 9, 2010, two relatives ofone of the bombings suspects were arrested, allegedly for attempting to bring aknife to the suspect in the prison.[152] The relatives, both elderly women, weredetained in Kireka for 12 days. Lawyers made multiple attempts to visit the twowomen, be present during their interrogations, and observe their well-being, butwere only granted access after 11 days of detention.[153]Several suspects arrestedin relation to the July 2010 bombings in Kampala also faced interrogation anddetention in Kireka, some after they had been charged with terrorism in courtand should have been in the exclusive custody of the Uganda Prison Services.Some stated that DNA samples were taken from them while they were detained inKireka, despite no court order and no consent for such a sample to be taken.[154] Two former suspects detailed how they werequestioned on and off for several days by Americans, who introduced themselvesas members of the Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI).[155] In one instance, an RRU officer came in after asuspect had refused to work as an FBI informant. The suspect said:He looked at me and said, ‘You think your life isimportant? See what we will do to you.’ I felt like they were going todisappear me. I was happy to finally see the prison after Kireka.[156]Theft of Suspects’ Property, Extortion,and Theft of EvidenceInterviewees described how personal property, includingmoney from wallets, phones, or household items, including medicine and food, wasroutinely stolen from suspects when they were arrested.[157]Victims of robberies also told Human RightsWatch that money was rarely returned to them despite police confirming thatthey had recovered stolen cash.Family members of suspects also complained to Human RightsWatch that RRU personnel pressured them to give money to secure thesuspects’ release. In some cases, RRU personnel urged wives of suspectsto sell land in order to raise funds to buy their husband’s freedom.[158]One suspect, arrested in 2008 for allegedlypurchasing stolen goods in Mbale district, said RRU agents arrested him at hisworkplace. He recognized them as local RRU agents normally involved in arrestsfor violent crime. One of them asked for the phone number of his brother, whomhe summoned to the station before demanding 2,000,000 Ugandan shillings ($900)to secure the suspect’s release. The suspect told Human Rights Watch ofthe exchange between his brother and RRU agents. “They said, ‘Yourbrother committed an offense. Give us 2 million.’ My brother said, ‘Whatfor? If it’s a capital offense, why should we pay? You should take him tocourt and sort it out.’”[159]When his brother did not pay, he was beatenand made to sign a confession that he was not permitted to read.Another detainee was promised release if he paid over 6,000,000Ugandan shillings (approximately$ 2,900), or that the beatings would stop if hepaid 100,000 Ugandan shillings (approximately $45).[160]In one instance, the military court handeddown the lenient punishment of a 22,000 Ugandan shillings (approximately $ 10)fine to an elderly detainee charged with unlawful gun and ammunitionpossession.[161] Thedefendant said in open court that he could not pay the fine since RRU officershad taken all his money during his arrest.[162]One knowledgeable source, familiar with the operations andmethods of RRU, told Human Rights Watch that in some cases suspects have beenforced to reveal bank account numbers or hand over bank account details.[163]Some suspects told Human Rights Watch that RRU personnel had used this methodto withdraw money from their accounts.Some people who reported theft of money by armed robbers topolice never recovered their money. One victim who was robbed of severalthousand dollars told Human Rights Watch that his money was still missing, eventhough RRU arrested the alleged thieves. He said:I kept going back to Central Police Station and RRU to lookfor my money. They said they had recovered the money but couldn’t releaseit yet. After a few weeks, the police said they had found the key to the safewhere the money was held but when they opened the safe, the money wasn’tthere.[164]Public Parading ofCriminal SuspectsRRU officers often force detainees to be photographed byjournalists prior to being brought to court, and suspects may be made to posenext to or holding firearms in front of photographers who have been invited by RRU.[165]An RRU officer testifying before the general court martial said that RRUheadquarters has a policy in instances of theft or robbery to hold pressconferences to parade suspects.[166] Presscoverage of these parades often refers to suspects as “hardcorecriminals” and “thugs,” even though they have never beenconvicted of a crime.[167]  Sucha practice clearly violates the right to be presumed innocent.The press events serve several purposes: to create publicsupport for RRU’s supposed successes in cracking down hard on crime, toserve as a deterrent, and to be a potential platform for suspects’ confessions.However, such policies aimed at forced public shaming of individuals can amountto violations of suspects’ rights to a fair trial and flout principles ofdue process. One detainee said, “They published my story to the media. Itwas in the New Vision….The government and public are scared of me,but I have never been tried.”[168]Inviting press tophotograph suspects also violates the UN Standard Minimum Rules for theTreatment of Prisoners, which provides that “[w]hen the prisoners arebeing removed to or from an institution, they shall be exposed to public viewas little as possible, and proper safeguards shall be adopted to protect themfrom insult, curiosity and publicity in any form.”[169]Trials of Civilians beforeMilitary CourtsIn most cases, RRU detainees are subsequently transferred toMakindye military barracks, in Kampala, where they again spend long periods inpre-charge detention—from one month to well over a year, according tocases that Human Rights Watch has documented. One detainee interviewed by HumanRights Watch stayed in Makindye for two years, another for two-and a-halfyears. Eventually, suspects arrested by RRU are detained in civilian prisonsonce they have been charged before the military courts.These cases end up before military courts because thegovernment argues they have jurisdiction over cases involving the military,former military personnel, or persons found in unlawful possession of firearmsor ammunition, which are considered to be the monopoly of the army.[170]Statistics aren’t available, but one military court official told HumanRights Watch that he believed that most defendants at the general court martialare civilians accused of having firearms.[171]The trial of civilians inmilitary courts has been a particularly contentious legal issue in Uganda inrecent years. In 2009, the country’s constitutional court held thatmilitary courts do not have jurisdiction over civilians.[172] Despite this ruling, military courts continue totry civilians. The chairman of the general court martial affirmed this failureto implement the ruling in open court, saying, “We try people with armyproperty …. Some people, the Uganda Law Society, wrote to say we shouldstay [stop] trying cases of civilians. I put it to the officials. We’llcontinue until otherwise. I’m waiting to be driven to court or I’llcontinue trying [civilians].”[173]Asked why RRU continues to hand suspects over to themilitary courts, despite the constitutional court ruling to the contrary, theinspector general of police told Human Rights Watch that police are obeying thelaw until parliament changes it.[174]One Ugandan defense lawyer described the difference betweenmilitary and civilian courts:The military courts have less oversight than ordinarycourts, both in structure and practice. If you have a real case, then you takeit to a civilian court. In civilian courts there is a reporting hierarchy.[175]As previously stated, the original aim in establishingOperation Wembley in 2002 was to circumvent the perceived obstacles in thecivilian court system. That pattern continues despite significant increasedsupport to the justice sector since then. [176]Under regional law, trying civilians in military courts isabsolutely prohibited. The African Commission, interpreting the African Charteron Human and Peoples’ Rights, has prohibited the trial of civilians inmilitary courts.[177] TheAfrican Commission’s Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a FairTrial and Legal Assistance in Africa also prohibit the trial of civilians inmilitary courts.[178] TheAfrican Charter also guarantees the associated right to judicial independence,guaranteed by article 26. The fundamental right to procedural fairness isundermined in Uganda by the infrequency of court sessions and the compositionand lack of legal competency of the judges. The African Charter does not admitany exceptions to the rule against the use of military courts to try civilians,such as emergency situations.Uganda should immediately stop prosecuting civilians beforemilitary courts, in accordance with regional laws and domestic court rulings.Opportunities to Address Abuses by Rapid ResponseUnitSeveral branches of government can and should play a moreactive role in curtailing abuses by RRU, and in ensuring that perpetrators ofhuman rights violations are held to account rather than shielded from scrutiny.The serious intimidation of suspects and their families means that the police,among others, will need to work hard to encourage victims of abuse to reportmistreatment. However, the manner in which suspects are tortured and often heldfor long periods incommunicado and then tried by military courts years aftertheir alleged crimes means that the Uganda government cannot solely rely onvictims coming forward. More must be done to identify abuses as they occur.This will require police commanders, the Police Standards Unit, and the UgandaHuman Rights Commission to increase their monitoring of operations.Commitments to Address Abusive RRU PracticesEfforts to address RRU abuses must come, first and foremost,from the unit’s commanding officers. This is necessary to ensure thatevidence during law enforcement operations is gathered within the limits of thelaw, and to ensure that personnel who commit abuses face criminal sanction.Joel Aguma, the new commander of RRU, told Human RightsWatch that he had instituted numerous changes since taking office in lateNovember 2010. He also confidently stated that abuses had reduced since he hadtaken office.[179] Hesaid he faced challenges in both eliminating “armed thuggery” fromUganda, as well as professionalizing his staff. He stated he is open tocriticism and hoped to work closely with civil society to address complaints.He now gives written instructions to regional RRU offices that personnel mustoperate within the law, and work “hand in hand” with police fromother units. He has also instituted a human rights desk in December 2010 and atoll free phone line for the public to communicate more directly with RRU. Thedesk has since registered six complaints, all regarding allegations that RRUofficers failed to follow up investigations. It is not clear how detainedsuspects who had been recently tortured would be able to report abuse to eitherthe desk or the phone line.Upon request, Aguma provided Human Rights Watch with a listof RRU and VCCU personnel who have been brought before courts of law since2005. The list includes some obvious errors in dates and names and it has notbeen possible to verify each assertion. But according to the document, in manyinstances cases were withdrawn or “reconciliation was promoted.”There is the one conviction for manslaughter stemming from an incident in 2005.Thirteen individuals involved in seven incidents are listed as free on courtbail, including cases of alleged crimes (including murders) thatappear—based on the court file number—to have occurred in 2007.Three individuals are on remand (involved in the death of Ssekanjjako notedearlier). Despite the numerous reports of abuse published by NGOs and theUganda Human Rights Commission over the years, only one case involves acriminal charge of assault and that case has been pending since 2008.[180]The Role of the Police Standards Unit (PSU)In July 2007, the Uganda police force established the PoliceStandards Unit (PSU). According to one police member involved in setting up theunit, “At the time, there was a real question: As police polices thecommunity, who polices the police?” [181]The unit was an effort to operationalize section 70 of thePolice Act, which lays out the procedures for complaints regarding the policeand monitoring conduct that violates the police code of conduct.[182]The unit is to advise the inspector general of police (IGP) and policemanagement on professional standards, investigate specific allegations ofprofessional misconduct within the force as assigned by the IGP or the public,and promote the respect for rule of law and human rights within police, amongother tasks. The unit is not currently represented throughout the country, butthere are plans to expand offices to more easily receive complaints from moreareas around the country.Police sources indicate that the unit receives manycomplaints. In 2009 alone, there were over 2,000 complaints, of which 1,200were “completed,” although it is not clear how many of theseinvolved RRU.[183] Once acomplaint is received, the unit must investigate and then can either recommend thatthe administrative courts of police handle the case, or hand it over to theCriminal Investigations Department (CID), both in consultation with thepolice’s legal department.[184]Violations of the police disciplinary code of conduct can result in dismissalfrom the police in the most serious cases, to fines and reprimands for lesseroffenses.[185] Insome serious instances, CID and PSU can jointly investigate a matter.Police indicate that the unit can initiate investigationsbased on allegations contained in media reports, surprise visits to policeposts, and complaints from the public. In cases of mistreatment of suspects, theunit relies heavily on family and friends of detained suspects to locate lovedones, gain access to the person, and then bring any complaints to theunit’s attention. Complaints via family members are clearly much lesslikely to be made if suspects are held incommunicado or transported longdistances, rather than detained close to home where family members can visitwith relative ease. Human Rights Watch interviewed several suspects whoindicated that their families had no idea where they were held or how to findthem. Many asked Human Rights Watch to make calls to family members on theirbehalf so that relatives could know their whereabouts. Human Rights Watchresearchers did not do so.A PSU officer indicatedthat they make monthly visits to Kireka. He remembered that an RRU officer wasarrested on one occasion for having detained someone over a dispute with alandlord, rather than a criminal matter. The RRU officer’s arrest,according to PSU, sent a signal that the police do not condone this behavior.It is not clear what later occurred in that case.Police indicate that inefficiencies in the justice systemare an obstacle to accountability within the police force. In some cases, the PSUhas funded travel costs for officers who have investigated cases of policemisconduct or abuse so that they can appear as witnesses in court, only to befrustrated by the fact the courts do not sit on the days scheduled. Anotherchallenge is public reluctance to report police abuse. This would appear to be particularlytrue of cases involving RRU, due to its notorious reputation and the influence ofOperation Wembley. Complaints about RRU are very unlikely to be made unlesspolice make a concerted effort to push for respect of rule of law.The Role of the UgandaHuman Rights Commission (UHRC)Established by the 1995 constitution, the Uganda HumanRights Commission (UHRC) is tasked with investigating human rights violationsand monitoring detention conditions.[186]TheUHRC, which is a standing body with judicial powers, is empowered to subpoenaany witness or document, order the release of any detained person, andrecommend payment or compensation, or any other legal remedy after it finds theexistence of a human rights abuse.[187]However,in cases before the UHRC, complainants do not sue their torturers directly:instead, the defendant is the attorney general as a representative of the state.This means that perpetrators are not identified and go unpunished. The UHRC canaward damages for torture, and many such cases are currently pending. As thechairperson of the UHRC told media, “[E]rrant armed officers torturepeople and it is the tax-payer who bears the cost.”[188]There is currently asignificant delay in cases pending before the UHRC: complainants waitapproximately two-and-a-half years for commissioners to hear a case.[189] This is partly due to a significant delay inappointing commissioners in 2009.[190] In addition, two commissioners recently steppeddown from office, so the UHRC is again operating without its required manpower.UHRC staff is granted access to Kireka but the content ofthose interviews has never been published or publicized, though commissionershave on occasion alluded to abuses occurring. For example, in April 2010, theUHRC held a training for RRU officers. According to media reports, officerswere encouraged to reach out to the public more because “if RRU builds abetter relationship with the public, the organ will not need to apply excessiveforce when arresting and extracting information from suspects.”[191]In the past, the UHRC worked specifically on abuses byOperation Wembley and VCCU and engaged in high-level advocacy with governmentofficials about their findings, which were then reported in publications.[192]But in more recent reporting, particularly since a new chairman of the commissiontook office in 2009, there is less reporting on the substance of dialogue withhigh-ranking security officials and less analysis of the causes of ongoingabuse by this unit. This is despite the fact that the UHRC noted in its 2009report that complaints involving allegations against RRU more than doubledbetween 2008 and 2009.[193] Thiskind of finding should immediately trigger public condemnation and furtherin-depth research by the UHRC to ensure abuses are addressed.UHRC commissioners shouldcontinue to raise concerns about RRU’s use of excessive force and tortureof suspects. Specifically, commissioners should insist that Rapid Response Unitwarrants particular attention because of its history of abuse. Whilecommissioners have engaged in “quiet diplomacy” with the securityservices, the results of this engagement—particularly commitments by the policeand military to take action regarding specific allegations—are never madepublic. The commissioners, endowed by the constitution to protect human rightsin Uganda, can play an important role in curtailing abuses if they speak outpublicly about abuses and hold security services responsible for their actionsin a timely manner.Uganda’s Duty toProvide Lawyers to DefendantsAnother key element in addressing the abusesdocumented in this report is for the government to ensure that all criminalsuspects can access lawyers from the start of their detention. There is noreason to believe that a properly conducted police investigation would becompromised by ensuring that suspects have the right to a proper defense. Anysystem of justice must be measured by its fairness, as well as by itsefficiency.International fair trial standards requirethat all persons suspected or accused of a crime have the right to defendthemselves and are entitled to consult with legal counsel.[194] Suspects in police custody, no matter the alleged crime, should havethe right to see a lawyer immediately, access a lawyer during interrogations,and to be informed of their right to remain silent.Prompt access to a lawyer is a fundamental safeguard against tortureand ill-treatment. Many authoritative sources have indicated that the provisionof lawyers should be from the moment of detention, to prevent abuse in custody.The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman orDegrading Treatment or Punishment states:[I]n its experience, the periodimmediately following deprivation of liberty is when the risk of intimidationand physical ill-treatment is greatest. Consequently, the possibility forpersons taken into police custody to have access to a lawyer during that periodis a fundamental safeguard against ill-treatment. The existence of thatpossibility will have a dissuasive effect upon those minded to ill treat detainedpersons; further, a lawyer is well placed to take appropriate action ifill-treatment actually occurs.[195]For the right to a lawyer to be fullyoperational in practice, appropriate provisions must be made for people whocannot afford legal fees. In practice in Uganda, defendants in criminal trialsfor the most serious crimes receive a lawyer at the commencement of trial ifthey cannot afford one, though this is always months, if not years, after theirinitial arrest.[196]According to the Poor Persons Defence Act, defendants in criminal trials canalso be certified to receive a state-provided lawyer if “it is desirablein the interests of justice.”[197]According to the Ugandan Legal Aid Providers Network, thereis no legal aid policy to require government to provide legal services toindigent persons in custody whose rights have been abused.[198]Though there are some provisions in national law regarding how legal aid mustbe provided, the systems are limited and do not function efficiently ortransparently. As evaluators to the main donor-funded program concluded, the“meagre provision of state-funded legal aid almost certainly puts Ugandain breach of its international treaty obligations in relation to legalaid.”[199]Annex1: Letter from HRW to PoliceMajor General Kale KayihuraPoliceHeadquarters, Parliament AvenueKampala, UgandaNovember 30, 2010Dear General Kayihura,We hope thisletter finds you well. As always, we appreciate the candid dialogue that youroffice has maintained with Human Rights Watch over the years. As we discussedin our last formal meeting in May 2010, we would appreciate your responses tosome questions regarding the Rapid Response Unit of the Police.In summary,over the last several years, Human Rights Watch has documented numerous casesof arbitrary detention as well as mistreatment at the hands of agents workingfor Rapid Response Unit (RRU) and its predecessors, Violent Crime Crack Unit(VCCU) and Operation Wembley. We seek responses to ensure accuracy in our workand to reflect your views in our reporting.Please provide us withinformation regarding the legal status of Rapid Response Unit, its commandstructure, mandate, geographic areas of operation and precise legal powersof its staff.What is the substantivedifference, if any, between RRU and VCCU or Wembley in structure,personnel or mandate?lease provide us withinformation regarding the legal status of Rapid Response Unit’sheadquarters in Kireka, Kampala. Is this a legal site for detention ofsuspects and if so, on what legal basis?How many individuals work forRRU? How many are police, special police constables (SPCs), or informaloperatives and what training have they received?Are all employeesof RRU obliged to obey the police code of conduct?Do RRU officers and/or SPCsworking with RRU carry identity cards or have any other identifyinginformation, such as insignia or uniforms?How does RRU work with the otherparts of police and the other security services, such as militaryintelligence, the army, Internal Security Organization or ExternalSecurity Organization? Who has the authority to call in RRU to investigatea particular case or collect suspects from another police post/station forfurther interrogation?In locations where RRU isoperational outside Kampala, what powers do the district police commandersand the officers in charges of the police stations (“OCStation”) have over RRU officers, SPCs, or informants, if any?Does RRU have any formal orinformal relationship with the Presidential Guard Brigade and if so, whatis that relationship?On what legal basis does RRUhand over detainees/suspects to the Ugandan military for detention inMakindye barracks or other military barracks and eventual prosecutionbefore the military courts martial?Please provide documentation ofany police, SPCs, and informal agents affiliated with Wembley, VCCU or RRUwho have been arrested, tried or administratively sanctioned forviolations of the laws of Uganda. Has anyone ever been convicted and ifso, who?What steps have been taken toidentify and investigate abuses committed by officers working forOperation Wembley, VCCU and/or RRU?What steps have been taken toprevent abuses committed by officers working for Operation Wembley, VCCUand/or RRU?Please provide us with anyinformation regarding the deaths of suspects in RRU custody in earlyJanuary 2010 on the Natete-Kyengera road.Please provide us with anyinformation regarding the death of Frank Ssekanjjako on August 23-24, 2010while in custody of RRU officers.Please provide us with anyinformation regarding the death of Henry Bakasamba in May 2010 while incustody of RRU officers.Please provide us with anyinformation regarding extrajudicial deaths at the hands of officers, SPCsor informants affiliated with Wembley, VCCU or RRU since 2002.Please provide us with anexplanation of RRU’s working relationship with the American FederalBureau of Investigations. Who leads those investigations and how aredecisions made regarding how suspects will be treated, if they will becharged, detained, etc?We lookforward to receiving your response to these inquiries by December 23, 2010, sothat we can include your perspective in our work. Please email any response to burnetm@hrw.orgor via fax at: +1-212-736-1300.Yourssincerely,Rona PeligalAfricaDirector, Human Rights WatchAnnex 2: Police Letter to HRWTHE INSPECTOR GENERAL OF POLICEPOLICE HEADQARTERSP.O.BOX 7055KAMPALAATTENTION:HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH1. RRUis a Unit of the Police under CID Headquarters and falls under crimeintelligence.4. RRUhas SPCS and Police Officers but the number of Police Officers is ¾ of the whole unit(Police Officers pasted through the formal Police training.) There is a trainingand human resource development desk to handle staff training.5. Allemployees of RRU (Police Officers and SPC’s) are obliged to obey thePolice Code of conduct as per regulation 1(a) and (c) and (e) of the Police Act Cap 303.6. Thereare no special Identity Cards for RRU but most of them being Police Officerscarry their identity cards. They don’t put on Police Uniform or any otherkind of special uniform. They perform their duties in that capacity ofdetectives.7. RRUshare information with other sister security organization and vice versa as perArticle 212 of 1995 Constitution. Some suspects of offences related to FireArms, when arrested by our sister security organs are referred here so thatthey are arraigned before G.C.M.Thesuspects referred here for further interrogation or investigation are referredby Regional Police Commanders and other a few from CID Headquarters.8. TheRRU in a particular Region or District are under the Police Authority of thatRegion or District and are obliged to work hand in hand with the area PoliceAuthority.9. RRUhas no formal or informal relationship with PGB, these are two differentIdentitities. And each with duties not related to one another.10. RRUhandles only those suspects who are due to appear in G.C.M.Offences like murderby murder by shooting Aggravated rebbery,failure to protect war materials towit Gun etc, (those offences affiliated to use of Fire Arms)-11. A copy of the list is attached and marked Annexure ‘A’ of those whohave ever been arrested and taken to Courts of Law.13. MEASURESTAKEN:Establishment of a Toll Free Line.Establishment of Human Rights Desk.Working closely with P.S.U.Arranging Short Staff Trainings on Wednesdays.Liaising with various stake holders.SP AGUMA JOELCOMMANDANT RRUAcknowledgmentsThis report wasresearched and written by Maria Burnett, senior researcher in the AfricaDivision of Human Rights Watch, significantly assisted by Africa Divisionconsultant Soo-Ryun Kwon.  The report was reviewed and edited by RonaPeligal, deputy Africa director; Aisling Reidy, senior legal advisor; andDanielle Haas, editor in the Program Office. Jeff Severson, former associate inthe Africa Division provided research support.Thomas Gilchrist, senior associate in the Africa Divisionand Lindsey Hutchison, associate in the Africa Division, provided editing,production assistance, and coordination. The report was prepared forpublication by Grace Choi, publications director, Kathy Mills, publicationscoordinator, and Fitzroy Hepkins, production manager.Human Rights Watch wishes to thank the many individuals whoagreed to be interviewed and who provided time and substantive input to thisresearch.[1]OperationWembley was formed at a meeting of security chiefs on June 25, 2002, chaired byPresident Yoweri Museveni. Grace Matsiko, “Bageya ‘is Voluntary ISOCadre,’” New Vision, July 23, 2002.[2]Human Rights Watch, State of Pain: Torture in Uganda, vol. 16, no. 4(A),March 2004, http://www.hrw.org/node/12160. Moses Mugalu, “Ex-WembleyConvicts Behind City Crime,” New Vision, May 17, 2008. HumanRights Watch interview with current RRU employee, November 12, 2010.[3]Human Rights Watch interviews with Ugandan journalists, Kampala, August 25 andDecember 13, 2010. Human Rights Watch interviews with former Wembley officers,Kampala, August 26, 2010. Human Rights Watch interviews with former Wembleyofficers, December 21, 2010.[4]Allan Turyaguma, “Museveni Defends Ops Wembley,” New Vision,August 26, 2002.[5]In 2004, opposition parliamentarian Erias Lukwago alleged a constitutionalviolation in the formation of numerous security agencies without any act ofparliament. Erias Lukwago, “Uganda Public vs. Yoweri Museveni,” Monitor,January 3, 2004 (“President Museveni and his NRM government haveestablished a plethora of intelligence and other militia groups without anysupportive Parliamentary legislation to wit; CMI, PPU, PGB, KAP, PIN, VCCU,Wembley etc. This contravenes Art. 218 of the Constitution which provides that:‘Parliament may by law establish intelligence services and may prescribetheir composition, functions and procedures.’”).[6]Felix Osike, “Judiciary Protests on Kayanja,” New Vision,July 31, 2002.[7]Human Rights Watch, State of Pain, p. 51.[8]Ibid.[9]Human Rights Watch interview with Geoffrey, Kampala, June 24, 2010.[10]Human Rights Watch interview with Anthony, Kampala, November 19, 2009.[11]Felix Osike, “Judiciary Protests on Kayanja,” New Vision,July 31, 2002. The chair of the Judicial Service Commission, Justice Christine Kitumba,condemned the extrajudicial killing of suspected robbers. “We don'tsupport that at all. We hope the security organisations will respect the lawand bring the suspects to court so that they don't kill evidence. We shouldrespect the rule of law,” she said.[12]Human Rights Watch, State of Pain.[13]Maj. Gen.Kale Kayihura, “The State Has Not Become Militarized,” NewVision, 28 July 2009.[14]Human Rights Watch, State of Pain. The official end date of Wembley isnot known. News reports indicate that it ended sometime in August 2002, but theCertificates of Appreciation handed out by the President’s office toWembley operatives indicate that the operations ended in January 2003.[15]Ibid.; Magara was also Kampala’s deputy regional police commander.Geoffrey Kamali and Kyomuhendo Muhanga, “Colonel Kayanja QuitsWembley,” New Vision, February 26, 2003.[16]Human Rights Watch interviews with former VCCU employee Kampala, August 26,2010; and with Ugandan journalists, Kampala, August 25 and December 13, 2010.[17]Uganda Human Rights Commission, Freedom from Torture: The End of OperationWembley and the Rise of the Violent Crime Crack Unit, 2003, chap. 9. HumanRights Watch interview with police sources, December 13, 2010.[18]According to the United States Department of State country reports on humanrights practices, VCCU arrested and detained over 500 suspects in 2003, and over 1,100 suspects in 2004. US State Department,Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, “Country Reports on HumanRights Practices – 2003: Uganda,” February 25, 2004,http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2003/27758.htm (accessed September 6,2010). US State Department, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor,“Country Reports on Human Rights Practices – 2004: Uganda,”February 28, 2005, http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2004/41632.htm(accessed September 6, 2010).[19]In 2003, Amnesty International called for aninquiry into the death of Nsangi Murisidi, a small business owner, who waspicked up by VCCU and killed due to “extensive loss of fluid and blood,severe bleeding in the brain and extensive burns on the buttocks.” AmnestyInternational, “Urgent need to end torture following death in custody,”AFR 59/009/2003, June 27, 2003, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/AFR59/009/2003/en(accessed September 6, 2010).[20] UgandaHuman Rights Commission, Freedom from Torture: The End of Operation Wembleyand the Rise of the Violent Crime Crack Unit, 2003, chap. 9 (“In2003 the Commission registered 48 complaints against the VCCU, compared to 44complaints registered against Operation Wembley in 2002.”).[21]Human Rights Watch interviews with Arnold,Kampala, November 20, 2009; with Arthur, Kampala, November 20, 2009; withRoger, Kampala, November 20, 2009; with Ali, Mbarara Main, February 23, 2010;with Daniel, Mbarara Main, February 23, 2010; with Edward, Mbale, December 7,2009; with Samuel, Mbale, December 7, 2009; with George, Kampala, June 24,2010; with Gerard, Kampala, June 24, 2010; with Stephen, Kampala, June 24, 2010;and with Julius, Murchison Bay, November 10, 2010.[22]Human Rights Watch interview with Gerald, Kampala, June 24, 2010.[23]Human Rights Watch interview with Stephen, Kampala, June 24, 2010.[24]Human Rights Watch interview with Donald, Mbarara Main, February 23, 2010.[25] Emmanuel Mulondo, “ VCCU Man Arrested On Torture Charges” NewVision, May 3, 2004.[26]Names of RRU operatives charged in courts of law since 2005, provided by RRUCommander Joel Aguma, On file with Human Rights Watch.[27]Amnesty International, “Detainees Tortured During IncommunicadoDetention,” AI Index: AFR 59/006/2007, September 14, 2007,http://www.amnesty.org.au/news/comments/3117/ (accessed September 6, 2010).[28]David Magara was quoted as saying, “Is that information on evidence? Have the peoplewho have supplied that information to you visited us and do they have evidence?You investigate for yourself and make your independent findings.” Solomon Muyita, “Army Leads inTorturing,” Monitor, July 21, 2007. The UHRC continues to includeabuses by RRU in its annual reporting.[29]Simon Kasyate, “Kayihura Undergoes Massive Overhaul,” Monitor,July 1, 2007.[30]The Crime Intelligence Unit would be charged with studying crime trends andmaking projections. The Crime Investigations Unit would continue with theCID’s traditional investigative role. Simon Kasyate, “KayihuraUndergoes Massive Overhaul,” Monitor, July 1, 2007.[31]Andrew Bagala, “VCCU Renamed, Gets Wider Role,” Monitor,September 25, 2007.[32] Ministryof Public Service, “A report on the approved structure of the UgandaPolice Force,” March 2009, on file with Human Rights Watch. The documentfurther explains that RRU’s “key functions” are to: “Developplans, strategies, policies and guidelines for effective management of hardcore criminals in the whole country; Plans and implements operations againsthardcore criminals in the whole country; Trace and apprehend well-knowncriminals who are still at large; Liaise with other security agencies and otherstakeholders within and outside Uganda for purposes of tracing and apprehendinghard core criminals; Compile case files and complete investigations of theviolent suspects; Promote and ensure reduction of violent crime in the countryby keeping vigilance surveillance on RRU suspects released from prisons; Assistpolice in curbing crimes which include but are not limited to burglaries,street mugging, mobile phone grabbing and theft of motorcycles and vehicles;Develop and build the human and non human capacity of the unit to handle hardcore criminals.”[33]In Mbale in February 2010, RRU reportedly harassed opposition supporters fromthe Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) party during by-elections. Wafula Oguttuand Ofwono Opondo, “Is the Mbale Election Result a Reflection of FDCStrength or NRM Internal Weaknesses?” New Vision, February 20,2010[34] AndrewBagala, “Police Search Bank over Missing 900 million UGS,” Monitor,October 15, 2009.[35]Herbert Ssempogo, “Two Held OverFraud,” Monitor, July 23, 2009; Eddie Ssejjoba, “SuspectedImpersonator Faints at Press Conference,” New Vision, June 7,2009; and Luke Kagiri, “Mityana Police Arrest Suspected Conmen,” NewVision, April 20, 2009.[36]Pascal Kwesiga, “Three Arrested Over Fake Notes in Masindi,” NewVision, June 30, 2010; and David Kazungu, “Police Impound a MillionFake Dollars,” Monitor, September 30, 2009.[37]Eddie Ssejjoba, “Kayihura Impostor Still in Police Custody,” TheNew Vision, April 14, 2009; and Francis Kagolo, “Saleh ImpostorArrested,” New Vision, November 8, 2008.[38]Obed K. Katureebe, “National Forestry Authority Chokes Under GrossCorruption,” Observer, November 25, 2009; Dradenya Amazia,“15 Stolen Vehicles Recovered,” New Vision, November 12,2009; Robert Mwanje and Faridah Kulabako, “Security Officials BeatWorshipers,” Monitor, August 12, 2009; and Uwera Runyambo andRobert Muhereza, “Injured Suspect Now at Mulago,” Monitor,July 30, 2009.[39]Patrick Jaramogi, “Tycoon Ezra Escapes in Police Car Chase,” NewVision, October 19, 2010.[40]Zurah Nakabugo, “41 Arrested in Police Raid On City Lodges,” Monitor,August 17, 2007.[41]“Uganda: Kenyan Activists at Risk of Torture,” Human Rights Watchnews release, September 17, 2010, http://www.hrw.org/node/93131.[42]In 2009, the Inspector General of Police terminated the services of 16 formerWembley operatives who had been employed in VCCU and RRU without explanation.Two active members of the military were ordered back to their military units.Orders from the inspector general of police, dated October 16, 2009 (On filewith Human Rights Watch).[43]Human Rights Watch interviews with current and former Wembley/VCCU/RRUemployees, Kampala, August 25, 2010.[44]Human Rights Watch interview, Kampala, February 22, 2011.[45]Human Rights Watch interviews with current and former Wembley/VCCU/RRUemployees, Kampala, August 25, November 13, November 14, and December 20, 2010.[46]Solomon Muyita, “Army Leads in Torturing,” Monitor, July 21,2007; Mercy Nalugo and Solomon Mutiya, “Rights Bodies Want MPs toCriminalise Torture,” Monitor, September 20, 2007.[47]SolomonMuyita and Pauline Kairu, “UHRC Orders Closure of Prisons in EasternUganda,” Monitor, June 27, 2009. The article notes that the UgandaHuman Rights Commission “accused the Police force particularly the RapidResponse Unit (RRU) of administering 41.6 per cent of the claimedtorture….”[48]Andrew Bagala and Emmanuel Gyezaho, “Police Crack Unit Disbanded,” Monitor,October 19, 2009. Some sources indicate that the removal of at least 19 of theRRU officers was related to disagreements over loyalty between former commanderDavid Magara and subsequent commander Emmanuel Muhairwe.[49] JulietAkankwasa, thewife of National Forestry Authority (NFA) head Damian Akankwasa, was detainedfor allegedly stealing 900 million Ugandan shillings (approximately US$450,000)from her husband. Her lawyer challenged her detention for over one week withoutcharge. She stated that she made an alleged confession at the Rapid ResponseUnit headquarters under duress. She accused police detectives led by DicksonByona of keeping her under illegal detention and threatening her withelectrocution and extraction of her fingernails. Andrew Bagala and EmmanuelGyezaho, “Police Crack Unit Disbanded,” Monitor, October 19,2009.[50]Police Chief Appoints New RRU Boss, The New Vision, November 18, 2010.[51]Human Rights Watch interview with Commander Joel Aguma, January 24, 2011.[52]Human Rights Watch interviews with Ugandan journalist, August 24, 2010; andwith Internal Security Organisation agent, November 29, 2010.[53]Human Rights Watch interview with ISO agent, November 29, 2010.[54]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December16, 1996, G.A. Res. 2200A (XX1), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc.A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23, 1976, acceded toby Uganda June 21, 1995.[55]Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment orPunishment (Convention against Torture), adopted December 10, 1984, G.A. res.39/46, annex, 39 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 51) at 197, U.N. Doc. A/39/51 (1984),entered into force June 26, 1987. The UK ratified the Convention againstTorture in 1988, ratified by Uganda, November, 3, 1986.[56]African [Banjul] Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, adopted June 27,1981, OAU Doc. CAB/LEG/67/3 rev. 5, 21 I.L.M. 58 (1982), entered into forceOctober 21, 1986, ratified by Uganda May 10, 1986.[57]StandardMinimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, adopted Aug. 30, 1955, by theFirst United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment ofOffenders, U.N. Doc. A/CONF/611, annex I, E.S.C. res. 663C, 24 U.N. ESCOR Supp.(No. 1) at 11, U.N. Doc. E/3048 (1957), amended E.S.C. res. 2076, 62 U.N. ESCORSupp. (No. 1) at 35, U.N. Doc. E/5988 (1977).[58]G.A. res. 43/173, annex, 43 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 298,U.N. Doc. A/43/49 (1988).[59]Adopted bythe Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatmentof Offenders, 1990.[60]BasicPrinciples on the Role of Lawyers, adopted at the Eighth United NationsCongress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, U.N.Doc.A/CONF.144/28/Rev.1 at 118 (1990).[61]Manualon the Effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel,Inhuman or Degrading Punishment (“Istanbul Protocol”), August 9,1999.[62] AfricanCommission on Human & Peoples’ Rights, “Principles andGuidelines on the Right to a Fair Trial and Legal Assistance in Africa,”DOC/OS(XXX)247, 2001,http://www.achpr.org/english/declarations/Guidelines_Trial_en.html (accessedFebruary 21, 2011).[63]Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995,art. 23(2).[64]Ibid., art. 24.[65]Ibid. The Anti-Terrorism Act specifically states that anofficer “who engages in torture, inhuman and degrading treatment, illegaldetention or intentionally causes harm or loss to property, commits an offenceand is liable, on conviction, to imprisonment not exceeding five years or afine … or both.” Anti-Terrorism Act, art. 17 (4). Human RightsWatch is not aware of any prosecutions of individuals under this article of theAct. For more, see Human Rights Watch, Open Secret: Torture and illegaldetention by the Joint Anti Terrorism Task Force in Uganda. April 2009.[66]Human Rights Watch interview with director of public prosecutions, RichardButeera, January 20, 2009.[67]Conclusions and recommendations of the Committeeagainst Torture: Uganda. “Consideration of Reports submitted by Stateparties under Article 19 of the Convention”, Art. 10 (a), June 21, 2005.CAT/C/CR/34/UGA, http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)/CAT.C.CR.34.UGA.En?Opendocument.[68]Website of the Parliament of Uganda, “Parliament of UgandaeNewsletter,” Vol. 4 Issue No. 5, July 5, 2010 - July 9, 2010, availableat http://www.parliament.go.ug/enewsletter/index.php/home/view/78/.[69]Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, art.23(3).[70]Ibid., art. 23(4).[71]Ibid., art. 28(3)(e). Human Rights Watchinterviews with criminal lawyers, Kampala, January 15 and 16, 2009.[72]A 2007 census of Ugandan Prisons indicatedthat the average length of stay on remand for the entire trial (from date ofadmission to date of case disposal) was 30.3 months for capital offences. TheRepublic of Uganda Justice Law and Order Sector, “Census of Prisoners in48 Central Government Prisons,” 2007,http://www.prisons.go.ug/publications/Prisoners%20census-2007.pdf (accessedDecember 17, 2010).The U.S. StateDepartment reports that judicial case backlogs contribute to pre-trialdetentions between two and three years, and sometimes as long as seven years inUganda. U.S. Department of State,“2009 Human Rights Report: Uganda,” 2010,http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2009/af/135982.htm (accessed December 17,2010). Human Rights Watch is aware of at least four individuals who werearrested by Operation Wembley in 2002 and whose trial is still not concluded,meaning that they have been on remand for eight years.[73]Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, art.23(5)(b) and (c).[74]Ibid., art. 23(5)(a).[75]Attorney General v. Tumushabe, Constitutional Appeal Number 3 of 2005.The court ruled that the General Court Martial is not exempt from theconstitutional requirement to comply with the provisions on entitlements tobail. The case was brought by 27 individuals suspected to be members of thePeoples Redemption Army (PRA), a Congo-based rebel group charged with treasonby the general court martial. For more than two years, the military refused toobey High Court orders for the suspects to be granted bail and access to theirlawyers or families. By the time the Supreme Court issued its ruling, many ofthe suspects had already applied for amnesty.[76] TheMagistrates Court Act sets out the actions which must occur after a person ischarged with certain capital crimes which must be tried in High Court. Inparticular, the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) must provide themagistrate’s court with an indictment and a summary of the case in orderto commit a case to the High Court. Magistrates Court Act of 1971, sec. 168.The Trial on Indictments Act does not allow a person accused of a criminaloffence triable by the High Court to be produced in the High Court unless anduntil such person has been committed for trial by the DPP. Trial on IndictmentsAct of 1971, sec. 1. Due to the criminal process’s dependency upon thespeed of the DPP’s actions, prisoners can continue on remand without anystatutorily defined time limitations.[77]A person also cannot plea before the magistrates court if the High Court hasjurisdiction over the case.[78]Article 23(6) as amended by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda(Amendment) Act 11/2005 provides:(6) where a person is arrested in respect of acriminal offence –(a) the person is entitled to apply to thecourt to be released on bail and the court may grant that person bail on suchconditions as the court considers reasonable;(b) in the case of an offence which is triable by theHigh Court as well as by a subordinate court, if that person has been remandedin custody in respect of the offence for sixty days before trial, thatperson shall be released on bail on such conditions as the courtconsiders reasonable(c) in the case of an offence triable only by the HighCourt, if that person has been remanded in custody for one hundred andeighty days before the case is committed to the High Court, that person shallbe released on bail on such conditions as the court considers reasonable.Before the constitutional amendment, (b) and (c)stated 120 and 360 respectively as the number of days that must pass before aperson is entitled to bail. See alsoUganda v. Besigye,Constitutional Court of Uganda at Kampala, Constitutional Reference No. 20 of2005, September 25, 2006.[79]Human Rights Watch interview with military court official, Kampala, December15, 2010. Human Rights Watch interview with Anthony, Kampala, Nov. 19, 2009 andJune 21, 2010. Human Rights Watch interview with Arnold, Kampala, November 20,2009. Human Rights Watch interview with Arthur, Kampala, November 20, 2009.Human Rights Watch interview with Roger, Kampala, November 20, 2009. HumanRights Watch interview with Brian, Kampala, November 20, 2009. Human RightsWatch interview with Christopher, Mbarara Main, February 23, 2010.[80]Report ofthe Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions,A/HRC/14/24May 20, 2010, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/issues/executions/annual.htm(accessed December 17, 2010). See especially, “Killings by LawEnforcement Officials or Other Security Forces,” para. 30.[81]Human Rights Watch interview with eyewitness 3, November 29, 2010.[82]Police register at Kabalagala police station.[83]Human Rights Watch interview with detained RRU officers, November 12, 2010.[84]Ibid.[85]Human Rights Watch interview with eyewitness 1, November 29, 2010 and eyewitness2, December 3, 2010.[86]Human Rights Watch interview with eyewitness 1, November 29, 2010.[87]Human Rights Watch interview with eyewitness 1, November 29, 2010 andeyewitness 2, December 3, 2010.[88]Ibid.[89]Human Rights Watch interview with eyewitness 1, November 29, 2010 and andeyewitness 2, December 3, 2010. One reported that the amount was 20,000 UGS(US$10) the other said that each officer was given 50,000 UGS (US$25).[90]Post-mortem report of Frank Ssekanjako, examination performed August 24, 2010, signedby Dr. Sylvester Onzvuua. A “tramline” injury is“typical of a blow from a linear blunt object.” MargaretStark, Clinical Forensic Medicine: A Physician's Guide, Humana Press, p.339.[91]Chris Kiwawulo, “Suspect on the Run,” New Vision, August 28,2010.[92]“Two Cops in Jail Over Death of Suspect,” New Vision, August25, 2010.[93]Human Rights Watch interview of brother of Frank Ssekanjako, August 26, 2010.[94]Ibid.[95]Human Rights Watch interview of brother of Frank Ssekanjako, November 25, 2010.[96]Note that most of the eyewitnesses in this account have not been interviewed bypolice who appear to have made minimal investigations in this case, despitehaving arrested the officers for the murder.[97]Herbert Ssempogo, “RRU Officers Held Over Killing Suspect,” NewVision, May 17, 2010. “Rights Body to Investigate Death in PoliceCustody,” New Vision, May 18, 2010. Herbert Ssempogo,“Suspect Dies in Police Custody,” New Vision, May 16, 2010.[98]Human Rights Watch interview with multiple eyewitness, December 22, 2010.[99]Ibid.[100]“Rights Body to Investigate Death in Police Custody,” New Vision,May 18, 2010.[101]Human Rights Watch interview with police officer, December 13, 2010.[102]Somesources claim more than four were killed in this incident. See Ire Roilson,“Seven Unarmed Civilians Executed At Kyengera –Natete,” TheIndependent, January 5, 2010.[103]AndrewBagala and Martin Ssebuyiira, “Four Shot Dead in City Robbery,” TheDaily Monitor, January 4, 2010.Steven Candia, “Kyengera Shooting SuspectsNamed,” The New Vision, January 4, 2010.[104]Thenumbers of those killed vary in the eyewitness accounts, but the lack of anexchange of gunfire is consistent. Andrew Bagala and MartinSsebuyiira, “Four Shot Dead in City Robbery,” The Daily Monitor,January 4, 2010.“[I]na different account of events by residents, the suspects had accepted tosurrender but the Police officers ordered them out of the car and shot them, aclaim denied by the Police.” Ire Roilson, “Seven UnarmedCivilians Executed At Kyengera –Natete,” The Independent,January 5, 2010. The author was an eyewitness, who wrote, “[T]here wasabsolutely no exchange of fire. Those seven people were unarmed; they did notreturn fire; but they were surely executed on the streets, with their hands upin the air and some were kneeling on the tarmac with their hands up pleadingfor their lives. Why they were not arrested, but shot mercilessly allegedly bylaw enforcement agencies in civilian clothes, terrifies people here who arebracing for violence in the run up to elections in 2011. The security personnelsurely could have arrested those people and taken them into custody. Forreasons best known to them, perhaps according to their operational command,they chose to summarily kill, rather than let justice run its course if indeedthe victims were in any way connected to some crime.”[105]Human Rights Watch interview with eyewitness in Kyengera, December 6, 2010.[106]Human Rights Watch interview with eyewitness 2, December 6, 2010.[107]JudeKafuuma, “UPC Raps Cops On City Shootings,” The New Vision, January7, 2010.[108]Human Rights Watch interview with James, Kampala, June 25, 2010. Human RightsWatch interview with Mohamed, Kampala, June 25, 2010. Human Rights Watchinterview with Grace, Butuntumura, November 11, 2010.[109]Human Rights Watch interview with Francis, Soroti, December 8, 2009.[110]Ibid.[111]Human Rights Watch interview with Simon, Kampala, June 21, 2010.[112]Human Rights Watch interview with James, Kampala, June 25, 2010.[113]Human Rights Watch interview with Agnes, Butuntumura, November 11, 2010[114]For example, one former Wembley detainee said that he saw four people die whilehe was held at Wembley offices in Clement Hill. Human Rights Watch interviewwith Geoffrey, Kampala, June 24, 2010.[115]Human Rights Watch interview with detainees, Kampala, Mbarara, November 2009,February 2010, June 2010. Human Rights Watch trial observations, MakindyeGeneral Court Martial, September 21, 2010.[116]Civilians who wish to own a gun must applyto the Ministry of Internal Affairs for a firearms certificate. The policecomplete a background check to assess criminal, mental, and addiction records.Applicants must demonstrate a genuine reason for owning a firearm, be at least25 years of age, and have competency in handling the firearm. If the applicantqualifies, the Ministry may then issue a certificate which must be re-appliedfor and renewed every year. See Firearms Act of 1970, sec 3 and 4. Theestimated number of civilians with guns in Uganda is about 400,000, but only2,770 of them are registered. GunPolicy.org, “Uganda, Gun, Facts,Figures, and the Law,” http://www.gunpolicy.org/firearms/region/Uganda(accessed Jan. 20, 2011).[117]Human Rights Watch interview with John, Kampala, June 21, 2010. Human RightsWatch interview with William, Kampala, June 25, 2010. Human Rights Watchinterview with Isaac, Kampala, June 25, 2010.[118]Human Rights Watch interview with Simon, Kampala, June 21, 2010.[119]Human Rights Watch interview with Gideon, Kampala, June 24, 2010. Human RightsWatch interview with Geoffrey, Kampala, June 24, 2010.[120]Human Rights Watch interview with Gideon, Kampala, June 24, 2010.[121]Human Rights Watch interview with Roger, Kampala, November 20, 2009. HumanRights Watch interview with Simon, Kampala, June 21, 2010.[122]Human Rights Watch interview with Jonathan, Kampala, June 21, 2010.[123]Human Rights Watch interview with John, Kampala, June 21, 2010. Human RightsWatch interview with William, Kampala, June 25, 2010. Human Rights Watchinterview with Isaac, Kampala, June 25, 2010.[124]Human Rights Watch interview with William, Kampala, June 25, 2010.[125]Ibid.[126]Ibid., Human Rights Watch interview with Gabriel, Mbale, December 9, 2009.[127]Human Rights Watch interview with Grace, November 9, 2010.[128]Human Rights Watch interview with Anthony, Kampala, June 21, 2010. Human RightsWatch interview with Gideon, Kampala, June 24, 2010.[129]Human Rights Watch interview with Gideon, Kampala, June 24, 2010.[130]Human Rights Watch interview with Jerome, Kampala, June 21, 2010. Human RightsWatch interview with Henry, Kampala, June 25, 2010. Human Rights Watchinterview with Isaac, Kampala, June 25, 2010.[131]Human Rights Watch interview with Gregory, Kampala, June 24, 2010.[132]Human Rights Watch interview with William, Kampala, June 25, 2010. Human RightsWatch interview with Isaac, Kampala, June 25, 2010.[133]Human Rights Watch interview with Isaac, Kampala, June 25, 2010.[134]Human Rights Watch interview with Moses, November 29, 2010.[135]Medical records from Mulago hospital as seen by Human Rights Watch.[136]Human Rights Watch trial observation, Makindye General Court Martial, September21, 2010.[137]Human Rights Watch trial observation, Makindye General Court Martial, September28, 2010.[138]Ibid.[139]Evidence Act of 1909, sec. 24. “A confession made by an accused person isirrelevant if the making of the confession appears to the court, having regardto the state of mind of the accused person and to all the circumstances, tohave been caused by any violence, force, threat, inducement or promisecalculated in the opinion of the court to cause an untrue confession to bemade.”[140]Evidence Act of 1909, sec. 1. “This Act shall apply to all judicialproceedings in or before the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal, the High Courtand all courts established under the Magistrates Courts Act, but not toaffidavits presented to any court or officer nor to proceedings before anarbitrator.”[141]Uganda Constitution, art. 23(4).[142]Ibid., art. 23(2).[143]Human Rights Watch interview with Commander Joel Aguma and police, January 24,2011.[144]The African Union Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a fair trial andlegal assistance in Africa Paragraph M (f).[145]Human Rights Watch interview with Simon, Kampala, June 21, 2010.[146]Human Rights Watch trial observation, Makindye General Court Martial, July 8,2010.[147]Human Rights Watch, Open Secret: IllegalDetention and Torture  by the Joint Anti-terrorism Task Force in Uganda,ISBN: 1-56432-467-2 , April 2009,http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2009/04/08/open-secret-0.[148]Human Rights Watch interview with friends of Annet Namwanga, Kampala, February17, 2011.[149]Others were held in the headquarters of the Joint Anti terrorism Task Force inKololo, Kampala, and the Chieftancy of Military Intelligence in Kitante,Kampala. Others were held in police posts around the capital.[150] Kimathihad been critical of the manner of the handover of Kenyan suspects to Ugandawithout proper legal process. For more on Kimathi’s case, see HumanRights Watch, “Uganda: Kenyan Activists at Risk of Torture, September 17,2010, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2010/09/16/uganda-kenyan-activists-risk-torture;Human Rights Watch, “Uganda: Terrorism Charges UsedAgainst Kenyan Rights Defender,” September27, 2010,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2010/09/27/uganda-terrorism-charges-used-against-kenyan-rights-defender;and Human Rights Watch, “Uganda: Kenyan Rights Defender toBe Tried for Kampala Bombings,” November30, 2010.http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2010/11/30/uganda-kenyan-rights-defender-be-tried-kampala-bombings.[151]Human Rights Watch has been denied access to Kimathi and allsuspects on the July bombings case by the Uganda Commissioner General ofPrisons.[152]CharlesAriko, “Uganda: Woman Tries to Arm City Bomb Suspect,” NewVision, December 5, 2010.[153]Human Rights Watch interview with defense lawyers, Kampala, December 8, 9, and17, 2010.[154]Human Rights Watch interview with MA, ER, December 22, 2010.[155]Human Rights Watch interview with MA, December 22, 2010 and January 20, 2011.[156]Human Rights Watch interview with MA, Kampala, December 22, 2010.[157]Human Rights Watch interview with Edgar, Mbale, December 7, 2009. Human RightsWatch interview with Gabriel, Mbale, December 9, 2009. Human Rights Watchinterview with Emmanuel, Mbale, December 9, 2009. Human Rights Watch interviewwith Jerome, Kampala, June 21, 2010. Human Rights Watch interview with Henry,Kampala, June 25, 2010. Human Rights Watch interview with William, Kampala, June25, 2010. Human Rights Watch interview with Mohamed, Kampala, June 25, 2010.Human Rights Watch trial observation, Makindye General Court Martial, September21, 2010. Human Rights Watch trial observation, Makindye General Court Martial,January 19, 2011.[158]Human Rights Watch interview with wives of suspects, Kampala, November 2010.[159]Human Rights Watch interview with Gabriel, Kampala, December 9, 2009.[160]Human Rights Watch interview with Jerome, Kampala, June 21, 2010.[161]Human Rights Watch trial observation, Makindye General Court Martial, January19, 2011.[162]Ibid.[163]Human Rights Watch interview with Ugandan government official, November 2010.[164]Human Rights Watch interview with robbery victim, Kampala, December 22, 2010.[165]Human Rights Watch interview with Duncan, Mbale, December 7, 2009. Human RightsWatch interview with Eric, Mbale, December 9, 2009. Human Rights Watchinterview with Evan, Mbale, December 9, 2009. Human Rights Watch trialobservations, Makindye General Court Martial, September 21, 2010.[166]Human Rights Watch trial observations, Makindye General Court Martial,September 21, 2010.[167]See,e.g.,Esther Mukyala, “Police Shoots 3 Robbers in Jinja,” New Vision,May 24, 2010; Stephen Candia, “Police Arrests 35 Suspects OverRobberies,” New Vision, January 28, 2010; Stephen Candia,“Kyengera Shooting Suspects Named,” New Vision, January 4,2010; Francis Kagolo, “Four Robbers Shot Dead in Kampala,” NewVision, January 3, 2010; Vision Reporter, “Police Arrests HighwayThugs,” New Vision, April 23, 2009; Moses Nampala, “RRU TeamKills Thugs, Recovers Gun in Tororo,” New Vision, April 14, 2009;Chris Kiwawulo, “Police Shoot Two Armed Thugs,” New Vision,October 29, 2008; Patrick Jaramogi and Richard Kanamugire, “38 SuspectedRobbers Paraded,” New Vision, October 28, 2008; Herbert Ssempogo,“Police Arrest 66 Suspects, Recover 19 Guns,” New Vision,September 11, 2008; Moses Nampala, “Cop Held Over Hiring Out Gun,” NewVision, August 20, 2008; Moses Mugalu, “Ex-Wembley Convicts BehindCity Crime,” New Vision, May 17, 2008; Abdulkarim Ssengendo,“Thugs Held,” May 8, 2008.[168]Human Rights Watch interview with Mohamed, Kampala, June 25, 2010.[169]Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, adopted by the FirstUnited Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment ofOffenders, held at Geneva in 1955, and approved by the Economic and SocialCouncil by its resolutions 663 C (XXIV) of 31 July 1957 and 2076 (LXII) of 13May 1977, Rule 45(1).[170]Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF) Act of 1992, sec.119(1)(g) and (h).The section lists persons subject to military law and includes:(g) every person, not otherwise subject to militarylaw, who aids or abets a person subject to military law in the commission of aservice offence; and(h) every person found in unlawful possessionof—(i) arms, ammunition or equipment ordinarily being the monopoly ofthe Defence Forces; or (ii) other classified stores asprescribed.[171]Human Rights Watch interview with court official, Kampala, July 8, 2010.[172]Uganda Law Society v. Attorney General, Constitutional Petition no. 18 of 2005. Theconstitutional court held “That section 119(1)(g) and (h) of the UgandaPeoples Defence Forces Act No.7/05 which subjects civilians not employed by orvoluntarily or in any other way officially connected with the Uganda PeoplesDefence Forces to military law and discipline, is inconsistent with Articles126(1) [‘Judicial power is derived from the people”] and 210[“Parliament shall enact laws regulating the Uganda Peoples’Defence Forces”] of the Constitution.” The court further held,“Therefore, civilians who do not fall under the categories stated in the[UPDF] Act are not liable to be tried by military courts because Parliament didnot intend them to [be] so tried.”[173]Human Rights Watch trial observation, Makindye General Court Martial, December16, 2010.[174]Human Rights Watch interview with inspector general of police, January 24,2011.[175]Human Rights Watch interview with Ugandan criminal defense lawyer, June 15,2011.[176]For more on financial support to the Justice, Law and Order sector, totalingover 366 billion Ugandan Shillings [1.74 million USD] in 2009-2010 alone, see http://www.jlos.go.ug.[177]Law Office of Ghazi Suleiman v. Sudan, Comm. Nos. 222/98 and 229/99,para. 64 (African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights 2003); MediaRights Agenda v. Nigeria, Comm. No. 224/98, paras. 60-66 (AfricanCommission on Human and Peoples’ Rights 2000).[178]African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, Principles andGuidelines on the Right to a Fair Trial and Legal Assistance inAfrica (Nov.1999).[179]Human Rights Watch interview with Commander Joel Aguma, Kampala, January 24,2011.[180]Names of RRU operatives charged in courts of law since 2005, from CommanderJoel Aguma, received by Human Rights Watch via email on January 25, 2011. HumanRights Watch did not republish this chart in the annex of this report becauseof the errors in names and dates.[181]Human Rights Watch, interview with member of Uganda Police Force, PoliceStandards Unit, December 13, 2010.[182]The Police Act, 1994, as amended by the Police (Amendment) Act, 2007, sec. 70.and Police Code of Conduct, Schedule 1.[183]Human Rights Watch, interview with member of Uganda Police Force, PoliceStandards Unit, December 13, 2010. “Completed” does not necessarilymean that disciplinary action was taken.[184]Ibid.[185]Police Code of Conduct, Schedule One of the Police Act.[186]The UHRC was established under articles 51 to 59 of the 1995 constitution.[187]UgandaConstitution, art. 53 (1). The court powers include the issuance of summons andthe power to compel testimony, on pain of contempt of court; however, the UHRCcannot investigate any matters pending before a court of law. The powers,functions, and structure of the UHRC are implementedin greater detail by the Uganda Human Rights Commission Act passedby parliament in 1997. Human Rights Watch, Protectors or Pretenders: Government Human RightsCommissions in Africa(NewYork: Human Rights Watch, 2001), http://www.hrw.org/legacy/reports/2001/africa/index.html.[188]Josephine Maseruka, “Mob Justice Cases Expected to Increase,” NewVision, September 23, 2009.[189]Human Rights Watch communication with staff of UHRC, December 15, 2010.[190]“Uganda: Carry out Rights Commission Recommendations,” Human RightsWatch news release, May 29, 2009, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2009/05/29/uganda-carry-out-rights-commission-recommendations.[191]Lydia Nabayego, “RRU officers urged to respecthuman rights,” The Observer, April 4, 2010.[192]See for example, Uganda Human Rights Commission, Freedom from Torture: TheEnd of Operation Wembley and the Rise of the Violent Crime Crack Unit,2003,http://www.uhrc.ug/index.php?option=com_docman&Itemid=111&limitstart=5,Chapter 9.[193]2009 Uganda Human Rights Commission report. Almost half of those involvedallegations of torture while others alleged deprivation of property, life, andunlawful detention. In a visit to the Makindye Military barracks, the UHRCfound 92 RRU suspects in detention, two of whom had been there for at least oneyear. See p 6, 9, and 48.[194]UnitedNations, Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons underAny Form of Detention or Imprisonment (Body of Principles), adoptedDecember 9, 1988, G.A. Res. 43/173, annex, 43 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 298,U.N. Doc. A/43/49 (1988). Principle 18 of this body reads: A detained orimprisoned person shall be entitled to communicate and consult with his legalcounsel.[195]Extractfrom the 6th General Report [CPT/Inf (96) 21] CPT – para 15. http://www.cpt.coe.int/en/documents/eng-standards.pdf.[196]Uganda Constitution, Art 28(3)[197]Poor Persons Defence Act of 2000, sec. 2.[198]LASPNET, “Mapping report: Legal Aid Service Provision in Uganda,”April 2009. http://laspnet.org/index2.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_view&gid=6&Itemid=15.[199]Evaluation of Uganda’s Legal Aid Basket, November 17, 2010, para. 2.15.Related ContentMarch 23, 2011News ReleaseUganda: Torture, Extortion, Killings by Police UnitInvestigate Rapid Response Unit and Prosecute Officers Responsible for AbusesMarch 23, 2011News ReleaseUganda: Torture, Extortion, Killings by Police UnitRegion / CountryAfrica UgandaProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch