The young Honduran woman had already 
endured gang threats, extortion, and 
kidnapping when she and her baby 
daughter tried to cross the Rio Grande  
river into the United States last April to  
be reunited with the rest of her family.  
They never made it.  “I was on a raft which was encountered by U.S. Border Patrol agents. 
The agents flipped the inflatable raft and all of us fell into the water, 
including many children. All the mothers were terrified that our 
children would be swept away by the current.... The agents began to stab 
the inflatable raft. It was so inhumane the way we were treated…. They 
saw how desperate we became thinking our children were going to 
drown. They then threatened us, mocked us, and used obscene words.”  
This horrifying scene was one of dozens recounted to Physicians for 
Human Rights (PHR) researchers who were on the ground in Mexican 
border towns this summer to conduct research on the impact of the U.S. 
government’s punishing Title 42 expulsion order. This specious Trump-
era rule has used the pretense of public health and COVID-19 mitigation 
to expel children and adults seeking refuge at the U.S. border nearly 
one million times since March 2020. Our research – part of our ongoing 
work to end unjust U.S. immigration policies – revealed how the order 
has resulted in family separation, gratuitous abuse and cruelty on the 
part of U.S. and Mexican officials, and acute medical and psychological 
harm to asylum-seeking children and adults. We mobilized nearly 
14,000 people to demand that President Biden rescind this spurious 
rule and provided expert declarations to support lawsuits against the 
order. We were gratified when a federal judge in September ruled in 
favor of a PHR-supported lawsuit by blocking the Biden administration 
from expelling migrant families at the border using the Title 42 order. 
However, the government has appealed, and, at the time of publication, 
the order remains in effect and is still being used to expel all asylum 
seekers. PHR is keeping up the pressure on the U.S. government to stop 
weaponizing COVID-19 and violating asylum seekers’ rights.  
continued on page 2Fall 2021Physicians for Human Rights
PHRecord
Demonstrators in New York’s Grand  
Central Station protest against  
U.S. immigration policies.
Photo: Karla Ann Cote/Nur Photo/Getty ImagesWe Won’t Tolerate Cruel and  
Inhumane Immigration Policies 
“US policy is ensnaring people in a deadly 
dilemma, where they are unsafe in their 
home country, unsafe in Mexico, and yet 
unable to seek safety at the U.S. border. 
From a public health perspective, the 
Title 42 order was junk science from the 
moment it began.” 
Dr. Michele Heisler, PHR Medical Director PHRecord Fall 20212
We also teamed up with partners on two 
other hard-hitting investigations into 
conditions facing asylum seekers in the 
United States. With the American Civil 
Liberties Union (ACLU), we produced the 
first in-depth, nationwide examination of 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement’s 
(ICE) abuse and retaliation against 
people who initiate hunger strikes in U.S. 
immigration detention to protest their 
conditions of confinement. We used the 
report – for which the ACLU obtained 
10,000 pages of previously unpublished 
documents – to advocate at the White 
House, Congress, and the Department of 
Homeland Security for new guidelines for 
the treatment of hunger strikers and for an 
end to immigration detention.  A 22-year-old mother from Guatemala 
who was expelled from the United States 
under the Title 42 order speaks with 
PHR researchers Alana Slavin (left) and 
Cynthia Pompa (right). 
Photo: Lizbeth Chávez for  
Physicians for Human RightsWe Won’t Tolerate Cruel and Inhumane Immigration Policies
continued from cover
And with former and current medical  
and public health faculty and students at 
the University of California, Los Angeles, 
we published a report that analyzed  
132 cases of asylum seekers fleeing 
domestic and gang violence in Mexico 
and Central America. Our findings of the 
widespread brutality they experienced 
and an endemic absence of protection 
from their governments is helping us 
advocate for the United States to urgently 
restore and expand legal protections for 
these asylum seekers.
Equipped with this exceptional trove  
of medically backed evidence and with  
your crucial support, PHR is helping to 
ensure that the United States’ immigration 
policies are fact-based, rights-respecting, 
and humane. 
“The claim that migrants 
entering from the southern 
border brought delta to the  
U.S. is baseless rhetoric. Rates 
are increasing everywhere, in 
every state in the country. It’s 
not a border issue or a migrant 
issue, it’s a national issue.” 
Max Hadler, PHR COVID-19 Senior Policy Expert  Cynthia Pompa, a program officer with 
PHR’s asylum program, was born in 
El Paso, Texas, and grew up in Ciudad 
Juárez, Mexico. The only U.S. citizen in her 
Mexican family, Pompa has lived, worked, 
and navigated the complexities of living in 
the U.S.-Mexico border region for most 
of her life. An author of PHR’s recent 
report “Neither Safety, Nor Health,” an 
investigation into Title 42 border expulsions, 
Pompa brings her unique perspective to 
advocating for people caught in the U.S. 
immigration system. PHR Voices
I’ve documented human rights abuses 
at the U.S.- Mexico border for years. I 
usually focused on the treatment that 
border residents, immigrants, and asylum 
seekers received from U.S. government 
officials – during a border inspection, 
in detention, being separated from 
their children, or expelled, deported, or 
turned back – but rarely on how they felt 
during and afterwards and the impact 
on their physical and mental health. The 
interviews we conducted for the Title 42 
expulsions report were very in-depth 
and personal. I have never seen people so 
desperate to share their stories, to be heard 
without judgment. I don’t think I’ll ever forget the young dad 
holding his two-year-old in his arms. After 
being targeted by organized crime, he fled 
with his wife and two children. At the U.S.-
Mexico border, U.S. agents split the family. 
He was told they would be reunited in 
California, but instead, he and his toddler 
were flown to El Paso, Texas and expelled 
across the border to Ciudad Juárez, Mexico. 
There, they were kidnapped and not 
released until they paid a ransom. The 
dad crossed again and begged U.S. agents 
to at least let the toddler stay so he could 
be with his mother, since he was still 
breastfeeding. The agents ignored his plea 
and expelled him again to Mexico. Cynthia Pompa  
A View from the U.S. Border
His child had lost weight, and his behavior 
had changed. This dad was so worried about 
the health of his son. He had tried so hard to 
find safety for him.  
I’ve lived how being born on one side of 
the political line immediately grants one 
person a long list of privileges, which are 
not the same for my sisters, friends, and 
especially not for the people I interviewed 
for this report. This investigation really 
highlights the vulnerability that these 
people migrating face when being stuck  
in Mexican border towns. When no  
one knows where you are, when the 
government and society have excluded  
you and marginalized you, you become an 
easy target for organized crime and  
for police abuse.  
The work PHR does to advance the 
protection of human rights for those 
migrating or seeking asylum is very 
valuable and unique. The impact on health 
of U.S. border and immigration policies is 
real and long-lasting and should be centered 
when developing policies. The medical 
community has a unique role to play to 
ensure that these policies respect peoples’ 
health and human rights. With the work  
we did in this investigation, PHR is keeping 
the pressure on the U.S. government to put 
an end to inhumane immigration policies 
and practices.
After months of working closely with our partners, 
mobilizing our Asylum Network, and advocating with 
members of California’s legislature, we are delighted 
to share that Governor Gavin Newsom of California 
has signed a law requiring private detention facility 
operators to respect all local and state public health 
orders and occupational safety and health regulations. 
This is a huge step forward in controlling the spread 
of COVID-19 in detention centers and protecting the 
health of all those who are being held or who work in 
ICE facilities. Immigrant advocates chalked up a significant victory in 
August, when ICE closed its facility at the York County 
Prison in Pennsylvania. PHR had documented a disgraceful 
lack of adequate COVID-19 protocols at York County Prison 
and other detention centers in our January 2021 report on 
COVID-19 in ICE detention and we have tirelessly advocated 
for these facilities’ closure. Success!  
Protecting ICE Detainees from COVID-19 Success!  
ICE Detention Facility Closed
Physicians for Human Rights phr.org 3PHRecord Fall 20214Dr. Michele Heisler and Medical Student Alana Slavin  
Inspiring the Next Generation of Health and Human Rights Advocates 
What was your vision for this  
PHR mentorship? 
Heisler:  It’s often when people are 
medical students that their interests 
begin to form. As a physician, I have a 
commitment to trying to foster a new 
generation of physicians and to showing 
them that they can also use their skills for 
advocacy. For me, there’s also an aspect of 
paying it forward: when I was a medical 
student, [former PHR medical director] Dr. 
Vince Iacopino played a similar role with 
me. I saw that I could apply my skills as a 
medical researcher to the kind of rigorous 
research that PHR does. This also fits into 
PHR’s larger strategy of building the next 
generation of human rights advocates. We 
have our overall internship program, but 
we also partner with individual medical 
schools – right now, we have Alana, who is 
a budding psychiatrist, and we also have 
a pediatric resident and an internist. In 
Alana’s case, the University of Michigan 
Medical School pays her stipend, and PHR 
provides her with experience. 
Slavin:  As an aspiring psychiatrist,  
I have witnessed the ways in which mental 
health outcomes are due to underlying 
events, and a key question is: how do we 
address health disparities before they 
cause problems down the line?
  The Hippocratic Oath calls me not only 
to treat patients but also to advocate 
for political systems that are more just. 
During my first year in medical school, 
I had been active with the PHR student 
branch, and seeing physicians like  
Dr. Heisler, who advocate both for their 
patients on an individual level and also  
on a societal level, was very influential. 
She’s a fantastic mentor! 
What have you learned from  
working with PHR? 
Slavin:  The medical world functions very 
differently than the human rights world. 
Medicine can be very fast-paced, we have 
fixed ideas. Learning how to partner with 
organizations – with changing needs on 
the ground – was incredibly important. 
This experience taught me to be a more 
flexible and accommodating team 
member, and to collaborate with team 
members outside the medical field.  
Dr. Heisler also taught me how to work 
with PHR and Michigan Medicine 
colleagues to draft a semi-structured 
interview protocol, to review it with our 
partners, and also to secure Internal 
Review Board approval in both Michigan 
and Mexico to allow us to conduct the 
research with human subjects. I also 
helped conduct the interviews, analyze the 
data, and draft the report of our findings 
for publication.Crucial to the mission of safeguarding 
human rights is ensuring that there is 
always a new generation of advocates. 
Here, PHR’s medical director, Michele 
Heisler, MD, MPA (left) and University of 
Michigan medical student Alana Slavin 
(right), co-authors of PHR’s recent report 
on Title 42 border expulsions, talk about 
the experience of mentoring and being 
mentored as human rights activists. 
What would you tell your medical 
colleagues and your fellow medical 
students about this experience?  
Heisler:  Teaching and mentoring is 
very energizing and inspiring. It makes 
me think of things in a new way: Alana 
raises questions and perspectives that I 
wouldn’t have thought of. The other thing 
that is important is the special niche that 
PHR occupies. It’s a lesson for a medical 
student not just in advocacy and how you 
think about impact but also how the same 
research skills that you’ll be using in your 
medical research can be used to promote 
health and human rights.
Slavin:  It was the most impactful 
experience in my medical career. It 
allowed me to use my skills to advocate for 
a marginalized population. This project 
was incredibly powerful not only in the 
one month that I was actively working 
on the research, but also in showing me 
how we can use our research to inform 
advocacy efforts, and in turn being able 
to witness how incredibly impactful 
this work can be. Being Dr. Heisler’s 
mentee was a great learning experience 
as a medical student who hopes to be a 
physician advocate.
PHR VoicesAbove: Health care workers joined PHR  
and the global People’s Vaccine Alliance 
during the United Nations General 
Assembly to press President Biden to do 
more to ensure global vaccine equity. 
Photo: Hannah Dunphy/  
Physicians for Human RightsWe’re Taking Urgent Action for 
Universal Vaccine Access 
As Delta and other variants fuel a new 
wave of the COVID-19 pandemic, PHR’s 
vast network of health professionals and 
partners is spurring action to reduce 
profound inequities in global access to 
vaccines.  PHR joined more than 175 public 
health experts, scientists, and activists 
to pressure President Biden to launch an 
ambitious global vaccine manufacturing 
program and urgently distribute millions 
of stockpiled vaccine doses. We are 
advocating for Congress to pass the NOVID 
Act (S. 1976/H.R. 3778), which would help 
combat the global spread of COVID-19 by 
funding the scale-up of global vaccine 
manufacturing capacity, delivery, and 
disease surveillance.  
And as world leaders gathered for the 
United Nations General Assembly and 
the U.S.-convened Global COVID-19 
Summit in September, we rallied our supporters and joined in the collective 
call of the global People’s Vaccine Alliance 
to insist that the world’s wealthiest 
countries, which have hoarded most of 
the global supply of vaccines, commit to 
immediately increasing global vaccine 
manufacturing and equitable distribution 
to ensure that all health care workers and 
other high-risk populations can receive 
this life-saving intervention.  Our press 
conference convening top public health, 
epidemiology, and human rights experts 
helped shape the media narratives around 
the global summit. 
In the United States, we have consistently 
urged an approach that promotes 
vaccination, equity, and respect for rights 
and public health institutions. Ahead of 
the widespread proliferation of vaccine 
mandates, we published a primer on how 
best to construct such requirements. 
And when the Tennessee Department of 
“A country by country approach, a 
nationalistic approach, is not going  
to get us out of this pandemic.  
And that’s where we are today.”
Dr. Soumya Swaminathan,  
Chief Scientist, World Health Organization, 
speaking at a PHR media briefing
“For every one person being vaccinated in a  
low-income country, about 117 people get 
vaccinated in a high-income country. And 
this is the type of inequity that is hurting 
all of us.” 
Dr. Ranit Mishori,  
PHR Senior Medical Advisor
Physicians for Human Rights phr.org 5Health undermined efforts supporting 
vaccination of children and young adults 
and banned actions promoting any 
vaccination drives, we joined Doctors 
for America and a broad range of health 
care partners to strongly condemn these 
reckless and life-risking moves.
Finally, we have forcefully denounced 
the silencing and persecution of public 
health officials like Dr. Nichole Quick, 
chief health officer for Orange County, 
CA, who resigned after death threats 
following her institution of a county-
wide mask mandate. These continued 
attacks on the public health workforce 
undermine our COVID-19 response and 
threaten everyone’s health. Your support is 
helping to safeguard the institutions and 
professionals whose expertise can lead 
us out of the pandemic and to ensure that 
global vaccine distribution is equitable 
and available to all. PHRecord Fall 20216Health Care under Siege in Myanmar 
Myanmar’s eight-month military coup 
and crackdown have taken a catastrophic 
toll on the country’s health system. PHR’s 
unique medical lens and long history of 
research on human rights abuses and 
atrocities in Myanmar have made us 
an important resource for the media, 
policymakers, international justice 
mechanisms, and local health workers. 
Working with Insecurity Insight and the 
Johns Hopkins University Center for Public 
Health and Human Rights, we published 
a report documenting at least 252 attacks 
and threats against health workers, 
facilities, and transports since the coup in 
February, the vast majority attributed to the 
Myanmar armed forces and police. PHR’s 
forensic expertise also continues to be 
sought out for analysis of deaths in custody 
and torture of protestors and activists at  
the hands of Myanmar security forces. 
“It’s an incredibly dangerous time for doctors right now, 
they’re facing multiple threats while they’re in the middle 
of a very dangerous epidemic that’s ravaging the country. 
The fact that they continue to serve their community is a 
testament to their commitment to their calling.” 
Jennifer Leigh, PHR Myanmar Expert 
“It is my opinion that Zin Ko Tun’s cause of death is more  
likely than not due to homicidal violence.... If we were able  
to actually see the body, clean the body and look for injuries, 
we would most likely have significant evidence [of torture].”
Dr. Karen Kelly, PHR Forensic Pathology Expert who analyzed records  
in a Myanmar activist’s death in custodyBelow: Medical students in Yangon attend 
the funeral of first-year medical student 
Khant Nyar Hein, who was shot by 
Myanmar security forces during a protest 
against the military coup in March 2021.
Photo: Stringer/Anadolu Agency/  
Getty ImagesNo Safe Place for Health Care in Syria 
As the Syrian conflict entered its 11th 
year this past March, three artillery 
strikes slammed into al-Atareb hospital 
in the western countryside of Aleppo 
governorate – one of the latest in a 
relentless, decade-long campaign of 
violence against health facilities and 
health workers by the Syrian government 
and its allies. PHR has documented these 
attacks since the start of the conflict. 
This summer, we partnered with the 
Syrian American Medical Society (SAMS) 
to produce a report on the al-Atareb 
strike – which killed seven people, injured 
15 others, and put the  hospital out of 
commission for two weeks. We continue 
to pressure the international community Al-Atareb hospital, in Syria’s Aleppo 
governorate, after it was targeted by 
three artillery strikes in March 2021  
which killed seven patients and injured  
15 people, including five medical staff. 
Photo: Syrian American Medical Society
“Throughout my detention period, all the 
torture was focusing on my role as a 
physician, who I was treating and how I 
got medical supplies. They wanted to  
know names of the other health-care 
providers that were working with me.” 
Dr. Houssam al-Nahhas,  
PHR MENA Researcher
PHR’s deep expertise on crowd-control 
weapons (CCW) and our investigations 
of excessive force during Black 
Lives Matter protests in 2020 were 
instrumental in helping to gain passage 
of a new California law which sets 
statewide standards for police use of 
rubber bullets and tear gas in protest 
settings. Assembly Bill 48, for which 
PHR worked extremely closely with 
the International Center for Not-for-
Profit Law and the original co-sponsors 
of the bill, prohibits California law 
enforcement agencies from using 
kinetic projectiles, chemical agents, 
and tear gas to disperse any peaceful 
assembly, protest, or demonstration. U.S. federal agents using tear gas, pepper 
ball, and rubber bullet weaponry against 
protestors in Portland, Oregon in July 2020. 
Photo: Andrew Stanbridge for  
Physicians for Human Rights
7Success!  
Reining in Crowd-control Weapons to demand a halt to these appalling and 
illegal attacks. In advance of the United 
Nations Security Council’s (UNSC) vote 
to renew and reopen international border 
crossings that allow humanitarian aid 
into Syria, we appealed directly to the 
ambassadors of all UNSC member states, 
disseminated a commentary by the UN 
Special Rapporteur on the right to health, 
and led a multimedia campaign featuring 
videos from Syrian health care workers 
on the critical importance of the border 
crossings. We are dismayed that only one 
of three life-saving crossings was approved 
and will continue to urge the international 
community to protect the health and 
rights of millions of Syrians. 
Physicians for Human Rights phr.orgIt also requires officers to be trained on 
the safe use of these weapons in life-
threatening situations, and it prohibits 
aiming them at the head, neck, or other 
vital organs. We have also supported 
similar legislation at the municipal level 
in San Francisco. PHR’s research has 
shown that these so-called “less lethal” 
weapons can cause serious injuries and 
even death, and we have advocated 
nation-wide for their use to be sharply 
curtailed, with PHR advocating for new 
regulations and restrictions on CCW use 
implemented in Virginia, Massachusetts, 
and Washington, D.C. Your support is 
helping us ensure the right to protest 
and to peacefully assemble, without 
fear of harm.For more than 30 years, Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) 
has used science and the uniquely credible voices of medical 
professionals to document and call attention to severe human 
rights violations around the world. PHR, which shared in the Nobel 
Peace Prize for its work to end the scourge of landmines, uses its 
investigations and expertise to advocate for persecuted health 
workers and facilities under attack, prevent torture, document mass 
atrocities, and hold those who violate human rights accountable.Shared in the 1997 
Nobel Peace Prize
PHR received the highest Charity Navigator rating for the sixth 
consecutive year, a distinction held by only 15 percent of the  
1.5 million charities that are rated annually.
PHR Voices
Dr. Vincent Iacopino  
Reflections on the Legacy of U.S. Torture after 9/11
As we reflect on the 20th anniversary of 
September 11 – the devastating loss of life 
and the actions of first responders and 
Flight 93 passengers – we must strive to 
understand the full scope of that day’s 
horror. This includes the tragic mistakes 
that the U.S. government made in its “war 
on terror,” resulting in the needless deaths 
of thousands of U.S. troops and hundreds 
of thousands of Iraqi and Afghan civilians, 
and the incalculable suffering from the 
systematic torture of thousands of people.The pursuit of justice should never 
undermine the rule of law. To honor 
the victims and heroes of 9/11, we must 
recognize the full scope of inhumanity 
that 9/11 represents. Now, more than 
ever, we need to work together across 
the lines that divide us, nationally and 
internationally, to ensure peace, justice, 
and respect for the dignity of all people.Vincent Iacopino, MD, PhD has documented 
human rights violations, including the torture 
of U.S. national security detainees during the 
“war on terror,” for more than 30 years. The 
longtime former PHR medical director and 
current member of PHR’s Advisory Council, 
Dr. Iacopino in August 2021 joined with PHR 
and medical, psychological, and legal experts  
to file an amici brief to the U.S. Supreme 
Court in the case of Guantánamo detainee 
Abu Zubaydah, who has been tortured and 
held without charges by the U.S. government 
for 19 years. 
To this end, PHR has worked tirelessly 
to document human rights violations 
committed by the U.S. government – 
including the systematic torture of national 
security detainees – and to hold perpetrators 
accountable. This includes health 
professionals, such as James Mitchell and 
Bruce Jessen, who were instrumental in the 
design, implementation, and concealment 
of the U.S. torture regime. PHR’s efforts have 
been critical in righting the wrongs of the past 
and preventing such abuses in the future.Dr. Iacopino is the principal author of the 
Istanbul Protocol, the international standard 
for the investigation and documentation of 
torture and ill-treatment. He is an adjunct 
professor of medicine at the University of 
Minnesota Medical School and a senior 
research fellow at the Human Rights Center, 
University of California, Berkeley. He shared 
his thoughts on the legacy of 9/11 and PHR’s 
work to end the United States’ use of torture.
Support PHR’s Efforts to Take the Politics out of Public Health 
 The COVID-19 pandemic will not end 
with fiery town hall debates nor by only 
vaccinating people in the world’s wealthiest 
nations. To truly mitigate the dangers of 
COVID-19, we must put public health  
before politics.  Over the last two years, PHR has convened 
the world’s leading public health and human 
rights experts to advocate for a science-  
and rights-based path out of the pandemic.  
To end the COVID-19 pandemic, we must: 
• Protect public health professionals and 
respect public health leaders and systems.
• Push for public health best practices 
worldwide and lead with science.• Protect and prioritize the health of  
at-risk populations.
• Combat medical misinformation and 
falsehoods about COVID-19.
 Please consider supporting this work by 
making a tax-deductible donation today at 
phr.org/donate .