2010 Annu Al Repo Rt
CENTRO DE RECURSOS JURID ÍCOS PARA LOS PUEBL OS IND ÍGENAS
CENTRO DE RECURSOS JURIDICOS
PARA LOS PUEBL OS INDÍGENASJUSTICE FOR INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
JUSTICE F OR INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
CENTRO DE RECURSOS JURID ÍCOS PARA LOS PUEBL OS IND ÍGENAS
CENTRO DE RECURSOS JURIDICOS
PARA LOS PUEBL OS INDÍGENASJUSTICE FOR INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
JUSTICE F OR INDIGENOUS PEOPLESouR mission st Atement  
The Indian Law Resource Center provides 
legal assistance to indigenous peoples of the 
Americas to combat racism and oppression, to 
protect their lands and environment, to protect 
their cultures and ways of life, to achieve sustainable economic development and genuine self-government, 
and to realize their other human rights.
The Indian Law Resource Center seeks to overcome 
the grave problems that threaten Native peoples by 
advancing the rule of law, by establishing national and 
international legal standards that preserve their human 
rights and dignity, and by challenging the governments 
of the world to accord justice and equality before the 
law to all indigenous peoples of the Americas.“We work to protect the legal 
rights, cultures and environments of 
Indian nations and other indigenous 
peoples of the Americas.”
ouR puRposes A nd go Als
Indian nations and  tribes and other indigenous communities throughout the world are afflicted 
by poverty, poor health and discrimination. Many 
Native communities are subjected to grave human 
rights abuses. Indian land and natural resources are often expropriated or degraded. When indigenous 
peoples are deprived of their ways of life and their 
ties to the earth, they suffer. Many have disappeared 
completely. Profoundly aware that when any culture 
ceases to exist, the whole world is diminished 
irrevocably, the Indian Law Resource Center’s principal 
goal is the preservation and well-being of Indian and 
other Native nations and tribes.
The Center provides legal assistance to Indian nations 
and other indigenous peoples in the United States and 
throughout the Americas at no cost to our clients.
The Center has an international Board of Directors, and 
it is a Non-Governmental Organization in consultative 
status with the United Nations Economic and Social 
Council. The Indian Law Resource Center is a tax-exempt 
organization under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal 
Revenue Code. We are funded entirely by grants and 
contributions from Indian nations, foundations and 
individuals. The Center accepts no government support.who we AR e
Adobe Wall, Jane Ash Poitras ©Adobe Wall, Jane Ash Poitras ©
The Indian Law Resource Center has had an 
exceptionally productive year in 2010, making 
major strides towards ensuring justice for 
indigenous peoples.
In December, 2010, the United States at last gave its support to the UN Declaration on the Rights of 
Indigenous Peoples. This, on the heels of endorsements 
by New Zealand and Canada earlier in the year, means 
there is now worldwide acceptance of indigenous 
peoples and our governments as a permanent part 
of the world community and the countries where we 
live. We have worked on the Declaration for more than 
30 years, and we are eager to see the promise of the 
Declaration become a reality. 
Our collaboration with Indian leaders, advocates and 
tribes to win acceptance of the Declaration, leads us to 
believe the time is right to tackle some of the big legal 
issues that have hindered Indian and Alaska Native 
nations and tribes for decades. 
The Center is providing legal help to Native nations on 
their land rights and their rights as sovereign Indian 
and Alaska Native nations. We are already seeing 
the formation of a coalition of tribal leaders who are 
eager to take action to reform federal Indian law and 
implement the UN Declaration. Moving forward will 
mean engaging federal government officials and also 
educating lawyers, federal judges and the general 
public about fair and just legal principles.In addition, we want to restore rights to sovereign Indian nations in order to make possible better protection of 
Native people, especially women. It has never been 
more urgent for us to carry on the legal battles to 
stop violence against Native women. The statistics are 
staggering: one of three American Indian women will 
be raped in her lifetime; three of five will be physically 
assaulted. Current federal laws must be reformed to 
stop this epidemic. 
Beyond North America, the need is also great. This 
year we decided to help the Rapa Nui people of Easter 
Island, which is a special territory of Chile. The Rapa 
Nui asked for our help to reclaim their land and self-
government rights and to secure better protections for 
their sacred sites—which include the massive stone 
figures for which the island is famous. 
These are just a few areas of our work. We need your 
continued help.
The momentum is building. We need to continue 
advocating and creating opportunities for change to 
better the lives of indigenous peoples around the world. 
I am grateful for your individual donations and for the 
generosity of our partners such as the Ford Foundation, 
Lannan Foundation, Oak Foundation, Libra Foundation, 
the U.S. Human Rights Fund, and the Charles Stewart 
Mott Foundation. We also thank Indian nations such as 
the Onondaga Nation, the Tonawanda Seneca Nation 
and others who have been very generous with financial 
support. We are grateful to all. Your generosity makes our 
work possible. Let’s make 2011 another exceptional year. 
RobeR t t. CoulteRpResident’s messA ge
“There is now worldwide acceptance of 
indigenous peoples and our governments 
as a permanent part of the world community 
and the countries where we live.”
3
www.IndIanlaw.orgBlackfeet Leader, Jane Ash Poitras ©lAnd Rights
nAtive lA nd lA w
Federal law concerning Indian and Alaska Native 
land—and Native nations in general—is terribly 
unjust and out of keeping with the Constitution 
and basic American values. Our Native Land 
Law project is focused on creating a fair and principled framework of law concerning the rights of Native 
Americans to their lands and resources—a framework 
consistent with the United States Constitution and 
Indian treaties, and with American concepts of 
fairness and modern principles of international human 
rights law. Our long-term goal is to reform—through 
political, judicial and administrative processes—the 
present discriminatory laws affecting Native lands and 
resources in the United States.
We have written a set of General Legal Principles and 
supporting Commentaries stating what we believe 
federal law really is or what it ought to be. These General 
Principles cover the topics of self-determination, the doctrine of discovery, aboriginal title, the power of the 
federal government to take Native lands, the plenary 
power doctrine, and the taxation of tribally held lands. 
These draft principles form a consistent framework of 
legal rules that would overcome the truly unfair and 
discriminatory rules that now are applied to Native 
nations. We wrote two versions of these Principles and 
Commentaries: a General Edition, and a Lawyers Edition 
for those interested in detailed analysis of the law. With the United States’ endorsement of the UN 
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, the 
movement for law reform is growing. Many tribal leaders 
are eager to begin developing strategies for improving 
the present framework of law. We are pleased with the 
progress made in 2010. We are consulting with Native 
tribes and making plans for providing legal assistance 
to tribes in their efforts to change the law.
In addition to meeting with Indian leaders, we have met 
with White House staff, the U.S. Department of State, 
and others to discuss how the federal government can begin to make changes in federal law and policies 
and how the government can implement the UN 
Declaration in a meaningful way. We are studying how 
we can present the Native Land Law Principles and 
related legal materials to judges and other government 
officials. 
We hope that debate and discussion will in time lead 
to consensus among Native leaders about the changes 
they wish to seek in federal law.
4
IndIan law resource cenTer“The current legal framework, more than any 
other factor, is responsible for the longstanding 
poverty, political marginalization and social ills 
that are so common in Indian Country.”—Draft General Principles of Law: Introduction
We Do Not Need An Interpreter, Jane Ash Poitras ©We Do Not Need An Interpreter, Jane Ash Poitras ©
timbish A shoshone tRibe
on June 10, 2010, the Center filed a lawsuit on 
behalf of the Timbisha Shoshone Tribe to 
stop an act of Congress that will take money 
belonging to the Timbisha Shoshone and other 
Western Shoshone tribes. This suit challenges the power of Congress to control and even take Indian 
money and other property. 
The case arises out of the astonishing injustices the 
federal government has meted out to the Western 
Shoshone tribes, including the Timbisha, in order 
to divest them of rights to their lands in Nevada and 
California. These nine tribes live on tiny remnants of 
their lands, while the federal government controls 
nearly all their homelands. Gold is mined extensively 
throughout much of the area. 
For more than a century, Congress has done practically 
whatever it wished with Indian property and Indian 
monies held by the federal government. Such 
congressional acts have rarely been challenged, almost 
never successfully. 
A successful lawsuit could prevent Congress from 
freely taking or controlling Indian property and funds. 
Tribes could have much greater ability to manage their 
affairs if they could stop unjustified government control 
and confiscation of their property. We are fighting the 
government’s efforts to dismiss the suit and are trying 
to overcome the predisposition of the courts to deny 
tribes the constitutional rights that others enjoy.mohAwk lA nd Rights
some of our most important legal work is to help Indian and Alaska Native nations protect—and 
sometimes regain—their homelands. 
The Mohawk Nation and other nations of the 
Haudenosaunee, or Six Nations Confederacy, have 
been fighting for many generations to recover a part of 
their homelands in New York State that was taken from 
them in violation of federal law. Our work on behalf 
of the Mohawk Nation in this case has made some 
progress. We are awaiting a decision from the federal 
district court. Our greatest challenge in the case is to 
assure that the federal courts accord Indian nations 
true equality before the law. 
The Mohawk Nation continues to collaborate with the 
other Mohawk governments in the hope that an agreed-
upon resolution of the claims can be achieved.
7
www.IndIanlaw.org“No person…shall be deprived of life, liberty, or 
property, without due process of law; nor shall property 
be taken for public use, without just compensation.”—Excerpt from the Fifth Amendment to the United States ConstitutionSpirit, Jane Ash Poitras ©RApA nui 
In 2010, the Center agreed to help the 36 clans of 
the Rapa Nui Nation. They live on Rapa Nui Island, 
commonly known as “Easter Island.” The island in the 
southeastern Pacific Ocean is a special territory of 
Chile, annexed in 1933 without the consent of the Rapa Nui Nation. The Rapa Nui clans are engaged in a collective 
effort to recover their ancestral lands. In addition, the 
clans want to reclaim their self-government rights so 
they can have a voice in curbing unsustainable growth 
and development on the island. We are providing legal 
assistance to help the Rapa Nui Nation use international 
laws and mechanisms to defend their rights and bring 
an end to more than a century of Chilean mistreatment 
and human rights violations.
The Rapa Nui people have had a hostile relationship 
with Chile dating back to 1888, when they signed 
a “treaty” with Chile resulting in the island and its 
inhabitants being treated as the property of the state. The Rapa Nui people were unlawfully confined to a 
small area; the remainder of the island was leased out 
to private enterprises. During the years the Rapa Nui 
were interned, which lasted until 1966, Chile ignored 
the aboriginal title held by each clan and sold their 
lands to private companies and developers. 
Rapa Nui Island, marketed by Chile as an international 
tourist destination, attracts tens of thousands of 
visitors each year who come to see the iconic stone 
figures for which the island is famous. Rather than 
harmonize development with the Native culture, 
Chilean policies disregard harm to the environment and 
ignore the rights of the Rapa Nui people. Some of the 
islands archeological sites, which have deep cultural 
and spiritual significance for the Rapa Nui, have been 
disrupted to make way for projects such as parking lots 
and restrooms. Center staff went to the island to meet with Rapa Nui clan leaders and to document the current situation in August, 
2010. In previous months, Rapa Nui clans had begun 
reoccupying their illegally taken lands to call attention 
to the need for serious and constructive dialogue to 
resolve these issues. The Chilean government took a 
hard line against the Rapa Nui protests, using excessive 
violence to evict clan members from their ancestral 
lands and criminally prosecuting the leaders. 
In October, the Center requested the Inter-American 
Commission on Human Rights to call upon Chile to 
take precautionary measures to protect the lives of 
Rapa Nui clan members and leaders. Clashes between 
Chilean police and clan members became increasingly 
violent and life threatening. Several Rapa Nui people 
were seriously injured during attempted evictions; clan 
members were shot with pellets and beaten with rifles. 
The violence has decreased since the Commission 
called for precautionary measures February 7, 2011, 
but the situation remains tense. During the coming year 
the Center will help to enforce the recommendations 
issued by the Commission, and will continue to help 
the Rapa Nui to win respect for their land rights and 
their right to self-government. 
“We want respect for our legitimate 
right to our ancestral lands and 
to build our future based on our 
traditional knowledge and culture.”
—Santi Hitorangi, Hito Clan
8
IndIan law resource cenTerDisputes over Rapa Nui sacred sites led to violent confrontations between clan members and the Chilean police.
Conquistador, Jane Ash Poitras ©Conquistador, Jane Ash Poitras ©
humAn Rights
winning h umAn Rights
For more than 30 years, we have helped Indian 
and Alaska Native peoples win recognition of 
their human rights, including: the right to exist as 
distinct peoples and cultures; the right to be free 
from discrimination and forced assimilation; the right of self-determination, and other essential rights.
Much of our work has focused on the creation of 
international human rights standards for indigenous 
peoples through the United Nations and the Organization 
of American States. We spent more than 30 years 
working for the adoption of the UN Declaration on the 
Rights of Indigenous Peoples, which was adopted by the 
UN General Assembly in 2007. In 2010, New Zealand and 
Canada endorsed the Declaration, leaving the United 
States as the only country officially opposed. After a 
significant push by the Center, Indian nations, partner 
organizations, and many of our individual supporters, 
the United States finally joined the rest of the world in supporting the Declaration just this past December. 
This means there is now worldwide recognition that 
indigenous peoples have a permanent right to exist as 
peoples, nations, cultures and societies. 
We also want the adoption of the American Declaration 
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples by the Organization of American States. The American Declaration would affirm the right of self-determination, rights to education, 
health, self-government, culture, lands, territories and 
natural resources, and would include provisions that 
address the particular situation of indigenous peoples 
in the Americas. With the endorsement of the UN 
Declaration, we hope the Obama administration will assume a leadership role in the development of a strong 
American Declaration. 
This work is more important than ever as global initiatives 
are threatening indigenous rights on a massive scale. 
The World Bank and United Nations have funded several 
projects designed to provide climate change solutions, 
but these projects could lead to violations of indigenous 
peoples’ land and natural resources rights. The UN and 
American Declarations could be used to address these 
threats and establish a framework to protect indigenous 
rights from potential violations. 
Now that the United States supports the UN Declaration, 
we are continuing to work with the Navajo Nation, the 
Six Nations Confederacy, the Lummi Nation and other 
Indian nations to see that the promises in the Declaration 
become a reality. We also continue to campaign to win 
United States support for the American Declaration.
10
IndIan law resource cenTer“The UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples sets the 
agenda for changing the future relationship between indigenous people 
and the United States; where our values, our teachings, our culture, our 
concept of the sacred, shall have more validity in negotiations.”—Jewell James, Lummi Nation
The Center provided support to tribal leaders during the review process for the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.humAn Rights tRA ining
The Center provides training and legal information 
in order to expand the number of Indian leaders 
and community members who participate in 
international human rights procedures. We help 
indigenous peoples to promote and defend their human rights, to use human rights law to change domestic law 
and to use their political power to change the United 
States’ policies concerning international human rights law.
Throughout the year, the Center helped to bring 
together several partners—the National Congress of 
American Indians, the Native American Rights Fund, 
the Navajo Nation, the Tonawanda Seneca Nation, the 
Cayuga Nation and United States government officials—
to discuss how to move forward in addressing a number 
of indigenous human rights issues. These meetings led 
to advocacy efforts to gain United States endorsement 
of the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous 
Peoples. The Center supported Indian leaders with fact sheets and talking points to help them understand the 
Declaration review process and why the Declaration 
is important. The U.S. State Department held three 
consultations with tribal leaders and non-governmental 
organizations in 2010. The Center assisted participants 
to prepare for the consultations and strategize about 
their statements. The Center also secured a grant to 
cover travel expenses for Indian leaders to participate 
in these consultations in Washington, D.C. In addition, 
the Center employed new media and social networking 
tools to keep indigenous leaders and allies informed 
about the Declaration review process, meetings, and 
advocacy opportunities. 
Pollack’s Legacy, Jane Ash Poitras ©
sAfe w omen, s tRong nA tions
native women—more than any other population 
in the United States—are being denied one of 
the most basic human rights: to be safe from 
violence. 
Native women are more than twice as likely as other women to be victims of sexual violence. One in three 
will be raped in her lifetime; three out of five will be 
physically assaulted. Studies show these high levels 
of violence are related to lax policing and prosecution 
by federal and state authorities, under-reporting of 
these crimes by women, and restrictions on tribal law 
enforcement authority. Federal law has stripped tribes 
of much of their authority to protect their own citizens. 
Tribes cannot prosecute non-Native offenders, who 
commit 88 percent of all violent crimes against Indian 
women. Federal authorities charged with investigating 
and prosecuting these crimes have regularly failed to 
do so. 
The Center has worked hard to raise awareness of this 
international human rights crisis. During the past year, 
we provided legal advice to and consulted with Native 
women’s organizations and tribal government officials 
and employees, including the National Congress of 
American Indians (NCAI) Task Force on Violence 
Against Women, Clan Star, and the Fort Belknap Indian 
Community. 
The Center has had two important successes in our work 
to stop violence against Native women in the United 
States:  First, we and NCAI submitted information to the State Department for inclusion in their report to the United Nations Human Rights Council for the Universal 
Periodic Review of U.S. compliance with international 
human rights treaties. The State Department received 
numerous comments from Indian nations and NGOs, 
but only the Center and NCAI made submissions that 
addressed issues of violence against Native women. 
Because of our advocacy the State Department 
specifically mentioned the problem of violence against 
Native women in its report, stating that “addressing 
crimes involving violence against women and children 
on tribal lands is a priority” for the Administration. 
This is a positive step for the United States.
Second, we, along with our partners at NCAI, invited 
Ms. Rashida Manjoo, the UN Special Rapporteur on 
Violence Against Women, to visit an Indian nation 
during her visit to the United States. We are happy to 
report that Ms. Manjoo visited the Eastern Band of 
Cherokee Indians in Cherokee, N.C., in January, 2011. 
There, she investigated the systemic legal barriers to 
ending violence against Indian women. This was a key 
opportunity to raise international awareness about 
violence against Indian women and to remind the United 
States of its international human rights obligations to 
Indian women.
For more information please visit our website, 
indianlaw.org/safewomen, for information on how to 
use international human rights advocacy to prevent 
violence against Native women. “Violence against women is the most pervasive 
human rights violation which continues to 
challenge every country in the world.”—Rashida Manjoo, UN Special Rapporteur on Violence Against Women
12
IndIan law resource cenTer
Golden Indian, Jane Ash Poitras ©Golden Indian, Jane Ash Poitras ©
Cent RAl And
south  AmeRi CA
mAyA Q’e QChi’ lA nd And
Resou RCe Rights
The Indian Law Resource Center is supporting 
efforts of Maya Q’eqchi’ Indian communities 
in Guatemala that have been fighting for their 
lands and rights to subsurface resources for 
more than 40 years. 
Agua Caliente is one Maya Q’eqchi’ community that 
we are helping. Agua Caliente’s land and natural 
resource rights are under threat because of a mining 
permit granted to a Canadian company by Guatemala. 
In February, 2010, Guatemala’s Civil Appellate Court 
denied our request for judicial protection of the Agua 
Caliente community’s land and resource rights. In 
conjunction with Defensoria Q’eqchi’ and the local legal 
counsel, we immediately appealed for a formal review 
of the decision by the highest court in Guatemala. With 
our help, they won a first favorable court decision as 
this report goes to press. If necessary, we will file a case 
against Guatemala before the Inter-American Human Rights Commission, asking for recognition of the Maya 
Q’eqchi’ land and subsurface rights. The Agua Caliente community has faced efforts to 
evict them from their lands by a Guatemalan local 
governor and mine security forces. These evictions, 
often violent, threaten the safety of the community 
members and leaders and local counsel. In November, 
2010, we asked the Inter-American Commission to 
intervene to protect the Agua Caliente community from 
further violence and potential evictions. We asked that 
Guatemala investigate, identify, judge and sanction 
those responsible for continued threats and violence 
against the Agua Caliente community.
As part of our overall efforts to help Agua Caliente and 
the other Maya Q’eqchi’ communities, Center staff wrote 
a paper addressing the Guatemalan legal framework 
on indigenous self-government, land and natural 
resource rights, protected areas, extractive industries, 
and political participation. This paper addresses the 
concerns of indigenous peoples regarding the creation 
of protected areas on indigenous lands. It provides 
concrete recommendations based on international 
human rights law standards and provides guidelines 
for strengthening and fulfilling the rights of indigenous 
peoples in Guatemala. 
14
IndIan law resource cenTer
The Center has been in consultation with the Augua Caliente Community about land and resource rights.
Power of the Yucca, Jane Ash Poitras ©Power of the Yucca, Jane Ash Poitras ©
18
Two Dollars Please, Jane Ash Poitras ©
multil AteRA l development bA nks:  
indigenous p eoples A nd the envi Ronment
Indigenous communities, lands and environments 
often are affected adversely by projects financed by 
multilateral development banks (MDBs), such as the 
World Bank and the Inter-American Development 
Bank. These MDB projects are often developed and implemented without the participation or consent 
of the local community that will be impacted. This 
is particularly true for Indian peoples in Mexico and 
Central and South America. 
In October, the Center helped indigenous leaders 
from Colombia, Bolivia and Peru prepare and present 
testimony before the Inter-American Commission on 
Human Rights regarding the impact of MDB-supported 
mining in indigenous communities. The testimony shed 
light on the terrible effects on indigenous communities 
and the environment caused by extractive industries and 
infrastructure and energy projects financed by MDBs.
Center staff traveled to Peru to study challenges 
facing indigenous communities in the Amazon region. 
A planned inter-oceanic highway to connect Brazil 
and Peru—part of the Initiative for the Integration of 
the Regional Infrastructure in South America—would 
run through the Flor de Ucayali Indian community. 
Community leaders say the highway would drastically 
change their way of life by bringing deforestation and 
resource extraction to the Amazon basin and other 
indigenous lands. The Center will work with this 
community and others in various countries to develop 
a strategy to advocate for indigenous peoples adversely 
affected by infrastructure projects in South America. We are also monitoring the development of programs 
related to the Reducing Emissions from Deforestation 
and Forest Degradation (REDD+) initiatives funded 
by the MDBs. Several MDBs have developed REDD+ 
programs to address climate change by paying land 
holders in developing countries for not cutting down 
trees or for planting trees. A large part of the remaining 
forest land in Mexico and Central and South America 
is Indian land. Indigenous communities are concerned 
that REDD+ projects will negatively impact their rights 
to their land, territories and natural resources.  
The Indian Law Resource Center is working to 
influence and create awareness among MDBs about 
their obligations to respect international law, the 
environment and human rights when funding 
development projects. The Center has been actively 
encouraging MDBs, including the International Finance 
Corporation (IFC), the private lending arm of the World Bank, to adopt strong human rights policies. Part of 
our strategy includes advocating for the development 
of human rights impact assessments to be used before 
lending begins. Many of the Center’s recommendations 
on human rights concerns have been incorporated in 
the current drafts of important IFC policies. 
We have encouraged civil society, states, and indigenous 
peoples’ organizations to be involved in constructive 
dialogue about the human rights obligations of MDBs. 
We hope this discourse will create further dialogue, 
strengthen grassroots communities’ struggles against 
unsustainable development practices and provide a 
seed from which a larger movement can grow around 
issues of MDB accountability, transparency and 
responsibility under the law.
17
www.IndIanlaw.org
The Center met with members of the Flor de Ucayali community in Peru, where a planned inter-oceanic highway will run through their village.Two Dollars Please, Jane Ash Poitras ©enviRonment Al pRoteCtion
pRoteCting Al AskA’s RiveR s
The Center has a long history of environmental 
advocacy in Alaska. Over the past year, we have 
focused much of our work on the Kuskokwim 
region. The Kuskokwim River Watershed 
Council—a coalition of Native villages from throughout the region—is working to protect the environmental 
integrity of the Kuskokwim River in a way that respects 
the subsistence lifestyle prominent in the region, as well 
the need for economic development. The competing 
needs for economic development and protection of the 
environment are all too common in Indian country. 
Given these competing interests, the Kuskokwim 
River Watershed Council requested the Center to 
provide it with information regarding developing good 
neighbor agreements—or environmental monitoring 
agreements—in the region. Good neighbor agreements 
among community non-profits, governments, and 
corporations can be an effective method of ensuring that the needs of all parties affected by extractive 
industries are being met. Based on the developing 
interest in good neighbor agreements, we drafted a 
memo analyzing successful agreements throughout 
North America and made recommendations for the 
Council to consider. We will continue to advise the 
Watershed Council on the potential for implementing 
good neighbor agreements as a means of protecting 
the environment of the Kuskokwim region.
  hAndbook  foR Conse RvAtionists  
The Indian Law Resource Center is producing 
a one-of-a-kind handbook that will help build 
collaboration between conservationists and 
Indian and Alaska Native nations. The goal 
of the Conservationists’ Handbook is to facilitate better alliances and to improve the effectiveness of 
conservation efforts. Protection of the environment is 
enormously important among Native communities. Yet 
collaboration between Native peoples and conservation 
organizations often is impeded, because professional 
conservationists lack information about Native 
nations and their resources. Today there is no ready 
resource to provide conservationists with practical 
information about Indian and Alaska Native peoples, 
their lands, histories, cultures and legal rights. Our 
Conservationists’ Handbook will expand understanding 
of Indian and Alaska Native tribes and will help foster 
positive relationships between conservationists and 
Native communities. The Handbook will be distributed 
widely among universities and conservation programs. 
We expect this resource to be a building block for 
powerful alliances that will protect the rights of Native 
peoples, while also protecting lands and ecosystems 
throughout the United States. 
18
IndIan law resource cenTer“We have discovered that successful partnerships most often develop 
between conservationists and Native nations when they are based on 
respect; open, honest, and frequent communication; and mutual trust.”—Conservation Handbook, Chapter IfoRt belkn Ap ReseR vAtion 
For more than 15 years, the Center has provided 
legal representation to the Assiniboine and 
Gros Ventre Tribes of the Fort Belknap Indian 
Reservation in Montana in their fight for 
environmental justice and clean-up of the contamination caused by the Zortman-Landusky gold mines.
With the ongoing reclamation of the mines, we are 
seeing improvement in the water quality in King Creek, 
Alder Gulch and Swift Gulch. Even so, the pollution often 
continues to exceed state water-quality standards, 
particularly for cyanide. We continue to provide legal 
advice to a technical working group that is monitoring 
the progress of the reclamation efforts. Still recovering 
from the environmental contamination of the Zortman-
Landusky mines, the tribes are determined not to 
become victims of environmental assaults in the 
future. We are committed to working with the tribes 
not only to help clean up past contamination, but also to ensure their ability to protect their lands from future 
contamination.
Eagle Master, Jane Ash Poitras ©
stAff
Robe Rt t. Coulte R, Executive Director
Robert, a member of the Citizen Potawatomi 
Nation, is an attorney with more than 30 years of 
experience in the field of Indian law. He founded the Center in 1978 with the goal of assisting Indian and Alaska Native nations in protecting 
their lands, resources and human rights. He is an 
author of many articles in the field of Indian law and human rights. He received his bachelor’s 
degree from Williams College and a law degree 
from Columbia University. 
ARmstRong A. w iggins , Director, Washington, D.C.
Armstrong is a Miskito Indian from Nicaragua 
and has been with the Center since 1981. He 
was a political prisoner during the Somoza and Sandinista regimes because of his leadership in promoting human rights in Nicaragua. He has 
more than 30 years experience working in the 
field of human rights. He directs the Washington, D.C., office and much of the international human 
rights work of the Center, managing the Mexico 
and Central and South America Program.
bARbARA  Anthony , Director of Development
Barbara joined the staff in June of 2009. She is 
a graduate of the University of Missouri and of 
the College of William and Mary Planned Giving Institute. She has over 15 years of professional development experience. 
JuAnitA CAbReRA -lopez , Program Assistant
Juanita is Maya Mam Indian from Guatemala. 
She left the Center in November, 2010, to pursue 
a Master’s of International Public Policy at the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University. She 
assisted with administration, development, 
communications and project support.
kiRsten mA toy C ARlson , Attorney
Kirsten, of Cherokee descent, joined the Center’s 
Montana office in 2007. She received her law 
degree in 2003 and her Ph.D. in Political Science in 2007, both from the University of Michigan. Prior to joining the Center, Kirsten taught law at 
the University of Minnesota Law School. boARd
susAn m. mAsten , Chairperson    
Yurok—Hoopa, CA 
Robe Rt t. Coulte R, President  
Potawatomi—Helena, MT
peteR C. John , Treasurer
Chicago, IL
g. Jon Roush , Secretary
Portland, OR
dACho Alex AndeR
Gwich’in—Fort Yukon, AK 
miChelle  Allen
Albany, CA
mARtin AveRy
Navajo—Coyote Canyon, NM 
melAnie ben JAmin
Ojibwe—Onamia, MN 
noRmA bixby
Northern Cheyenne—Lame Deer, MT 
viviAnA e. figue RoA
Kolla—Montreal, Quebec, Canada
gAiAshkibos
Lac Courte Oreilles Chippewa—Hayward, WI
teRRi  henRy
Cherokee—Cherokee, NC
dARwin h ill
Tonawanda Seneca—Basom, NY
20
IndIan law resource cenTer
boARd And stAffbo sCott, Director of Finance & Administration
Bo, who joined the Center in October, 2010, is 
responsible for the Center’s administrative 
and financial matters. He received his B.S. in Accounting from the University of Great Falls. He is currently pursuing a Master’s in Business 
Administration from the University of Montana.
luCy RAin simpson , Senior Attorney
Lucy, a member of the Navajo Nation, joined the Center’s Montana office in 2004. She has 
more than 12 years of experience in the field of Indian law, with much of that working directly with tribal governments such as the Northern 
Cheyenne and Crow tribes and the Navajo 
Nation. She received her J.D. from the University of Colorado in 1998. 
ginny  undeRwood , Director of Communications
Ginny, a member of the Comanche Nation, 
joined the Center in 2009. She has more 
than 15 years of experience in the field of communications and most recently served as Executive Director of Programs and Strategic 
Initiatives for the communication arm of The 
United Methodist Church. She received her B.A. in Mass Communications from Oklahoma 
City University.
loRenA vACA , Program Assistant
Lorena is originally from Ecuador and has worked extensively with indigenous peoples 
in South America, particularly in the Amazon. She assists with administration, development, communications and project support. She has 
strong field experience in Guyana on climate 
issues. She holds a B.A. in Government and International Politics from George Mason 
University.
2010 i nteRns & v olunteeR s   
evelyn Ae Ro
Rebe CCA Aleem
sApphi Re diAmAnt Rink
mARi A Rensh Aw 
Rosie w oRthenleonARdo CRippA, Attorney
Leonardo, a Kolla Indian from Jujuy, Argentina, joined the Center’s Washington, D.C., office 
in 2005. He received his law degree from Universidad Nacional de Tucumán in Argentina and a Master’s of Law degree from American 
University Washington College of Law in 2008. 
He previously worked at the Center for Justice and International Law on human rights cases 
within the Inter-American system.
kARl A geneRA l, Law Clerk
Karla (Kawenniiostha) was hired in October, 2010, as a Law Clerk in the Helena, Montana 
office. Karla is deer clan and a citizen of the Mohawk Nation from northern New York. In May, she earned her J.D. and Master’s degree in 
Sociology from Syracuse University College of 
Law and the Maxwell School.
philomen A kebeC, Attorney
Philomena, a member of the Bad River Band of 
Chippewa Indians, joined the Center in April, 
2010. She received her J.D. from the University of Minnesota in 2008 and served as the judicial law clerk to the Honorable Kathleen Mottl.
CuRt klotz , Director of Finance & Administration
Curt, a Certified Public Accountant who was 
responsible for the Center’s administrative and 
financial matters, joined the Center in 1994. After more than 16 years with the Center, he resigned to move closer to his family. Curt’s outstanding and 
dedicated work was a tremendous contribution 
and an asset to the Center.
lisA myAyA , Communications & Development Assistant
Lisa joined the Center’s Montana office in 2007. 
She works on communications and development 
projects and assists with office administration. She has more than 15 years of experience in the non-profit sector, primarily with resource 
conservation, education and arts organizations.
mARilyn RiChARdson , Assistant to the Director  
Marilyn, a member of the Chippewa Tribe, joined the Center in 1996. She works closely with the 
development staff, serves as the assistant to the Board of Directors and coordinates direct mail and special events.
21
www.IndIanlaw.org
22
IndIan law resource cenTerfound Ations
Pauline Allen Endowment
Baker Brook Foundation
Bay and Paul Foundations
Cinnabar Foundation
Connect U.S. Fund
Fanwood Foundation/West
Ford Foundation
Goerlich Family Foundation
Peter and Patricia Gruber Foundation
Indian Land Tenure Foundation
Indigenous People’s Fund of the
 Tides Foundation
Lannan FoundationLibra Foundation
Laura Jane Musser Fund
Charles Stewart Mott Foundation
OneFamily Foundation
Overbrook Foundation
True North Foundation
U.S Human Rights Fund
Winky Foundation
oRgAnizAtions
Combined Federal Campaign
Human & Civil Rights
 Organizations of America
Institute of International EducationJustGive.org
Montana State Employees Combined 
Giving Campaign
New York City Transit Authority
United Airlines
United Way of New York City
United Way of the National Capital 
Area
Wells Fargo Community Support 
Campaign
World Resources Institute
Zoot Enterprises, Inc.indiAn nAtions
Tonawanda Seneca NationGwichyaa Zhee Gwich’in Tribal 
Government
Lummi Nation
San Manuel Band of Mission Indians
Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians
mAJoR donoR s
Hans and Jutta Bertram-NothnagelNorma Bixby
Marlyne Gentry in honor of Mary 
Gentry Wauneka
Laurie Goldstein
Carole Grant & Frank Grant III
Michael Hirschhorn & Jimena 
Martinez
Peter & Sherry John
Rowan & Nancy McQuarrie
Donal & Diana Mullineaux
Ralph Nader
Geoffrey Oelsner, Jr. & Leslie Oelsner 
in honor of Chief Light Foot Talking Eagle
Andrea ReamsCasey Reams
Christina Reams
Nicholas & Shelley Robinson
Jon Roush & Joyce Chinn
Jean Sidley in memory of Terry Sidley
Arthur W. Simon Trust
John & Barbara Sweeney in honor of 
Peter C. John
Malin & Ann Volmer in memory of 
Irene Logan
Anonymous (2)Cont RibutoR s
Julie Achterhoff & Ron Konicke in 
memory of Jsn Sheehan
Janis Alcorn
Christopher Amato & Diana Hernandez
Barbara Anthony
Susan Anthony
Sidney Armstrong
Vertis Belcher in honor of President 
Obama
John Bell & Jomarie Meade
Curtis Berkey & Cameron Brown
Henry Bilenchi
Ann Bracke
Stan & Glenda Bradshaw
Raymond & Joyce Brown
Leslie Brownrigg
Clifton Buck-Kaufman
Mitchell L. Bush, Jr.
Penny Cabot
Lois Chalmers & Walter Hill, Jr.
Julius Chambers
David Chambers & Sigrid Gentile-
Chambers
Peter Chestnut
Roger Clark & Amelia Boss
Murray Cohen & Myrna Moran
John Crawford & Cindy Coulter
Martha H. Cremer in memory of 
Katherine Kelley Cremer
Gary Deason in memory of Roy 
Thomas; in honor of Tim Coulter and the U.N. Declaration
Barbara Deloria in memory of Vine Deloria, Jr.
Paul DestlerJewel Dhuru 
Richard Donahue
Karen Denham Downen in memory of 
Katheryn Miley & Frederic Charles 
Denham
Wendy Eaton in honor of Black CloudMary Felegy
Curry First 
Anne & Harrison Frahn
Paul FryeContRibuto Rs
“We are only able to do this important work because 
of the dedicated support of donors. Thank you.”—Susan Masten, Chairpersongaiashkibos in memory of 
Wasaygishig (Mr. Louis T. Barber)
Gary Garriott & Valerie Lamont
Gordon & Marion Gerrish
Ravi Grover
Hurst Hannum & Ann Barger Hannum
Linda Hayes & John Gauthier in honor 
of Marge LaMorie
Mary Clare Gubbins in memory of 
Shelton Davis
Louis R. Hellwig
Scott Hempling & Margaret Flaherty
Marina A. Henriquez
Eric Hirschhorn & Leah Wortham in 
memory of John D.B. Lewis
John Hughes
Barbara Hunter
Adam Jacobs
Inge & Marge Jacobson
Ryan Jenkins
Eric Janz, Jr.
Anne & Kirk Johnson
James Johnson
Roderic Johnson & Carol Williams
David Kairys & Antje Mattheus 
Stanley & Holly Kaleczyc in honor of 
Ray Peck
Arlene Kato
Christine Kaufman
Tessa Keenan
Pat Kohler, Sr.
Ira Kurzban in honor of Tim Coulter
Jodi Lasseter in honor of Chief Koko, 
APA President, Guyana
Polly Laurelchild-Hertig
Richard M. Leventhal
Kalen Lipe
Lucy LippardRenee Llanusa-Cestero in memory of 
Eleanor Leacock
Clifford Lonokapu
Robert & Linda Low in honor of Tim 
Coulter and Sam SanchezDick Ludington
Melody Kapilaloah MacKenzie
Beverly Magley
Greg Margolis
Ken Margolis
Christopher & Dahmien Mason in 
honor of Senk’lip
Willa McArdle
Edwin McCullough
Linda Jansen McWilliams in memory 
of Dorothy J. Burke
Colin H. W. Morgan
Mark Munger & Katherine Bourne in 
memory of Petra Shattuck
Bob Nichol & Phyllis Bock
Darrell Nichols in memory of James Tiger
Nancy & Alan Nicholson
Jill & Ralph Norgren
John & Sandy Oitzinger
Rebecca Oyer Meyers in memory of 
John Oyer
David & Katheyn Padilla
Lisa & Raymond Pan
Eva & John Petoskey
Christopher Pezzola
Steve & Roberta Pieczenik
Bernard Pomerance
Michael & Christine Pope
Alan Rabinowitz
Deborah Rand
Catherine Betty Ransom
Victor & Joan Reiman in memory of 
Charles Reiman
Paul Richards
Mark Rifkin
Roger & Olive Robison
William H. Rodgers, Jr.
Kirk RosenbaumDavid Rubinstein
Harry Sachse
Arnold & Otto Saiki
Geraldine Schaaf“Our funding is entirely by contributions from 
individuals, foundations, organizations, and Indian 
nations. Services are provided without charge.”
Michael Schechtman & Holly Bander
Lisa Schmidt
James W. Schmitt
Mark Sethre
Ellen Shatter
Aliza Shapiro
Jennifer Sidley in memory of Terry 
Sidley
Leonard & Elaine Simon in memory of 
Arthur W. Simon
Jim & Erica Spaulding
Tim Speyer
Bob & Anne Staffanson
Nancy Stearns
Doug Sternberg
David B. Stewart
Milton Takei
Thomas Trauger in honor of Tim 
Coulter
Stephen Trimble in memory of 
Michael Kabotie
Jean Trousdale in memory of Joe 
Coulter
Jana Walker
Anthony F. C. & Betty Wallace
Ken & Stephanie Wallace
Rosemary Waltzer
David Weissbrodt & M. Patricia 
Schaffer 
Tisa Wenger
Kim Kennedy White
Barry & Bonnie Willdorf
Clifton & Doris Woest in memory of 
Black Sparrow Hawk, Sac War Leader
Margaret Woo
Shannon Work
Robin Wright
Forrest Wade YoungHugh & Karen Zackheim
Lisa Zeilinger
Anonymous (12)
The Center is a 501(c)(3) non-profit; all donations are tax-deductible.
Donations can be made online at www.indianlaw.org  or
mailed to Indian Law Resource Center, 602 N. Ewing St., Helena, MT  59601.  
 24
IndIan law resource cenTer  Temporarily Permanently 2010
 Unrestricted Restricted Restricted totAl
suppo Rt And R evenue
Contributions  $78,357  $5,026  $2,482   $85,865  
Grants  783,432   532,285  -   1,315,717  
Bequests and trusts  6,690   -   -   6,690  
Contract services  -  13,500   -   13,500  
Interest  4,649  1,124   -   5,773  
Other  30,404   -   -   30,404  
Realized and unrealized  188   1,295   -   1,483  
gains and (losses) on investments
Released from restrictions  789,858   (789,858)  -   - 
Total support and revenue  1,693,578   (236,628)  2,482   1,459,432  
expenses
Program services  960,544   -   -   960,544  
Management and general  225,747   -   -   225,747  
Fundraising  239,216   -   -   239,216  
Total expenses  1,425,507   -   -   1,425,507  
Increase (decrease) in net assets      268,071   (236,628)  2,482   33,925  
Net assets at beginning of year       357,683   1,207,623   48,239   1,613,545  
Net assets at end of year    $625,754   $970,995   $50,721   $1,647,470    Temporarily Permanently 2009
 Unrestricted Restricted Restricted totAl
  $52,275   $6,000   $2,477   $60,752  
  486,168   1,103,584   -   1,589,752  
  7,190   -   -   7,190 
  -   -   -   - 
  3,711   773   -   4,484 
  7,440   266   -   7,706 
  141   942   -   1,083  
  1,088,114   (1,088,114)  -   - 
  1,645,039   23,451   2,477   1,670,967  
  862,622   -   -   862,622 
  177,182   -   -   177,182 
  224,086   -   -   224,086  
   1,263,890   -   -   1,263,890  
        381,149   23,451   2,477   407,077 
       (23,466)  1,184,172   45,762   1,206,468  
     $357,683   $1,207,623   $48,239   $1,613,545  
stAtement of A Ctivities
for the year ended December 31, 2009stAtement of A Ctivities
for the year ended December 31, 2010finAnCiAls
liAbilities A nd net A ssets
 2010 2009
CuRRent liAbilities
Accounts payable    $18,787   $11,842 
Accrued salaries and vacation payable    31,134   49,922 
Payroll taxes payable    15,052   2,878 
Total current liabilities            64,973   64,642  
net A ssets
Unrestricted   630,756   357,683 
Temporarily restricted    965,974   1,207,623 
Permanently restricted              50,740   48,239  
totAl net A ssets      1,647,469   1,613,545  
totAl liAbilities & net A ssets    $1,712,442   $1,678,187  stAtements of f inAnCiAl position
as of December 31, 2010  and 2009         
Assets
 2010 2009
CuRRent  Assets
Cash and cash equivalents   $753,642   $529,472 
Certificates of deposit    150,355   160,000 
Grants receivable (net)   299,311   483,776 
Contributions receivable    -   - 
Other receivables  1,064   600 
Prepaid expenses   15,908   7,968 
Total current assets        1,220,281   1,181,816  
pRopeRty & e Quipment —At Cost
Net depreciable assets    37,389   44,120 
othe R Assets
Deposits    1,325   1,325 
Seminole and Gar Creek land purchase   420,269   420,269 
Investments          33,179   30,657  
       454,773   452,251  
totAl Assets     $1,712,442   $1,678,187  
Each year the Center engages an independent accounting firm to audit its financial statements.  The financial information presented here is an excerpt of the audited statements for 
the years ended December 31, 2010 and 2009.  To review the Independent Auditors’ Report and full audited statements, please visit our web site at www.indianlaw.org and follow 
the “About Us” link to “Financial Statements.” You may also contact the Helena, Montana office to request a printed copy.feAtuRed A Rtist
JAne Ash p oitRAs, RCA, B.Sc., B.F.A., M.F.A.
This year’s featured artist is Jane Ash Poitras, RCA. Jane is an internationally acclaimed visual artist whose work has been showcased 
in numerous solo and group exhibitions around the world, and can be found in many prestigious public, private and commercial 
collections. She is a graduate of the University of Alberta (U of A) with degrees in microbiology and printmaking, and has a Master of 
Fine Arts in Painting and Sculpture from New York City’s Columbia University. She is a longtime lecturer at the U of A and a much-in-demand guest lecturer across North America and overseas. 
Respected for her generous support of Aboriginal and community causes, her numerous honors include the RCA (Royal Canadian Academy of Arts) designation, the Alberta Centennial Medal, the National Aboriginal Achievement Award for Arts and Culture, the University of Alberta Alumni 
Award of Excellence, and the City of Edmonton Cultural Hall of Fame Salute to Excellence. Most 
recently, she received the Lieutenant Governor of Alberta Distinguished Artist Award. A year-long major exhibition of Jane’s art opened at the Royal Ontario Museum in Toronto last September.
Of Cree/Dene descent, Jane was born in the isolated northern community of Fort Chipewyan, 
Alberta. Orphaned as a young child, she was fostered by an elderly German woman and grew up in Edmonton. She meets regularly with Elders from many Native communities to hear their stories and 
to learn from them. She travels often, allowing her to observe and partake in the rituals of various 
Native cultures. By doing so, she brings a very humanist approach to her work. She isn’t just trying to give information—rather her work is about sharing knowledge. Her visual presentation of First 
Nations has had a tremendous impact on Canadian art and beyond.
Jane Ash Poitras, Curtis Trent Photo ©
The Center was among the winners of the Peter and 
Patricia Gruber Foundation’s 2010 International 
Justice Prize. The award recognizes individuals 
and organizations for championing the rights of 
oppressed groups through advocacy, legal reform and the development of international law to 
protect human rights.  
The Center was recognized for its efforts to 
advance the rule of law, establish national and 
international legal standards to preserve human rights and dignity, and challenge governments to 
accord justice and equality before the law to all 
indigenous peoples of the Americas.
Martin Avery, Center board member, holds the 2010 
Gruber Justice Prize following the awards ceremony held October 11, 2010, in Washington, D.C.2010 i nteRnAtion Al Justi Ce 
pRize w inne RsmAin offiCe
602 n . ewing s tReet
helen A, mt 59601
406.449.2006
mt@indiAnlAw.oR gwAshington, d C offiCe
601 e s tReet, s .e.
 wAshington, d C 20003
202.547.2800
dCoffiCe@indiAnlAw.oR g
www.indi AnlAw.oRg
              find us on
CENTRO DE RECURSOS JUR ÍDICOS PARA LOS PUEBL OS IND ÍGENAS
CENTRO DE RECURSOS JURIDICOS
PARA LOS PUEBL OS INDÍGENASJUSTICE FOR INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
JUSTICE F OR INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
Cover Art—Indigenous People, Jane Ash Poitras ©
