UNITED STATES 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON INDIAN AFFAIRS 
LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON S. 248 
"TRIBAL LABOR SOVEREIGNTY ACT OF 2015" 
I. Introduction WRITTEN TESTIMONTY OF 
RICHARD GUEST 
SENIOR STAFF ATTORNEY 
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 
April 29, 2015 
Chairman Barrasso and Distinguished Members of the Committee: 
The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is a national , non-profit legal 
organization dedicated to securing justice on behalf of Native American tribes, 
organizations, and individuals. Since 1970, NARF has undertaken the most 
important and pressing issues facing Native Americans in courtrooms across the 
country and here within the halls of Congress. 
We are honored to be invited to provide testimony to the Committee 
regarding S. 248, the "Tribal Labor Sovereignty Act of 2015"-a bill to clarify the 
rights of Indians and Indian tribes on Indian lands under the National Labor 
Relations Act (NLRA). The purpose of our testimony is to demonstrate that, in 
furtherance of its longstanding policies of Indian self-determination, tribal self-
governance and tribal economic self-sufficiency, it is time for Congress to provide 
parity for tribal governments under the NLRA. In this context, parity 
encompasses the quality of being treated equally under the law alongside Federal and State governments. Tribal governments are entitled to the freedom to choose 
the appropriate time, place and manner for regulating union activity on Indian 
lands and collective bargaining for its employees. 
II. Parity with the Federal and State Governments 
The National Labor Relations Act was enacted by Congress in 1935 to govern labor relations 
in the private sector. Under section 2 of the NLRA, the term "employer" is defined to include 
"any person acting as an agent of an employer , directly or indirectly , but shall not include the 
United States or any wholly owned Government corporation, or any Federal Reserve Bank, or 
any State or political subdivision thereof. ... " Therefore, workers in the public sector­
employees of the federal and state governments -were not afforded the rights and protections of 
the NLRA. Based on sound policy determinations , Congress provided those governments an 
opportunity to choose how to best regulate union organizing and collective bargaining labor 
relations with their workers given the essential and, oftentimes, sensitive nature of their work. 
A. Parity with the United States 
In 1978, forty-three years after it passed the NLRA, Congress enacted the Federal Labor 
Relations Act ("FLRA)," 5 U.S.C. § 7101 et seq., regulating labor relations for most federal 
workers. The FLRA specifically aims to "prescribe certain rights and obligations of the 
employees of the Federal Government and to establish procedures which are designed to meet 
the special requirements and needs ofthe Government." 5 U.S.C. § 7101(a)(2). Congress 
determined that the rights of federal workers to organize, bargain collectively , and participate in 
labor organizations: "(1) safeguards the public interest, (2) contributes to the effective conduct 
of public business; and (3) facilitates and encourages the amicable settlement of disputes 
between employers and employees involving conditions of employment. " 5 U.S.C. § 710l(a)(l). 
2 However, the FLRA does not apply to all federal employers or employees. Coverage extends 
to individuals employed in an "agency," 5 U.S.C. § 71 03(a)(2), but specifically excludes 
members of the military, noncitizens who work outside the United States, supervisory and 
management personnel, and various Foreign Service officers. 5 U .S.C. § 71 03( a)(2)(B). It also 
excludes all employees of certain federal agencies, including the Federal Bureau of Investigation, 
the Central Intelligence Agency, and the United States Secret Service. 5 U.S.C. § 7103(a)(3). 
Although patterned after the NLRA, based on the Federal government's unique public­
service needs, obligations and vulnerabilities, the FLRA mandates certain proscriptions and 
prescriptions not contained in the NLRA. One important example is the scope of the authorized 
collective bargaining process. Under the NLRA, private-sector employees are entitled to 
collectively bargain with respect to wages, hours, benefits, and other working conditions . Under 
the FLRA, federal employees can only collectively bargain with respect to personnel practices. 
Under the FLRA, there is no right to negotiate working conditions such as wages, hours, 
employee benefits, and classifications of jobs. 
A second important diffemce is the right of private sector employees to engage in "concerted 
action," like workplace strikes. Under the FLRA, there is no right to strike for federal workers. 
In fact, the FLRA specifically excludes any person who participates in a workplace strike from 
the definition of "employee ," 5 U.S.C. § 71 03(a)(2)(B)(v) , and it specifies that it is an unfair 
labor practice for labor unions to call or participate in a strike, a work stoppage, or picketing that 
interferes with the operation of a federal agency. 5 U.S.C. § 7116(b)(7)(A). 
3 B. Parity with the States 
According to a 2002 Report by the Government Accountability Office ("GAO") , about 26 
states1 and the District of Colombia had statutorily-protected collective bargaining rights for 
essentially all State and local government workers; 12 states2 had collective bargaining only for 
specific groups ofworkers (e.g. teachers, firefighters) ; and 12 states3 did not have laws providing 
rights to collective bargaining for any government worker. "Collective Bargaining Rights," 
GA0-02-835, p. 8-9 (September 2002). According to the Report, most State government 
workers who are entitled to collective bargaining rights under state law are prohibited from 
striking. Instead, those States provide compulsory binding interest arbitration (a procedure 
unavailable under the NLRA). I d. at p. 10. 
In a January 2014 Report, Regulation of Public Sector Collective Bargaining in the States, 
the Center for Economic and Policy Research (CEPR) reviewed the rights and limitations on 
public-sector bargaining in the 50 states and the District of Colombia in order to answer three 
key questions -whether workers have the right to bargain collectively, whether unions can 
bargain over wages, and whether workers have the right to strike. A copy of the Report is 
attached to this testimony (minus the Appendix). The CEPR did not update the numbers 
provided by GAO, but it did provide helpful charts to better illustrate the types of policy choices 
State governments are making in regulating the rights of government workers: Chart 1, 
1 Alaska, California, Connecticut, Delaware , Florida, Hawaii, Illinois, Iowa, Maine, Massachusetts , Michigan , 
Minnesota , Montana, Nebraska , New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania , Rhode 
Island, South Dakota, Vermont, Washington , and Wisconsin . As with the NLRA, the state laws that provide 
collective bargaining rights to public employees often exclude various groups of employees (e.g., many states 
expressly exclude management officials) from coverage. GAO 02-835, at note 12. 
2 Georgia, Indiana, Idaho, Kansas, Kentucky , Maryland, Missouri, Nevada, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Tennessee, 
and Wyoming. Three of these states, Indiana, Kentucky and Missouri, extend collective bargaining rights to certain 
public employees thr ough an executive order from the governor. GAO 02-835, at note 14. 
3 Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Louisiana , Mississippi, New Mexico, North Carolina, South Carolina, 
Texas, Virginia, and West Virginia. Texas prohibits collective bargaining for most groups of public employees, but 
firefighters and police may bargain in jurisdictions with approval from a majority of voters. GAO 02-835, at note 13. 
4 "Legality of Collective Bargaining for Select Public-Sector Workers" lists the states which 
regulate collective bargaining for specific workers is legal, illegal, or simply no ; Chart 2, 
"Legality of Collective Wage Negotiation for Select Public-Sector Workers"; and Chart 3, 
"Legality of Striking for Select Public-Sector Workers. " As you review each chart, you can see 
that certain states make it illegal, or do not protect the rights of certain government workers, to 
engage in collective bargaining or wage negotiations, with most states making it illegal for these 
government workers to strike. 
And of final note, according to the National Right to Work Legal Defense Foundation 
(http://www.nrtw .org/), 25 States have enacted right to work laws and 25 States do not have right 
to work laws. 4 Therefore, half of the State legislatures have determined that-as a matter of 
State labor relations policy-a worker in a Right to Work State not only has the right to refrain 
from becoming a union member, but cannot be required to pay anything to the union unless the 
worker chooses to join the union. 
III. Regulating Labor Relations on Indian Lands 
Before its 2004 decision in San Manuel Indian Bingo and Casino, the National Labor 
Relations Board did not exercise jurisdiction over tribal-owned businesses located on Indian 
lands. In Fort Apache Timber Co. (1976), and Southern Indian Health Council (1988), the 
NLRB held that tribal-owned businesses operating on tribal lands were exempt from federal 
labor law jurisdiction as "governmental entities."5 However , in Sac & Fox Indus. (1992), the 
NLRB held that the provisions of the NLRA would apply to a tribal-owned business operating 
4 The 25 states that have right to work laws are: Alabama , Arizona, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Indiana, 
Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana , Michigan , Mississippi, Nebraska, Nevada, North Carolina, North Dakota, Oklahoma , 
South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming. 
5 The NLRB did exercise jurisdiction over non-Indian enterprises operating . For example, in Simplot Fertilizer Co. 
(1952), the NLRB exercised jurisdiction over a union's attempt to organize a non-Indian phosphate mining company 
leasing Shoshone-Bannock tribal land in Idaho. Also see Texas-Zinc Minerals Corp. (1960), and Devils Lake Sioux 
Mfg. Corp. (1979). 
5 outside the reservation. Thus, prior to 2004, the NLRB drew a distinction regarding its 
jurisdiction based on whether the tribal business was located on Indian lands (no jurisdiction) 
versus off-reservation (jurisdiction). Today, in considering S. 248, the Committee should be 
mindful that the 566 federally-recogni zed Indian tribes enjoy demographic , cultural, political and 
economic diversity, and should not be subject to any one-size fits all approach. 
A. The Navajo Nation Labor Code 
Enacted by resolution in 1985, the Navajo Preference in Employment Act ("NPEA") serves 
as the Navajo Nation's general labor code. 15 N.N.C. Sec. 601 et seq; Resolution No. CAU-63-
85 in 1985, and amended through Resolution No. C0-78-90 in 1990. Incorporated into the 
NPEA is a clause which enables unionization on the Navajo Nation. 15 N.N.C. Sec. 606 Union 
and Employment Agency Activities; Rights of Navajo Workers 
A. Subject to lawful provisions of applicable collective bargaining agreements, the basic 
rights of Navajo workers to organize, bargain collectively , strike, and peaceably 
picket to secure their legal rights shall not be abridged in any way by any person. The 
right to strike and picket does not apply to employees of the Navajo Nation, its 
agencies, or enterprises. 
B. It shall be unlawful for any labor organization , employer or employment agency to 
take any action, including action by contract, which directly or indirectly causes or 
attempts to cause the adoption or use of any employment practice, policy or decision 
which violates the Act. 
It was the legislative intent of the council in 1985 to incorporate the most basic of those 
privileges of the National Labor Relations Act ("NLRA") to tribal employees , whom the council 
acknowledged were otherwise exempt from the NLRA. The rights of Navajo Nation employees 
to collectively bargain were debated and CAU-63-85 ultimately passed. 14 NTC 81111985 
The 1990 Navajo Nation council debated whether to include in the amendments "closed 
shop" language, which would permit labor organizations to collect union dues from non-
members. This sparked much debate in the council, which ultimately decided 34 to 33 to ensure 
6 the Navajo Nation is a "right to work" jurisdiction, and amended the Labor Investigative Task 
Force's proposed amendments to strike the "closed shop" language otherwise amending 15 
N.N.C. Sec. 606. 28 NNC 10/25/90 
The NPEA confers upon the Human Services Committee ("HSC") of the legislative council 
to "promulgate rules and regulations necessary for the enforcement and implementation of the 
provisions ofthis Act." 15 N.N.C. Sec. 616. HSC has availed themselves with this authority in 
the otherwise sparsely worded enabling legislation through Resolution No. HSCJY-63-94 
Adopting the Navajo Preference in Employment Act Regulations to Provide Rules and 
Enforcement Procedures to Permit Collective Bargaining for Employees of the Navajo Nation, 
Its Agencies or Enterprises 
These regulations provide additional guidance as to, for example, management's role of 
neutrality, prohibited employer practices, how to become an exclusive bargaining agent, the 
process for certification , an impasse resolution in the event of failed bargaining , and the process 
for decertification of a bargaining agent. 
Collective bargaining is occurring on the Navajo Nation, with private enterprise as well as 
government. The United Mine Workers of America ("UMWA") represents employees at the 
Navajo Nation Head Start Program, a tribal government program. The Nal-Nishii Federation of 
Labor AFL-CIO includes 12 labor organizations that represent miners, power plant workers, 
construction workers, school employees and city employees working on or near the Navajo 
Nation. 
B. California Tribal Labor Relations Ordinances 
In negotiating tribal-state gaming compacts in 1999, Indian tribes in California agreed to 
adopt a process for addressing union organizing and collective bargaining rights of tribal gaming 
7 employees, or the compact is null and void. From these negotiations, a Model Tribal Labor 
Relations Ordinance ("Ordinance ") was crafted , and tribes with 250 or more casino-related 
employees were required to adopt the Ordinance. In its 2007 Report, California Tribal State 
Gambling Compacts 1999-2006 , the California Research Bureau provided the following 
summary: 
• Under the Model Tribal Labor Relations Ordinance ("Ordinance "), employees have the 
right to engage in employee organizations , bargain collectively , and join in concerted 
activities for the purpose of collective bargaining. The Ordinance defmes unfair labor 
practices on the part of a tribe or a union, guarantees the right to free speech, and provides for 
union access to employees for bargaining purposes. (Excluded employees include 
supervisors, employees of the tribal gaming commission, employees of the security or 
surveillance departments, cash operations employees or any dealer.) 
Key Issues: Certification of union representation and dispute resolution 
• Upon a showing of interest by 30 percent of the applicable employees , the tribe is to provide 
the union an election eligibility list of employee names and addresses . A secret ballot is to 
follow. An elections officer chosen by the tribe is to verify the authorization cards and 
conduct the election. If the labor organization receives a majority of votes, the election 
officer is to certify it as the exclusive collective bargaining representative for the unit of 
employees. Decisions may be appealed to a tribal labor panel. 
• The Ordinance establishes procedures to address an impasse in collective bargaining, 
including the union's right to strike outside oflndian lands, and to decertify a certified union. 
It also creates three levels of binding dispute resolution mechanisms, beginning with a tribal 
forum, followed by an arbitration panel, and finally tribal court and federal court. Collective 
bargaining impasses may only proceed to the first level of binding dispute resolution, in 
which a designated tribal forum makes the decision. 
California Tribal State Gambling Compacts 1996-2006, at p. 33-34 (a copy of the Labor Standards 
section, P. 33-39, of the Report is appended to this testimony).In a presentation to the Intemational 
Association of Gaming Attomeys in September 1999, the following observations were provided 
regarding the Ordinance as a product of compromise between powerful forces, including : 
1. the public policy of providing economic support for Indians from non-tax sources 
through Indian gaming; 
2. the drive by the State of Califomia to reclaim some of the economic benefit it had 
forfeited to Nevada by blocking the expansion of gaming in Califomia J.; 
3. the expectation of employees working at Indian casinos that they will have the same 
rights as employees working at non-Indian enterprises; 
8 4. the need and desire by many tribes to maintain and expand their gaming operations; 
and 
5. the wish by other interested parties in the gaming business (most importantly, Nevada 
gaming companies and unions representing their employees) to create, at a minimum, a 
"level playing field" by eliminating the competitive advantage enjoyed as a result of the 
non-union status of California's Indian casinos. 
The full written presentation is available at http://cornorate.findlaw.com/litigation -disputes/the-
california -tribal-labor-relations-ordinance-overview-and .html. 
The Ordinance provides labor unions at tribal gaming facilities with a number of advantages not 
provided for under the NLRA. Most impmtantly, under the Ordinance unions at tribal casinos: (1) 
have the right to enter onto casino property at any time to talk to employees and post leaflets and 
posters there in order to facilitate the organizing of employees ; and (2) may engage in secondary 
boycotts after an impasse is reached in negotiations without suffering any penalty under the 
Ordinance. 
The Ordinance also provides tribes with certain advantages not enjoyed by employers under the 
NLRA. Most importantly , unions representing tribal casino employees may not strike, picket or 
engage in boycotts before an impasse is reached in negotiations. Since 1999, a number of new tribal-
state gaming compacts have been negotiated, or renegotiated , some with additional provisions 
regulating labor, but all requiring the adoption of the 1999 Model Tribal Labor Relations Ordinance. 
The examples of the Navajo Nation and the California tribes exemplify the growing list oflndian 
tribes who are regulating labor relations with their employees. Mr. Chairman , we hope that you and 
each member of the Committee will recognize that each of the 566 tribes-as governments -must 
have the opportunity to make their own policy judgments regarding labor relations on their 
reservations based on the values and priorities which best serve the needs of their community. In 
general, there are four areas of concem for Indian tribes: (1) a guaranteed right to strike threatens 
tribal government revenues and the ability to deliver vital services; (2) the broad scope of collective 
9 bargaining for "other working conditions " will undermine federal and tribal policies requiring Indian 
preference in employment ; (3) pre-emption of the power to exclude which is a fundamental power of 
tribal government diminishes the ability of tribes to "place conditions on entry, on conditioned 
presence, or on reservation conduct"; and ( 4) the potential for substantial outside interference with 
tribal politics and elections. 
IV. Conclusion 
In closing Mr. Chairman , we would simply remind you and members of the Committee that 
under the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act ("IGRA"), Congress recognized "a principal goal of 
Federal Indian policy is to promote tribal economic development , tribal self-sufficiency , and 
strong tribal government ," 25 U.S.C. § 2701, and declared its purpose was "to provide a statutory 
basis for the operation of gaming by Indian tribes as a means of promoting tribal economic 
development , self-sufficiency , and strong tribal governments. " 25 U.S.C. § 2702. 
Congress said that, and we believe Congress meant that tribal gaming is a part of tribal 
government -a means of generating tribal revenues to support tribal programs and services. In 
25 U.S.C. § 2710(b)(2)(B) , Congress stated "net revenues from any tribal gaming are not to be 
used for purposes other than--(i) to fund tribal government operations or programs ; (ii) to 
provide for the general welfare of the Indian tribe and its members ; (iii) to promote tribal 
economic development; (iv) to donate to charitable organizations; or (v) to help fund operations 
of local government agencies. " Congress determined that tribal gaming is a governmental 
activity of Indian tribes-and should not be treated as a commercial activity on par with non­
Indian casinos as the NLRB has determined in San Manuel Indian Bingo and Casino. 
10 cepr 
CENTER FOR ECONOMIC AND POLICY RESEARCH 
Regulation of Public Sector 
Collective Bargaining 
in the States 
By Milia Sanes and John Schmitt* 
II I . l!h: : . Center for Economic and Policy Research 
1611 Connecticut Ave. NW 
Suite 400 
Washington, DC 20009 tel: 202-293-5380 
fax: 202-588-1356 
www.cepr.net 
' i\filla Sanes is a Program _\ssistanr ar the Cenrer for Economic and Policy Research, in \\'ashingron D.C. .John Schmitt is a 
Senio1· Hconomisr at CF.PR. Contents 
Introduction .................... ............................................................................ ......................................... 3 
Right to Collective Bargaining ....................... ............................................... ..................................... 4 
Wage Negotiations ........................... ............................................... .......................................... .......... 7 
Right to Strike .................................... ........................................................ .......................................... 8 
Observations, Anomalies, and Ambiguities ....................................... .................. ............................ 9 
References ................ ................................................................................. ......................................... 11 
Appendix ................................................... ........................................................... .............................. 12 
Acknowledgements 
We thank Dean Baker and Nicole Woo for helpful comments and the Ford Foundation and Public 
Welfare Foundation for generous support. Introduction 
While the unionization of most private-sector workers is governed by the National Labor Relations 
Act (NLRA), the legal scope of collective bargaining for state and local public-sector workers is the 
domain of states and, where states allow it, local authorities. This hodge-podge of state-and-local 
legal framework s is complicat ed enough, but recent efforts in Wisconsin, Michigan , Ohio, and other 
states have left the legal rights of public-sector workers even less transparent. 
In this report, we review the legal rights and limitations on public-sector bargaining in the 50 states 
and the District of Columbia, as of January 2014. Given the legal complexitie s, we focus on three 
sets of workers who make up almost half of all unionized public-sector workers: teachers, police, 
and firefighter s, with some observations, where possible, on other state-and-local workers.1 For each 
group of workers, we examine whether public-sector workers have the right to bargain collectively / 
whether that right includes the ability to bargain over wages; and whether public-sector workers 
have the right to strike. 
Our work updates, in part, a 1988 study by Robert Valletta and Richard Freeman, who conducted a 
comprehen sive review of collective-bargaining laws for state employees, local police, local 
firefighter s, non-college teachers, and other local employees. Much of the attention to public-sector 
bargaining since Valletta and Freeman has concentrated on public school teachers and we have 
relied heavily on a statutes database compiled by the National Council on Teacher Quality for an 
important part of the information presented here. 
At the state-and-local level, the right to bargain collectively, the scope of collective bargainin g, and 
the right to strike in connectio n with union activity is determined by a combination of state laws and 
case law. The interpretations of the relevant laws and court interpretations, and the frequent silences 
of both legislators and the courts with respect to specific types of public-sector workers in particular 
legal jurisdictions, makes it difficult to summarize the legal state of play across 50 states, 
Washington, DC, and thousand s of local jurisdictions. In the rest of this report, we offer our best 
interpretati on of how the relevant state statutes and case law answer our three key questions -
whether workers have the right to bargain collectively, whether unions can bargain over wages, and 
whether workers have the right to strike -for the three groups of workers we focus on (teachers, 
police, firefighters). The detailed appendix also includes, where available, information on the law as 
it applies to public-sector workers in general. Our approach is to look first at state statutes. Where 
In 2013, according to Current Population Survey data, the United States had 16.9 million state-and-local public­
sector workers. Of these, 4.5 million (26.6 percent) were teachers; about 700,000 (4.3 percent) were police officers; 
and about 350,000 (2.1 percent) were fire fighters. In the same year, 40 percent of all state-and-local workers were 
unionized. The unionization rate for teachers was 55 percent; police, 60 percent; and firefighters, 67 percent. 
2 "Collective bargaining " is the term most used in statutes across the states. In some instances other terms such as 
"conferencing," the term used for teachers' collective bargaining in Tennessee, are used in regulations for the same 
principle. 
Regulation of Public Sector Collective Bargaining in the States 3 state statutes have left ambiguitie s or do not address public-employee collective bargaining or related 
issues of interest, we have looked to case law and executive orders. 
Given the complexities involved -and current efforts in many states to restructure the legal 
framework regulating public-sector unionization -we see the work here as an ongoing effort. We 
will revise our interpretation s, and this document, as new informati on comes to our attention and as 
states implement important changes to existing laws. 
Right to Collective Bargaining 
Chart 1 shows the legality of collective bargaining for public-sector firefighters, police and teachers 
in each state. We have divided states into three categories: Illegal, Legal, and No Statute/Case Law. 
States labeled "Illegal" have specific statutes -or case law in the absence of a statute -that bars 
public employees from collectively bargaining (and, by extension, negotiating over wages ot 
striking). In these cases, statutes or court cases directly address - and prohibit -collective 
bargaining . For states labeled "Legal," definitive laws or case law exist that actively protect or 
promote collective bargaining (or negotiating wages or the right to strike). States labeled "No 
Statute/Case Law" are ones where statutes and case law are ambiguous. In these cases, we were not 
able to identify any explicit state-level regulation of public-sector employees' collective bargaining 
(or right to negotiate wages or strike). In some of these cases, a lack of relevant state-level statutes 
means that a combination of historical practice and local laws ends up determining workers' rights. 
The leeway involved appears to vary across states. Details on the specific statutes or case law we 
used to assign states to the three categories appear in the appendix. 
In four states -North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, and Virginia-it is illegal for firefighters 
to bargain collectively. In these same states and Georgia, it is also illegal for police officers to bargain 
collectively. Five, mostly overlapping, states -Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Virginia, 
plus Texas-do not allow collective bargaining for teachers. Nortl1 Carolina, South Carolina, and 
Virginia have blanket statutes that prohibit collective bargaining for all public-sector employees and 
do not make exceptions. Texas and Georgia have state statutes banning collective bargaining in the 
public sector, but explicitly carve out exceptions for police and firefighters in the case of Texas (Tex. 
Gov't Code Ann. § 174.002) and fire fighters in the case of Georgia (Ga. Code Ann §25-5-4). 
Georgia is the only state that singles out teachers in legislation in order to prevent them from 
bargaining collectively (Ga. Code Ann. § 20-2-989.10).3 In Tennessee, case law has ruled public­
sector collective bargaining to be illegal, but the state legislature passed a law that specifically permits 
collective bargaining for teachers. 
3 Ga. Code .Ann. § 20-2-989. 10-"Nothing in this part shall be constmed to permit or foster collective bargaini1rg as pari of the 
stale mles or local unit of administration polides." 
Regulation of Public Sector Collective Bargaining in the States 4 CHARTl 
Legality of Collecti\'e Bargaining for Select Public-Sector Workers 
Firefighters Police Teachers 
lUegal North Carolina Georgia Georgia 
South Carolina North Carolina North Carolina 
Tennessee South Carolina South Carolina 
Virginia Tennessee Texas 
Virginia Virginia 
Legal Alaska Missouri Alaska Montana Alabama Ivlissouri 
Arizona Montana Arizona Nebraska Alaska Montana 
Arkansas Nebraska Arkansas Nevada Arkansas Nebraska 
California Nevada California New California Nevada 
Colorado New Hampshire Connecticut Hampshire Colorado New Hampshire 
Connecticut New Jersey Delaware New Jersey Connecticut New Jersey 
Delaware N ew Mexico District of New Mexico Delaware New Mexico 
District of New York Columbia New York District of New York 
Columbia orth Dakota Florida North Dakota Columbia North Dakota 
Florida Ohio Hawaii Ohio Florida Ohio 
Georgia Oklahoma Idaho Oklahoma Hawaii Oklahoma 
Hawaii Oregon Illinois Oregon Idaho Oregon 
Idaho Pennsylvania Indiana Pennsylvania Illinois Pennsylvania 
Illinois Rhode Island Iowa Rhode Island Indiana Rhode Island 
Indiana South Dakota Kansas South Dakota Iowa South Dakota 
Iowa Texas Kentucky Texas Kansas Tennessee 
Kansas Utah Louisiana Utah Kentuch.-y Utah 
Kentuch.-y Vermont Maine Vermont Louisiana Vermont 
Louisiana Washington Maryland Washington Maine Washington 
Maine West Virginia Massachusetts West Virginia Maryland West Virginia 
Maryland Wisconsin Michigan Wisconsin Massachusetts Wisconsin 
Massachusetts Wyoming Minnesota Michigan Wyoming 
Michigan Missouri Minnesota 
Minnesota Mississippi 
No Stature/ Alabama Alabama IMwn• Case Law l\lfississippi Colorado 
Mississippi 
Wyoming 
Source: Authors' analysis. See Appendix for details. 
Note: See text for discussion of Colorado , Idaho, Tennessee, and Wisconsi n. 
In almost all of the remaining states, firefighters, police, and teachers have the legal right (but not 
the requirement ) to bargain collectively. Many states have legislation that covers all public employees 
in the state and establishes both the right to organize and to bargain collectively. 
In a small number of states, neither legal statutes nor case law clearly establish or prohibit collective 
bargaining (see the third row of the chart). Firefighters in Alabama and Mississippi, police in 
Alabama, Colorado, Mississippi, and Wyoming, and teachers in Arizona all find themselves in a legal 
environment where no set statutes or existing case law governs collective bargaining at the state 
level. As a result, collective bargaining is permissible at the state level, but the actual legality of 
collective bargainin g depends on local laws. 
Regulation of Public Sector Collective Bargaining in the States 5 The case of Colorado provides a useful example of some of the challenge s involved in categorizing 
state collective bargaining regimes. For firefighter s, rights are spelled out in a state statute giving 
firefighters the right to form unions, meet and confer, and bargain collectivel y. However, for police 
(or peace officers), Colorado has no state-level laws specifically addressing these rights. The 
Colorado Firefighter Safety Act, however, does mention other public employees: 
C.R.S. 29-5-212 (1)-The collective bargai11ingprotlisions of this patt 2 do not app!J to a'!Y home mle city that 
has language in its chatter on June 5, 2013, that provides for a collective bmgaining process for firefighters 
emplqyed b.Jt the home rule city. This part 2 applies to all other public emplqyers, including home mle cities without 
language in their chatters tbat address a collective bmgainingprocess forfirefighters. 
Based on this language and the home rule regulations, some police officers have the right to bargain 
collectively depending on local determination. The Colorado State Lodge Fraternal Order of Police 
has several member lodges that represent these bargaining units. Meanwhile, teachers in Colorado 
have taken a different approach to their apparent exclusion from state law and have secured their 
collective bargaining through case law: 
Littleton Educ. Ass'n v. Arapahoe County Sch. Dist., 191 Colo. 411, 553 P.2d 793 (1976) -
Schoo/ boards have the auth01i[Y to enter into collective bargaining agreements with representatives of their 
emplqyees provided that the agreements do not conflict 1vith existing laws governing the conduct of the state school 
!)Stem. 
Other state employees that don't fall into one of the three categories have their collective bargaining 
rights granted through an executive order, Executive Order Authorizing Partnership Agreements 
with State Employees (12/28/2007). 
Recent state actions in Idaho, Tennessee, and \Visconsin, and under consideration in other states 
have not eliminated public-sector bargaining, but have sought to limit significantly its scope. These 
recent actions do not change the status of these states in Chart 1 (or their status in Chart 2 where 
new limitations do not prohibit bargaining over compensation). However, these new legislative 
actions have reduced public-sector workers bargaining rights. In Idaho, SB 1108 (2011), restricted 
the scope of many teachers' collective bargaining. For teachers in Tennessee, a 2011 law changed the 
way bargaining is done to allow non-union professional organizatio ns to represent employees with 
the effect that union representation is no longer a requireme nt for bargaining.4 Wisconsin's Act 10, 
which has received extensive media attention, limits bargaining for public employees by imposing 
raise caps, limiting contracts to one year with salary freezes during the contract term, and requiring 
annual recertification of unions. 5 
4 Winkler, et al (2012), p. 315. 
5 Greenhouse (2014). 
Regulatioi1 of Public Sector Collective Bargaining in the States 6 Wage Negotiations 
Fewer state statutes address the specific legality of wage negotiations than address the general right 
to bargain collectively. The only states where it is specifically illegal to negotiate over wages are those 
where collective bargaining is already illegal and therefore wage negotiations aren't allowed by 
default (see Chart 2). Of the remaining states, most protect the bargaining of wages and benefits 
through legislative definition s and as part of more broad-reaching statutes that cover general labor 
policy. In general, negotiations over wages and benefits are legal where collective bargaining is 
allowed for public employees. 
CHART2 
Legalit\ of Collecth·e \'\'age Negotiatio n for Select Public-Sector Workers 
Firefi_ghtcrs Police Teachers 
IUegal North Carolina Georgia Georgia 
(Collective South Carolina North Carolina North Carolina 
bargaining is Tennessee South Carolina South Carolina 
also illegal in Virginia Tennessee Texas 
these states) Virginia Virginia 
Legal Alaska Missouri Alaska Montana Alaska Nebraska 
Arizona Montana Arizona ebraska Arkansas Nevada 
California Nebraska California Nevada California New Hampshire 
Colorado Nevada Connecticut New Connecticut New Jersey 
Connecticut New Hampshire Delaware Hampshire Delaware New Mexico 
Delaware New Jersey District of New Jersey District of New York 
District of New Mexico Columbia New Mexico Columbia Ohio 
Columbia New York Florida New York Florida Oklahoma 
Florida Ohio Hawaii Ohio Hawaii Oregon 
Georgia Oklahoma Illinois Oklahoma Idaho Pennsylvania 
Hawaii Oregon Indiana Oregon Illinois Rhode Island 
Idaho Pennsylvania Iowa Pennsylvania Indiana South Dakota 
Illinois Rhode Island Kansas Rhode Island Iowa Tennessee 
Indiana South Dakota Kentucky South Dakota K,1nsas Utah 
Iowa Texas Maine Texas Maine Vermont 
Kansas Utah Maryland Utah Maryland Washington 
Kentucky Vermont Massachusetts Vermont Massachusetts West Virginia 
Maine Washington Michigan Washington Michigan Wisconsin 
Maryland Wisconsin Minnesota Wisconsin Minnesota Wyoming 
Massachusetts Wyoming J'vlissouri Missouri 
Michigan Montana 
Minnesota 
No Statute/ Alabama Alabama Alabama 
Case Law Arkansas Arkansas Arizona 
Louisiana Colorado Colorado 
Mississippi Idaho Kentucky 
North Dakota Louisiana Louisiana 
West Virginia Mississip pi Mississippi 
~ orth Dakota North Dakota 
West Virginia 
Wyoming 
Source: Authors' analysis. See Appendix for details. 
Regulation of Public Sector Collective Bargaining in the States 7 A sizeable number of states have no state law or administrative code that addresses the issue of 
negotiation s over wages and benefits. \Xfhere there is no regulation, the practice can be deemed 
"permissible," determined on a more case-by-case basis, or regulated at local levels. 
Right to Strike 
CHART3 
Legality of Striking for Select Public-Sector Workers 
Firefighters Police Teachers 
Illegal Alabama l'vfissouri Alabama Mississippi Alabama Nebraska 
Alaska Montana Alaska Missouri Arizona Nevada 
Arizona Nebraska Arizona Montana Arkansas New Hampshire 
Arkansas Nevada Vermont Nebraska Connecticut New Jersey 
California New Hampshire Arkansas Nevada Delaware New Me.xico 
Colorado New Jersey California New Hampshire District of New York 
Connecticut New Mexico Connecticut New Jersey Columbia North Carolina 
Delaware ewYork Delaware New Mexico Florida North Dakota 
District of North Carolina District of New York Georgia Oklahoma 
Columbia North Dakota Columbia North Carolina Idaho Rhode Island 
Florida Oklahoma Flortda North Dakota Indiana South Dakota 
Georgia Oregon Georgia Oklahoma Iowa Tennessee 
Idaho Pennsylvania Illinois Oregon Kansas Texas 
Illinois Rhode Island Indiana Pennsylvania Kentucky Virginia 
Indiana South Dakota Iowa Rhode Island Maine Washington 
Iowa Tennessee Kansas South Dakota Maryland West Virginia 
Kansas Texas Kentucky Tennessee Massachusetts Wisconsin 
Kentucky Utah Louisiana Texas Michigan 
Louisiana Vermont Maine Virginia Mississtppi 
Maine Virginia Maryland Washington Missouri 
Maryland Washington Massachusetts Wisconsin 
Massachusetts Wisconsin Michigan 
Michigan Minnesota 
Minnesota 
l'vfississippi 
Legal Hawaii Hawaii Alaska Minnesota 
Ohio Ohio California Montana 
Colorado Ohio 
Hawaii Oregon 
Illinois Pennsylvania 
Louisiana Vermont 
No Statute/ South Carolina Colorado South Carolina 
Case Law West Virginia Idaho Utah 
Wyoming South Carolina Wyoming 
Utah 
West Virginia 
Wyoming 
Source: .\uthors' analysis. See Appendix for details. 
Regulation of Public Sector Collective Bargaining in the States 8 While the majority of states allows collective bargaining and wage negonanons for public-sector 
workers, the opposite is the case when it comes to the right to strike (Chart 3). Only two states 
(Hawaii and Ohio) grant firefighter s and police the right to strike, and only twelve states (Alaska, 
California, Colorado, Hawaii, Illinois, Louisiana, Minnesota, Montana, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, 
and Vermont) allow teachers to strike. Even in states that have statutes protecting the right to strike 
for public-sector workers in general, specific exceptions are created for public safety employees. In 
Ohio, while strikes are permissible, "the public employer may seek an injunction against the strike in 
the court of common pleas of the county in which the strike is located" (Ohio Rev. Code Ann. § 
4117.15). In all of the states where teachers can strike, the right to strike has been extended to 
public-sector workers in general (with the exception of firefighters and police officers). 
As with the right to bargain collectively over wages and benefits, a few states don't address the issue 
of strikes directly in state laws. Strictly speaking, South Carolina has no state statute that addresses 
public-sector workers' right to strike, but we have included South Carolina with those where strikes 
are illegal because the state prohibits collective bargaining. In other states without statutes speaki ng 
to strikes, the right to strike depends on local law or the terms of the collective-bargaining 
agreement itself. 
Observations, Anomalies, and Ambiguities 
The majority of states have clear legal statutes that lay out the rights of public-sector workers. 
Nevertheless, the legal framework in a number of states is less clear. 
For example, the Arizona statute that governs public-safety employee rights, includes the ambiguou s 
language: "shall not be construed to compel or prohibit in any manner any employee wage and 
benefit negotiations" (Arizona Revised Statutes: Chap 8, Art 6, § 23-1411). This type of language, 
neither requiring nor prohibiting collective bargaining or other areas of worker rights, occurs in 
several others states as well. 
In recognition of this ambiguity, the National Council on Teacher Quality (NCTQ) classifies 
collective bargaining laws as falling into three categorie s:6 
Collective batgaining required-Disl1icts must collectivelY batgain if employees request to do so. 
Collective bargaining permissible -Distticts mqy choose whether or not to collective!J batgain if employees request 
to do so. 
Collective bargaining prohibited -It is illegal for distticts to collective!J batgain with employees. 
In our analysis, we only distinguish between legal frameworks where collective bargaining, 
negotiations over wages and benefits, and public-sector strikes are "legal" or "illegal." Some states 
6 See NCTQ. 
Regulation of Public Sector Collective Bargaining in the States 9 classified here as having a legal right to bargain collectively, would be categorized as only 
"permissible " by NCTQ. 
A separate issue involves barriers put in place in some states to prevent union organizing or to make 
it more difficult. This report looks only at the legality of collective bargaining , wage negotiation, and 
striking; there are many other issues surrounding public-sector employee s' ability to negotiate and 
organize that are affected by state and local regulations that are not discussed here. For example, 
earlier we mentioned specific cases of Idaho, Tennessee, and Wisconsin. In addition, some states are 
applying "right-to-work" laws specifically to public employees as well (Alabama, Florida, Idaho, 
Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Nebraska , Nevada, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Tennessee, 
and Utah). 
In some cases, employee associations represent the interests of employees even when collective 
bargainin g is illegal. For example the Fraternal Order of Police (FOP) has "lodges" in all states, 
including Virginia, North Carolina, and South Carolina where collective bargaining is prohibited. 
While the FOP is the umbrella for many bargainin g units in states that allow collective bargaining, in 
states where collective bargaining is illegal, the organization provides other services (that a union 
might) without being able to represent police officers in negotiations over employment conditions. 
Similar associations exist for teachers and firefighters in other states The presence of a "union" is 
not indicative of collective bargaining rights in these localities. These non-union employee 
associations may negotiate on behalf of workers in some circumstances where formal collective 
bargainin g is illegal. 
While about one-third of all state-and-local public-sector workers fall under the three ma1n 
categories discussed above -firefighters, police, and teachers -over 11 million employees work in 
other state-and local-government jobs. There are fewer clear statutes that cover these other public­
sector workers. Some states are like Vermont, which has both a State Employees Labor Relations 
Act and a Vermont Municipal Labor Relations Act that govern public employees and their collective 
bargainin g from the state level. North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia have state laws that ban 
all collective bargaining. In others, such as Arizona, the legality of collective bargaining is determined 
for other public-sector workers through a range of executive orders, state law, and case law. 
Regulation of Public Sector Collective Bargaining in the States 10 References 
American Federation of State, County & Municipal Employees (AFSCME ). "Public Sector 
Collective Bargaining Laws." AFSCME. http:/ /www.afscme.org/news/publications/for­
leaders/public-sec tor-collective-bargaining-laws (accessed December 19, 2013). 
Greenhouse, Steven. 2014. ''Wisconsin 's Legacy for Unions." The New York Times, February 22. 
http:/ /www.nytimes.com/2014/02/23/business/wisconsins-legacy-for-unions.html 
International Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF). 1988. "Collective Bargaining: The Collective 
Bargaining Process." New York: IAFF. 
http:/ /www.iafflocal2294.org/items/LICB_CollectiveBargainin g.pdf 
National Council on Teacher Quality (NCTQ). "State Bargaining Rules Data." 
http:/ /www.nctq.org/ districtPolicy / statelnfluence.do (accessed December 19, 2013). 
National Right to Work Legal Defense Foundation. "Right to Work States." 
http:/ /www.nrtw.org/rtws.htm (accessed December 19, 2013). 
Winkler, Amber M.,Janie Scull, and Dara Zeehandelaar. 2012. "How Strong Are U.S. Teacher 
Unions? A State-By-State Comparison." Washington, DC: The Thomas B. Fordham 
Institute. http:/ /www.edexcellencemedia.net/ publications/2012/20121 029-How-Strong­
Are-US-Teacher-Unions/20121029-Union-Strength-Full-Report.pdf 
Valletta, Robert and Richard Freeman. 1988. "Appendix B The NBER Public Sector Collective 
Bargaining Law Data Set," NBER Chapters, in: When Public Sedor Worker:r U11ionize, pp, 399-
420. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. 
Regulation of Public Sector Collective Bargaining in the States 11 Appendix 
The following table draws on data compiled by American Federation of State, County & Municipal Employees (AFSCME); International 
Association of Fire Fighters (1998); National Council on Teacher Quality; National Right to Work Legal Defense Foundation; Winkler, 
Scull, and Zeehandelaar (2012); and Valletta, and Freeman (1988). 
Alabama 
Collective Bargaining 
All/Other 
Police Collective bargaining is not addressed 
No state statute regarding collective bargaining . 
Collective bargaining rights for police are determined 
on the local level. 
Firefighters Collective bargaining is not addressed 
No state statute regarding collective bargaining . 
Collective bargaining rights for firefighters are 
determined on the local level. 
Teachers Collective bargaining is legal 
Statute: Ala. Code§ 16-1-30 
Alaska "Before adopting the written policies, the board shall, 
directly or indirectly through the chief executive 
officer, consult with the applicable local employees' 
professional organization." 
Case Law: Walker County Bd. of Educ. v. Walker 
County Educ. Ass'n, 431 So. 2d 948, 954 (Ala. 1983) 
"Section 16-8-10 only obligates the Board to meet and 
consult with those persons set out in the statute; it 
does not obligate the Board to reach any agreement, 
accept any proposals or negotiate any matter if it does 
not wish to do so." 
Collective Bargaining 
Rcgulat1un 11rPubllc Sector Colh.:cti,·c Bargaminr. 111 the States Wage Negotiation 
Wage negotiation not addressed 
No state statute regarding collective 
bargainin g 
Wage negotiation not addressed 
No state statute regarding collective 
bargaining 
Wage negotiation not addressed 
No state statute regarding collective 
bargaining 
Wage Negotiation Striking 
Striking is illegal 
Case Law: Cherokee County Hosp. Bd. v. 
Retail, Wholesale, & Dept. Store Union, 
.AFL-CIO, 294 Ala. 151, 153, 313 So. 2d 
514, 516 (1975) 
"Public strikes are illegal and public lockouts 
are improper , if not illegal." 
Striking is illegal 
Case Law: Cherokee County Hosp. Bd. v. 
Retail, Wholesale, & Dept. Store Union, 
.AFL-CIO, 294 Ala. 151, 153, 313 So. 2d 
514, 516 (1975) 
"Public strikes are illegal and public lockouts 
are improper, if not illegal." 
Striking is illegal 
Case Law: Cherokee County Hosp. Bd. v. 
Retail, Wholesale, & Dept. Store Union, 
.AFL-CIO, 294 Ala. 151, 153, 313 So. 2d 
514, 516 (1975) 
"Public strikes are illegal and public lockouts 
are improper, if not illegal." 
Striking 
1:! CALI FORN lA 
STATE LIBRAR Y 
FOUND[D 1850 
California Research Bureau 
')ll!l I' !:>tr.-et. Sunc-3Utl 
PO. Box '.l.J2!l37 
<;lrr~m.-nw. C A 'J.J237-IlOO 1 
('))(,) h53 -x.J.> phon<.' 
(lJ 1 6) r,5.J-5:->2'J tax 
c ;\ A California Tribal-State Gambling 
Compacts, 1999-2006 
By Charlene Wear Simmons, Ph.D. 
Assistant Director 
February 2007 
CRB 07-001 
R E s E A R c ll 13 U R E A lJ LABOR STANDARDS 
RATIFIED COMPACTS 
1999 Tribal-State Compact 
• The tribe agrees to adopt standards no less stringent than federal workplace and 
occupational health and safety standards. The state may inspect for complian ce 
unless a federal agency regularly inspects for compliance with the federal standards. 
Violations of the applicable standards are violations of the compact. 
• The tribe agrees to adopt and comply with state and federal anti-discrimination laws. 
However the tribe may provide employment preference to Native Americans. 
• The tribe may create its own workers compensation system provided there is 
specified coverage including the right to notice, an independent medical examination , 
a hearing before an independent tribunal, a means of enforcement, and benefits 
comparable to those afforded under state law. Independent contractors doing 
business with the tribe must comply with state workers' compensation laws. 
• The tribe agrees to participate in state unemployment compensation and disability 
programs for employees of the gaming facility, and consents to the jurisdiction of 
state agencies and courts charged with enforcement. 
Model Tribal Labor Relations Ordinance (Optional Addendum B) 
The 1999 tribal-state compact requires a tribe to adopt an agreement or other procedure 
acceptable to the state for addressing the organization and representational rights of Class 
III gaming employees and employees in related enterprises, or the compact is null and 
void. Attached to the compact, as "Optional Addendum B" is a Model Tribal Labor 
Relations Ordinance. Tribes with 250 or more casino-related employees are required to 
adopt an identical ordinance. (The tribal ordinances were reviewed for conformity by the 
governor 's legal affairs advisor.) 
• Under the Model Tribal Labor Relations Ordinance ("Ordinance "), employees 
have the right to engage in employee organizations, bargain collectively, and join 
in concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining. The Ordinance 
defines unfair labor practices on the part of a tribe or a union, guarantees the right 
to free speech, and provides for union access to employees for bargaining 
purposes. (Excluded employees include supervisors , employees of the tribal 
gaming commission , employees of the security or surveillance departments, cash 
operations employees or any dealer.) 
California Research Bureau, California State Library 33 Key Issues: Certification of union representation and dispute resolution 
• Upon a showing of interest by 30 percent of the applicable employees , the tribe is 
to provide the union an election eligibility list of employee names and addresses. 
A secret ballot is to follow. An elections officer chosen by the tribe is to verifY 
the authorization cards and conduct the election. If the labor organization 
receives a majority of votes, the election officer is to certifY it as the exclusive 
collective bargaining representative for the unit of employees. Decisions may be 
appealed to a tribal labor panel. 
• The Ordinance establishes procedures to address an impasse in collective 
bargaining, including the union's right to strike outside of Indian lands, and to 
decertifY a certified union. It also creates three levels of binding dispute 
resolution mechanisms, beginning with a tribal forum, followed by an arbitration 
panel, and fmally tribal court and federal court. Collective bargaining impasses 
may only proceed to the first level of binding dispute resolution, in which a 
designated tribal forum makes the decision. 
2003 Tribal-State Compacts 
The three new compacts negotiated by Governor Davis in 2003 are similar to the 1999 
tribal-state compact. They were with the Torres-Martinez Desert Cahuilla Indians, the La 
Posta Band of Mission Indians and the Santa Ysabel Band ofDieguefio Indians. 
• No apparent change from the 1999 compact's Model Tribal Labor Relations 
Ordinance . 
2004 Tribal-State Compacts 
Governor Schwarzenegger signed new compacts with three tribes (the Coyote Valley 
Band ofPomo Indians, the Fort Mojave Indian Tribe and the Lytton Rancheria). The 
Lytton compact was not ratified by the legislature; the Coyote Valley and F011 Mojave 
compacts were ratified. The governor also negotiated amended 1999 compacts with seven 
tribes, all of which were ratified. Key changes are summarized below. 
Coyote Valley Balld of Pomo Indians and Fort Mojave Indian Tribe 
• The tribes agree to adopt and comply with federal and state workplace and 
occupational health and safety standards. State inspectors may assess compliance 
unless regular inspections are made by a federal agency with the federal standards. 
Violations of the applicable standards are violations of the compact and may be the 
basis to prohibit employee entry into the gaming facility. 
• The tribes agree to participate in the state's workers' compensation program for 
employees of the gaming facility and consent to the jurisdiction of the Worker's 
Compensation Appeals Board and state courts for purposes of enforcement. The 
tribes also agree to participate in the state unemployment compensation benefits 
34 California Research Bureau, California State Library program and withhold the appropriate taxes, and consent to state agency jurisdiction 
and the jurisdiction of state courts for enforcement. 
Mode/labor relations ordinance 
The tribes agree to repeal their existing tribal labor relations ordinances and adopt the 
labor relations ordinance appended to the compact, which differs in important respects 
from the model ordinance appended to the 1999 and 2003 compacts . 
• As in the 1999 compact, a labor organization is granted access in order to organize 
eligible employees in non-work areas on non-work time. The tribe agrees to provide 
the labor organization with a list of eligible employees and their last known addresses 
upon a showing of interest from 30 percent of the employees. The tribe also agrees to 
facilitate the dissemination of information from the labor organization to eligible 
employees. 
Key Issues: union certification and dispute resolution 
• "Card check neutrality "--A new Section 7 on "tribe and union neutrality " provides 
that if a labor organization offers in writing to not engage in strikes or disparage the 
tribe, and to resolve all issues through binding dispute mechanisms, the tribe agrees to 
recognize and certify the labor organization if it provides dated and signed 
. authorization cards from at least 50 percent plus one of the eligible employees 
without a formal election. The tribe agrees to not express any opposition to that labor 
organization or preference for another labor organization . 
• If a labor organization agrees to accept the conditions specified for "tribe and union 
neutrality " in Section 7(a), the labor organization is deemed to have accepted the 
entire Ordinance and waives any right to file any form of action or proceeding with 
the National Labor Relations Board. • 
• If a labor organization has agreed in writing to accept the conditions for "tribe and 
union neutrality" specified in Section 7(a), and the union engages in a strike, boycott 
or other economic activity, the tribe may withdraw from its obligation to resolve the 
impasse through a binding dispute mechanism . If the labor organization has not 
agreed to the conditions in Section 7(a), it may engage in a strike in the event the 
impasse is not solved through binding dispute resolution mechanisms . 
• The model ordinance creates three levels of binding dispute resolution mechanisms in 
the event of an impasse: first, a designated tribal forum, and second, a Tribal Labor 
Panel composed of arbitrators. The panel is to serve all the tribes that have adopted 
this ordinance and its decisions are binding. Finally, either party may seek to compel 
• The National Labor Relations Board has asserted jurisdiction over labor relations in tribal casinos, finding 
in a 2004 Decision and Order that operating a commercial business such as a casino " ... is not an 
expression of sovereignty in the same way that runnin g a tribal court system is." The San Manuel Band of 
Mission Indians has appealed the decision to the U.S. Supreme Court. See Charlene Wear Simmons, 
Gambling in the Golden State, California Research Bureau, May 2006, pp. 76-77 for a brief discussion of 
this issue. 
California Research Bureau, California State Library 35 arbitration or confirm an arbitration award in Tribal Court, and the decision may be 
appealed to federal court. Unlike the 1999 compact, a collective bargaining impasse 
may proceed through all levels of dispute resolution , not just the first level. 
• The model ordinance specifies factors for an arbitrator to consider if collective 
bargaining negotiations result in an impasse. These include wages, hours and other 
terms and conditions of employment at other Indian gaming operations in Mendocino 
County, the cost ofliving, regional and local market conditions, the tribe's financial 
capacity (if the issues is raised by the tribe), the size and type of casino or related 
facility, and the competitive nature of the business environment. 
Rumsey Band of Wintun Indians--amended 1999 compact 
• The section on labor relations in the 1999 compact is repealed, replaced by the tribe's 
labor relations ordinance since the tribe has recognized a union as the exclusive 
collective bargaining representative for its employees and entered into a collective 
bargaining agreement. As in the Coyote Valley compact, the tribe agrees to adopt 
and comply with federal and state workplace and occupationa l health and safety 
standards. 
Buena Vista Rancheria of Me-Wuk Indians of California, Ewiiaapaayp Band of 
Kumeyaay Indians, Pauma Band of Luiseno Mission Indians of the Pauma & 
Yuima Reservation, United Auburn Community -amended 1999 compacts 
• Within 30 days of the effective date of the amendment, the tribes are to amend their 
labor relations ordinances (described in the 1999 tribal-state compact) to incorporate 
a revised tribal labor relations ordinance similar to the ordinance described in the 
Coyote Valley compact, including card check neutrality. The local labor market is to 
be considered in case of an impasse. Buena Vista and Ewiiaapaayp agree to adopt 
and comply with federal and state workplace and occupational health and safety 
standards. 
Viejas Band of Kumeyaay Indians-amended 1999 compact 
• Since the tribe entered into a collective bargaining agreement with a labor 
organization before the enactment of its tribal labor relations ordinance , and that 
agreement has since been renewed, no change in the ordinance is necessary to address 
employee rights. The tribe agrees to adopt and comply with federal and state 
workplace and occupational health and safety standards. 
Pala Band of Mission Indians-amended 1999 compact 
• The tribe has entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with a labor union 
providing for employer neutrality, arbitrator-verified authorizations that a majority of 
eligible employees have authorized the union, a no strike clause and binding 
arbitration. The tribe has recognized the union as its exclusive bargaining 
representative. For this reason, the parties agree that no change in the tribal labor 
relations ordinance is necessary. The tribe agrees to adopt and comply with federal 
and state workplace and occupational health and safety standards. 
36 CaJifomia Research Bureau, California State Library 2006 Tribal-State Compact 
The governor negotiated an amended 1999 tribal-state compact with the Quechan Tribe 
in 2005. The amended compact was ratified by the legislature in August 2006 and signed 
by the governor on September 28, 2006. 
Quechan Tribe of the Fort Yuma Indian Reservation-amended 1999 compact 
• The tribe agrees to adopt and comply with federal and state workplace and 
occupational health and safety standards and consents to the state's jurisdiction to 
inspect and enforce those standards. 
• The model labor relations ordinance is similar to that in the 1999 tribal-state compact, 
with some changes. These include deletion of the provision that tribal law, 
ordinances, customs, and traditions prevail over the model labor relations ordinance 
in the event of conflict. The provison that strike-related picketing shall not be 
conducted on Indian lands is also deleted. 
• Notably, this compact does not provide for card check neutrality . The selection of a 
collective bargaining agency is by secret ballot in an election conducted by the tribe. 
UNRATIFIED COMPACTS 
2004 Unratified Tribal-State Compact 
Lytton Rancheria of California 
• The tribe agrees to withhold earnings of persons employed at the gaming facility to 
comply with child and spousal support orders. 
• The initial provisions of the model labor relations ordinance are somewhat similar to 
those in the Coyote Valley tribal-state compact. A major difference is the lack of 
"card check neutrality. " The union is not afforded the option of presenting 
authorization cards signed by 50 percent of the eligible employees, requiring the tribe 
to enter into an agreement to certify and authorize the union as the employees ' 
bargaining agent without a secret ballot. The provisions of the 1999 tribal-state 
compact requiring a secret ballot election apply, although the tribe and the union may 
agree to a different arrangement. 
• Provisions regarding dispute resolution mechanisms and requiring binding arbitration 
are similar to those in the Coyote Valley tribal-state compact. 
2005 Unratified Tribal-State Compacts 
In 2005, Governor Schwarzenegger negotiated new tribal-state compacts with the Yurok 
Tribe of the Yurok Reservation , the Big Lagoon Rancheria and the Los Coyotes Band of 
Cahuilla and Cupefio Indians that were not ratified by the legislature. 
California Research Bureau, California State Library 37 Yurok Tribe of the Yurok Reservatio11 
• The model labor relations ordinance appended to the compact (Exhibit B) is similar to 
that in the Lytton Rancheria compact and, as in other 1999 compacts, the tribe agrees 
to adopt it. There is no provision for "card check neutrality " as in six of the 2004 
compacts. The union is not afforded the option of presenting authorization cards 
signed by 50 percent of the eligible employees, thereby requiring the tribe to enter 
into an agreement to certify and authorize the union as the employees ' collective 
bargaining agent. Instead the provisions of the 1999 compact requiring a secret ballot 
election apply, although the tribe and the union may agree to a different arrangement. 
• An employment preference for members of the tribe is not explicitly stated as in the 
previous compacts. 
Los Coyotes Band of Cahuilla a11d Cupeiio llldia11s and the Big Lagoo11 Ra11cheria 
• The tiibes agree to adopt and comply with federal and state workplace and 
occupational health and safety standards, allow inspection by state inspector s, and 
consent to the jurisdiction of state enforcemen t agencies including the Division of 
Occupational Safety and Health, the Occupational Safety and Health Standards Board 
and the Occupational Safety and Health Appeals Board, and of state comts. 
• The tribes may elect to fmance their liability for unemployment compensation 
benefits, instead of participating in the California Unemployment Fund, by any 
method specified in California Unemployment Insurance Code§ 803. 
• The tribes agree to participate in the state's workers' compensation program. 
• The tribes agree to adopt the Model Tribal Labor Relations Ordinance appended to 
the compact. This model ordinance contains a section on "Tribe and union 
neutrality " similar to that in the Coyote Valley compact. 
• Card check neutrality: If a labor organization offers in writing to not engage in 
strikes or disparage the tribe, and to resolve all issues through binding dispute 
mechanisms , the tribes agree to recognize and certify the labor organization if it 
provides dated and signed authorization cards from at least 50 percent plus one of the 
eligible employees , without a formal election. 
• Although similar in other respects to the Coyote Valley tribal-state compact, the 
appended model labor relations ordinance does not explicitly mention the union's 
right to strike, providing instead that the tribe and labor organization will negotiate in 
good faith for a collective bargaining agreement. 
2006 U11ratijied Tribal-State Compacts 
In August 2006, the governor submitted six tribal-state compacts to the legislature for 
ratification. An amended compact with the Quechan Tribe of the Fort Yuma 
Reservation, which had been negotiated in 2005, was ratified. Five newly negotiated 
amended 1999 compacts were not ratified. These were with the Morongo Band of 
Mission Indians, the Pechanga Band of Luisefio Indians, the San Manuel Band of 
38 California Research Bureau, California State Library Mission Indians, the Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians, and the Sycuan Band of the 
Kumeyaay Nation. 
Morongo Band of Mission Indians, Pechanga Band of Luise1io Indians, Agua 
Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians, San Manuel Band of Mission Indians, Sycuan 
Band of the Kumeyaay Nation-amended 1999 compacts 
• The tribes agree to comply with standards no less stringent than those in the federal 
Fair Labor Standards Act and implementing regulations. 
• The ttibes agree to participate in the state's workers' compensation program for their 
employees and to ensure that independent contractors doing business with the ttibe 
comply with state workers' compensation laws. Alternatively, the tribe may establish 
its own system of insuring gaming facility employees ' work-related injuries, with 
specified standards. 
• The Model Tribal Labor Relations Ordinance appended to the 1999 tribal-state 
compact remains in force. Notably, it does not contain the provision for card check 
neutrality found in eight of the 2004-2005 compacts (six of which have been 
ratified), or the revised dispute resolution process found in those compacts. 
California Research Bureau, California State Library 39 