Join WAT fast during June Torture Awareness Week!Campaign URLCopyTwitter 0 tweetsSubscribePast Issues RSS TranslateEnglishالعربيةAfrikaansбеларуская мовабългарскиcatalà中文（简体）中文（繁體）HrvatskiČeskyDanskeesti keelNederlandsSuomiFrançaisDeutschΕλληνικήहिन्दीMagyarGaeilgeIndonesiaíslenskaItaliano日本語ភាសាខ្មែរ한국어македонски јазикبهاس ملايوMaltiNorskPolskiPortuguêsPortuguês - PortugalRomânăРусскийEspañolKiswahiliSvenskaעבריתLietuviųlatviešuslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпскиதமிழ்ภาษาไทยTürkçeFilipinoукраї́нськаTiếng ViệtView this email in your browserGreetings, Dear Friends,The past year has been fraught with suffering and death; the pandemic has sidelined the plight of the men locked away in Guantanamo.  Since last fall, however, WAT and the Close Guantanamo Coalition have worked diligently to press the issue of Guantanamo for first candidate and then President Biden.  Now during Torture Awareness Week WAT will fast in solidarity with the Guantanamo prisoners, take actions on their behalf, and once again witness in public.This newsletter begins with an invitation to you to join the fast from your home, and then continues with 2 other June events and a couple of articles.  On the heels of the WAT fast comes the annual anti-death penalty fast and vigil at the Supreme Court from June 29 to July 2.  On June 8 there is a panel discussion including Mohamedou Slahi on what it will take to close Guantanamo.We hope you will join us during Torture Awareness Week whether you choose to fast or not.In peace and solidarity,The WAT Organizing TeamFast with us during Torture Awareness Week: June 21-26We invite you to join WAT's Torture Awareness Week Fast.  We will be fasting in our homes, in deference to the still unvanquished pandemic. Fast for a day or two, or for all five days, and meet with us on Zoom for mutual support on Monday and Wednesday evenings and Saturday morning.  Our purpose is to use our own bodies to deepen our understanding of the U.S. use of torture, especially against the Muslim men locked in Guantanamo.  If you would like to join us, please send an email to witnesstorture@gmail.com with RSVP for Fast in the subject line: you'll receive the Zoom link, a menu of actions you can take during the week, and tips on fasting safely.If you decide not to fast you can still take concrete actions to oppose torture and support torture survivors, from writing the men in Guantanamo to calling/emailing key decision-makers.  The WAT website will also list other events commemorating Torture Awareness Week.  We will be adding events  and suggestions for actions through the end of the fast so keep an eye on the website for updates.  And if you are mounting a vigil or action in your area email us and we'll post it.June 26: UN Day of Support for Victims of TortureTorture Awareness Week is the lead-up to June 26, the International UN Day of Support for Victims of Torture -- a day that WAT has traditionally observed in conjunction with the Torture Abolition and  Survivors Support Coalition.  TASSC was founded in 1998 by Sister Dianna Ortiz after she was captured and brutally tortured while teaching in the highlands of Guatemala.  Upon her return to the U.S. she fasted in front of the White House demanding information about U.S. involvement in her torture.  Tragically, this courageous woman, who not only survived kidnapping and torture but used the experience to become a voice for torture victims everywhere, died of cancer February 19 at the age  of 62.  We miss her greatly.  Dianna, Presente!In the early years of WAT we gathered in June to vigil in solidarity with torture survivors at the TASSC vigil in Lafayette Square, donning orange jump suits and protesting nonviolently.   This year WAT will hold a small vigil in Lafayette Square at 2 pm Saturday June 26.  Local activists will attend and it will be live-streamed for those of you in other places, whether at home or at your own local vigils.Starvin' for Justice: powerful anti-death penalty fast and vigilFrom June 29 to July 2, death penalty abolitionists from around the country will gather for the 28th year at the steps of the Supreme Court to call for an end to capital punishment in the United States.  In addition to the strong public witness, this is an excellent opportunity to meet other abolitionists and to "recharge your batteries" while engaging in public outreach and maintaining a physical presence at the Court. The witness is powerful and profound.Can an Oscar-Nominated Film, a New President and the Courts Close Guantanamo?On Tuesday June 8 at noon the Quincy Institute will host a discussion on how the Biden administration can close Guantanamo and bring an end to indefinite military detentions and the War on Terror’s erosion of the rule of law.  The panel includes former Guantanamo prisoner Mohamedou Ould Slahi, Senior Counsel for the Senate Judiciary Committee Rita Siemion and ACLU National Security Project Director Hina Shamsi.If the war in Afghanistan is really over, experts say 28 men in Guantanamo must be releasedIn a May 31, 2021 article in The Nation, military experts argue that according to a Supreme Court decision, "continued detention of individuals who fought against the United States in Afghanistan is authorized 'if the record establishes that United States troops are still involved in active combat in Afghanistan.'"   With the withdrawal of United States troops from active combat in Afghanistan, that authorization is now ending, and the 28 men at Guantánamo not charged criminally as terrorists but detained only as combatants in the military hostilities in Afghanistan should be allowed to return home."The government can't seem to bury the tortureAccording to David Luban in Just Security,  at the Guantanamo Military Commissions proceedings "It can hardly be exaggerated how much of the years-long pretrial scuffling is about torture – whether its details can be discovered or remain buried, and what the government can do to interfere with defense efforts to bring those details to light."Donate to support our workPlease consider a donation to help fund our annual Fast for Justice this January.  We are completely volunteer driven and run. We have no paid staff; all of the money you donate goes to funding the work we do together.  Click here to donate.Who we areWitness Against Torture formed in 2005 when 25 Americans went to Guantánamo Bay and attempted to visit the detention facility. They began to organize more broadly to shut down Guantánamo, end indefinite detention and torture and call out Islamophobia. During our demonstrations, we lift up the words of the detainees themselves, bringing them to public spaces they are not permitted to access. Witness Against Torture will carry on in its activities until torture is decisively ended, its victims are fully acknowledged, Guantánamo and similar facilities are closed, and those who ordered and committed torture are held to account.www.witnessagainsttorture.comCopyright © 2021 Witness Against Torture, All rights reserved.Want to change how you receive these emails?You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.