1
2019 ANNUAL REPORT
Chief Clara Soaring Hawk
Deer Clan Chief 
Ramapough Lenape Nation
Photo by Vlad Archin.2© 2019 CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS   
666 BROADWAY FL 7
NEW YORK, NY 10012  
212.614.6448         
ccrjustice.org
Follow the Center for Constitutional Rights on social media: Center for Constitutional Rights on 
Facebook, @theCCR on Twitter, and ccrjustice on Instagram.OPPRESSIVE STATE POWER                       STRUCTURAL RACISM
SHAPES & MARKS
Our shapes and marks are an 
extension of the brush stroke 
in our logo and they play a 
signiﬁcant role in our brand 
identity. Please reference our 
brand guide to see rules for 
their use and examples for how 
they can be used in context.
Shapes should most frequently 
be used in combination with 
headline treatments that use 
our display font, Timmons NY. 
The shapes:
·  Can also be used to create 
   framing devices.
·  Should be used in smart 
    ways to convey meaning—
    not decoratively (e.g. as 
    a pattern).
·  Can be used individually or 
    in groups.
·  Can be used instead of 
    photography. 
·  Should be scaled 
   proportionally. Brushmarks 
   can be scaled 
   unproportionally to be 
   made slightly thicker 
   or thinner.
Drawing new shapes and 
marks should be limited. If the 
need arises, be sure that new 
shapes maintain consistency 
in their line widths and 
proportions.
SHAPES & MARKS
Our shapes and marks are an 
extension of the brush stroke 
in our logo and they play a 
signiﬁcant role in our brand 
identity. Please reference our 
brand guide to see rules for 
their use and examples for how 
they can be used in context.
Shapes should most frequently 
be used in combination with 
headline treatments that use 
our display font, Timmons NY. 
The shapes:
·  Can also be used to create 
   framing devices.
·  Should be used in smart 
    ways to convey meaning—
    not decoratively (e.g. as 
    a pattern).
·  Can be used individually or 
    in groups.
·  Can be used instead of 
    photography. 
·  Should be scaled 
   proportionally. Brushmarks 
   can be scaled 
   unproportionally to be 
   made slightly thicker 
   or thinner.
Drawing new shapes and 
marks should be limited. If the 
need arises, be sure that new 
shapes maintain consistency 
in their line widths and 
proportions.
SHAPES & MARKS
Our shapes and marks are an 
extension of the brush stroke 
in our logo and they play a 
signiﬁcant role in our brand 
identity. Please reference our 
brand guide to see rules for 
their use and examples for how 
they can be used in context.
Shapes should most frequently 
be used in combination with 
headline treatments that use 
our display font, Timmons NY. 
The shapes:
·  Can also be used to create 
   framing devices.
·  Should be used in smart 
    ways to convey meaning—
    not decoratively (e.g. as 
    a pattern).
·  Can be used individually or 
    in groups.
·  Can be used instead of 
    photography. 
·  Should be scaled 
   proportionally. Brushmarks 
   can be scaled 
   unproportionally to be 
   made slightly thicker 
   or thinner.
Drawing new shapes and 
marks should be limited. If the 
need arises, be sure that new 
shapes maintain consistency 
in their line widths and 
proportions.
SHAPES & MARKS
Our shapes and marks are an 
extension of the brush stroke 
in our logo and they play a 
signiﬁcant role in our brand 
identity. Please reference our 
brand guide to see rules for 
their use and examples for how 
they can be used in context.
Shapes should most frequently 
be used in combination with 
headline treatments that use 
our display font, Timmons NY. 
The shapes:
·  Can also be used to create 
   framing devices.
·  Should be used in smart 
    ways to convey meaning—
    not decoratively (e.g. as 
    a pattern).
·  Can be used individually or 
    in groups.
·  Can be used instead of 
    photography. 
·  Should be scaled 
   proportionally. Brushmarks 
   can be scaled 
   unproportionally to be 
   made slightly thicker 
   or thinner.
Drawing new shapes and 
marks should be limited. If the 
need arises, be sure that new 
shapes maintain consistency 
in their line widths and 
proportions.
PATRIARCHY                              STRUCTURAL ECONOMIC INJUSTICE
TAGLINE
Our tagline complements our 
name and logo. It’s a brief, 
evocative, and memorable 
phrase that boldly declares 
who we are and what we stand 
for. The tagline explicitly 
communicates our relentless 
commitment to achieve justice 
and serves as a call to action 
that inspires people to stand 
up and join our ﬁght against 
oppression. 
When reproducing our tagline 
in our signature headline 
typeface, Timmons NY, use 
these vector graphics—never 
type it out youself. The tagline 
should always appear in our 
primary palette—so in red, 
black, or white typography.
Two orientations of the tagline 
have been saved as individual 
ﬁles in a variety of diﬀerent 
formats and colors, but more 
orientations can be made 
using the vector art provided 
here.
The tagline can also be typeset 
in GT Pressura, in sentence 
case, in a variety of weights. In 
these instances it may be 
typed out with live text.
VISION
The Center for Constitutional Rights fights for a world 
without oppression—where people use their power to achieve 
justice and guarantee the rights of all. 
MISSION
The Center for Constitutional Rights stands with social justice 
movements and communities under threat—fusing litigation, 
advocacy, and narrative shifting to dismantle systems of 
oppression regardless of the risk.1TABLE OF CONTENTS
Here’s what you did in 2018 and 2019!  T ogether, we are a force for justice!
MESSAGE FROM THE BOARD CHAIR
MESSAGE FROM THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
ASSOCIATE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SPOTLIGHT
MESSAGE FROM THE LEGAL & ADVOCACY DIRECTORS
STRUCTURAL RACISM: Dismantling White Supremacy
PATRIARCHY : Fighting Gender Oppression
OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES: Combating Abusive Corporate Power
ABUSIVE STATE POWER: Challenging Unjust Government Policies
NEW VISION FOR ADVOCACY
THE CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS IN THE NEWS
BUILDING THE NEXT GENERATION OF MOVEMENT LAWYERS
Bertha Justice Fellowship Program / Ella Baker Internship Program
CASE INDEX
CHANGEMAKERS RECEPTION
CHANGE IS GOOD CELEBRATION
A SPLENDID BODY OF TIGERISH PEOPLE RECEPTION
FINANCIAL REPORT
WELCOME TO OUR NEW BOARD MEMBER
BOARD, STAFF, ELLA BAKERS, INTERNS, VOLUNTEERS
ATTRIBUTIONS
WAYS TO SUPPORT THE CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS2
3
4
5
6
11
16
21
32
34
35
38
45
46
47
48
49
50
52
532Now, more than ever, we need the creative, 
radical, movement-focused vision of the Center for 
Constitutional Rights. As each day seems to bring 
new, previously unthinkable horrors, the Center for 
Constitutional Rights’ amazing staff is stepping up to 
defend the rights and freedoms of the most vulnerable 
communities impacted by the rise of white supremacy 
and nationalism, fascism, racism, transphobia, and 
other hateful ideologies. Your steadfast partnership 
and unyielding commitment to social justice makes 
our work possible; our accomplishments are your 
accomplishments. 
When the Trump administration fabricated illegal new 
rules to bar asylum seekers from entering the U.S., the 
Center for Constitutional Rights sued and won. When 
Fordham University refused to recognize a chapter of 
Students for Justice in Palestine because it would be 
“polarizing, ” the Center for Constitutional Rights sued 
the university and won. When the T ownship of Mahwah, 
New Jersey used zoning laws to prevent members of the 
Ramapough Lenape Nation from using their ancestral 
land, the Center for Constitutional Rights sued the 
town and won.
Even more, part of what makes this organization 
so unique is that our work takes place outside the 
courtroom as well, supporting our movement partners 
with critical messaging, behind-the-scenes support, 
and educational/advocacy campaigns. The Center for 
Constitutional Rights played a key role in the coalition 
that worked to have the NYPD fire the police officer 
who killed Eric Garner, with the understanding that 
this was just the start, not the end of the campaign to 
gain justice for Black and Brown people terrorized 
by the NYPD. Executive Director Vince Warren went 
on MSNBC voicing opposition to a much-hailed plan to label domestic mass shootings a form of domestic 
terrorism, since strengthening the state’s surveillance 
powers only empowers the state and threatens the 
safety of the public: “The horrible El Paso and Dayton 
shootings should not lead Congress to expand domestic 
terrorism laws. If we want to limit mass shootings, 
tighten gun laws. If we want to end white supremacy, 
start with the presidency. ” And we created a new Open 
Records Project to train and assist movement advocates 
in gaining access to critical public documents that can 
expose government wrongdoing.
Now more than ever, we thank you for your support 
of our team of fierce, unrelenting, and passionate 
advocates. Thank you to all of our new and longtime 
individual and institutional partners. Special heartfelt 
thanks to those who have made gifts to the Michael 
Ratner Campaign for the Next Generation, as well 
as those who are among our Justice Sustainers and 
members of our Thelma Newman Planned Giving 
Society.  Thank you to my fellow board members and to 
the staff at the Center for Constitutional Rights.
Peace,
Chair, Board of Trustees
MESSAGE FROM THE BOARD CHAIR
KATHERINE FRANKE
3
today, as you’ll see in the pages of this report. That’s 
because, like you, we recognize that the dark history of 
the United States rapidly becomes our future when we 
are not vigilant, and that fighting for the future we want 
means vociferously rejecting the present we have.
When historians turn to this ugly, desperate moment 
in history and write about those who, with integrity, 
resistance, and action, thwarted the global renaissance 
of white supremacy, YOU will be a big part of that story. 
When future students ask who ended the Muslim 
Ban, fought for LGBTQIA liberation, helped desperate 
migrants receive asylum at the southern U.S. border, 
prevailed against police control of Black communities, 
supported Native organizers protecting their land, 
advocated for marginalized communities internationally, 
and held corporations accountable for human rights 
abuses, the answer will be the Center for Constitutional 
Rights and supporters like you. The fight for justice has 
become harder for sure. However, the good news is 
that the Center for Constitutional Rights has become 
stronger      __ because of you.
I hope you enjoy this annual report; take pride in the 
miraculous work we’ve been able to do together and 
come away even more energized to build the future with 
integrity, resistance, and action! Neither the work in 
this report nor the future we want to build together is 
possible without your generosity and your unwavering 
belief that Justice T akes a Fight . On behalf our staff, 
board, myself, and, most of all, our clients, thank you for 
being on the frontlines with us! 
Vince Warren
This summer, The New York Times  published a major work 
observing the 400th anniversary of the arrival to this land 
of kidnapped Africans who were enslaved. The series of 
essays examined our history since 1619 and chronicled 
how every part of our society has been touched by 
American slavery. One powerful piece posited that 
because of this, Black people in America were not merely 
passive beneficiaries of eventual American democracy, 
rather they were key to forming it, challenging the 
nation’s legally-sanctioned cruelty with their integrity, 
resistance, and action. However, beneath this important 
view of the “peculiar institution” of slavery lies another, 
older one that demonstrates that the institution was 
not peculiar in the least. Prior to 1619, colonial settlers 
enslaved thousands of Native people as their lands were 
stolen, and the evidence indicates that enslaved Native 
people were sold in exchange for enslaved African 
people starting that year. They too fought back with their 
integrity, resistance, and action.
Although the methods of resistance of Native and 
African people might have varied widely, what they 
were fighting did not. Whereas many Black people 
were kidnapped, relocated, and forced into servitude by 
companies with the support and encouragement of the 
government, many Native people had their lands stolen, 
were kidnapped, relocated, and forced into servitude by 
the government with the support and encouragement 
of companies. At play in both experiences are three 
essential drivers: the amalgamated corporate and state 
power necessary to deprive people of their basic rights; 
the white supremacist mythology casting Black and 
Brown people as terrorists, combatants, and criminals; 
and, of course, the sanction of the law.
These are among the fundamental elements that are 
baked into the very concept of America and which, half a 
century after our founding, remain the sharp focus of the 
work the Center for Constitutional Rights undertakes MESSAGE FROM THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
VINCE WARREN4service fellowship named named for Arthur and another 
Center for Constitutional Rights founder, Morton 
Stavis. After a judicial clerkship, she went on to the 
Advancement Project, a partner organization and fierce 
movement lawyering shop in its own right, where she 
was co-program director and senior attorney of their 
Power & Democracy Program based in Washington, 
D.C., and represented the North Carolina NAACP in the 
landmark North Carolina “monster” voter suppression 
case, NC NAACP v. McCrory.   
She has now brought her wealth of vision, leadership, 
and experience back to the source —the organization 
that Arthur and Morty founded—to help us sharpen our 
transformative tools. “The Center for Constitutional 
Rights’ historical commitment to social justice and 
building power aligns perfectly with my years of work 
challenging systemic barriers and power structures that 
disenfranchise and oppress communities of color, ” said 
Donita. “I look forward to leading implementation of the 
organization’s strategic vision and goals while ensuring 
we are effectively assessing and responding to emerging 
issues and trends. ” 
A key hallmark of the Center for Constitutional Rights’ 
strategy to win is not just moving to the cutting edge of 
today’s justice problems, but also to moving all of us—
our staff, movement partners, and supporters like you  
—there together with all the tools, strategy, resources, 
skill, and power necessary for making our world a more 
just place.  We are grateful that Donita has chosen to 
lead and build with us in this crucial phase of the fight.
The Center for Constitutional Rights was thrilled to 
welcome Donita Judge as its new Associate Executive 
Director this year. Through her leadership, she is enabling 
the organization to increase its impact through greater 
innovation, strategic alignment, and learning. During 
the course of the year, she has already helped the 
organization live the same values on the inside that 
it promotes and fights for on the outside, enhancing 
transparency, accountability, and shared, visionary 
leadership throughout the organization. Donita is 
a nationally renowned voting rights expert whose  
strategic skills are greatly respected by colleagues in 
the legal, advocacy, and communications fields, and by 
people on the ground with whom she has worked across 
the country.
However, Donita’s path to the Center for Constitutional 
Rights has been, in many ways, returning to the source 
of her inspiration. She attended Rutgers University 
School of Law—Newark, where founder Arthur Kinoy 
taught Constitutional Law. Donita wasn’t the typical law 
student. After a successful career with United Airlines, 
she was one of those special students that went to law 
school, as former Center for Constitutional Rights Legal 
Director Professor Bill Quigley has said, “not just to 
learn about laws that help people but also with a hope 
that they might learn to use new tools to transform and 
restructure the world and its law to make our world a 
more just place. ” 
Learning those tools while a law student, she was awarded 
the Kinoy-Stavis Fellowship, the school’s premier public  ASSOCIATE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
DONITA JUDGE5As it must have for you, for many of us at the Center 
for Constitutional Rights, this year has felt like forever. 
Trump’s relentless attacks on vulnerable communities, his 
conspiracy to promote a white nationalist agenda – and 
violence – inside and outside the government, and the drip-
by-endless-drip dismantling of elementary democratic 
norms can be exhausting. At the same time, at the Center 
for Constitutional Rights we feel privileged to stand with 
so many courageous, visionary, and tireless activists who 
are on the front lines – at the border, in the streets, in our 
vast prison system – protecting migrants, families, and 
other communities under threat from this harrowing lurch 
toward fascism. Indeed, with every act of resistance, in the 
courts, the legislature, or the streets, we draw strength and 
greater resilience – and a faith that this moment actually 
provides us a profound opportunity not just to resist, but 
to imagine. With ugliness and evil laid bare before us, we 
must work to build an irresistible, alternative vision.  
Our biggest institutional commitment in the Trump era 
has been to protect the rights of immigrants and refugees. 
We have filed three major lawsuits to stop the Trump 
administration’s attempted dismantling of the asylum 
system, reunited two parents with their toddlers following 
a harrowing kidnapping and torturous forced separation 
initiated by Immigration and Customs Enforcement, and 
sued to protect activists from harassment and surveillance 
by Department of Homeland Security and FBI officials. 
Trump’s immigration policy is certainly an effort to advance 
a white nativist agenda, but its attack on the asylum system 
represents an unprecedented rejection of the post-World 
War II human rights consensus – one centered around 
an understanding that countries are bound to assist 
vulnerable individuals, such as refugees, simply because 
of their status as human beings entitled to rights and 
recognition. This vision of international human rights and 
collective responsibility is under threat, and we seek to 
resist Trump’s attacks on it, and, with our partners and 
clients, promote that soaring vision in the most compelling 
way we can.  Another new emphasis for our team has been in 
pursuit of environmental justice in the once-pristine 
Atchafalaya Basin area of Louisiana, in an inimitable 
Center for Constitutional Rights way – by supporting 
our movement partners fighting on the ground, and by 
foregrounding the way in which climate injustice most 
impacts poor, Black, and Native communities. With 
activists who are fighting for their families and their lives, 
we challenged the state licensing of a pipeline security 
company suspected of surveilling and harassing anti-
pipeline activists, litigated open records requests showing 
the intertwined government-corporate interests in 
Louisiana pipeline development, challenged the pipeline 
company’s expropriation of private land, and sued to block 
enforcement of a gas-industry generated law targeting 
activists who lawfully protest around pipeline grounds. 
The relationships we built in the Atchafalaya region, led us 
to new partnerships with terrific Black environmental justice 
activists in the Death Alley region of Louisiana, who want 
to end industrial destruction and be able to live healthy, 
fulfilling lives in their communities. 
With the addition of dynamic new staff, we have also 
increased our focus on gender and LGBTQIA justice, 
working to stop the continued displacement of trans 
persons from basic economic opportunities; to end 
criminalization of sex work, which disproportionately 
impacts trans people of color; and to ensure adequate 
health and mental health care for trans prisoners. We 
know that when we center—and fight for— the safety, lives, 
and visions of those most vulnerable, we all become free.  
In Gratitude and Solidarity,
Baher Azmy
Legal Director
MESSAGE FROM THE
LEGAL DIRECTOR
BAHER AZMY
ADVOCACY DIRECTOR
NADIA BEN-YOUSSEFNadia Ben-Youssef
Advocacy DirectorBaher Azmy
Legal Director
Nadia Ben-Youssef
Advocacy Director6
STRUCTURAL RACISM
Dismantling White Supremacy
“ Any long-term, sustainable 
change will require that 
we start to not only change 
laws and policies, but divert 
resources away from these 
symptoms that harm us, and 
build up the infrastructure of 
our communities to actually 
hold ourselves … as long as 
we continue to feed the beast 
of mass incarceration and 
mass criminalization, our 
communities will not be safer 
and they will not thrive in 
meaningful ways. ” 
—Marbre Stahly-Butts,  
    Law4BlackLivesDuring the press conference to announce the filing of our case Black Love Resists in the Rust v. 
City of Buffalo, which challenges racially discriminatory and economically exploitative traffic 
checkpoints.7 STRUCTURAL RACISM
Dismantling White Supremacy
COMBATING SETTLER COLONIALISM AND DISPOSSESSION  
For generations, the Ramapough Lenape Nation  has congregated on a parcel of land in Mahwah, New Jersey 
– a sacred site used as a place of worship and reflection. In October 2016, when a proposed fossil fuel pipeline 
threatened the Ramapough’s use as well as the safety of the land and water supply, they formed the Split Rock 
Sweetwater Prayer Site on the property. Allies of their environmental stewardship joined in peaceful assemblies at 
the site in solidarity with the Ramapough’s opposition to the pipeline. 
These meetings angered the neighboring Hunt & Polo Club Homeowner’s Association, an enclave of expensive 
homes, which mounted an aggressive campaign of harassment against the Ramapough, pressuring the T ownship of 
Mahwah to levy aggressive fines of thousands of dollars per day for “unauthorized structures” like a prayer circle 
and stone altar. The Hunt & Polo Club insisted that even two Ramapough persons simply praying on their own land, 
in the open air, violated the T ownship’s zoning law. By April 2019,  the potential fines against the Ramapough 
amounted to over $4 million . Law enforcement arbitrarily arrested tribal members on trumped-up charges, the land 
was vandalized, and the Ramapough heard gunshots outside their homes. The Homeowner’s Association and the 
T ownship would have liked for the Ramapough to surrender their valuable property. 
“The Constitutional guarantee of religious liberty ensures that a hostile and discriminatory municipality cannot 
simply issue hundreds of minor zoning infractions in order to prevent the Ramapough from the religious use of their 
ancestral land, no matter how much Mahwah and the Polo Club would like to see them gone, ” said Rachel Meeropol, 
senior staff attorney at the Center for Constitutional Rights. “Racism cannot be dressed up in a municipal code. ” The Center for Constitutional Rights has always fought against society’s deeply seated structural racism. We 
know that to effectively dismantle white supremacy, we must address the roots of settler colonialism and the 
legacies of ethnic cleansing, enslavement, and racial violence. We shine a light on the policies and practices that 
brazenly discriminate against people of color, and advocate for a world of historical justice and equity. 
Thank you for sharing in our mission and making our work possible.The Ramapough Lenape Nation. Photo by Vlad Archin.8 STRUCTURAL RACISM
Dismantling White Supremacy
In Ramapough Mountain Indians Inc. v. T ownship of Mahwah, Ramapo 
Hunt & Polo Club , the Center for Constitutional Rights is standing 
with our client to expose the racial and religious persecution they are 
suffering from the conjoined interest of the Homeowner’s Association 
and the T ownship. Along with co-counsel, we sued the T ownship and 
the Hunt & Polo Club in federal court, asserting the Ramapough’s right 
to religious freedom and free assembly and alleging a conspiracy to 
deny the Ramapough equal protection under the law. On June 28, the 
Ramapough Lenape Nation reached a settlement with the T ownship, 
which agreed to dismiss all the pending fines and recognized the 
Ramapough’s right to gather on their land for religious purposes. 
We will continue pursuing our federal lawsuit against the Hunt and 
Polo Club for its religiously-discriminatory harassment. Hyperlocal 
reporters from Patch.com, local journalists from The Star-Ledger , and 
national media such as MSN.com saw the value in sharing this story. 
FIGHTING FOR HUMAN RIGHTS: 
ENDING INDEFINITE SOLITARY CONFINEMENT
 
After years of extremely intensive litigation, in 2015 the Center for 
Constitutional Rights reached a landmark, broad-ranging settlement 
with the State of California that effectively ended the state’s 
inhumane and abusive policy of indefinite solitary confinement. 
Although the settlement of Ashker v. Governor of California   
succeeded in its main goal of releasing nearly every person who 
had been held in long-term solitary confinement, the California 
Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR) then sent 
many of these men to “Level IV prisons, ” where conditions were 
similar to those they experienced in solitary confinement – little to 
no out-of-cell time and minimal programing or job opportunities. In 
July 2018, we won a motion arguing that this placement violates the 
settlement agreement. That same month The Nation  highlighted the 
Ashker  case as part of an in-depth feature published in conjunction with the fifth anniversary of the prisoner hunger 
strikes that led to our involvement in the issue. The article also highlighted that, despite the historic settlement, lead 
plaintiff T odd Ashker was back in isolation after only “13 months of being able to see the sky and talk face to face with 
other human beings. ” 
We sought an extension of the settlement agreement, seeking to maintain the court’s jurisdiction over CDCR. In 
January, the court held that that CDCR was continuing to violate the constitutional rights of Ashker  class members 
by repeatedly relying on unreliable and even fabricated confidential information to send them back to solitary 
confinement. The court also found CDCR is using constitutionally flawed gang validations to deny people in prison a 
fair opportunity for parole. CDCR has appealed both of these victories to the court of appeals. Our seven-year fight 
for justice continues, as does our reliance on media outlets and blogs, including The Nation, Solitary Watch  and The San 
Francisco Bay View , to shed light on the abhorrent conditions our clients suffer.“With horrifying dismay, I find 
myself again having to come 
forward to defend my people, 
the Ramapough Lenape — the 
original people of this land. 
We are once again confronted 
by systemic racism, wrapped 
in the old Jim Crow mantra 
of ‘we treat them just like 
anyone else. ’”
- Chief Dwaine Perry, 
Ramapough Lenape Indian 
Nation
9 STRUCTURAL RACISM
Dismantling White Supremacy
EXPOSING THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY’S “RACE PAPER”: 
THE CRIMINALIZATION OF BLACK ACTIVISTS
The Center for Constitutional Rights filed a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) lawsuit in partnership with Color of 
Change, revealing that in early 2017, intelligence analysts at the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) were at 
work on an internal, secret threat assessment they referred to as the “Race Paper. ” The FOIA case, Color of Change 
v. Department of Homeland Security and Federal Bureau of Investigation , uncovered the “Race Paper, ” but also 
emails, field reports, and other documents that confirm that local and federal law enforcement – operating under 
a crude intelligence framework that broadly casts Black activists as extremists and potentially violent—have been 
collaborating to monitor activists, social media organizing, and lawful, First Amendment-protected protest activity. 
The “Race Paper”  was produced in completely redacted form—not a single word in the document was visible. The 
court denied our motion to remove redactions from the “Race Paper” because it found, after its own review of the 
contents, that the document was a draft and therefore entitled to certain exemptions to the FOIA statute.  
We continue to work on this issue, and the Center for Constitutional Rights was invited to speak at a July 2018 
congressional briefing entitled “Extreme Surveillance. ” Interest in the “Race Paper” has since grown on Capitol Hill: 
Rep. Donald Payne (D-NJ) publicly questioned DHS Deputy Under Secretary Brian Murphy about the contents of 
the “Race Paper” at a House Homeland Security Hearing on Domestic T errorism.  And on June 4, 2019, during a 
House “Confronting White Supremacy” hearing, Rep. Ayana Pressley (D-MA) publicly questioned Michael McGarrity, 
the director of the FBI’s Counterterrorism Division, about the “Race Paper” and the inflammatory—and invented— 
“Black Identity Extremist” designation. Our communications team also briefed numerous outlets about the 
disclosure of the existence of the “Race Paper, ” which led to coverage in The Intercept  and  ShadowProof .
POLICING THE POLICE: 
DISMANTLING RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN LAW ENFORCEMENT
 
In our ongoing class action lawsuit Furlow v. Belmar , the Center for Constitutional Rights, in conjunction with Arch 
City Defenders of St. Louis, is fighting racist and oppressive law-enforcement practices in the St. Louis area. For 
too long, St. Louis County has operated a system of “wanteds” — a statewide electronic notice to law enforcement 
officers that designates an individual for summary arrest and imprisonment for up to 24 hours — which clearly 
violate an individual’s right to due process and to be free from unlawful arrest. Since the practice began, the county 
has issued over two million “wanteds, ” leading to the unconstitutional arrests of a disproportionate number of 
poor and Black residents . 
In January, the St. Louis Post-Dispatch  featured our client Dwayne Furlow in a story on the department’s practice of 
warrantless wanted arrests and highlighted how the case spurred change: following the election of a new prosecutor, 
St. Louis County police officers can no longer enter people as wanted in cases of misdemeanors and municipal 
ordinance violations. 10 STRUCTURAL RACISM
Dismantling White Supremacy
The Center for Constitutional Rights continues to doggedly 
pursue implementing the reforms ordered by the court in 
the landmark federal class action lawsuit Floyd v. City of New 
Y ork , which successfully challenged the New York Police 
Department’s widespread practice of racial profiling and 
unconstitutional stops and frisks . Our work is as urgent as ever: 
the federal monitor’s January 2019 report found that more than 
one out of every three stops recorded by NYPD officers in the 
first quarter of 2018 lacked reasonable suspicion and that officers 
didn’t record over 50 percent of the stops they conducted. 
On June 26, 2019, the Office of the Inspector General for the 
NYPD (OIG) — an independent body that conducts investigations 
of and reports on NYPD practices—released a scathing report 
showing that, of the more than 2,600 racial profiling complaints 
lodged against the NYPD by the public since 2014, the NYPD’s 
internal investigations reached the unthinkable conclusion that not one of them could be substantiated. OIG 
recommended that the Civilian Complaint Review Board take over investigation of these complaints — a move that 
we fully support, along with federal oversight of the department’s practices and policies. Despite these ongoing 
discriminatory and unconstitutional practices within the NYPD, we continue the hard work toward systematic 
reforms. For example, the NYPD patrol officers are still undergoing training in the new stop-and-frisk procedures 
using materials that we helped develop and that we monitor to ensure that they are being used accurately and 
effectively. There is also interest from reporters in keeping this story in the news. Because of New York Magazine, 
Politico  and the ABA Law Journal , we can continue to hold the NYPD accountable in the court of public opinion.
We are also actively advocating for improved policing and more stringent accountability. This past year, the Center 
for Constitutional Rights testified in two separate hearings before the Public Safety Committee of the New York 
City Council — one regarding the NYPD’s obstruction of justice for civilian complaints and another to underscore 
the changes the NYPD must implement to be an accountable, transparent, and nondiscriminatory department, 
consistent with the requirements of the remedial order in Floyd . 
 
“The NYPD’s systemic lack of discipline and accountability for misconduct must end, and we urge the 
department to take concrete steps towards holding its officers accountable when they violate peoples’ 
rights and for improving systems as necessary. ” — Advocacy Program Manager Nahal Zamani
Additionally, we have advocated for passage of the Safer NY Act , a suite of bills in the New York State Legislature 
to increase police transparency and help increase accountability in New Yorkers’ most common encounters with 
police. The Safer NY Act includes provisions to reduce unnecessary arrests for low-level, ticketable offenses, legalize 
marijuana while ensuring the reinvestment of resources in communities most harmed by prohibition, and repeal the 
NYS police secrecy law (Civil Rights Law 50-a) . Further, together with the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational 
Fund, we advocated to the New York State Legislature for repeal of Civil Rights Law 50-a, which shrouds crucial 
information about an officer’s past misconduct and discipline from the public and thus undermines public trust in law 
enforcement. 
11PATRIARCHY
Fighting Gender Oppression
“I am a feminist, and what that 
means to me is much the same 
as the meaning of the fact that 
I am Black; it means that I must 
undertake to love myself and 
to respect myself as though my 
very life depends upon self-love 
and self-respect. ”
June Jordan,  Civil Wars12The Center for Constitutional Rights has long worked together with courageous clients and dynamic social 
movements to uproot the systems of heteropatriarchy, violence, sexism, bias, privilege, and oppression 
that perpetuate the marginalization of women and LGBTQIA people across the globe. This year, we have 
recommitted to centering the voices and vision of the transgender community.  
We are so grateful for your belief in and commitment to a world of gender justice where all people can live and thrive. 
FIGHTING FOR TRANSGENDER 
RIGHTS: DISMANTLING 
THE DISCRIMINATION-TO-
INCARCERATION PIPELINE
R.G. & G.R. Harris Funeral Homes v. Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission and 
Aimee Stephens  is a landmark case before 
the U.S. Supreme Court that asks whether 
the Civil Rights Act of 1964 guarantees 
transgender people the right to live and work 
free from prejudice. In July 2019, we filed 
an amicus brief in support of plaintiff Aimee 
Stephens, a funeral home director from 
Michigan who was fired from her job because 
of anti-transgender bias. Our brief, filed on 
behalf of 46 organizations that advocate for 
LGBTQIA rights, elevated the voices of more 
than 30 transgender employees who, like Ms. 
Stephens, have lost jobs, been passed over for 
promotions, and faced routine harassment 
due to virulent discrimination. 
In January 2019, we filed a brief in Reiyn 
Keohane v. Florida Department of Corrections  
urging the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit to uphold the right of transgender people to access gender-
related healthcare in prison and express themselves without punishment or fear. Our brief elevates the voices and 
experiences of the transgender population behind bars, including noted activist Ashley Diamond , who experienced 
physical and mental anguish after being denied medically-necessary healthcare. By doing so, the Center for 
Constitutional Rights continues its long history of advocating for the civil and human rights of incarcerated people 
and opposing the bigoted and inhumane operation of our system of mass incarceration.
PATRIARCHY
Fighting Gender Oppression
Employers said that my gender
expression was ‘vile,’ ‘disgusting,’
and ‘annoying.’ I was called an
‘abomination,’ and a ‘man in a 
dress.’ I was told I ‘shouldn’t be
walking like a girl.’ I was told 
they did not want ‘the kind of 
attention’ I would bring to their
company. They told me they
couldn’t have ‘my kind’ in a place 
of business.
—Miss Major, transgender 
rights activist13Staff Profile
CHINYERE 
EZIE 
Last December, Chinyere Ezie was walking from the 
subway to her office at the Center for Constitutional 
Rights when she passed by the storefront of luxury 
brand Prada and was confronted with trinkets that 
bore an unmistakable resemblance to blackface. 
When she reached the office, she was shaking with 
anger and voiced her horror to her colleagues, all of 
whom were quick to support her. They offered to 
make protest signs and urged her to raise her voice – 
and she did. Loudly. Within days, her social media post 
had been shared thousands of times, the media picked 
up the story, and Prada removed all the items.
“I love how nimble we are at the Center for 
Constitutional Rights, ” says Chinyere, who joined the 
staff in October. 
“There is an ethos of support among all my colleagues, 
who are ready, at any moment to advocate. ” 
Chinyere is currently working to disrupt the 
discrimination-to-incarceration pipeline that has 
pushed transgender people to the margins of society. 
In 2019, she filed an amicus brief in R.G. & G.R. Harris 
Funeral Homes v. Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission and Aimee Stephens  signed by 46 
organizations that gave voice to dozens of transgender 
people whose experiences with workplace 
discrimination forced them into underground 
economies like sex work. Chinyere has also lent 
support to coalitions fighting the criminalization and 
policing of LGBTQIA people nationwide. Chinyere will 
continue amplifying LGBTQIA voices and disrupting 
systems of oppression in the coming year as her 
caseload expands.
FIGHTING ARCHAIC 
SEX STATUTES THAT 
PREDOMINANTL Y PUNISH 
POOR PEOPLE OF COLOR 
In its 2003 landmark decision in Lawrence v. 
Texas , the United States Supreme Court held 
that state statutes criminalizing oral or anal 
sex with no element of force, exploitation 
of minors, or commercial exchange, are 
unconstitutional, stating that the mere 
existence of sodomy laws “is an invitation to 
subject homosexual persons to discrimination 
both in the public and the private spheres. ” 
Yet, 16 years later, Mississippi still has an 
“Unnatural Intercourse” statute on the books 
which it is still enforcing by requiring people 
with Unnatural Intercourse convictions to 
register as sex offenders. Doe v. Hood , filed 
on behalf of several Mississippi residents, 
argues that this statute and its corresponding 
registration requirement are unconstitutional.
After several years of effort, Mississippi 
agreed to remove from its sex offender 
registry four plaintiffs and 25 others who had 
out-of-state convictions under the Louisiana 
Crimes Against Nature by Solicitation statute, 
whose registration requirements we had 
succeeded in striking down in an earlier 
case, Doe v. Jindal . Doe v. Hood  continues 
in the name of just one remaining plaintiff, 
“Arthur Doe, ” who the state still insists must 
register because of a guilty plea to unnatural 
intercourse in Mississippi from 1978 — 17 
years before the enactment of Mississippi’s 
sex offender registration requirements.
In October 2018, the district court issued 
an order stating that Mississippi’s statute 
“appears to be unconstitutional” and that Doe 
“should not be subject to the stigmatizing 
requirements” imposed by the registration, 
signaling agreement with our interpretation 
of the law. Nevertheless, the court questioned 
whether as a technical matter, Doe needed to 
first attempt to undo his conviction in state 
court prior to seeking relief in federal court. 
In May 2019, the court stayed the case until 
Arthur Doe can file a motion in state court 
seeking to vacate or expunge his conviction. 
The filing and outcome of that motion is 
pending. 
1314
“ All transgender people, and especially transgender people of color, know that discrimination is real and 
it is dangerous: it fuels poverty, homelessness, and mass incarceration. ” 
— Center for Constitutional Rights’ staff attorney Chinyere EziePATRIARCHY
Fighting Gender Oppression
FIGHTING FOR TRANSGENDER RIGHTS: 
ENDING CRIMINALIZATION & PROFILING
In 2019, the Center for Constitutional Rights joined a 
coalition of groups to fight the criminalization and profiling 
of LGBTQIA and immigrant communities in New York State. 
We urged New York State legislators to repeal an archaic 
anti-loitering statute often termed the “walking while trans 
ban”  because it is used by law enforcement almost exclusively 
to harass transgender people of color. We also took a stand 
when Layleen Polanco Xtravaganza , a young transgender 
woman with a seizure disorder who was arrested on a 
misdemeanor offense, died at Rikers Island because she was 
unable to make bail. Additionally, we pushed legislators to pass 
a bill to provide expanded criminal record relief to trafficking 
survivors, allowing them to overcome barriers to housing, 
employment, social services, and adjustments to immigration 
status, including visas and citizenship. Although our fight 
to end the marginalization, criminalization, and police harassment of LGBTQIA people in New York State remains 
ongoing, we are proud of the support and momentum we generated this year.
ENDING VIOLENCE AGAINST MOTHERS OF COLOR
Across the country, health care and medical professionals are engaging in the cruel and harmful practice of 
disproportionately reporting expectant and new mothers of color for child maltreatment investigations, intensive 
state surveillance and control, and forced family separation — all of which lead to devastating consequences for 
the mother and the child. Medical care providers are exercising enormous and reckless discretion — influenced by 
stigma, stereotypes, racism and classism — in assessing whether newborns are at risk. Further, there is little evidence 
that medical providers engage in harm reduction strategies, such as: obtaining informed consent from patients 
before fishing for evidence against them; warning the patient of the impending report to the foster system and its 
L to R: Staff Attorney Chinyere 
Ezie, Simpson Thacher Partner 
Jennifer Hobbs, activist and 
Emmy-nominated actress 
Laverne Cox talk about 
LGBTQIA rights and the 
importance of allyship at 
Simpson Thacher’s 6th Annual 
Citywide Diversity Reception 
in July, 2019.15PATRIARCHY
Fighting Gender Oppression
consequences; or protesting the prosecution 
of their patients and the taking of newborns 
from their mother.
In June 2019, the Center for Constitutional 
Rights joined the Movement for Family Power, 
National Advocates for Pregnant Women, and 
other organizations in preparing a submission 
to the United Nations Special Rapporteur 
on Violence Against Women taking a critical 
international look at this issue and larger 
concerns within the United States foster care 
system. The right to retain care and custody of 
one’s children is one of the most fundamental 
human rights.  
The Center for Constitutional Rights charges 
that the United States foster care systems 
make “interventions” under the guise of 
“protecting children from their parents, ” but 
are often basing these decisions to intervene 
on a racist, colonial, and classist ideology that 
view poor parents and parents of color as 
inherently less fit to parent and more in need 
of government supervision to care for their 
children. Medical professionals consistently 
demonstrate their collusion in this practice by 
violating the rights of their patients of color 
who are expecting or parenting newborns, 
particularly in three major instances: 
when patients contest or refuse medical 
interventions; when patients experience 
prenatal or postpartum depression; and when 
patients are suspected of using drugs while 
pregnant.   
On this latter instance, the Center for Constitutional Rights demanded accountability for the pernicious practice of 
disproportionate drug testing of Black women in New York City hospitals. In April 2019, we testified at the Hearing 
on the Impact of Marijuana Policies on Child Welfare  before the City Council Committees on Hospitals and General 
Welfare. Our testimony exposed the discriminatory targeting of drug testing for new mothers and their newborns; 
the traumatic impacts of Administration for Child Services’ investigations and removals on the basis of mere 
marijuana usage among mothers of color; and the disconnect between this dangerous practice and the national call 
to legalize marijuana. We are advocating for a world where institutions cease punishing parents for being poor, Black, 
Latinx, or Indigenous, and all families are able to thrive. 
16
“Business knows no pity, and cares for justice only when justice is 
seen to be better policy. If it had power to control the elements, 
it would grasp in its iron clutches the waters, sunshine and air 
and resell them by measure, and at exorbitant prices to the 
millions of famished men, women and children. ”
W.A. Duncan, in the Cherokee Advocate , 1892OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC 
STRUCTURES
Combating Abusive Corporate Power
March Against Death Alley, which 
took place May 31 —June 3, 2019 
between New Orleans and Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana.17OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES
Combating Abusive 
Corporate Power
The Center for Constitutional Rights exposes and combats corporate abuses domestically and abroad. 
These cases and campaigns seek to overturn an economic model that prioritizes profits over people and 
the environment, and drives militarism and war. With your partnership, we seek to hold corporations 
accountable for human rights violations, restrict corporate influence over government decision-making, 
and fight back against the criminalization of those who defend our climate and communities and speak out 
against war-profiteering. 
With your support, we fight against inhumane and illegal practices, plundering of the environment, and the 
criminalization of those who defend our communities. 
 
NO IMPUNITY FOR TORTURE
“Even now I still think about it. I have nightmares where I’m falling into a hole, where I have a bag over my head. 
It never really left me. ”   —Plaintiff Salah Al-Ejaili
In Al Shimari v. CACI Premier T echnology, Inc. , we seek accountability from a for-profit corporation, hired by the 
U.S. government to provide interrogation services in the notorious Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq, for directing and 
participating in a conspiracy to torture in 2003-04. In 2018, the district court affirmed that there was sufficient 
evidence to support our clients’ claims of torture, war crimes, and cruel and degrading treatment, allowing our 
case to proceed. As we prepared for an April trial date, CACI continued its efforts to have the case dismissed, 
without success. CACI had also sought to bring in the U.S. government as a third-party defendant in an attempt 
to shift liability from itself to the federal 
government. However, in late March, Judge 
Leonie Brinkema found that neither CACI nor 
the U.S. could claim immunity for violations 
of internationally prohibited conduct like 
torture and war crimes, and dismissed the 
government from the case.  CACI immediately 
lodged an appeal, which prompted the district 
court to suspend the trial date, putting on hold 
the plaintiffs’ decade-long effort to have their 
day in court. In July, our Legal Director Baher 
Azmy argued in a special session of the Fourth 
Circuit Court of Appeals why the appeal should 
be dismissed. As we await the court’s decision, we 
are keeping our plaintiffs’ case in the public eye: 
we featured the case on our podcast, “The Activist 
Files, ” and a story featuring plaintiff Salah Al-Ejaili 
ran in The Independent . 
Second from left: Salah Al Ejaili, one of the plaintiffs in Al Shimari v. CACI Premier 
T echnology, Inc. with his family and Senior Staff Attorney Katie Gallagher in May, 
201918ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE: 
PROTECTING DISSENT AGAINST CORPORATE DESTRUCTION 
OF THE ENVIRONMENT
 
In Louisiana, Black and Indigenous communities have endured a long and painful history at the hands of the 
petrochemical industry, which has devastated their health, livelihood, land, and environment. Recently, Energy 
Transfer, the company that built, owns, and operates the Dakota Access Pipeline in North Dakota, joined with Phillips 
66 and Sunoco to form Bayou Bridge Pipeline, LLC (BBP) and constructed a 162-mile pipeline through 11 parishes 
in Louisiana and 700 waterways. The Center for Constitutional Rights stands with local faith leaders, fishermen, 
conservationists, and advocates for environmental and social justice, including those who strongly opposed this new 
pipeline. 
 
White Hat v. Landry:  On August 1, 2018, the Louisiana legislature enacted a new bill that dramatically 
increased the penalties faced by protestors engaging in civil disobedience in and around pipelines and 
pipeline construction sites. Since the protests at Standing Rock opposing the Dakota Access Pipeline were 
disbanded in February 2017,  more than 60 bills that heighten the risk and criminal penalties of dissent 
have been introduced across 30 states; 14 times in 2019 alone . Many of these bills seek to criminalize 
free speech activity as “riots” and activists as “terrorists. ” The Louisiana bill adds pipelines to the definition 
of “critical infrastructure” – a ridiculous designation as the state is host to a vast network of pipelines on 
both public and private property that could be invisible and virtually anywhere. Anyone could be trespassing 
without knowledge. On May 22, the Center for Constitutional Rights filed White Hat v. Landry,  arguing 
that the new law is unconstitutionally vague and overly broad and targets speech and expression opposing 
pipelines. We are representing three individuals charged with felonies, landowners, and environmental 
and racial justice organizations impacted by the new law. The story was quickly picked up by local, national, 
mainstream, and progressive media outlets, including Politico, U.S. News & World Report, The Intercept, and 
Truthout .  
Sheriff’s Pipeline Records:  In 2016, St. Charles 
Sheriff and then-president of the National Sheriffs 
Association Greg Champagne traveled to North 
Dakota to observe the law enforcement response 
to protests against the Dakota Access Pipeline. 
He also sent sheriff’s office employees there to 
support the production of a pro-law enforcement 
video series—to the tune of $36,000 of taxpayers’ 
dollars. Suspecting prejudicial connections between 
the Sheriff’s Office and companies involved in the 
proposed BBP , we sought records related to the 
sheriff’s travel and communications. In December 
2018, the appeals court ordered the sheriff to 
produce receipts related to his employees’ travel to 
North Dakota and search cameras for video footage 
taken during their time there. 
 
Constitutional Challenge:  We filed a constitutional 
challenge on behalf of three holdout landowners of 
properties in the Atchafalaya Basin who refused to 
bow down to an eminent domain land grab by BBP , 
OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES
Combating Abusive 
Corporate Power
—19claiming that BBP’s expropriation of these owners’ land violates their rights to property and due process 
under the U.S. and Louisiana constitutions. The landowners also sued BBP for violating their property rights 
and trespassing, because the company began construction on their property without the legal right to do 
so. The challenge refutes the company’s claim that the pipeline is in the public interest — the underlying 
basis for invoking eminent domain. Although the judge ruled that the company committed trespass, he 
unfortunately still allowed it to exercise eminent domain over the property and awarded the clients a pitiful 
$150 in damages for the expropriated land and trespass. Our clients are appealing.
DEMANDING ACCOUNTABILITY
We intensified public scrutiny on these corporate abusers by supporting the Coalition Against Death Alley in its March 
for Justice, when activists delivered their demands to the Louisiana governor’s office. Our advocacy team is also 
working with international allies to build pressure for accountability of other petrochemical companies operating with 
impunity in Death Alley. 
We continue to defeat frivolous lawsuits by Energy Transfer, the corporation behind the Dakota Access Pipeline . 
Attempting to silence critics of the pipeline, Energy Transfer hired President Trump’s longtime law firm, Kasowitz 
Benson T orres LLP , to, bizarrely, sue Earth First! – which is not an organization or entity of any sort, but rather a 
philosophy of environmental activism based on biocentrism, 
direct action, and not compromising with Earth-destroying 
corporations. The lawsuit nonetheless claimed that Earth First! 
funded a violent terrorist presence at the Standing Rock protests 
and was part of a sprawling conspiracy to deceive the public 
about the environmental risks of pipelines. In 2018, soon after 
we successfully secured dismissal of the claims against Earth 
First!, Energy Transfer added several individual defendants. One 
of them is Krystal Two Bulls , an Oglala Lakota and Northern 
Cheyenne organizer Energy Transfer claims was a media 
coordinator for the Red Warrior Camp at Standing Rock. We 
took on her defense and won, getting all claims against Ms. Two 
Bulls dismissed and exposing Energy Transfer as a corporate bully 
abusing the U.S. legal system to deter concerned citizens from 
engaging in free speech.  
“The only goal of these laws is to silence Indigenous people and every American 
community that stands up for the rights of our Mother Earth, her land, her water and all 
her creatures and plants who have no voice in these so-called halls of justice but which 
we, as human beings, depend upon entirely for our existence. ”
— Ann White Hat, Water Protector from L ’eau Est La Vie Camp/ PlaintiffOPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES
Combating Abusive 
Corporate Power
Center for Constitutional Rights client Krystal Two Bulls. 
Photo by Erika Larson20
INTERNATIONAL ADVOCACY TO 
END CORPORATE CAPTURE 
Our U.S.-based and international partners are working 
together at the United Nations to address corporate 
control of our systems of governance and the lack 
of accountability that communities endure when 
corporations violate their human rights. Specifically, the 
Center for Constitutional Rights is working in coalition 
with groups from all regions of the world to include a 
provision in the future treaty that would restrict the 
ability of corporations to influence government laws 
and policies to favor profit-making at the expense of 
human rights. If successful, this treaty will be the first 
international human rights law to contain an expressed 
provision of this kind and will be an important 
requirement for states to protect their citizens from 
corporate control of their systems of governance. 
Our international work recognizes the global scope of 
corporate control and the necessity for a coordinated 
effort by people around the world to take back our 
means of self-government. The Women of Cancer Alley is a first-ever collection of 
short films made by Black women who live adjacent to 
chemical plants, tank farms, and refineries along an 80-
mile stretch of the Mississippi River in southern Louisiana. 
The area has been known as “Cancer Alley” and “Death 
Alley” because of the overwhelming, intergenerational 
burden of illness and death caused by toxic industry 
pollution. Over 180 petrochemical plants exist among the 
historic and predominantly Black communities, where in 
some places, the risk of cancer from polluted air is 800 times the national a verage. The short films depict the lives, 
fears, and activism of eight Black women – Liz Gordon, Ariel Williams, Iris Carter, Cheryl Adams, Shamelle Lavigne, 
Sharon Lavigne, Lydia Gerard, and Eve Butler. The Center for Constitutional Rights featured the project in our 
Freedom Flicks film series and highlighted the voices and visions of two of these brave women, Lydia Gerard and 
Sharon Lavigne, on our podcast, “The Activist Files. ”
OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES
Combating Abusive 
Corporate Power21
ABUSIVE STATE POWER
Challenging Unjust Government Policies
“We come to the 
U.S. from countries 
with histories of 
political repression 
but we thought our 
freedom of speech 
would be protected 
as we stood up to 
defend our rights. ”
Client from Center 
for Constitutional 
Rights’ case Migrant 
Justice v. Nielson22STANDING WITH AND FIGHTING FOR IMMIGRANTS:
DISMANTLING THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION’S SHAMEFUL 
CAMPAIGN AGAINST ASYLUM SEEKERS AND IMMIGRANTS
 
After the horrors of World War II, the U.S. committed to abide by the emergent 
international law requirement to give people the opportunity to seek safe haven 
in our country as they fled from persecution and violence in their home countries. 
T oday, the Trump administration is in the process of systematically undoing 
these commitments, violating U.S. and international law by enforcing inhumane, 
retaliatory practices against already vulnerable asylum seekers and immigrants—
at our Southern border and within the U.S. interior. The Center for Constitutional Rights is fighting against this 
barbaric war on immigrants  by exposing and opposing the Trump administration’s unlawful and immoral policies 
and practices. Working with our partners in the immigrant rights movement, this year we filed four of the leading 
lawsuits challenging the Trump administration’s attack on the asylum system and immigrant rights activists.
 In November 2018, the Center for Constitutional Rights joined forces with the American Civil Liberties Union 
(ACLU) and Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) to file East Bay Sanctuary v. Trump , a federal lawsuit challenging 
the administration’s sudden and unilateral bar on asylum eligibility to those who cross the Southern border without 
authorization.  For over half a century, the U.S. has recognized the right of asylum for individuals fleeing persecution 
in their home country regardless of their manner of entry. But on November 8, 2018, the Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS) and the Department of Justice (DOJ) issued a rule barring those who enter the U.S. “without 
inspection” -- that is, without going through the formal process at ports of entry—from seeking asylum. The next 
day, Trump issued a presidential proclamation suspending asylum grants to all those who cross the Southern border 
outside of ports of entry, despite the fact that, as our work in Al Otro Lado v. McAleenan  (see p. 23) has shown, even 
at ports of entry border patrol officers have almost entirely ceased allowing migrants to present their cases for 
asylum . The East Bay  lawsuit dealt a major blow to the administration’s efforts to formally block Latinx and other 
migrants at the Southern border: we won a preliminary injunction from a federal judge in Northern California that 
halted the asylum ban, and then defeated the government’s attempt to obtain an emergency suspension of the ruling 
in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit and the Supreme Court. 
  “Nearly every day it seems there is a new policy announced or effort uncovered 
aimed solely at making life for asylum seekers and immigrants in general unbearable. ”
— Erika Pinheiro, Al Otro Lado Director of Litigation and PolicyABUSIVE STATE POWER
Challenging Unjust 
Government Policies
From our earliest work 50 years ago, standing with the freedom fighters of the Civil Rights 
Movement, to our work today with communities under threat in the U.S. and abroad, the Center for 
Constitutional Rights has cultivated a relentless body of visionaries, lawyers, activists, and donors 
who fight back against abuses of power by government officials and institutions. We understand 
that unjust government policies have deep historical roots, and, as we challenge abusive 
immigration practices or mass surveillance, we also work to dismantle the ideologies that threaten 
the lives of those the state has deemed “criminal. ” We “catch courage” from our clients and envision 
a just society where power is redistributed to those at the margins. 
Thank you for standing with us, and for believing in the world we want to build.
23Staff Profile
ANGELO GUISADO 
Angelo Guisado grew up in Miami — his father a recently arrived refugee 
on the Mariel boatlift, his mother a former volunteer and supporter of the 
Black Panthers. Social justice “was instilled in me at such an early age that 
it was almost reflexive . . . it’s always been something I’ve cared about. ” He 
traces the moment his activism sparked to the Jena Six incidents in 2006. 
Six Black teenagers in Jena, Louisiana were arrested, harassed, and abused 
after Black students protested the hanging of nooses outside their high 
school. At the time, he was a junior in college, studying philosophy, and the switch flipped: he joined the clarion 
call to action and has remained actively committed to social activism ever since.
As a paralegal, he worked on police abuse and anti-discrimination cases. In law school, he participated in the 
federal litigation clinic, representing the most vulnerable and unpopular clients, including a prisoner being 
denied medical care. After law school, he clerked for the late Damon J. Keith, a judge on the U.S. Court of 
Appeals for the Sixth Circuit and legend of the Civil Rights Movement. He honed his litigation chops at Paul 
Weiss, where he also took on multiple pro bono cases that touched on asylum, clemency, special education 
discrimination, and family separation. 
Since joining the Center for Constitutional Rights as a staff attorney in March 2017, Angelo has tirelessly 
traveled to the U.S.-Mexico border, fighting for asylum-seekers, and throughout the states fighting against 
discriminatory policing and anti-immigration policies. One of his most rewarding moments to date has been 
helping a Central American client travel through Mexico, across the border, and safely into the U.S. to serve as 
a plaintiff in Al Otro Lado v. Nielsen , a lawsuit challenging the Trump administration’s unlawful and cruel turn-
backs of asylum seekers along the U.S.-Mexico border. 
Of the Center for Constitutional Rights, Angelo says, “It is just a really rad place to work. As near-ideal as it gets 
. . . I never knew a place of work could be so diverse in every sense of the word. This is where I belong. ”
Only several months later, the Trump administration issued a new asylum ban rule (Asylum Ban 2.0), barring asylum 
for anyone who transited through a third country if they failed to seek protection there before applying for asylum at 
the U.S.-Mexico border. This policy would effectively ban any non-Mexican asylum seeker at the Southern border, 
including refugees fleeing horrific violence in the Northern Triangle countries in Central America as well as migrants 
from Africa and South America. In July, we again teamed up with the ACLU and SPLC in East Bay Sanctuary v. Barr 
and obtained yet another injunction, blocking this cruel, racist, and radical revision of our asylum laws. The ruling 
made national news and was covered by media outlets ranging from T he Philadelphia Inquirer, MSNBC and Democracy 
Now!  to all of the major broadcast stations.
Even before Trump initiated his asylum bans, DHS had a widespread and ongoing practice of turning asylum seekers 
away from official ports of entry at the Southern border. Many Mexican, Central American, and African migrants 
who have waited for months in border towns for their “turn” to apply have become desperate enough to cross the 
border without inspection.  And, as we discovered over the past year through our class action lawsuit Al Otro Lado 
v. McAleenan , brought with a powerful grassroots border rights group and several individual plaintiffs, these illegal 
DHS practices are directly attributable to Trump’s high-level officials ordering CBP officials to restrict the entry of 
asylum seekers and make them wait weeks or months in dangerous Mexican border towns based on a false claim of a 24lack of capacity to process them. T o quote CBP officers, “We have orders not 
to let anybody in. ”
As the denials have grown in number, the conditions in Mexican border areas 
have grown more dangerous, with migrants facing continued threats from 
gangs and kidnappers as they wait to be processed by CBP . Along with our 
partners the American Immigration Council and SPLC, we have named and 
attempted to shame high-level officials for their flagrant disregard of domestic 
and international law. In July 2019, a federal district judge in California 
rejected most of the government’s second attempt to dismiss the case, allowing 
our constitutional claims under the Due Process Clause and our international 
law claims under the Alien T ort Statute to proceed.
However, even as our class action case proceeds, the government has been 
taking retaliatory action against migrants and advocates. Recently, CBP 
detained and questioned Al Otro Lado staff lawyers who were attempting to cross the border to assist clients 
stranded in Mexico. The government has also placed alerts on Al Otro Lado staff’s U.S. passports and revoked travel 
documents without explanation. 
Even within the U.S., the Center for Constitutional Rights 
is exposing an alarming pattern of sustained government 
harassment and retaliation against immigrants and 
immigrant rights advocates. In a case filed in November 
2018, Migrant Justice v. Nielsen , we represent a 
Vermont-based grassroots organizing group fighting for 
economic justice, labor, and human rights. Along with 
three of its members and leaders, Migrant Justice is suing 
the Department of Homeland Security, Immigration 
and Customs Enforcement (ICE), and the Vermont 
Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) for engaging 
in a years-long, systemic campaign of surveillance, 
harassment, arrest, and detention of nearly a dozen of 
its members in violation of the First Amendment. T o 
conduct this harassment campaign, ICE has relied on assistance from the Vermont DMV, which provided personal 
and sensitive information about Migrant Justice members as part of its discriminatory practices against Vermont’s 
Latinx community. ICE’s arrests and detention of activists are part of a disturbing national trend: since 2016, ICE has 
arrested twenty high-profile immigrant rights’ leaders around the country and has targeted countless others.  The 
Guardian, The Intercept, Democracy Now!  and local radio stations, including WAMC, covered the filing of our lawsuit, 
amplifying the voices of the many Migrant Justice members targeted by ICE.
On April 19, we filed a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request on behalf of the humanitarian organization 
No More Deaths  seeking information regarding Border Patrol’s role in responding to requests for emergency 
assistance along the U.S.-Mexico border, particularly its interference with — and even sabotage of — humanitarian 
efforts in an area infamous for its high migrant death toll. Between 1998 and 2015, more than 6,500 migrants died 
on the U.S. side of the border, mostly from environmental heat exposure and drowning in the Rio Grande. Many 
more individuals remain uncounted. The JURIST, an online, real-time legal news and research service, featured our 
request, underscoring its importance and the dire circumstances of migrants at the U.S. border. 
ABUSIVE STATE POWER
Challenging Unjust 
Government Policies
25ABUSIVE STATE POWER
Challenging Unjust 
Government Policies
THE FIGHT TO KEEP FAMILIES TOGETHER
Family separations, retaliation, harassment, and unrelenting prejudice are now the hallmarks of the Trump 
administration’s immigration policies. At our borders, within the U.S. and across the world, migrants are increasingly 
threatened. The Center for Constitutional Rights is committed to ending these appalling and unconstitutional 
attacks on migrants and activists and to demanding justice. In the last year, we have worked with communities and 
social movement partners to challenge this type of government abuse. Whether standing with Yemeni families 
separated by the Muslim Ban, or demanding the reunification of a Honduran father and his toddler who were torn 
apart by ICE, our lawyers and advocates are committed to securing the rights of all to move, to belong, and to 
maintain family unity .
CHALLENGING THE CRUEL AND ABSURD MUSLIM BAN  
An ongoing war in Yemen has spawned a massive humanitarian crisis. Three-quarters of the population now requires 
assistance amidst widespread famine, a cholera epidemic, and the internal displacement of over two million people. 
Due to the war, the U.S. closed its embassy in Yemen in 2015 and began scheduling visa interviews at consulates 
in other countries. Thousands of Yemeni visa applicants began travelling to nearby Djibouti to interview for visas. 
Many had already faced serious delays and had been waiting years for visas. As a result, they were still in Djibouti 
awaiting interviews or visa approvals when Trump cruelly implemented the Muslim Ban . Many remain stranded 
there today, and others have made the difficult choice of returning to Yemen, a war zone, because they could no 
longer afford to remain in Djibouti. In December 2018, the Center for Constitutional Rights filed Alobahy v. Trump , 
a lawsuit on behalf of three Yemeni-American clients whose immediate family members were stranded in Yemen and 
Djibouti. Each of their family members had received a notice of their visa approval, but once the third iteration of 
the Muslim Ban went into effect, they all received denials. However, on the ban’s own terms, it cannot be applied to 
revoke already issued visas. Through this case, we shined a light on the Muslim Ban’s devastating human impact, and 
succeeded in providing relief to some of the families. We are delighted to share that within weeks of the filing, all of 
the visas were issued, and our clients’ family members arrived in the United States in January, reuniting in Brooklyn. 
The outcome in Alobahy was likely facilitated by the high-profile coverage we obtained of our clients’ situations, 
including in The New York Times . Additionally, our team appeared with two of the clients — and a four-year-old 
daughter — on the December 26 episode of Democracy Now!
PROTECTING ASYLUM SEEKERS AND THEIR FAMILIES
Last fall, we won two important family separation cases, bringing to light the trauma caused by Trump’s immigration 
policies.
In the first case, Mr. C. and his then 19-month-old son, D.J.C.V., fled Honduras under the threat of death and 
arrived at the U.S.-Mexico border at the end of April 2018, where they sought asylum. Detained in the notorious 
“hieleras” or “iceboxes, ” Mr. C. was found to have a reasonable fear of persecution, rendering him eligible to seek 
relief in immigration courts. But, after two days, ICE forcibly took the small toddler from his father, claiming that a 
misdemeanor arrest years before his son was born precluded Mr. C. from caring for his child. Mr. C. was detained 
in detention facilities and unable to communicate with his child,  who was detained elsewhere for five months. In 
partnership with Mr. C’s asylum lawyer, we filed D.J.C. V . v. U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) , arguing 
that the government had violated Mr. C. ’s and his son’s rights to family integrity, and making the novel claim that 
the prolonged separation of parent and child in pursuit of deterrence and punitive ends met the statutory and 26ABUSIVE STATE POWER
Challenging Unjust 
Government Policies
STORY OF MOHAMMED ALOBAHY
Mohammed Alobahy came to the U.S. at the age of 16, “full 
of hopes and dreams, ” he said. “Those dreams included 
going to college and becoming an engineer, starting a 
family, and living a respectable and honorable life that 
I couldn’t have in Yemen. ” Mohammed became a U.S. 
citizen, graduated from college, and became a structural 
engineer, but Trump’s Muslim Ban turned his dreams into a 
nightmare.
 In January 2016, Mohammed returned to Yemen to marry 
his childhood sweetheart, Amal. He then returned to the 
U.S. to petition for his wife’s visa so she could join him 
there. In November 2017, Amal made the arduous trip from Yemen to Djibouti for her visa interview. At the end of 
her interview, the consular officer informed her that her visa was approved and she could pick up her passport with 
the visa shortly. Over the phone, Mohammed and Amal celebrated their impending reunification, and he and his 
mother bought a wedding dress for Amal in anticipation of their second wedding reception once she arrived. But, in 
March, when Amal arrived at the U.S. Embassy to pick up her passport, she received a letter stating that her visa was 
now “provisionally revoked. ” In the months that Amal had been waiting, Trump’s Muslim Ban had gone into effect, 
scattering loved ones and separating families. T o support Amal, who was stranded in Djibouti, Mohammed uprooted 
his life and moved into his parents’ home so that he could send $2,000 a month to cover his wife’s expenses abroad. 
He had not seen Amal in almost two years.
“The question that breaks my heart and shatters my dreams, scaring my 
hopes, and swapping my smile with a tear and a frown is when my wife asks 
me ‘Mohammed, will we ever meet?’”
In January 2019, Amal and Mohammed reunited, due to our lawsuit challenging the denial of their visas. They held a 
large celebration of their marriage and victory in Brooklyn with friends, family, and their community just days after 
she landed in the U.S.
Our strategy of drawing public attention to individual families impacted by the Ban has continued to prompt the 
government to grant waivers that enable families to reunite — further confirming the arbitrary nature of the ban 
and the absurdity of the administration’s purported security rationale. We continue to partner with members of the 
Yemeni-American community and are working with members of Congress to highlight the stories of the Yemenis 
stranded in Djibouti and advocate for individual cases, as well as for intervention to obtain broader, systemic 
change. Comedian Samantha Bee featured seven Yemenis that our team worked with on the April 10 edition of 
her show “Full Frontal with Samantha Bee, ” and The Washington Post  then featured their stories. We leveraged the 
national spotlight to request waivers for the families. Since the episode aired, all of the family members have been 
granted waivers and reunited with their loved ones in the U.S. Additionally, soon after NPR ran a story on June 26 
about another of our clients who had been separated from her husband and four children for more than a year, she 
received a waiver and will be reunited with her family.
27ABUSIVE STATE POWER
Challenging Unjust 
Government Policies
international definition of torture. After Mr. C. was released on bond, 
we sought a temporary restraining order to free his son, who had 
turned two while detained. At the hearing the judge ordered the 
immediate release of Mr. C. ’s son, calling the government’s practice 
of separating families “the most cruel of all cruelties. ” Within hours, 
father and son were reunited.
In the second reunification case, Ms. Q. and her then three-year-old 
son, J., fled extreme violence and gang persecution in El Salvador 
and sought asylum in the U.S. Shortly after arriving,  they were 
held in a crowded cell without bedding, adequate clothing, or 
sanitary supplies . After J. became ill, vomiting on his clothing and 
with diarrhea, detention officers refused to provide him a change of 
clothes or medical attention. Pressured to sign voluntary departure 
papers in untranslated English, Ms. Q. refused, and immigration 
agents removed J. from her the next day, detaining her in T exas and 
her son in Chicago. During the eight months he was held, J.  began to show signs of extreme trauma. Ms. Q. was 
deemed ineligible for asylum based on an unsupported warrant in El Salvador claiming gang affiliation. Even after an 
immigration judge found that the Salvadoran warrant provided no evidence of dangerousness, ICE used it to insist 
that Ms. Q. and J. could not even be detained together, much less released. On October 24, in partnership with the 
National Immigrant Justice Center and Ms. Q. ’s private lawyers, we filed Ms. Q. v. U.S. Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement , making the same arguments we did in Mr. C. ’s case. At the hearing, U.S. District Judge Paul L. Friedman 
ordered the mother and son reunited within three days , even if they remained detained. In a surprising course-
correction, ICE released Ms. Q. from custody, and she and her son were joyfully reunited. 
ENDING ISLAMOPHOBIA AND DISCRIMINATORY PROFILING 
STANDING WITH PEOPLE IN PRISONS 
For decades, the Center for Constitutional Rights has stood in solidarity with people in prison fighting against cruel 
treatment. We believe that prisons are a harsh means of social control that have devastated communities of color in 
the U.S. and marginalized communities around the world. While we regularly challenge conditions of confinement 
and the existence of military prisons like Guantánamo, we are committed to imagining and building a world entirely 
without prisons.
DEFENDING GUANTÁNAMO PRISONERS AND TORTURE SURVIVORS 
 As part of the Bush administration’s so-called “War on T error” — the military prison at Guantánamo Bay is one 
of the most shameful examples of human rights violations and unconstitutional practices perpetrated by the U.S. 
government. For nearly two decades, the Center for Constitutional Rights has fought for justice for prisoners. We 
have brought suits against the government on behalf of numerous individual detainees, including a mass Habeas  filing 
for 11 prisoners, many of whom have been held for 16 years without charge or trial, and submitted filings on behalf 
of clients in foreign courts investigating U.S. torture and, more recently, to the International Criminal Court in The 
Hague . We work closely with NGO allies and grassroots partners to keep the spotlight on our clients, to connect 
with activists and organizations that continue the fight to close t he prison, and to continue our call for action and 
28ABUSIVE STATE POWER
Challenging Unjust 
Government Policies
accountability within government. Our advocacy team organized events and actions around the 17th anniversary 
of the prison’s opening in January, where we welcomed new voices into our coalition and briefed Congressional 
staffers and allies on the current state of the prison. We continue to convey our outrage at the government’s position 
regarding boundless and inhumane detention. These key cases crystallize the battles we are fighting on behalf of 
victims of torture at the hands of U.S. agencies and successive administrations.
AL HAJJ V . TRUMP  ON DEATH BY INCARCERATION AT GUANTÁNAMO
Our client Sharqawi Al Hajj, a 45 year-old man from Yemen, has been detained without charge since 2002, including 
for over two years in CIA sites before his transfer to Guantánamo. T oday he is gravely ill , the cumulative effects of 
years of torture, desperate protests through hunger strikes, and the cruelty of indefinite detention itself. He has been 
repeatedly hospitalized in Guantánamo , and this year his mental health in particular took a serious downturn, while 
the government continues to maintain that he is in good health. His continued detention is senseless and tragic, and 
may very well mean a death sentence.  
 
STRENGTHENING INTERNATIONAL MECHANISMS OF ACCOUNTABILITY:
INVESTIGATING WAR CRIMES AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY AT THE INTERNATIONAL 
CRIMINAL COURT 
As part of our long-running effort to hold Bush administration officials 
accountable for their role in implementing a global torture program, in 2018 
we filed “victims’ representations” on behalf of our clients Sharqawi Al Hajj  
(see above) and Guled Duran  at the International Criminal Court (ICC) 
in support of its proposed investigation of crimes against humanity and 
war crimes by the T aliban, Afghan forces, and members of the U.S. armed 
forces and the CIA. In April 2019, the ICC issued an unprecedented and 
dangerous decision denying the prosecutor’s request for an investigation, 
stating that the investigation would not serve “the interests of justice” . The 
decision came on the heels of a campaign against the ICC by the Trump 
administration, led by National Security Advisor John Bolton, that included 
threats of sanctions, limits to the court’s access to U.S. bank accounts, and a 
visa denial for the ICC Prosecutor. In response, we filed an appeal with the 
ICC Appeals Chamber, which remains pending, and we will be undertaking 
advocacy in New York and The Hague to ensure that the ICC is positioned to 
meet its obligations to provide equal access to justice for all. We also filed a complaint to the United Nations Special 
Rapporteur on the Independence of Judge and Lawyers, calling for an investigation into U.S. interference with 
proceedings at the ICC. 
We will fight the government’s attempts to suppress information on torture practices  and will seize every 
opportunity to put those who bear the greatest responsibility for systematic violations on trial. We are also prepared 
to mount new defenses should the Trump administration attempt to repopulate Guantánamo and will continue 
our work at the ICC to hold Bush administration officials accountable for their role in the torture of detainees at 
Guantánamo, Afghanistan, and secret “black sites” around the globe.
29ABUSIVE STATE POWER
Challenging Unjust 
Government Policies
STANDING WITH PALESTINIANS AND THE MOVEMENT 
FOR FREEDOM AND DIGNITY 
The Center for Constitutional Rights is proud to be fighting together with our Palestinian partners for freedom, 
justice, and dignity. For decades, we have challenged U.S. complicity in Israeli human rights violations, while 
supporting activists, academics, and organizations facing legal and other attacks for their advocacy on behalf of 
Palestinian rights. This year, we pushed back against the Israeli government’s illegal settlement enterprise through 
innovative litigation against Airbnb and won a landmark victory for student activists to continue promoting 
Palestinian rights. Our lawyers and advocates are working in U.S. courts and internationally to shift discourse and 
policy on Palestine towards liberation.
CHALLENGING THE ILLEGAL ISRAELI GOVERNMENT’S SETTLEMENT ENTERPRISE
In the current age of “people-to-people” tourism, Israeli settlers are renting out unlawfully seized properties — 
properties owned by Palestinians that Palestinians are prevented from accessing — to tourists via the Airbnb 
platform. In response to this continued land grab by their occupiers and by companies’ complicity in the settlement 
of their land, Palestinian advocates campaigned for years to have Airbnb and other businesses withdraw operations 
from the occupied territory. Finally, in November 2018, Airbnb announced it would delist approximately 200 
settlement properties in occupied Palestine. Within days, 11 Israeli settlers and eight U.S. citizens who sought to 
rent Airbnb properties in settlements brought suit against Airbnb in a Delaware court under the Fair Housing Act. In 
their lawsuit, Silber v. Airbnb , they claimed — without mention of their unlawful appropriation of the properties — that 
Airbnb’s decision to delist the properties in the occupied West Bank “discriminates against Jews and/or Israelis on its 
face and in effect on the basis of race, religion and national origin. ” On April 9, Airbnb caved to this legal bullying and 
abandoned its plan to delist properties in the illegal settlements, in breach of its human rights obligations. 
Prior to the April settlement, the Center for Constitutional Rights intervened in the suit and filed counterclaims 
against the settlers on behalf of the Palestinians who actually own or are prohibited from accessing the land where 
the listed properties unlawfully sit. The Palestinians — Ziad Alwan, Randa Wahbe, the village of Jalud, and the 
town of ‘Anata  — sought to protect their interests in preventing continued dispossession and discrimination, and 
to bring counterclaims against the Israeli settlers. The intervention marks the first time that Palestinians are 
directly challenging the Israeli settlers living on their land in a U.S. court . With this case, we are also standing up 
to the legal bullying tactics deployed by human rights violators in their efforts to extinguish any criticism of Israeli 
government policies.  
After the dismissal of the case, we immediately filed a motion urging the federal judge in the case to permit our 
clients’ claims against the Israeli settlers to proceed regardless of the dismissal of the case against Airbnb. Although 
that motion was denied, we continue to seek justice for the Palestinians whose land was unlawfully seized and keep 
pressure on Airbnb to reverse its unprincipled decision.
The media coverage in our lawsuit against Airbnb provides a good case study in how news coverage can move people 
to act. After outlets, including The Nation Magazine, Now This News, Common Dreams, BuzzFeed,  and Middle East Eye,  
reported on the facts of the lawsuit, and prompted by calls from various coalition partners, the next cycle of stories 
were about people deactivating their Airbnb accounts because Airbnb did not remove the settlement properties 
from its website. Vice’s headline read: “People Are Deactivating Airbnb for Allowing Listings in the Occupied West 
Bank. ”30PROTECTING THE RIGHT TO ADVOCATE FOR 
PALESTINIAN FREEDOM
In Awad v. Fordham , with our co-counsel Palestine Legal and Alan 
Levine, we won a landmark victory on behalf of student activists who 
were barred by Fordham University from forming a Students for 
Justice in Palestine (SJP) club. Fordham’s administration had vetoed 
the student government’s approval of SJP , claiming it would create 
“polarization” on campus and “run contrary to the mission and values” 
of Fordham. In August, the court annulled Fordham’s decision and 
ordered Fordham to recognize SJP . This is a victory for advocates of 
Palestinian freedom everywhere, but especially on college campuses, 
where such advocacy is routinely suppressed, even as it grows 
stronger every year.      
In Bronner v. Duggan , we are defending Dr. Steven Salaita in two cases 
brought against him, the American Studies Association (ASA), and 
several other individuals following the ASA’s passage of a resolution to 
endorse the call by Palestinian civil society to boycott Israeli academic 
institutions. After the federal case was dismissed in February, plaintiffs 
appealed and brought another case in D.C. Superior Court. The 
Center for Constitutional Rights and other defendants’ counsel have 
moved to dismiss that case under D.C. ’s Anti-SLAPP (Strategic Lawsuit 
Against Public Participation) Act, which protects defendants from 
meritless cases targeting advocacy on public interest issues. In the 
Washington State Court of Appeals, we are defending our victory in 
Davis v. Cox,  in which we represent former Olympia Food Co-op board 
members who were sued in 2011 for the co-op’s boycott of Israeli 
goods. The trial court dismissed the case in 2018, finding the plaintiffs 
had not shown that the co-op had suffered any injury.  
In Jordahl v. Brnovich , we filed an amicus brief in support of a 
challenge to Arizona’s law that forbids the state from contracting 
with companies that boycott Israel. We also filed an amicus brief 
in Arkansas Times v. Waldrip , which is challenging a similar law in 
Arkansas.
LEGAL AND POLITICAL INTERVENTIONS TO DEMAND ACCOUNTABILITY 
AND PROTECT HUMAN RIGHTS
We continue in our efforts to deter serious violations of international law against Palestinian civilians and human 
rights defenders by holding Israeli officials accountable for past breaches. In addition to continuing to support 
Palestinian human rights organizations’ work with the ICC, we filed an amicus brief in Doğan v. Barak  on behalf of 
ourselves and the Rachel Corrie Foundation for Peace and Justice in support of the family of Furkan Doğan, the 
American teenager killed when Israeli forces intercepted and stormed the Gaza-bound flotilla in international waters ABUSIVE STATE POWER
Challenging Unjust 
Government Policies
Ziad Alwan is a United States 
citizen and a Palestinian with West 
Bank residency. He was born in Ein 
Yabrud, Palestine, and currently 
lives in Chicago. Ziad’s family’s 
land, for which he has his father’s 
deed, has been illegally seized by 
Israel. Israeli settlers established 
the settlement of Ofra on Alwan’s 
land, and a settler now runs a bed 
& breakfast there, which she lists 
on Airbnb. Ziad and his family are 
not able to access their land, and 
can only view it through the online 
postings for the bed & breakfast. 
Though Ziad was young when he 
was last able to see the land, he 
continues to fight for it, teaching 
his five children about their land 
and their family’s history.
31in 2010. We urged the Ninth Circuit to deny former Israeli Defense Minister Ehud Barak immunity from claims of 
torture and extra-judicial killing. Disappointingly, the court dismissed the case on immunity grounds in August 2019 
— an outcome urged by both the Obama and Trump administrations.
 
In April 2019, the Center for Constitutional Rights spearheaded a letter to the U.S. State Department, together with 
Palestinian human rights organizations, calling for the cessation of military aid to Israel. The letter followed renewed 
Congressional advocacy where a team from the Center for Constitutional Rights joined a delegation of Palestinian 
human rights defenders to promote a coherent human-rights-based foreign policy that includes Palestine. That 
significant shifts are taking place in the corridors of power is a reflection of the compelling work of Palestinians and 
the Palestine solidarity movement. 
SUPPORTING MOVEMENTS IN CHALLENGING OPPRESSIVE 
SYSTEMS THROUGH OPEN 
RECORDS REQUESTS
In May, the Center for Constitutional Rights launched the Open Records 
Project: FOIA for the Movement , providing resources and trainings focused 
on the process of making public records requests using the federal 
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) as well as state open records laws. 
This initiative draws on our long history of using FOIA as a tool for social 
change by supporting advocates’ efforts to effectively use open records 
requests in challenging and exposing abusive government policies. 
The launch included publication of FOIA Basics for Activists  — a guide 
for activists containing an overview of the FOIA process; step-by-step 
instructions for filing FOIA and state requests and navigating agency 
responses; and  strategies to use open records requests and the documents they produce to advance social justice 
advocacy and campaigns.
In addition to resources, the project offers trainings on FOIA for activists, lawyers, and journalists. 
“Open records and freedom of information requests are powerful tools for activists to use in their efforts to 
challenge injustice.  We hope the Open Records Project can assist our allies in achieving their social justice 
goals. ”
— Open Records Projects coordinator, Senior Legal Worker, and author of the booklet, Ian Head
We also provide amicus support for important FOIA cases. T ogether with co-counsel at the Seton Hall Law School’s 
Center for Social Justice, in March 2019 we filed an amicus brief to the Supreme Court in Food Marketing Institute 
v. Argus Leader Media , a case we correctly feared would overturn decades of Supreme Court precedent barring 
corporate third parties from appealing the federal government’s loss in a FOIA case after the government declines to 
do so itself. On behalf of Detention Watch Network, Human Rights Defense Center, and the Prison Policy Initiative, 
we argued that private third parties do not have standing to demand that government information be kept secret 
under the FOIA. The 6-3 decision written by Justice Gorsuch will make it harder for activists to obtain crucial 
information about corporate capture of government work. ABUSIVE STATE POWER
Challenging Unjust 
Government Policies
32For decades, the Center for Constitutional Rights has worked beyond the courtroom to amplify the stories 
of our clients and community, identifying key political moments and opportunities to center the experiences 
of those most impacted by systems of oppression. Our lawyers and advocates have stood with those on the 
frontlines to resist the world we have; while our principled resistance remains critical, we are committed to 
shifting our center of gravity towards imagining and building the world we want. T ogether with impacted 
people, movement partners, and allies, we are designing the cultural and political interventions that shift 
discourse and policy towards justice and liberation. This is what movement advocacy looks like. 
Thank you for building with us!
NADIA BEN-YOUSSEF
Nadia joined the Center for Constitutional Rights as Advocacy Director — a new position in the 
organization — in January 2019, but in truth she has been working in partnership with the staff 
for years. After studying law and working in human rights in the U.S. and throughout the world, 
she journeyed to live and work in Palestine. There, starting in 2010, she led international 
advocacy efforts for Adalah — The Legal Center for Arab Minority Rights in Israel . For Adalah and 
numerous Palestinian human rights organizations based in Israel, the West Bank, and Gaza, 
the Center for Constitutional Rights has been a longtime, trusted partner for its principled 
commitment to human rights and belief that all struggles for freedom are interconnected. 
“I’ve been learning from the team at the Center for Constitutional Rights for many years, and am so grateful for their 
unflinching commitment and political coherence about the most significant human and moral issues of our time. ” 
Now, as Advocacy Director at the Center for Constitutional Rights, Nadia is looking forward to leading national and 
international advocacy efforts to elevate the voices and visions of our clients and community.  Nadia is particularly 
interested in cultural interventions for shifting narratives, and looking forward to deepening the organization’s work 
at the intersection of art and advocacy. A descendant of refugees, immigrants, and artists, Nadia defines herself, “as a 
lawyer by training and an artist at heart. ” She believes strongly in the power of art to change the world and the role of 
creatives in charting the future.
Early in 2019, a delegation from the Center for Constitutional Rights traveled to Washington, D.C. — which is not 
known as a place of radical possibility — to meet with new members of Congress. Thanks to the strength of social 
movements, we have members of a freshman class who are accountable to the principles of justice, equity, and 
collective freedom. For decision-makers, the Center for Constitutional Rights has long been a go-to organization 
for our breadth and depth of information and expertise on human and civil rights violations, but now we are also 
regularly approached by more progressive members of Congress for our analysis of necessary future social change.
“The Center for Constitutional Rights is a deeply political, uncompromising organization that is clear about its principles and 
values. In this political moment, that  clarity is a gift.”
At a time when the onslaught on the most vulnerable communities feels relentless, Nadia finds that the Center for 
Constitutional Rights team and our movement partners are endlessly inspiring and says, “It is a privilege to do this work. ” NEW VISION FOR ADVOCACY
33ART & ADVOCACY
At the Center for Constitutional Rights, we believe in the transformative power of art and culture. We work with 
artists, storytellers, and cultural institutions to amplify issues, elevate cases, and center clients’ stories. Through the 
visual arts, and in relationship with playwrights and filmmakers, we have been able to reach new audiences, cultivate 
public engagement, and, at times, offer alternative venues of justice.  As we assess the current political moment, we 
are convinced that we must create the space for artists to not only reflect the world we have, but to help us imagine 
the world we want to see. 
As part of this work, we have re-launched Freedom Flicks, the Center for Constitutional Rights’ long-running film 
series, which harnesses the power of film to educate, activate, and build community. Our programming includes 
screenings of cutting-edge, socially engaged films followed by a short conversation with storytellers, lawyers, and 
activists. Through the series, we continue to build and deepen relationships with artists and NYC institutions such as 
the Brooklyn Academy of Music (BAM) and Film Forum. 
Recent film selections include: “The Silence of Others, ” “The Feeling 
of Being Watched, ” and “The Women of Cancer Alley. ”
In the coming year, Advocacy Program Manager Aliya Hana 
Hussain will be spearheading new national cultural programming 
for the Center for Constitutional Rights. Stay tuned for upcoming 
art exhibits, film screenings, artist open-houses, and other 
opportunities to advance the vision of the world we want.  Art is 
critical to our collective pursuit of justice — join us!   
 
NEW VISION FOR ADVOCACY
L to R:  Senior Staff Attorney Omar Farah, filmmaker Assia Boundaoui, writer and activist Darnell Moore at Freedom Flicks screening of The Feeling of 
Being Watched , May, 2019.34THE CENTER FOR 
CONSTITUTIONAL 
RIGHTS
IN THE 
NEWSThe Center for Constitutional Rights Communications Department 
has had an incredible year, spreading our unapologetically radical 
perspective to thousands of readers and viewers on traditional and 
social media, and expanding our use of new media, such as videos and 
graphics, to reach new audiences.
Our strategies include:
• Press releases and statements on breaking news that get to 
reporters’ inboxes first, which helped the department secure 
6,624 media hits in the last fiscal year
• Our podcast, “The Activist Files, ” which features the stories of 
people on the front lines fighting for justice, including activists, 
lawyers, and artists
• Staying connected with reporters, producers, and bookers to keep 
them informed on our range of issues
• Op-eds from our clients and legal team offering radical thought 
leadership on the pages of major newspapers from The New York 
Times  to the Washington Post
• Frequent appearances on MSNBC, Al Jazeera, Democracy Now! 
and more, bringing our distinctive analysis to TV audiences
• Facebook Live streams to bring our thousands of supporters into 
the conversation during and after hearings, press conferences, 
and actions
• Growing engagement on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, and our 
Instagram account
• Frontlines of Justice, our weekly email newsletter that brings you 
the Center for Constitutional Rights’ latest every Monday
• The Daily Outrage, the Center for Constitutional Rights’ blog
• Emails on breaking news, upcoming events, and more
Your continued support enables the Center for Constitutional Rights 
to keep amplifying our uniquely radical perspective through diverse 
media channels, shift public onion on our critical issues, and expand 
our audiences.
35The Bertha Justice Fellowship Program is a two-year program for emerging 
lawyers who are interested in gaining both practical experience working on 
Center for Constitutional Rights cases and a theoretical understanding of 
how legal advocacy can create social change. 
Bertha Justice Fellows are sponsored by the Bertha Foundation, which hosts 
emerging lawyers at legal organizations across the world.
The Center for Constitutional Rights is currently hosting four Bertha Justice 
Fellows, through September 2020. 
Astha Sharma Pokharel is a 2017 graduate of New York University School of 
Law and has worked at the Center for Constitutional Rights to defend Palestinian 
human rights advocates and environmental justice activists against harassing 
SLAPP suits (strategic lawsuits against public participation), to challenge Fordham 
University’s decision to deny recognition to a Students for Justice in Palestine 
club, and on the Silber v. Airbnb  case, a federal suit challenging Israeli settlements in 
Occupied Palestinian T erritory. She also works on immigrant rights issues. 
Aya Saed  is a 2018 graduate of Harvard Law School and works on issues of 
corporate accountability through Al Shimari v. CACI , a federal lawsuit on behalf of 
four Iraqi torture victims against U.S. based government contractor CACI Premier 
T echnology. She is also involved in various Muslim Ban and domestic terrorism 
challenges. 
Brittany Thomas  is a 2018 graduate of the University of Miami School of 
Law and works at the Center for Constitutional Rights to challenge the Trump 
administration’s Public Charge Rule, to protect the religious freedom of the 
Ramapough Lenape Nation, and to end unconstitutional ticketing practices in Black 
Love Resists in the Rust v. City of Buffalo . 
Lupe Aguirre  is a 2016 graduate of the University of California Berkeley School 
of Law and works on issues of biased and abusive police practices through Floyd v. 
City of New York  in partnership with the grassroots coalition Communities United 
for Police Reform, and issues of immigrant rights in Migrant Justice v. Nielsen . She 
is also working with community partners in Pennsylvania to challenge death by 
incarceration. 
 BUILDING THE NEXT GENERATION OF MOVEMENT LAWYERS 
BERTHA JUSTICE FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM
Lupe Aguirre
Astha Sharma Pokharel
Aya Saed
Brittany Thomas36BUILDING THE NEXT GENERATION OF MOVEMENT LAWYERS 
ELLA BAKER INTERNSHIP PROGRAM
AARON GREENE
Ella Baker modeled leadership that centered on helping 
others see the power within themselves to act for change. 
This was a key lesson I learned sitting with Constance 
Curry outside of a chapel at Benedict University the day 
before my interview with the Center for Constitutional 
Rights. Constance was one of Ella’s closest friends and 
served with her as an advisor to the leaders of Student 
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC). Constance 
and other members of SNCC encouraged me that night 
to “pick up the baton and continue to run towards justice. ” 
A few weeks later, I received an email from the Center for 
Constitutional Rights extending an offer to be a 2018 Ella 
Baker Intern; this felt like destiny.
Being able to work alongside 11 extraordinary fellow law 
students was an incredible experience. I’ll never forget 
our six-hour call with the plaintiffs in the Ashker  case, 
where currently incarcerated activists gave updates on their conditions and provided strategies on the best ways to 
proceed with the litigation. It exemplified a movement philosophy at the Center for Constitutional Rights, which is 
to allow those impacted to lead the efforts. I also saw this during the press conference and rally against the Trump 
administration’s Travel Ban on Yemen, where one of the speakers memorably said, “we will keep fighting this ban until 
justice rolls down like a mighty stream. ” Lastly, attending the U.S. District Court oral argument and seeing Center for 
Constitutional Rights attorneys work as a team to advocate for their clients incarcerated at Guantánamo Bay was 
remarkable.  After departing the courtroom, their work did not stop as they continued their advocacy by recording an 
overview and taking pictures holding their clients’ photos to share on social media. 
Following the Ella Baker internship, I served as the President of the Matthew J. Perry Chapter of the Black Law 
Student Association.  We hosted social justice programs for the university, including a forum with Jaribu Hill (whom 
I met when she presented for the Ella Baker Movement Lawyer Workshops), Gicola Lane, and Ben Crump, provided 
monthly presentations on legal issues to five community high schools, and were named the 2018-2019 Southern 
Region Chapter of the Year. As the National Coordinator for the Earn Our Vote initiative, I organized grassroots voter 
education efforts in Washington, D.C., partnered with the NAACP Legal Defense Fund for voter protection efforts, and 
presented at various forums including the 2018 Southern Human Rights Organizers’ Conference (SHROC). 
CCR created the Ella Baker Summer Internship Program in 1987 to honor the legacy of Ella Baker, a hero of 
the civil rights movement, and to train the next generation of social justice lawyers. Through our program, 
interns gain practical litigation experience and sharpen their theoretical understanding of the relationship 
between social change, organizing, and lawyering. Ella Baker Interns also become connected to a global 
community of social justice law students and lawyers through our Ella Baker Alumni Network. 
Find out more about two of our 2018 Ella Baker Interns below. Their fresh perspectives and commitment to 
dedicating their lives to the fight for social justice give us hope for the future!
L to R: Senior Staff Attorney Omar Farah, Ella Baker Intern Aaron 
Greene, Executive Director Vince Warren at the Southern Human Rights 
Conference in December, 2018.37I’m currently working to finish my first book, Break Every Chain .  The book details the similarities between the era of 
slavery, convict leasing, and the era of mass incarceration, and includes original letters and poems from prisoners 
across the nation.  
T o my Center for Constitutional Rights family, I say, “thank you for providing a life-changing experience. Each one of 
you exemplified an important lyric from Ella’s Song: “we who believe in freedom cannot rest. ”
RAFAELA URIBE  
Since my time at the Center for Constitutional Rights, I’ve 
graduated from T emple University Beasley School of Law 
as an associate member of T emple’s Rubin Public Interest 
Law Honor Society, a special designation for students 
whose public service efforts have exceeded expectations. 
I also received the Lena L. Hale Award for outstanding 
contributions to the law school community. During my 
last year of law school, I was the co-director of training for 
the T emple Student Disciplinary Advocacy Service and a 
member of the Moot Court team. This fall I started  as a 
staff attorney in the Child Advocacy Unit at the Philadelphia 
Defender’s Association. 
My experience an Ella Baker Intern was one of the most 
rewarding experiences of my law school career. It was 
completely refreshing to be in a legal environment where 
the attorneys were as concerned with issues of race, 
gender, class, and equity as they were with the intricacies of 
the legal questions at hand. The programming and speakers 
we heard from pushed me to think about movement 
lawyering and the dynamic positions lawyers can occupy 
in social movements. The Center for Constitutional Rights 
was the first legal space where I felt that I could actually bring my whole self into the work, something that is usually 
missing from the white and male-dominated spaces typical of the legal profession. 
Being surrounded by other brilliant law students, attorneys, and advocates showed me that there are many different 
ways to answer legal questions, that the law can be used not only for outcomes but to create dynamic social change, 
and that in order to do so, we need lawyers working hand in hand with the most impacted communities for those 
outcomes. I hope to carry everything I learned at the Center for Constitutional Rights into my legal career!BUILDING THE NEXT GENERATION OF MOVEMENT LAWYERS 
ELLA BAKER INTERNSHIP PROGRAM
38CASE I INDEX
CASE/PROJECT 
NAMECASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
STRUCTURAL RACISM
Floyd v. City of New York Federal class action lawsuit against the City of New York 
that successfully challenged the NYPD’s practice of racial 
profiling and unconstitutional stop and frisks, and that is now 
implementing broad reforms to NYPD policing practices.Jonathan Moore, Dominique Day, 
and Luna Droubi of Beldock Levine 
& Hoffman LLP; Jenn Rolnick 
Borchetta of Bronx Defenders; 
Communities United for Police 
Reform (CPR) 
Furlow v. Belmar Federal class action lawsuit challenging the so-called “wanteds” 
system as used in St. Louis County, Missouri, because it 
routinely leads to unconstitutional arrests,  predominantly of 
Black residents.Arch City Defenders (St. 
Louis); Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, 
Wharton & Garrison LLP
Color of Change v. FBI, DOJ 
& DHSFOIA litigation against federal law enforcement agencies, 
seeking information on their surveillance of Movement for 
Black Lives activists.Color of Change; Avidan Cover of 
the Civil Rights and Human Rights 
Clinic at Case Western University 
School of Law
Phillips v. Snyder (formerly 
Bellant v. Snyder)Federal lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of state-
appointed “Emergency Managers” that took away local 
democratic processes in predominantly Black and Brown 
communities of Michigan.John Philo, Anthony Paris, and 
Stephanie Vaught of Sugar Law 
Center; Bill Goodman and Julie 
Hurwitz of Goodman & Hurwitz, 
P .C.; Herbert Sanders of the 
Sanders Law Firm; Keith Flynn of 
Miller Cohen PLC; Cynthia Heenan 
and Alec Gibbs of Constitutional 
Litigation Associates; Mark P . 
Fancher, Michael J. Steinberg, and 
Kary L. Moss of the ACLU Fund 
of Michigan; Samuel Bagenstos of 
University of Michigan Law School
Gulino v. Board of Education 
of the City of New York 
and the New York State 
Education DepartmentFederal class action lawsuit that successfully challenged the 
racially discriminatory impact of several standardized tests 
New York City used in a re-certification process for city public 
school teachers, developing a large back pay award for class 
members.DLA Piper; Josh Sohn of Strook, 
Strook & Lavan LLP;  Samuel R. 
Miller
United States of America and 
Vulcan Society, Inc. v. City of 
New YorkFederal class action lawsuit on behalf of the Vulcan Society 
of Black firefighters and individual firefighters and firefighter 
applicants that successfully challenged the New York City Fire 
Department’s racially discriminatory hiring  and promotions 
practices and that is now implementing reforms.Richard Levy, Dana Lossia, Robert 
Stroup, and Rebekah Cook-Mack 
of Levy Ratner, P .C.; Judy Scolnick 
of Scott + Scott LLP; the Vulcan 
Society
Black Love Resists in the Rust 
v. BuffaloFederal class action lawsuit challenging racially discriminatory 
and economically exploitative traffic checkpoints in 
predominatnly Black and Brown neighborhoods in Buffalo.Black Love Resists in the Rust; 
National Center for Law and 
Economic Justice, Western New 
York Law Center; Covington & 
Burling LLP
Ramapough Mountain 
Indians, Inc. v. T ownship of 
Mahwah, Ramapo Hunt & 
Polo ClubFederal lawsuit against the T ownship of Mahwah, NJ and 
the Hunt & Polo Club protecting the Ramapough’s First 
Amendment right to use their land for religious worship and 
ceremonies without excessive municipal fines and harassment.Ramapough Lenape Nation; Weil 
Gotshal & Manges LLP; Jonathan 
Wallace; Matthew Daloisio; Valeria 
Gheorghiu of the National Lawyers 
Guild; Covington & Burling LLP39CASE/PROJECT 
NAMECASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
Puerto Rico Freedom of 
Information Act (FOIA) 
RequestsFOIA litigation seeking information about the controversial 
and anti-democratic fiscal control board established in 2016 
to address Puerto Rico’s debt crisis  pursuant the Puerto 
Rico Oversight, Management, and Economic Stability Act 
(PROMESA).Natasha Lycia Ora Bannan of 
LatinoJustice PRLDEF; Carla 
Minet of Centro de Periodismo 
Investigativo (Center for 
Investigative Journalism)
PATRIARCHY
R.G. & G.R. Harris Funeral 
Homes v. Equal Opporunity 
Commission and Aimee 
Stephens (Amicus)Amicus brief to U.S. Supreme Court on behalf of 40+ 
organizations, demonstrating the pervasiveness and 
consequences of workplace discrimination against trans 
persons “on the basis of sex, ” that highlighted trans voices.Transgender Law Center; Akerman 
LLP
Keohane v. Florida 
Department of Corrections 
(Amicus)Amicus brief to Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals on behalf 
of the Center for Constitutional Rights and 10 organizations 
advocating for LGBTQIA rights, explaining through individual 
stories how the denial in prison of full gender dysphoria care 
causes immense suffering that rises to cruel and unusual 
punishment under the Eighth Amendment.  Lambda Legal
Doe v. Hood Federal lawsuit challenging Mississippi’s ongoing enforcement 
of its sodomy statute through required sex offender 
registration, over a decade after such statutes were struck 
down by the Supreme Court.Jacob W. Howard; Robert B. 
McDuff; Matthew Strugar
Survivors Network of those 
Abused by Priests (SNAP) v. 
the PopeLegal submissions before international human rights bodies 
and advocacy on behalf of the Survivors Network of those 
Abused by Priests (SNAP) charging Vatican officials with 
enabling and concealing widespread and systematic sexual 
violence against children and vulnerable adults by Catholic 
clergy.Survivors Network of those 
Abused by Priests (SNAP); Bishop 
Accountability; Ending Clergy 
Abuse (ECA)
STRUCTURAL ECONOMIC INJUSTICE
Energy Transfer v. 
Greenpeace, Earth First! Defending Earth First! Journal and Krystal Two Bulls in a 
SLAPP (Strategic lawsuit against public participation) brought 
by the pipeline company to harass environmental activists.Greenpeace, Earth Rights 
International, Protect the Protest 
coalition, Civil Liberties Defense 
Center
Center for Constitutional 
Rights v. St. Charles Parish 
Sheriff’s OfficeA case brought under the Louisiana public records law seeking 
the release of records relating to the travel to Standing Rock 
of the sheriff, who served as president of the National Sheriffs 
Association, and his employees, as well as communications 
with the pipeline company and private security firms.Bill Quigley
Atchafalaya Basinkeeper, 
Louisiana Bucket Brigade, 
and 350 New Orleans v. 
Bayou Bridge Pipeline, LLCA case brought to enforce the Louisiana public records law 
against a pipeline company, which has been delegated the 
power of eminent domain, seeking records concerning their 
land expropriations across the 162-mile route of the pipeline.Bill Quigley
40CASE/PROJECT 
NAMECASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
Louisiana Bucket Brigade v. 
Office of the GovernorA case brought under the Louisiana public records law against 
Louisiana Governor John Bel Edwards seeking records of 
meetings and communications with representatives of pipeline 
companies involved in the Bayou Bridge Pipeline project.   Bill Quigley
Louisiana Bucket Brigade v. 
Mayor of St. GabrielA case brought under the Louisiana public records law against 
the mayor of the town of St. Gabriel for records relating to the 
zoning board.Bill Quigley
Bayou Bridge Pipeline, LLC, 
v. 38.00 Acres, More or Less, 
Located in St. Martin ParishRepresenting landowners in Louisiana who are challenging the 
exercise of eminent domain by private oil pipeline company.Bill Quigley; Misha Mitchell of 
Atchafalaya Basinkeeper
White Hat v. Landry First Amendment challenge of gas-industry sponsored 
Louisiana law that punishes protestors for standing on pipeline 
lands.Bill Quigley
Coalition Against Death Alley 
v. EdwardsCase brought to assert protesters’ rights to march across two 
bridges in Louisiana as part of their march to bring attention 
to the poisoning of African-American communities along the 
Mississippi River between Baton Rouge and New Orleans.Bill Quigley
Al Shimari v. CACI Federal lawsuit on behalf of four Iraqi torture victims against 
U.S.-based government contractor CACI Premier T echnology, 
Inc. challenging corporate impunity under the Alien T ort 
Statute for war crimes and torture at Abu Ghraib prison.Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler 
LLP; Jeena Shah; John Zwerling; 
Shereef Akeel; Mohammed Alomari
OPPRESSIVE STATE POWER
Silber v. Airbnb Intervention on behalf of Palestinians in a federal lawsuit 
brought by Israeli settlers against Airbnb for its (now 
rescinded) decision to delist settlement properties.Misty A. Seemans 
Immigrant Defense Project 
(IDP) v. Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement 
(ICE) and Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS)FOIA litigation against the Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS) and Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) 
seeking information related to ICE’s home raids policies and 
arrest data.Immigrant Defense Project; 
Hispanic Interest Coalition of 
Alabama
Jailhouse Lawyers Handbook The Jailhouse Lawyers Handbook (JLH) is a resource for 
prisoners who wish to file a federal lawsuit addressing poor 
conditions in prison or abuse by prison staff. We distribute 
approximately 10,000 copies of it per year in response to 
direct requests for the handbook or requests for help with the 
issues it covers.National Lawyers Guild
Turkman v. Ashcroft (known 
as Ziglar v. Abassi in the 
Supreme Court)Federal class action lawsuit challenging abuse of Muslim, Arab, 
and South Asian men following 9/11 immigration sweeps.Michael Winger; Alexander 
Reinert; Covington & Burling LLP
Al Otro Lado v. Nielsen Class action lawsuit against officials at DHS and Customs and 
Border Protection (CBP) challenging CBP’s unlawful practice 
of depriving asylum seekers along the U.S.-Mexico border 
access to the U.S. asylum process.Al Otro Lado; American 
Immigration Council; Southern 
Poverty Law Center; Mayer Brown
T anvir v. T anzin (formerly 
T anvir v. Holder)Federal lawsuit challening the FBI’s abuse of the No-Fly List 
to coerce law-abiding American Muslims into spying on their 
religious communities.Creating Law Enforcement 
Accountability and Responsibility 
of CUNY School of Law (CLEAR); 
Debevoise & Plimpton
Muslim Ban Waiver FOIA FOIA litigation to obtain documents that would provide much-
needed clarity on the process for obtaining a waiver to the 
Muslim Ban.Muslim Advocates41
CASE/PROJECT 
NAMECASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
Detention Watch Network 
(DWN) v. Immigration 
Customs and Enforcement 
(ICE) and Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS)FOIA litigation that obtained documents regarding private 
prison industry’s role in controversial immigrant detention 
quotas; established right to information in government 
contracts with private entities.Detention Watch Network; 
Jennifer B. Condon of Seton Hall 
University School of Law, Center 
for Social Justice
Animal Legal Defense Fund v. 
Herbert (Amicus)Amicus brief supporting plaintiffs’ successful motion for 
summary judgment invalidating Utah’s “ag-gag” law, which 
targeted animal rights activists, in violation of the First 
Amendment.R. Shane Johnson
Animal Legal Defense Fund v. 
Wasden (Amicus)Amicus brief on behalf of two journalism professors to 
Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals supporting affirmation of the 
lower court ruling that Idaho’s “ag-gag” law violates the First 
Amendment.
Davis v. Cox Defense of former Olympia Food Co-op board members who 
were sued over the decision to boycott Israeli goods.Davis Wright Tremaine LLP; 
Barbara Harvey
Palestine Movement Support Advocacy and legislative work challenging suppression of 
Palestinian rights advocacy.Palestine Legal; National 
Lawyers Guild; Jewish Voice for 
Peace; Institute for Middle East 
Understanding
Awad v. Fordham University Lawsuit challenging Fordham University’s decision to deny 
students’ application to start a Students for Justice in Palestine 
(SJP) club on campus.  Palestine Legal; Alan Levine
Bronner v. Duggan Defending Dr. Steven Salaita in two lawsuits brought against 
him, the American Studies Association (ASA), and several other 
individuals for the ASA’s resolution to endorse a boycott of 
Israeli academic institutions.Whiteford, T aylor & Preston; Law 
Office of Mark Kleiman; Richard 
Renner
Jordahl v. Brnovich Amicus Brief to Ninth Circuit to uphold injunction of anti-BDS 
law that forbids Arizona from contracting with companies that 
boycott Israel. Palestine Legal
Arkansas Times v. Waldrip Amicus Brief to Eight Circuit to reverse dismissal of challenge 
to Arkansas’ anti-BDS law.Palestine Legal; Law Office of 
Matthew Strugar
Doğan v. Barak Amicus Brief to Ninth Circuit arguing that former Israeli official 
is not entitled to immunity for the killing of U.S. citizen. Rachel Corrie Foundation for 
Peace and Justice 
Barhoumi v. Trump Continued representation of an Algerian citizen held at 
Guantánamo since 2002.Maj. Justin Swick (USAF) of 
Military Commissions Defense 
Organization; Richard Reiter; Jared 
Kneitel42CASE/PROJECT 
NAMECASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
Ameziane v. United States / 
Ameziane FOIAHuman rights petition and request for precautionary measures 
before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights 
(IACHR) urging the IACHR to declare that the U.S. government 
violated Ameziane’s human rights and prescribe relief, 
including a public apology for what was done to him; FOIA 
action seeking information about alleged government policy of 
keeping seized Guantánamo detainee property.Andrew J. Brouwer of Refugee Law 
Office; Sophie Weller;  Jennifer 
Oscroft of Cornerstone Barristers; 
Francisco Quintana and Elsa 
Meany of Center for Justice and 
International Law (CEJIL)
Al Qahtani v. Trump Continued representation of the only Guantánamo detainee  
the government has openly admitted was tortured.Ramzi Kassem, CUNY School of 
Law; Sandra Babcock of Cornell 
Law School; Lawrence Lustberg of 
Gibbons P .C.
Khan v. Trump / Khan v. 
Gates / United States v. KhanContinued representation of Guantánamo prisoner Majid 
Khan, a victim of the CIA torture program who was charged in 
military commissions.Katya Jestin and Natalie Orpett 
of Jenner & Block LLP; LTC Jon 
Jackson; LCDR Jared Hernandez; 
Military Commissions Defense 
Organization; Anna Gallagher 
of Maggio + Kattar, P .C.; Sameer 
Khosa of Axis Law Chambers 
(Pakistan)
Duran v. Trump Continued representation of a Somali native who was 
captured in Djibouti, rendered to the CIA in March 2004, and 
to Guantánamo in September 2006, where he has since been 
held indefinitely and without charge.
Guantánamo partners Litigation and advocacy on behalf of the men at Guantánamo John Chandler; Eugene Fidell; 
Eric Freedman; Stephen Vladeck; 
Ramzi Kassem, Office of the 
Federal Public Defender, District 
of Oregon; Military Commissions 
Defense Organization; David 
Remes; Jenner & Block LLP; 
Covington & Burling LLP; 
Debevoise & Plimpton LLP; Robert 
Kirsch; Sabin Willett; Dr. Katherine 
Porterfield; Martha Rayner; 
Witness Against T orture; Amnesty 
International USA; Constitution 
Project; American Civil Liberties 
Union; Reprieve; National Coalition 
to Protect Civil Freedoms; Center 
for Victims of T orture; Gibbons PC
Senior Staff 
Attorney Katie 
Gallageher speaks 
at “The Threshold 
from Occupation 
to Annexation” 
Conference held at 
Birzeit University, in 
Ramallah, Palestine.  
Co-sponsors were 
Al-Haq, Palestinian 
Center for Human 
Rights (PCHR) and 
the International 
Federation for 
Human Rights 
(FIDH), October, 
2018.43CASE/PROJECT 
NAMECASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
Al Hajj v. Trump (Mass 
Habeas)Motion on behalf of 11 Guantánamo detainees challenging 
the legality of Trump’s Guantánamo policy to foreclose 
possibility of any prisoner releases, regardless of individual 
circumstances.George M. Clarke III; Clive 
Stafford-Smith and Shelby Sullivan 
Bennis of Reprieve; Thomas A. 
Durkin; Martha Rayner of Fordham 
University School of Law; Mari 
Newman and Dari W. Killmer of 
Killmer, Lane & Newman, LLP; 
Stephen M. Truitt; Charles H. 
Carpenter of Carpenter Law Firm 
PLC; Agnieszka M. Fryszman of 
Cohen, Milstein, Sellers & T oll 
PLLC; Law Office of H. Candace 
Gorman; Darin Thompson; Office 
of the Federal Public Defender, 
Cleveland, Ohio; Professor Joseph 
Margulies of Cornell University 
School of Law; George Brent 
Mickum IV; Erin Herro; Mark 
Denbeaux; Amanda L. Jacobsen of 
University of Copenhagen, Faculty 
of Law 
Ashker v. Governor of 
CaliforniaClass action lawsuit that successfully challenged prolonged 
solitary confinement as cruel and unusual punishment. 
Currently monitoring settlement agreement.Jules Lobel; Weil, Gotshal & 
Manges LLP; Law Offices of 
Charles Carbone; Legal Services 
For Prisoners With Children; 
California Prison Focus; Siegel & 
Yee; Ellenberg & Hull; Bremer Law 
Group PLLC; Samuel R. Miller; Eva 
DeLair; Law Office of Matthew 
Strugar; Azure Wheeler
Aref v. Sessions Federal lawsuit challenging Communications Management 
Units (CMUs), two highly restrictive federal prison units that 
segregate certain prisoners and severely limit and control their 
communications.Weil, Gotshal & Manges LLP; 
Kenneth A. Kreuscher
Food Marketing Institute v. 
Argus Leader MediaAmicus Brief to U.S. Supreme Court arguing that private third 
parties cannot demand that government information be kept 
secret under FOIA.   Seton Hall Law School’s Center for 
Social Justice; Detention Watch 
Network; Human Rights Defense 
Center; the Prison Policy Initiative
Accountability for U.S. 
T orture: FranceSupporting action seeking accountability for U.S. torture, 
brought in France under the principle of universal jurisdiction.European Center for 
Constitutional and Human Rights 
(ECCHR)
Accountability for U.S. 
T orture: SpainActions seeking accountability for U.S. torture, brought in 
Spain under the principle of universal jurisdiction.European Center for 
Constitutional and Human Rights 
(ECCHR); Gonzalo Boye of Boye-
Elbal y Asociados
International Criminal 
Court: Palestine Preliminary 
ExaminationSubmission on the closure of Gaza as a crime against humanity 
– persecution. Palestinian Center for Human 
Rights; Al-Haq; Al Mezan
Mamani v. Sánchez de Lozada 
/ Mamani v. Sánchez BerzaínFederal lawsuit against former President and Defense Minister 
of Bolivia for extrajudicial killings of indigineous Bolivians.Judith Chomsky; Beth Stephens; 
Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld 
LLP; Susan Farbstein, Thomas 
Becker, and Tyler Giannini of the 
International Human Rights Clinic 
at Harvard Law School; Claret 
Vargas of the Center for Law, 
Justice and Society (Dejusticia); 
Paul Hoffman of Schonbrun, 
Seplow, Harris and Hoffman LLP .44CASE/PROJECT 
NAMECASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
East Bay Sanctuary Covenant 
v. TrumpFederal lawsuit challenging Trump administration regulation 
that would deny asylum to individuals who cross into the 
United States outside of ports of entry.ACLU Immigrants’ Rights Project; 
ACLU of Northern California; 
Southern Poverty Law Center
East Bay Sanctuary Covenant 
v. BarrFederal lawsuit challenging Trump administration regulation 
that would deny asylum to individuals who have  transited 
through a third country before arriving at the U.S. border.ACLU Immigrants’ Rights Project; 
ACLU of Northern California; 
Southern Poverty Law Center
No More Deaths FOIA FOIA request on behalf of the advocacy group No More 
Deaths seeking data and protocols regarding Customs and 
Border Protection’s ineffective search and rescue operations 
on the Southern border.No More Deaths
Migrant Justice v. Nielson Federal lawsuit challenging Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement’s harassment, infiltration, and retaliation against 
a labor and immigrant advocacy group for its activism.Migrant Justice; National Center 
for Law and Economic Justice; 
Gibson Dunn & Crutcher
Alobahy v. Trump Successful federal lawsuit challenging improper denial of visas 
to Yemeni applicants under the Muslim Ban.Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
Ms. Q. v. U.S. Immigration and 
Customs EnforcementSuccessful federal lawsuit releasing and reuniting a mother 
with her four-year-old son who was taken from her under 
Trump’s family separation policy.Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher LLP; 
National Immigrant Justice Center
D.J.C.V. v. U.S. Immigration 
and Customs EnforcementSuccessful federal lawsuit reuniting a father with his two-
year-old son who was taken from him under Trump’s family 
separation policy.Morgan Lewis & Bockius LLP
Accountability for 
International Crimes in 
AfghanistanVictims’ representations and appeal on behalf of two 
Guantánamo  detainees with the International Criminal Court 
in support of an investigation into the Bush administration’s 
global torture program; a complaint with the U.N. Special 
Rapporteur on Independence of Judges and Lawyers 
alleging interference by the Trump administration with ICC 
proceedings.International Federation for 
Human Rights (FIDH)
Ali v. Trump Appeal in the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals seeking application 
of the due process clause to Guantánamo  and corresponding 
limits to the duration of detention there.Candace Gorman
45CHANGEMAKERS RECEPTION
“If you have an activist, a lawyer, and a storyteller, you can change 
the world.” 
On October 18, 2018, we held our second annual 
Changemakers reception in Manhattan. 
The 2018 Changemakers awards went to Dolores Canales, 
co-founder of California Families to Abolish Solitary 
Confinement and a powerful voice in the movement to end 
mass incarceration and solitary confinement; Weil, Gotshal & 
Manges LLP , which has been an invaluable partner to us in our 
fight against solitary confinement at California’s Pelican Bay 
prison as well as in our work in defense of Indigenous Peoples’ 
rights to land and religious ceremony; and Sara Jayyousi, the 
daughter of Center for Constitutional Rights client Kifah 
Jayyousi, a writer-storyteller-activist who uses the art of 
spoken word to stand with the Center for Constitutional 
Rights in our on-going challenge to Communication 
Management Units (“experimental prison units”). 
The evening included a cocktail reception, the Changemakers 
Awards ceremony, and a dynamic conversation with the 
Changemakers. We are very grateful to our generous event 
sponsors who helped make the evening possible: Rosemary R. 
Corbett & David Kaiser and Weil, Gotshal & Manges LLP .
L to R: 2018 Founders Awardee Ellen Yaroshefsky and former 
Board President Jules Lobel
L to R: Changemaker Sara Jayyousi, Board Chair Katherine Franke, 
former Board President Jules Lobel, Changemaker Dolores Canales, 
Senior Staff Attorney Rachel Meeropol, Changemaker Miriam Buhl 
of Weil, Gotshal & Manges, LLP , Executive Director Vince Warren
L to R: Bertha Fellows Astha Sharma Pokharel, Brittany Thomas, 
Lupe Aguirre, Legal Aid Society ally Ashley John sonBoard Chair Katherine Franke46CHANGE  IS GOOD
As part of the Center for Constitutional Rights’ 50th anniversary celebration 
in 2016, we revamped our strategic framework and thought about why we do 
the work we do and what our work could look like in the future. While our core 
mission and vision have remained the same, we determined that our future 
work, new strategic framework, and the more expansive audiences we want to 
reach required us to reexamine our mission and vision statements. So, we used 
this opportunity as a pathway to update our look, our vision for the future, and 
how we achieve it, which are now more adaptive and bold.
After working 10 months on the visual and written elements, we revealed our 
new logo, tagline, and key messaging, which include the vision and mission 
statements. On October 18, 2018, we celebrated with 300 friends and 
supporters — mostly unaffiliated progressives, the exact audience we’re trying 
to reach with our new look and feel.
Executive Director Vince Warren
L to R: Board Chair Katherine Franke, Staff Attorney  
Diala Shamas,  Bertha Justice Fellow Lupe Aguirre
 L to R: Events Associate Obi Nwabuzor and 
Communications Director Chandra HayslettGraffiti Artist Vincent Ballentine
Racial and 
Religious 
Profiling case 
installation“We Are Fighting For” Post-It wall47A SPLENDID BODY OF 
TIGERISH PEOPLE RECEPTION
On June 12, 2019 in New York City, we held our annual 
thank-you reception for our generous supporters, “A 
Splendid Body of Tigerish People, ” whose name evolved 
from a description of the Center for Constitutional Rights 
by Alexander Cockburn in The Village Voice .  We had a festive 
celebration at Midtown Loft & T errace, and presented 
two awards: the Founders Award to Vincent McGee, and 
the Radical Leadership Award to Chief Dwaine Perry. 
Vincent McGee is a steadfast advocate for international 
human rights, non-violence, and access to healthcare. 
A philanthropic leader for many years, he is a long-time 
friend, partner, and advisor to the Center for Constitutional 
Rights. Chief of the Ramapough Lenape Nation, Dwaine 
Perry serves not only as a spiritual guide, but also a staunch 
activist, leading a forceful resistance against the stripping 
away of Indigenous Peoples’ rights. Vincent and Chief 
Perry’s leadership serve as an inspiration to the Center for 
Constitutional Rights and all of those who stand with us 
in the struggle for justice. Their bravery, commitment, and 
creativity embody our history and mission and what it means 
to be dedicated to the longstanding fight for justice.
Bertha Fellow Brittany Thomas presents Radical Leadership Award to 
Chief Dwaine Perry of the Ramapo Lenape NationL to R: Staff Attorneys Diala Shamas, Angelo Guisado, Senior 
Legal Worker Ibraham Qatabi, Advocacy Program Manager 
Aliya Hussain, Advocacy Director Nadia Ben-Youssef, Senior 
Staff Attorney Pardiss Kebriaei, CUNY Law Professor and 
co-counsel on several Center for Constitutional Rights cases 
Ramzi Kassem, Former Ella Baker Intern Thomas Power, 
Advocacy Program Manager Dominic Renfrey
L to R: 2019 Ella Baker Interns T ania Murrillo, Drew 
Heckman
L to R: Radical Leadership Awardee Chief Dwaine Perry, 
Founders Awardee Vincent McGee, Executive Director 
Vince Warren4876+24+HT otal Expenses
$10,394,20980+15+2+2+1+HT otal Revenue, 
Gains, and Other 
Support
$10,855,585
n Program Services (Litigation and Advocacy)    $7,968,312
n Suppporting Services (Administration and General)    $2,425,897n Grants and Contributions       $8,106,283
n Court Awards and Attorney Fees           $1,986,729 
n Net Investment Income        $    399,490
n In-Kind Income         $    349,957
n Other Income                             $       13,126
       FINANCIAL REPORT
The Center for Constitutional Rights is a nonprofit charitable organization
that relies on individual and foundation support.
Your dedication and generosity is indispensable in the fight for justice. Thank you!
These are preliminary figures. Our audit is in progress.49WELCOME, NEW BOARD MEMBER
JUSTIN HANSFORD
Justin Hansford is an associate professor of law and executive director 
of the Thurgood Marshall Civil Rights Center. He was previously a 
Democracy Project Fellow at Harvard University, a visiting professor of 
law at Georgetown University Law Center, and an associate professor 
of law at Saint Louis University. He has a B.A. from Howard University 
and a J.D. from Georgetown University Law Center, where he was a 
founder of the Georgetown Journal of Law and Modern Critical Race 
Perspectives. He has also received a Fulbright Scholar award to study 
the legal career of Nelson Mandela and served as a clerk for Judge 
Damon J. Keith on the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth 
Circuit.
Justin is a leading scholar and activist in the areas of critical race 
theory, human rights, and law and social movements. He is a co-author 
of the forthcoming Seventh Edition of Race, Racism and American Law , 
the celebrated legal textbook that was the first casebook published 
specifically for teaching race-related law courses. His interdisciplinary 
scholarship has appeared in academic journals at various universities, 
including Harvard, Georgetown, Fordham, and UC at Hastings.
In the wake of the killing of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri, 
Justin worked to empower the Ferguson community through 
community-based legal advocacy. He co-authored the “Ferguson to 
Geneva” human rights shadow report and accompanied the Ferguson 
protesters and Mike Brown’s family to Geneva, Switzerland, to testify 
at the United Nations. He has served as a policy advisor for proposed 
post-Ferguson reforms at the local, state, and federal level, testifying 
before the Ferguson Commission, the Missouri Advisory Committee 
to the United States Civil Rights Commission, the President’s T ask 
Force on 21st Century Policing, and the Inter-American Commission 
on Human Rights.  On August 9, Justin was awarded the 2019 Right 
to Fight Award for his work as a leader in racial and social justice by 
the Michael O.D. Brown We Love Our Sons & Daughters Foundation. 
This honor was especially meaningful as it fell on the 5th anniversary of 
Michael Brown’s death.
50BOARD, STAFF, ELLA BAKERS, 
INTERNS, VOLUNTEERS
BOARD
Katherine Acey
Treasurer
Lumumba Akinwole-Bandele
Laila Al Arian
Leo Aldridge 
Amanda Alexander 
Natasha Lycia Ora Bannan 
Colette Pichon Battle
Rosemary R. Corbett
Secretary
Lisa Crooms-Robinson
Michelle DePass
Jean Entine
Development Committee 
Chair
Marjorie Fine 
Katherine Franke
Board Chair
Justin Hansford
Leila Hessini
Vice Chair
Nsombi Lambright
Monami Maulik
Gay J. McDougallSTAFF 
Management T eam
Vincent Warren
Executive Director
Baher Azmy
Legal Director 
Nadia Ben-Youssef
Advocacy Director 
(as of January 2019)
Chandra Hayslett
Communications Director 
Theda Jackson-Mau
Director of Development 
Donita Judge
Associate Executive Director 
(as of January 2019)
Maria LaHood
Deputy Legal Director
Grace Lile
Director of Operations 
Jeffrey Weinrich
Finance Director
Operations Staff
Gregory Butterfield
Finance Manager
Orlando Gudino
IT Manager
Meriam Haider
Receptionist/Administrative Assistant 
(as of February 2019)
Lisa Levy
Senior Human Resources Manager
Wan Yin Lui
Operations ManagerEdwin Santana
Administrative Associate, Operations 
Lynette Seymour
Executive Associate
Anderson T averas
IT Associate
Alberto White
Office Manager 
(through August 2018)
Communications
Lauren Gazzola
Communications Associate for Publications 
Charles Greene
Web Communications and Multimedia Manager 
Jen Nessel
Communications Coordinator
Alessandra Perotti
Digital Engagement Manager
Alex Webster
Communications Assistant 
(as of March 2019)
Development
Doug Edelson
Foundation Relations Officer 
Amy Greenstein
Associate Director of Development 
Jasmine Jacobs
Donor Relations Associate 
(through March 2019)
Rob Santiago
Senior Major Gifts Officer 
Daniel Strum
Database and Online Giving Manager 
Charisse Waugh
Grant Writer51BOARD, STAFF, ELLA BAKERS, 
INTERNS, VOLUNTEERS
Legal and Advocacy Department 
Lupe Aguirre
Bertha Justice Fellow 
(as of September 2018)
Darius Charney
Senior Staff Attorney
Claire Dailey
Legal Worker
J. Wells Dixon
Senior Staff Attorney
Chinyere Ezie
Staff Attorney 
(as of October 2018)
Omar Farah
Senior Staff Attorney
Katherine Gallagher
Senior Staff Attorney
Angelo Guisado
Staff Attorney 
Ian Head
Senior Legal Worker
Aliya Hussain
Advocacy Program Manager 
Shayana Kadidal
Senior Managing Attorney
Pardiss Kebriaei
Senior Staff Attorney
Stephanie Llanes
Bertha Justice Fellow 
(through July 2018)
Rachel Meeropol
Senior Staff Attorney
Associate Director of Legal Training 
and EducationObiajulu Nwabuzor
Events Associate
Afrika Owes
Administrative Associate
Legal & Advocacy
Ibraham Qatabi
Legal Worker
Dominic Renfrey
Advocacy Program Manager
Aya Saed
Bertha Justice Fellow 
(as of September 2018)
Ghita Schwarz
Senior Staff Attorney
Diala Shamas
Staff Attorney
Astha Sharma Pokharel
Bertha Justice Fellow 
(as of October 2018)
Pamela Spees
Senior Staff Attorney
Brittany Thomas
Bertha Justice Fellow 
(as of September 2018)
Leah T odd
Senior Legal Worker 
Britney Wilson
Bertha Justice Fellow 
(through September 2018)
Noor Zafar
Bertha Justice Fellow 
(through August 2018)
Nahal Zamani
Advocacy Program Manager2018-2019 Ella Bakers
Hana Alicic
Kenneshea Allums
Jonathan Cohen
Eliana Green
Aaron Greene
Elizabeth Gyori
Myriah Heddens
Jennifer Jones
Daniel Levine-Spound
Samuel Martinez
Beth Patel
Rafaela Uribe
Interns
Daria Brosius
Brittany Castle
Erik Crew
Leen Dweik
Mario Fitzgerald
Asma Jaber
Joy Mitchell
Hyatt Mustefa
Florence Otaigbe
Gerardo Romo
Mahum Shabir
Jayson Swain
Sophia Maria Wistehube
Brian Yeh
Volunteers
Lorenzo G. DiSilvio
Merry Neisner52
ATTRIBUTIONS
Research and writing: 
Emily Antoniades, Emily@antoniades.com
Design: 
Kathryn Bowser, Kathrynbowser@gmail.com
Photo Credits:
p. 3, 13, 23, 26, 32, 35: Matt Mercado
p. 4, 5 (top middle), 8, 20: Vlad Archin
p. 11 Jacob Lund/Getty Images
p. 15  PicNoi Stock Photos53OTHER WAYS TO SUPPORT THE CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS!
DONATE STOCK.  If you sell depreciated stock and 
give the proceeds to the Center for Constitutional 
Rights, you may be able to claim the loss on your 
taxes, as well as the charitable deduction. If you 
donate appreciated securities to us, you may 
avoid capital gains taxes and receive a charitable 
deduction. For stock transfer information, go to 
www.CCRjustice.org/gifts-stocksfunds.
HOST A MEET FOR JUSTICE  HOUSE PARTY  to 
introduce friends and allies to our work. Now more 
than ever, we need your help in expanding our reach 
to those who care about freedom and justice. Help 
us connect with those in your network who share 
these values.
.
ATTEND A LOCAL EVENT  if we are in your 
neighborhood — and bring a friend! If you are on our 
email list, you will receive invitations. Public events 
are listed on our calendar at www.CCRjustice.org/
calendar.
STA Y UP-TO-DATE AND SHARE OUR NEWS!  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter, CCRJustice on 
Instagram, and Center for Constitutional Rights 
on Facebook and bookmark our website: www.
CCRjustice.org. Sign up for our weekly newsletter, 
the Frontlines of Justice , at ccrjustice.org/home/get-
involved/get-latest. Share our newsletters, action 
alerts, and appeals with your friends.MAKE AN ONLINE GIFT  at www.CCRjustice.org/
Donate. It’s fast, easy, and secure, and your gift will 
go to work right away. Online gifts are a quicker and 
greener way to give.
JOIN THE JUSTICE SUSTAINERS.  These gifts 
provide the Center for Constitutional Rights with a 
reliable, steady source of income, making it possible 
for us to plan, leverage, and allocate resources 
in a way that means more hope for our clients, 
more support for movements, more justice and 
accountability.  Sign up online to give monthly at our 
website: www.CCRjustice.org/Donate. 
INCLUDE THE CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL 
RIGHTS IN YOUR WILL.  Including the Center for 
Constitutional Rights as a beneficiary in your will 
is an excellent way to make a statement about the 
values you held during your lifetime, while ensuring 
that we will be here for the long haul. You may 
choose to make a bequest of a specific dollar amount 
or a percentage of your estate. 
MAKE THE CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL 
RIGHTS YOUR BIRTHDA Y GIFT! Ask friends and 
family to make gifts to the Center for Constitutional 
Rights in your honor as your holiday/birthday/
anniversary/no-reason-at-all gift OR make gifts to 
us in honor of the folks on your shopping list. These 
gifts will pay tribute to our shared social justice 
values and build our audience, while fueling our 
efforts to fight for the most vulnerable and building 
the power of social movements. 
For more information on any 
of the above, please contact 
Theda Jackson-Mau, Director of 
Development at 212-614-6448 
or tjackson-mau@ccrjustice.org. 
We are calling on you.
JOIN FORCES  with activists, lawyers, and storytellers 
to fight oppression and build power. 
You have a role to play. Donate. Act. Share.54The Center for Constitutional Rights is grateful 
for your dedication and partnership. You make 
it possible for us to think big and to stake out 
daring positions.  
Because of you, our litigation and advocacy are 
holistic, fearless, and relentless.  
T ogether, we are transforming the power 
structures that oppress vulnerable 
communities, building the strength of social 
justice movements, and training the next 
generation of movement lawyers and activists.
Thank you!
www.CCRjustice.org55
