   PRESS RELEASE  
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 
  April 22, 2009  
CONTACT: 
Betsy Griffing, ACLU of Montana Legal Director 
(406) 830-3009 
betsyg@aclumontana.org  
 
Ronald F. Waterman, Attorney, Gough, Shanahan, John son & Waterman, PLLP 
(406) 442-8560 
 
ACLU of Montana Files Prison Discrimination Complai nt 
Native American prisoners’ rights violated at Cross roads Correctional Center 
 
HELENA, MT — The American Civil Liberties Union of Montana filed a discrimination complaint against th e state of 
Montana last week on behalf of Native American pris oners at the Crossroads Correctional Center whose r ights were 
violated through en-masse strip searches, being den ied the ability to properly celebrate sweat lodge c eremonies 
and being retaliated against when they complained a bout the mistreatment. 
 
John Henry Knows His Gun, Dee Chance White Hip, Dar rly Lewis Frost, Jason Jay Chiefstick, Brian Anthon y 
Johnston and 30 John Doe plaintiffs filed the compl aint against the State of Montana, the Montana Depa rtment of 
Corrections, Crossroads Correctional Center, Correc tions Corporation of America, Montana State Prison Warden 
Mike Mahoney and Crossroads Warden Sam Law. 
 
 “It is important the Native American culture and r eligion be treated with respect and equality in our  prison 
system,” said ACLU of Montana Legal Director Betsy Griffing.  “The sweat lodge ceremony is an importan t part of 
Native American religion and culture.”  
 
Private prison company Corrections Corporation of A merican operates the Crossroads facility in Shelby,  Mont. 
 
Beginning in mid-August 2008, all inmates attending  sweat lodge ceremonies were stripped before and af ter the 
ceremonies. The strip searches were conducted in th e hallway of the recreation area where they could b e observed 
by other inmates, and on at least one occasion in v iew of prison cameras monitored by female guards. 
 
In addition the complaint alleges guards made racia lly disparaging remarks during the ceremonies and p rison staff 
refused to supply the cured tobacco and other mater ials essential to the sweat lodge ceremony. When a prisoner 
complained about the non-tobacco material provided for the pipe, he was stripped of his position as pi pe carrier 
and later put into solitary confinement when he enc ouraged other inmates to ask that he be reinstated as pipe 
carrier. 
 
And while other religious services are offered each  week, sweat lodge ceremonies are only available to  prisoners 
every other week, denying them equal access to prac tice their faith. 
 
“Private prisons must meet the same standards as Mo ntana’s state-run prisons,” Griffing said.  “That m eans they 
must respect prisoners’ religion and allow them to practice it without harassment or retaliation.” 