Winter 2006 Newsletter
On November 16, family
members, faith leaders,lawyers, elected officials, stu-dents and other supportersrallied across from BryantPark in New York City toexpress their outrage overthe illegal contract betweenthe New York StateDepartment of CorrectionalServices (DOCS) and MCI.Organized by the New YorkCampaign for TelephoneJustice, a project of CCR inpartnership with gr oups rep-
resenting New York State
prisoners’ families, the eventwas the culmination of manymonths of advocacy andaggressive public educationabout a policy that adverselyaffects thousands of families,most of whom ar eon limited
incomes and can least afford
the exorbitant rates chargedby MCI to maintain phonecontact with their impris-oned loved ones. 
Buoyed by strong words of
support from New York StateAssemblymen Jeffrion Aubryand Adriano Espaillat whosponsored the FamilyConnections Bill that passedin the Assembly, severalspeakers took to the stage tovoice their opposition to thecontract and to urgeGovernor Geor ge Pataki to
end the contract when it
expires in March of 2006. 
Telephone Justice UpdateOn January 17, 2006, CCR filed a lawsuit
against George W. Bush, the head of theNational Security Agency, and the heads of
the other major security agencies, challeng-ing the NSA’s surveillance of persons with-in the U.S. without judicial approval or
statutory authorization. The suit seeks aninjunction that would prohibit the govern-
ment from conducting warrantless surveil-lance of communications in the U.S. CCRfiled the suit in the Federal District Courtfor the Southern District of New York on itsown behalf and on behalf of CCR attorneysand legal staff representing clients who fitthe criteria described by the AttorneyGeneral for tar geting under the NSA
Surveillance Program.
As has been widely r eported, for over four
years the NSA, with the appr oval of thepresident, has engaged in a program of
widespread warrantless electronic surveil-lance of telephone calls and emails in vio-
lation of the Foreign IntelligenceSurveillance Act. The suit argues that theNSA Surveillance Program violates a clear
criminal law, exceeds the president’sauthority under Article II of the
Constitution, and violates the First andFourth Amendments. The ForeignIntelligence Surveillance Act explicitlyauthorizes foreign intelligence electronicsurveillance only upon or ders issued by
federal judges on a special court. Itexpressly authorizes warrantless wiretap-ping only for the first 15 days of a war ,and
makes it a crime to engage in wiretappingwithout specific statutory authority. CCR Files Suit over NSA Domestic Spying
CCR is pleased to announce
that William Goodman
accepted the position of
Legal Director at the Center
this past October. Nationally
renowned for civil rights litigation expertise and prisoners’ rights work, Billserved before as CCR’s
legal director from January
1998 through February2003. During that tenurehe led CCR in several successful cases includingone against the NYPD forracial pr ofiling in st ops 
and frisks. He was largely
responsible for shapingCCR’s legal doc ketafter
9/11. Notably, Bill initiat-
ed 
Turkmen v. Ashcroft ,
challenging t he post-9/1 1
policies of the Bush adminis-
tration that racially profile
thousands of immigrantsespecially those of Middle
Eastern and South Asian
descent. Bef orereturning 
to CCR, Bill continued his
civil rights work as a part-
ner at Moore & Goodman,
LLP.He had been serving
as the Interim Legal
Director since June 2005. 
We are delighted that 
Bill agreed to return asCCR’s legal dir ector at 
acritical period in both
CCR’s and t he nation’s 
history.Please join us in
welcoming Bill Goodman
back to the Center! 
In this Issue
2 Hungry for Justice
2 Remembering Wiwa3 Farewell to Ron
Daniels
4Cuba Travel
4 CCR Welcomes New
BoardMembers
4 Foundation Thank
You’s
4CCR Lawyers Go The
Extra Mile
5WhyHabeas Matt ers
5 Court Stripping Act
6Donor Spo tlightcontinued on page 3
continued on page 3
CCR 666 BR OADWAY, 7th FLOOR, NEW YORK, NY 10012 • PHONE (212) 614-6473 • FAX (212) 614-6449 
EMAIL INF O@CCR -NY.ORG• WWW .CCR -NY.ORG
OnNovember 10, 1995, internationally
renowned author and human rights andenvironmental activist Ken Saro-Wiwaand eight other activists were hanged inNigeria. Arrested and held for monthswithout charges, tortured while indetention, and sentenced to death by a“Special Tribunal,” these men were exe-cuted for their peaceful efforts to defendthe indigenous Ogoni people of Nigeriafrom abuses caused by oil extractionactivities of Royal Dutch/Shell. 
In 1996 CCR filed suit against Shell for its complicity in
these human rights abuses. Ten years later, despite factsthat tie Shell to the executions of the Ogoni 9 and to thecontinuing abuse of the Ogoni people, Shell still deniesculpability, while its own internal reports
show it is still part of the problem. 
OnNovember 10, CCR sponsored a com-
memoration and celebration, 
Remember
the Ogoni 9 ,at the Metropolitan
Community Church of New York.
The event coincided with over 40 peace-
ful vigils organized around the globe insolidarity with the Ogoni people tohonor the memory of the Ogoni 9. 
•
*Ken Saro-Wiwa, Baribor Bera, Saturday Doobee, Nordu
Eawo, Daniel Gbokoo, Barinem Kiobel, John Kpuinen,Paul Levura and Felix Nuate 
CCR and endorsing organizations
held a noon vigil on November 1, 2005inWashington, D.C., in front of the
Department of Justice as part of CCR’s
national “Fast for Justice” campaign.
Coordinated by Edget Betru, the CCRGuantánamo Global Justice Initiative
organizer, the fast was called to letsupporters show their solidarity with
the Guantánamo detainees and to putpressure on the Bush Administrationby keeping the Guantánamo situation
in the public eye. 
“Since early 2002, the men held at
Guantánamo Bay have waged desper-ate and at times life-threateninghunger strikes to protest their deten-tion without trial and the conditionsunder which they have been kept,”Betru said. “Despite CCR’s efforts tohold them accountable, the BushAdministration continues to dismissthe Supreme Court ruling in CCR’scase 
Rasul v .Bush which said that the
detainees have a right to their day incourt. W ecall upon the Department of
Justice to uphold the r ule of law and
give the detainees a fair hearing imme -diately and to release those who have
committed no crime.” 
Inaddition to the hearings in federal
courts, the Fast for Justice demands
included: the provision of adequatefood, water, shelter, medical treatment
and the observance of religious prac-tices for the detainees; timely reports
on the health status of the prisonersfor the families and legal counsel ofthe detainees, especially those partici-
pating in the hunger strike; and a callfor access to the detainees for domes-
tic and international independentinvestigators. These demands werehand delivered to the Department ofJustice by those gathered for the Vigilon November 1.
The on-going hunger strike at
Guantánamo started in August 2005.
Guards were ordered to begin force-feeding the protesting detainees withdirty feeding tubes which ar eviolently
inserted and r emoved as punishment,
causing the striking prisoners to vomitblood and experience intense painwhich they equate to tortur e, accor d-ing to CCR Attorney Gita Gutierrez. 
Simultaneous vigils were also held in
New York City outside of the FederalPlaza, at various law schools, in thestates of New Hampshire, Oregon,and in Managua, Nicaragua.Thousands of individual supportersnation wide participated in the FastFor Justice. 
•
Tofind out how you can get involved,
visit www .ccr-ny.org/gac or contact
Edget Betr uat 212-614-6477 or
Ebetr u@ccr -ny.orgHungry for Justice: Vigil in Solidarity with Detainees
Remembering The Ogoni 9*
CCR 666 BROADWAY, 7th FLOOR, NEW YORK, NY 10012 • PHONE (212) 614-6473 • FAX (212) 614-6449 
EMAIL INF O@CCR-NY.ORG• WWW.CCR-NY.ORG2
©Greenpeace/LambonCCR supporters demonstrate in front of
the Dept. of JusticeCCR Bids
Farewell to
Executive
Director Ron Daniels
After 12 years at CCR’s helm, Ron Daniels
stepped down as Executive Director
December 31.  He plans to focus more time onbuilding the Institute of the Black World 21st
Century, where he serves as president.
“It has been my privilege to serve as
Executive Director of this incredible institu-tion at one of the most cr ucial moments in
the history of this country ,” Daniels com -
mented. “Few people have the opportunity
to serve at the head of an organization that isat the very forefront of the struggle for socialjustice and social change in the United Statesand the world. It has been an extraordinaryexperience.”
“Ron Daniels has been the heart and soul of
CCR. He has been our political conscienceand led us to amazing victories,” said CCRPresident Michael Ratner. “During his 12-year tenure we almost tripled in size. We willcontinue to fight to uphold the legacy thatRon Daniels has given to us all. He will besorely missed, and we wish him great successin building the Institute of the Black World.” 
Befor eCCR, Ron served as Southern Regional
Coordinator and Deputy Campaign Manager
for Jesse Jackson’s 1998 pr esidential bid and
was an independent candidate for president
in 1992. Daniels was the first AfricanAmerican to serve as executive director at theCenter. 
While CCR will miss Ron and his leadership,
we ar eexcited for him and wish him the best
in his new endeavors.
•
CCR 666 BROADWAY, 7th FLOOR, NEW YORK, NY 10012 • PHONE (212) 614-6473 • FAX (212) 614-6449 
EMAIL INF O@CCR-NY.ORG• WWW.CCR-NY.ORGIn the course of representing post-
9/11 clients, including theGuantánamo detainees, the
Center’s lawyers have engaged 
in innumerable telephone callsand e-mails with people outside
the U.S. including their clients,their clients’ families and outside
lawyers, potential witnesses, and others. Given that the gov-ernment has accused many 
of CCR’s overseas clients of beingassociated with Al Qaeda or of
interest to the 9/11 investigation,there is little question that theseattorneys have been subject to theNSA surveillance program. TheCenter filed this lawsuit in or der 
to protect CCR attorneys’ right to represent their clients free of unlawful and unchecked 
surveillance.
According to CCR attorney
Shayana Kadidal, “The mereexistence of the program harms
CCR and our attorneys becauseit serves to inhibit their ability to
institute and effectively litigatethese suits.” 
CCR is represented in the suit by
the Center’s Bill Goodman,
Shayana Kadidal, and MichaelRatner, and CCR cooperatingattorney David Cole. Also appear-ing as an attorney for CCR isProfessor Michael Avery, presi-
dent of the National LawyersGuild. 
•
The rally was followed by a
highly spirited mar ch across
42nd Str eet in the midst of the
midtown lunch cr owd and
attracted many onlookers andinter ested passersby who wer e
similarly anger ed when told the
reason for the gathering. The
final destination of the marcherswas the office of GovernorPataki, where family membersdelivered a giant bill for $400million representing the amountpaid by family members to MCIsince the original contract beganin 1996.
The event attracted broad press
coverage throughout the state, inprint, radio and television out-lets, and significantly incr eased
the public’s awareness of this
exploitative practice. 
On January 9, 2006, the Family
Connections Bill moved out ofthe N.Y .State Senate Committeeon Crime Victims, Corrections,
and Crime, by a unanimous vote,bringing New York closer to end-ing the unjust backdoor tax onfamilies of prisoners.
“As this bill moves to the Senate
floor ,families of prisoners have
real hope that their obscene
phone bills will end,” said CCR’sAnnette Dickerson. 
•Campaign for Telephone Justice Update
continued from coverCCR Files Suit over NSA Domestic Spying
continued from cover3
CCR’s long anticipated update to its
1999 booklet on the travel restrictions toCuba was recently released. The book-
letdetails the latest travel restrictions to
Cuba and provides information on
obtaining general and specific licensesfor travel. While the booklet is not asubstitute for legal advice, we are excit-
ed to further our educational effortsabout the Cuba travel embargo.
Meanwhile, we are continuing our legalefforts to challenge and overturn thisdisastrously unconstitutional policy.  
•
Toobtain your copy, visit on the CCR
website, www.ccr-ny.org. Click on the“Education & Outreach” tab and thengo to the “Cuba T ravel Initiative” link
to find the booklet. Know Before You Go:
Restrictions on Travelto Cuba
CCR is Grateful to Our Foundation Funders 
for Their Support*:
The Alfred and Jane Ross Foundation !The Bardon-Cole Foundation !
The Blue Oak Foundation !The Charitable Gift Fund !The Funding
Exchange !The Helena Rubinstein Foundation !The Jack P . Tate Foundation II
!The Jewish Communal Fund !The Joseph & Sally Handleman Foundation
!The Liberty Hill Foundation !The Madison Community Foundation !
The Max and Anna Levinson Foundation !The Normandie Foundation !The
Oak Foundation !The Open Society Institute !The Rhode Island Foundation
!The Ritter Foundation !The Samuel Rubin Foundation !The San Francisco
Foundation !The Spingold Foundation !The Stewart R. Mott Charitable
Trust !The T aub Family Foundation !The V anguard Charitable Endowment
Program !The William B. Wiener Jr. Foundation.
*The foundations listed above have provided new leadership-level grants
of $5,000 or mor ebetween 7/1 and 12/30/05 .
CCR 666 BROADWAY, 7th FLOOR, NEW YORK, NY 10012 • PHONE (212) 614-6473 • FAX (212) 614-6449 
EMAIL INF O@CCR-NY.ORG• WWW.CCR-NY.ORG4
Two of CCR’s attorneys are currently
traveling to gather information for ourwork on behalf of the men held at Guantánamo Bay. Attorney GitanjaliGutierrez is on a ten-day trip toGuantánamo Bay. She is meeting withsome of CCR’s clients, monitoring conditions and finding out the latestinformation on the long runninghunger strikes at the prison camp. 
Tina Foster is also traveling. Tina is 
currently in Yemen with a group of CCR affiliated habeas attorneys and will be continuing onto Bahrainand Afghanistan. She is meeting withfamily members of those detained atGuantánamo. Tina is assembling infor-mation from family members about thecircumstance of our clients capture and
meeting with activists to build the inter-
national movement demanding that themen at Guantánamo be given a fair trialor released.  
•CCR Welcomes New Board Members: 
As Of October, 2005
Michelle DePass • Michael Steven Smith
As Of January, 2006
Catherine Albisa • Karima Bennoune
Ann Cammett • Eric L. Lewis
Michael Steven Smith
Michael Steven Smith, a lawyer, has been in private practice in New York
City doing tort litigation since l989. He, along with board member Dick
Sobel, founded a progressive law firm in Detroit. He also worked atHarlem and Queens Legal Services offices, and was the director of
Seafarers Legal Services. Michael has testified before committees of theUnited States Congress on democratic rights for Arab Americans and beforethe United Nations on the human rights of Palestinians. He is on the execu-tive committee of the city chapter of the NLG and the board of The BrechtForum and co-hosts the WBAI radio show "Law and Disorder" with
Michael Ratner, among others. Michael has written or edited six books. 
Michelle DePass
Michelle DePass is currently a Program Officer in the Community and
Resource Development Unit of the Ford Foundation where she leads theFoundation’s work in the ar ea of Envir onmental Justice and Healthy
Communities. For five years she served as Executive Dir ector of the New
York City Environmental Justice Alliance. Michelle has worked at CCR as a
William Kunstler Racial Justice Fellow ,and was Senior Policy Advisor for
the Envir onment within the McGr eevey administration. She has also taught
federal envir onmental law and policy at the City University of New York.CCR Lawyers Go 
The Extra MileOn December 30, Pr esident Bush signed
into law the Department of DefenseAppr opriations Act for 2006. Included in
the appr opriations bill was an amendment
author ed by Senators Graham and Levin,
which when combined with the McCainAmendment is now known as theDetainee T reatment Act. The Detainee
Treatment Act, which strips the courts of
jurisdiction to hear habeas cases broughtby detainees, poses a steep, but not insur-mountable set of challenges to the Center’swork on behalf of the 500 men currentlybeing held at Guantánamo Bay – and byextension, to CCR’s work to address thecircumstances of the thousands of othersdetained around the world by, or at therequest of, U.S. authorities. 
In June 2004, CCR won a groundbreaking
Supreme Court victory in 
Rasul v. Bush
when the court r uled that the detainees
had the right to challenge their indefinite
detentions in U.S. courts. Since that ruling,the Center and its cooperating attorneyshave filed habeas petitions on behalf ofhundreds of detainees. The passage of thenew law may at first seem to do away withmuch of the Center’s work on behalf of theGuantánamo detainees, yet the opposite is
true. In addition to challenging the consti -
tutionality of the law as applied to each
detainee, the Center now also faces chal -
lenges fr om the Administration’s ef fort to
dismiss all 1 11 habeas cases based on the
Act’s intended ef fect on the courts’ power
to hear detention challenges, r esulting in a
second group of cases that will be argued
up to the Supreme Court once again aspart of CCR’s fight for justice on behalf ofthe detainees. 
The worst result of the law’s passage is
that justice will likely be delayed for allthose sitting in U.S. detention. Rather thanhaving their habeas petitions heard withinthe next few months, these cases may nowbe delayed up to a year or more, tied up inlitigation over the constitutionality andapplicability of the statute and theAdministration’s attempts to subvert theseparation of powers and the system ofchecks and balances. And while CCR andits cooperating attorneys fight for thedetainees, the human cost to those sittingin detention away from family, friends andcountry will continue to be unacceptablyhigh and tragic. 
•The ancient right of habeas corpus guarantees that 
no one can be arrested by the state or seized in anyfashion and held without being brought before a judge,charged with a crime and having evidence brought 
forward establishing probable cause for the person to
have been arrested and held. This is the most basic ofdemocratic rights and provides real protection fromthe bald assertion of power by the police or the state. Itis the very heart of due process of law. 
The writ of 
habeas corpus has been around for over 1,000
years and first emerges in writing in 1215 in the Magna
Carta. Because of its age and its centrality, it is oftencalled the ‘Great Writ.’ It is enshrined in Article I of 
the United States Constitution and as such predateseven the Bill of Rights. In well over 200 years there hasnever been a congressional stripping of the right of
habeas, until now with the Detainee Treatment Act.
Consequently, the Bush Administration has set a dan-gerous precedent and has once more usurped the ruleof law. If the Guantánamo detainees can be deniedtheir constitutionally guaranteed writ of 
habeas corpus ,
then who is to say that anyone else charged with a lesser crime will not be held indefinitely without the
ability to face their accusers and to know the accusa-
tions made against them?
•
CCR 666 BROADWAY, 7th FLOOR, NEW YORK, NY 10012 • PHONE (212) 614-6473 • FAX (212) 614-6449 
EMAIL INF O@CCR-NY.ORG• WWW.CCR-NY.ORG5
CCR was listed as one of
the top-rated charities for
civil r ights and adv ocacy
by the American Institute
of Philant hropy. AIP is 
anonprofit charity watch-
dog and information 
service whose mission 
is to maximize the effec-
tiveness of every dollar
contributed to charity 
by providing donors with
the information they need
to make more informed
giving decisions.
For more information about
CCR’s rating and AIP’s 
criteria, visit
http://www.charity-
watch.org/toprated.html.Why Habeas Matters
Congress Creates Bad Precedent: 
Passes Dangerous Court Stripping ActTina Rasnow is a new CCR
supporter and FoundersCircle member who has par-layed her belief in theCenter’s work into a familyaffair by introducing herbrother and parents to CCR.They are now also supportersof the Center!
Now a Southern California
resident, Ms. Rasnowreceived her J.D. from theUniversity of California,Hastings College of the Law.After clerking for theAlameda County PublicDefender’s office during lawschool, Ms. Rasnow started her legal car eer
with Hawkins & Lombino before going on to
begin her own practice.
In 1997, she became an adjunct law professor
at Ventura College of Law and later thatsame year left private practice
to develop a self-help legalaccess center for the VenturaCounty Superior Court,where she has worked as asenior attorney ever since. Shecurrently serves as an adjunctprofessor at Union Instituteand University.
Besides teaching, Ms. Rasnow
has authored numerous arti-cles in local newspapers andlegal publications on access tojustice issues.
She is a member of the
National Lawyers Guild,
among many other bar associations, and hernumerous awards include the VenturaCounty NAACP President’s Award,California W omen Lawyers President’s
Award, and California State Bar President’s
Pro Bono Service Award. 
•Donor Spotlight: Tina Rasnow
Founded in 1966 by attorneys representing civil rights demonstrators in the South, the Center for Constitutional Rights is a nonprofit legal and 
educational organization dedicated to advancing and protecting the rights guaranteed by the United States Constitution and the Universal Declarationof Human Rights. CCR is committed to the creative use of law as a positive force for social change.The CCR newsletter 
is produced twice ayear. For the latest
updates and action alerts, visitwww.ccr-ny.organd sign up for CCR’s on-line mailing list.666 Broadway, 7th Floor, New York, NY 10012
Tina w orking wit hastudent at
the Mobile Self-Help Legal
Access Center.Contact 
Sue Troutman at
(212) 614-6448 
for more information
about CCR’s
Founders Circle 
or Thelma Newman
Society (planned
giving program) 
or write:
CCR 
Attn. Sue Troutman
666 Broadway, 7th
Floor
New York, NY
10012