CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookWhen Judge Michael Posnor denied 
the defendant’s motion to dismiss 
CCR’s case, Sexual Minorities Uganda 
(SMUG) v. Lively, on August 14, fol-lowing the January 2013 oral argu-ments, CCR and our clients had two big reasons to celebrate. First, the groundbreaking case would pro-ceed, allowing us to move forward to hold Scott Lively accountable for the persecution of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) Ugandans. Second, the ruling recog -
nized that persecution based on sexual orientation or gender identity is a crime against humanity, an historic win for LGBTI rights worldwide. 
Readers of our newsletter will recall 
that CCR filed this case in March 2012, using the Alien Tort Statute (ATS), the legal tool CCR pioneered to hold hu -
man rights abusers accountable in U.S. courts for crimes committed abroad. The suit alleges that since 2002, Lively, notorious for blaming the Holocaust on gays in Germany and claiming the Nazi Party was a product of gay fascists, conspired with key anti-gay extremists in Uganda to deprive the LGBTI community of their fundamen -
tal rights and also assisted in efforts to develop and introduce the notorious “Kill the Gays” bill. Lively’s efforts are not limited to Uganda. He has worked in a number of countries, particularly in Eastern and Central Europe, to im-plement his program of persecution. Most recently, his “fingerprints” can be found on Russia’s recent wave of anti-gay laws. Yet like the Holocaust, Lively accuses the Russian LGBTI community of creating the wave of anti-gay violence they currently face. During the nine-week long trial in CCR’s groundbreaking federal class action lawsuit, Floyd v. City of New York, the 
court heard scathing testimony from witnesses, including NYPD police officers, field supervisors, precinct com -
manders, senior policymaking officials, criminologists, police practices experts and New Yorkers who have been stopped by the New York Police Department (NYPD)  
illegally without suspicion and on the basis of their  
race. Witnesses told stories of being stopped without any cause in front of their homes, on their way to work, or  
simply walking down the street to buy milk. Our data  
presented at trial demonstrated that approximately 85  
percent of people stopped are Black and Latino, even though these two groups make up only 52 percent of the city’s population and, as evidence at trial revealed, a stan-dard profile of a stop-and-frisk target is instilled through -
out the NYPD as “young, male, black.” Moreover, almost 90 percent of people stopped were not engaged in any criminal activity. 
On August 12, Judge Shira A. Scheindlin issued two land-
mark rulings in Floyd. In her first opinion, which was just shy of 200 pages, Judge Scheindlin found that the NYPD had indeed engaged in a policy and widespread practice of unconstitutional and racially discriminatory stops and frisks. Judge Scheindlin wrote, “The City’s highest officials have turned a blind eye to the evidence that officers are 
CCR Attorney Darius Charney and Executive Director Vince Warren at press  
conference announcing victory in Floyd v. City of New York . Behind them are 
clients from Floyd and its predecessor Daniels v. City of New York.WINTER 2013
Stop and Frisk Victory but the Fight for 
Justice Continues
continued on page 3
continued on page 4CCR Victory Against Anti-Gay Extremist Advances  
LGBTI Rights Globally 
Photo: Pam BradshawCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookFruits of our Labors
So much has happened since our last newsletter, it’s hard 
to know where to begin. We are harvesting the fruits of our labor over many years across all of our dockets, and it’s been without a doubt the most successful several months in our history. 
Of course, the biggest victory was the historic August ruling 
in our landmark case, Floyd v. City of New York, challeng-ing New York City’s stop-and-frisk policies. The trial last spring lasted nine weeks and the ruling mandated a com-prehensive set of reforms with community input. Since late October, the case has been caught up in a spate of virtually unprecedented appeals motions, orders and responses – the outcome of which is unclear as of this writing. What is clear is that CCR put stop and frisk on the map in New York City and across the country, and one way or another, it will be reformed. Just a week after the Floyd ruling the City Council 
passed legislation reining in the NYPD’s practice, overrid-ing Mayor Bloomberg’s veto. Meanwhile, Bill de Blasio ran for mayor on an anti-stop-and-frisk platform, and on Elec-tion Day, he won in a three-to-one landslide. 
In the very same week that the Floyd decision was handed 
down CCR scored another groundbreaking legal advance. 
In denying Scott Lively’s motion to dismiss, the judge in our SMUG v. Lively case ruled that persecution on the basis 
of sexual orientation and gender identity is a crime against humanity and that the fundamental human rights of LGBTI people are protected under international law. 
This is one of many firsts in what has been a banner year for 
CCR. The settlement of one of our cases against private mili-tary contractors for their role in the torture of Iraqis at Abu Ghraib was the first time any torture victims have received compensation in U.S. courts post-9/11. One of the two cases we won against ICE for their “sleeping while Latino” home raids included winning policy changes as well as compensa -
tion for the victims of these illegal raids. 
Meanwhile, we also won our class action lawsuit against 
the state of Louisiana for putting people on the sex offender registry list based solely on a solicitation conviction; more than 800 people were removed from the registry in this follow-up to our previous victory against the state. 
Our work in Chelsea (formerly Bradley) Manning’s case – 
fighting for press and public access to the court proceedings in this historically significant government whistleblower case – ended in formal defeat in June, but along the way the government published hundreds of the documents we had gone to court to have released. We also scored signifi-cant steps towards accountability in our international case against the Vatican for its role in enabling and covering up rape and other abuse of children and vulnerable adults. The International Criminal Court indicated it would not proceed with a formal investigation at this time, but left open the possibility of reconsidering the case. At the same time, how -
ever, the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child invited information from us and has now required the Vatican to answer questions and to appear at a public hearing in Janu -
ary. It is the first time ever that a UN body has called the Vatican to account for its role in the abuse. 
Every time I type the words “the first time,” “groundbreak -
ing,” “historic,” “victory” in this column I get the chills. 
CCR continues to be true to its mission, doing cutting-edge legal work, making a real difference in the law and the lives of marginalized and oppressed people.
–Vincent WarrenLetter from the Executive Director
2
Vince speaking at a Communities United for Police Reform Rally for NYPD  
Accountability and Community Safety (September 2012).
New Report on the Death Penalty
More than 30 years after the Supreme 
Court attempted to “modernize” the use of the death penalty, conditions on many death rows across the U.S. remain bar-baric and research continues to show that race is the presiding factor in determining who is sentenced to death. In May, CCR and the International Federation for Hu -
man Rights (FIDH) undertook a fact-find-ing mission in CA and LA to evaluate the death penalty in these jurisdictions under a human rights framework. The result is a groundbreaking new report, authored by our Be Just Fellows, Susan Hu and Jessica Lee. The report is  
available at: www.ccrjustice.org/death-penalty 
CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook3Stop and Frisk Victory  (continued from cover)
conducting stops in a racially discriminatory manner.” Her 
second order laid out a series of reforms necessary to bring NYPD stop-and-frisk practices into compliance with the U.S. Constitution, including the appointment of an inde-pendent monitor to oversee the development and imple -
mentation of reforms that must incorporate the input of communities most heavily impacted by the NYPD’s illegal stop-and-frisk practices.
This sweeping victory has been 14 years in the making. 
After countless discriminatory and illegal stops made by the NYPD, they are finally being held accountable. This is a victory for all New Yorkers. It is time for the city to stop denying that the NYPD’s stop-and-frisk practice is a prob-lem, and instead work with the community to fix it.
Instead, the city immediately appealed the rulings and 
filed a motion for a stay in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in September. In response, community groups, labor organizations, and other allies flooded the steps of City Hall and submitted declarations in support of the reform process moving forward to the Court of Appeals. On October 29, CCR’s Darius Charney argued before a three-judge panel against the city’s motion for a stay and demonstrated why the reform process needed to move forward rather than waiting for a resolution of the city’s appeal of the case.
Just two days later, in what the New York Times rightfully 
called both a “bad ruling” and “unwise,” the U.S. Court of 
Appeals for the Second Circuit stayed Judge Scheindlin’s liability and remedies rulings. While the stay does not overturn Scheindlin’s finding that the NYPD’s stop-and-frisk practices were unconstitutional and racially discrimi -
natory, the appellate court went a step further, of its own accord, and removed Judge Scheindlin from the case. 
Recognizing that “justice delayed is justice denied,” the 
day after the New York City mayoral election, CCR joined with members of Communities United for Police Reform (CPR) – an unprecedented campaign bringing together a movement of community members, lawyers, research -
ers and activists working together to end discriminatory policing practices in New York – back on the steps of City Hall. We called for the end of an era of discriminatory policing practices and on Mayor-elect Bill de Blasio to live up to his campaign promise to drop the city’s appeal of the stop-and-frisk ruling and to drop a legal effort to an anti-profiling law passed by City Council so that the much-needed reforms can proceed as necessary. CCR also launched an online petition calling on the mayor-elect to drop the appeal and our partners and allies across the city echoed our call.CCR will be back in court challenging this ruling, and  
we will continue our advocacy efforts for a fair and just New York. We won’t stop until the NYPD works for  
and is accountable to the communities that it is supposed to serve.
For updates and more information on the case and advocacy efforts go to: www.ccrjustice.org/floyd and www.stopandfrisk.org 
Be Just Fellow Chauniqua Young speaks at rally urging Mayor-Elect Bill de Blasio 
to Drop the Appeal.
Partner Spotlight: Riptide Communications Engineering Front-Page News
Media coverage of the Floyd trial, verdict and appeals 
process has been tremendous. The story has been on the front page of the New York Times three times (so far) and has been covered in literally thousands of articles and broadcasts. Coverage like this does not just “happen”; it is engineered, and at the center of CCR’s media work on Floyd has been our longtime media partner Riptide Communications. Working with CCR’s Communications Director Dorothee Benz and the entire in-house communications team, Riptide’s David Lerner was an integral part of the planning of the Floyd media strat-egy and the point person on executing much of that strategy. He was also the one who was at the courthouse every day throughout the nine-week trial, answering reporters’ ques -
tions, lining up interviews, and herding cats (aka lawyers) to facilitate a twice-daily press briefing. Riptide has been a CCR partner for decades and has been involved in many of our seminal cases, such at the Filartiga case that put the Alien Tort Statute on the map of U.S. human rights litigation. 
Photo: An-Tuan WilliamsCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookIn March 2013, Lively’s lawyers 
from Liberty Counsel, the right-wing organization affiliated with Liberty University/Falwell Ministries, filed supplemental briefing arguing that the case should be dismissed based on the Kiobel  decision (see Kiobel  article on 
page 5). However, Posnor’s decision, which is the first positive ATS ruling post-Kiobel , rebuked that argument 
stating that the restrictions from Kiobel  
do not apply to this case, noting how a substantial amount of Lively’s conduct was in the U.S. The Judge went on to say that, in fact, Lively has maintained a sort of “Homophobia Central” in Springfield. 
Judge Posnor’s decision had other 
important holdings. Most importantly, he held that: “Widespread, systematic persecution of LGBTI people consti -
tutes a crime against humanity that unquestionably violates international norms…. The history and current exis-tence of discrimination against LGBTI people is precisely what qualifies them as a distinct targeted group eligible for protection under international law. The fact that a group continues to be vulnerable to widespread, systematic persecution in some parts of the world simply cannot shield one who com -
mits a crime against humanity from liability.”
The decision sends a strong message 
to those like Lively who export hate: you can and will be held accountable. The ruling will contribute significantly to strengthening accountability for widespread persecution of LGBTI people worldwide. As the case has now entered a new phase, the work has intensified in Uganda as well as in the U.S. We will not rest until we bring justice and accountability for our clients and stop Scott Lively. 
CCR Attorney Pam Spees, SMUG Executive Director Frank Mugisha and CCR friends and family at God Loves 
Uganda film screening in New York City. 
4CCR Victory Against Anti-Gay Extremist  (continued from cover)
On February 28 – the same day former Pope Benedict XVI stepped down – CCR took our work on behalf of partner and client, SNAP (the Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests) to the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child when we filed a shadow report documenting the ongoing crisis of sexual violence against children in the Catholic Church. The report (available on CCR’s website) lays out the depth and breadth of the worldwide prob-lem; the policies and practices within the church that have enabled the violence; and the rights in the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) that are consistently and repeatedly violated by the Vatican. As a result, the CRC summoned the Vatican to report on its record of protecting children from sexual violence and safeguarding their well -
being and dignity. This is an historic moment. It is the first known instance that the Holy See is being called to account for its actions on these issues before an international body with authority. And survivors and CCR will have a seat at the table. In June 2013, CCR and SNAP participated in the closed pre-sessional meeting to help determine the issues and scope of questions to address to the Holy See when it formally reports in January 2014. 
On another front in the work for accountability, in early 
June, the Center heard from the International Criminal Court (ICC) prosecutor’s office that they were not proceed -
ing with a further investigation at this time. However,  CCR and SNAP were heartened that the ICC left the door open to future submissions and their indication that they would reconsider their decision in light of additional evidence. They also urged us to pursue prosecutions in national jurisdictions and a remedy in other international fora. It is significant that this response allows for contin -
ued work and that the prosecutor did not suggest that in all cases these aren’t serious crimes that do not merit the court’s attention, nor did they suggest they cannot investi -
gate the church hierarchy. CCR and SNAP are considering next steps.
In Historic First, Vatican Summoned to Report before UN
Photo: Pam BradshawCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook5In July, CCR was in court to argue against U.S. govern -
ment officials’ efforts to dismiss our targeted killing 
case, Al-Aulaqi v. Panetta, which we filed jointly with the 
ACLU on behalf of three American citizens – including 16-year-old Abdulrahman Al-Aulaqi – who were killed by U.S. drones in Yemen in 2011. Government officials are arguing that the courts should step aside when the executive branch conducts extrajudicial killings, that due process does not require judicial process, and that the executive branch can be trusted to be judge, jury, and executioner when it comes to fundamental rights – all claims the judge found “troubl[ing].” “The executive is not an effective check on the executive when it comes to an individual’s constitutional rights,” she said at oral argument. “[Y]es, they have constitutional rights, but there is no remedy for those constitutional rights. That’s what you’re telling me. …[This is] an assertion of authority that says the Court has no role in this. None, none, none.” This exchange is a sobering summation of the administration’s position in our case. When the government claims that it can deprive people of their most fundamental right – their very lives – without any meaningful check, more than ever we need organizations like CCR to be in court, demanding that the government account for its actions. A ruling could come any day.In April 2013, the U.S. Supreme Court issued a disap-pointing decision in Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Shell (described in detail in the Winter 2012 newsletter) that limited the ability of U.S. courts to hear cases arising from human rights violations committed abroad under the Alien Tort Statute (ATS). The Court found that there must be a more direct tie to the U.S. for the court to have jurisdiction, finding the case must “touch and concern” the U.S. “with sufficient force,” thereby curtailing the ability of plain -
tiffs to sue, particularly in “foreign-cubed cases” (where the defendant and plaintiff are foreign, and the alleged conduct all occurred on foreign soil). There are numerous ways that it can be argued that cases “touch and concern” the U.S., including when the defendant is a U.S. citizen or corporation, when some conduct occurs in the U.S., or when an important national interest – like the protection and promotion of human rights – is implicated. These arguments are currently at play in courts around the country. The Kiobel decision has already impacted CCR’s work, and some of these cases will help define the future scope of the ATS:
In April, our case against Roberto Micheletti, who became 
de facto President of Honduras after the 2009 coup, for the death of 19-year-old Isis Murillo, was dismissed. The judge found that the District Court in Texas was not the appropriate forum to hear the case, due to the recent limi -
tations laid out in Kiobel. CCR has taken Isis’ case to the International Criminal Court and continues a wide array of advocacy regarding human rights in Honduras.
CCR’s case Al Shimari v. CACI, challenging the torture of 
detainees at Abu Ghraib by private military contractor 
CACI, was dismissed in June. The court narrowly inter -
preted the “presumption against the extraterritorial ap -
plication” of the ATS set forth in Kiobel to foreclose claims 
arising outside the U.S. – even though CACI is a U.S. corporation, it conspired with U.S. soldiers to commit war crimes who were punished in U.S. court martials, and the crimes occurred at a time when the U.S. exercised total ju-risdiction over Abu Ghraib and occupied Iraq. CCR filed its appeal brief with the Fourth Circuit on October 29. Six amicus briefs, including by retired military and the UN Special Rapporteurs on Torture, were filed on November 5. Briefing will continue through the end of the year and we anticipate oral argument will be heard in 2014.
Despite the frustrations, there is reason for hope. In  
August, CCR received the first positive ATS decision  
following the Kiobel decision in Sexual Minorities  
Uganda v. Scott Lively when the Judge denied Lively’s 
Motion to Dismiss and allowed the case to proceed. (see article on cover)SCOTUS Limits the Applicability 
of the ATS, CCR Fights On
CCR Attorney Pardiss Kebriaei, Legal Director Baher Azmy and Attorney Maria 
LaHood outside the courthouse following argument in Al-Aulaqi v. Panetta .CCR In Court Challenging Executive’s 
Targeted Killing Program
Save the Date, SoCal!
From Pelican Bay to Guantánamo Bay:  
The U.S. Inhumane Detention Policy
Join CCR Executive Director, Vince Warren on Tues, February 4th.
Co-sponsored by Community Coalition and SHARE. 
Details at: www.ccrjustice.org/calendarCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook6The Human Impact of Pelican Bay Prison
CCR’s lawsuit challenging prolonged 
solitary confinement, torturous condi-tions, and an all-but-nonexistent re -
view process in the Security Housing Units (SHUs) at the notorious Pelican Bay State Prison is going strong. In September, CCR attorneys urged the court to certify our case, Ashker v. Brown, as a class action, which will al -
low it to apply to all Pelican Bay SHU prisoners, hundreds of whom have languished there for over a decade. We expect a ruling any day!
Meanwhile, CCR, activists on the 
ground, prisoners’ families, and the prisoners themselves have continued to advocate against, and organize to end, long-term solitary confinement. Over the summer, 30,000 prisoners throughout California engaged in their third hunger strike protesting SHU confinement and conditions. The strike ended after 60 days, when the California legislature agreed to hold hear -
ings examining inhumane SHU conditions. As we always do, CCR has continued to forefront the voices of our clients and their families in the Pelican Bay case. Beginning on the first day of the hunger strike, Truthout ran a series of first-person testimonials by each of the Ashker plaintiffs. Then, shortly after the hunger strike ended, Marie Levin, the sister of CCR client Ronnie Dew-berry, was featured on NPR’s Story Corps program, sharing the personal impact of more than two decades of her brother’s isolation in the Pelican Bay SHU. Finally, on the eve of oral argument on CCR’s class certification motion, the San Jose Mercury News  ran 
an op-ed by Pelican Bay SHU pris-
oner Kevin McCarthy. Kevin is not a plaintiff in Ashker, but 
explained why it is so important that the case be certified as a class action—so that he, and hundreds of others, can win relief from the conditions in which they live. His story is a powerful reminder of why Ashker should apply to every prisoner suffering the torture that the case is seeking to end.
Bittersweet Progress at Guantánamo
As we round the corner on the 12th anniversary of the first detentions at Guantánamo Bay, we reflect on a year of heart-wrenching protest, slow prog -
ress, and cautious hope. Sparked by sudden searches of Qurans, and fueled by over a decade of indefinite deten-tion, between February and August most of the 166 men at Guantánamo participated in a hunger strike that galvanized efforts to close the prison, captivated the media, and even drove President Obama to deliver a speech in which he recommitted to closing the prison and lifted his self-imposed ban on transfers to Yemen. Despite the high-profile pledges, however, only two men have been transferred out of Guantánamo since then. Meanwhile, Congress held its first Guantánamo hearing since Obama took office, and the Inter American Commission on Human Rights held another hearing – its second in six months, at which CCR attorneys again testified – on what it called the “flagrant violation of international law” and “human rights crisis” that is Guantánamo. 
These developments are bittersweet. 
They represent progress, to be sure, but it is small and slow, and it is a reminder that steps to close the prison could be bigger and bolder, concerned with human rights rather than a politi -
cal playbook. Still, there is an oppor -
tunity to leverage this turn of events, and CCR has done just that. We have never let up on calling out President Obama when he has disingenuously claimed that Congress tied both his hands behind his back. We have con -
sistently issued statements, published opinion pieces, and saturated our social media with this message. Now, the two recent transfers have demon-strated that he does, indeed, have the ability to act—and they have undercut his ability to continue to claim he lacks the power to send these men home. Meanwhile, we have not allowed the people behind the political battle over Guantánamo to fade from public view. In recent months, CCR published several opinion pieces profiling our clients, discussing the collective pun -
ishment against Yemenis, and describ -
ing the effects of the hunger strike in gut-wrenching detail. 
We have kept up the fight, working 
as hard to close this prison in 2013 as we did in 2012, and every year since it opened. We will do the same in 2014 and beyond, until this shameful chap-ter in our nation’s history is closed.
The restraint chair used to force-feed detainees  
on hunger strike.
Marie Levin, sister of CCR client, being interviewed 
outside the courthouse.
Photo: Jason LeopoldCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook7Ramzi is an Associate Professor 
of Law at the City University of New York where he directs the Immigrant & Non-Citizen Rights Clinic and also super -
vises the Creating Law Enforce-ment Accountability & Respon-sibility (CLEAR) project. With his students, Professor Kassem represents prisoners of vari -
ous nationalities presently or formerly held at American facilities at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, at Bagram Air Base, Afghanistan, at so-called “Black Sites,” and at other detention sites worldwide, as well as victims of domestic state surveillance, among other clients. He studied at Columbia and the Sorbonne and has taught at Fordham University School of Law and Yale Law School. 
“It was as an Ella Baker that I really began integrating the larger 
social justice community. It speaks tomes that many of the people I worked with as an Ella Baker remain allies and partners in my work today.”After nearly 14 years helping to 
shape the course and develop-ment of CCR’s work, Annette Warren Dickerson has left her position as Director of Educa-tion and Outreach to explore the possibilities of doing more direct, hands-on advocacy and strategic campaign work. An -
nette made a significant contri-bution to CCR’s growth, both in size and stature. Her vision for what CCR could do as an advocacy organization resulted in her building the Education and Outreach Department into a fully staffed department; ca -
pable of meeting the increasing demands for more and stron-ger advocacy in support of movements and on key CCR issues.  It is no surprise to anyone who knows Annette that her skills – warmth, compassion, political acumen and drive – led to deep and meaningful relationships with our allies. Annette spearhead-ed CCR’s incredibly successful Prison Telephone Campaign, has been a role model for many both inside and outside of CCR and has been an inspiration to hundreds of Ella Bakers who passed through our summer internship program during her tenure. We know she will be doing great things in the next phase! She will be greatly missed.
CCR in Brief….
• CCR’s efforts to gain access to documents and  
transcripts in PFC Chelsea Manning’s trial resulted in 
hundreds being released to the public and the issue of public access to the trial became a national discussion.
• After successfully challenging the requirement that 
our nine clients register as sex offenders because they were convicted under Louisiana’s archaic Crime Against Nature by Solicitation (CANS) statute, CCR 
extended this victory to the entire class of individuals 
with CANS convictions. This resulted in the life-changing removal of 870 people from Louisiana’s sex offender registry.
• W e appealed the dismissal of our lawsuit challenging 
the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act arguing that  
the judge incorrectly dismissed the case by misinter -
preting it as criminalizing only property destruction 
and threats, despite the law’s broad prohibition on 
causing an animal enterprise any loss of property, including profits.
• T he U.S. agreed to pay over $1.2M in attorneys’ fees 
in CCR’s lawsuit NDLON v. ICE . CCR brought the 
case to force the U.S. to turn over documents re: the 
so-called “Secure Communities” program revealing 
the program’s true cost and scope and giving our allies critical information for their advocacy efforts.
• As a result of more than a decade of litigation  
challenging racial bias in the FDNY, 2013’s entering class of firefighters is the most diverse in the city’s 
history. We continue to represent the Vulcan Society 
and class members pursuing back pay, compensatory damages, and additional claims of racial discrimination.
• CCR appealed the dismissal of high-level officials in 
our Turkmen v. Ashcroft case challenging the roundup and illegal detention of Muslim and Arab immigrants in the post-9/11 racial profiling dragnet.
• After a two-month investigation in which CCR repre -
sented Brooklyn College Students for Justice in Pales -
tine, the City University of New York issued a report 
vindicating the student group from accusations of 
anti-Semitic discrimination related to their event on the movement for boycott, divestment and sanctions against Israel. The investigation came about following a high-profile attack by public officials and others who 
had tried to get the event cancelled.  
• CCR’s Bertha Social Justice Institute Director , Purvi 
Shah and other CCR allies and trainers, presented  
a workshop at the National Lawyers Guild annual  conference in Puerto Rico on Movement Lawyering 
and Activism.Thank You to Annette Dickerson
Update from an Ella: Ramzi Kassem
Annette honoring Ella Baker’s legacy and the 
20th Anniversary of CCR’s Ella Baker program 
at the 2008 President’s Reception.
Photo: Justin NormanPhoto: Robin MartinVote for CCR by December 31! 
Every year members of CREDO Mobile vote 
to donate millions of dollars 
to progressive organizations 
and causes, and CCR is on the ballot for 2013. If you are a member of CREDO Mobile or 
Working Assets, go to www.credomobile.
com/vote and vote for CCR! 
 Not a CREDO member? It’s easy to join.  
Simply go to credoaction.com and take an 
action for justice. Once you’re a CREDO Ac-tion member, cast your vote for CCR!
Make an online gift and consider  
making it recurring. 
It’s fast, easy and secure, and your gift will go to work 
right away. Online gifts are a 
greener way to give – re-ducing mailing expenses and supplies so more of your gift goes to 
programs. Even better, make it recurring – 
recurring gifts provide CCR with a reliable, steady source of support making it possible for us to plan better and take on more cases. Sign up for a monthly or quarterly recurring 
gift at: www.CCRjustice.org/donatetoday.
Give the Gift of CCR!
Ask friends and family to make gifts to CCR in your honor this 
holiday season OR make gifts to 
CCR in honor of the folks on your shopping list. These gifts will pay tribute to our shared social justice values, while fueling CCR’s continued efforts to seek justice on behalf of 
our clients and the communities we serve. 
Do this online at www.CCRjustice.org/donate
Donate stock or make a transfer 
through your IRA.
If you sell depreciated stock and give the proceeds to CCR, you may be able to claim the loss on your taxes, as 
well as the charitable deduction. If 
you donate appreciated securities to CCR, you may avoid capital gains taxes and receive a charitable deduction. If you have an Individualized Retirement Account, 
you can make a donation to CCR as part of 
a charitable rollover. Please contact CCR at 212-614-6489 for more information.
Use social media and share the news!
Follow @theCCR on Twitter 
and retweet us. Like “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook and share our posts. Subscribe to our email 
list at www.CCRjustice.org and forward our 
newsletters and action alerts to your friends. 
Host a house party to fundraise for CCR 
and to introduce friends and allies to CCR’s 
work. Attend a local event if CCR is in your 
neighborhood—and bring a friend! If you 
are on our email list you will receive in-vitations, or you can view public events 
on our calendar at www.CCRjustice.org/
calendar.666 Broadway, 7th Floor, New York, NY 10012 • www.CCRjustice.org
The Center for Constitutional Rights is dedicated to advancing and protecting the rights guaranteed by the United States Constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Founded in 1966 
by attorneys who represented civil rights movements in the South, CCR is a non-profit legal and educational organization committed to the creative use of law as a positive force for social change.Top Ways You Can Support CCR This Holiday Season!
Breaking News:
Stop and Frisk Victory
Victory Against Anti-Gay  
ExtremistVatican Summoned to  
Report before UNTargeted Killing UpdateSCOTUS limits ATS,  
CCR Fights On
For even more information on 
these cases and all of CCR’s work check out our newly released 2013 Annual Report at: ccrjustice.org/annual-report