 
 
  
“My Only Crime Was       
That I Was a Doctor”  
 How the Syrian Government Targets Health  
Workers for Arrest, Detention, and Torture  
December 2019  Physicians for Human Rights  
 
 2  
 
 
 
  Acknowledgments  
This report was written by Physicians for Human Rights 
(PHR) staff members Rayan Koteiche, MENA researcher, 
and Sere ne Murad, associate researcher, with co -
authorship by Michele Heisler, MD, MPA, medical director. 
Phelim Kine, PHR deputy director of programs and 
director of research and investigations, also contributed to 
the writing of the report. External review was p rovided by 
Adrienne Fricke, JD, MA, senior fellow at the Harvard 
Humanitarian Initiative.  
  
The clinical evaluations for this report were conducted by 
Michele Heisler; Ahmad Banasr, MD, head of the Clinical 
Forensic Department in Tunisia; and Sana Hamzeh, PhD, 
head of treatment and rehabilitation of torture and trauma 
survivors at Restart Center,  Lebanon.  
 
PHR leadership and staff contributed to the writing and 
editing of this report, including DeDe Dunevant, director of 
communications; Derek Hodel, interim program director; 
Donna McKay, executive director; Michael Payne, interim 
director of advocacy; and Susannah Sirkin, director of 
policy. The report benefitted from review by PHR Emeritus 
Board Member Robert S. Lawrence, MD. The report was 
reviewed, edited, and prepared for publication by Claudia 
Rader, MS, senior communications manager. Mul timedia 
associated with the report was coordinated by Hannah 
Dunphy, digital communications manager. Research was 
contributed by Isabelle Clements, MENA intern. Theresa 
McMackin and Maya Tessler, communications interns, 
helped prepare the report for public ation.  
 
PHR would also like to thank Syria Relief and 
Development, the Union of Medical Care and Relief 
Organizations, the Syrian American Medical Society, the 
Assistance Coordination Unit, the Center for Victims of 
Torture, and Restart Center for the supp ort they provided 
to the research. PHR is also grateful to Ali Barazi and his 
associates for translating the report. PHR is especially 
indebted to all the survivors of detention and torture who 
shared their stories.  
  
This report is supported in part with the German Federal 
Foreign Office’s funds by ifa (Institut für 
Auslandsbeziehungen), Funding Programme zivik.  
 
Cover: Leila, a paramedic, 
was detained and tortured by 
Syrian security forces, who 
accused her of providing 
medical assistance to 
combatants  and supporting 
“terrorists.”   Contents  
3  Executive Summary  
7 Introduction  
8 Background  
11 Methodology  
13 Findings  
37 Legal Framework  
39 Conclusion  
40 Recommendations  
43 Endnotes  
   
  
 3 Executive Summary  
 
In 2011, t he Syrian government cracked  down with extreme  violence on mass 
popular protests calling for sweeping economic and political reform  after more 
than 50 years of dictatorship . The anti-government opposition  responded to that 
repression by organizing both political and military resistance to the Syrian 
regime . By mid -2012 , Syria was experiencing  a full -fledged internal conflict .1 For 
the past eight years, the Syrian government and it s allies  have sought to 
systematically extinguish dissent through every means at their disposal, a 
strategy that has entail ed massive human rights violations.  The conflict has killed 
hundreds of thousands of civilians and displaced more than  half of Syria’s 
population internally and across the country’s borders.  The Syrian  government 
has prosecuted the war by intentionally targeting  civilian populations in restive 
areas and any  perceived opposition supporters. It has imposed sieges on 
opposit ion-held areas ,2 shelled and bombarded densely populated urban centers,  
and conducted a  campaign of arrest, torture , and enforced disappearance of 
suspected insurgents and their supporters  that has laid waste to much of the 
country and sparked an exodus of  millions of Syrians seeking refuge in 
neighboring countries and beyond .3  
 
The Syrian government and its allies have also systematic ally target ed health 
facilities and health workers  as part of a wider strategy of war aimed at break ing 
civilian populations  and forcing them into submission .4 Since the beginning of 
the conflict, Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) has documented 583 attacks on 
health facilities; t he Syrian government and its allies have been responsible for 
carrying out more than  90 percent of these attacks.5 Through their purposeful 
assault on health, the Syrian government and its allies have systematically denied 
access to medical care in areas outside of their immediate control and actively 
persecuted health workers wh o, in adherence to  their professional ethics, 
courageously provide such care to the sick and wounded, including opposition 
supporters .6 The Syrian government has  blatantly disregarded special protections 
afforded to medical units and personnel  under international humanitarian law  
and has branded health workers  – who provide nondiscriminatory  health care  in 
line with their legal and ethical obligations  – as enemies of the state.  
 
While m uch documentation and data have been presented to policymakers and 
the public regarding the relentless bombing and destruction of health facilities,7 
less is known about the experiences and suffering of health personnel who have 
been targeted for their medical work during the conflict. For this report, PHR 
clinician researchers conducted semi -structured interviews and brief structured 
psychological ass essments between June and August 2019 with 21 formerly 
detained Syrian health care workers, of whom two were women and 19 were men. 
These included people working in a wide range of health sectors: physicians 
(seven), pharmacists (four), medical volunteers (three), paramedics (one) , and 
psychiatrists (one). While other parties to the conflict – including non -state 
armed groups – have perpetrated crimes, including arbitrary detention, this  
 4 report focuses on detentions carried out by the Syrian government in o rder to 
provide further insight into its strategy of systematic targeting of health 
infrastructure and personnel throughout the conflict. While more data may be 
necessary to generalize knowledge about the targeting  of Syrian health care 
workers since the s tart of the conflict in 2011, this report illustrates how the 
Syrian government has effectively criminalized the provision of 
nondiscriminatory care to all, regardless of political affiliation.  
 
PHR research focused on the following key issues: To what ex tent, if at all, were 
health workers targeted for detention and ill -treatment due to their provision of 
nondiscriminat ory care and other efforts to support the provision of care? What 
were their experiences in detention and what types of ill -treatment, if any, were 
they subjected to? What was the impact of the detention and ill -treatment of 
health workers on their decision to leave Syria, and their willingness to practice 
in their field , and on their desire to  potentially  return to Syria?  
 
The study reveal s that the majority of the formerly detained health workers 
interviewed by PHR were arrested by Syrian government forces specifically 
because of their status as care providers, and their real or perceived involvement 
in the provision of health services to opposition members and sympathizers. 
Through examination of health workers’ experiences in detention, the report 
shows the link between their involvement in the provision of nondiscriminatory 
health care and their arrest, imprisonment, and ill -treatment in  detention. 
Although the interviewees’ detention experiences differed, their accounts point 
consistently to the Syrian government’s system of detention, interrogation, and 
torture of those providing health care, or supporting access to health care, for 
perceived opponents. The health workers whose experiences PHR has 
documented are among the many who continue to provide and enable health 
care, despite the associated risks. This report details the price they paid for doing 
so, while recognizing that they are among those  fortu nate enough to  have 
survived Syrian government detention facilities.  
 
In most of the cases documented in this study, Syrian security forces inflicted 
torture on detainees as an integral part of the interrogation process. Interviewees 
reported that Syrian security forces regularly beat, humiliated, and subjected 
them to stress positions. In some cases, they were burned, shocked with 
electricity, and sexually assaulted. Interviewees described an interrogation 
process aimed to force “confessions” to activitie s considered treasonous under 
the Syrian  Counter -terrorism Law 19 (2012),8 as well as to gather information on 
other health workers and health care activities. In many cases, interrogations 
centered on the interviewees’ involvement in medical work. Syrian government 
interrogators and torturers accused many of the former detainees of working in 
or establishing field hospitals, providing medical treatment and material support 
to “terrorists,” and other acts considered to be subversive. Many of the 
interviewee s who appeared in Syrian courts were confronted with confessions 
extracted under torture and reported that they were accused by judges of having 
been involved in providing or supporting medical care to “terrorists.”   
 5 Several interviewees reported long -term health consequences due to lack of 
access to medical care in detention after torture. In all cases, the interviewees 
were subjected to inhumane living conditions within detention: overcrowding; 
lack of sanitation; lack of access to food, water, toilet s, and medical care; and lack 
of ventilation. The conditions described may also constitute ill -treatment and, in 
some cases, torture. The lack of medical care prompted some of the interviewees 
to provide health services to others in detention, even as they  witnessed the 
deadly consequences of torture, abuse, and poor conditions, and often felt 
powerless in the face of disease and injury.  
 
Based on voluminous documentation of the Syrian Government’s violent 
targeting of the health sector and its systematic use of detention and torture to 
suppress perceived dissent, Physicians for Human Rights finds that the Syrian 
government has violated both national and international laws as well as basic 
medical ethics and the obligation to care for the sick and wounded w ithout 
discrimination in all circumstances.  In this report’s recommendations, Physicians 
for Human Rights calls upon:  
 
• Parties to the conflict, particularly the Syrian government and affiliated 
forces, to immediately and unconditionally release all arbitra rily or 
unlawfully detained individuals and allow unconditional access to official and 
unofficial detention sites;  
• The Syrian government to respect the rights and dignity of all Syrian citizens, 
and particularly health workers on whom the country’s civilian population 
relies;  
• United Nations member states, regional bodies, and the international 
community to hold the Sy rian government accountable for its human rights 
and international humanitarian law violations.  
 
 
Dr. Youssef : A Surgeon Tortured for Supporting “Terrorists”  
 
Dr. Youssef’s interrogators repeatedly asked him about 
the medical point network he had helped to establish 
and the network’s members. Interrogators told him they 
detained him for supporting “terrorists” and working 
against the regime.  
Dr. Youssef was in his  fourth year of surgical residency when the conflict in 
Syria erupted. He joined sever al friends to create an anonymous network of 
volunteers who established medical points9 to treat individuals who were 
injured while peacefully protesting.  
 
On August 21, 2011, seven plainclothes security officers arrested Dr. Youssef 
as he was treating a patient in a hospital in the Qalamoun region north of  
 6 Rural Damascus  governorate . They took him to the al -Khatib  State Security 
Branch. There, the authorities took his personal effects, strip -searched him, 
and confined him in a 1 -by-1.5-meter cell for the next 69 days. He was not 
charged or given any reason for his arrest and was not allowed to contact his 
family or seek counsel. State security authorities interrogated and tortured 
Dr. Youssef daily for periods of between one and three hours. The 
interrogat ors had detailed knowledge of his activities, including awareness of 
jokes he had told to certain individuals on specific days. Dr. Youssef’s 
interrogators repeatedly asked him about the medical point network he had 
helped to establish and the network’s me mbers. Interrogators told him they 
detained him for supporting “terrorists” and working against the regime. The 
severity of the torture increased in each session. The initial torture sessions 
consisted of his interrogators beating his stomach and legs with  heavy 
electric cables. They later applied electricity to his genitalia and administered 
electrical shocks to his body while he was submerged in water. They 
threatened to hang him on three separate occasions. Despite the constant 
torture, Dr. Youssef conti nued to deny all charges, both fabricated and real, 
in order to protect himself, his colleagues, and his friends.  
 
A month into his detention, an interrogator told Dr. Youssef that authorities 
had already detained his colleagues, mentioning them by name. The guards 
nevertheless continued to torture him, apparently solely to punish him. They 
beat the soles of his feet with thick plastic pipes filled with concrete. He 
eventually confessed to various activities he was accused of having been 
involved in, inclu ding providing support to protesters, on the express 
condition that his captors improve the conditions of his detention. The 
authorities required that he write his confession three separate times.  
On the 69th day of his detention, the authorities moved Dr . Youssef to a 
larger cell within al -Khatib  State Security Branch for two weeks before 
transferring him to the General Intelligence Branch in Kafarsouseh, 
Damascus. At the end of these two weeks, and after almost three months of 
detention in intelligence f acilities without charges, he was transferred to Adra 
Civilian Prison north of Damascus. In Adra, Dr. Youssef had more regular 
access to food, and could communicate with his family for the first time since 
his arrest. The authorities finally filed formal l egal charges against him in the 
Civil Court of Damascus and subsequently released him on bail in December 
2011 without rendering a verdict.  
 
In September 2013, Dr. Youssef learned from members of the opposition that 
they had information from an agent working with an intelligence branch in 
al-Nabek that the authorities intended to re -arrest him. He immediately left 
for opposition -controlled Idlib, where he began working in a field hospital. In 
August 2014, Dr. Youssef left for Turkey. While he is not ab le to practice 
medicine in Turkey, he has continued to provide administrative and 
programmatic support to the medical sector inside Syria.  
 
  
 7  
Introduction  
 
Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) has – through a rigorous methodology, that 
includes English and Arabic open -source research and field source corroboration 
– verified and mapped attacks on  medical facilities and medical personnel by all 
parties to the conflict since 2011.10 By early September 2019, combatants had 
inflicted 583 attacks on at least 350 medical facilities.11 By PHR’s assessment, the 
Syrian government and its allies are responsible for 90 percent of those attacks.12 
The systematic targeting of health facilities an d health workers has been a crucial 
component of a wider strategy of war employed by the Syrian government and its 
allies to force civilian populations into submission.13 Through its purposeful 
assault on health, the Syrian government and its allies have sy stematically denied 
access to medical care in areas outside of their immediate control and actively 
persecuted health workers who, in line with their professional ethics, provide 
such care to perceived opposition supporters.14 The Syrian government has 
intentionally targeted Syrian health workers providing nondiscriminatory health 
care as enemies of the state. It has explicitly equated health workers who provide 
nondiscriminatory care  with “terrorists”15 who can and should be detained, 
tortured, and killed.16 Through in -depth qualitative interviews with 21 formerly 
detained health workers, the following report provides evidence of the link 
between their arrest, imprisonment, and ill -treatment and their engagement in 
the medical field.  
Dr. Youssef was arrested while treating a patient at a hospital north of Damascus. He was detained 
and tortured  for a year on charges of supporting “terrorists.”   
 8 Background  
 
Overview of t he Conflict  
 
In February 2011, small -scale protests broke out in Syria opposing corruption, 
raising economic grievances, and calling for democratic rights and for the release 
of political prisoners. The largely peaceful protests expanded in March, when 
thousands of Syrian citizens in multiple locations across the country assembled in 
the streets, demanding sweeping economic and political reforms and adopting 
anti-government slogans.17 The Syrian government responded with a violent 
crackdown that fueled wi der protests.1819 At the end of April 2011, the Syrian 
government conducted its first large -scale military operation20 in what would 
become a full -fledged campaign to suppress dissent. Toward the end of summer 
2011, the opposition began to organize itself int o distinct political groupings.21 
Those factions in turn organized their own military wings, bolstered in numbers 
by mass defections from the Syrian Arab Army as well as by a growing stream of 
foreign fighters.22 By July 2012, hostilities in Syria had transi tioned from an 
insurgency to a full -fledged internal conflict.23 The number of armed groups 
grew, and many sought and began receiving material and operational support 
from foreign states with widely diverging agendas.24  
 
As armed anti-government groups proliferated, the violence increased 
exponentially. The Syrian government deployed a strategy that appeared 
primarily to target civilian populations of restive areas and any suspected 
opposition supporters. It imposed sieges on oppos ition -held areas,25 shelled and 
bombarded densely populated urban centers, used chemical weapons to target 
civilians, established extensive networks of security checkpoints, and led a 
widespread campaign of arrest, torture, and enforced disappearance of sus pected 
insurgents and their supporters.26 The Syrian government’s practices drew 
international condemnation, including through UN Security Council resolutions 
2042,27 2118,28 and 2139.29  Anti -government armed groups perpetrated similar 
abuses, albeit on a sig nificantly smaller scale.30 Despite the scale and intensity of 
the Syrian government’s repression and its effective monopoly on air power 
during the early phases of the war, by early 2015 it appeared to be drifting toward 
defeat31 with large tracts of territ ory falling to a variety of armed groups, 
including the self -declared Islamic State (ISIS). In September 2015, Russia 
intervened in support of the Syrian government, tipping the scale in its favor 
while compounding civilian suffering.32 The Syrian governmen t and its allies, 
through relentless coordinated air and ground offensives, have since been able to 
recapture most opposition -held areas. As of the writing of this report, 
northwestern Syria (primarily the northern part of Hama and the entirety of 
Idlib) i s the only area that remains under anti -government armed group control 
and has been the target of a concerted air campaign since April 2019.33  
By some estimates, the Syrian conflict has claimed the lives of more than half a 
million people.34 The Syrian Obse rvatory for Human Rights reports at least 
372,000 documented deaths by August 2019,35 an estimated third of whom were  
 9 civilians. More than half of Syria’s pre -war population of 22 million has been 
displaced internally or has fled the country as refugees sin ce 2011.36 The conflict 
has led to one of the most complex and dire humanitarian situations in recent 
history, with an estimated 11.7 million people currently aid -dependent for basic 
subsistence.37 Attempts by the United Nations and UN member states to end t he 
Syrian conflict have repeatedly failed.38 Prospects for a negotiated settlement 
remain unlikely, given that the Syrian government and its allies can justifiably 
perceive the relative success of a military strategy premised on egregious 
violations of huma n rights and basic international norms.39 
 
Detention, Torture, and Ill -treatment  
 
Among the host of harrowing abuses that have defined the Syrian conflict, 
arbitrary detention, enforced disappearance, and torture of Syrian civilians – 
primarily perpetrated by the Syrian government – are notable for their frequency 
and gratuitous cruelty.  International and national human rights organizations 
and independent bodies mandated to investigate alleged human rights violations 
have extensively documented the Syrian government’s routine practice of 
arbitrary detention and torture of civilians.40 That documentation reveals an 
industrial -scale Syrian government incarceration apparatus that has enabled  the 
detention, interrogation, torture, extrajudicial execut ion, and disappearance of 
tens of thousands of civilians perceived as opposition supporters or as 
insufficiently loyal to the regime.41 That apparatus is in many respects a natural 
extension of a system that has been in place since the inception of the Ba ’athist 
regime,42 largely facilitated through the powers conferred on security forces by 
the establishment of a perpetual state of emergency43 and legislative decrees that 
provide security forces full immunity.44  
 
In 2011, anti -government protests caused the Syrian government to expand the 
detention system to stifle growing dissent. The Counter -terrorism Court, 
established by the 2012 Counter -terrorism Laws,45 provided judicial cover for a 
campaign of mass -arrests.46 As of the end of August 2019, information  from the 
United Nations’ Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian 
Arab Republic (IICOI) and Syrian human rights monitors suggest s that the 
number of people detained since 2011 – mostly at the hands of the Syrian 
government – now excee ds 100,000 .47  
The Syrian government incarceration apparatus has 
enabled the detention, interrogation, torture, extrajudicial 
execution, and disappearance of tens of thousands of 
civilians perceived as opposition supporters or as 
insufficiently loyal to the  regime.  
 
The IICOI has determined that most detainees of the Syrian government are 
being held without due process and denied access to their families and to legal 
representation.48 The commission states that detainees   
 10  
“… endure various forms of brutal to rture and subsist in severely 
inhumane conditions. Many have died in detention, while others have 
been summarily executed. The bodies of those who have died as a result of 
torture, neglect, inhumane conditions, or from executions are rarely 
returned to the ir families, who are also not notified about burials.”49 
 
In its February 2016 report on deaths in detention in Syria, the IICOI concluded 
that Syrian government forces committed crimes constituting a “systematic and 
widespread attack against a civilian population”50 through their conduct of mass 
arrests, enforced disappearance, and subsequent ill -treatment and killing of 
detainees. The IICOI further concluded that the Syrian government is responsible 
for crimes against humanity and war crimes lin ked to detention.51 
 
While the Syrian government and its allies have been responsible for the majority 
of violations in the conflict, non -state armed groups have  also perpetrated 
crimes, including arbitrary detention under brutal conditions, torture of 
detainees, and summary executions of perceived government supporters, 
humanitarian workers, and activists, among others.52 A range of anti -government 
armed groups have a lso been implicated in such acts, including Hayat Tahrir al -
Sham (HTS, previously Jabhat al -Nusra),53 Kurdish forces (forces associated with 
the Democratic Union Party),54 and ISIS.55 The actions of these and other armed 
groups in depriving civilians of their  liberty are reprehensible and rise in some 
cases to the level of war crimes.56 While the larger issue of detention practices by 
non-state armed groups lies outside the scope of this report, the interviews on 
which the report is based demonstrate the widesp read and systematic use of ill -
treatment  and torture of health care workers in Syrian government detention 
facilities.  
Doctors treat a 
wounded man in a field 
hospital in the 
opposition -held city of 
Qusayr in July 2012. 
Most of the health 
workers interviewed by 
PHR said they were 
detained and tortured 
by Syrian government 
forces because they 
provided health care, or 
supported access to 
care, for perceived 
opponents.  
Photo: Antonio 
Pampliega/ AFP/Getty 
Images  
 
 11 Methodology   
 
Sampling Strategy  
 
Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) used chain , or snowball , sampling to identify 
potentially eligible health workers for this study. While this method does not lead 
to a representative sample, it constituted the only sampling option that allowed 
for effective contact with eligible participants with whom outreach i s otherwise 
extremely difficult. In addition, utilizing established networks and existing 
relationships helped with the development of necessary trust among potential 
participants, given ongoing threats to health care workers  and medical 
communities remain ing in Syria. The team sought to form as representative a 
sample as possible by engaging a wide variety of different professional groups 
within the health sector and individuals with links to a range of geographical 
areas in Syria. The participants in the research were all Syrian nationals above 
the age of 18; they were engaged in medical work as professionals or as 
volunteers during the Syrian conflict; and they had been detained by a party to 
the conflict after 2011.  
 
Human Subject Protections  
 
The PHR cl inician researchers obtained consent from each interviewee following 
a detailed explanation of PHR’s work, the purpose of the investigation, and the 
voluntary nature of participation. To preserve the security and confidentiality of 
the participants, PHR ha s replaced their names with pseudonyms and taken their 
pictures in a fully de -identified manner.  
 
PHR’s Ethics Review Board provided guidance to and approved this study based 
on regulations outlined in Title 45 CFR Part 46, which are used by academic 
institutional review boards in the United States. All PHR’s research and 
investigations involving human subjects are conducted in accordance with the 
Declaration of Helsinki 2000, a statement of ethical principles for medical 
research involving human subjec ts, including research on identifiable human 
material and data.57 
 
Semi -structured Interviews  
 
Clinician researchers conducted semi -structured interviews and brief structured 
psychological assessments between June and August 2019 with 21 health workers 
who had experienced detention in Syria.58 Some of the interviews were conducted 
in person in Beirut, Lebanon, and in Gaziantep and Istanbul, Turkey. Others were 
conducted remotely over secure connections with participants residing in France, 
Germany, Syria, and  Turkey.  
 
Interviewers sought to understand the extent to which health workers were 
targeted for detention and ill -treatment due to their provision of  
 12 nondiscriminatory care  and other efforts to support nondiscriminatory provision 
of health care; their exp eriences in detention and the types of ill -treatment to 
which they were subjected; and the impact of the detention and ill -treatment of 
health workers on their decision to leave Syria. Finally, the PHR team sought to 
understand the interviewees’ intentions  to practice in the health care field and to 
return to Syria, as well as their perceived ability to do so.  
 
At the end of each session, the clinician interviewers conducted brief 
psychological assessments using a form that adheres to Istanbul Protocol59 
guidelines which form the international standard for the documentation of 
torture and ill -treatment . They asses sed the interviewees’: 1) social functioning; 
2) past and current psychological symptoms; 3) changes in psychological 
symptoms over time; and 4) current mental status.  
 
Qualitative Data Analysis  
 
Drawing on notes and full recordings of the interviews, PHR clinician researchers 
wrote case reports based on each interview. Clinicians provided diagnostic 
interpretations of the results of the psychological assessments, credibility of the 
accounts, and evaluation of the extent to which interviewees reported a 
connection between their medical and health care -related activities  and their 
detention and subsequent treatment during detention. PHR analyzed all 
interview transcripts thematically, aiming to establish a causal link between 
health workers’ provision of care  and their targeting for detention and ill -
treatment.  
 
PHR Clinical Team  
 
All interviews were conducted by a highly experienced team of two physicians 
and one psychologist trained in the Istanbul Protocol: Sana Hamzeh, PsyD, 
Ahmad Banasr, MD, and Michele Heisler, MD, MPA. Two of the clinicians are 
fluent in Arabic.  
 
Terminology  
 
In this report, the term “health worker” refers to individuals who at the time of 
detention were engaged professionally or as volunteers in the search for, 
collection, transportation, diagnosis, or treatment of the wounded and sick 
(including provision o f first aid); in the prevention of disease; or in the provision 
of logistical or administrative support to health services. Health workers can 
include physicians, nurses, paramedics, ambulance drivers, search and rescue 
personnel, pharmacists, and others.  
 
Limitations  
 
Allegations of torture and ill -treatment may be affected by recall bias and/or 
intentional exaggeration or misrepresentation by the former detainees for  
 13 personal and/or political gain . PHR was not able to investigate and corroborate 
the statements made by the interviewees in this report. Interrogation and 
detention records were not available for examination. The highly trained clinician 
interviewers made independent determinations rela ting to the veracity and 
credibility of the testimony of the interviewees based on the internal consistency 
of the statements and how the details of the statements compare to available 
information on detention and ill -treatment in Syria.  
 
PHR was able to interview only two formerly detained female health workers, 
despite extensive efforts. The relative shortage of Syrian women health care 
providers as the conflict has developed is a complex phenomenon that merits 
further study; this may contribute to the l ow numbers of women detainees willing 
to be interviewed. Additionally, the stigma associated with detention and 
especially the physical forms of ill -treatment and torture may be a further barrier 
to participation. Thus, the experiences of female health wor kers who were 
detained is under -documented.  
 
Nevertheless, the report provides useful insights into challenges faced by health 
workers in Syria as a result of their direct or indirect involvement in the provision 
of care. Through an examination of the exp eriences of 21 health workers who 
survived detention in Syria, this report provides evidence of the link between 
their engagement in the medical field and their arrest, imprisonment and ill -
treatment. The report cannot provide a comprehensive picture of ho w detention 
was used in the persecution of health workers in Syria and, based on sample size 
and composition, its claims are not generalizable. They do, however, illustrate the 
experiences of similarly situated individuals working in an oppressive legal an d 
political environment. It is critical to remember that PHR was able to reach only 
individuals fortunate enough to have survived Syrian security branches and 
detention facilities. PHR believes these and other survivors represent a fraction of 
the health p rofessionals subjected to abuses. The experiences of health workers 
still in Syrian detention facilities, who were killed in these facilities, or whose 
fates remain unknown are impossible to represent in this study.  
Findings  
 
Overview  
 
The health workers interviewed by Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) all 
reported that their involvement in the provision of health care played a 
prominent role in their arrest, detention,  interrogation , and torture by Syrian 
security forces. Syrian security forces arrested and detained all of the 21 health 
workers interviewed by PHR.60 Syrian security forces arrested more than three -
quarters of those health workers between 2011 and 2013, with a third of these 
arrested in 2012.  
  
 14 Security forces detained the interviewees in facilities in Aleppo, Damascus, Rural 
Damascus, Daraa, Hama, and Homs. Syrian military units, the Syrian Ministry of 
Interior, and the four main security services operated the detention facilities.61  
Health work ers PHR interviewed were often transferred multiple times between 
different security service branches, as well as between military and civilian 
detention facilities. On average, interviewees reported being transferred at least 
three times; some were reloca ted up to six times. The duration of detention in 
each facility between transfers varied from a few hours to more than a year.  
 
Without exception, Syrian authorities subjected the interviewees to systematic 
interrogation and torture. Interviewees describe d experiencing identifiable 
patterns of violence and mistreatment that recurred as they were transferred 
from one detention facility to another. In most cases, torture was fully integrated 
into the interrogation process. In many cases, participants describ ed how their 
captors used torture or the threat of torture to force them to “confess” to 
supporting or taking part in acts of violence against the state. In many cases, 
interrogations centered on the participants’ involvement in medical work. Syrian 
govern ment interrogators and torturers accused many of the participants of 
working in or establishing field hospitals, providing medical treatment to 
“terrorists,” and/or providing material support to “terrorist” organizations and 
working to overthrow the Syrian  government. Although some interviewees were 
charged in civil court, the majority of formerly detained Syrian health workers 
interviewed by PHR experienced judicial review of their cases by either military 
field courts,62 military courts,63 or Counter -terror ism Court,64 where due process 
protections are suspended in practice.  
 
 
Involvement in Health Care Service Provision  
 
All of the formerly detained health workers whom PHR interviewed reported a 
clear link between their role in provision of nondiscriminatory care and the 
circumstances of their  arrest and detention.  
 
Dr. Jamal’s ordeal underscores t he relationship between provision of such care 
and the Syrian security forces’ deliberate targeting of health workers suspected of 
aiding opposition forces or supporters. Dr. Jamal was a second -year medical 
student in 2011 when the first peaceful protests erupted. By 2013, ever -rising 
demands for medical care, due primarily to Syrian government attacks on civilian 
areas, motivated him to start volunteering in a field hospital in opposition -
controlled Aleppo.  Health workers engaged in any activity perceived to 
benefit those characterized as opposition sympathizers 
would be targeted by Syrian government security forces 
for arrest at checkpoints, in their homes, and at their 
workplaces.  
  
 15  
“When I got involved in 2013, I hadn’t even fin ished medical school yet. 
But the medical needs were so acute, there was such a clear shortage of 
doctors, that a friend and I decided to cross to the other [opposition -
controlled] side of Aleppo – there was still an open crossing then – and 
start working at a field hospital there. We crossed back into government -
controlled Aleppo about three months later to take our exams. We kept 
going back and forth to keep up with our studies. At the beginning we 
really didn’t know what we were doing. They put us in the  emergency 
ward and taught us how to suture wounds, stop bleeding, insert IV lines. ” 
Dr. Jamal’s involvement in emergency medical care provision mirrors that of 
many of the health workers interviewed for this report. Many interviewees 
described first responding to the needs of individual injured protestors, then, as 
the conflict escalated,  digging through rubble for survivors, tending to torn limbs, 
and treating multiple trauma victims. In a growing organizational vacuum, many 
professionals and volunteers became involved in the administrative and logistical 
sides of health care: they procur ed and distributed medical supplies, secured 
funding, and established medical points and field hospitals on emerging front 
lines. Describing his work in northeastern Syria, Ali, a pharmacist from Hama, 
said, “ I was a pharmacist, a nurse, a doctor, a recept ionist. Everything.”  
  
“We treated injured people – civilians, opposition 
soldiers, captured regime soldiers – we didn’t care who 
they were.”  
Wessam, describing his provision of nondiscriminatory 
care in field hospitals in Rural Damascus  
Wessam , a health volunteer from Rural Damascus, was tortured and detained for almost three years 
after he was found carrying medical supplies. He said his interrogators “wanted names of doctors 
and where the field hospitals and warehouses were.”  
Photo: Diego Cu polo for Physicians for Human Rights   
 16 The formerly detained health workers PHR interviewed come from diverse 
professional backgrounds. Most of the participants received varying levels of 
professional training as doctors, nurses, and pharmacists. A few had  no medical 
experience prior to 2011; they entered the health sector as volunteers for reasons 
of conscience. Their roles ranged from first responders who treated victims at the 
site of incidents of mass violence to logisticians who coordinated administrat ive 
tasks in field hospitals.  
 
Most interviewees told PHR that they became aware early in the crisis of the risks 
associated with their work – being beaten, detained, or shot while tending to 
injured protestors. They also learned that health workers engag ed in any activity 
perceived to benefit those characterized as opposition sympathizers would be 
targeted by Syrian government security forces for arrest at checkpoints, in their 
homes, and at their workplaces. All the participants, many of whom lost 
collea gues to death and detention long before becoming victims themselves, 
articulated recognition that the nondiscriminatory provision of health care 
services was officially forbidden by the Syrian government under Counter -
terrorism Law 19, in which health care  was seen as “material support for 
terrorism.”  
 
In the face of a violent crackdown that rapidly evolved into an internal conflict, 
concerned health workers responded with a form of makeshift medical response, 
spurred by necessity and surrounded by constra ints and danger that persist to 
this day in some areas of Syria. Importantly, it shaped how individuals injured as 
a result of violence perpetrated by the Syrian security forces were provided with 
treatment. Health workers organized anonymous coordination structures, 
established clandestine medical response cells, smuggled medical supplies, and 
furtively raised funds to support health care service provision. Surgeons 
surreptitiously operated on the injured in makeshift wards inside people’s homes. 
The healt h workers whose experiences PHR documents are among the many who 
continued providing and enabling health care despite the associated risks of 
arrest, detention, and torture.  
 
Circumstances of Arrest  
Most of the formerly detained health workers interviewed by PHR reported they 
were arrested by Syrian government forces specifically because of their status as 
health workers and their (real or perceived) involvement in the provision of 
health services to the opposition. Those arrests and subsequent detentions w ere 
the result of either targeted security force intrusions into health workers’ homes 
or workplaces or resulted from the exposure of their status as health workers at 
military checkpoints or during other random sweeps by security forces.  
 
In the majority of cases documented by PHR, health workers were arrested at 
their places of work. Doctors, nurses, and other health workers were taken by   
 17  
 
 
 
 
 
 
security forces from hospitals, clinics, and offices. In a particularly alarming case, 
Air Force Intelligence members arrested Dr. Ahmad, a  surgeon from Hama, in 
the surgical ward of his hospital while he was operating on a patient with a thigh 
injury.  
 
“On October 27, 2011, I finished my shift at the Hama National Hospital, 
and I drove back home. My hometown is about 45 km away from the cit y 
of Hama. I got there around 3:30 in the afternoon. I got a phone call from 
a local man telling me that one of my relatives was injured. So, I drove to 
the hospital in town to treat him. I was in the surgical ward when they 
[Air Force Intelligence] came i n. There was a huge raid on the hospital. 
They took me along with a lab technician. Of course, they also took the 
patient. I was surprised to learn later that he was still alive. The way they 
pulled him off the respirator, I thought he wouldn’t last 10 min utes in 
their custody. ” 
 
Dr. Ahmad subsequently learned during interrogation that the patient with the 
thigh injury was suspected by authorities of being a “terrorist.” Air Force 
Intelligence arrested Dr. Ahmad merely because he was treating him. “My only 
crime was that I was a do ctor,” he said. In a similar case, in August 2012, Air 
Force Intelligence arrested Dr. Loay, a general physician from Damascus, while 
he was treating a patient at a field hospital in the town of Jobar, east of the 
capital. Dr. Loay recalls that a large num ber of Air Force Intelligence personnel 
raided the small facility and arrested him along with two nurses. He and the  
  
“You have a field hospital here! This is going to send 
you to your death.”  
Ali, a pharmacist, quoting the soldier who arrested him 
after searching his vehicle at a checkpoint in Hama  
 
Ali, a pharmacist 
from Hama, was 
detained after 
Syrian soldiers 
found medical 
supplies in his 
vehicle.  
Photo: Diego 
Cupolo for 
Physicians for 
Human Rights  
  
 18  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
nurses had managed to remove the patient from the facility right before they 
were arrested. The Air Force Intelligence personnel took Dr. Loay  to the Mezzeh  
Military Airport Intelligence Branch in Damascus and detained him there for 
more than 14 months. I n yet another example, Hassan, a nurse from Homs, was 
arrested from the hospital in which he worked by Political Security.  
 
“I remember it was morning. I was working in the emergency ward, 
changing a patient’s dressing. I felt a tap on my shoulder. I said , ‘One 
moment.’ As soon as those words came out of my mouth, I was pulled 
back by the shoulder, my arms were twisted behind my back , and I was 
slammed against a wall. I was handcuffed, blindfolded, and quickly loaded 
into a vehicle. The vehicle was full an d very noisy. There were many 
people yelling, asking where they were being taken. Later, when I was 
released, I was told the entire medical staff was arrested on that day.”  
 
A significant number of former detainees interviewed were arrested at military or 
security checkpoints. Those arrests were the result of the inclusion of their names 
on official government wanted lists, or due to behavior deemed suspicious by 
security forc es. In March 2015, Passport and Immigration officials arrested 
Omar, a health volunteer from Harasta, Rural Damascus, while he was applying 
for a passport. Prior to his arrest, Omar had been involved in a network of 
volunteers who procured and transported medication into government -besieged 
areas. He later learned that one of his associates had given him up to 
interrogators under torture, resulting in the addition of his name to an official 
wanted list apparently disseminated across Syrian government agenci es.  
Soldiers arrested Dr. Hadi, a 34 -year -old pediatrician from Daraa, after a chance 
discovery that he was delivering supplies to a field hospital providing 
nondiscriminatory medical care.  
 
“On August 9, 2012, in the late afternoon, I was stopped at a military 
checkpoint on the main highway between Daraa and Damascus. It was a 
9th Armored Division checkpoint. They’re based out of Sanamein in that 
same area. In early 2012, I and a group of oth er doctors started secretly 
setting up medical points to respond to injuries, especially in Eastern 
Ghouta.… On that day, I was with a driver and we were transporting a 
quantity of medical supplies – saline, antibiotics, gauze, medical plaster, 
etc. – to a field hospital in Daraa. That was the third time we did that. The “I was working in the emergency ward, changing a patient’s 
dressing . I felt a tap on my shoulder. I said ‘One moment.’... I 
was pulled back by the shoulder, my arms were twisted 
behind my back , and I was slammed against a wall. I was 
handcuffed, blindfolded, and quickly loaded into a vehicle.... 
The entire medical staff was arrested on that day.”  
Hassan, a nurse from Homs  
  
 19 first two times we went through side roads. But on that day, they caught 
us on the highway.”  
 
Dr. Hadi and the driver were both arrested and sent to the 9 th Division base in 
Sanamein, Dara a. That same evening, an interrogator at the base accused Dr. 
Hadi of intending to equip an anti -regime field hospital. Five days later, he was 
transferred into the custody of Military Intelligence. The circumstances of Dr. 
Hadi’s arrest point to a governm ent-wide policy criminalizing the provision of 
health care to perceived supporters of the opposition. Syrian authorities detained 
him without legal justification for nearly six months, during which he was 
repeatedly interrogated and tortured before he was finally released after 
managing to bribe a judge in Counter -terrorism Court.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interrogation  
 
The health workers interviewed by PHR described interrogation as a routine part 
of their experience in detention. The interrogation sessions varied significantly in 
frequency, process, and length, but were almost always accompanied by torture. 
Interrogator s accused many of the interviewees of providing medical care to 
“terrorists” or of establishing or providing material support to “terrorist” 
organizations. Interrogators demanded details about detainees’ specific role in 
the medical sector, their patients,  their colleagues, and their sources of funding.  
 
In some cases, interrogators appeared to be equipped with accurate information 
about the detainees’ medical activities. In July 2014, Military Intelligence 
arrested Samer, a pharmacist from Damascus involv ed in transporting/delivering 
medical supplies into Eastern Ghouta. He remembers being surrounded by 
Military Intelligence personnel as he was leaving his office and one of them 
saying, “We finally caught you.” During his first interrogation at Military 
Intelligence Branch 215 in Damascus, his interrogators gave him a pen and paper 
and instructed him to provide an account of his life “from birth until detention.” 
To protect his colleagues, Samer wrote a vague account of independently 
providing treatment to injured protesters. Two hours later, his interrogators  
 
 “There was a huge raid on the hospital. They took me 
along with a lab technician.... They also took the 
patient. I was surprised to learn later that he was still 
alive. The w ay they pulled him off the respirator, I 
thought he wouldn’t last 10 minutes in their custody.”  
Dr. Ahmad, a surgeon arrested while operating on a 
patient in Hama   
 20  
 
 
 
brought him back for more questioning and asked about his colleagues by name, 
with obvious knowledge of their roles in the network and his relationship to each 
of them. Interrogators told him that one of his colleagues had already been 
detained and had told them e verything about Samer’s activities. Although Samer 
decided to cooperate with his interrogators after deducing that his colleague had 
likely confessed all relevant details under torture, his captors still subjected him 
to severe beatings and threats of tort ure and death. Samer eventually confessed 
to distributing medication to besieged towns in the eastern suburbs of Damascus 
and disclosed information that led to the eventual arrest of one of his associates.  
In other cases, the interrogators did not appear to possess information about the 
detainees but showed clear interest in their work as health professionals once 
such information was disclosed. In October 2014, Third Armored Division 
soldiers arrested Dr. Hussam, a surgeon from Rural Damascus, at a checkp oint in 
the town of Qutayfah, north of Damascus. His arrest was apparently linked to his 
town of origin – Harasta, an opposition stronghold. When Dr. Hussam’s 
interrogator learned he was a physician, he reacted gleefully, muttered 
“excellent,” and shifted his line of questioning to specific questions about Dr. 
Hussam’s workplace, patients, and colleagues. The interrogations even strayed to 
granular details about his profession, including about his hospital’s intake 
process and patient records’ storage detai ls.  Dr. Hussam concluded that the 
interrogator was seeking actionable information on medical facilities and medical 
personnel working in opposition -held areas.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “You [doctors] are far more dangerous than terrorists. 
We kill them, you bring them back.”  
Dr. Loay, quoting his interrogator at al -Mazzeh Air 
Force Intelligence Branch in Damascus  
“We finally caught you,” military intelligence officers told Samer when they arrested him at his 
office. Samer, a pharmacist who helped deliver medical supplies to the opposition -held area of 
eastern Ghouta, was tortured and detained for 17 months.  
Photo: Diego Cupolo for Physicians for Human Rights   
 
 
 21  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Syrian security authorities also consistently sought to extract confessions from 
the interviewees. Interrogators repeatedly urged detainees to “confess” to a 
variety of charges that ranged from fact -based allegations to nonsensical 
accusations. In numerous  cases, “confessions” didn’t even require specific 
allegations or charges. Four -and-a-half months into the detention of Majd, a 
surgical assistant from Idlib, at the Air Force Intelligence branch in al -Leramoun, 
Aleppo,  a prison guard forced him to fingerp rint blank pages. The following day, 
a Military Court judge informed him that he had confessed to crimes including 
killing 12 Syrian Arab Army officers and 17 soldiers, planning to bomb the 
military academy, and treating “terrorists.” Majd described those fabricated 
accusations as an essential part of the interrogation process. “It’s a negotiation 
with your interrogator,” he told PHR. “He accuses you of carrying a certain 
number of weapons and munitions. Then, as you cry out in pain while you’re 
being tortu red, he says: ‘ Fine, you were carrying fewer weapons.’” Most health 
workers interviewed were forced to sign or fingerprint prepared confessions or 
blank papers. The authorities used these documents, collected under torture or 
its threat,  as evidence agains t them. Amin, a surgical assistant from Homs, 
explained: “During one of the torture sessions, while handcuffed, they forced me 
to fingerprint a number of papers. When I asked what I was confessing to, the 
officer told me to shut my mouth and to be thankful  to be leaving the branch 
alive.”  
 
In the cases of the health workers interviewed by PHR, the extraction of 
confessions rarely ended their torture. While in some cases confessions led to a 
temporary lull in ill -treatment, the interrogation and torture process often 
repeated itself following  transfer to other facilities. These transfers appeared 
arbitrary in nature and the interviewees rarely knew where they were being taken 
until they reached their destination. The length of detention in each facility 
varied and the reason for transfer was n ever apparent to the interviewees. From 
the sample of 21 interviewees, it was difficult to deduce any pattern or meaning 
behind the transfers, although arbitrary and repeated transfer could have been 
used to induce psychological distress.  
 
 
  “He kept saying that you a re a group of organized doctors 
and you have your own field hospitals and your own 
warehouses ... He wanted names of doctors and where the 
field hospitals and warehouse were ... They charged  me 
with ‘supporting terrorism by medical supplies.’”  
Wessam, a health volunteer from Rural Damascus, 
describing his interrogation during detention  
  
 22  
 
 23 Torture  
 
Health workers PHR interviewed described in gruesome detail the forms of 
torture65 Syrian security services subjected them to. The beatings and humiliation 
often began shortly after arrest and rose and fell in intensity and cruelty through 
cycles of interro gation and transfers between detention facilities. In some cases, 
the torture only ended after authorities transferred detainees to civilian prisons. 
PHR interviewees were unambiguous in their assertions that their torturers 
sought to viciously and repeate dly punish them for their provision of health care 
to people the Syrian government had decreed were forbidden from receiving such 
treatment.  
 
Torture methods varied from one detention facility to another. Most of the 
formerly detained health workers whom P HR interviewed described being 
subjected to prolonged beatings and forced stress positions, including hanging by 
the arms for extended periods of time. Humiliation tactics, including prolonged 
nudity and insults to family and faith, were also common throug hout all 
mentioned detention facilities. Interviewees also described Syrian guards and 
interrogators inflicting burns with cigarettes, electrical shock,  sexual assault, and 
a variety of psychological stress methods, including staging mock executions.  
 
Most interviewees reported the use of falaqa  (also known as  falanga) , which 
entails lashes to the soles of the feet with electrical wire, silicon tubes, or blunt 
sticks. Interrogators employed this torture technique across all mentioned 
security branches. Detainees subjected to falaqa reported intense and prolonged 
pain, bleeding, infections, and an inability to walk or stand following falaqa 
sessions. Mohannad, a pharmacist from Idlib who Military Intelligence detained 
and repeatedly tortured for seven day s in August 2011, recalled that the pain from 
falaqa lingered for more than a month after his release. Most interviewees 
reported being subjected to various stress positions, the most common of which 
was the shabeh  method, whereby the subject is suspended from a ceiling or pipe 
by the wrists for prolonged periods of time. The balanco  method, in which the 
subject is hung by the wrists while they are tied behind his or her back, was also 
reported as common. “Sometimes it took me months to regain full use of m y 
hands after I was subjected to these hanging sessions. You need someone to feed 
you and clean you. Your hands become useless,” one interviewee said. In 
addition, being beaten with thick PVC pipes, a method labeled “al -Akhdar al -
Brahimi” (the name of the UN Special Envoy to Syria at the time) was reported by 
several interviewees, as was being lashed with steel wire or electrical cables.  
 
 
 
 
 “Losing consciousness was a blessing because it was 
a break fro m all the physical and psychological torture.”  
Tareq, a health activities coordinator from Aleppo, 
describing his treatment during interrogations  
  
 24 A few of the interviewees reported sexual assault and torture by Syrian security 
personnel. The abuses included groping, electrical shocks applied to their 
genitals, the burning of their genitals with boiling water, and threats of rape. Dr. 
Ibrahim, a pedi atrician from Daraa, stated that the soldiers and interrogators of 
the 9th Armored Division used a combination of physical and psychological 
methods when torturing him. “They would force us to torture ourselves,” he 
related. Dr. Ibrahim’s torturers forced him to grab live electrical wires and hold 
them while the current was on. If he refused, he would be beaten until he 
complied. If he let go of the cables while being electrocuted, he would be beaten 
until he grabbed them again. “Every cell of my body writh ed from the pain. You 
feel like you can’t stop shrieking. The shocks bounced me around the room. Even 
after it was over, the pain persisted as if I was still being electrocuted.”  
PHR research does not indicate that Syrian government authorities subjected 
health workers to any distinctive form, intensity, or duration of torture. Instead, 
PHR’s interviews reconfirmed that Syrian authorities use torture systematically. 
Regardless of what type of activities they are involved in, those detained by the 
Syrian go vernment for political reasons are subjected to torture and interrogation 
as a matter of course.66 PHR research provides compelling evidence that health 
workers who provide or facilitate nondiscriminatory medical care  are subject to 
the same brutal torture regimen as political prisoners, suspected insurgents, and 
those deemed “terrorists” by the Syrian government.67   
 
 
  
Dr. Ibrahim, a 
pediatrician from 
Daraa, was brutally 
tortured by Syrian 
security forces who 
accused him of 
supporting 
"terrorists" through 
his field hospital.  
Photo: Diego 
Cupolo for 
Physicians for 
Human Rights  
“Every cell of my body writhed from the pain. You feel 
like you can’t stop shrieking. The shocks bounced me 
around the room. Even after it w as over, the pain 
persisted as if I was still being electrocuted.”  
Dr. Ibrahim, a pediatrician from Daraa  
  
 25 Tareq : Brutalized for Volunteering as a Medic   
 
Before the conflict, Tareq  worked in marketing in Aleppo. He had no 
previous medical training. Soon after the government crackdown began in 
2011, he trained in first aid and started working as a paramedic, 
transferring patients between medical facilities. He eventually joined a 
group of doctors as a member of a non -profit organization that offer ed 
medical services in eastern Aleppo and  became the administrative 
director of one of the main trauma hospitals  in opposition -controlled East 
Aleppo.   
 
Toward the end of May 2013, Military Security arrested Tareq at home 
and placed him in solitary confinement at the Military Security Branch of 
Aleppo until the end of the summer. In addition to a raft of accusations 
related to “undermining” the Syrian state, Tareq’s interrogators charged 
him with “membership in a terrorist organization,” in reference to the 
Aleppo City Medical Council. About four months into his detention, 
Military Security transferred Tareq to Damascus, where he was 
imprisoned underground in al -Mazzeh Military Airport for one  week 
before being transferred to the Palestine Branch of Military Intelligence in 
Damascus. They placed him in solitary confinement in cell number 56. He 
was interrogated and tortured three months later and then again two 
months after that.  
 
Tareq’s inte rrogators subjected him to a broad range of torture methods 
including a variety of stress positions, beatings, electrocution, burning of 
the body – including the genitalia – with boiling water, and sexual assault. 
Tareq described how he often fainted from the pain during interrogation 
sessions. “Losing consciousness was a blessing because it was a break 
from all the physical and psychological torture,” he said. At one point 
during his detention in the Palestine Branch, Tareq was hung naked by 
the arms in fr ont of a female detainee placed in the same position.  
 
“They brought me in and hung me from the ceiling and, in a 
second, removed all my clothes. I suddenly realized I was 
completely naked. I was unable to understand what was 
happening until I saw a naked woman one meter in front of me. 
Her nipples were burnt. There were cigarette burns across her 
chest. Her hair was unkempt. There was dried up blood between 
her thighs. I felt a deep shame. For three days, the woman was 
hung in front of me. It was the  most difficult period of the past 
four years. The prison guard used to enter and insult us. He did 
not touch us with his hands because he was disgusted by us. He 
used to molest the woman with a plastic tube and tell me:  “Why 
don’t you defend her? Where’s your honor?”  In the same way, he 
used to molest me while interrogating me to get me to have an 
erection. Ultimately, he would insult her and ask her:  “Is it  
 26 enough? Is its size large enough for you? Are you satisfied?”  She 
would cry.”  
 
In addition, he witn essed several other instances of sexual violence 
against other detainees.  
 
“They brought in two women and the soldiers on duty 
raped them right in front of us. One of them fainted from 
screaming. I thought she was dead. She was a nurse from 
Qusair in Homs . Confronting those kinds of atrocities and 
feeling powerless in front of this inhumanity is much 
harder than physical torture.”  
 
In total, Tareq  was detained in the Palestine Branch for 14 months. After 
numerous cycles of torture, they took his fingerprints, which he 
interpreted as a sign that he would go to court. Instead, he was 
transferred to the Military Police prison in Qaboun, Damascus, wher e he 
was detained for nearly one month. On October 29, 2014, Tareq was 
transferred to Adra Prison, which he described as a “five -star hotel 
compared to the previous detention facilities.” While at Adra Prison, he 
appeared in Counter -terrorism Court about o nce every six months. He 
was charged with “supporting a terrorist organization” (the medical 
board) and plotting to overthrow the Syrian regime. The court sentenced 
him to 10 years in prison, revoked his Syrian nationality, confiscated his 
assets, and fine d him 1,800,000 Syrian pounds (the equivalent of $3,500 
at the time). With the help of a lawyer provided to him by the 
International Committee of the Red Cross, he was released after having 
been detained for four years, five months, and ten days.   
 
  
“They brought in two women and the soldiers on duty raped 
them right in front of us. One of them fainted from 
screaming. I thought she was dead. She was a nurse from 
Qusair in Homs. Confronting those kinds of atrocities and 
feeling powerless in front of th is inhumanity is much harder 
than physical torture.”  
Tareq, a health activities coordinator who was subjected to 
extreme torture, including sexual violence, during more than 
four years of detention  
  
 27 Inhumane Conditions in Detention  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Beyond the systematic torture they endured, each of the interviewees reported 
extremely poor living conditions across all detention centers. Those conditions, 
according to numerous human rights instruments , including a 1992 ruling by the 
Human Rights Committee,68 may amount to torture.  Interviewees consistently 
encountered overcrowding, extremely poor sanitation, lack of access to medical 
care, insufficient food, and lack of access to clean drinking water. Interviewees 
told PHR that these conditions appeared to b e intentional and designed to 
compound detainees’ misery. Following his arrest by Air Force Intelligence in 
Aleppo, Majd was held for a single night at the Kweires Military Aviation Institute 
about 30 km east of Aleppo city. Air Force Intelligence then tra nsferred him to its 
branch in al -Leramoun, and detained him there for four -and-a-half months.  
 
“They walked us in to the facility and stripped us all of our clothing. They 
stood us on a wall naked, both arms and one leg up for about half an hour. 
Then they  distributed us into cells. Mine was cell number three – a room 
that’s about six meters long and four meters wide. There was a single 
square window no bigger than 25 -by-25 centimeters. It was covered with 
a steel plate with three holes drilled into it and a very small fan.… We 
were 125 people in that space. Everyone was in their underwear. The 
smell was horrendous. You would have to lift your head above the crowd 
to be able to breath. The cell itself was filthy and we were not allowed to 
clean it. We were a llowed to go the bathroom three times a day. However, 
they only gave us 60 seconds to relieve ourselves and they beat us with 
silicone sticks on the way there and back. ”  
 
Wessam, a health volunteer from Rural Damascus, described trying to cope with 
the se vere overcrowding in the al -Fayha Political Security Branch in Damascus, 
where more than 60 prisoners were placed in a four -by-five-meter cell. “ We 
assigned three men to each tile and divided our days into three shifts,” Wessam 
explained. “One detainee wou ld sleep on his side with his legs on the second 
detainee who would be sitting, while the third detainee would be standing. We 
took turns: eight hours standing, eight hours sitting, and eight hours sleeping.”  “We got used to the smell of dead bodies.”  
Omar, describing how frequently  fellow detainees would 
die in custody in the Kafarsouseh Military Intelligence 
Branch, Damascus  
  
 28  
Wessam, a health volunteer, was packed into a four -by-five-meter cell with more than 60 
other prisoners, who had to stand, sit, and sleep in eight -hour shifts on a tiny portion of the 
floor. A number died of rampant disease . 
Photo: Diego Cupolo  for Physicians for Human Rights  
  
All 21 interviewed health workers said that the authorities rarely provided 
sufficient quantities of food, and the food that was provided was 
frequently inedible. Most participants described receiving two to three 
meals a  day that usually consisted of a piece of bread or a few bites of rice. 
In a few cases, detainees were given olives or a bit of marmalade. 
Interviewees said that this scant diet often led to malnutrition, dramatic 
weight loss, and long -term constipation. O ne interviewee reported 
weighing 90 kg before being detained. His weight upon release was 54 kg. 
Food deprivation was also used by Syrian security services as a form of 
punishment. Tareq, the 44 -year -old health activities coordinator  from 
Aleppo, recalled how food was used to manipulate and humiliate 
detainees in the Palestine Branch.69   
 
“Most of the time we would eat and never be full. We just wished 
that one day we would get that feeling of satisfaction after a meal 
again. For a time, they cuffed our hands behind our backs during 
meal time so we would have to eat like animals. All I wish ed for 
then was to be able to use a spoon. Then they deprived us of food 
altogether and dumped our meals in the toilet in front of us. My 
only wish then was to be able to eat.”  
 
Hassan, a nurse from Homs, described the first week of Ramadan in 2012 
at the  Riot Unit in Homs Central Prison, when prison authorities cut off  
 
 
 29  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
food, water, and electricity in response to detainees protesting poor 
conditions. Hassan spoke of how blockaded detainees resorted to drinking 
stagnant water from an old reservoir and to hunting mice and rats and 
cooking them over burning blankets to break  their fast.   
 
The majority of interviewees described being denied regular access to showers 
and soap. Omar, the health volunteer from Harasta,  explained that in his 63 days 
of detention in the Kafarsouse  Military Security Branch in Damascus, prison 
authorities allowed him to shower only twice. Describing the process, he said:  
 
“They told us to take our clothes off and rounded us up by groups of 50. 
They led us from our building to another and then down i nto a basement. 
There, we were led into the showers three at a time. The water was boiling 
hot. They gave us 60 seconds to shower. Anything over that and we would 
get the whip. They gave us one bar of soap and the three of us would try to 
lather each other  up as quickly as possible. That shower space was also a 
toilet and the kitchen where the prison’s food was cooked.”  
 
Some interviewees reported not being allowed access to the toilet, forcing them to 
relieve themselves in their cells. The cells were ofte n described as filthy, with 
grime, blood, and dirt covering the ground and the walls. Unsanitary conditions 
led to chronic diarrhea, widespread lice, scabies , and a range of severe skin 
infections. Describing conditions in Military Intelligence Branch 215,  Omar said:  
 
“Lice was itself a form of punishment because they didn’t even try 
to treat it. Eleven of us would need to share a single blanket, even 
though some of us would have lice or scabies. It was a tactic they 
used to transmit these diseases and mak e us feel even more 
depressed.”  
 
These conditions exposed detainees to a range of health risks that were 
compounded by the lack of adequate medical care available to them. Many of the 
interviewees reported that authorities denied them medical care or prov ided 
inadequate, incompetent, and even hostile services. Hazem, a 28 -year -old nurse 
from Aleppo, was released from detention permanently disabled as a result of a 
brutal beating to his knee that went untreated. Although he did receive medical 
attention, an  injection a nurse gave him at the State Security Branch in Aleppo 
where he was injured left him temporarily paralyzed, and his injury never healed. 
Hazem spent time in the Military Hospital in Aleppo as well as Damascus “When we came out [of detention], we were two men and 
12 corpses.”  
Tareq, a health activities coordinator who endured more 
than four years of torture, describing how few prisoners 
survived the dire conditions of detention  
 
  
 30 Hospital, where he reported that de tainee patients were often neglected, beaten, 
and ill -treated. One interviewee summarized detainees’ fear of the quality of 
medical care in detention by stating that “people would prefer to die in prison 
than go to the hospital and have to suffer through m ore torture.” Almost all 
interviewees recalled witnessing the death of fellow detainees as a result of 
torture, poor prison conditions, and/or a lack of adequate medical care. Referring 
to his 14 months of detention at the Military Intelligence’s Palestine  Branch in 
Damascus, Tareq stated that those who made it out of the facility alive were the 
lucky few. “When we came out, we were two men and 12 corpses.”  
 
Since medical care was either unavailable or inadequate, many interviewees 
provided health care whi le in detention in order to fill the gap, either with the 
consent of the detaining authorities or in secret. As health workers, they 
witnessed the impact of prevalent abuse and neglect and did what they could to 
counter it with the limited resources available to them. In the Jameeliyeh Military 
Police Branch in Aleppo, prison guards would often bring medical cases to Majd 
for treatment. “They would only bring them to my corner if they were dying,” he 
said. “I watched 14 deta inees die and the only thing I could do for them was 
pray.” In Homs Central Prison, authorities allowed Hassan to establish a medical 
unit in the prison to offer medical services to prisoners. It had 10 beds and 
received medications from the Syrian Red Cre scent. When detainees arrived at 
the civilian prison from other branches, Hassan and other health volunteers, 
including an anesthetist and a pharmacist, would conduct a preliminary 
assessment, provide medications for scabies and lice, and address wounds wh en 
possible. The situation was drastically different in security branches. Hassan 
explained:  
 
“In the security branch, I tried to provide some medical care – in 
secret, naturally. If I was caught providing consultations or care to 
anyone, the consequences  would have been dire. Given conditions 
in the detention site, we saw a lot of skin ulcers. The infections were 
horrible. We tried to treat them. With an infected skin ulcer, you 
must make a small incision to drain the pus. We used to make those 
incisions with whatever was available. We tried to get our hands on 
what little soap and salt was available around us to make 
disinfectants.”  
 
Interviewees described the conditions to be far worse – more violent, more 
crowded, more inhumane – in security branches t han in civilian prisons. Even in 
facilities where conditions were described by some interviewees as “less 
intolerable” – primarily in Adra Central Prison and Homs Central Prison – the 
most fundamental international standards relating to the treatment of 
prisoners70 were ignored.  
 
As documented by various human rights organizations and monitoring bodies, 
including the United Nations Independent International Commission of Inquiry 
(IICOI), Syrian authorities have been aware of these conditions and of their  
 31 devastating and often deadly impact on individuals in their custody.71 This 
awareness, in addition to the effective control the Syrian government exerts over 
all regime -affiliated official and unofficial detention sites, has led the IICOI to 
conclude that thes e conditions have been inflicted on detainees “in the pursuance 
of a state policy to attack a civilian population.”72  
 
Enforced Disappearances  
 
Most detention cases documented by PHR can be qualified as enforced 
disappearances.73,74 In most cases, and unless relatives were at the scene of arrest, 
the families of the interviewees had no information about their whereabouts or 
fate for months. During their detention in security branches, none of the 
detainees were allowed any contact wi th the outside world. Many were only able 
to contact their families once they were transferred to civilian prisons. The 
gravity of enforced disappearances and their impact on the families of detainees 
was palpable in Dr. Jamal’s description of the scene ou tside the Civilian Court in 
Damascus on the day he was released:  
 
“As soon as I came out of the courthouse – and this is a something I will 
never forget – about 50 women rushed me. Each one of them had a 
picture in her hand. ‘This is my son,’ ‘This is my h usband,’ ‘This is my 
brother,’ they would tell me. ‘Have you seen my son?’ I tried to look at the 
pictures, but I couldn’t recognize any of the faces. There was a man there 
who told me to leave before more of them showed up. And that’s what I 
did. I ran aw ay. It was such a difficult moment. They’re just standing 
there, and they show these pictures to every detainee who gets released 
out of that courthouse.”  
 
Arbitrary Detention by Non -Government Armed Groups  
 
Anti -government armed groups detained three of the 21 health workers 
interviewed by PHR following their release from Syrian government detention 
facilities. The groups included the Islamic State (ISIS) and Hayat Tahrir al -Sham 
(HTS). In all three cases, the detentions had no relation to the detainees’ medical 
work. Their captors subjected all three interviewees to varying degrees of ill -
treatment. An ISIS security cell arrested Tamer, a pharmacist who coordinated 
vaccination campaigns in northeast Syria, in June 2017 for carrying a satellite 
phone. ISIS  detained him for seven days in the basement of an unknown 
makeshift facility, where guards repeatedly threatened him with execution. HTS 
detained Tareq, the health activities coordinator  from Aleppo, toward the 
beginning of May 2017 for four days on charg es of being secular and of “delaying 
victory.” His captors forced him to listen to sermons on HTS’s expectations of 
public conduct in areas under its control, but otherwise did not mistreat him. An 
unknown armed group abducted and detained Dr. Loay in West ern Aleppo and 
held him for one week, during which he reports no torture. He was released after 
his family paid $28,000 in ransom. It should be noted that these three cases are 
not representative of documented patterns of more extreme abuse carried out by  
 32 non-government armed groups – specifically ISIS and HTS. ISIS and HTS have 
perpetrated serious violations in territories under their control, including 
detention, torture, and summary executions.75  
 
Leila : Beaten  for Providing Medical Assistance  
 
Leila is a certified physical therapist and natural healer from Damascus. 
When protests began in 2011, she started treating injured demonstrators 
at a clinic in her opposition -sympathetic neighborhood. As the conflict 
escalated, Leila’s neighborhood came u nder increased government attack, 
driving out most physicians in the area. This created an immense shortage 
in medical practitioners, especially female professionals. Leila and her 
colleagues used her clinic to treat war casualties. “The government 
noticed  what we were up to and shelled the clinic almost immediately,” 
she recalled.   
 
In early 2012, Leila began volunteering as a paramedic with the Red 
Crescent. In the fall of that year, Leila and other volunteers received a call 
that one of her son’s friends had been injured in a particularly unsafe area 
of her neighborhood. She volunte ered to go tend to him, thinking that she 
ran a lower risk of targeting as a woman. She left on foot, because 
ambulances were being targeted by government forces. Before she 
reached the injured boy, she was shot by a government sniper. The bullet 
entered h er shoulder, ruptured her lung and exited her back. Severely 
injured and struggling to find help, Leila was arrested by soldiers from the 
Syrian army’s 4th  Armored Division. They took her to al -Mujtahed 
Hospital in al -Mujtah ed neighborhood in Damascus, whe re she was held 
Syrian Air Force Intelligence officers detained Leila, a paramedic, for almost five months, 
accusing her of providing medical assistance to armed combatants, beating her, a nd trying 
to force her to share locations of field hospitals.  
  
 33 for 12 days under arrest and guarded while she was treated. When she had 
partially recovered, she was transferred from the hospital to the Air Force 
Intelligence Branch. Air Force Intelligence detained Leila for a full day 
before releasing her. In the few hours she spent at the branch, 
interrogators beat her, verbally abused her, and accused her of providing 
support to “terrorists.”  
 
Following her release and recovery, Leila continued her work in the health 
sector. During a trip with her si ster to buy medical equipment and 
medication in Damascus in October 2015, she was arrested again, this 
time by the police. Her sister was immediately released but the police 
transferred Leila to the Air Force Intelligence Branch in al -Mezze Military 
Airpor t in Damascus. For the next 11 days, Air Force Intelligence 
personnel interrogated and beat Leila on a daily basis. They accused her 
of providing medical assistance to armed combatants, smuggling 
explosives into Damascus, and providing material support to “terrorists.” 
They showed her maps of the city and asked her to share the locations of 
the field hospitals she knew about. Leila tried to explain to her 
interrogators that she only did humanitarian work but was often 
threatened with violence when she made that claim. After almost five 
months in detention, interrogators forced Leila to fingerprint a stack of 
papers she was not allowed to read. She was then moved to the Airforce 
Intelligence Branch in Harasta, where she was held for eight days before 
being re leased.  
 
Almost immediately after being released, Leila returned to her work in 
field hospitals as the government’s bombing campaign on opposition -held 
areas around Damascus intensified. When her neighborhood fell to Syrian 
government forces, Leila left S yria for Turkey.  
 
 
Judicial Mechanisms  
 
PHR interviews with formerly detained health workers reveal the absence of 
legitimate judicial processes to which Syrian authorities subjected detainees. In 
multiple cases, interviewees reported that judges specifically designated 
nondiscriminatory medical activities as crimes. In many other cases, medical 
activities were not explicitly referenced as accusations in court but were instead 
couched under generic “support for terrorism” charg es.  
 
The role of the Syrian judiciary in perpetuating arbitrary detention is 
underscored throughout the testimonies of the health workers PHR interviewed 
for this study. Three -quarters of the interviewees experienced some form of 
judicial process during t heir detention. They appeared in court and usually faced 
formal charges. More than half of those who passed through the Syrian court 
system appeared in Counter -terrorism Court. The remainder appeared in military 
courts, military field courts , civil courts,  or a combination thereof. Those  
 34 interviewees whose cases were tried in Counter -terrorism and military courts 
reported a consistent, almost exclusive, reliance by judges on “evidence” that had 
been wholly fabricated by security services, or confessions obt ained through 
torture.  
 
All interviewees described a highly unpredictable experience of the court system, 
with no discernible rules or procedures. Pre -trial detention periods varied from 
one interviewee to another. The interviewees’ interactions with the j udges were 
described as perfunctory, and sometimes lasted less than a minute. Some of the 
interviewees were able to appoint lawyers to represent them. However, even 
when assisted by counsel, interviewees stated the lawyers were not present in 
every court s ession and, when they were, they seemed powerless to raise a 
defense.  
 
Many interviewees stated that the sole “evidence” presented in court proceedings 
were confessions either extracted under torture or entirely fabricated by 
interrogators. In at least fi ve cases, judges dismissed or ignored allegations of 
torture raised by the detainees in their court hearings. In his first session in the 
Military Court of Homs, Hassan reported that he told the military judge that he 
had been forced to confess under tortu re, pointing to his blue, swollen face as 
proof. Hassan said the judge responded, “You look fine to me.” After nine months 
in the Homs Central Prison, Hassan was released into forced conscription into 
the Syrian army.  
 
Few of the interviewees who passed th rough the court system were released, even 
when the court dismissed their cases or rendered not -guilty verdicts. In at least 
five cases, interviewees secured their release by bribing judges through their 
lawyers. After his case was referred to the criminal  section of the Counter -
terrorism Court, Samer, the 33 -year -old pharmacist from Damascus, stated that a 
string of lawyers extorted him and his family with the promise of a not -guilty 
judgment in return for a payment. Finally, he and his family reached an 
agreement with a lawyer whereby they paid him the sum of $10,000 only after 
the judge released Samer on bail. Similarly, the Harasta health volunteer, Omar, 
paid a bribe of $8,000 to the Counter -terrorism Court in return for being granted 
bail. Both Samer a nd Omar fled government -controlled territory before the 
sentencing phase. Dr. Loay characterized his experience in the First Military Field 
Court of Damascus as a “farce”:   
 
“You walk into the courtroom and stand in front of a judge, your arms and 
legs bo und with chains. He asks for your name, your date of birth, and 
goes on to sentence you. I was convicted of six offenses: financing 
terrorism, abduction, murder, working to undermine patriotic sentiment, 
working to bring about the downfall of the Syrian re gime, and conspiring 
against the state. I was sentenced to death by hanging. The presiding 
judge was a general in military uniform.”   
 35 Post-Detention Experiences  
 
Post-Detention Work  
 
After being released from detention, almost all of those whom PHR interviewed 
sought in some way to continue humanitarian work, despite their detention 
ordeals. Many returned to work in field hospitals in opposition -controlled parts 
of the country, with some of those who were interviewed remotely still living and 
working  in these areas. The decision to leave Syria was difficult for many 
interviewees, with a number noting their desire to keep their family members 
safe as the main factor . Several interviewees provide clinical care for Syrian 
refugees in neighboring countrie s. Others have moved into coordination or 
administrative roles to continue providing support for health care facilities within 
Syria, for displaced populations, or for broader public health efforts in their 
countries of residence.  Many reported continuing to derive a strong sense of 
meaning and purpose from their current work, even if their professional goals 
had to change.  
 
All interviewees currently living in exile reported that they would not consider 
returning to live and work in Syria without  a change in regime and guarantees for 
their security. Some described this as “only if Assad left power,” others as “only 
when there  is safety, complete safety.” Many participants expressed their ongoing 
fear of returning to government -controlled areas of Syria, as they had 
information that gave them credible reasons to believe they were still wanted by 
different security apparatuses. Mohannad, the Idlib pharmacist who worked with 
a humanitarian organization, explained:  
 
“I would never even think of going near an area controlled by the 
Syrian government. I know that the minute I go near a government -
controlled area I will be detained, a nd I am sure killed.… I know I 
am still wanted because I worked with what they consider to be a 
‘terrorist organization. ’ Many of my friends and colleagues have 
been detained. Some are still in detention. Others have been killed. 
There is a high risk. This  is not just a fear, this is a reality and a 
nightmare.”  
 
Psychological Impact of Detention  
 
All the health workers interviewed had experienced multiple traumatic events 
since the Syrian conflict began. In addition to their shared experience of 
detention, almost all had also experienced the death of friends or family 
members, direct bombings and shelling, or other attacks. It is thus impossible to 
disentangle the impact of detention from these other experiences. While the 
duration of detention and severity and frequency of torture during detention 
varied among interviewees, most described a similar temporal course of 
psychological symptoms after release from detention. Most reported nightmares, 
hypervigilance, and feeling depressed, withdrawn, and avoidant i mmediately  
 36 after release, with the severity of symptoms diminishing over time for those now 
living outside of Syria. Many evinced a high level of self -awareness, describing 
positive strategies they used to cope with painful memories of what they had 
experi enced, such as employing humor or trying to recount their experiences to 
others. A few noted that they continued to grapple with feeling emotionally 
detached, socially withdrawn, or needing to avoid certain situations that 
reminded them of events during de tention. One respondent had been tortured on 
his birthday and avoided all mention and celebration of his and others’ birthdays; 
another had difficulty providing treatment for patients who had also been 
prisoners.  
 
The most frequently reported continued negative emotion was a sense of guilt for 
being alive while other health worker detainees had died. Even those who 
suffered long detentions with repeated, brutal torture described feeling guilty 
that they had not suffered as much as other people had, such as friends and 
colleagues who had been killed. As Dr. Youssef explained: “I always feel guilty. 
After I was released from detention, I felt I should do more. Then I felt guilty that 
I should have t aken responsibility for mobilizing the opposition. Since I have 
come to Turkey, I have felt guilty for being safe in Gaziantep. Four of my friends 
who stayed in Idlib to work at a field hospital were killed by a bombing of the 
hospital in 2013; I feel guil ty that I didn’t encourage them to leave.”   
Dr. Youssef, a surgeon who was detained and tortured for a year, looks at images of doctors at the 
hospital in Rural Damascus where he used to work. He says he often feels guilty for having survived 
when many colleagues and other detained health profession als were killed.  
  
 37  
 
 
 
 
 
 
All those interviewed generously provided hours of their time to recount their 
experiences and share their stories. Despite their ordeals, their defining 
char acteristic was resilience. Dr. Ziad, a psychiatrist from Rural Damascus, stated 
“I hit the bottom after detention. Now I am granted new life so I must do more 
and live differently.”  Their commitment to their medical work was also evident in 
their continuat ion in the medical or humanitarian field post -detention. As one 
health volunteer  explained, “I did have a lot of hopelessness and guilt but 
working with detainees transformed my bitterness to energy.”  
Legal Framework  
 
Armed Conflict Classification and Ap plicable International 
Humanitarian Law  
 
This report focuses on detention and abuse by the Syrian government and non -
state armed groups; for the purpose of legal analysis, the conflict in Syria may be 
characterized as primarily a non -international armed conflict in which 
obligations arise under b oth international treaty and customary law.  
 
The body of treaty law outlining States parties’ obligations under international 
humanitarian law (IHL) are the Geneva Conventions  of 1949 , which Syria ratified 
in 1953. Significantly, they contain provisions r elated to protecting civilians, 
regulating detention, and safeguarding medical personnel. Common Article 3 of 
the Geneva Conventions applies to all parties to the conflict in Syria and contains 
specific stipulations on the equal and humane treatment of per sons taking no 
active part in hostilities. Common Article 3 prohibits mutilation, torture, 
humiliating and degrading treatment, and the passing of sentences and the 
carrying out of executions without previous judgment by a “regularly constituted 
court.”76 In addition to the IHL obligations arising under treaty law, the Syrian 
government and other parties to the conflict in Syria are bound by customary 
international law  (CIL) , including, but not limited to: Rule 99, prohibiting the 
arbitrary deprivation of li berty ;77 Rule 90, prohibiting torture and other cruel and 
inhumane punishment ;78 Rule 98, prohibiting enforced disappearances ;79 and 
Rule 89, prohibiting murder.80  
 
CIL also protect s the provision of medical care .81 Rule 25 of customary 
international humanitar ian law provides for the protection and respect of 
medical personnel engaged exclusively in medical duties,82 with the idea that they 
should not be knowingly attacked or prevented from discharging their functions. “In Syria, those who issue judgements are the intelligence 
services and not the judges.”  
Dr. Ahmad, who appeared in Counter -terrorism Court 16 
months after he was first arrested  
  
 38 Rule 26 of CIL prohibits the punishment of a person for performing medical 
duties in line with medical ethics.83 
 
Applicable International Human Rights Law  
 
In addition to its obligations under IHL and CIL, Syria has ratified multiple 
international treaties containing articles relevant to the detention, abuse, and 
torture of health workers in Syria. Critically, Syria has ratified the International 
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, which codifies the right to 
physical and mental health in Article 12. The obligation to extend the right to 
health in a nondiscriminatory manner is articulated in Article 2.2, which states 
that “the rights enunciated i n the present Covenant will be exercised without 
discrimination of any kind ”84 (emphasis added) . 
 
The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) was ratified by 
Syria in 1969. Article 7 of the ICCPR prohibits torture or cruel, inhuman, or 
degrading treatment or punishment.85 Significantly, Articles 9, 10, and 14 of the 
ICCPR also pertain to aspects of the abuses alleged: prohibition of arbitrary 
arrest or detention (Art. 9); the humane treatment of detainees (Art. 10); and 
provision of fair trials (Art. 14).86 Of particular interest for this report, Syria 
ratified the Convention against Torture (CAT) in 2004.87 Article 2 of the CAT 
requires States parties to actively prevent acts of torture in territories under their 
jurisdiction, allowing for no derogation under any circumstances, including in a 
state of war, internal instability, or public emergency.88  
 
While Syria is not party to the Rome Statute, which established the International 
Criminal Court, the court may obtain jurisdiction to investi gate and prosecute 
acts proscribed therein through a number of mechanisms including potentially 
through the discretion of the Prosecutor, though this has not yet proved 
possible.89 Of note, Article 7 of the Rome Statute provides that imprisonment or 
other d eprivation of physical liberty, torture, and enforced disappearance may be 
considered crimes against humanity when committed as part of “a widespread 
and systematic attack directed against any civilian population.”90  
 
Applicable Domestic Law and Abrogation  
 
In theory, the Syrian Constitution of 2012 provides for a range of protections 
against arbitrary detention and torture. In practice, however, these guarantees 
are all but invalidated through the judiciary’s effective capture by the executive 
and security  branches. In its section on the rule of law, Articles 51 -53, the 
Constitution spells out human rights and principles that include the presumption 
of innocence in trials, the right to counsel, the right to fair trial, the prohibition of 
torture and cruel t reatment, and the prohibition of false imprisonment.91 The 
Syrian Penal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedures provide for similar 
procedural protections.  
  
 39 A permanent, nation -wide state of emergency established in 1963 enabled the 
creation of a parallel  judicial system which has been used to quell dissent and 
preserve regime stability.92 Exceptional courts, including military courts and the 
Supreme State Security Court, funneled untold numbers of people perceived by 
the Syrian government as threats into b oth official and unofficial detention 
sites.93 The state of emergency was lifted in April 2011 only to be replaced by 
sweeping counter -terrorism measures that included the promulgation of 
Counter -terrorism Law 19, and the establishment of the Counter -terror ism Court 
through Decree 22 in July 2012.94 The Counter -terrorism Court has enabled the 
Syrian government to circumvent the handful of constitutional and procedural 
protections provided to civilians under domestic law and has facilitated a 
campaign of wides pread human rights abuses.  
Conclusion  
 
This study’s findings indicate that the government of Syria has targeted health 
workers for arbitrary arrest, detention, and torture for the ostensible “crime” of 
honoring their professional codes of ethics, which require them to provide care to 
the sick a nd wounded without discrimination. Syrian security forces have 
purposefully conflated provision of medical care to civilians who live in 
opposition -controlled areas and to those whom they consider direct opponents 
with “terrorism.” They have subjected heal th care workers to brutal and unlawful 
punishment, resulting in severe trauma  and, in some cases,  permanent disability. 
Additionally, removing these health workers from areas in which patients are 
desperately in need of lifesaving care may have resulted in  large numbers of 
preventable illnesses and fatalities. Together, these actions violate both national 
and international laws and demonstrate profound disrespect for universally 
recognized norms of medical ethics: the obligations of health professionals to 
care for the sick and wounded without preference or discrimination. Within 
methodological limitations, these findings provide compelling evidence of the 
targeting of health workers in Syria.  
 
This study provides evidence of patterns of arbitrary arrest of health workers in 
their homes and workplaces. In some cases, these arrests were based on evidence 
of “criminality” obtained during the torture of those health workers’ colleagues or 
associates. In other cases, health workers were detained after medical sup plies or 
equipment – materials associated by the Syrian government with 
nondiscriminatory care provision – were discovered on their persons at security 
checkpoints. While the cases documented in this report are not recent, ongoing 
PHR investigations indica te that the Syrian government’s practices of detention, 
torture, and enforced disappearance continue to affect health workers,95 among 
many other s targeted by the regime as political enemies .  
 
Medical facilities and health workers  are both particularly vul nerable to attack 
and essential to community health during times of violent conflict . They 
represent a safety net that is obligated to support the community and treat all  
 40 wounded and sick individuals, regardless of their affiliations . This duty by 
necessit y places health workers  on the front lines of conflict and human suffering. 
Physicians and other health workers  in Syria have been arrested and detained in 
the course o f fulfilling their obligations to provide medical care both inside and 
outside medical facilities. This purposeful and unlawful mistreatment  aims to 
prevent physicians from participating in the care of opposition forces and 
civilians who live in areas domin ated by those forces . In line with the extensively 
documented strategy of attacking health care facilities ,96 the targeting and 
mistreatment of health workers a lso serves to decrease vital health care capacity, 
erode trust in the safety of health institutio ns, and weaken health systems in the 
short and long term.  
 
The Syrian government and its  allies have consistently demonstrated contempt 
for human rights  and international humanitarian law . During the eight years of 
the conflict to date, they have deployed a strategy directed first and foremost at 
civilian populations of restive areas and persons perceived to be supporting the 
opposition. They have imposed sieges on opposition -held areas ,97 shelled and 
bombarded densely populated urban centers, established ex tensive networks of 
security checkpoints, and led a widespread campaign of arrest, torture , and 
enforced disappearance of suspected insurgents and their supporters.  
 
For years, evidence of abuses carried out by the  Syrian  security forces  has been 
reported by numerous human rights groups .98 Torture, including beatings, sexual 
violence, solitary confinement, electric al shock s, and food deprivation are 
common ly used against  detainees suspected of anti -government sympathies, 
including health workers . Physicians for Human Rights calls upon the Syrian  
government to respect the rights and dignity of all Syrian citizens and particularly 
the health workers on whom the country’s ci vilian population desperately relies. 
Recommendations  
 
The situation of detainees in Syria , including those targeted because they are  
health workers, forms a crucial part of a human rights crisis of enormous 
proportions . Resolving this crisis is critical f or Syria’s future. The issue of 
arbitrary detention has been widely perceived as a precondition to any political 
solution to the conflict. It figures prominently in four UN Security Council 
resolutions on Syria (UNSC 2139 ,99 2254 ,100 2268 ,101 2474102), is seen by the  
Special Envoy for Syria  as a critical element of trust building to support the 
political process ,103 and is notably present in the third Brussels Conference Co -
Chairs declaration.104 Nevertheless, this stated interest has yet to translate into 
substantive progress. The only current negotiation platform for discussing the 
release of detainees – the Astana Working Group on Detentions and Abductions 
– has never evolved beyond its limits as a prisoner swap mechanism , leaving  the 
issue of detainees within a framework that has been seen by many as supporting 
the interests of the Syrian government and its allies.  With thousands of people 
still detained or missing , and the pace of arrests reportedly rising in areas  
 41 recently re -taken by the Syrian government ,105 the issue requires urgent action by 
a range of actors implicated in the Syrian conflict. Physicians for Hum an Rights 
therefore call s on all concerned parties to implement the following 
recommendations without delay:  
 
To the Syrian Government and Affiliated Forces, and All Parties 
to the Conflict:  
 
• Immediately and unconditionally release all arbitrarily or unlawfully 
detained individuals from official and unofficial detention sites, starting 
with the most vulnerable , including children, women, the elderly, and the 
disabled . 
• Take immediate and systemic measures to prevent the torture and ill -
treatment of detainees and ensure that allegations of abuse are  
investigated and abusers held accountable .  
• Disclose the locations of all official and unofficial detention sites and 
provide comprehensive lists of all those held in those sites . 
• Disclose infor mation to families on the location and status  of detained 
and abducted relatives, notifying them of the circumstances of death and 
location of burial when applicable .  
• End the use of “exceptional” courts, including military field tribunals and 
the Counter -terrorism Court. Suspend all sentences passed through these 
courts and guarantee fair trials for the accused under UN supervision .   
• Allow unconditional access to all places of detention, official and 
unofficial, by designated international bodies and huma nitarian 
organizations .  
• Improve detention conditions in compliance with international standards , 
including through ensuring detainee contact with families, access to 
medical care, and sufficient water and food , as well as preventing torture, 
ill-treatment , and sexual violence . 
• Respect health services and protect medical personnel , patients, facilitie s, 
and transport from attack or interference . 
 
To the Russian Federation :  
(As the main supporter of the Syrian government and a party to the 
conflict in Syria ) 
 
• Use influence to press  the Syrian government to implement the above -
listed recommendations, focusing on the unconditional release of those 
arbitrarily detained, disclosing information to families on the fate and 
whereabout s of detained relatives, and granting access by international 
monitors to detention sites .  
• Support UN Securi ty Council measures to accelerate the release of the 
arbitrarily detained, including medical personnel, in accordance with 
resolutions 2139 and 2254.   
 42  
To the U nited Nations  Security Council:  
 
• Address non -implementation of prior UN Security Council resolutions by 
adopting a stand -alone resolution on the situation of detainees and 
missing persons, setting out in detail the steps that the government of 
Syria is required to take under international  law. 
• Enforce accountability by referring the situation in Syria to the Prosecutor 
of the International Criminal Court .  
• Adopt targeted sanctions against persons, agencies , and groups credibly 
suspected of being responsible for or complicit in conduct lead ing to 
arbitrary arrests, custodial deaths, torture , and enforced disappearances . 
• Encourage all parties to the conflict to abide by UNSC resolutions 2139, 
2254, 2268 , and 2474  and draw specific attention to the targeting of 
medical personnel . 
 
To the UN Sp ecial Envoy for Syria:  
 
• Ensure that discussions of human right s and international humanitarian 
law violations , including arbitrary detention, torture, enforced 
disappearances , and attacks on health , are prominent within the political 
process . 
• Re-insert the issue of detainees, abductees , and the missing under the 
framework of the Geneva peace process and push the Astana Guarantors 
to widen the scope of the Working Group on Detainees and Abductees 
beyond its current focus on low -level one -to-one prisoner exchange and 
into a scalable release of civilian prisoners . 
 
To UN Member States :  
 
• Refrain from forcibly returning Syrian refugees to their country of origin , 
given the ongoing risks of targeting, detention, abductions, enforced 
disappearance, to rture , and ill -treatment .  
• Strengthen targeted sanctions against Syrian officials credibly implicated 
in the ongoing serious violations of international humanitarian law and 
international human rights law . 
• Exercise international and domestic law, including  universal jurisdiction 
principles, to investigate and prosecute Syrian military and civilian 
officials responsible for carrying out war crimes and crimes against 
humanity against detainees in Syria. Ensure cooperation among states, 
including sharing of ev idence bilaterally, where possible, with national 
prosecutors who are pursuing these cases in domestic courts.  
 
 
  
 43 Endnotes  
1 Joseph Holliday, “The Assad Regime: From Counterinsurgency to Civil War,” The 
Institute for the Study of War , March 2013, 9, 
http://www.understandingwar.org/sites/d efault/files/TheAssadRegime -web.pdf .  
2 “Sieges as a Weapon of War: Encircle, starve, surrender, evacuate,” Independent 
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, May 29, 2018, 
https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/CoISyria/PolicyPaperSieges_
29May2018.pdf . 
3 United Nations General Assembly, “ Report of the Independent International 
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic*,” February 5, 2015, 4 -5, 
https://documents -dds-
ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G15/019/37/PDF/G1501937.pdf?OpenElement . 
4 Physicians for Human Righ ts, “The Syrian Conflict: Eight Years of Devastation and 
Destruction of the Health System,” March 12, 2019, https://phr.org/our -
work/resources/the -syrian -conflict -eight -years -of-devastation -and-destruction -of-the-
health -system/ . 
5 Physicians for Human Rights, “Illegal Attacks on Health Care in Syria,” 
http://syriamap.phr.org/#/en .  
6 “On Eighth Anniversary of Syria Conflict, PHR Renews Call for Accountability, 
Cessation of Attacks o n Health Care Infrastructure,” Physicians for Human Rights,  
March 12, 2019, https://phr.org /news/on -eighth -anniversary -of-syria -conflict -phr-
renews -call-for-accountability -cessation -of-attacks -on-health -care -infrastructure/ .   
7 Physicians for Human Rights, “Illegal Attacks on Health Care in Syria .”   
8 Law 19 defines “terrorism” in an overly broad manner as: “every act that aims at 
creating a state of panic among the people, destabilizing public security and damaging the 
basic infrastructure of the country by using weapons, ammunition, explosives, flamma ble 
materials, toxic products, epidemiological or bacteriological factors or any method 
fulfilling the same purposes ” (emphasis added).  
9 Emergency response units/centers with limited staff and equipment usually established 
on the front lines or in particu larly volatile areas for emergency stabilization of trauma 
cases and referral to larger medical facilities.  
10 Physicians for Human Rights, “Illegal Attacks on Health Care in Syria .” 
11 Ibid.  
12 Ibid.  
13 Physicians for Human Rights, “The Syrian Conflict: Eight Years of Devastation and 
Destruction of the Health System.”  
14 Ibid.  
15 Mazen Eyon, “Russia, China Veto a draft resolution that aims to protect terrorists in 
Idleb,” Syrian Arab News Agency , September  19, 2019, 
https://www.sana.sy/en/?p=173708 .  
16 Human Rights Watch, “Syria: Counterterrorism Court Used to Stifle Dissent,” June 25, 
2013, https://www.hrw.org/news/2013/06/25/syria -counterterrorism -court -used -stifle -
dissent . Accessed on October 23, 2019.  
17 Khaled Yacoub Oweis, “Syria protests spread, authorities pull back,” Reuters , 21 March 
2011, https://www.reuters.com/article/us -syria/syria -protests -spread -authorities -pull-
back -idUSTRE72K4CD20110321 . 
18 Katherine Marsh, Haroon Siddique, and Matthew Taylor, “Syria’s crackdown on 
protesters becomes dramatically more brutal,” The Guardian , April 25, 2011, 
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/25/syria -crackdown -protesters -brutal . 
19 “Thousands of Syrians chant anti -regime slogans at protesters’ funerals ,” The 
Telegraph , December 21, 2011, 
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/middleeast/syria/ 8970985/Thousands -
of-Syrians -chant -anti-regime -slogans -at-protesters -funerals.html .                                                             
 44                                                                                                                                                                
20 United Nations General Assembly, “Report of the independent international 
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,” November 23, 2011, 8,  
https://undocs.org/A/HRC/S -17/2/Add.1 . 
21 “Guide to the Syrian Opposition,” BBC News, October 17, 2003 , 
https://www.bbc.com/news/world -middle -east-15798218 . 
22 United Nations General Assembly, " Report of the Independent International 
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic*,” February 5, 2015, 5,  
http s://documents -dds-
ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G15/019/37/PDF/G1501937.pdf?OpenElement . 
23 Holliday, “The Assad Regime,”9.  
24 Joost Hiltermann, “The Syrian Conflict and International Support for Rebel Groups,” 
International Crisis Group , September 28, 2018, https://www.crisisgroup.org/middle -
east-north -africa/eastern -mediterranean/syria/syrian -conflict -and-internat ional -
support -rebel -groups . 
25 Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, “Sieges 
as a Weapon of War: Encircle, starve, surrender, evacuate,”  May 29, 2018, 
https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/CoISyria/PolicyPaperSieges_
29May2018.pdf . 
26 United Nations General Assembly, “Report of the Independent International 
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic*,” February 5, 2015, 4 -5, 
https://documents -dds-
ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G15/019/37/PDF/G1501937.pdf?OpenElement .  
27 United Nations Security Council, “Resolution 2042 (2012),” Apr il 14, 2012, 
https://www.securitycouncilreport.org/atf/cf/%7B65BFCF9B -6D27 -4E9C -8CD3 -
CF6E4FF96FF9%7D/Syria%20SRES%202042.pdf .  
28  United Nations Security Council, “Resolution 2118 (2013),” September 27, 2013, 
http://www.securitycouncilreport.org/atf/cf/%7B65BFCF9B -6D27-4E9C -8CD3 -
CF6E4FF96FF9%7D/s_res_2118.pdf . 
29  United Nations Security Council, “Resolution 2139 (2014),” February 22, 2014,  
http://www .securitycouncilreport.org/atf/cf/%7B65BFCF9B -6D27 -4E9C -8CD3 -
CF6E4FF96FF9%7D/s_res_2139.pdf .  
30 Hiltermann, “The Syrian Conflict and International Support for Rebel Groups .” 
31 Kareem Shaheen, “String of losses in Syria leaves Assad regime increasingly 
prec arious,” The Guardian , June 11, 2015, 
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/11/syria -losses -east-assad -regime -
precarious . 
32 Andrew Osborn, “Russia begins Syria air strikes in its biggest Mideast intervention in 
decades,” Reuters, September 30, 2015, https://www.reuters.com/article/us -mideast -
crisis -russia/russia -begins -syria -air-strikes -in-its-biggest -mideast -intervention -in-
decades -idUSKCN0RU0MG20150930 .  
33 “Under -Secretary -General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief 
Coordinator, Mark Lowcock Press Statement on Northwest Syria, 18 July 2019,” 
ReliefWeb , July 18, 2019, https://reliefweb.int/report/syrian -arab -republic/under -
secretary -general -humanitarian -affairs -and-emergency -relief -93.   
34 “More than 570 thousand people were killed on the Syrian territory within 8 years of 
revolution demanding freedom, democracy, justice, and equality,” Syrian Observatory 
for Human Rights , March 15, 2019, http://www.syriahr.com/en/?p=120851 .  
35 “In the highest monthly death toll in 17 months, 1520 people were killed in August 
2019,” Syrian Observatory for Human Rights , September 1, 2019, 
http://www.syriahr .com/en/?p=139262 .  
36 “Quick facts: What you need to know about the Syria crisis,” Mercy Corps , accessed 
October 23, 2019, https://www.mercycorps.org/articles/iraq -jordan -lebanon -syria -
turkey/quick -facts -what -you-need -know -about -syria -crisis#idlib  
37 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, “Syrian Arab 
Republic,”  https://www.unocha.org/syria .   
 45                                                                                                                                                                
38 Three UN envoys who tried and failed in quest for Syria peace,” France 24, January 15, 
2019, https://www.france24.com/en/20190115 -three -un-envoys -who -tried -failed -quest -
syria -peace . 
39 Anne Barnard, “Syrian Government Docume nts Show Widespread Abuses, Rights 
Center Says,” New York Times , May 21, 2019, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/05/21/world/middleeast/syrian -government -
documents -abuses.html .  
40 Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, the Syrian Network for Human Rights, 
the Violations Documentation Center, and the United Nations Independent International 
Commission of Inquiry on Syria have all documented the various facets of detention in 
Syria.  
41 Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), “Out of Sight, Out of 
Mind: Deaths in Detention in the Syrian Arab Republic,” February 3, 2016, 4, 
https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/CoISyria/A -HRC -31-
CRP1_en.pdf . 
42 Syria’s Arab Socialist Baath Party came to power in a military coup in 1963 and 
legislated a state of emergency that gave the government unch ecked authority to curb 
individual freedoms when matters of national security were thought to be at stake.  
43 Amnesty International, “Syria: Torture by the security forces,” October 1987, 1, 
https://www.amnesty.org/download/Documents/200000/mde240091987en.pdf . 
44 Human Rights Watch, “A Wasted Decade: Human Rights in Syria during Bashar al -
Asad’s Ten Years in Power,” July 16, 2010, 
https://www.hrw.org/report/2010/07/16/wasted -decade/human -rights -syria -during -
bashar -al-asads -first -ten-years -power . 
45 As discussed in the Legal Standards section of this report, the counter -terrorism laws 
(June 28, 2012) and the Counter -terrorism Court promulgated in July 2012 largely 
replaced the state of emergency that had been lifted by President Assad in April 2011.  
46 Human Rights Watch, “Syria: Counterterrorism Court Used to Stifle Dissent,” June 25, 
2013, https://www.hrw.org/news/2013/06/25/syria -counterterrorism -court-used -stifle -
dissent . 
47 United Nations Security Council, “Security Council Failing Thousands of People 
Detained, Abducted in Syria, Civil Society Speakers Say, Demanding Information about 
Missing Persons’ Whereabouts,” August 7, 2019, 
https://www.un.org/press/en/2019/sc13913.doc.htm   
48Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, 
“Detention in the Syrian Arab Republic: A Way Forward,”  March 8, 2018, 
https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/CoISyria/AWayForward_Det
entionInSyria.pdf . 
49 Ibid, 2.  
50 OHCHR, “Out of Sight, Out of Mind,” 16 . 
51 Ibid, 17 . 
52 Amnesty International, “Amnesty Report: Abductions, Torture and Summary Killings 
at the Hands of Armed Groups in Syria” , July 3, 2016, 
https://www.amnestyusa.org/press -releases/amnesty -report -abductions -torture -and-
summary -killings -at-the-hands -of-armed -groups -in-syria/ . 
53 Ibid, 16.  
54 Amnesty International, “Syria: Arbitrary detentions and blatantly unfa ir trials mar PYD 
fight against terrorism,” September 7, 2015, 
https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2015/09/syria -abuses -mar-pyd-fight -against -
terrorism/ . 
55 OHCHR, “Out of Sight, Out of Mind,” 14; Ibid.  
56 Ibid, 1 and 18.  
57 Physicians for Human Rights, “Shot While Fleeing: Rohingya Disabled by Myanmar 
Authorities’ Targeted Violence,”  June 25, 2019, https://phr.org/our - 
 46                                                                                                                                                                
work/resources/shot -while -fleeing -rohingya -disabled -by-myanmar -authorities -targeted -
violence/#_edn30 . 
58 The semi -structured interview protocol covered eight broad domains: 1) background 
demographic, educational, and professional information; 2) pre -detention work and 
experiences; 3) events leading to detention and circumstances of arrest; 4) experiences 
duri ng detention and, if relevant, of judicial processes, sentencing, and imprisonment; 5) 
circumstances and experiences of release; 6) post -detention work and experiences in 
Syria; 7) current living situation, work, and circumstances; and 8) conditions under 
which the interviewees would return to live and work in Syria.  
59 OHCHR, Istanbul Protocol Manual on the Effective Investigation and Documentation 
of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment , 2004,  
https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/training8Rev1en.pdf .  
60 Three of the interviewees also reported arrests and detention by non -government 
armed groups, including the Islamic State and Hayat Ta hrir al -Sham, following their 
release from government detention facilities.  
61 The main security services are the Department of Military Intelligence (Shu`bat al -
Mukhabarat al -`Askariyya); the Air Force Intelligence Directorate (Idarat al -Mukhabarat 
al-Jawi yya); the Political Security Directorate (Idarat al -Amn al -Siyasi); and the General 
Intelligence Directorate (Idarat al -Mukhabarat al -`Amma).  
62 Established by Legislative Decree No. 109 of 17 August 1968, for use during armed 
conflict, either against the enemy or to prosecute soldiers who deserted the battlefield. 
Later, Legislative Decree No. 109 of 17 August 1968 was amended to expand the court ’s 
jurisdiction to also cover periods of “domestic unrest.” Mikael Ekman, ed, “ILAC Rule of 
Law Assessment Report: Syria 2017,” International Legal Assistance Consortium , 
http: //www.ilacnet.org/wp -content/uploads/2017/04/Syria2017.pdf . 
63 Established to deal with all cases involving members of the military or police; Ibid.  
64 Established in July 2012, the Counter -terrorism Court has exclusive jurisdiction over 
all cases concernin g terrorism in Syria with the authority to also try civilians for state 
security offenses, including activists, demonstrators, and related personnel; Ibid.  
65 Torture is defined by the Convention Against Torture as “ any act by which severe pain 
or sufferin g, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person for such 
purposes as obtaining from him or a third person information or a confession, punishing 
him for an act he or a third person has committed or is suspected of having committed, or  
intimidating or coercing him or a third person, or for any reason based on discrimination 
of any kind, when such pain or suffering is inflicted by or at the instigation of or with the 
consent or acquiescence of a public official or other person acting in an official capacity.”  
66 Human Rights Watch, “Torture Archipelago: Arbitrary Arrests, Torture, and Enforced 
Disappearances in Syria’s Underground Prisons since March 2011,” July 3, 2012, 
https://www.hrw.org/report/2012/07/03/torture -archipelago/arbitrary -arrests -torture -
and-enforced -disappearances -syrias . 
67 Torture in prisons run by Syrian authorities has been an entrenched practice for 
decades – one that has been scaled up since the beginning of the conflict, but whose 
methods have changed very little over time. So far -reaching has this practice of torture 
been, that terms describing its methods – falaqa, shabeh, balanco  and many others – 
have beco me elemental to the Syrian lexicon. Torture is banned under a number of 
international treaties to which Syria is party. When torture is committed as part of a 
widespread and systematic attack against civilian populations, as has been the case in 
Syria, it amounts to a crime against humanity under international customary law and the 
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.  
68 Office of the High Commissioner  for Human Rights, ‘‘CCPR General Comment No.21  : 
Article 10 Humane Treatment of Persons Depriv ed of Their Liberty ,’’ Refworld , April 10, 
1992, 1, https://www.refworld.org/docid/453883fb11.html .  
69 Military Intelligence Branch 235 in Damascus is known as Palestine Branch.  
70United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Standard Minimum Rules for the 
Treatment of Prisoners ,  
 47                                                                                                                                                                
https://www.unodc.org/pdf/criminal_justice/UN_Standard_Minimum_Rules_for_the
_Treatment_of_Prisoners.pdf . 
71 United Nations Human Rights Council,  “Out of Sight, Out of Mind.”     
72 Ibid, 17.  
73 The International Conventio n for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced 
Disappearance defines a person as “disappeared” if they are: “Arrested, detained or 
abducted against their will or otherwise deprived of their liberty by officials of different 
branches or level of Governme nt, or by organized groups or private individuals acting on 
behalf of the Government, followed by a refusal to disclose the fate or whereabouts of the 
persons concerned or a refusal to acknowledge the deprivation of their liberty, which 
places such persons  outside the protection of the law.”  
74 United Nations, International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from 
Enforced Disappearance , 
https://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/migration/generalassembly/docs
/globalcompact/A_RES_47_133.pdf .  
75 United Nations Human Rights Council , “Out of Sight, Out of Mind,” 14.  
76 International Committee of the Red Cross , The Geneva Conventions , August 12, 1949, 
36, https://www.icrc.org/en/doc/assets/files/publications/icrc -002-0173.pdf . 
77 International Committee of the Red Cross, “Rule 99. Deprivation of Liberty,” 
Customary International Law , July 2019, https://ihl -databases.icrc.org/customary -
ihl/eng/docs/v1_rul_rule99#Fn_B4BD78D1_0000 2. 
78 International Committee of the Red Cross, “Rule 90. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman or 
Degrading Treatment,” Customary International Law , July 2019, https://ihl -
databases.i crc.org/customary -ihl/eng/docs/v1_rul_rule90 . 
79 International Committee of the Red Cross, “Rule 98. Enforced Disappearance,” 
Customary International Law,  July 2019, https://ihl -databases.icrc.org/customary -
ihl/eng/docs/v1_cha_chapter32_rule98 .  
80 International Committee of the Red Cross, “Rule 89. Violence to Life,” Customary 
International Law , July 2019, https://ihl -databases.icrc.org/customary -
ihl/eng/docs/v1_cha_chapter32_rule89 . 
81 International Committee of the Red Cross, “Rule 110. Treatment and Care of the 
Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked,” Customary International Law, July 2019, https://ihl -
database s.icrc.org/customary -ihl/eng/docs/v1_rul_rule110 .  
82 International Committee of the Red Cross, “Rule 25: Medical Personnel,” Customary 
International Law, updated July 2019, https://ihl -databases.icrc.org/customary -
ihl/eng/docs/v1_rul_rule25#Fn_E202BFDC_00002 .  
83 International Committee of the Red Cross, “Rule 26. Medical Activities,” Customary 
International Law , updated July 2019, https://ihl -databases.icrc.org/customary -
ihl/eng/docs/v1_rul_rule26 .  
84 UN General Assembly, International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights , January 3, 1976, 
https://www.ohchr.org/EN/professionalinterest/pages/cescr.aspx . 
85 Ibid.  
86 United Nations General Assembly, International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights, December 19, 1966, 5 -6, 
https://treaties.un.org/doc/publication/unts/volume%20999/volume -999-i-14668-
english.pdf . 
87 Syria has declared its reservation to the competence of the committee of the CAT: “In 
accordance with the provisions of article 28, paragraph 1, of the Convention, the Syrian 
Arab Republic does not recognize the competence of the Committ ee against Torture 
provided for in article 20 thereof. United Nations General Assembly, Convention Against 
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, December 
10, 1984, https://treaties.un.org/pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=IND&mtdsg_no=IV -
9&chapter=4&lang=en .  
 48                                                                                                                                                                
88 United Nations General Assembly, Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, 
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment , 3. 
89 International Criminal Court, Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, July 
17, 1998, 3 -4, https://www.icc -cpi.int/NR/rdonlyr es/ADD16852 -AEE9 -4757 -ABE7 -
9CDC7CF02886/283503/RomeStatutEng1.pdf . 
90 Ibid, 13.  
91 Syrian Arab Republic’s Constitution of 2012, “ Chapter II: Rule of Law,” 11, 
https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/Syria_2012.pdf?lang=en . 
92 Human Rights Watch, “ A Wasted Decade: Human Rights in Syria during Bashar al -
Asad’s First Ten Years  in Power ,” July 16, 2010, 
https://www.hrw.org/report/2010/07/16/wasted -decade/human -rights -syria -during -
bashar -al-asads -first-ten-years -power ; Amnesty International, “ Syria: End Human Rights 
Violations in Syria ,” October 2011, 3 -4, 
https://www.amnesty.org/download/Documents/32000/mde240342011en .pdf  
93 Mikael Ekman, ed, “ILAC Rule of Law Assessment Report: Syria 2017,”46 -7. 
94 Syrian Arab Republic Constitution of 2012 , “Article 1 of Law 19, Anti -Terrorism Law,”   
http://www.parliament.gov.sy/arabic/index.php?node=55151&cat=4306 . 
95 PHR is in the process of documenting a number of recently reported cases of Syrian 
security forces’ arrest and enforced disappearance of health workers, including doctors 
and first responder s from the Damascus suburb of Eastern Ghouta and the southern 
governorate of Daraa.  
96 Physicians for Human Rights, “Illegal Attacks on Health Care in Syria.”  
97 Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, “Sieges 
as a Weapo n of War.”  
98 Human Rights Watch, “Torture Archipelago.”  
99 United Nations Security Council, “ Resolution 2139 (2014). ”  
100 United Nations Security Council, “ Resolution 2254 (2015) ,” December 18, 2015, 
https://undocs.org/S/RES/2254(2015) .  
101 United Nations Security Council, “ Resolution 2268 (2016) ,” February 26, 2016, 
https://undocs.org/S/RES/2268(2016) . 
102 United Nations Security Council, “ Resolution 24 74 (2019) ,” June 11, 2019,  
https://undocs.org/S/RES/2474(2019) . 
103 Special Envoy Pedersen has mentioned that addressing the issue of detainees, 
abductees, and the missing is a priority and would help “hea l wounds and build 
confidence” and move the political process in the right direction; Oslo Forum Interview, 
“Moving Forward: Geir O. Pedersen on developments in Syria,” Centre for Humanitarian 
Dialogue, May 9, 2019, https://www.hdcentre.org/wp -
content/uploads/2019/06/Moving -forward -Geir -O-Pedersen -on-developments -in-
Syria.pdf .  
104 “Brussels III Conference on ‘Supporting the future o f Syria and the region’: co -chairs 
declaration,” European Council , March 14, 2019, 
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press -releases/2019/03/14/brussels -iii-
conference -on-supporting -the-future -of-syria -and-the-region -co-chairs -declaration/ , 
point 11.  
105 Human Rights Watch, “ Syria: Detention, Harassment in Retaken Areas ,” May 21, 
2019, https://www.hrw.org/news/2019/05/21/syria -detention -harassment -retaken -
areas .  