 
Physicians for  
Human Rights  
 
December 2015  
 Truth Matters:  
Accountability for CIA 
Psychological Torture  
 
 
 
phr.org  Truth Matters  2 
 About Physicians for  
Human Rights  
 
For nearly 30 years, Physicians for Human Rights 
(PHR) has used science and medicine to document and call attention to mass atrocities and severe 
human rights violations.  
 
PHR is a global organization founded on the idea  
that health professionals, with their specialized skills, ethical duties, and credible voices, are uniquely positioned to stop human rights 
violations.  
 
PHR’s investigations and expertise are used to 
advocate for persecuted health workers and medical 
facilities under attack, prevent torture, document 
mass atrocities, and hold those who violate human 
rights accountable.  
 
 
Acknowledgments  
 
This report was written by Sarah Dougherty, JD, 
MPH, senior fellow, PHR Anti- Torture Program , and 
Christine Mehta, PHR researcher.  
 This report has benefited from review by PHR 
leadership and staff, including Donna McKay, 
executive director; Widney Brown, director of programs ; DeDe Dunevant, director of 
communications; Carolyn Greco, advoc acy 
associate; and Claudia Rader, content and marketing manager.  
 
Trip Eggert, PHR intern, formatted and prepared 
this report for publication . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cover:  A Guant ánamo detainee's feet are shackled to the floor as 
he attends a life skills  class inside the Camp 6 high -security 
detention facility.  
Photo: Michelle Shephard -Pool/Getty Images  
 Table of Contents  
 
3  Introduction  
4  Legal Protection  
5  Regime of Psychological Torture  
7  Intentional Infliction of Pain and Suffering  
Operational re liance on “ learned 
helplessness ” 
    Intentional infliction of severe pain and 
suffering  
    Failure to take measures to prevent known 
harms  
10  Select Methods of Detainee Abuse  
   Forced nudity and sexual torture  
 Solitary confinement and sensory                      
deprivation  
   Sleep deprivation  
   Waterboarding  
11  Select Psychological Effects of Torture  
   Detainees’ experiences of torture events  
   Real-time indicia of harm  
14  Conclusion  
   Permissive and corrupting effects  
   Transparency, accountability, and redress  
15  Recommendations  
16  Endnotes  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
phr.org  Truth Matters  3 
 Introduction  
 
One year after the Senate torture report’s partial 
release, impunity for CIA torture persists. The United 
States must pursue full transparency, accountability, and redress to restore the rule of law and ensure 
these human rights abuses are never repeated.  
 
On December 9, 2014, the U.S. Senate Select Committee 
on Intelligence released the executive summary, 
findings, and conclusions of its 6,700 -page report on 
the CIA’s post -9/11 torture program.
  The Senate 
torture report documents the “abuses and countless mistakes” which followed the decision of “CIA personnel, aided by two outside contractors, [to] initiate a program 
of indefinite secret detention and the use of brutal 
interrogation techniques in violation of U.S. law, treaty 
obligations, and our values.”
1  
 The two contractors —  psychologists James Mitchell and 
Bruce Jessen — developed a comprehensive program of 
detainee torture which sought the wholesale psychological destruction of human bein gs. Mitchell and 
Jessen set out to prove to the CIA that they could break 
down detainees to such an extent that any resistance on a detainee’s part would be impossible . Human beings 
need to have some sense of control over their own 
bodies and minds and som e order or certainty in their 
lives. Mitchell and Jessen used their understanding of 
these needs to destroy people’s minds and bodies, as a tool in the “war on terror.”  
 The psychologists developed the torture techniques, personally tested them on detaine es, and supervised the 
roll-out and scale -up of their methods throughout the 
CIA program. The torture program eventually encompassed at least 139 detainees, with over 50 
countries supporting illegal rendition and detention at 
secret “black sites.”
2  
 Despi te the claims of torture apologists, the brutality of 
this program was not confined to a handful of techniques. Nor does it matter whether these 
techniques were "authorized." As the Senate torture  
report reveals, the operational goal of Mitchell and 
Jessen was to destroy human beings using methods and  practices long recognized and clearly manifest as torture. In doing so, they and the health professionals 
who became involved in the program compromised 
their humanity and integrity as healers.  
One year la ter, transparency and accountability – let 
alone redress to victims –  remain stalled. Torture is 
absolutely prohibited under domestic and international law, and the United States’ failure to reject impunity has 
come at a very high cost . CIA torture has damaged the 
lives of its victims, the integrity  of health professionals 
who were complicit in these crimes, the integrity of democratic institutions, and hard-worn norms 
prohibiting torture and other cruel, inhuman, or 
degrading treatment or punishment.  
A roll of protective wire  rings a detainee camp in Guantánamo Bay.  
Photo: John Moore/Getty Images  
 
 
 
phr.org  Truth Matters  4 
 Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) has long called for 
transparency and accountability on the part of health 
professionals involved in any of the government’s 
torture practices. In the past year, there have been positive developments, including the American 
Psychological Association’s (APA) resolution to ban all 
psychologists from participating in national security interrogations or working in detention settings  that 
operate in violation of international law. Additionally, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) has filed a civil lawsuit against Mitchell and Jessen on behalf of three 
detainees who were subjected to their torture methods.  
 
But the public’s knowledge of the program remains 
fragmented. The government must take the actions 
necessary to ensure that these systematic violations of well-established norms are not repeated. Only 
transparency and the pursuit of a full understanding of both what happened an d how it happened can prevent a 
reoccurrence. Truth is crucial in helping survivors to 
process what happened to them, countering 
misinformation previously disseminated by the 
government, and highlighting factors that led to abuses. 
It helps societies to un derstand why abuses were 
committed.  
 Preventing a reoccurrence of these violations and 
ensuring justice are the primary responsibility of the U.S. government. It must ensure that those who have 
broken the law are properly investigated and 
prosecuted, while  protecting those individuals’ due 
process and fair trial rights –  protections denied to their 
victims.  It cannot use national security or state secret 
laws to evade and eviscerate this obligation.  
 Legal Protection   
U.S. officials attempted to reinterpret the law to 
permit torture and used health professionals to 
legitimize these policies and practices and indemnify 
those responsible for torture against prosecution.  
 
Torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading 
treatment and punishment are absolutely prohibited, 
without exception and in all circumstances, under 
international law and U.S. federal law, including the 
Constitution. The UN Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment, which the United States ratified in 1994, 
defines torture as the intentional infliction of severe 
pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, by or with 
the consent of the state authorities for a specific 
purpose. The U.S. government has a legal  obligation to 
prevent torture under all circumstances and to 
investigate allegations, punish perpetrators, and provide reparations to victims.
3 
 After the 9/11 terror attacks, the Bush administration declared that the war on terrorism was “a new kind of 
war” and began asserting exceptions to the absolute 
prohibition against torture. U.S. officials took several 
steps that eroded or eliminated traditional protections 
for detainees in U.S. custody, including determining that 
the Geneva Conventions did not app ly to certain 
detainees and creating new definitions of torture , which  
attempted to preclude recognition of and liability under 
U.S. criminal law.
4 
 The DOJ’s Office of Legal Counsel (OLC) issued a series 
of classified “torture memos,” i ncludin g the infamo us 
Yoo-Bybee Mem o which limited the definition of  physical 
torture  to only those acts that cause physical pain 
consistent with a “serious physical injury, such as organ 
failure, impairment of bodily function or even death.” 
Psychological torture  was define d as only those acts that 
cause “prolonged mental harm” “lasting for months or 
even years” and in response to “threats of imminent death; threats of infliction of the kind of pain that would 
amount to physical torture; infliction of such physical 
pain as a  means of psychological torture; use of drugs 
or other procedures to deeply disrupt the senses, or 
fundamentally alter an individual’s personality.”
5  
  
 
phr.org  Truth Matters  5 
 The Bush administration’s unfounded and now -
rescinded legal opinions provided the underpinnings for 
the use of techniques long classified as torture by the 
U.S. State Department. These included hooding, painful 
stress positions, prolonged isolation, sleep deprivation, 
sensory deprivation and overload, forced nudity and 
sexual humiliation, exposure to temperature extremes, dietary manipulation, wall- slamming, and mock 
drowning by waterboarding, among others.
 6  
 Psychologists were intimately involved in the development and deployment of those techniques —  
conferring on them a patina of science. Psychologists,  
physicians, and  other health professionals helped 
provide a façade of safety for torture through medical 
monitoring, in order to  justify their alleged legality.  The 
Yoo-Bybee Memo stated that a “good faith” argument 
could be made that health professionals ’ monitoring of 
the application of the techniques would ensure that they did not cause “severe and long lasting” mental and physical pain and suffering to a degree that would 
violate U.S. laws prohibiting torture.
7 
 
  Regime of Psychological Torture   
Mitchell and Jessen helped develop and 
operationalize the CIA’s brutal torture regime. They 
proposed weaponizing “learned helplessness” as an 
interrogation strategy –  a calculated process to 
reduce detainees to profound psychological 
debilitation and helplessn ess. 
 
In the face of intense pressure for “human intelligence,” 
the CIA began looking at the use of torture in 
interrogations and exploring potential legal defenses.8 It 
contracted two former military psychologists, James Mitchell and Bruce Jessen, to develop, operate, and 
assess “ an entire program of exploitation of prisoners 
using torture as a central pillar.”
 9 Mitchell and Jessen 
had prior experience with the military’s Survival, 
Evasion, Resistance, and Escape (SERE) program, which trains service m embers to resist torture if captured by 
subjecting them to simulated harsh conditions and tactics.  
 
By February 2002, Mitchell and Jessen developed a 
proposal to weaponize the theory of “learned helplessness” by using SERE -derived torture tactics to 
interrogate detainees. “Learned helplessness” is a 
psychological phenomenon in which individuals become passive and depressed in response to adverse uncontrollable events.
10 Mitchell and Jessen theorized 
that they could induce learned helplessness in detainees by subjecting them to abusive conditions of 
confinement and harsh “interrogation” techniques. The 
goal was to reduce each detainee to a state of extreme psychological debilitation, suffering, and submission . 
Once learned helplessness had been achieved, the 
detainee would lack the will or ability to lie under 
questioning.   
 
Mitchell and Jessen’s proposal drew on decades of U.S. government -funded research into the use of 
interrogation to produce certain psychological states. The genesis of this research was Co ld War coercion 
techniques used by Soviet and Chinese interrogators to 
extract false confessions from American prisoners of 
war. U.S. researchers, trying to understand so -called 
“brainwashing,” studied tactics of isolation, 
environmental manipulation, stre ss positions, sleep 
deprivation, unpredictability, dependence, and the 
deliberate destruction of an individual’s personality, 
which were used to induce compliance.
11  
  
 
phr.org  Truth Matters  6 
 The psychologists’ proposal also drew on interrogation 
techniques that the CIA taught to  military and security 
services in Latin America in the 1980s  to support 
military dictatorships as part of the U.S. government’s Cold War strategy. Interrogators were trained to inflict 
physical and psychological abuses on subjects to render 
them physically weak and exhausted (debilitation), helplessly  dependent on their questioners 
(dependence), and intensely fearful and anxious (dread). These techniques are detailed in the KUBARK 
Counterintelligence Interrogation Manual of 1963
12 and 
the Human Resources Exploitation Manual of 1983:  
 The purpose of all coercive techniques is to induce 
psychological regression in the subject by bringing a 
superior outside force to bear on his will to resist. Regression is basically a loss of autonomy, a 
reversion to an earlier behavioral level. As the 
subject regresses, his learned personality traits fall 
away in reverse chronological order.
13  
 The CIA’s manuals focused not only on interrogation methods but also on the environment in which 
interrogations took  place. The so -called “enhanced 
interrogation” regime that Mitchell and Jessen proposed 
followed these programs , using SERE techniques to 
condition and break down terror suspects.    
The floor shackles in the solitary recreation room in Cell Block C at 
Guantánamo Bay.  
Photo: Jim Watson/AFP/Getty Images  
 But the CIA torture program was fundamentally different 
from the SERE techniques and research on learned 
helplessness with human subjects. The military’s SERE training was conducted on volunteers and “care fully 
regulated, both for students’ safety, and to ensure that the training increases rather than decreases their confidence in their ability to resist.” Instructors made 
“maximum effort” to stop short of producing learned 
helplessness and to avoid breakin g the will of the 
students.
14  
 
In addition, learned helplessness in humans is 
understood as a potential explanation for how depression develops, including the “stress and anxiety 
disorders that result from torture.”
15 It was first 
observed by Martin Seligma n and his colleagues during 
electroshock experiments with dogs and later studied in 
human volunteers with substitute stimuli (e.g., 
unsolvable tasks).16 The misapplication of learned 
helplessness theory to abusive interrogation was untested  and lacked any scientific basis .
17 It was also 
profoundly unethical, as inducing learned helplessness 
and even setting up such an experiment violates the prohibitions against torture and ill- treatment.
18  
 
 
 
phr.org  Truth Matters  7 
 Nevertheless, Mitchell and Jessen sold “learned 
helplessness,” weaponized as an interrogation strategy, 
to the CIA. They conceptualized and designed the techniques, personally applied them to detainees, conducted psychological evaluations of detainees they 
tortured, and trained other interrogators in the use of 
torture.
19 Moreover, as the Senate torture report notes, 
they “played a role in convincing the CIA to adopt such a policy.”
20  
 The Mitchell and Jessen -devised techniques and 
objectives were integrated into CIA practice, as indicated 
in 2003 draft med ical guidelines from the CIA’s Office of 
Medical Services  (OMS):  
 
Captured terrorists turned over to the CIA for 
interrogation may be subjected to a wide range of legally sanctioned techniques, all of which are also used on U.S. military personnel in SERE training 
programs. These are designed to psychologically 
‘dislocate’ the detainee, maximize his feelings of vulnerability and helplessness, and reduce or 
eliminate his will to resist our efforts to obtain critical 
intelligence.
21 
 
Sanctioned techniques included so -called “standard 
measures” (those deemed to be “without physical or 
substantial psychological pressure”) and “enhanced 
measures” (those deemed to cause "physical or  
psychological pressure” beyond “standard measures”). 
The CIA noted: “In all instances, the goal of these 
techniques is psychological impact” –  they are “designed 
to induce shock, surprise and/or humiliation.”22 
 Intentional Infliction of Pain and Suffering  
 “Enhanced interrogation” is premised on inflicting 
profound psychological trauma. The intended result 
was predictable and no effort was made to avoid it.  
 The detention and interrogation program that Mitchell 
and Jessen proposed was a holistic effort to take apart detainees’ personalities and abuse their bod ies, with the 
goal of turning them into compliant prisoners.  It is easy 
to see the relationship between the intended result and torture. As stated in the international standard for 
effective investigation and d ocumentation of torture and 
ill-treatment know n as the Istanbul Protocol:  
 
One of the central aims of torture is to reduce an 
individual to a position of extreme helplessness and distress that can lead to a deterioration of cognitive, 
emotional and behavioral  functions. Thus, torture is 
a means of att acking an individual’s fundamental 
modes of psychological and social functioning. Under such circumstances, the torturer strives not only to 
incapacitate a victim physically but also to 
disintegrate the individual’s personality. The torturer 
attempts to de stroy a victim’s sense of being 
grounded in a family and society as a human being 
with dreams, hopes and aspirations for the future.
23 
 
The scientific literature establishes that learned helplessness is severe mental harm; intentionally inducing learned helplessness could therefore constitute 
mental torture:  
 
Experts have long considered “psychological 
techniques to break down the individual,” including 
accentuating feelings of helplessness, among the forms of abuse that can amount to torture or ill -
treatme nt.
24  
 
In addition, techniques that are highly unpredictable or 
involve a high degree of uncontrollability are associated with higher degrees of distress than those techniques in 
which the victim feels that he or she has some degree of 
control over the lev el of pain and suffering that is 
inflicted.
25  
  
 
phr.org  Truth Matters  8 
 Accordingly, “feelings of helplessness” is included as 
one of 21 types of torture methods listed in the Istanbul 
Protocol.26 It is also included as one of thirteen types of 
psychological torture practices comp iled by Almerindo 
E. Ojeda in the category of “induced desperation.”27 
According to Metin Basoglu, “Abundant research 
evidence shows that learned helplessness  is mental 
harm that is severe enough to qualify as torture even by 
U.S. standards.”28  
 Operational  reliance on “learned helplessness”  
 
The express aim of Mitchell and Jessen –  to profoundly 
disrupt the senses and personality of detainees by inducing learned helplessness –  was embedded in the 
design of their torture methods and program. This is 
evident  in a cable they sent to CIA headquarters in 
August 2002, after interrogating detainee Abu 
Zubaydah:  
 
 
 
 
An inmate stands at an interior fence in Guan tánamo Bay.  
Photo: John Moore/Getty Images  
 Our goal was to reach the stage where we have broken any will or ability of subject to resist or deny 
providing U.S. information (intelligence) to which he 
had access. We additionally sought to bring subject to the point that we confidently assess that he does 
not/not possess undisclosed threat information, or 
intelligence that could prevent a terrorist event.
29  
 
This goal became part and parcel of the CIA’s operational methodology, and was explicitly stated in 
the OLC memos. For example, the CIA’s 2004 Background Paper on Combined Techniques states:  
 
Effective interrogation is based on the concept of 
using both physical and psychological pressures in a comprehensive, systematic, and cumulative manner  
to influence HVD [high value detainee] behavior, to overcome a detainee’s resistance posture. The goal of interro gation is to create a state of learned 
helplessness and dependence  conducive to the 
collection of intelligence in a predictable, reliable, and sustainable manner.
30  
 
 
 
phr.org  Truth Matters  9 
 Intentional infliction of severe pain and suffering  
 
The CIA program involved the applica tion of detailed 
and personalized plans of severe, prolonged, and 
cumulative mental and physical pain and suffering, as 
the Senate torture report reveals. This pain and 
suffering was deliberate, given the extent to which the effects of the methods were not  only understood in 
advance, but anticipated:  
 
The pressures identified by the CIA were fully 
expected to cause detainees psychological suffering. 
The CIA regulated the anticipated infliction of pressures on detainees not by whether pain and 
suffering was expected, but by the intensity and 
duration of the pain and suffering expected from 
those techniques. The CIA anticipated a range of 
physical and mental effects from interrogation, even 
“severe” pain and suffering. The CIA anticipated that these effects wo uld occur repeatedly, over extended 
periods of time, and/or in combination.
31  
 What’s more, the medical literature has shown the severe physical and mental health consequences of the 
CIA torture practices. Helplessness or loss of control 
induced by unpredi ctable or uncontrollable stressors 
has been found to be the primary psychological process 
by which humans mediate torture -induced traumatic 
stress. Exposure to such stressors produces a 
cumulative impact, increasing the risk of helplessness and hopelessnes s, which degrade an individual’s ability 
to cope with and mediate physical pain and psychological distress. In short, stressors that are unpredictable or uncontrollable can increase a subject’s 
helplessness or loss of control, and torture intended to 
induc e helplessness is likely to cause greater pain, 
suffering, and harm.
32  
 The CIA’s torture practices, both authorized and unauthorized, have resulted in severe and lasting 
physical and psychological pain and disabilities — 
consistent not only with the U.S. Torture Statute’s definition of “severe mental pain or suffering,” but also 
with the contemporaneous Yoo -Bybee definition of 
torture.
33 Descriptions of actual application of the 
methods, from the Senate torture report and the larger 
documentary record, esta blish that Mitchell and Jessen 
intended to induce learned helplessness and cause 
severe mental harm.  
 Failure to take measures to prevent known harms  
 Intent to commit torture can also be deduced from the 
failure of Mitchell, Jessen, and other CIA personn el to 
take measures to prevent the anticipated or manifested 
harms. The Senate torture report is replete with 
examples of detainees screaming, cowering, and 
becoming psychotic from deprivation of light, food, sound, human contact, temperature manipulation,  
waterboarding, and other torture methods. The cruelty, and intent to commit cruelty, are apparent from the failure to intervene.  
 There is no indication that OMS health professionals or CIA psychologists conducted any meaningful 
assessments of the potential physical and/or 
psychological harms of enhanced interrogation 
techniques. It is not possible to claim that these 
techniques, formerly recognized by the U.S. government 
as torture, were “safe, legal, and effective” without assessments of the physi cal and/or psychological 
harms
. 
 
According to retired brigadier general and  PHR anti-
torture expert Dr. Stephen N. Xenakis,  “The act of 
attempting to inflict severe physical and/or mental pain, alone, imputes the intent of torture and/or ill  treatment; 
it does not require material medical (physical and/or 
psychological) evidence.”
34  
 
phr.org  Truth Matters  10 
 Select Methods of Detainee 
Abuse  
 The CIA used torture techniques which have been 
documented by PHR and a larger body of medical 
literature as causing intense psy chological harm. 
 
Researchers, health professionals, and forensic 
specialists have documented the harmful psychological and physical effects of abusive interrogation tactics, 
including on U.S. prisoners and prisoners of war. In 
addition, PHR has previously  documented the harmful 
effects of “enhanced interrogation” techniques on 
detainees in U.S. custody, including prolonged solitary 
confinement, sensory deprivation, sleep deprivation, sexual humiliation (including forced nudity), stress 
positions (often to aid sleep deprivation), temperature 
manipulation, sensory bombardment, and waterboarding.
35  
 
The Senate torture report illustrates how these brutal 
and coercive methods were typically inflicted on detainees prior to actual “questioning” – not to extract 
information directly but rather to break down the 
detainee’s ability to resist questioning.  
 
Forced nudity and sexual t orture  
 
One of the first actions CIA personnel took was to strip detainees of their clothing and leave them naked for the 
majority of their  time in detention. Forced nakedness 
aims to humiliate, intimidate, and destabilize the detainee, and implicitly carries the threat of rape or 
other forms of sexual violence.
 36 
 Methods such as forced nudity are physical in nature, but do not necessarily c ause physical pain to the 
victims. Nevertheless, they can have devastating mental health consequences for individuals, including PTSD, 
major depression, suicidal thoughts, severe feelings of 
shame, detachment from spouses and other family members, and sexu al dysfunction. 
 Forced nudity is intended to create a power differential between the detainees and interrogators by stripping 
the victim of his or her identity, and establishing an 
environment where the threat of sexual and physical assault is always imminent.
37 
 Another technique applied by CIA interrogators that can 
be classified as sexual assault – albeit one that was not 
“authorized” – is rectal feeding and hydration.  PHR 
analyzed the use of rectal feeding and hydration on five 
detainees detailed in t he Senate torture report and 
found that rectal procedures were performed without 
evidence of medical necessity, and as a means of 
behavior control constituting torture.38 
 
Solitary confinement and sensory d eprivation  
 Effects of solitary confinement include depression, 
anxiety, difficulty with concentration and memory, hypersensitivity to external stimuli, hallucinations, 
perceptual distortions, paranoia, and problems with 
impulse control.
 39 Sensory deprivation, “including 
hooding and isolation, leads  to severe anxiety, 
depression, and psychotic -like thinking with serious 
health consequences.”40 
 
The psychological and physical effects of solitary confinement and sensory deprivation have been well -
documented, from prisoners held in high -security 
prisons to political prisoners held in isolation. For 
example, in Germany in the 1970s, members of the Red 
Army Faction were held in solitary confinement with 
sensory deprivation for periods ranging from months to years. When doctors examined the prisoners for fit ness 
to stand trial, the doctors found that they suffered from physical and psychological constraints including irritability, exhaustion, sleep disturbance, chronic fatigue, trembling, sweating, loss of sense of reality, 
memory loss, lack of concentration,  dizziness, walking 
difficulties, chronic headaches and generalized body 
pain, depression, and claustrophobia.
41  
 Although some of the symptoms will diminish once an individual is removed from isolation, there are often 
long-lasting, harmful effects.
42 One study of former 
prisoners of war found that even forty years after their 
release, some soldiers still suffered symptoms of 
anxiety, confusion, depression, suspiciousness, and 
detachment from social interactions.43 People who have 
experienced long -term isolation may also show marked 
problems with relationships, including the dissolution of marriages, friendships, and parent -child rela tionships. 
Long-term exposure to extreme isolation can lead to an 
increased withdrawal of prisoners into themselves and an alienation from others.
44 
 Even the CIA’s KUBARK Manual and Human Resource Exploitation Manual stated that extreme sensory deprivation and solitary confinement “induces 
unbearable stress and anxiety and is a form of 
torture,”
45 a fact the CIA would have und erstood.  
  
 
phr.org  Truth Matters  11 
 Sleep d eprivation  
 
The use of sleep deprivation on detainees, often for 
periods of days or weeks, is described throughout the Senate torture report. CIA interrogators often placed 
detainees in standing or stress positions to keep them 
from sleep ing, exposed them to extreme cold or 
extreme heat, and played loud Western rock, pop, or 
metal music in their cells for days at a time to prevent 
them from sleeping. At least two detainees on record reported loss of hearing that they believe is due to 
prolonged exposure to high volume music in an 
enclosed space.
46 
 Sleep deprivation causes both physical and 
psychological harm, the most serious being cognitive impairment. These include “attention deficits, decreases 
in short -term memory, speech impairments, 
perseveration, and inflexible thinking.”
47 The literature 
shows that psychotic features can emerge from sleep 
deprivation “within one week, and can lead to self -harm, 
including symptoms resembling paranoid 
schizophrenia.”48 Sleep deprivation also leads to 
hypertension and other cardiovascular diseases.49 
 
Waterboarding  
 
The CIA identified waterboarding –  understood by the 
medical community as a form of “controlled drowning” 
or “suffocation by water” –  as “by far the most traumatic 
of the enhanced interrogation  techniques.”50 The Senate 
torture report describes this torture technique as “physically harmful, inducing convulsions and vomiting,”
51 and the risk of hyponatremia from water 
ingestion.52 The risks were such that emergency medical 
intervention was sometimes  necessary.53 The mental 
effects of waterboarding are difficult to know due to the lack of literature or access to detainees for forensic examination:  
 
Discerning the direct effects of waterboarding on 
their state of mind has been constrained without the 
possibility of direct examination including mental 
status evaluation …. Truthfully, we don’t know, and 
probably will never know, the facts about 
waterboarding and psychologically based abusive interrogation practices. The findings and details of 
the interrog ations are closely held secrets.
54  
 Select Psychological Effects 
of Torture  
 Torture has harmful psychological effects – which 
CIA interrogators set out to achieve and which visibly manifested in detainees.   
All torture aims to undermine victims psychologically. 
The aim of Mitchell and Jessen’s “learned helplessness” program was to erode the detainee’s concept of self and 
the outside world, and to deny his humanity. Reducing 
an individual to a position of extreme helplessness and inducing a constant state of fear through torture often 
leads to a deterioration of cognitive, emotional, and 
behavioral functions .
55  
 The lack of visible injury can make mental torture seem less significant than physical torture, but the long -term 
consequences of torture are more often psychological, 
according to studies of prison populations and political prisoners of war. When applied, the distinction between 
physical and psychological torture is artificial, as torture 
systematically employed for interrogation purposes is ultimately designed to break down the psyche and 
therefore the ability to resist, through physical and/or mental pain.
56 In the words of former UN Special 
Rapporteur on Torture Peter Kooijmans: 
 
Even when the most brutal physical means are used, the long -term effects may be psychological, even 
when the most refined psychological means are 
resorted to, there is nearly always the accompanying 
effect of severe physical pain. A common effect is the disintegration of the personality.
57 
 Moreover, as Basoglu et a l. have found, both physical 
and non- physical stressors caused similar levels of  
“severe mental pain or suffering” and “prolonged mental 
harm.”
58 One of the most common long -term effects of 
torture is post -traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). One 
study of tort ure survivors from six different countries 
showed that between 69 and 92 percent of survivors were diagnosed with PTSD:
59  
 
Repetitive exposure to frightening and life -
threatening circumstances contributes to debilitating 
[PTSD]. Victims of abusive interrog ation suffer with 
anxiety and depressive disorders, manifest brief 
psychotic disorders, including delusions and hallucinations, develop obsessive- compulsive 
disorder, and are moved to the brink of suicide. Many are demoralized and hopeless. The combined techniques of sleep manipulation, social isolation, 
and sensory bombardment with loud music can lead  
 
phr.org  Truth Matters  12 
 to vivid imagery approaching hallucinatory and 
delusional processes, body image distortion, 
temporal disorientation, and cognitive impairment.60 
 
Events and s timuli that remind the PTSD sufferer of the 
traumatic event can induce a state of panic and a sense of urgency to escape from the situation. PTSD 
symptoms can persist for years following a traumatic event.
61 Other common emotional and psychological 
manifest ations  of distress in torture survivors are major 
depression and self -harm, damaged “self -concept,” 
psychosis, and substance abuse.   
Detainees’ experiences of torture events  
 
This type of severe and long -lasting harm is consistent 
with the experience of Suleiman Abdullah Salim, one of 
the ACLU plaintiffs subjected to torture designed by Mitchell and Jessen. Salim was held incommunicado for 
a total of five years and diagnosed with PTSD following 
his release. According to a recent interview by the ACLU, he suffers frequent nightmares and flashbacks to his 
time in detention, as well as dizziness and confusion. He continues to experience severe pain throughout his body, including his jaw, teeth, back, shoulders, and 
legs.
62 
 The CIA’s first detainee to undergo “enhanced 
interrogation” torture was Abu Zubaydah, on Mitchell’s recommendation. According to Mitchell’s interrogation 
plan to disorient him psychologically and “increase his sense of learned helplessness,” Abu Zubaydah was 
stripped naked, placed in solita ry confinement in a cell 
kept “extremely cold,” and bombarded with “loud rock 
music or discordant noise”:  
 Throughout, he was kept shackled to one of the two chairs in his cell…his diet was restricted…he was 
continuously deprived of sleep …. He was contin ually 
and repeatedly interrogated while held under these 
conditions for the next two or three weeks.
63 
 
Similarly, the three ACLU plaintiffs, Mohamed Ben Soud, Gul Rahman (deceased), and Salim, were held in the 
notorious “Salt Pit” black site in Afghanistan , where 
“detainees were kept in total darkness,” “loud music was 
played constantly in the facility,” and “detainees were 
shackled to the wall and given buckets for human 
waste.”
64 
 
 
A detaine e being guided by two US Army MPs at Camp X -Ray. 
Photo: Peter Muhly/AFP/Getty Images  
 
 
 
 
phr.org  Truth Matters  13 
 Upon arrival at the detention center, all three were 
stripped and kept naked for prolonged periods of time. 
In Salim’s case, an object was forcibly inserted into his 
anus. Detainees were then hooded, shackled, and placed in solitar y confinement.
65 Interrogations typically 
involved extensive use of stress positions, waterboarding or threat of waterboarding, nudity, standing sleep deprivation for multiple days, and other 
methods to induce a state of “helplessness” in 
detainees.  
 
At lea st six detainees were stripped and shackled nude, 
placed in the standing position  in order to deprive them 
of sleep, or subjected to other CIA “enhanced interrogation” techniques prior to being questioned by 
an interrogator in 2003. Five of these detainees  were 
shackled naked in the standing position with their 
hands above their head immediately after their medical 
check.
66  
 
The interrogation phase described in the plan included 
near constant interrogations, as well as continued sensory deprivation, a liquid diet, and sleep deprivation. 
In addition, the interrogation plan stated that the CIA's 
“enhanced interrogation” techniques would be used, including: 
 … the attention grasp, walling, the facial hold, the facial slap... the abdominal slap, cramped 
confinem ent, wall standing, stress positions, sleep 
deprivation beyond 72 hours, and the waterboard, as 
appropriate to… [the detainee’s] level of resistance.
67 
 
   Real-time indicia of h arm 
 
The Senate torture report indicates that CIA 
interrogators and medical pe rsonnel observed and 
recorded harmful psychological and behavioral issues 
resulting from the torture techniques and practices, 
including “hallucinations, paranoia, insomnia, and attempts at self -harm and self -mutilation.”
68  
 For example, in the case of Abd ullah Rahim Hussein al -
Nashiri, Jessen conducted a psychological assessment 
during the course of interrogation in 2003 and 
recommended the full use of “enhanced interrogation” measures including waterboarding, despite an email 
from the CIA’s chief of inter rogations stating his 
“serious reservations with the continued use of 
enhanced techniques with [al -Nashiri] and its long term 
impact on him”:  
 
Al-Nashiri has been held for three months in very 
difficult conditions, both physically and mentally. It is the assessment of the prior interrogators that [al -
Nashiri] has been mainly truthful and is not 
withholding significant information. To continue to 
use enhanced techniques without clear indications that he is withholding important info is excessive and 
may caus e him to cease cooperation on any 
level…continued enhanced methods may push [al -
Nashiri] over the edge psychologically.
69 
 
In 2003, a l-Nashiri was diagnosed by CIA psychologists 
with “anxiety” and “major depressive” disorders.70 Other 
detainees described in the Senate summary also exhibited psychological and behavior issues, particularly following prolonged solitary confinement:  
 
  
   
 
phr.org  Truth Matters  14 
   
• Ramzi bin al- Shibh began having visions, 
paranoia, and insomnia, and made multiple 
attempts at self -harm. CIA psychologists 
linked bin al- Shibh’s psychological and 
behavioral issues with his solitary 
confinement and “inability to cope with long -
term detention.”71 
 
• Majid Khan was subjected to rectal feeding 
and hydration in 2004, a procedure done t o 
exhibit “total control over the detainee,” not to address legitimate medical needs.
72 
Shortly after, Khan engaged in “acts of self -
harm that included attempting to cut his 
wrist on two occasions, an attempt to chew 
into his arm at the inner elbow, an atte mpt 
to cut a vein in the top of his foot, and an 
attempt to cut into his skin at the elbow joint 
using a filed toothbrush.”73 
 
• Abu Zubaydah was kept in isolation for 47 
days between June and August 2002, to keep 
him “off -balance.” His all -white cell had no 
natural lighting or windows, just “four 
halogen lights pointed into the cell.” Security 
officers wore “all black uniforms, including 
boots, gloves, balaclavas and goggles” to 
disguise their identity and prevent him 
forming any human connection with them. 
Handcuffs, leg shackles, and loud music 
were employed to enhance a “sense of 
hopelessness.” Throughout, he was kept 
naked and sleep -deprived.74 
 
In Abu Zubaydah’s case, the chief of interrogations at 
“Detention Site Green” in Thailand acknowledged the 
likelihood of harm, stating that “station personnel will 
make every effort possible to ensure that subject is not permanently physically or mentally harmed but we 
should not say at the outset of this process that there is 
no risk.”
75  
 
Indeed, at various points, CIA staff, including some 
health professionals, expressed concerns about Mitchell 
and Jessen’s role in the program, the brutal nature of 
the techniques, and the role that OMS was being asked to play in monitoring interrogation sessions and 
certifying wheth er they caused impermissible levels of 
pain and suffering. Despite these concerns, the torture 
interrogations continued.
76  
    Conclusion  
 Permissive and corrupting effects  
 The work of Mitchell and Jessen had an impact far beyond the design and testing of a torture program. 
The U.S. Department of Justice relied on their claims –  as 
well as those of other CIA health professionals and 
personnel – that these techniques were safe , effective, 
and, therefore, legal.  Arguably, if psychologists had not 
signed off on the claim that the techniques were safe and effective, the lawyers would have had a harder time 
redefin ing torture.  
 
But Mitchell and Jessen’s work also had a corrupting 
effect on the health professionals who participated in 
the torture program.  Indeed, the role of psychologists was abetted by the decision of the APA – in collusion 
with members of the Bush administration – to lower 
their ethical standards to allow psychologists to participate in interrogations of security detainees, 
effectively undermining respect for human rights and 
medical ethics.  
 
Not only did health professionals participate in torture, 
but the CIA relied on their participation.  In instances when objections were raised  to this role within the OMS, 
they were overruled by the CIA .  
 The CIA scaled up their torture methodology and enlarged the scope of who would be subjected to the 
torture. This included the research and monitoring 
components that were central to their claims of legality 
as asserted in the now -rescinded DOJ Office of Legal 
Counsel torture memos. The program they devised had devastating consequences for the victims of torture. Their actions are a violation of medical ethics and of 
both do mestic and international law, yet , while there has 
been some acknowledgement of these crimes , there has 
been no accountability. To the contrary, Mitchell and 
Jessen were paid more than $1 million each, their 
company was paid $81 million, and the two men we re 
indemnified against legal costs up to $5 million.  
  
 
phr.org  Truth Matters  15 
  
 
Transparency, accountability , and r edress  
 
The United States has an obligation under international law to conduct speedy, transparent investigations into 
allegations of torture in CIA detention cent ers, and, 
where evidence is found amounting to individual 
criminal responsibility, to prosecute alleged perpetrators 
in a court meeting international fair trial standards. It is 
crucial to ensure that those heading the chain of command responsible for auth orizing torture are held 
to account.  
 Ensuring the right to know the truth about past human 
rights abuses –  for victims and family members as well 
as the general public –  is recognized in international 
human rights law as part of a state’s obligation to investigate and provide remedy for violations of human 
rights. Truth is crucial in helping survivors process what 
happened to them. At a societal level, it is also crucial to 
countering misinformation and highlighting factors that led to abuses. It helps in stitutions and societies 
understand why abuses were committed so that they 
can prevent their repetition.   
 
On October 13, 2015, the ACLU filed a lawsuit against 
psychologists Mitchell and Jessen. While this is an 
important first step in pursuing truth and  reparations 
for the victims, the U.S. government still has an obligation to pursue criminal accountability for 
allegations of torture.  
  
Recommendations  
 The absolute prohibition against torture and ill-
treatment and the obligation of all states to inve stigate 
and prosecute those responsible for torture are the 
means by which governments can effectively end 
torture. These two principles, taken together, send an 
unequivocal message that torture and ill- treatment can 
never be justified.  
 
In the case of th e United States , the government has 
simultaneously tried to deny that it uses torture and to 
provide a fig leaf of legal arguments. Those arguments are based on redefining torture through specious arguments by psychologists and claiming that, under 
excepti onal circumstances, torture is justifiable. The 
U.S. has also invoked national security to obscure both 
the scope of the torture program and the identities of 
those who have committed acts of torture or ordered 
torture.  
 
Such a posture is unacceptable in the United States, just 
as it was unacceptable in Chile under Augusto 
Pinochet’s rule, Uganda under Idi Amin’s rule, or South Africa under its apartheid governments. The U.S. 
government must end the cover -up and honor its 
obligation to investigate and pros ecute those 
responsible. Specifically:  
 
1. Based on a thorough investigation, the Department of Justice should bring charges 
against those individuals who designed the 
torture program, implemented the torture program, and/or ordered torture be used.  
 
2. The U.S . government should release the entire 
Senate torture report and allow investigators 
access to other documents relevant to the 
investigation into the use of torture.  
 
3. Detainees subjected to torture should be provided the means to seek redress against the 
government and individuals who tortured them.  
 
4. Detainees subjected to torture by agents of the U.S. government – regardless of where the 
crime was committed – should be provided 
with a full range of reparations for their suffering  and rehabilitation . 
  
 
phr.org  Truth Matters  16 
 Endnotes  
1 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (113th Cong.), 
Findings and Conclusions, Committee Study of the Central 
Intelligence Agency’s Detention and Interrogation Program , 
Dec. 9, 2014, 
http://www.feinstein.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/files/ser
ve?File_id=7c85429a -ec38- 4bb5 -968f-
289799b f6d0e&SK=D500C4EBC500E1D256BA5192118959
09. 
2 Open Society Justice Initiative. Globalizing Torture: CIA 
Secret Detention and Extraordinary Rendition  (February 
2013), 
https://www.opensocietyfoundations.org/sites/default/files
/globalizing -torture -20120205.pdf  
3 Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or 
Degrading Treatment or Punishment, adopted December 
10, 1984, G.A. Res. 39/46, annex, 39 U.N. GAOR. Supp. (No. 51), U.N. Doc. A/Res/39/46 (1984), entered into force 
June 26, 1987, ratified by the United States on October 21, 
1994, 
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CAT.a
spx 
4 Iacopino, Vincent. “US torture and national security: The 
imperative of accountability.” Zeitschrift für 
Psychologie/Journal of Psychology  219, no. 3 (2011): 190-
192. 
http://psycnet.apa.org/index.cfm?fa=buy.optionToBuy&id=
2011- 23524- 011 
5 Memorandum from Jay S. Bybee, assistant attorney 
general, to Alberto R. Gon zales, counsel to the president, 
regarding “Standards for Conduct of Interrogation under 18 
U.S.C. Sections 2340-2340A,”  August 1, 2002, ( “Yoo/Bybee 
Memo”) http://www.justice.gov/sites/default/ 
files/olc/legacy/2010/08/05/memo -gonzales -aug2002.pdf    
6 Allen, Scott et al. Leave No Marks: Enhanced Interrogation 
Techniques and the Risk of Criminality , Physicians for 
Human Rights and Human Rights First, August 2007, 1. 
http://phr.org/library/reports/leave -no-marks -report -
2007.html   
7 Yoo/Bybee Memo, cited in Allen, Scott et al. Doing Harm: 
Health Professionals’ Central Role in the CIA Torture 
Program , Physicians for Human Rights, December 2014. 
http://s3.amazonaws.com/PHR_Reports/doing -harm- health -
professionals -central -role-in-the-cia-torture -program.pdf   
8 SSCI Summary, “Findings and Conclusions,” 19.  
9 Air Force Capt. Michael Kearns, ret., quoted in Jason 
Leopold and Jeffrey Kaye. “EXCLUSIVE: CIA Psychologist's Notes Reveal True Purpose Behind Bush's Torture Program.” 
TruthOut.org , March 22, 2011. 
http://www.truth-
out.org/news/item/205:exclusive- cia-psychologists -notes -
reveal- true-purpose -behind -bushs -torture -program    
10 Basoglu, Metin. “Definition of torture in United Sta tes law: 
Does it provide legal cover for ‘enhanced interrogation 
techniques’?.” Mass Trauma, Mental Health & Human Rights 
Blog, February 7, 2015. 
https://metinbasoglu.wordpress.com/2015/02/07/definitio
n-of-torture -enhanced -interrogation . See also SSCI 
Summary, Findings and Conclusions , 21. 
11 CIA. Brainwashing from a Psychological Viewpoint (1956).  
12 KUBARK was the CIA’s code name for itself in Vietnam. 
CIA. KUBARK Counterintelligence Interrogation (1963).  
13 CIA. Human Resource Exploitation Training Manual  
(1983).  
14 The Constitution Project. Report of the Constitution 
Project’s Task Force on Detaine e Treatment  (March 2013), 
205. http://detaineetaskforce.org/pdf/Full -Report.pdf   
15 O’Mara, Shane. Why Torture Doesn’t Work: The 
Neuroscience of Interrogation  (Cambridge: Harvard University Pr ess, 2015), 142. 
http://psycnet.apa.org/psycinfo/2001- 16094- 001   
16 Schwartz, Barry, Steven F. Maier, and Christopher 
Peterson. "From Helplessness To Hope: The Seminal Career 
Of Martin Seligman ." In J. Gillham (ed.). The Science of 
Optimism And Hope (Radnor, PA: Templeton Foundation 
Press, 2000), 11- 37.  
17 O’Mara, Why Torture Doesn’t Work , 142.  
18 Luban, David and Henry Shue. “Mental Torture: A Critique 
of Erasures in U.S. Law.”  Georgetown Law Journal 100, no. 3 
(2012), 861, citing M. Gregg Bloche. The Hippocratic Myth : 
Why Doctors Are Under Pressure to Ration Care, Practice 
Politics, and Compromise their Promise to Heal (New York: 
St. Martin’s Press, 2011).  
http://scholarship.law.georgetown.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi
?article=1619&context=facpub    
19 Allen et al., Doing Harm , 5.  
20 SSCI Summary, 32.  
21 CIA Office of Medical Services. Draft Office of Me dical 
Services Guidelines on Medical and Psychological Support to Detainee Rendition, Interrogation, and Detention , 
September 4, 2003. 
http://graphics8.nytimes.com/packages/pdf/politics/2009
0825- DETAIN/2004CIAIG.pdf .   
22 Ibid.  
23 Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights. 
Istanbul Protocol: Manual on the Effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhum an or 
Degrading Treatment or Punishment . Professional Training 
Series No.8/Rev.1 (2004), 45. 
http://physiciansforhumanrights.org/issues/torture/interna
tional -torture.html   
24 Katherine Newell, Open -source Government Information 
about the CIA Rendition, Detention and Interrogation (RDI) 
Program (2011), 6.  
25 Borchelt, Gretchen and Christian Pross. Break Them 
Down: Systematic Use of Psychological Torture by US 
Forces , 
Physicians for Human Rights, May 2005. 
http://phr.org/library/reports/us -torture -break- them -down -
2005.html   
26 Istanbul Protocol, 29.  
27 Almerindo E. Ojeda. “What Is Psychol ogical Torture?”  The 
Trauma of Psychological Torture . Almerindo E. Ojeda (Ed.) 
(Westport, CT: Praeger, 2008), 2- 3, cited in Luban and Shue, 
“Mental Torture,” 19.   
28 Basoglu, “Definition of torture in United States law.” See 
also SSCI Summary, “Findings and  Conclusions,” 21.  
29 SSCI Summary, 46.  
30 Memorandum from CIA to OLC, Background Paper on 
CIA’s Combined Use of Interrogation Techniques , December 
30, 2004. 
https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/files/torturefoia/release
d/082409/olcremand/2004olc97.pdf   
31 Newell, “Open -source Government Information,” 9.  
32 See ibid. See also Brief of Amicus Curiae Physicians for 
Human Rights in Support of Petitioner’s Motion for 
Mandamus, In re: Abd Al -Rahim Hussein Muhammed Al -
Nashiri v. Barack Obama, No. 15 -1023 (December 7, 2015).  
33 Torture Act, 18 U.S.C.A. § 2340 (2004).  
34 Xenakis, Stephen N. “Neuropsychiatric evidence of 
waterboarding and other abusive treatments.” Torture 22 
(2012):23. http://www.ir ct.org/media -and-
resources/library/torture -journal/archive/volume -22--
supplementum -1--2012.aspx .   
35 See Borchelt and Pross, Break Them Down , 1. See also 
Allen et al., Leave No Marks .      
 
phr.org  Truth Matters  17 
  
36 Allen et al., Leave No Marks , 9, citing Herman, Judith 
Lewis. Trauma and Recovery: The Aftermath of Violence — 
from Domestic Abuse to Political Terror  (New York: 
BasicBooks, 1992), 33- 95.  
37 Borchelt and Pross, Break Them Down , 56.  
38 Physicians for Human Rights. “Fact Sheet: Rectal 
Hydration and Rectal Feeding.” Dece mber 2014. 
http://physiciansforhumanrights.org/library/other/fact -
sheet -rectal -hydration -and-rectal -feedi ng.html    
39 Borchelt and Pross, Break Them Down ,” 59.  
40 Xenakis, “Neuropsychiatric evidence,” 22.  
41 Borchelt and Pross, Break Them Down , 63, citing 
Grassian, Stuart. “Psychopathological Effects of Solitary 
Confinement.” American Journal of Psychiatry  140 
(1983):1450– 54. 
42 Ibid., 61.  
43 Ibid., 68, citing Sutker Patricia B. et al. “Cognitive Deficits 
and Psychopathology Among Former Prisoners of War and 
Combat Veterans of the Korean Conflict.” American Journal 
of Psychiatry  148, no. 1 (1991): 67– 72.. 
44 Ibid., 60, citing Graessner, Sepp. “Gesundheitliche 
Auswirkungen von Langzeithaft mit Isolation; Historische 
Wurzeln und Forderungen.” In: Birck A, Pross C, Lansen J, 
eds. Das Unsagbare  (Berlin, Germany: Springer Verlag, 
2002),253– 269 and Leidermann, P. Herbert . “Man Alone: 
Sensory Deprivation and Behavioral Change.” Corrective 
Psychiatry & Journal of Social Therapy  8 (1962):64– 74.. 
45 KUBARK was the CIA’s code name for itself in Vietnam. 
CIA. KUBARK Counterintelligence Interrogation (1963).   
46 SSCI Summary, 147 . 
47 Borchelt and Pross, Break Them Down , 69, citing  Sadock 
B, Sadock V, eds. Kaplan and Sadock’s Comprehensive 
Textbook of Psychiatry . Vol. 1. 8th ed. (Philadelphia, PA: 
Lippincott Williams &  Wilkins; 2005), 289; Alvarez GG, Ayas 
NT. “The Impact of Daily Sleep Duration on Health: A Review 
of the Literature.” Progress in Cardiovascular Nursing  19 
(2004):56– 59; and Carskadon, MA. “Sleep deprivation: 
Health Consequences and Societal Impact.” Medical Clinics 
of North America  88, no. 3 (2004):767– 77. 
48 Xenakis, “Neuropsychiatric evidence,” 22.  
49 See note 50, supra.  
50 CIA Office of Medical Services. OMS Guidelines on Medical 
and Psychological Support to Detainee Rendition, 
Interrogation, and Detentio n, December 1, 2004. http://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/pdfs/
DOJOLC001145.pdf . 
51 SSCI Summary, Findings and Conclusions, 3.  
52 SSCI Summary, 86.  
53 Ibid., 43- 44. 
54 Xenakis, “Neuropsychiatric evidence,” 22.  
55 Istanbul Protocol, 45  
56 Ibid., 29.  
57 UN Commission on Human Rights. Torture and Other 
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment: 
report of the Special Rapporteur, Theo van Boven,  U.N. D oc. 
A/59/324 (2004), para. 45, quoting the first Special Rapporteur on Torture, Peter Kooijmans. 
http://daccess -
dds-
ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N04/498/52/PDF/N0449852.p
df?OpenElement   
58 Basoglu, “Definition of torture in United States law.”  
59 Borchelt and Pross, Break Them Down ,” 50, citing 
Moisander Pia A. and Erik Edston. “Torture and Its Sequel —
A Comparison Between Victims from Six Countries.” Forensic Science  International  137 (2003):133– 140 .  
60 Xenakis, “Neuropsychiatric evidence,” 22.  
61 “Trauma - and Stressor -Related Disorders: Posttraumatic 
Stress Disorder.” American Psychiatric Association. 
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders , (5th 
ed.). Washington, DC (2013).  
62 Salim et al. v. Mitchell et al. , No. 2:15 -cv-00286 (Wa. 
October 13, 2015), Complaint, 50- 51. 
63 Ibid., 19.  
64 SSCI Summary, 49.  
65 Salim v. Mitchell, 34.  
66 SSCI Summary, 77.  
67 Ibid., 77.  
68 Ibid., 11.  
69 Ibid., 71.  
70 Ibid. 
71 Ibid., 111.  
72 Physicians for Human Rights. “Fact Sheet: Rectal 
Hydration and Rectal Feeding.”  
73 SSCI Summary, 112.  
74 SSCI Summary, 28.  
75 SSCI Summary, 36.  
76 Allen et al., Doing Harm , 9. phr.org
Nobel Peace Prize  
Co-laureateNew York, NY
HeadquartersBoston, MA Washington, DC