The Agua Caliente 
NARF’s client, the Agua Caliente Band of CahuillaIndians and their ancestors have been in Coachella
Valley, California, since time immemorial. Deep in
Kak wa wit (Tahquitz Canyon) north of Palm
Springs, archaeologists have discovered proof ofCahuilla Indian occupation for more than 5,000years, which echoes the Tribe’s oral history.According to the migration story of the AguaCaliente, Evon ga net (“the Fox”) was a powerful
leader who traveled to the Coachella Valley from anearby valley in the west.  As he entered the valley,he recognized and marked it as a new home for hispeople. Soon thereafter, the leader of the Fox Clan,Ca wis ke on ca, saw the mark of the Fox alongside
the oasis of what is now known as Palm Springsand settled his tribe deep in the canyon.  For thou-sands of years, Agua Caliente people have not onlylived but thrived in the region.  
Thriving in the desert takes special knowledge and
skills, which the Cahuilla gained over the millennium.  Surface waters are often available onlyseasonally and can be unreliable.  The Cahuilla
VOLUME 42, NO. 1 WINTER/SPRING 2017NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Groundwater Rights Confirmed 
But the Fight Continues
Groundwater Rights Confirmed 
But the Fight Continues ........................ page 1
Case Updates ............................................page 5National Indian Law Library .................. page 9Call to Action ........................................ page 10NARF .................................................... page 11NARF Board .......................................... page 12
Andreas Creek Indian Canyons courtesy 
Kate Anderson / Agua Caliente 
Band of Cahuilla Indians.people developed walk-in groundwater wells to
provide a water source during times of droughtand skillfully used water from nearby streams toirrigate their crops. The rock-lined ditches, dams,and reservoirs that they created remain asreminders of the ancient Cahuilla ways andknowledge.  The Cahuilla people have long beenthe stewards of the surrounding land and waters.
The Cahuilla were keenly aware of the value of
water and paid it great respect.  The area’s hotsprings, originally known as Sec-he (boiling
water) and renamed as Agua Caliente (hot water)
by Spanish arrivals, provided the Cahuilla peoplewith clean water for drinking and bathing as wellas a spiritual connection point to the underworldof the nukatem (ancient spiritual beings) and a
place of healing.  To this day, the water is life-sus-taining and sacred.
Today, Palm Springs is world-renowned, and the
Agua Caliente share the beautiful Coachella Valleywith visitors from around the world who aredrawn to the desert oasis.  What most visitorsdon’t realize is that beneath that desert landscapethere is an immense reservoir of pristine waters,the Coachella Valley Aquifer.  The water in theaquifer is filtered through layers of sand and grav-el as snowmelt and rainfall seep back under-ground to replenish the great resource.  Thisamazing groundwater has provided for the
Cahuilla since their long-ago arrival. Not only fortheir irrigation and drinking, but also for theirrich ceremonial and spiritual traditions. 
The Water
The Coachella Valley Aquifer is large; however,even with its remarkable size, the aquifer is notinfinite. It is a precious and finite resources thatcan be adversely impacted by ongoing pollutionand depletion.  The Agua Caliente understand thatand have fought for over two decades to improvemanagement of the resource.
With the growing popularity of the Coachella
Valley, the aquifer is being overused and abused.Water from the aquifer is being pumped out at analarming rate to supply the growing demand. ThePalm Springs Desert Sun reported a 34-foot drop
in the aquifer’s water levels between 1975 and2015—the approximate height of a three-storybuilding.  In 2010, the Coachella Valley WaterDistrict (“CVWD”), one of the two water agenciesserving the area, and one of the largest pumpersof groundwater in the Coachella Valley, estimatedthe cumulative overdraft of the aquifer over theyears at over 5.5 million acre-feet and an averagecontinuing annual overdraft of approximately239,000 acre-feet per year.  Besides the threat ofdepletion, this type of overdrafting can cause
PAGE 2                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Andreas Canyon. VOLUME 42, NO. 1 PAGE 3NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND“ground subsidence” in which the pore space in
the aquifer collapses and the surface above sinks.Studies indicate that areas in the southernCoachella Valley already are subsiding.  
In an attempt to offset the unsustainable over-
drafting of the aquifer, local water agencies beganimporting water from the Colorado River and arti-ficially recharging or replenishing the water inthe aquifer.  This may have slowed the overdraft-ing of the aquifer, but it introduced an entirelynew problem – declining groundwater quality.The Colorado River water has high levels of totaldissolved solids and other nutrients from uprivermunicipal, mining, and agricultural runoff, and itis not treated before it is used for recharge.  Fromthe recharge site in the Upper Valley, the lower-quality water flows down directly toward the AguaCaliente Reservation, directly impacting the qual-ity of water underlying the Tribe’s lands.  For decades, the Tribe has advocated for reducingthe over-pumping and protecting the aquifer.  TheTribe well understands the essential nature of theaquifer for sustaining today’s needs as well asthose of future generations.  The Agua Calienterepeatedly called on the local water agencies tomake the protection of the aquifer a priority. Thecontinuing mismanagement of the area’s waterresources finally led the Tribe to bring suit againstthe two main water agencies that serve the area.
The Litigation
On May 14, 2013, on behalf of the Agua CalienteBand of Cahuilla Indians, NARF and co-counselfiled suit against CVWD and Desert Water Agency(DWA) and their respective individual boardmembers, in the federal district court for theCentral District of California in Riverside,California.  The relief requested by the Tribe in itscomplaint is a declaration of the Tribe’s reservedand aboriginal water rights to groundwater tosatisfy the pr esent and future needs of the Tribe
and its members, as well as to protect the Tribe’swater rights from further damage by the wateragencies’ overdraft and artificial recharge of theCoachella Valley groundwater aquifer withuntreated, lower-quality imported Colorado Riverwater.  The defendant water agencies answeredthe complaint, denying that the Tribe has reservedor aboriginal rights to water, as well as assertingother defenses.  The case was assigned to Judge
Jesus Bernal, a federal judge in the EasternDivision of the Central District.  
Early in the case, the Tribe and the water agencies
agreed to divide the litigation into three phases –the first phase would address whether the Tribehas a reserved right to groundwater and whetherthe Tribe has an aboriginal right to groundwater.The second phase encompasses whether the Tribeowns the pore space below its reservation, whichis impacted by the artificial recharge of importedgroundwater, whether the Tribe is entitled to fulfillment of its groundwater rights with water ofa certain quality, what standard will be used toquantify the Tribe’s rights, and whether several ofthe equitable defenses asserted by the water agen-cies apply to this type of claim.  The third phaseencompasses the actual quantification of theTribe’s groundwater rights and pore space, andpossibly determining the standard for the qualityof water required to fulfill the Tribe’s water right.
In May 2014, the United States intervened on
behalf of the Tribe, supporting the Tribe’s claimfor a reserved right to groundwater.  Motions forsummary judgment were filed by all parties on
Ancestral Cahuilla dug walk-in wells in the
Coachella Valley. October 21, 2014, with respect to the phase one
issues.  The Tribe and the United States bothargued that federal law controls the issues of thecase and that federal law provides that the Tribehas a reserved right to enough water from anyavailable source to fulfill its present and futureneeds.  The water agencies argued that Californiastate law should apply and that the Tribe and theUnited States should be limited to the same waterrights as other landowners in the CoachellaValley, contrary to a line of cases recognizing thatfederally reserved water rights of Indian tribes areprior and paramount to state-law based rights andapply to groundwater resources underlying reser-vation lands.  
Oral arguments were held on March 16, 2015, and
Judge Bernal issued his order on March 20, 2015.In this ruling, the Tribe’s reserved right to waterwas recognized and the court ruled in the T ribe’s
favor that a tribal reserved right can be fulfilled by groundwater.  Although many courts,both federal and state, have recognized that federallyreserved water rights apply to groundwater as wellas to surface water, this was a significant opinionas it clearly and decisively applied the doctrine ofU.S. v. Winters , an early case establishing the
reserved water rights of Indian tribes, to ground-water.  The court declined to find that the Triberetained an aboriginal right to groundwater, ruling that previous case law limiting the rights ofall California tribes applied to this case as well,and that the Tribe’s aboriginal rights were extin-guished by specific federal acts pertaining to theestablishment of the State of California.  However,the more significant ruling that the Tribe’sreserved water rights apply to groundwater was avictory for Agua Caliente.  
Following the District Court’s ruling in favor of
the Tribe’s reserved right to groundwater, thewater agencies petitioned for interlocutory reviewon that sole issue by the federal Ninth CircuitCourt of Appeals.  On October 18, 2016, a three-judge panel of the Ninth Circuit heard oral argu-ments.  The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals issueda unanimous opinion on March 7, 2017. Itaffirmed Judge Bernal’s 2015 ruling, holding thatthe Winters doctrine applies, and that the Tribe“has a reserved right to groundwater underlyingits reservation as a
result of the pur-pose for which the reservation wasestablished.”  TheCourt also broadlyconstrued the orig-inal purposes for
the creation of thereservation. Theruling is a signifi-cant victory forthe Tribe and theCoachella Valley.Most recently, thedefendant waterdistricts have indi-cated they will notseek rehearing inthe Ninth Circuit,but will petitionthe U.S. SupremeCourt for a writ of
certiorari.
A denial of certiorari by the Supreme Court
would be a logical result, given that the Courtordinarily does not grant review of cases that donot raise significant splits of opinion amongst thevarious state supreme courts or federal appellatecircuits.  Irrespective of the outcome, groundwa-ter will continue to be an increasingly importantresource for Indian tribes, especially in the aridwestern states.  The combination of growing pop-ulations in the West coupled with the effects of climate change producing shrinking watersupplies mean an even more uncertain water supply picture for tribes.  Tribes’ ability to ensurethe availability of enough clean water and to plana responsible water future for themselves andfuture generations will continue to be a funda-mental challenge for decades to come.  The abilityof tribal governments to work collaboratively aspartners with decision makers in neighboringcommunities will be vital to effective planningand the efficient use of everyone’s resources.This will only be possible when the existence oftribal rights are recognized and respected by surrounding communities. ❂
PAGE 4                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Tahquitz Canyon. VOLUME 42, NO. 1 PAGE 5NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDCASE UPDATES
Since 2004, North Dakota has had a voter ID law
on the books. Until recently, the law allowed avoter without ID to cast a ballot if either a pollworker could vouch for the voter’s identity as aqualified voter or the voter signed an affidavitunder penalty of perjury that he or she was quali-fied to vote. In 2013, the North Dakota legislaturenarrowed the forms of ID that were acceptableand eliminated the voucher and affidavit fail-safes. 
The legislature cited the need to eliminate voter
fraud, but illegal voting has never been a problemin the state. In fact, Secretary of State AlvinJaeger declared in a 2006 letter to a researcher,“during my fourteen years as Secretary of Stateand the state’s chief election officer, my office hasnot referred any cases of voter fraud to the UnitedStates Attorney, the North Dakota AttorneyGeneral, or to local prosecutors. We haven’t hadany to refer.” However, in 2015, the legislatureagain amended the election law to further restrictthe forms of acceptable ID. 
The voter ID law required qualified electors to
submit one of four forms of ID, which must contain a qualified elector’s name, residentialaddress, and date of birth. Due to reasons rootedin the discriminatory treatment of NativeAmericans, many living on Indian reservations inNorth Dakota do not have a qualifying ID, such asa driver’s license or state ID card. While NorthDakota claims that tribal IDs qualify under itslaw, most tribal IDs do not have a residentialaddress printed on them.  This is due, in part, tothe fact that the U.S. postal service does not provide residential delivery in these rural Indiancommunities.  Thus, most tribal members use aPO Box and, if a tribal ID has an address, it is typ-ically the PO Box address, which does not satisfyNorth Dakota’s restrictive voter ID law. In boththe primary and general election in 2014, manyqualified North Dakota tribal electors were disen-franchised because they only had a tribal ID. In 2016, on behalf
of eight NativeAmericans, NARFand co-counselfiled suit to blockNorth Dakota’svoter ID law, alleg-ing that it disen-franched NativeAmerican voters,thus violating thestate and federal constitutions as well as theVoting Rights Act. Weeks before the November2016 election, Judge Hovland of the United StatesDistrict Court for the District of North Dakotafound the law violated the U.S. Constitution andissued a preliminary injunction, which requiredthe state to provide a fail-safe mechanism forthose voters without qualifying ID. In a lengthyopinion, Judge Daniel L. Hovland wrote, “[I]t isclear that a safety net is needed for those voterswho simply cannot obtain a qualifying voter IDwith reasonable effort.” 
Judge Hovland wrote, “[t]he record is replete with
concrete evidence of significant burdens imposedon Native American voters attempting to exercisetheir right to vote in North Dakota.” Although thestate argued that the law was necessary to preventvoter fraud, the court found that there “is a totallack of any evidence to show voter fraud has everbeen a problem in North Dakota.” The court con-cluded that it “is a minimal burden for the Stateto conduct this year’s election in the same man-ner it successfully administered elections fordecades before the enactment of the new voter ID laws.”  Accordingly, the Courtrequired North Dakota to permit voters without aqualifying ID to vote if they signed an affidavitswearing to their qualifications. 
More recently, on April 24, 2017, Governor
Burgum signed H.B. 1369 into law. The newly
ND Ignores Federal Judge in Developing 
New Voter ID Law
PAGE 6                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDminted voter ID law completely ignores Judge
Hovland’s directive. NARF is preparing to challenge the new law in court. Some legislatorssupporting the bill have described it as a way tocure the problems identified by the federal court;however, H.B. 1369 does not contain any fail-safemechanisms like the one required by the court.H.B. 1369 does allow for provisional balloting,but it requires each voter to present a qualifyingID to an election official within six days in order
for his or her vote to be counted.  In this way, thelaw makes allowance for voters who left their IDsat home, but it does not address the problem ofvoters who, although qualified to vote, cannotobtain one of the narrow set of permitted IDsbecause of financial or other circumstances.Under the new law, those qualified electors arenot allowed to vote.
Trump Orders Review of Bears Ears Designation
Last December, President Obama designated anarea of great importance in southeastern Utah asa national monument known as “Bears Ears.”  InApril, President Trump signed an executive orderdirecting Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke to con-duct a two-part review, aimed first at the BearsEars National Monument in Southeastern Utahand then at other post-1995 monument designa-tions made pursuant to the Antiquities Act.
The stated policy of the order is to review all
monuments created since 1996 to determine ifthey were created without “public outreach andproper coordination.” However, the Bears EarsNational Monument was created after decades ofadvocacy and many public meetings in the regionand in Washington, DC, over the past two years.The effort to protect Bears Ears was very long,very public, and very robust. To say that it needsreview to determine if the proper outreach wasconducted is an outrage and nothing more thanpretext to withdraw Bears Ears from monumentprotection altogether.
Bears Ears is a homeland to five tribes (Navajo,
Ute Mountain Ute, Uintah and Ouray Ute, Hopi,and Zuni) as well as other Southwestern tribes.Like countless other tribes across the UnitedStates, Native people were removed from BearsEars by threat and coercion and forced ontoreservations.  However, the threats of a hostilegovernment could not keep people away from theplace they called home since time immemorial.Bears Ears is an area filled with sacred sites,hunting grounds, and medicines that are all stillutilized today, and it is a place where Nativeancestors are buried and to be honored.Monument management is to be guided in part
by a Bears Ears Commission made up of commis-sioners from five tribes whose members continueto use the Monument for cultural and religiouspurposes to this day: Navajo Nation, Hopi Tribe,Zuni Tribe, Uintah and Ouray Ute, and UteMountain Ute Tribe.
“The Trump administration’s review of Bears
Ears is extremely disappointing because BearsEars is one of the most important places toIndian Country and the Tribes fought hard toensure that this sacred area was protected,” saidNARF Executive Director John Echohawk.
“Make no mistake, this order has nothing to do
with asking for public input.  They got that increating the Bears Ears Monument. They justdon’t like the result.  This order is about takingaway public lands from the American people inorder to free them up for resource exploitation,”said NARF Staff Attorney Natalie Landreth. 
The Native American Rights Fund represents the
Hopi Tribe, Pueblo of Zuni, and Ute Mountain UteTribe and will fight to protect the Bears EarsNational Monument.
Bears Ears photo courtesy Tim Peterson.VOLUME 42, NO. 1 PAGE 7NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
The Tribal Supreme Court Project is part of the
Tribal Sovereignty Protection Initiative and isstaffed by the National Congress of AmericanIndians and the Native American Rights Fund.The Project was formed in 2001 at the request ofa number of tribes, in response to a series of U.S.Supreme Court cases that negatively affectedtribal sovereignty.  The purpose of the Project isto promote greater coordination and to improvestrategy on litigation that may affect the rights ofall Indian tribes.  We encourage Indian tribes andtheir attorneys to contact us in our effort to coor-dinate resources, develop strategy, and preparebriefs, especially at the time of the petition for awrit of certiorari, prior to the Supreme Court
accepting a case for review.  You can find copiesof briefs and opinions on the major cases we trackon our website (http://sct.narf.org). 
Indian Law Cases Decided by the Court
Lewis v. Clarke – On April 25, 2017, the Court
issued its opinion, reversing the ConnecticutSupreme Court and holding that, “in a suitbrought against a tribal employee in his individ-ual capacity, the employee, not the tribe, is thereal party in interest and the tribe’s sovereignimmunity is not implicated.”  Further, the Courtheld that “an indemnification provision does notextend a tribe’s sovereign immunity where it oth-erwise would not reach.”  This case involved Mr.Clarke, a limousine driver employed by theMohegan Tribal Gaming Authority, who rear-ended and injured the Lewises on an interstatehighway outside the tribe’s reservation inConnecticut.  The Connecticut Supreme Courthad held that the doctrine of tribal sovereignimmunity extends to Mr. Clarke as an employeeof a tribe who was acting within the scope of hisemployment when the accident occurred.
Writing for a unanimous Court, Justice
Sotomayor observed that a government employeewho is acting within the scope of his employmentat the time a tort is committed is not—by itself—sufficient to bar suit against that employee on thebasis of sovereign immunity. The opinion makesclear that this common law principle appliesregardless of whether the employee works for thefederal government, a state government, or a
tribal government.  The Court also points to thedistinction drawn from its legal precedentbetween individual- and official-capacity suits. Inan official-capacity suit, the relief sought is onlynominally against the government official and is—in fact—against the official’s office and thus thesovereign itself.  On the other hand, an individual-capacity suit seeks to impose personal liabilityupon the government official for their tortiousactions.  Accordingly, it is the identity of the “realparty in interest” which dictates what immunitiesmay be available.  In applying these principles tothis case, the result was apparent to the Court:  
This is a negligence action arising from a tort
committed by Clarke on an interstate high-way within the State of Connecticut. The suitis brought against a tribal employee operatinga vehicle within the scope of his employmentbut on state lands, and the judgment will notoperate against the Tribe. This is not a suitagainst Clarke in his official capacity. It issimply a suit against Clarke to recover for hispersonal actions, which ‘will not requireaction by the sovereign or disturb the sover-eign’s property.’”
The Court rejected Mr. Clarke’s argument that
the Mohegan Tribal Gaming Authority is the realparty in interest here because it is required bytribal law to indemnify tribal employees for anyadverse judgment under these circumstances.The Court observed that it has never before hadoccasion to decide the question of whether anindemnification clause is sufficient to extend asovereign immunity defense to a suit against anemployee in his individual capacity.  Based on
Tribal Supreme Court Project
PAGE 8                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDthe same general principles outlined above, the
Court held that “an indemnification provisioncannot, as a matter of law, extend sovereignimmunity to individual employees who wouldotherwise not fall under its protective cloak.”Once again, the Court made it clear that this prin-ciple will apply equally regardless of whether it isthe immunity of the federal government, a stategovernment, or a tribal government, at issue. 
The implications of this decision are unclear at
this point, but should begin to be clarifiedthrough pending and future litigation.  TheCourt has laid down a bright-line rule that tribalsovereign immunity does not extend to suitsbrought against tribal employees or officials intheir individual capacity – unless there is a deter-mination that the tribe is the “real party in inter-est.”  In addition, the Court left open the questionof whether tribal employees and officials are entitled to “official immunity” – immunity foractions taken within the scope of their employ-ment – on a similar basis as state and federalemployees and officials.  
Petitions for a Writ of Certiorari Granted
Patchak v. Zinke – On May 1, 2017, the Court
granted review of a petition filed by DavidPatchak, a non-Indian landowner seeking reviewof a decision by the U.S. Court of Appeals for theD.C. Circuit which held that the Gun Lake TrustLand Reaffirmation of 2014, a standalone statutereaffirming the Department of the Interior’s deci-sion to take the land in question into trust for theGun Lake Tribe, was constitutionally sound andremoved jurisdiction from the federal courts overany actions relating to that property.  Mr. Patchakhad successfully argued before the Supreme
Court in 2012 that he had prudential standing tobring an Administrative Procedure Act action andCarcieri challenge to the acquisition of trust landfor the benefit of the Match-E-Be-Nash-She-WishBand of Pottawatomi Indians/Gun Lake Tribe.The Court has granted review of Question 1 presented in the petition for cert:  
Petitioner filed a lawsuit challenging the
Department of Interior’s authority to takeinto trust a tract of land (“the BradleyProperty”) near Petitioner’s home.  In 2009,the District Court dismissed his lawsuit onthe ground that Petitioner lacked prudentialstanding.  After the Court of Appeals reversedthe District Court, this Court granted reviewand held that Petitioner has standing, sover-eign immunity was waived, and his “suit mayproceed.”  Match-E-Be-Nash-She-Wish Band
of Pottawatomi Indians v. Patchak, 132 S.Ct.
at 2199, 2203 (2012) (“Patchak I”).  Whilesummary judgment briefing was underway inthe District Court following remand from thisCourt, Congress enacted the Gun Lake Act—a standalone statute which directed that anypending (or future) case “relating to” theBradley Property “shall be promptly dis-missed,” but did not amend any underlyingsubstantive or procedural laws.  Followingthe statute’s directive, the District Courtentered summary judgment for Defendant,and the Court of Appeals affirmed.
1. Does a statute directing the federal courts to
“promptly dismiss” a pending lawsuit fol-lowing substantive determinations by thecourts (including this Court’s determina-tion that the “suit may proceed”)— without
amending underlying substantive or procedur-al laws—violate the Constitution’s separationof powers principles?
Unless extensions are requested, the petitioner’s
opening brief is due on June 15, 2017. The UnitedStates’ and the Tribe’s briefs in response are dueon July 17, 2017.  The case will not be argueduntil after the Court returns from its summerrecess on October 2, 2017. ❂
National Indian Law Library
Indian Law Updates now Include 
Tribal Court OpinionsEach week, the National Indian Law Library(NILL) provides free updates on Indian lawthrough the Indian Law Bulletins.  For over adecade, the library has offered access to federaland state court cases, legal news and scholar-ship, federal legislation, and regulatory actionfrom agencies and departments like theEnvironmental Protection Agency and theBureau of Indian Affairs. In 2017, the libraryadded a bulletin covering tribal court opinions.Free access to tribal court opinion research hasbeen a challenge to Indian law researchers, butnow subscribers to the Indian Law Bulletins canlearn about selected opinions published by tribalcourts, some of which are found only on theNILL website. Bulletin updates are free, distrib-uted via email, and available on our website.Find the Indian Law Bulletins at http://www.narf.org/nill/bulletins/ 
Free Searchable Database of Indian Law and News
Besides the weekly updates and emails, contentfrom the Indian Law Bulletins is archived on the NILL website.  The archived collection,effectively creates a searchable database ofNative American law and legal news. To beginresearching a topic, type your search term intothe Google Search box on the right side of theIndian Law Bulletins page.  You can search byIndian law topic or case name, just as you wouldin Google. Your search results will be organizedunder nine tabs that represent each of the indi-vidual bulletins.  
Many of the materials that are covered in the
bulletins are available online.  If the item youwould like to see is not available online, you cancontact the library (http://www.narf.org/nill/asknill.html) to request a copy.Free Access to Tribal Codes and Constitutions
at our Tribal Law Gateway Over 100 tribal codes and constitutions areavailable in full-text at our Tribal Law Gatewayat http://www.narf.org/nill/triballaw/. Researcherscan find triballaw by name oftribe or searchthe Gateway forspecific terms ortopics. In addi-tion to full-textmaterials, ourwebsite providesthe tables ofcontents forabout 200 docu-ments that wehave in our col-lection, but thatare not availableonline. You canbrowse the tableof contents provided and contact the library(link above) to obtain the content you need.  TheTribal Law Gateway is constantly being updatedand improved and is the best place to start if youare looking for tribal law. In an effort to make theGateway more practical, we continue to add audioclips to help with tribal name pronunciation.
Support the National Indian Law Library
Your contributions help ensure that the librarycan continue to supply free access to Indian lawresources and that it has the financial meansnecessary to pursue innovative and ground-breaking projects to serve you better. We are not tax-supported and rely on individual contri-butions to fund our services. Please visit http://www.narf.org/nill/donate.html  for more infor-mation on how you can support this mission. 
❂Justice Through Knowledge!
VOLUME 42, NO. 1 PAGE 9NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Library Director David Selden.PAGE 10                                                                          NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Aleut Community of St. Paul Island 
Amerind Risk 
Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma 
Comanche Nation 
Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians
Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla 
Indian Reservation 
Gila River Indian Community 
Kenaitze Indian Tribe 
National Indian Gaming Association 
Nottawaseppi Huron Band of Potawatomi 
Pechanga Band of Luiseño Indians 
Penobscot Indian Nation 
Poarch Band of Creek IndiansPonca Tribe of Nebraska 
Pueblo of Acoma 
Pueblo of Isleta 
Quinault Indian Nation 
San Manuel Band of Mission Indians
Seminole Tribe of Florida 
Seven Cedars Casino - Jamestown S'Klallam 
Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate of the 
Lake Traverse Reservation 
Soboba Band of Luiseño Indians 
Southern Ute Indian Tribe 
Tulalip Tribes 
White Earth Nation 
Yocha Dehe Wintun NationIt has been made abundantly clear that non-
Indian philanthropy can no longer sustainNARF’s work.  Federal funds for specific projectshave also been reduced.  Our ability to providelegal advocacy in a wide variety of areas such asreligious freedom, the Tribal Supreme CourtProject, tribal recognition, human rights, trustresponsibility, tribal water rights, Indian ChildWelfare Act, and Alaska tribal sovereignty issuesis compromised.  NARF is now turning to thetribes to provide this crucial funding to contin-ue our legal advocacy on behalf of IndianCountry.  It is an honor to list those tribes andNative organizations who have chosen to sharetheir good fortunes with the Native AmericanRights Fund and the thousands of Indian clients
we have served.  
The generosity of tribes and Native organiza-
tions is crucial in NARF’s struggle to ensurethe freedoms and rights of all NativeAmericans. These contributions should be anexample for all. We encourage other tribes andorganizations to become contributors and partners with NARF in fighting for justice forour people and in keeping the vision of ourancestors alive.  We thank the following tribesand Native organizations for their generoussupport of NARF for the 2017 fiscal year so far– October 1, 2016 to May 15, 2017:
CALL TO ACTIONVOLUME 42, NO. 1  PAGE 11NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDTHE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF Annual Report: This is NARF's major report on its programs and
activities.  The Annual Report is distributed to foundations, major con-tributors, certain federal and state agencies, tribal clients, NativeAmerican organizations, and to others upon request.  
NARF Legal Review is published biannually by the Native American
Rights Fund.  Third class postage paid at Boulder, Colorado.  There is nocharge for subscriptions, however, contributions are appreciated.
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund is a nonprofit, charitable
organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws of the District ofColumbia.  NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the provi-sions of Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and contribu-tions to NARF are tax deductible.  The Internal Revenue Service hasruled that NARF is not a "private foundation" as defined in Section 509(a)of the Internal Revenue Code.Boulder, CO (Main) Office: 
1506 Broadway, Boulder, CO  80302-6217 (303)-447-8760; FAX (303)-443-7776  www.narf.org 
Washington, DC Office:
1514 P Street, NW (Rear) Suite D, Washington, DC 20005-1910 (202) 785-4166; FAX (202) 822-0068
Anchorage, AK Office:
745 W. 4th Avenue, Suite 502, Anchorage, AK 99501-1736(907) 276-0680; FAX (907) 276-2466The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is the oldest and
largest nonprofit law firm defending and promoting the legalrights of Indian people on issues essential to their tribal sover-eignty, their natural resources, and their human rights. NARFempowers individuals and communities whose rights, economicself-sufficiency, and political participation have been eroded orundermined. 
The United States has tried to subjugate and dominate Native
peoples, yet we still exist today as independent quasi-sovereignnations, each having a unique relationship with the federal gov-ernment. Tribes today are governed by a myriad of federaltreaties, statutes, and case law. Yet it is within these laws thatNative Americans place their hope and faith for justice and theprotection of their way of life. 
Since its inception in 1970, NARF has represented over 250
tribes in 31 states in such areas as tribal jurisdiction and recog-nition, land claims, hunting and fishing rights, the protection ofIndian religious freedom, and many others. In addition to greatstrides achieving justice on behalf of Native American people,perhaps NARF’s greatest distinguishing attribute has been itsability to bring high quality, highly ethical legal representationto dispossessed tribes. This legal advocacy continues to play avital role in the survival of tribes and their way of life. NARFstrives to protect the most important rights of Indian peoplewithin the limit of available resources. 
One of the responsibilities of NARF’s first Board of Directors was
to develop priorities to guide the organization in its mission topreserve and enforce the legal rights of Native Americans.  Thecommittee developed five priorities that continue to lead NARFtoday:
• Preserve tribal existence
• Protect tribal natural resources• Promote Native American human rights• Hold governments accountable to Native Americans• Develop Indian law and educate the public about Indian rights,
laws, and issues
Under the priority to preserve tribal existence, NARF works to
construct the foundations that are necessary to empower tribesso that they can continue to live according to their Native tradi-tions, to enforce their treaty rights, to insure their independenceon reservations, and to protect their sovereignty. Throughout the process of European conquest and colonization
of North America, Indian tribes experienced a steady diminish-ment of their land base to a mere 2.3 percent of its original size.An adequate land base and control over natural resources arecentral components of economic self-sufficiency and self-deter-mination, and are vital to the very existence of tribes.  Thus,much of NARF’s work involves protecting tribal naturalresources.  
Although basic human rights are considered a universal and
inalienable entitlement, Native Americans face the ongoingthreat of having their rights undermined by the United Statesgovernment, states, and others who seek to limit these rights.Under the priority of promoting human rights, NARF strives toenforce and strengthen laws which are designed to protect therights of Native Americans to practice their traditional religion,to use their own language, and to enjoy their culture.  
Contained within the unique trust relationship between the
United States and Indian nations is the inherent duty for all levels of government to recognize and responsibly enforce themany laws and regulations applicable to Indian peoples.  Becausesuch laws impact virtually every aspect of tribal life, NARF main-tains its involvement in the legal matters holding governmentsaccountable to Native Americans.
A commitment to develop Indian law and educate the public
about Indian rights, laws, and issues is essential for the contin-ued protection of Indian rights.  This primarily involves estab-lishing favorable court precedents, distributing information andlaw materials, encouraging and fostering Indian legal education,and forming alliances with Indian law practitioners and otherIndian organizations. 
Requests for legal assistance should be addressed to the
Litigation Management Committee at NARF's main office at1506 Broadway, Boulder, CO 80302.  NARF’s clients are expectedto pay whatever they can toward the costs of legal representa-tion. 
❂NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Moses Haia, Chairman .............................................................................................. Native Hawai ian
Robert McGhee, Vice-Chairman ........................................................ Poarch Band of Creek IndiansKurt BlueDog ...................................... Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate of the Lake Traverse ReservationTex G. Hall ........................................................................................................ Three Affil iated Tribes
Gary Hayes...................................................................................................... Ute Mountain Ut e Tribe
Julie Roberts-Hyslop...................................................................................... Native Village of Tan ana
Jefferson Keel .......................................................................................................... Chickas aw Nation
Stephen Lewis ...................................................................................... Gila River Indian Community Anita Mitchell.......................................................................................................... Muckles hoot Tribe
Larry N. Olinger .................................................................. Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla IndiansRichard Peterson .................................................................................. Tlingit & Haida Indian TribesPeter Pino ..................................................................................................................... ....... Zia Pueblo
Michael Smith ........................................................................................................ Chickasaw  Nation
Executive Director: John E. Echohawk .................................................................................. Pawnee
NARF LEGAL REVIEW • VOLUME 42, NO. 1 • WINTER/SPRING 2017Native American Rights Fund
1506 Broadway
Boulder, CO 80302Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage
PPAAIIDD
Boulder, Colorado
Permit No. 589
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER
