A.  Introduction
Three decades of worldwide effort by
Indigenous Peoples resulted in an historic victoryin the United Nations General Assembly onSeptember 13, 2007, when that body adopted theDeclaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples(Declaration) by an overwhelming majority.
1
143 Yes, 4 No, 11 Abstaining.  The four countrieswho voted against the Declaration were theUnited States, Canada, New Zealand, andAustralia. The Declaration affirms the collectivehuman rights of Indigenous Peoples across abroad range of areas including self-determination,spirituality, land rights, and rights to intellectual property; thereby providing somebalance to an international rights frameworkbased largely on individual rights. The NativeAmerican Rights Fund (NARF), has worked withits client, the National Congress of AmericanIndians (NCAI), and indigenous peoples world-wide, in the process of elaborating the
Declaration since 1999.
Being the product of a highly political process,
the Declaration is not a perfect document anddoes not include everything Indigenous Peopleshad hoped and worked for over the past thirtyyears. Nevertheless, the Declaration is an impor-tant and historic step in recognizing the rightsof Indigenous Peoples.
VOLUME 32, NO.2                                                            SUMMER/FALL 2007Native American Rights FundNative American Rights FundNative American Rights Fund
United Nations Adopts Historic Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples ............................ page 1
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples ................................................................ page 7
CASE UPDATES- NARF’s launches guide to Indian Child Welfare Act .......................................................................... page 18
- NARF Alaska Victorious in Four Cases ........ page 19NARF Attorney ................................................ page 20CALLING TRIBES TO ACTION! ...................... page 21Indian Law Library .......................................... page 22NARF ................................................................ page 23UNITED NATIONS ADOPTS HISTORIC DECLARATION
ON THE RIGHTS OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
1Three decades is a somewhat arbitrary starting point.  It refers back to a 1977 meeting at the United Nations in Geneva, Switze rland concerning
discrimination against Indigenous peoples in the Americas.  However, indigenous efforts in the international arena go back much  further in time.  
In the 1920s, Deskaheh, speaker of the Council of the Iroquois Confederacy, attempted to bring a dispute with Canada before the  League of Nations.
The League did not address the issue, viewing it as a domestic matter between Canada and the Iroquois.LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:24 AM  Page 1B.  Background to the Declaration Process.
In 1977, a group of indigenous representatives
met in Geneva, Switzerland for theInternational Non-Governmental OrganizationConference on Discrimination against IndigenousPopulations in the Americas, organized by the NGO Sub-Committee on Racism, RacialDiscrimination, Apartheid and Colonialism.  In1982, based in part on recommendations fromthis Conference, the UN Working Group onIndigenous Populations was formed within theSub-Commission on the Promotion andProtection of Human Rights, (then known as theSub Commission on the Prevention ofDiscrimination and Protection of Minorities).This Working Group was composed of indepen-dent experts.  In 1988, the working group chaircompleted a draft declaration on the rights ofindigenous peoples, based largely on their input,and in 1994, the Sub-Commission adopted aDraft Declaration on the Rights of IndigenousPeoples.
2
This Draft Declaration was forwarded to the
Human Rights Commission. The Human RightsCommission established an intersessionalWorking Group on the Draft Declaration(WGDD) charged with elaborating a declarationon the rights of indigenous peoples “taking intoaccount” the Draft approved by the Sub-Commission. The WGDD was initially authorizedfor ten years, and then extended for an additionalyear.  Thus, for eleven years, nations and indige-
nous peoples met in Geneva, generally for twoweeks a year, to elaborate this declaration.
By the end of the eleven year period, agree-ment had had not been reached on, numerous,
but not all, provisions of the draft declaration.At the same time, for reasons unrelated to the draft declaration, the Human RightsCommission came under fire at the UnitedNations and was replaced by the Human RightsCouncil – events that placed the process of finishing the declaration in doubt.  In the midstof this confusion, the Chair of the WGDD,Peruvian Ambassador Luis Chavez, took the provisions upon which agreement had beenreached, and, drafted a compromise text forthose provisions on which agreement had notyet been reached. This compromise text wasbased on the years of discussion that hadoccurred in the WGDD.  He submitted the draftdeclaration to the Human Rights Commissionwhich, as one of its final acts, forwarded it to thenewly created Human Rights Council. TheHuman Rights Council met for the first time inJune of 2006 and on June 29, 2006, by a vote ofthirty in favor, two opposed (Canada andRussia), and twelve abstaining, approved theDeclaration and forwarded it to the GeneralAssembly for adoption.
In the General Assembly, a group of African
Nations garnered sufficient votes to defer consideration of the Draft Declaration to allowtime for further consultation. The African Groupinitially proposed numerous unacceptableamendments, which it later withdrew in favor ofnine amendments with which most indigenouspeoples could live. On September 13, 2007, theDeclaration was adopted overwhelmingly, withopposition coming from only Canada, Australia,New Zealand, and the United States.
3
PAGE 2                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
2See discussion in S. JAMES ANAYA, INDIGENOUS PEOPLES IN INTERNATIONAL LAW, (2d ed. 2004) p. 57.
3In explaining their votes, the countries opposed to the DRIP pointedly stated that, based on their objections, the document cou ld not become 
customary international law.  In the written explanation of its vote, the United States “rejects any possibility that this docu ment is or can become 
customary international law.  We have continually expressed our rejection of fundamental parts of the former Subcommission text , and of this text, as
have numerous other States.  As this declaration does not describe current State practice or actions that States feel obliged t o take as a matter of legal
obligation, it cannot be cited as evidence of the evolution of customary international law.”  Stmt. at pp. 2-3.  The United Sta tes’ explanation of its vote
(Stmt.), can be found at www.usunnewyork.usmission.gov/press_releases/20070913_204.html.  This is an attempt by the United Stat es to rely on a 
doctrine known as the “persistent objector” doctrine to prevent the development of customary international law.  It has been qu estioned whether this
doctrine ever had validity, and even if at one time it did have validity, whether it still does. In a United Nations with 192 m embers, can a handful of
countries prevent a principle from becoming customary international law?  See e.g. ANTONIO CASSESE, INTERNATIONAL LAW (2d ed. 2 005) p. 162.
In this context it is worth noting that the Declaration has already been cited by the Supreme Court of Belize in a decision uph olding land rights of the
Mayan villages of Conejo and Santa Cruz.  The court referred to Art. 26 of the Declaration, dealing with land rights as “reflec ting … the growing 
consensus and the general principles of international law on indigenous people and their lands and resources.” Par. 131.  The f ull text of the Supreme
Court ruling can be found at http://www.law.arizona.edu/depts/iplp/advocacy/maya_belize/documents/ClaimsNos171and172of2007.pdf.  LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:24 AM  Page 2NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                          PAGE 3NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDC.  ANALYSIS OF THE DECLARATION
The Declaration deals with many more issues
than can be dealt with in this article, and willundoubtedly provoke an avalanche of legal commentary and debate. Only a brief overview ofsome of the highlights is given here, along withthe objections by the United States and somepreliminary observations on those objections.
4
1.  Overview – Collective Nature of Rights
At a general level, the Declaration acknowl-
edges collective human rights, and thereby provides a corrective to the western humanrights framework, which is heavily weightedtoward individual human rights.
5Indigenous
peoples have typically not been at the table wheninternational rights documents such as theUniversal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR)have been elaborated. As a result, their collectivehuman rights have not been adequately takeninto account.
6Indigenous peoples therefore
were adamant that the Declaration focus ontheir collective human rights.
7In this they were
successful, as the document recognizes a broadrange of collective human rights. The very collective nature of the rights is problematic tothe United States and even some countries thatvoted for the Declaration.
8
The United States’ explanation of its opposition
to the Declaration states that “The intent ofStates participating in the Working Group wasclear that, as has always been the case, humanrights are universal and apply in equal measureto all individuals. This principle is fundamental
to international rights, and means that onegroup cannot have human rights that are deniedto other groups within the same nation-state.”Stmt. at page 4.
9While this issue will be debated
extensively in years to come, a few preliminaryobservations about the United States’ positionare in order.
The argument that one group cannot have
human rights not held by others in the same nation-state is contradicted by thejurisprudence of the United States itself. Equalprotection analysis recognizes that those situateddifferently need not be treated the same.
4The four countries in opposition had similar objections, so when the United States is mentioned as having a particular objectio n, generally Canada,
Australia and New Zealand can be understood to have the same objections.  The fact that these countries voted against the Decla ration does not mean
that they oppose everything in the Declaration, but rather that the matters which they found objectionable controlled their ove rall vote.
5For a discussion of the differences in thinking underlying notions of individual and collective rights, and the necessity for p rotection of indigenous
collective human rights, see, Robert N. Clinton, The Rights of Indigenous Peoples as Collective Group Rights , 32 ARIZ. L. REV. 739 (1990).
6As to the western bias in international human rights in general, see, Richard Falk, Think Again: Human Rights , FOREIGN POLICY, (March/April 2004).
7See e.g. Art. 3 (self-determination); Art. 8 (right to freedom from assimilation or destruction of their culture); Art. 10 (rig ht to remain on their
lands); Arts. 11 and 12 (right to their maintain their cultures, customs, traditions, etc.); Art. 23 (right to traditional medi cines); Art. 31 (right to their
cultural heritage, traditional knowledge, etc.); Art. 37 (right to respect for their treaties, agreements and other constructiv e arrangements).
8The United Kingdom explained that they were voting for the document with the understanding that the only collective human right  in the docu-
ment is the right to self-determination.  According to the UK, other collective rights recognized in the Declaration are not hu man rights, since, in
their view, human rights belong to all people and many of the rights in the Declaration pertain only to indigenous peoples.  (O ral statement on
September 13, 2007).
9The reference to the statement of the United States is to the written explanation of their opposition to the Declaration, supra , n 3.
LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:24 AM  Page 3Indigenous peoples have rights grounded in
their unique historical reality; that unique history is a legitimate reason for them to haverights not held by others.  In Morton v. Mancari ,
417 U.S. 535 (1974) the United States SupremeCourt noted that the status of Indian nations assovereigns, and the government-to-governmentrelationship between them and the federal government provides a legitimate basis for theirspecial treatment in United States law.  Nor is itunknown in the United States for group rightsto override individual rights.  A good example ofthis is the Indian Child Welfare Act, 25 U.S.C. §§1901 et seq.  In that legislation, Congress recog-nized that Indian tribes have a collective right intheir children that is in parity with the constitu-tional rights of parents regarding the upbringingof their children, and in appropriate circum-stances can take precedence over those individualrights.  This recognition of collective rights wasupheld by the Supreme Court in Holyfield v.
Miss. Choctaw Indian Nation, 490 U.S. 30 (1989).
The United States also expresses the concern
that if the collective holds human rights, indi-viduals would be “extremely vulnerable topotential violations of their human rights by thecollective.”  Stmt. at page 4.  Given the historicviolation of the collective human rights ofIndigenous Peoples by countries which extol thehuman rights of individuals, this argument isdisingenuous at best. Rights have been denied toindigenous peoples through treating them asgroups; they should also be accorded rights asgroups.
10 This objection also results from the
failure to read the Declaration in context. Rightsare not absolute, as the Declaration itself makesclear.  See, e.g. Art. 46.2.  “In the exercise of the
rights enunciated in the present Declaration,human rights and fundamental freedoms of allshall be respected...”
PAGE 4                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Indigenous representatives outside the U.N. on the day the Declaration passed. (Left to Right) Tony Belcourt 
(Metis Nation – Canada); William David (Indian Law Resource Center); Celeste McKay (Native Women's Association ofCanada); Armstrong Wiggins (Indian Law Resource Center); Kim Gottschalk (Native American Rights Fund); DarwinHill (Sub Chief Tonawanda Seneca Nation); Karl Hill (Sub Chief Cayuga Nation); Rainy Blue Cloud Greensfelder(Mohawk – International Forum on Globalization); Stuart Patterson ( a Chief of the Tuscarora Nation).
10See Clinton, supra, n. 5 at 746.LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:24 AM  Page 4NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 5NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND2.  Specific Collective Rights
As already pointed out, in interpreting the
Declaration, it is important to consider eachprovision in the context of the entire document.The United States takes provisions out of contextand interprets them in an absolute fashion.  Thisextreme interpretation is then used to justify itsopposition to the Declaration.
a.  Self-Determination.
Self determination is at the heart of the
Declaration and is the one group right that allcountries acknowledge as a human right.Without this right, the document would havebeen unacceptable to indigenous peoples.  Twointernational covenants, the InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political Rights, and theInternational Covenant on Economic, Socialand Cultural Rights, provide in their commonArticles 1 that: “All peoples have the right of self-determination. By virtue of that right they freelydetermine their political status and freely pursuetheir economic, social and cultural develop-ment.”
11Article 3 of the Declaration tracks this
language precisely – substituting “Indigenouspeoples” for “All peoples.” 
For the United States, the mere fact that
Article 3 of the Declaration tracks the languageof the common Articles 1 makes the declarationunacceptable.  According to the United States,the right as expressed in those Covenants “isunderstood by some to include the right to fullindependence under certain circumstances.”Stmt. p. 3. Indigenous peoples are not entitledto this right according to the United States.What is difficult to understand is that the UnitedStates finds the specific language of Article 46.1inadequate to assuage its fears.  That Article provides that:  “Nothing in this Declaration maybe interpreted as implying for any State, people,group or person any right to engage in anyactivity or to perform any act contrary to theCharter of the United Nations or construed asauthorizing or encouraging any action which
would dismember or impair, totally or in part,the territorial integrity or political unity of sovereign and independent States.”  This languagecould not be more clear.
b.  Lands, territories and natural resources. 
The Declaration has broad provisions concerning
rights to lands, territories and naturalresources.  Article 25 starts with the right ofindigenous peoples to “maintain and strengthentheir distinctive spiritual relationship with theirtraditionally owned or otherwise occupied andused lands, territories, waters and coastal seasand other resources.”  Article 26.1 provides that“Indigenous peoples have the right to the lands,territories and resources which they have tradi-tionally owned, occupied or otherwise used oracquired.” Article 26.2 refers to the right to“own, use, develop and control the lands, terri-tories and resources that they possess by reasonof traditional ownership or other traditionaloccupation or use, as well as those which theyhave otherwise acquired.” Article 27 requiresthe establishment of a system to “recognize andadjudicate the rights of indigenous peoples pertaining to their lands, territories andresources…”  Article 28 provides for redress forlands “which have been confiscated, taken,occupied, used or damaged without their free,prior and informed consent.” Par. 1. This redress“can include restitution or, when this is not possible, just, fair and equitable compensation...”Compensation is to take the form of “lands, territories and resources equal in quality, sizeand legal status or of monetary compensation orother appropriate redress.”  Par. 2.  Thus, indige-nous peoples have the right to all land that theyhave traditionally used, and to continued possession of that land if still in their possession.A mechanism must be set up to establish the different categories of land and to provideredress for land lost without their “free, prior,and informed consent.”  Art. 28.1.  This seems
11See General Assembly Resolution 2200 (XXI) of 16 December 16, 1966.LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:24 AM  Page 5fairly straightforward.
The United States, however, views these provi-
sions as “particularly unworkable.” The UnitedStates asserts that the intention of the Stateswas to “encourage the establishment of mecha-nisms at the national level for the full legalrecognition and protection of the lands, territoriesand resources indigenous peoples possess byreason of traditional ownership, occupation, oruse, as well [as – sic] those which they have otherwise acquired.” Stmt. at p. 3. Note theabsence of any reference to traditional lands notnow in the possession of indigenous peoples.This was not an inadvertent oversight, as is clearfrom the additional assertion that “the goal ofthe States in the Working Group was to encouragejust, transparent and effective mechanisms forredress for actions taken by the States afterendorsing the declaration.” Id. Thus, in the
United States’ view, all transgressions predatingthe declaration’s adoption were to be wipedclean and redress was to be available only forfuture depredations!  
c.  Free, Prior and Informed Consent
Article 19 of the Declaration provides that
“States shall consult and cooperate in good faith
with the indigenous peoples concerned throughtheir own representative institutions in order toobtain their free, prior and informed consentbefore adopting and implementing legislative oradministrative measures that may affect them.”The United States expresses the concern thatthis provision could be misread to “confer upona sub-national group a power of veto over thelaws of a democratic legislature.”  Stmt. at page4.  Once again, context is essential.  The expresslanguage of Article 46.2 provides in pertinentpart that “In the exercise of the rights enunciatedin the present Declaration, human rights andfundamental freedoms of all shall be respected.”Article 46.3 provides that: “The provisions setforth in this Declaration shall be interpreted inaccordance with the principles of justice,democracy, respect for human rights, equality,non-discrimination, good governance and goodfaith.”  The Declaration, properly read, strengthens,
rather than weakens the democratic process byensuring that the rights of indigenous peopleswill not be ignored as has happened too often inthe past. 
CONCLUSION
The Declaration on the ‘Rights of Indigenous
Peoples’ is an historic milestone in the longstruggle by indigenous peoples for due recogni-tion in the world. The Declaration is not perfect,but details important “minimum standards forthe survival, dignity and well-being of theindigenous peoples of the world,”  Art. 43. andmakes clear that nothing in the Declaration“may be construed as diminishing or extin-guishing the rights indigenous peoples havenow or may acquire in the future.”  Art. 45.  Thevast majority of the world, including thosecountries with the vast majority of indigenouspeoples, recognizes that, not only can the worldlive with the Declaration, it will be a better placefor doing so. The United States, Canada,Australia, and New Zealand, are out of step withthe march of history. ❂
PAGE 6                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:25 AM  Page 6NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 7NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
United Nations A/61/L.67*
General Assembly Distr.: Limited
12 September 2007
Original: English
Sixty-first session
Agenda item 68Report of the Human Rights Council
Belgium, Bolivia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Latvia, Nicaragua, Peru, Portugal, Slovenia and Spain:draft resolution 
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
The General Assembly,
Taking note of the recommendation of the Human Rights Council contained in its resolution
1/2 of 29 June 2006, by which the Council adopted the text of the United Nations Declarationon the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,
Recalling its resolution 61/178 of 20 December 2006, by which it decided to defer consider-
ation of and action on the Declaration to allow time for further consultations thereon, and alsodecided to conclude its consideration before the end of the sixty-first session of the GeneralAssembly,
Adopts the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples as contained in
the annex to the present resolution.
* Reissued for technical reasons.
LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:25 AM  Page 7PAGE 8                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDA/61/L.67 07-49830 — 2
Annex
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and good faith in the 
fulfilment of the obligations assumed by States in accordance with the Charter,
Affirming that indigenous peoples are equal to all other peoples, while recognizing the right of all
peoples to be different, to consider themselves different, and to be respected as such,
Affirming also that all peoples contribute to the diversity and richness of civilizations and cultures,
which constitute the common heritage of humankind,
Affirming further that all doctrines, policies and practices based on or advocating superiority of 
peoples or individuals on the basis of national origin or racial, religious, ethnic or cultural differences areracist, scientifically false, legally invalid, morally condemnable and socially unjust,
Reaffirming that indigenous peoples, in the exercise of their rights, should be free from discrimination
of any kind,
Concerned that indigenous peoples have suffered from historic injustices as a result of, inter alia,
their colonization and dispossession of their lands, territories and resources, thus preventing them fromexercising, in particular, their right to development in accordance with their own needs and interests,
Recognizing the urgent need to respect and promote the inherent rights of indigenous peoples which
derive from their political, economic and social structures and from their cultures, spiritual traditions,histories and philosophies, especially their rights to their lands, territories and resources,
Recognizing also the urgent need to respect and promote the rights of indigenous peoples affirmed
in treaties, agreements and other constructive arrangements with States,
Welcoming the fact that indigenous peoples are organizing themselves for political, economic, social
and cultural enhancement and in order to bring to an end all forms of discrimination and oppressionwherever they occur,
Convinced that control by indigenous peoples over developments affecting them and their lands, 
territories and resources will enable them to maintain and strengthen their institutions, cultures and 
traditions, and to promote their development in accordance with their aspirations and needs,
Recognizing that respect for indigenous knowledge, cultures and traditional practices contributes to
sustainable and equitable development and proper management of the environment,
Emphasizing the contribution of the demilitarization of the lands and territories of indigenous peoples
to peace, economic and social progress and development, understanding and friendly relations amongnations and peoples of the world,LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:25 AM  Page 8NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 9NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDA/61/L.67 07-49830 — 3
Recognizing in particular the right of indigenous families and communities to retain shared respon-
sibility for the upbringing, training, education and well-being of their children, consistent with the rightsof the child,
Considering that the rights affirmed in treaties, agreements and other constructive arrangements
between States and indigenous peoples are, in some situations, matters of international concern, interest,
responsibility and character,
Considering also that treaties, agreements and other constructive arrangements, and the relationship
they represent, are the basis for a strengthened partnership between indigenous peoples and States,
Acknowledging that the Charter of the United Nations, the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights 1and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights as well as the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,2affirm the fundamental importance of the right to self-
determination of all peoples, by virtue of which they freely determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development,
Bearing in mind that nothing in this Declaration may be used to deny any peoples their right to self-
determination, exercised in conformity with international law,
Convinced that the recognition of the rights of indigenous peoples in this Declaration will enhance
harmonious and cooperative relations between the State and indigenous peoples, based on principles ofjustice, democracy, respect for human rights, non-discrimination and good faith,
Encouraging States to comply with and effectively implement all their obligations as they apply to
indigenous peoples under international instruments, in particular those related to human rights, in consultation and cooperation with the peoples concerned,
Emphasizing that the United Nations has an important and continuing role to play in promoting and
protecting the rights of indigenous peoples,
Believing that this Declaration is a further important step forward for the recognition, promotion and
protection of the rights and freedoms of indigenous peoples and in the development of relevant activitiesof the United Nations system in this field,
Recognizing and reaffirming that indigenous individuals are entitled without discrimination to all
human rights recognized in international law, and that indigenous peoples possess collective rightswhich are indispensable for their existence, well-being and integral development as peoples,
Recognizing also that the situation of indigenous peoples varies from region to region and from 
country to country and that the significance of national and regional particularities and various historicaland cultural backgrounds should be taken into consideration,
1See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
2A/CONF .157/24 (Part I), chap. III.LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:25 AM  Page 9PAGE 10                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDA/61/L.67 07-49830 — 4
Solemnly proclaims the following United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples as
a standard of achievement to be pursued in a spirit of partnership and mutual respect:
Article 1
Indigenous peoples have the right to the full enjoyment, as a collective or as individuals, of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms as recognized in the Charter of the United Nations, the UniversalDeclaration of Human Rights 
3and international human rights law.
Article 2
Indigenous peoples and individuals are free and equal to all other peoples and individuals and have
the right to be free from any kind of discrimination, in the exercise of their rights, in particular that basedon their indigenous origin or identity.
Article 3
Indigenous peoples have the right to self-determination. By virtue of that right they freely determine
their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development.
Article 4
Indigenous peoples, in exercising their right to self-determination, have the right to autonomy or
self-government in matters relating to their internal and local affairs, as well as ways and means forfinancing their autonomous functions.
Article 5
Indigenous peoples have the right to maintain and strengthen their distinct political, legal, economic,
social and cultural institutions, while retaining their right to participate fully, if they so choose, in thepolitical, economic, social and cultural life of the State.
Article 6
Every indigenous individual has the right to a nationality.
Article 7
1. Indigenous individuals have the rights to life, physical and mental integrity, liberty and security 
of person.
2. Indigenous peoples have the collective right to live in freedom, peace and security as distinct peoples
and shall not be subjected to any act of genocide or any other act of violence, including forcibly removingchildren of the group to another group.
Article 8
1. Indigenous peoples and individuals have the right not to be subjected to forced assimilation 
or destruction of their culture.
3Resolution 217 A (III).LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:25 AM  Page 10NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 11NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDA/61/L.67 07-49830 — 5
2. States shall provide effective mechanisms for prevention of, and redress for:
(a) Any action which has the aim or effect of depriving them of their integrity as distinct peoples, 
or of their cultural values or ethnic identities;
(b) Any action which has the aim or effect of dispossessing them of their lands, territories or
resources;
(c) Any form of forced population transfer which has the aim or effect of violating or undermining
any of their rights;
(d) Any form of forced assimilation or integration;(e) Any form of propaganda designed to promote or incite racial or ethnic discrimination directed
against them.
Article 9
Indigenous peoples and individuals have the right to belong to an indigenous community or nation,
in accordance with the traditions and customs of the community or nation concerned. No discriminationof any kind may arise from the exercise of such a right.
Article 10
Indigenous peoples shall not be forcibly removed from their lands or territories. No relocation shall
take place without the free, prior and informed consent of the indigenous peoples concerned and afteragreement on just and fair compensation and, where possible, with the option of return.
Article 11
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to practice and revitalize their cultural traditions and customs.
This includes the right to maintain, protect and develop the past, present and future manifestations oftheir cultures, such as archaeological and historical sites, artifacts, designs, ceremonies, technologies andvisual and performing arts and literature.
2. States shall provide redress through effective mechanisms, which may include restitution, 
developed in conjunction with indigenous peoples, with respect to their cultural, intellectual, religiousand spiritual property taken without their free, prior and informed consent or in violation of their laws,traditions and customs.
Article 12
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to manifest, practice, develop and teach their spiritual and 
religious traditions, customs and ceremonies; the right to maintain, protect, and have access in privacyto their religious and cultural sites; the right to the use and control of their ceremonial objects; and theright to the repatriation of their human remains.
2. States shall seek to enable the access and/or repatriation of ceremonial objects and human remains
in their possession through fair, transparent and effective mechanisms developed in conjunction withindigenous peoples concerned.
Article 13
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to revitalize, use, develop and transmit to future generations
their histories, languages, oral traditions, philosophies, writing systems and literatures, and to designateand retain their own names for communities, places and persons.LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:25 AM  Page 11PAGE 12                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDA/61/L.67 07-49830 — 6
2. States shall take effective measures to ensure that this right is protected and also to ensure that
indigenous peoples can understand and be understood in political, legal and administrative proceedings,where necessary through the provision of interpretation or by other appropriate means.
Article 14
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to establish and control their educational systems and 
institutions providing education in their own languages, in a manner appropriate to their cultural methods of teaching and learning.
2. Indigenous individuals, particularly children, have the right to all levels and forms of education of
the State without discrimination.
3. States shall, in conjunction with indigenous peoples, take effective measures, in order for 
indigenous individuals, particularly children, including those living outside their communities, to haveaccess, when possible, to an education in their own culture and provided in their own language.
Article 15
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to the dignity and diversity of their cultures, traditions, 
histories and aspirations which shall be appropriately reflected in education and public information.
2. States shall take effective measures, in consultation and cooperation with the indigenous peoples
concerned, to combat prejudice and eliminate discrimination and to promote tolerance, understandingand good relations among indigenous peoples and all other segments of society.
Article 16
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to establish their own media in their own languages and to have
access to all forms of non-indigenous media without discrimination.
2. States shall take effective measures to ensure that State-owned media duly reflect indigenous 
cultural diversity. States, without prejudice to ensuring full freedom of expression, should encourage privately owned media to adequately reflect indigenous cultural diversity.
Article 17
1. Indigenous individuals and peoples have the right to enjoy fully all rights established under applic-
able international and domestic labor law.
2. States shall in consultation and cooperation with indigenous peoples take specific measures to 
protect indigenous children from economic exploitation and from performing any work that is likely tobe hazardous or to interfere with the child’s education, or to be harmful to the child’s health or physical,mental, spiritual, moral or social development, taking into account their special vulnerability and theimportance of education for their empowerment.
3. Indigenous individuals have the right not to be subjected to any discriminatory conditions of labor
and, inter alia, employment or salary.LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:25 AM  Page 12NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 13NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDA/61/L.67 07-49830 — 7
Article 18
Indigenous peoples have the right to participate in decision-making in matters which would affect
their rights, through representatives chosen by themselves in accordance with their own procedures, aswell as to maintain and develop their own indigenous decision-making institutions.
Article 19
States shall consult and cooperate in good faith with the indigenous peoples concerned through their
own representative institutions in order to obtain their free, prior and informed consent before adoptingand implementing legislative or administrative measures that may affect them.
Article 20
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to maintain and develop their political, economic and social systems
or institutions, to be secure in the enjoyment of their own means of subsistence and development, andto engage freely in all their traditional and other economic activities.
2. Indigenous peoples deprived of their means of subsistence and development are entitled to just and
fair redress.
Article 21
1. Indigenous peoples have the right, without discrimination, to the improvement of their economic
and social conditions, including, inter alia, in the areas of education, employment, vocational trainingand retraining, housing, sanitation, health and social security.
2. States shall take effective measures and, where appropriate, special measures to ensure continuing
improvement of their economic and social conditions. Particular attention shall be paid to the rights andspecial needs of indigenous elders, women, youth, children and persons with disabilities.
Article 22
1. Particular attention shall be paid to the rights and special needs of indigenous elders, women,
youth, children and persons with disabilities in the implementation of this Declaration.
2. States shall take measures, in conjunction with indigenous peoples, to ensure that indigenous
women and children enjoy the full protection and guarantees against all forms of violence and discrimi-nation.
Article 23
Indigenous peoples have the right to determine and develop priorities and strategies for exercising
their right to development. In particular, indigenous peoples have the right to be actively involved indeveloping and determining health, housing and other economic and social programes affecting themand, as far as possible, to administer such programes through their own institutions.
Article 24
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to their traditional medicines and to maintain their health 
practices, including the conservation of their vital medicinal plants, animals and minerals. Indigenousindividuals also have the right to access, without any discrimination, to all social and health services.LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:25 AM  Page 13PAGE 14                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDA/61/L.67 07-49830 — 8
2. Indigenous individuals have an equal right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of
physical and mental health. States shall take the necessary steps with a view to achieving progressivelythe full realization of this right.
Article 25
Indigenous peoples have the right to maintain and strengthen their distinctive spiritual relationship
with their traditionally owned or otherwise occupied and used lands, territories, waters and coastal seasand other resources and to uphold their responsibilities to future generations in this regard.
Article 26
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to the lands, territories and resources which they have 
traditionally owned, occupied or otherwise used or acquired.
2. Indigenous peoples have the right to own, use, develop and control the lands, territories and
resources that they possess by reason of traditional ownership or other traditional occupation or use, aswell as those which they have otherwise acquired.
3. States shall give legal recognition and protection to these lands, territories and resources. Such
recognition shall be conducted with due respect to the customs, traditions and land tenure systems of theindigenous peoples concerned.
Article 27
States shall establish and implement, in conjunction with indigenous peoples concerned, a fair, 
independent, impartial, open and transparent process, giving due recognition to indigenous peoples’ laws,traditions, customs and land tenure systems, to recognize and adjudicate the rights of indigenous peoplespertaining to their lands, territories and resources, including those which were traditionally owned orotherwise occupied or used. Indigenous peoples shall have the right to participate in this process.
Article 28
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to redress, by means that can include restitution or, when this
is not possible, just, fair and equitable compensation, for the lands, territories and resources which theyhave traditionally owned or otherwise occupied or used, and which have been confiscated, taken, occupied,used or damaged without their free, prior and informed consent.
2. Unless otherwise freely agreed upon by the peoples concerned, compensation shall take the form
of lands, territories and resources equal in quality, size and legal status or of monetary compensation orother appropriate redress.
Article 29
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to the conservation and protection of the environment and the
productive capacity of their lands or territories and resources. States shall establish and implement assis-tance programes for indigenous peoples for such conservation and protection, without discrimination.
2. States shall take effective measures to ensure that no storage or disposal of hazardous materials
shall take place in the lands or territories of indigenous peoples without their free, prior and informedconsent.LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:25 AM  Page 14NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 15NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDA/61/L.67 07-49830 — 9
3. States shall also take effective measures to ensure, as needed, that programes for monitoring,
maintaining and restoring the health of indigenous peoples, as developed and implemented by the peoples affected by such materials, are duly implemented.
Article 30
1. Military activities shall not take place in the lands or territories of indigenous peoples, unless 
justified by a relevant public interest or otherwise freely agreed with or requested by the indigenous peoples concerned.
2. States shall undertake effective consultations with the indigenous peoples concerned, through
appropriate procedures and in particular through their representative institutions, prior to using theirlands or territories for military activities.
Article 31
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to maintain, control, protect and develop their cultural heritage,
traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions, as well as the manifestations of their sciences,technologies and cultures, including human and genetic resources, seeds, medicines, knowledge of theproperties of fauna and flora, oral traditions, literatures, designs, sports and traditional games and visualand performing arts. They also have the right to maintain, control, protect and develop their intellectualproperty over such cultural heritage, traditional knowledge, and traditional cultural expressions.
2. In conjunction with indigenous peoples, States shall take effective measures to recognize and 
protect the exercise of these rights.
Article 32
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to determine and develop priorities and strategies for the 
development or use of their lands or territories and other resources.
2. States shall consult and cooperate in good faith with the indigenous peoples concerned through
their own representative institutions in order to obtain their free and informed consent prior to theapproval of any project affecting their lands or territories and other resources, particularly in connectionwith the development, utilization or exploitation of mineral, water or other resources.
3. States shall provide effective mechanisms for just and fair redress for any such activities, and 
appropriate measures shall be taken to mitigate adverse environmental, economic, social, cultural or spiritual impact.
Article 33
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to determine their own identity or membership in accordance
with their customs and traditions. This does not impair the right of indigenous individuals to obtain citizenship of the States in which they live.
2. Indigenous peoples have the right to determine the structures and to select the membership 
of their institutions in accordance with their own procedures.LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:25 AM  Page 15PAGE 16                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDA/61/L.67 07-49830 — 10
Article 34
Indigenous peoples have the right to promote, develop and maintain their institutional structures
and their distinctive customs, spirituality, traditions, procedures, practices and, in the cases where theyexist, juridical systems or customs, in accordance with international human rights standards.
Article 35
Indigenous peoples have the right to determine the responsibilities of individuals to their communities.
Article 36
1. Indigenous peoples, in particular those divided by international borders, have the right to maintain
and develop contacts, relations and cooperation, including activities for spiritual, cultural, political, economic and social purposes, with their own members as well as other peoples across borders.
2. States, in consultation and cooperation with indigenous peoples, shall take effective measures 
to facilitate the exercise and ensure the implementation of this right.
Article 37
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to the recognition, observance and enforcement of treaties,
agreements and other constructive arrangements concluded with States or their successors and to haveStates honor and respect such treaties, agreements and other constructive arrangements.
2. Nothing in this Declaration may be interpreted as diminishing or eliminating the rights of indigenous
peoples contained in treaties, agreements and other constructive arrangements.
Article 38
States in consultation and cooperation with indigenous peoples, shall take the appropriate measures,
including legislative measures, to achieve the ends of this Declaration.
Article 39
Indigenous peoples have the right to have access to financial and technical assistance from States and
through international cooperation, for the enjoyment of the rights contained in this Declaration.
Article 40
Indigenous peoples have the right to access to and prompt decision through just and fair procedures
for the resolution of conflicts and disputes with States or other parties, as well as to effective remedies forall infringements of their individual and collective rights. Such a decision shall give due consideration tothe customs, traditions, rules and legal systems of the indigenous peoples concerned and internationalhuman rights.
Article 41
The organs and specialized agencies of the United Nations system and other intergovernmental 
organizations shall contribute to the full realization of the provisions of this Declaration through themobilization, inter alia, of financial cooperation and technical assistance. Ways and means of ensuringparticipation of indigenous peoples on issues affecting them shall be established.LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:25 AM  Page 16NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 17NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDA/61/L.67 07-49830 — 11
Article 42
The United Nations, its bodies, including the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, and 
specialized agencies, including at the country level, and States shall promote respect for and full application of the provisions of this Declaration and follow up the effectiveness of this Declaration.
Article 43
The rights recognized herein constitute the minimum standards for the survival, dignity and 
well-being of the indigenous peoples of the world.
Article 44
All the rights and freedoms recognized herein are equally guaranteed to male and female indigenous
individuals.
Article 45
Nothing in this Declaration may be construed as diminishing or extinguishing the rights indigenous
peoples have now or may acquire in the future.
Article 46
1. Nothing in this Declaration may be interpreted as implying for any State, people, group or person
any right to engage in any activity or to perform any act contrary to the Charter of the United Nations orconstrued as authorizing or encouraging any action which would dismember or impair, totally or in part,the territorial integrity or political unity of sovereign and independent States.
2. In the exercise of the rights enunciated in the present Declaration, human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all shall be respected. The exercise of the rights set forth in this Declaration shall be subjectonly to such limitations as are determined by law, and in accordance with international human rightsobligations. Any such limitations shall be non-discriminatory and strictly necessary solely for the purposeof securing due recognition and respect for the rights and freedoms of others and for meeting the justand most compelling requirements of a democratic society.
3. The provisions set forth in this Declaration shall be interpreted in accordance with the principles
of justice, democracy, respect for human rights, equality, non-discrimination, good governance and good faith.
United Nations A/61/L.67*
General Assembly Distr.: Limited
12 September 2007
* Reissued for technical reasons.LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:25 AM  Page 17PAGE 18                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDFrom the embryonic days of our Nation, Indian
tribes have long struggled against the assimila-tionist policies instituted by the United Stateswhich sought to destroy tribal cultures by removingNative American children from their tribes andfamilies. In a stark example of such policies, thepurpose articulated in the charter of the firstboarding school in the 1890s on the Navajo reser-vation was “to remove the Navajo child from theinfluence of his savage parents.” The federal government continued its boarding school policyfor over one hundred years. Countless lives givetestimony to the harsh effects of that policy.
Later on, the federal government failed to protect
Indian children from misguided and insensitivechild welfare practices by state human serviceagencies, which resulted in the unwarrantedremoval of Indian children from their families andtribes. In fact, in the 1950s and 1960s, the federalgovernment worked with non-Indian organiza-tions, such as the Child Welfare League ofAmerica, to outright remove Indian children fromtheir homes and place those children in non-Indian homes.
Statistical and anecdotal information show that
Indian children who grow up in non-Indian settings become spiritual and cultural orphans.They do not entirely fit into the culture in whichthey are raised and yearn throughout their life forthe family and tribal culture denied them as chil-dren. Many native children raised in non-Nativehomes experience identity problems, drug addiction, alcoholism, incarceration and, mostdisturbing, suicide.
In the 1960s, the federal government embarked
on a new federal Indian policy of tribal self-determination. This new policy fosters tribal existence and self governance by allowing tribes tooperate programs once operated solely by the federal government. It also increased federal services and benefits available to tribes to enhancetheir capabilities. Thus, tribes are now working tofully regain control of their destiny and that oftheir children.
In view of this new policy and the problems facingtribes as a result of the loss of their children, the
Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) was enacted in1978. It established minimum federal jurisdictional,procedural and substantive standards aimed toachieve the dual purposes of protecting the rightof an Indian child to live with an Indian family andto stabilize and foster continued tribal existence.To gain a basic understanding of the ICWA and toaccess information to expand that understanding,NARF has created A Practical Guide to the Indian
Child Welfare Act. The Guide, available both in
print format and on-line, is a new powerfulresource tool for tribal, state, and federal entitiesinvolved in Indian child custody proceedings.  TheGuide consists of an Introduction, Frequently
Asked Questions with responses categorized under22 topics, with a wealth of ICWA resources. Theon-line version contains more than 1,000 full-textresources.
A Practical Guide to the Indian Child Welfare
Act is intended to foster compliance with the 
letter and spirit of the ICWA. NARF plans to updatethe Practical Guide on a regular basis—at least
once a year as time and funding allow. Updates willbe incorporated into the on-line version and willbe made available for free download at the NARFwebsite (www.narf.org/icwa).
This project was generously funded by
the Administration for Native Americans,with supplemental funding by theMorongo Band of Mission Indians, Bureauof Indian Affairs and supported by theNational Indian Child Welfare Association
CASE UPDATES
NARF launches guide to Indian Child Welfare ActLegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:25 AM  Page 18NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 19NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDas a key partner. An Advisory Board –
made up of a multi-disciplinary team consisting of members of tribal courts andtribal ICWA departments, state govern-ments, Indian law practitioners, NativeAmerican non-profit organizations, lawfirms, and urban Indian centers – providedguidance on the content of the guide. 
NARF Alaska Victorious in Four Cases
NARF Alaska attorney Heather Kendall-Miller
has won four important cases in a row on behalf ofAlaska Natives. In Ahtna Tene Nene’ Subsistence
Committee v. Alaska Board of Game , suit was
brought on behalf of tribal organizations and communities who live a subsistence way of life tooverturn a series of regulations adopted by theAlaska Board of Game in March of 2007. The regulations severely restrict, and in some caseseliminate plaintiffs’ subsistence uses of moose andcaribou. In mid-June plaintiffs sought a prelimi-nary injunction in state court requesting that thecourt enjoin the State from implementing theseregulations for the fall hunt. On July 20th , thecourt found that plaintiffs had shown that theysatisfied the “balance of hardships” standard forgranting a preliminary injunction by raising serious and substantial questions going to themerits of the case and by demonstrating that thebalance of hardships tip sharply in their favor.
On June 10, 2006 the State of Alaska brought
suit challenging the Federal Subsistence Boardscustomary and traditional (C&T) use finding forsubsistence uses of moose by members of theChistochina Tribe.  A positive C&T finding entitlesresidents for a specific community to the subsis-tence priority under Title VIII of the AlaskaNational Interest Lands Conservation Act.Chistochina was granted intervention in this
action to protect its C&T status for moose. OnJune 27, 2007 in State v. Demientieff ,  the district
court entered an Order in favor of defendantUnited States and Chistochina against the Stateand upholding the Federal Subsistence Board’scustomary and traditional use finding for subsistence uses of moose by members of theChistochina Tribe.  
On January 5, 2005, the State of Alaska filed a
lawsuit in the District of Columbia challenging thefinal rule implementing the mandate in the prior subsistence case, John v. United States . The
prior case established that the United States mustprotect subsistence uses of fisheries in navigablewaters where the United States possesses areserved water right. The State challenges theSecretaries’ implementation of the mandate byarguing that the reserved waters doctrine requiresa quantification of waters necessary to fulfill specific purposes. On January 18, Katie John fileda motion for limited intervention for purposes offiling a motion to dismiss for failure to join anindispensable party. On May 17, 2007 in State v.
Norton , the district court entered an Order
upholding the agency’s rule-making process iden-tifying navigable waters in Alaska that fall withinfederal jurisdiction for purposes of Title VIII’s subsistence priority.  
On January 3, 2005 the Villages of Tanana,
Nulato, Akiak, Kalskag, Lower Kalskag andKenaitze along with Theresa and Dan Schwietertfiled a complaint against the State of Alaska,Attorney General, and various state agencies challenging the policy adopted by the AttorneyGeneral of Alaska that state courts have exclusivejurisdiction over child custody proceedings involvingAlaska Native children and Tribes in Alaska do not
have concurrent jurisdiction to hear children’scases unless certain conditions are met. On May30, 2007 in Tanana  v. State , the court issued an
opinion in the Tribe’s favor rejecting all of theState’s arguments. The court held that AlaskaTribes possess inherent power to adjudicate pro-ceedings involving member children. The Tribeshave moved for injunctive relief to prohibit thestate and its agency’s from denying full faith andcredit to tribal court decrees pending appeal to theAlaska Supreme Court. 
❂LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:25 AM  Page 19PAGE 20                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND“When you go out there to represent
Indian people, you see your family – yourbrothers, your sisters, your nephews, yourmother and father, your grandparents.You realize the devastating impact thatsociety can have on people because theyare a different culture, because their skinis a different color.  Being Indian at NARFbrings a focus – a fire – a determination todo the very best.  You’re going to be asgood a lawyer as any non-Indian lawyerwho ever walked into a court room.  Thisorganization is like a warrior society.  Youput your life on the line – be the best youcan be – always being prepared.  Yourfighting for the survival of your people...”
With these words, NARF attorney Yvonne
Knight (Ponca-Creek) marked the 20thAnniversary of NARF in 1990.   On September 30,2007, Yvonne said goodbye to NARF as she movedon into retirement after 36 years of fighting for therights of all of us in Indian country.  Through thisjourney, Yvonne has proven to be a modern dayIndian warrior, as can be attested to by the count-less tribes and individuals that she has guidedthrough the myriad of Indian law, legislation, andcourt rulings.  Yvonne has stood before Congress,federal and state courts, tribes and communitiesto defend the rights of our people.  Yvonne wasmotivated by the thought that NARF is a warriorsociety and that she fought these courtroom bat-tles, not for abstract reasons, but for family.  Thisshe believed, made Indian attorneys more formi-dable in court when they’re up against impossibleodds.  Her victories helped to protect our cultures,our spirituality, our way of life, and helped todetermine our future.  Yvonne understood thepower of our elders visions and transformed themto create leadership and change.
Yvonne – your legacy will be hard to follow, but
your inspiration will guide the next generation ofIndian attorneys to
continue this fightfor family, for what isright, and for what itshould be. You willbe missed.
Yvonne is of Ponca-
Creek descent and amember of the PoncaTribe.  While in lawschool, she was afounding member ofthe American IndianLaw Students Association (now the NativeAmerican Law Students Association), and servedon first board of directors of that organization.Yvonne was the first Indian woman law graduatefrom the University of New Mexico’s Indian LawScholarship Program.  She joined NARF as a staffattorney in 1971 and has represented countlesstribes and individuals in cases involving a varietyof Indian law issues.  She served as a member of atask force of the American Indian Policy ReviewCommission responsible for recommendingchanges in federal statutes affecting Indians.
Yvonne was actively involved in the passage and
implementation of the Menominee RestorationAct.  She has also had extensive lawyering experi-ence in such areas of Indian law as drafting tribalconstitutions; defining and enforcing the federaltrust responsibility to Indians; litigating tribalclaims to land, water, and other natural resources;enforcing Indian education rights; and, definingand enforcing tribal court jurisdiction.  Yvonnehas a B.S., University of Kansas (1965); J.D.,University of New Mexico (1971); High SchoolTeacher, Kansas City, Kansas (1966-68); ReginaldHeber Smith Fellow (August 1971 to July 1974);Native American Rights Fund (1971 to 2007);admitted to practice law in Colorado. 
❂NARF ATTORNEY
A modern day Indian warriorLegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:25 AM  Page 20NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 21NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
•  Ak-Chin Indian Community
•  Barona Band of Mission Indians•  Chitimacha Tribe of Lousiana•  Colusa Casino Resort•  Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Indians•  Fort McDowell Yavapai Nation•  Little Traverse Bay Band of Odawa Indians•  Mashantucket Pequot Tribal Nation•  Mescalero Apache Tribe•  Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe•  Miccosukee Indian Gaming•  Mohegan Sun Casino•  Muckleshoot Tribe•  Native Village of Port Lions•  Oneida Tribe of Indians of Wisconsin•  Pala Band of Mission Indians•  Pamunkey Indian Reservation
•  Pauma Band of Mission Indians•  Poarch Creek Band•  Prairie Band of Potawatomi Nation•  Pueblo of Tesuque•  Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe of Michigan•  San Manuel Band of Mission Indians•  San Pasqual Band of Diegueno Indians•  Seminole Tribe of Florida•  Shakopee Mdewakanton Sioux Community
of Minnesota
•  Siletz Tribe•  Southern Ute Indian Tribe•  Sycuan Band of Kumeyaay Indians•  Twenty-Nine Palms Band of Mission Indians•  Viejas Band of Kumeyaay IndiansIt has been made abundantly clear that non-
Indian philanthropy can no longer sustainNARF’s work.  Federal funds for specific projectsare also being reduced at drastic rates. Our ability to provide legal advocacy in a wide varietyof areas such as religious freedom, the TribalSupreme Court Project, tribal recognition,human rights, trust responsibility, tribal waterrights, Indian Child Welfare Act, and on Alaskatribal sovereignty issues has been compromised.NARF is now turning to the tribes to providethis crucial funding to continue our legal advocacy on behalf of Indian Country. It is anhonor to list those Tribes and Native organizations
who have chosen to share their good fortunes with the Native American Rights Fundand the thousands of Indian clients we haveserved. The generosity of Tribes is crucial inNARF’s struggle to ensure the future of allNative Americans. We encourage other Tribes tobecome contributors and partners with NARF infighting for justice for our people and in keepingthe vision of our ancestors alive. We thank thefollowing tribes and Native organizations fortheir recent support since October 1, 2006:
CALLING TRIBES TO ACTION!LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:25 AM  Page 21PAGE 22                                                                          NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNational Indian Law Library
About the Library
The National Indian Law Library (NILL) located
at the Native American Rights Fund in Boulder,Colorado is a national public library serving peopleacross the United States. Over the past thirty-threeyears NILL has collected nearly 9,000 resourcematerials that relate to federal Indian and triballaw. The Library’s holdings include the largest collection of tribal codes, ordinances and constitu-tions in the United States; legal pleadings frommajor American Indian cases; law review articleson Indian law topics; handbooks; conferencematerials; and government documents.   
Library Services
Information access and delivery: Library users
can access the searchable catalog whichincludes bibliographic descriptions of the libraryholdings by going directly to: http://www
.
narf.org/nill/index.htm or by accessing the 
catalog through the National Indian LawLibrary/Catalog link on the Native AmericanRights Fund website at www.narf.org. Once relevant materials are identified, library patronscan then choose to request copies or borrowmaterials through interlibrary loan for a nominal fee.
Research assistance: In addition to making its
catalog and extensive collection available to thepublic, the National Indian Law Library providesreference and research assistance relating toIndian law and tribal law. The library offers freeassistance as well as customized research for anominal fee. 
Keep up with changes in Indian law with
NILL ’s Indian Law Bulletins: The Indian LawBulletins are published by NILL in an effort keepNARF and the public informed about Indian lawdevelopments. NILL publishes timely bulletinscovering new Indian law cases, U.S. regulatoryaction, law review articles, and news on its web site.(See: http://www
.narf.org/nill/bulletins/ ilb.htm )
New bulletins are published on a regular basis,
usually every week and older information ismoved to the bulletin archive pages. When newinformation is published, NILL sends out brief
announcements and a link to the newly revisedbulletin page via e-mail. Send an e-mail to DavidSelden at dselden@nar
f.orgif you would like to
subscribe to the Indian Law Bulletin service.The service is free of charge!
Support the Library: The National Indian Law
Library is unique in that it serves the public butis notsupported by local or federal tax revenue.
NILL is a project of the Native American RightsFund and relies on private contributions frompeople like you. For information on how you cansupport the library or become a sponsor of a special project, please contact David Selden,the Law Librarian at 303-447-8760 ordselden@narf.org For more information aboutNILL, visit: http://www.narf.org/nill/index.htmLocal patrons can visit the library at 1522Broadway, Boulder, Colorado. ❂
Your Information Partner!LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:25 AM  Page 22NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 23NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDTHE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF Annual Report. This is NARF’s major report on
its programs and activities. The Annual Report is distributed to foundations, major contributors, certainfederal and state agencies, tribal clients, NativeAmerican organizations, and to others upon request.Ray Ramirez Editor, ramirez@narf.org.    
The NARF Legal Review is published biannually by 
the Native American Rights Fund. Third class postage paid at Boulder, Colorado. Ray Ramirez, Editor,ramirez@narf.org.  There is no charge for subscriptions,however, contributions are appreciated.
Tax Status .  The Native American Rights Fund is a non-
profit, charitable organization incorporated in 1971under the laws of the District of Columbia.  NARF isexempt from federal income tax under the provisions ofSection 501 C (3) of the Internal Revenue Code, andcontributions to NARF are tax deductible.  The InternalRevenue Service has ruled that NARF is not a “private
foundation” as defined in Section 509(a) of the InternalRevenue Code.
Main Office:
Native American Rights Fund1506 Broadway, Boulder, Colorado  80302 (303-447-8760) (FAX 303-443-7776)http://www.narf.org  
Washington, D.C. Office:
Native American Rights Fund1712 N Street, NW, Washington, D.C. 20036 (202-785-4166) (FAX 202-822-0068)
Alaska Office:
Native American Rights Fund420 L Street, Suite 505, Anchorage, Alaska 99501 (907-276-0680) (FAX 907-276-2466)The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) was
founded in 1970 to address the need for legal assis-tance on the major issues facing Indian country.  Thecritical Indian issues of survival of the tribes andNative American people are not new, but are thesame issues of survival that have merely evolved overthe centuries.  As NARF is in its thirty-seventh yearof existence, it can be acknowledged that many of thegains achieved in Indian country over those years aredirectly attributable to the efforts and commitmentof the present and past clients and members ofNARF’s Board and staff. However, no matter howmany gains have been achieved, NARF is stilladdressing the same basic issues that caused NARFto be founded originally.  Since the inception of thisNation, there has been a systematic attack on tribalrights that continues to this day.  For every victory, a new challenge to tribal sovereignty arises fromstate and local governments, Congress, or thecourts.  The continuing lack of understanding, andin some cases lack of respect, for the sovereignattributes of Indian nations has made it necessary for NARF to continue fighting.NARF strives to protect the most important rights
of Indian people within the limit of availableresources.  To achieve this goal, NARF’s Board ofDirectors defined five priority areas for NARF’s work:(1) the preservation of tribal existence; (2) the protection of tribal natural resources; (3) the promotion of human rights; (4) the accountability of governments to Native Americans; and (5) thedevelopment of Indian law and educating the publicabout Indian rights, laws, and issues.
Requests for legal assistance should be addressed
to NARF’s main office at 1506 Broadway, Boulder,Colorado 80302. NARF’s clients are expected to pay whatever they can toward the costs of legal representation.
NARF’s success could not have been achieved with-
out the financial support that we have received fromthroughout the nation.  Your participation makes abig difference in our ability to continue to meet ever-increasing needs of impoverished Indian tribes,groups and individuals. The support needed to sustain our nationwide program requires your continued assistance.LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:25 AM  Page 23NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND BOARD OF DIRECTORS
John Gonzales, Chairman ................................................................................ San Ildefonso Pueblo
Paul Ninham, Vice-Chairman ................................................................................Wisconsin OneidaKeith Anderson ............................................................ Shakopee Mdewakanton Sioux Community Andrew J. Bowers, Jr. ................................................................................ Seminole Tribe of FloridaFred Cantu, Jr. ...................................................................................................... Saginaw C hippewa
Delia Carlyle .......................................................................................... Ak Chin Indian Communit y
Elbridge Coochise ............................................................................................................. ........... Hopi
Billy Frank ................................................................................................................... ......... Nisqually
Jim Gray ...................................................................................................................... ................ Osage
Kunani Nihipali ........................................................................................................ Native Hawaiian
Lydia Olympic ................................................................................................................. . Yupik/Aleut
Anthony Pico ................................................................................ Viejas Band of Kumeyaay IndiansWoody Widmark ................................................................................................................ S itka Tribe
Executive Director: John E. Echohawk .................................................................................. Pawnee
NARF LEGAL REVIEW • VOLUME 32, NO.2 • SUMMER/FALL 2007
NARF Legal Review
1506 Broadway
Boulder, CO 80302Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage
PAID
Boulder, Colorado
Permit No. 589
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER
LegalReview(b) 11/07  11/15/07  11:25 AM  Page 24