On August 15, 2016, Alaska
Attorney General Jahna Lindemuthannounced that the State of Alaskawill not pursue fur ther litigation
in Alaska Native Community v.
U.S. Secretary of the Interior.That case affirmed the ability ofthe Secretary of Interior to takeland into trust on behalf of Alaskatribes and Alaska Natives, and alsoacknowledged the rights of Alaskatribes to be treated the same as allother federally recognized Tribes.The State’s decision to not seekSupreme Court review ends yearsof protracted litigation and ushersin a new era for Alaska tribes.
“Trust land” refers to land held
by the United States in trust forthe benefit and use of an Indiantribe or individual.  It contrastswith “fee land” or land held in “fee simple” whichis the most common type of land ownership.  Feeland is property in which owners have completeownership of the land and the home.  Owners of“fee land” can sell or mortgage their land butremain subject to state taxation and debt obliga-tions on their mortgage.  Unlike fee land, trustland is not subject to state taxation or debt fore-closure, and is considered “Indian Country” forjurisdictional purposes.  Indian Country includesall land within the limits of any Indian reservationunder the jurisdiction of the United States gov-ernment; all lands belonging to or falling withinthe jurisdiction of an Indian tribe; and all Indianallotments, the Indian titles to which have not
VOLUME 41, NO. 2 SUMMER/FALL 2016NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Land into Trust Litigation Ends
Historic Victory for Alaska Tribes
Land into Trust Litigation Ends
Historic Victory for Alaska Tribes .......... page 1
NARF stands with 
Standing Rock Sioux Tribe ...................... page 4
Case Updates ............................................page 8National Indian Law Library ................ page 13Calling Tribes to Action! ...................... page 14NARF .................................................... page 15NARF Board .......................................... page 16
been extinguished.  Moving land from fee into
trust status occurs when a Tribe or individual suc-cessfully petitions the Secretary of the Interior(Secretary) to accept legal title of tribally-or-Indian-owned fee land pursuant to theDepartment of Interior’s (DOI) fee to trust regula-tions at 25 C.F .R. part 151.  Land formallybecomes trust land when a deed or federal patentis issued reflecting the United States as the legaltitle holder of property for the benefit of an indi-vidual Indian or an Indian tribe.
The Secretary’s statutory authority to take land
into trust arises from Section 5 of the 1934 IndianReorganization Act (IRA), which was made applic-able to Alaska in 1936.  Congress adopted the IRAto “establish machinery whereby Indian tribeswould be able to assume a greater degree of self-government, both politically and economically.”The IRA was intended to roll back the devastatingeffects of the General Allotment Act of 1887, alsoknown as the Dawes Act.  Under the Dawes Act,millions of acres of tribal reservation lands werebroken up and allotted to individual Indians in fee
with excess lands opened up to non-Native settle-ment.  The total amount of Indian–held landdeclined from 138 million acres in 1887 to 48 mil-lion in 1934.
Congress commissioned the Meriam Report
in 1928, which documented the failure of feder-al Indian policy during the Allotment period.The Report provided the impetus for a majorchange in federal Indian policy marked by pas-sage of the IRA, also known as the Wheeler-Howard Act. Section 5, which has beendescribed as the “capstone” of the land relatedprovisions of the IRA, authorizes the Secretary,in her discretion, to acquire land in trust forIndian tribes and individuals.
In 1978, the Secretary proposed a regulation to
establish a formal process for DOI’s acquisition offee land into trust; the proposed rule made no spe-cial mention of Alaska.  Several months after thatproposed rule was published, the Associate
PAGE 2                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 3NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDSolicitor for Indian Affairs signed an opinion let-
ter addressing the question of whether theSecretary could take former reservation land intotrust.  The Associate Solicitor concluded that, inlight of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act(ANCSA), “it would . . . be an abuse of theSecretary’s discretion to attempt to use Section 5of the IRA to restore the former Venetie Reserve totrust status.”  The ANCSA had extinguished abo-riginal claims and set forth a broad declaration ofpolicy to settle land claims.  However, the statuto-ry text of ANCSA did not expressly revoke theSecretary’s authority, under Section 5 of the IRAas extended by the 1936 amendment, to take landinto trust in Alaska.  Nonetheless, the final regu-lations included an “Alaska exception” that barredfederally recognized tribes in Alaska (exceptMetlakatla Indian Community that already hadtrust status of their lands) from taking advantageof the regulatory process.  
In 1994, NARF represented three Alaska Native
Tribes in filing a petition with the Secretary torevise the land-into-trust regulations to “includewithin [their] scope all federally recognizedAlaska Native tribes.”  The Secretary put that peti-tion out for notice and comment, describing it asa request that the Secretary “remove the portionof the existing regulation that prohibits the acqui-sition of land in trust status in the State of Alaskafor Alaska Native Villages other than Metlakatla.”Although the Secretary proposed a revision to theland-into-trust regulation in 1999, he noted that“[t]he proposed regulations would . . . continuethe bar against taking Native land in Alaska intrust.”  The Secretary referenced the AssociateSolicitor Opinion and stated that while “that opin-ion has not been withdrawn or overruled, we rec-ognize that there is a credible legal argument thatANCSA did not supersede the Secretary’s authori-ty to take land into trust in Alaska under the IRA.”Id.(citations omitted).  The Secretary then invit-
ed comment on the continued validity of theAssociate Solicitor’s opinion and issues raised byNARF’s petition.  In 2001, the Secretary publisheda final rule rescinding the Associate SolicitorOpinion, concluding that “there is substantialdoubt about the validity of the conclusion reachedin the 1978 Opinion.”  Although the opinion waswithdrawn, “the Department . . . determined thatthe prohibition in the existing 151 regulations on
taking Alaska lands into trust (other thanMetlakatla) ought to remain in place.”    
In 2006, NARF represented four Alaska Tribes
and sued the United States, arguing that the“Alaska exception” violated 25 U.S.C. § 476(g) ofthe IRA.  That statute nullifies regulations thatdiscriminate among Indian tribes.  The State ofAlaska was granted intervenor status and arguedthat differential treatment of Alaska tribes wasrequired by the ANCSA.  On March 31, 2013, thedistrict court granted summary judgment in favorof plaintiff tribes.  The court held that “ANCSA leftintact the Secretary’s authority to take land intotrust throughout Alaska,” Akiachak Native
Community v. Salazar, and that “Congress did
not explicitly eliminate the grant of authority”with the passage of ANCSA.  The DOI agreed thatthe prohibition was unlawful and initiated a rule-making to revise the existing regulation.  The DOIthen proceeded to have three tribal consultationssessions in Anchorage, Alaska, Washington, D.C.,and by teleconference.  On December 23, 2014,DOI published a final rule deleting the “Alaskaexception.”  The Final Rule’s Preamble noted thattwo recent federal commissions recommend theenhancement of tribal powers and the restorationof Native rights in Alaska—including renewal ofthe option to create trust lands. 
The publication of the final rule mooted the
challenge as the removal of the “Alaska exception”was the relief that Plaintiff Tribes had soughtthrough litigation.  The State of Alaska nonethe-less elected to carry forward its appeal, but thecourt of appeals found the controversy to be mootand dismissed the appeal.  
The State of Alaska’s announcement that it will
forego further litigation ends a long history ofstate/tribal animosity and represents a significantpolicy shift from prior administrations that choseto vigorously litigate any assertion of tribal sover-eignty.  The decision to work with Tribes ratherthan against them ushers in a new era where trib-al and state officials can cooperatively worktogether to protect the health, safety, and welfareof Alaska’s tribal member citizens. ❂The Native American Rights Fund (NARF)
stands with the people of the Standing Rock SiouxTribe in their fight to protect sacred and irreplaceable resources, including the waters ofthe Missouri River, against the Dakota AccessPipeline.  
NARF is working with the Standing Rock Sioux
Tribe’s attorneys, EARTHJUSTICE, and will betaking the lead to develop and coordinate an effec-tive amicus brief strategy in support of theStanding Rock Sioux Tribe in their lawsuit againstthe U.S. Army Corps of Engineers in relation tothe Dakota Access Pipeline (DAPL).  The litigationinvolves two broad issues surrounding the pro-posed construction of a major crude-oil pipelinethat passes through the Tribe’s ancestral lands.First, the pipeline would pass under the MissouriRiver (at Lake Oahe) just a half a mile upstream ofthe tribe’s reservation boundary, where a spillwould be culturally and economically catastroph-ic.  Second, the pipeline would pass through areasof great cultural significance, such as sacred sitesand burial grounds that federal law seeks to protect.Also see http://earthjustice.org/features/faq-stand-
ing-rock-litigation.  
Based on their years of experience with the work
of the Tribal Supreme Court Project, NARF hasagreed to provide direct assistance in channelingthe overwhelming support received by theStanding Rock Sioux Tribe from all across Indiancountry in order to provide a strong, unified voicein the federal courts.  On September 9, 2016,District Court Judge Boasberg denied the Tribe’smotion for a preliminary injunction.  After thecourt’s ruling against the Standing Rock SiouxTribe, the Department of Justice, the Departmentof the Army and the Department of the Interiorissued a joint statement stating that the Army willnot authorize constructing the Dakota Accesspipeline on Corps land bordering or under LakeOahe until it can determine whether it will needto reconsider any of its previous decisions
PAGE 4                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNARF Stands With 
Standing Rock Sioux Tribe
All photos courtesy of Rob Wilson Photography -
@RobWilsonFoto, rawpolitics@gmail.com NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 5NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
regarding the Lake Oahe site under the National
Environmental Policy Act and will invite formalgovernment-to-government consultations withthe Tribe.  The Department of the Army urges thepipeline company to stand down on any construc-tion within 20 miles of the Missouri River.  Inaddition, the Tribe filed its notice of appeal and anemergency motion for a stay pending appeal inthe U.S. Court of Appeals for the DC Circuit,which had issued a temporary stay of the pipelineconstruction until oral arguments on the emer-gency stay were heard on October 5, 2016, in Washington, DC.  On October 9, 2016, theCourt ordered that the administrative injunctionbe dissolved.
On October 10, 2016, the Department of Justice,
Department of the Army and Department of theInterior regarding the D.C. Circuit Court ofAppeals October 9 decision issued a joint state-ment – “The Army continues to review issuesraised by the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and otherTribal nations and their members and hopes toconclude its ongoing review soon.  In the interim,the Army will not authorize constructing the
Dakota Access Pipeline on Corps land borderingor under Lake Oahe.  We repeat our request thatthe pipeline company voluntarily pause all con-struction activity within 20 miles east or west ofLake Oahe.”  They also stated that they will con-duct listening sessions on whether there shouldbe nationwide reform on the Tribal consultationprocess for these types of infrastructure projects.
NARF , along with NCAI, other tribal organiza-
tions, and Indian tribes from across the country,are prepared to move quickly, in coordinationwith EARTHJUSTICE, to develop litigation andamicus strategy in response to the outcome. 
Water is life, and this critical resource to Indian
tribes has historically been threatened by outsideinterests.  Indeed, the right to clean water is an internationally recognized human right.Historically, communities of color, includingindigenous peoples, have been those most at riskof having this basic and necessary right denied or violated.  Federal laws such as the National
PAGE 6                                                                          NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Historic Preservation Act, requiring government-
to-government consultation with Indian tribes,are vital to Tribes’ abilities to protect theirresources.  When those laws are disregarded, wemust call the offending parties to task.   
There is no doubt that the Dakota Access
Pipeline presents grave threats to the StandingRock Sioux Tribe, and others, and that the lapsesin the federal regulatory process failed to protectthe tribes’ right to be consulted on a government-to-government basis, on an issue that directlythreatens the values of these Tribes.  
The Dakota Access Pipeline threatens the Tribe’s
water resources.  The pipeline route includes ariver crossing upstream from the main diversionpoint for the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe’s watersupply.  Access to clean and safe water is a neces-sity for any community and is a human right.  Ifand when the pipeline breaks, the Tribe’s watersupply would be directly impacted, and most like-ly rendered unusable.  The people of the StandingRock Sioux Tribe must be able to depend on theavailability of a reliable source of clean and safewater to serve the many needs of their people andtheir homeland.  The risks associated with this,
and many other pipelines, are unacceptablebecause of the irreversible harm that results whenpipelines rupture.  
The Dakota Access Pipeline route also crosses
many lands that have traditional cultural signifi-cance to the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe, as well asto many other tribal nations. The pipeline pre-sents a threat to the integrity of ancestral burialsand other cultural resources, as well as to landswhich are and have been integral to traditionalreligious practices since time immemorial.  
Projects like the Dakota Access Pipeline, with its
very real risks of permanent harm to waterresources, cultural resources, tribal lands andother natural resources, must be developed in fullconsultation with the tribes whose lands,resources, and futures are impacted.  Tribes mustbe fully and meaningfully included in the deci-sion-making process, as required by federal law. 
The Native American Rights Fund stands with
the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe in the effort to pro-tect their land, water, culture, and their future. ❂
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 7NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
PAGE 8                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDCASE UPDATES
On August 1, 2016, a federal district court
enjoined North Dakota’s strict voter ID law andruled that voters unable to obtain the necessaryidentification may vote in the upcoming electionby completing a declaration or affidavit. Thecourt agreed with the seven Native American vot-ers that the new law disproportionately burdensNative Americans and denies qualified voters theright to vote.
North Dakota House Bills 1332 and 1333 put in
place the most restrictive voter ID law in thenation.  Before this decision, North Dakota voterswere required to present one of only four qualify-ing IDs with a current residential address printedon it in order to vote.  Before enactment of thoselaws, North Dakota required a poll clerk torequest an ID, but a voter without one could stillvote if the clerk vouched for their qualificationsor the voter signed an affidavit of identity.  In aSeptember 20 order, the court required NorthDakota to reinstitute the affidavit procedure,which allows qualified voters to cast a ballot evenif they do not have an ID.
Federal Judge Daniel Hovland wrote, “[t]he
record is replete with concrete evidence of signif-icant burdens imposed on Native American votersattempting to exercise their right to vote in
North Dakota.” Although the state argued thatthe law was necessary to prevent voter fraud, thecourt found that there “is a total lack of any evi-dence to show voter fraud has ever been a prob-lem in North Dakota.” The court concluded thatit “is a minimal burden for the State to conductthis year’s election in the same manner it suc-cessfully administered elections for decadesbefore the enactment of the new voter ID laws.”
“What we asked for is that all qualified voters
have the opportunity to cast a ballot – particular-ly Native Americans. This ruling is an incrediblevictory for North Dakota voters as it will ensurethat fail-safe mechanisms will be in place inNovember to protect them” said Native AmericanRights Fund attorney Matthew Campbell.
The plaintiffs are represented by the Native
American Rights Fund, Richard de Bodo ofMorgan, Lewis & Bockius LLP , and Tom Dicksonof the Dickson Law Office.  NARF won importantVoting Rights cases in Alaska in 2010 and againin 2015, establishing that the State of Alaskashould be required to provide greater languageassistance to voters who speak Alaska Nativelanguages.Federal Court Enjoins Restrictive North Dakota 
Voter ID Law
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 9NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Ten years ago, frustrated with the inability of
the Executive Branch and Congress to resolvelegitimate claims for historic breaches of trust bythe United States regarding millions of dollars oftrust funds and trust resources, American Indianand Alaska Native Tribes turned to the thirdbranch of government for help – the federal judi-ciary.  By December 31, 2006, over 100 tribeswere suing the government for historical trustaccountings and monetary damages for trustmismanagement.
NARF represented over half of these Tribes.
“When we filed these cases,” said NARF StaffAttorney Melody McCoy, who serves as the leadattorney in NARF’s tribal breach of trust cases,“we expected to be slogging it out in court foryears.”  That all changed when Barack Obamawas elected President of the United States inNovember 2008.  He quickly made good on hiscampaign promise to negotiate on a government-to-government basis with each suing tribe out-of-court settlements of their historical breach oftrust claims.
By the end of Obama’s First Term, over 70 set-
tlements had been reached between the UnitedStates and tribes, and dozens more were reachedin the Second Term, such that by September2016, no tribe was actively litigating its historicalbreach of trust claims.  The settlements ranged inamounts from tens of thousands to over half abillion dollars.
In April 2013, in response to requests for assis-
tance by several tribes who did not have pendingcases, NARF filed Sisseton Whapeton Oyate v.
Jewell, bringing 10 more tribes into court, and
ultimately to the settlement table.  “It was a boldmove,” says McCoy, “and it really tested theObama Administration’s commitment to settlingthese claims.”  At the final Obama Administration’sWhite House Tribal Nations Conference inSeptember 2016, U.S. Department of the InteriorSecretary Sally Jewell was among the federal officials to announce the settlements for the 10 Sisseton Tribes: Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate;
Quinault Indian Nation; Kickapoo Tribe ofOklahoma; White Earth Nation; Pueblo of Acoma;Comanche Nation; Penobscot Indian Nation;Seminole Tribe of Florida; Southern Ute IndianTribe; and the Confederated Tribes of the UmatillaIndian Reservation.
“The Sisseton Tribes are thrilled to join the
extraordinary resolution by the ObamaAdministration of decades of trust mismanage-ment by the United States of their trust funds,land, and natural resources,” confirmed McCoy.“The United States unilaterally imposed itself asthe trustee for tribal trust assets, but it has notbeen a good trustee,” she continued.  “No onewould dispute that, but no branch of the federalgovernment has been able or willing to equitablyfix this problem until now.”
NARF continues to represent four tribes in
North Dakota, Montana, and Minnesota in a long-running complex historical breach of trust case,and a consortium of tribes in Arizona in a morerecent case.NARF Helps 10 more Tribes Reach Historic Settlements
with the United States
Official White House Photo by Pete SouzaPAGE 10                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDThe Kickapoo Tribe of Kansas held a ceremony
to commemorate completion of the Plum CreekSettlement Agreement on September 9, 2016. 
In his statement, Tribal Chairman Lester
Randall said, “This Agreement secures theKickapoo Tribe’s long-term viability, for withoutwater, we cannot survive as a Tribe or a commu-nity.”  Randall went on to say, “This commemo-ration ceremony allows the Kickapoo People toformally thank Kansas Attorney General DerekSchmidt and staff as well as the KansasDepartment of Agriculture and representatives ofother state agencies for working with the Tribeand the Native American Rights Fund to securethe Tribe’s right to a permanent supply of water,thus enhancing the quality of life for tribal mem-bers and sustaining the Kickapoo Reservation forfuture success and enhancement.”
The Kickapoo Tribe has worked for more than
40 years to secure a safe and reliable source ofwater for its reservation beginning with the con-struction of a small dam, water intake and treat-ment system in the 1970’s.  Since that time, theTribe has worked with regional stakeholders ondevelopment of a water storage initiative knownas the Plum Creek Project. 
According to the Environmental Protection
Agency, the water supply for the Reservation is inviolation of the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974.The Kickapoo people are unable to safely drink,bathe or cook with tap water.  There is notenough water on the reservation to provide basicmunicipal services to the community and theTribe is not even able to provide local schoolswith reliable, safe running water.  The fire depart-ment cannot provide adequate fire protection dueto the water shortage.  The proposed ReservoirProject is the most cost effective and reliablemeans by which the Tribe can improve the watersupply.
The Plum Creek Project stalled due to the
inability of the Tribe to secure adequate propertyrights after the local watershed district refused toexercise condemnation authority.  Many man-
made lakes and watersheds developed in Kansashave required the use of eminent domain andcondemnation authority in instances where notall land owners are willing to sell.  As are result ofthese setbacks, the Tribe set out to acquire landin fee simple title through negotiation and pur-chase with willing landowners.  To date the Tribehas acquired a substantial portion of land neededfor the Plum Creek Project and continues tosolicit the purchase of additional land from arealandowners.  This effort will continue as the Tribeworks with the Congressional delegation and theNatural Resources Conservation Service to take a fresh look at the design of the Plum CreekProject.  
The Plum Creek Agreement quantifies the
Tribe’s senior water rights in the Delaware RiverWatershed, which is necessary for the PlumCreek Project to proceed.  Plum Creek is a tribu-tary to the Upper Delaware River, which flowsthrough the Kickapoo Reservation in BrownCounty.  The Tribe has successfully negotiated itswater right with the State of Kansas, the U.S.Department of the Interior and U.S. Departmentof Justice, with the assistance of technical staffand consultants.  
Signatories to the Agreement include the State
of Kansas, Office of the Kansas Attorney Generaland the Kickapoo Tribe in Kansas.  Upon execu-tion, the Agreement will be forwarded to theFederal Government for ratification followingapproval by the U.S. Congress.
Kickapoo Tribe’s water settlement agreement finalized
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 11NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
The Tribal Supreme Court Project is part of the
Tribal Sovereignty Protection Initiative and isstaffed by the National Congress of AmericanIndians (NCAI) and the Native American RightsFund (NARF). The Project was formed in 2001 inresponse to a series of U.S. Supreme Court casesthat negatively affected tribal sovereignty. Thepurpose of the Project is to promote greater coor-dination and to improve strategy on litigationthat may affect the rights of all Indian tribes. Weencourage Indian tribes and their attorneys tocontact the Project in our effort to coordinateresources, develop strategy and prepare briefs,especially at the time of the petition for a writ ofcertiorari, prior to the Supreme Court acceptinga case for review. You can find copies of briefs andopinions on the major cases we track on theNARF website (http://sct.narf.org). 
On September 26, 2016, the Court held its long
conference during which the Justices considerednearly two-thousand petitions filed during itssummer recess, including six petitions in Indianlaw cases.   On September 29, 2016, the Courtissued an order granting review in Lewis v.Clarke, a case involving an individual-capacitysuit against a tribal employee and the doctrine oftribal sovereign immunity.  In short, theConnecticut Supreme Court held that a tribalemployee who is acting within the scope of hisemployment falls within the sovereign immunityof the Tribe even though he is sued in his indi-vidual, not official, capacity.
On October 3, 2016, the Court issued a second
order list from the long conference and deniedreview in four other Indian law cases.  However,the Court has held over the petition in Tunica-
Biloxi Gaming Authority v. Zaunbrecher in
which the Louisiana Court of Appeals, in conflictwith the holding by the Connecticut SupremeCourt in Lewis v. Clarke, found that the doctrineof tribal sovereign immunity does not extend to asuit against individual tribal employees foralleged acts of negligence in the course and scopeof their employment.   In Lewis v. Clarke, the Court granted review of
a petition seeking review of a decision of theConnecticut Supreme Court which held that doc-trine of tribal sovereign immunity extends to anemployee of the tribe who is acting within thescope of his employment. The petitioners—theLewises—are a non-Indian couple who were rear-ended by a limousine owned by the MoheganTribal Gaming Authority on I-95 (outside theTribe’s reservation). The petitioners sued theTribal Gaming Authority and Mr. Clarke (the dri-ver and an employee of the Tribal GamingAuthority) in state court for negligence. However,prior to the filing of the motion to dismiss basedon tribal sovereign immunity, the petitionersdropped their suit against the Tribal GamingAuthority, and proceeded against Mr. Clarke inhis individual capacity. The trial court, relying onMaxwell v. San Diego (9th Cir. 2013), held that
the doctrine of tribal immunity does not applywhen the Tribe is neither a party, nor the realparty in interest because the remedy, and thedamages sought will be paid by the defendanthimself, and not the Tribe. The ConnecticutSupreme Court distinguished Maxwell (a case
involving claims of gross negligence), reversedthe trial court, and held that the doctrine of trib-al sovereign immunity extends to the driver as anemployee of a Tribe who was acting within thescope of his employment when the accidentoccurred. 
The petitioners have specifically requested that
the Court resolve this conflict among the lowercourts. The question presented in the cert peti-tion is: “Whether the sovereign immunity of an
Tribal Supreme Court Project
PAGE 12                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDIndian tribe bars individual-capacity damages
actions against tribal employees for torts com-mitted within the scope of their employment.”The petitioners’ opening brief is due onNovember 14, 2016. The Tribe’s response brief isdue on December 14, 2016. The Project is work-ing directly with the attorneys representing Mr.Clarke and the interests of the Mohegan Tribe todevelop an effective amicus brief strategy.
Pro-Football, Inc. v. Blackhorse – On April 25,
2016, in response to a petition filed by the UnitedStates in Lee v. Tam, seeking review of an en banc
decision of the U.S. Court of Appeals for theFederal Circuit which held that the disparage-ment clause in § 2(a) of the Lanham Act is faciallyinvalid under the free speech clause of the FirstAmendment, Pro-Football, Inc. filed a petition forwrit of certiorari before judgment (by the FourthCircuit) asking that if the Court grants review inTam, then the Court should also grant review in
Pro-Football, Inc. v. Blackhorse as “a necessary
and ideal companion to Tam. ”  The U.S. Supreme
Court agreed to decide whether the federal gov-ernment’s ban on offensive trademarks — therule used to revoke the Washington Redskins reg-
istrations — violates the First Amendment.  
The justices granted certiorari in the separate
case of The Slants, a rock band that was denied atrademark registration on its name by the U.S.Patent and Trademark Office on the grounds thatit was offensive to Asian-Americans.  At issue is theLanham Act’s Section 2a, which bars the registra-tion of trademarks that “disparage” people. USPTOsays the provision merely denies a small benefit inorder to further legislative policy and doesn’t hin-der speech, but the Federal Circuit declared therule unconstitutional in December. USPTOappealed that ruling to the high court in April. 
The U.S. Supreme Court refused the
Washington Redskins' extraordinary request tojoin the Tam case challenging the government'sban on offensive trademarks.  The Redskins’ sep-arate case is still pending before the FourthCircuit, set for arguments in December. The teamhad filed their extraordinary request this summerto skip the appeals court and join The Slants’Supreme Court proceedings. 
In Muscogee Creek Nation v. Jewell, the
Muscogee Creek Nation retained NARF to repre-sent it in its pending action in the federal districtcourt for the District of Columbia for historicalaccounting of its trust funds and assets.  NARFand experts retained by NARF have been review-ing the Nation’s trust account data provided bythe government in the context of political nego-tiated settlements by the Obama Administration,and have assisted the Nation in making an offer ofsettlement to the government.  In September2015 the parties reached agreement on a settle-ment in principle of the Tribe’s claims in this caseand on August 27, 2016, the Muscogee CreekNation approved the settlement of its claimsagainst the United States.On December 20,
2006, the MuscogeeCreek Nation filed anaction in federal dis-trict court raising trustaccounting claims, trustfund mismanagementclaims, and non-mone-tary trust asset orresource mismanage-ment claims and seeking injunctive relief anddamages.  On December 30, 2013, the Nationretained the Native American Rights Fund as legalcounsel to represent the Nation in this action(thereby replacing its prior legal counsel). ❂
Muscogee Creek Nation settles trust fund suit 
with the federal government
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 13NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNational Indian Law Library
Free Weekly Indian Law Updates
Each week, The National Indian Law
Library provides free updates on Indian lawthrough the Indian Law Bulletins.Researchers in the library uncover the lat-est legal developments and information rel-evant to Native Americans, including recentcases, legal news and scholarship, federallegislation, and regulatory action fromagencies and departments such as theEnvironmental Protection Agency, theBureau of Indian Affairs and theDepartment of Education.  The updates aredistributed via email, on our blog, and onthe NARF Facebook page.
To receive the Indian Law Bulletins by email,
please sign up through the NILL website:http://narf.org/nill/bulletins/index.html 
Free Searchable Database of Indian Law and News
Content from the Indian Law Bulletins is
archived on the NILL website each week, effective-ly creating a searchable database of NativeAmerican law and news.  To begin researching atopic, type your search term into the GoogleSearch box on the right side of the Indian LawBulletins page.  Topics include Child Welfare,Education, Economic Development, Environment& Energy, Land & Water, Recognition &Enrollment, and Sovereign Immunity. Yourresults will be organized under nine different tabsthat represent individual bulletins.
Most cases, legislation and regulatory actions
are available in full-text.  Many news and lawreview articles are also available online.  If theitem you would like to see is not available online,you can use the Research Help link(http://www.narf.org/nill/asknill.html) to requestit from the library.Free Access to Tribal Codes and Constitutions
at our Tribal Law Gateway
Find tribal law by name of tribe or search the
Gateway using terms for law on a topic. Over 100tribal codes and constitutions are available infull-text and content from over one hundredmore are available by request. Just browse thedetailed table of contents provided and use theaskNILL request form to receive an emailed copyof the content you need.  The Tribal Law Gatewayis constantly being updated and improved and webelieve the best place to start if you are lookingfor tribal law. In an effort to make the Gatewaymore practical, we are now adding audio clips tohelp with tribal name pronunciation on eachindividual tribal nation page.
Support the National Indian Law Library
Your contributions help ensure that the
library can continue to supply free access toIndian law resources and that it has the financialmeans necessary to pursue innovative andgroundbreaking projects to serve you better.Please visit http://www.narf.org/nill/donate.htmlfor more information on how you can supportthis mission. 
❂Justice Through Knowledge!
PAGE 14                                                                          NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians
Ak-Chin Indian Community
American Indian Youth Running Strong, Inc.
Asa’carsarmiut Tribal Council
Chickasaw Nation
Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians
Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe of Indians
First Nations Development Institute
Fond du Lac Band of Lake Superior Chippewa
Klamath Tribes
Miccosukee Tribe
Mohegan Sun
Muckleshoot Tribe
National Indian Gaming Association
Nome Eskimo Community
Nottawaseppi Huron Band of the Potawatomi
Organized Village of SaxmanPechanga Band of Luiseño Indians
Poarch Band of Creek Indians
Pueblo of Isleta
Rosebud Sioux Tribe
Sac and Fox Nation
San Manuel Band of Mission Indians
San Pasqual Band of Mission Indians
Seminole Tribe of Florida
Seven Cedars Casino/Jamestown S’Klallam
Shakopee Mdewakanton Sioux Community
Stebbins Native Community
Suquamish Tribe
Tanana Chiefs Conference
Tulalip Tribes
Wyandotte Nation
Yavapai-Prescott Indian Tribe
Yoche Dehe Wintun NationIt has been made abundantly clear that non-
Indian philanthropy can no longer sustainNARF’s work.  Federal funds for specific projectshave also been reduced.  Our ability to providelegal advocacy in a wide variety of areas such asreligious freedom, the Tribal Supreme CourtProject, tribal recognition, human rights, trustresponsibility, tribal water rights, Indian ChildWelfare Act, and on Alaska tribal sovereigntyissues has been compromised.  NARF is nowturning to the tribes to provide this crucialfunding to continue our legal advocacy onbehalf of Indian Country.  It is an honor to listthose Tribes and Native organizations who havechosen to share their good fortunes with theNative American Rights Fund and the thousands
of Indian clients we have served.  
The generosity of tribes is crucial in NARF’s
struggle to ensure the freedoms and rights of allNative Americans. Contributions from thesetribes should be an example for every NativeAmerican Tribe and organization. We encourageother Tribes to become contributors and part-ners with NARF in fighting for justice for ourpeople and in keeping the vision of our ances-tors alive.  We thank the following tribes andNative organizations for their generous supportof NARF for our 2016 fiscal year – October 1,2015 to September 30, 2016:
CALLING TRIBES TO ACTIONNARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 15NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDTHE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF Annual Report: This is NARF's major report on its programs and
activities.  The Annual Report is distributed to foundations, major con-tributors, certain federal and state agencies, tribal clients, NativeAmerican organizations, and to others upon request.  Ray RamirezEditor, ramirez@narf.org.  
The NARF Legal Review is published biannually by the Native American
Rights Fund.  Third class postage paid at Boulder, Colorado.  RayRamirez, Editor, ramirez@narf.org.  There is no charge for subscrip-tions, however, contributions are appreciated.
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund is a nonprofit, charitable
organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws of the District ofColumbia.  NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the provi-sions of Section 501 C (3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and contribu-tions to NARF are tax deductible.  The Internal Revenue Service hasruled that NARF is not a "private foundation" as defined in Section 509(a)
of the Internal Revenue Code.
Main Office: Native American Rights Fund, 1506 Broadway, Boulder,
Colorado  80302 (303-447-8760) (FAX 303-443-7776). www.narf.org 
Washington, D.C. Office: Native American Rights Fund, 1514 P Street,
NW (Rear) Suite D, Washington, D.C. 20005 (202-785-4166) (FAX 202-822-0068).
Alaska Office: Native American Rights Fund, 745 W. 4th Avenue, Suite
502, Anchorage, Alaska 99501 (907-276-0680) (FAX 907-276-2466).
Workplace Campaigns: NARF is a member of America’s Charities, a
national workplace giving federation. Giving through your workplace isas easy as checking off NARF’s box, #10350 on the Combined FederalCampaign (CFC) pledge form authorizing automatic payroll deduction.The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is the oldest and
largest nonprofit national Indian rights organization in the coun-try devoting all its efforts to defending and promoting the legalrights of Indian people on issues essential to their tribal sover-eignty, their natural resources and their human rights. NARFbelieves in empowering individuals and communities whoserights, economic self-sufficiency, and political participation havebeen systematically or systemically eroded or undermined. 
Native Americans have been subjugated and dominated.
Having been stripped of their land, resources and dignity, tribestoday are controlled by a myriad of federal treaties, statutes, andcase law. Yet it is within these laws that Native Americans placetheir hope and faith for justice and the protection of their way oflife. With NARF’s help, Native people can go on to provide leader-ship in their communities and serve as catalysts for just policiesand practices towards Native peoples nationwide. From a histori-cal standpoint Native Americans have, for numerous reasons,been targets of discriminatory practices.
Since its inception in 1970, NARF has represented over 250
Tribes in 31 states in such areas as tribal jurisdiction and recog-nition, land claims, hunting and fishing rights, the protection ofIndian religious freedom, and many others. In addition to thegreat strides NARF has made in achieving justice on behalf ofNative American people, perhaps NARF’s greatest distinguishingattribute has been its ability to bring excellent, highly ethicallegal representation to dispossessed tribes. NARF has been suc-cessful in representing Indian tribes and individuals in cases thathave encompassed every area and issue in the field of Indian law.The accomplishments and growth of NARF over the years con-firmed the great need for Indian legal representation on a nation-al basis. This legal advocacy on behalf of Native Americans con-tinues to play a vital role in the survival of tribes and their way oflife. NARF strives to protect the most important rights of Indianpeople within the limit of available resources. 
One of the initial responsibilities of NARF’s first Board of
Directors was to develop priorities that would guide the NativeAmerican Rights Fund in its mission to preserve and enforce thelegal rights of Native Americans.  The Committee developed fivepriorities that continue to lead NARF today:
• Preservation of tribal existence
• Protection of tribal natural resources• Promotion of Native American human rights• Accountability of governments to Native Americans• Development of Indian law and educating the public about
Indian rights, laws, and issuesUnder the priority of the preservation of tribal existence , NARF
works to construct the foundations that are necessary to empow-er tribes so that they can continue to live according to theirNative traditions, to enforce their treaty rights, to insure theirindependence on reservations and to protect their sovereignty. 
Throughout the process of European conquest and coloniza-
tion of North America, Indian tribes experienced a steady dimin-ishment of their land base to a mere 2.3 percent of its originalsize.  Currently, there are approximately 55 million acres ofIndian-controlled land in the continental United States and about44 million acres of Native-owned land in Alaska.  An adequateland base and control over natural resources are central compo-nents of economic self-sufficiency and self-determination, and assuch, are vital to the very existence of tribes.  Thus, much ofNARF’s work involves the protection of tribal natural resources .  
Although basic human rights are considered a universal and
inalienable entitlement, Native Americans face an ongoing threatof having their rights undermined by the United States govern-ment, states, and others who seek to limit these rights. Under thepriority of the promotion of human rights , NARF strives to
enforce and strengthen laws which are designed to protect therights of Native Americans to practice their traditional religion,to use their own language, and to enjoy their culture.  
Contained within the unique trust relationship between the
United States and Indian nations is the inherent duty for all lev-els of government to recognize and responsibly enforce the manylaws and regulations applicable to Indian peoples.  Because suchlaws impact virtually every aspect of tribal life, NARF maintainsits involvement in the legal matters pertaining to accountability
of governments to Native Americans.
The coordinated development of Indian law and educating the
public about Indian rights, laws, and issues is essential for the
continued protection of Indian rights.  This primarily involvesestablishing favorable court precedents, distributing informationand law materials, encouraging and fostering Indian legal educa-tion, and forming alliances with Indian law practitioners andother Indian organizations. 
Requests for legal assistance should be addressed to the
Litigation Management Committee at NARF's main office, 1506Broadway, Boulder, Colorado 80302.  NARF’s clients are expected topay whatever they can toward the costs of legal representation. 
❂NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Moses Haia, Chairman .............................................................................................. Native Hawai ian
Robert McGhee, Vice-Chairman ........................................................ Poarch Band of Creek IndiansKurt BlueDog ...................................... Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate of the Lake Traverse ReservationTex G. Hall ........................................................................................................ Three Affil iated Tribes
Gary Hayes ………………………………………………………………. Ute Mountain Ute TribeJulie Roberts-Hyslop …………………………………………………… Native Village of TananaJefferson Keel .......................................................................................................... Chickas aw Nation
Stephen Lewis ……………………………………………………... Gila River Indian Community Anita Mitchell.......................................................................................................... Muckles hoot Tribe
Larry N. Olinger .................................................................. Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla IndiansRichard Peterson .................................................................................. Tlingit & Haida Indian TribesPeter Pino ………………………………………………………………………………. Zia PuebloMichael Smith ........................................................................................................ Chickasaw  Nation
Executive Director: John E. Echohawk .................................................................................. Pawnee
NARF LEGAL REVIEW • VOLUME 41, NO. 2 • SUMMER/FALL 2016Native American Rights Fund
1506 Broadway
Boulder, CO 80302Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage
PPAAIIDD
Boulder, Colorado
Permit No. 589
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER
