I can’t tell you how privileged I feel to be making
this talk.  There’s no doubt about it:  other thanmy family, the pivotal moment in my life was inOctober 1971 when I walked through the frontdoor of 1506 Broadway and became a staff attor-ney for NARF .  I have no words for all the joy andbeauty that tribal sovereignty–and Indian people–have brought to my life.  Thank you.
In celebration of these 45 years, I’d like to pay
brief honor to David Getches, Tom Fredricks, andJohn Echohawk, the only directors NARF has everhad.  They were all forces, each in their own way,in establishing the greatness of this organization,and carried the high ideals of NARF in every partof their careers.  Thanks to you three.
“They had nothing.” “They had nothing.” 
“They had nothing.”
I’m writing a history of the Boldt decision and
last spring had the pleasure of spending severalweeks in Seattle, where I could interview many ofthe people involved in that historic litigation.During those interviews three attorneys, twofrom the tribes and one from the state ofWashington, independently volunteered andemphasized the words I just spoke to you. “Theyhad nothing.”
I asked each of them to explain what they meant
by that phrase. They mentioned the grindingpoverty–60% unemployment would be a conserv-ative figure around 1970.  They variously men-tioned physical factors such as the universal lackof indoor plumbing and electricity, the absence ofpaved roads, and the housing, most of whichqualified as shacks.  They also emphasized thehealth problems and the very limited educa-tional opportunities.  They pointed to the other
factors indicating the terrible state that Indianpeople in Northwest Washington found them-selves in. Of course, Indians all across the coun-try were enduring similar conditions.
VOLUME 40, NO. 2 SUMMER/FALL 2015NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
They had nothing
They Had Nothing - Charles Wilkinson
................................................................ page 1
Case Updates .......................................... page 7 NARF mourns passing of former Board 
member Barbara Smith ...................... page 11
NARF 45th Anniversary Photo Essay .. page 12New NARF Board Members.................. page 16National Indian Law Library ................ page 17Calling Tribes to Action! ...................... page 18NARF .................................................... page 19NARF Board .......................................... page 20Charles WilkinsonThey had nothing.  It was for exactly that reason
that Vine Deloria Jr., Charles Lohah, DavidRisling, and a few other Indian people wanted toestablish a national organization dedicated to vin-dicating the legal rights of Native American people.
Of course, although Indian people lacked a
great many things, it was not literally true that inthe late 1960s they had nothing.  They still hadthe most important thing, their vibrant cultures,demeaned and battered to be sure, but still verymuch part of their minds and hearts.Nonetheless, the national government, the states,and local citizens had taken away a lot and sup-pressed much of what they didn’t take.
They took away the indigenous economies.
Even today Indian people, when asked to describetheir financial well-being before the white peoplecame, will say that “we were rich.”  That is aneconomic fact, not a romantic construct, for theoriginal economies were much more substantialand elaborate than is commonly realized by non-Indians.  In the Pacific Northwest, for example,tribes developed elaborate economic markets–reaching down to the Columbia, well up intoCanada, and to the crest of the Cascades andbeyond–for the trade and sale of deer and elkmeat and, especially salmon and other marinespecialties.  Then, the new people came and, afterspending decades benefiting from the vigorousnative economies, overran those economies withtheir technologies and capitalism. In ways wecan’t fully comprehend, the outsiders could neverget beyond the ironclad assumption that Indianpeople were inferior and that the God-given mis-sion of the westward expansion was to eliminateall native institutions, regardless of how valuablethey might in fact be.
They took away the land.  They didn’t get all of
it, because the tribes retained enough militarycapability at treaty time to prevent that.  After the
treaties many people, both political leaders andcommon citizens, stoutly believed–and there isfar too much truth in it–that if you took away theland you would eventually erase the culture.John Wesley Powell, the great explorer, policymaker, philosopher of the West, was explicitabout it.  He strongly and cravenly supportedallotment in the late 1880s because, if you couldwrench the land away from the tribes, especiallythe sacred places, you could wrench away the cul-ture as well.  That would, he and others believed,hasten the moment when the vanishing Indianwould become the vanished Indian which, afterall, was the ultimate objective of national policy.
They outlawed many of the old dances and cer-
emonies.  Is there a darker chapter in the story ofthe First Amendment than the BIA's relentlessregulatory crackdown on Native dances and othercustoms?  Some traditional practitioners carriedout their ceremonies in the dark, in basements orother hard to-find locations, but for many thethreat of punishment was too real and too severe.Besides, the crackdowns came in other forms, asin the Pacific Northwest where BIA employeessimply torched traditional dance halls.
They suppressed the languages, the ultimate
expression of culture and worldview in all soci-eties.  BIA and boarding schools prohibited nativetongues, often washing out boys’ and girls’mouths with yellow lye soap if they spoke them.Government officials and people in town scornedand ridiculed Native speakers.
They directly hit Native families.  Parents and
children were both pressured hard so that theyoung people would go to the boarding schools,meaning that these family members would beaway from home most of the year.  In the schools,they would suffer nothing less than indoctrina-
PAGE 2                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 3NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
tion.  The students would be told “don’t pay any
attention to your grandparents.  They are oldfashioned.  Ignore them and you have a chance tobecome a real American.”  Inexcusably, federalofficials stood idly by in the post-World War IIera, when states and churches began aggressivelyremoving–sometimes amounting to kidnap-ping–Indian children from their homes andobtaining state-court adoption papers in favor ofnon-Indian. 
They took away something else.  They took
away hopes and dreams and optimism and indi-viduality.  They took away the right to be yourself. 
And, by the late 1960s and early 70s, many pol-
icymakers were still defending and pursuing thecurrent policy adopted by Congress in 1953: out-right termination of treaties, reservations, andfederal obligations to tribes.
It was into this cauldron of circumstances that
NARF was created 45 years ago.  Vine Deloria Jr.,put it right: “We better win this one because, if wedon't, there won’t be another.”
Not that NARF was seen as the be all and end
all.  Many organizations would be needed, as wellas building capacity in the tribes themselves.Still, tribal leaders at the time placed greatemphasis on the need for lawyers and law reform.Indian people and tribes are subject to many lawsand regulations, and the field is known for itscomplexity.  The new legal services firms on ornear reservations were already making their pres-ence felt and some capable attorneys practicedIndian law in private firms.  The hope, and thathope has more than borne itself out, was thatNARF could play a particular role in addressingnational issues, becoming a substantial firm with excellent lawyers, and representing Indianindividuals and tribes who needed attorneys onpressing matters that  raised issues of national
consequence but who could not afford to paylawyers. 
From the beginning, one of NARF’s strengths
has been its vision in prioritizing its work, first tomeet the situation just described and, over time,to gradually adjust its work to meet changing cir-cumstances as tribes made many advances andnew kinds of needs emerged.  This ability to meetthe particular challenges of particular timesbecomes ever more evident when we look atNARF’s accomplishments in the early years upthrough today.
NARF’s work also has been marked by what was
mostly an unexpected result. For lawyers in private practice, and back in those days privatepractice was most of what law was, attorneyswork was mostly self-contained.  You worked ona single project, like a contract, will, corporatecharter, or lawsuit.  The results might benefit theclient, maybe a lot, but they would be mostly lim-ited to that specific project.
It turned out that NARF’s work has been much
more than that. This was partly because itinvolves public law, partly because of the particularcircumstances of Indian country. One example,though it is somewhat more diffuse than othersI’ll mention, involves one of NARF’s core con-cerns, tribal sovereignty. We have seen, overthese 45 years, how an advance in one discretearea of tribal sovereignty, whether it be educa-tion, health, water rights, jurisdiction, or other,that that this one victory will likely increase, evenif slightly, the general respect of outsiders fortribal sovereignty. And, over time, increasedrespect for tribal sovereignty will arch toward theestablishment of still broader and deeper sub-stantive tribal sovereignty.Now, from the vantage point of 45 years, we can
see this dynamic in Technicolor from the waythat NARFs work has played out.  The extraordi-nary 1974 ruling by Judge George Boldt in United
States v. Washington –which mid-19th century
treaties guaranteed to tribes the right to harvest50% of the salmon in Northwest Washington–hasturned out to be even more historic than thedecision seemed at the time.  Judge Boldt ruledthat, as sovereign governments, tribes could reg-ulate fishing.  Immediately, the tribes formednatural resource departments, drafted regula-tions, set up enforcement systems with officers,hired fisheries scientists, and established orupgraded existing tribal courts.  These were per-haps the first modern regulatory systems inIndian country.  Then, seeing how well the fisheries agencies worked, the Northwest tribesbegan setting up tribal agencies for education,health, land-use planning, and other purposes.They joined together to create the NorthwestIndian Fisheries Commission, with deep exper-tise in science and policy, one of the first inter-tribals.  In time, the judicial recognition of tribalmanagement authority, coupled with these otherefforts, led to the comprehensive regime in theNorthwest for co-management of the marinefisheries among the United States, the tribes, andthe states. 
The wave of changes initiated by the Boldt deci-
sion went beyond fisheries in ways in addition tothose already mentioned.  Today, the Northwesttribes are elaborate and substantial sovereigngovernments, with most of them having morethan 300 governmental employees, not countinggaming and other enterprises.  Tribal leaders reg-ularly point to the Boldt decision as the trigger-ing point for their modern revival.  To be sure,NARF has never gone it alone and virtually alwayshas coordinated with other people and organiza-tions.  In the Northwest, Billy Frank Jr. and othertribal leaders and activists, and Judge Boldt 
himself, played major roles.  So did legal servicesattorneys and private practitioners who were willing to bill for below their normal fees. But David Getches was lead counsel, and heknocked around many ideas with attorneys backin Boulder, and to this day Northwest Indian people honor NARF’s central role in  that land-mark lawsuit that led to a thoroughgoing refor-mation of tribal organizations reaching farbeyond the bounds of the actual issues decided inthe case.  
Much the same can be said about NARF’s role in
other contexts, then and today, as a significantcontributor to the modern tribal movement.
This dynamic was at work in United States v.
Michigan , where NARF played a sturdy role in
that case and in the tribal revival in the UpperGreat Lakes area. So, too, with MenomineeRestoration in 1973, which led directly to therestoration of all terminated tribes, the recogni-tion of non-recognized tribes, and the formationby all of those tribes of active and effective sover-eign tribal governments. Menomonee restorationcould never have happened without the energyand talent of Ada Deer, Sylvia Wilbur, and otherMenominee leaders and activists, but NARFplayed an effective role there also.  Many of therevived Eastern tribes have built their modernoperations upon the Eastern land claims cases,where NARF broke new ground.  At Pyramid Lakein Nevada, the Pyramid Lake Paiutes and its lead-ers achieved true comprehensive watershedrestoration throughout the Truckee and Carsonwatersheds, and then put together expanded trib-al governments in the fashion seen in theNorthwest, but it never could have happenedwithout the all-out commitment to the litigationby the Native American Rights Fund. 
PAGE 4                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 5NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
By the mid-1980s, Walter Echo-hawk, with help
from Steve Moore, was hard at work fulfilling oneof his life's passions, combatting the scourges ofexcavating and stealing of traditional culturalobjects and human remains.  Numerous lawsuitsand negotiations finally funneled into the NativeAmerican Graves Protection and Repatriation Actof 1990, one of the most luminous accomplish-ments for NARF and all of Indian country.Essential to NAGPRA was the effort put in by reli-gious practitioners, who patiently explained,often in their own languages, the horror of theproblem and how deeply Indian people wanted tomake inroads into it.  It also was an occasionwhere the beauty of the law, which we do notoften enough witness, can be seen in full flowerdue to the legal genius, traditional roots, and all-out commitment of Walter Echo-hawk, who,through NAGPRA, changed the world.
Over the past 20 years or so, NARF has both
solidified its position as a main guardian andcoordinator of the whole field of Indian law and,as well, has moved into new and exciting areas.From the beginning, NARF saw itself a watchdogfor the whole field, yes, but the field was a lotsmaller and less complicated back then.  Nowthere are many more participants and kinds ofparticipants.  Nonetheless, NARF has continuedits sacred obligation to represent tribes with lim-ited resources and significant legal needs and, aswell, maintains its centrality in the nationalIndian law community.
For example, NARF long had a practice of filing
amicus briefs in every Supreme Court caseinvolving Indians but since 2001 we have had theTribal Supreme Court Project, where NARF has alead role.  No, we haven't had a lot of greatresults, but that is due to the Court, not us.  Thisproject, working with attorneys across Indiancountry, has built a solid system for putting ourcases before the Court in the best possible light.
Strategies such as whether and how to handlecert are addressed in great depth.  Once in theCourt, briefs, including amici, are polished andthe cases are argued by the best lawyers.  It isn'teasy–the 90-party conference calls are horrid–butthe Tribal Supreme Court Project has become anecessary, effective, and permanent cornerstoneof tribal advocacy.
The trust relationship has long been under fire
and we must protect this foundational doctrine asbest we can.  NARF sees itself as the watchdog forthe trust and large results followed from ElouiseCobell's call to John Echohawk to do something.In the end, the individual allottees received lessthan they deserved but the payments were rea-sonably substantial.  The land buyback provisionshave already returned some 1.5 million acres totribal ownership and there is more to come.  Mostof the tribal cases, which were legally difficult,have settled, and the results have been highlyfavorable to the tribes.  
NARF’s consistent, long-time commitment to
foundational issues in Indian Law, and in Indiancountry generally, can also be seen in NARF’sefforts in education.  The reality was and is that amajority of Indian children are educated in stateschools, many of them off the reservations. Earlyon, recognizing the connection between sover-eignty and education, NARF was a strong sup-porter of the movement for Indian-controlledschools, a grassroots effort to increase the num-ber of Indian people on state school boards.  Overtime, the mission was expanded and for the pastseveral years NARF , with Melody McCoy thechampion, has been a leader in achieving consid-erable success in creating tribal education codesthat apply both on the reservations and in stateschools.NARF has taken a leadership role in yet another
foundational and complex area, the settlement oftribal water rights cases.  From the beginning,tribes looked to NARF for leadership.  In the 1980s,NARF made contact with the Western GovernorsAssociation and the Western States Water Counciland they joined in an effort to set a context for set-tlements, in recognition of the fact that, for allwater users, including tribes, settlement can oftenbe the preferred option over litigation. A majorconference has taken place every two years and thedoors of water users, the state offices, and thetribes remained open.  Congress has enacted 29water settlements with NARF attorneys handlingnine of them and offering advice in most of theothers.  There is still more work to be done, andNARF will be right in the middle of it.
Native people know their homelands and, far
more than most, understand the destructivemarch of climate change. Tribal villages inAlaska, Northwest Washington, and elsewherehave already been affected by rising ocean waters.All across the country, Indian people are seeingand feeling the impacts on forests, rivers, range-land, and animals.  NARF is working to assurethat tribes will be treated as sovereigns in stateand federal assessments and planning for publicland and water resources.  
The climate change work dovetails with NARF’s
involvement in international issues where, since1999, the organization, often representing NCAI, has been active in the adoption Amongother things, for the past six years NARF hassteadfastly participated in the elaborate UNFramework Convention on Climate Changeprocess.  Progress has been painfully slow but thestakes are high and NARF will continue to pressfor full recognition of the special circumstances,and rights under the UN Declaration, ofAmerican Indians and other indigenous peoples. As you know, there is much more to tell about
this extraordinary organization that itself, haschanged the world.  But, oh, would I ever beremiss if I didn't mention one other part ofNARF: the Anchorage office–NARF North.  Thespecifics vary across Indian country but everytribe is burdened in some significant way by theweight of history.  Alaska is as bad as it gets.  TheAlaska Native Claims Settlement Act, passed in1971, was an abject horror and for nearly half acentury state and federal officials used every partof it they could in their crusade to brutalizeNative land, sovereignty, economy, and culture.Larry Aschenbrenner and Bob Anderson foughtback with everything they had and, amazingly,staved off a lot and made some progress.  Now wehave those four wonderful lawyers up there,Heather Kendall-Miller, Natalie Landreth, ErinDoutherty, and Matthew Newman.  They've takenon about every issue you can name in that bigstate, from voting rights to Indian Child WelfareAct to water and fishing and hunting rights toland into trust.  And, somehow, ultimately, afterthe Supreme Court’s Venetie decision–about as
wrong-headed and devastating as court opinionsget–they have, impossibly, piece by painstakingpiece, made significant progress in resurrectingthe sovereignty that seemed lost forever. 
So, I'd like to finish off by offering a hearty toast
to the attorneys, staff, and board, past and pre-sent, of NARF North, and of NARF nationally,who have carried so high the banners of Nativepeople, their sovereignty, the human spirit, andthe very best law firm there ever was.  
A TOAST!!! ❂
PAGE 6                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 7NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDCASE UPDATES
In January 2015, the Bureau of Indian Affairs
(BIA) published its new revisions to theGuidelines for State Courts and Agencies inIndian Child Custody Proceedings. The newGuidelines represent major progress in addressingmany of the problematic areas which have arisensince the Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) wasenacted in 1978 – such as the Existing IndianFamily exception, which the Guidelines expresslyrepudiate. In February 2015, the BIA announcedit intended to take its reforms even further by proposing, for the first time ever, to promul-gate binding federal regulations governing the implementation of ICWA. These reforms,however, have drawn the ire of ICWA opponentsnationwide.
The first response from ICWA opponents came
on May 27, 2015, when the National Council forAdoption (NCA) filed a suit against the BIA in fed-eral district court for the Eastern District ofVirginia. The case, National Council for Adoption
v. Jewell , claims that the BIA exceeded its author-
ity in publishing the updated 2015 Guidelines,that the Guidelines themselves violate theConstitutional rights of Indian children and par-ents, and that provisions of ICWA itself areunconstitutional under the Tenth Amendment.Days after the case was filed, NARF began work-ing with other attorneys from the National IndianChild Welfare Association (NICWA), the NationalCongress of American Indians (NCAI), and theAssociation of American Indian Affairs (AAIA) todevelop a response. Together, this informal work-ing group has worked to develop a litigationdefense strategy. The BIA filed a motion to trans-fer venue on July 30, 2015, which the courtdenied. Plaintiffs then filed for summary judg-ment, which the BIA opposed, and filed a motionto dismiss for lack of subject matter jurisdictionand for judgment on the pleadings. NARF repre-senting NICWA, NCAI, and AAIA, filed an amicusbrief in support of the BIA on September 18,2015. On September 29, 2015, the court deniedPlaintiff’s motion for summary judgment on thegrounds that (1) Plaintiffs lacked standing to
challenge the Guidelines , (2) the Guidelines arenot a “final agency action” within the meaning ofthe APA because they do not create legal rightsand obligations, and (3) the Guidelines are non-binding interpretive rules not subject to theAdministrative Procedures Act’s notice-and com-ment procedures. The court also noted that itwould soon be issuing a memorandum opinionand order. 
In Minnesota, leading members of the Academy
of Adoption Attorneys filed a constitutional chal-lenge in state court to the Minnesota IndianFamily Preservation Act (MIFPA). The case, Doe
v. Jesson , makes many of the same constitutional
challenges to the MIFPA as the plaintiffs make inNational Council for Adoption v. Jewell; specifi-
cally, that the MIFPA violates the rights of Indianchildren and parents by requiring them to notifythe tribe of the adoptive proceeding and by allow-ing a tribe to intervene in the case. Plaintiffs filedfor a preliminary injunction and requested expedited consideration of the case. NARF imme-diately reached out to the attorneys for the Tribeinvolved, the Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe, and provided research and technical assistance informing a response. The Tribe was ultimatelysuccessful in defeating the preliminary injunc-tion, with the court finding the plaintiffs would
National Indian Child Welfare Act Defense
PAGE 8 NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDsuffer no irreparable harm by having to notify the
Tribe on the adoptive proceeding in state court.The Tribe and the State have since filed separatemotions to dismiss the case. Because many stateshave enacted similar state-ICWAs likeMinnesota’s MIFPA, NARF is working in conjunc-tion with the attorneys from the Minnesota basedfirm BlueDog, Paulson & Small, P .L.L.P . – princi-pled by NARF Board member Kurt BlueDog – indeveloping an amicus strategy on behalf ofMinnesota’s other tribal governments.
Finally, on July 7, 2015, the Goldwater
Institute—a conservative think tank located inPhoenix, Arizona—filed a lawsuit challenging theconstitutionality of ICWA and the revisedGuidelines. The suit, filed in Arizona federal dis-trict court as A.D. v. Washburn , seeks declaratory
and injunctive relief and specifically targets thetransfer, active efforts, burdens of proof forremoval and termination of parental rights, andplacement preferences provisions of the ICWA, aswell as corresponding sections in the Guidelines.The complaint requests that the court declarethese provisions of ICWA, and the correspondingGuidelines, unconstitutional as beyond theauthority of Congress and the Department of theInterior. It further requests that the court enjointhe defendants from ensuring enforcement of theprovisions. NARF , together with NICWA, NCAI,and others immediately began formulating amedia and legal response to the suit. The BIA’sresponse to the complaint is due on October 16,2015. NARF has been coordinating with the twotribes with member children in the case—theNavajo Nation and the Gila River IndianCommunity. NARF also continues to coordinatewith NICWA, NCAI, and AAIA and will likely filean amicus brief.
In addition to the federal cases listed above,
NARF’s ICWA Defense team is monitoring impor-tant cases in Michigan and Oklahoma.
Tribal Voting Rights
In Toyukak v. Treadwell, NARF and co-counse l 
Morgan, Lewis & Bockius LLP and Armstrong 
Teasdale LLP , acting on behalf of two tribal coun-
cils and two Alaska Native  voters, filed suit in fed-
eral court charging state elections officials with 
ongoing violations of the federal Voting Rights 
Act (VRA) and the United States Constitution. 
The suit claimed state officials failed to p rovide 
oral language assistance to citizens whose first 
language is Yup’ik, the primary language of many 
Alaska Natives in the Dillingham and Wade 
Hampton regions. Trial was held from June 23 to 
July 3, 2014 and the court rende red a n oral deci-
sion on September 3, 2014. T he Court held that 
the Defendants had in fact violated Section 203 of 
the VRA in all the census areas at issue. The 
Court further found that the Defendants had 
improperly relied on what they called “outreach 
workers” in villages to translate the entire Official 
Electio n Pamphlet themselves, even though 
these workers had never been asked to d o so and  
there was no evidence showing they could do 
this. The Court found that the end result was anabsence of all pre-election information such as
candidate statements, ballot measures, pro andcon statements for ballot measures and all otherinformation available to English speaking votersbefore an election. After briefing, the Courtordered broad remedial relief including the writ-ten and audio translation of all pre-election mate-rials distributed in English, posting of bilingualtranslators at all polling places, and also ordered
NARF LEGAL REVIEW PAGE 9NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDDefendants to report back to the Court on their
progress after the November 2014 election,which was submitted shortly before Christmas2014.
In 2015, NARF and the plaintiffs spent several
months in an extended negotiation with the Stateof Alaska to settle the case. On September 30,2015, the Court approved a settlement agreementwith the Defendants that provides broad relief inthe form of a comprehensive language assistanceprogram, including the appointment of federalobservers through the 2020 elections, translationof all pre-election information into the Yup’ikand Gwich’in languages, the creation of a newstate-level position specifically devoted to lan-guage assistance, and court oversight and report-ing through 2020.
In 2013, the U. S. Supreme Court in the Shelby
County case invalidated Section 4 of the VotingRights Act which required preclearance by theU.S. Justice Department of changes in state vot-ing laws in certain states with histories of dis-crimination. On behalf of Bristol Bay NativeCorporation and the Alaska Federation of Natives,NARF has been working on a Congressionalamendment to the Voting Rights Act that wouldprotect Alaska Natives and American Indiansfrom the kinds of voting discrimination they havefaced across the country since 2013. SenatorMark Begich introduced the NatiVRA (S.2399) inan attempt to remedy some of the longstandingissues such as the lack of language assistance,lack of polling places, and lack of early voting, butit did not pass before expiration of the 2013-2014congressional term. Despite significant efforts, alarge coalition of civil rights groups were unableto get a broader “Shelby Fix” through Congresseither.
On June 24, 2015, Senator Leahy and approxi-
mately 30 co-sponsors introduced the VotingRights Advancement Act, a broad based bill thatprevents specific practices wherever they mayoccur in the country. That bill also includes anew Section 2 called “Voting on Indian lands”that mandates equal access to early voting,absentee voting and in-person polling locationson all Indian lands, which is very broadly definedin the bill. NARF helped author these sections inresponse to comments and complaints fromIndian reservations and Native villages. SenatorMurkowski (AK) signed on as the first Republicanco-sponsor on September 10, 2015. Additionally,in August 2015, Senator Tester introduced S1912, a voting bill specifically directed at electionproblems in Indian Country. NARF submittedsome comments and suggested changes to thebill to ensure that while Tribes have an opportu-nity to designate polling locations, states shouldnot be permitted to shift their expenses and bur-dens for these matters onto the Tribes.
In January 2015, NARF proposed an ambitious
new project: gathering voting rights advocates,lawyers, experts, and tribal advocates into oneroom to discuss current problems with voting inIndian Country and begin to develop solutions tothese problems. The meeting was held May 27-28,2015 in Washington, DC. It was convened in partbecause the 2016 election cycle promises to be anunusually important one at the national, stateand local levels. The national elections includethe selection of a new President, and with 34Senate seats up (24 of which are currentlyRepublican held seats), a determination of whichparty will control the U.S. Senate. Six of theseSenate seats are in states with significant (andpotentially determinative) American Indian/Alaska Native (AIAN) populations: Alaska,Arizona, California, North Dakota, Oklahoma,and South Dakota. There are also eleven guber-natorial races in 2016, three of which are in stateswhere the Native vote may play a significant role(North Dakota, Montana and Washington).
In addition, in the wake of the U.S. Supreme
Court’s decision in Shelby County, numerousstate legislatures have passed new election lawsthat impose significant barriers to AIAN voters.Currently, individuals and organizations workingon AIAN voting rights issues do so independent ofone-another, with no coordinated strategy inplace to address voting rights issues in IndianCountry. To date, this work has been generally(but not exclusively) reactive – in response to animmediate threat – rather than proactive orplanned in advance of a specific election. That iswhat this project hopes to change. This meetingPAGE 10 NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
The Tribal Supreme Court Project is part of the
Tribal Sovereignty Protection Initiative and is
staffed by the National Congress of AmericanIndians (NCAI) and the Native American RightsFund (NARF).  The Project was formed in 2001 inresponse to a series of U.S. Supreme Court casesthat negatively affected tribal sovereignty.  Thepurpose of the Project is to promote greater coor-dination and to improve strategy on litigationthat may affect the rights of all Indian tribes.  Weencourage Indian tribes and their attorneys tocontact the Project in our effort to coordinateresources, develop strategy and prepare briefs,especially at the time of the petition for a writ ofcertiorari, prior to the Supreme Court acceptinga case for review.  You can find copies of briefsand opinions on the major cases we track on theNARF website (www.narf.org/sct/index.html). 
On September 28, 2015, the Court held its
“long” conference at which it considered nearly2000 petitions filed during the summer months,including five petitions in Indian law cases.  In itsorder list of October 1, 2015, the Court grantedreview in 13 cases, including the petition filed bythe State of Nebraska in Nebraska v. Parker (No.
14-1406) in which the State is challengingwhether the establishments in the Village ofPender which serve alcoholic beverages are subjectto the Omaha Tribe’s liquor licensing and tax reg-ulations. Thus, the Tribal Supreme Court Projecthas been and continues to prepare for a very busyOctober Term 2015 (“OT2105”).  In June 2015,the Court granted review of two petitions inIndian law cases: Dollar General Corporation v.Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians (tribal court
jurisdiction over non-Indians doing business on-reservation) and Menominee Indian Tribe of
Wisconsin v. United States (equitable tolling of
statute of limitations in suits against U.S.).  Thelatter two cases are currently being briefed by theparties.  Menominee will be argued on December1, 2015, and Dollar General will be argued onDecember 7, 2015.  
In its order list of October 5, 2015, the Court
summarily denied review of the four other peti-tions filed in Indian Law cases in considered during its long conference: Oklahoma v. Hobia(ex parte Young suit in wake of Bay Millsdecision); Sac and Fox Nation v. Borough of Jim
Thorpe (repatriation of remains of Jim Thorpe
under NAGPRA); Torres v. Santa Ynez Band ofChumash Indians (contractor bankruptcy and
sanctions involving a tribe); and Wisconsin v. Ho Chunk (state regulation of class II gaming). ❂
Tribal Supreme Court Project update was conceived and planned specifically to addressthe shifting and increasingly complex issues sur-rounding AIAN voting. The specific goals of themeeting were: (1) Prepare pre-sessionreports/memos (by participants) describing his-tory of work on voting rights issues in Indiancountry, effectiveness of strategies employed, andcurrent status of issue (e.g., resolution by settle-ment or consent decree, ongoing litigation); (2)Bring together in one room lawyers, advocates,and grassroots organizers involved in litigatingvoting rights cases in Indian Country and otherswho have information to share about currentproblems in Indian Country; (3) Conduct a seriesof work sessions in which the participants discusscommon issues, brainstorm approaches to thesechallenges, and generate a strategy and litigationplan to address the highest priority voting rightsissues in Indian Country; (4) Allocate or assignissues to specific people or organizations andform collaborative partnerships to execute ourstrategy and litigation plan; and (5) Have an orga-nized and prepared litigation strategy for the2016 election cycle.
With the completion of this initial meeting, the
participants have developed an ongoing projectcalled the Native American Voting RightsCoalition (NAVRC). It meets on a monthly basis,as do its subgroups on redistricting, litigation,capacity building and data gathering. The NAVRCis actively working on its 2016 work as well asfundraising for the group itself.NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 11NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNARF mourns passing of former Board member
Barbara Smith
“Healing brings a quiet and
the quiet brings the peace.”
It is with heavy hearts that
NARF mourns the suddenpassing of Barbara Smith(Chickasaw) who walked onNovember 11, 2015.  Barbarahad just completed her three
two-year terms as a member of NARF’s Board ofDirectors. Barbara was an attorney and a tribal
court judge and truly believed that indigenouspeacemaking practices were in the best interestof all tribes in order to have healing for theirrespective communities.  Barbara first came toknow of NARF and work with us through ourIndigenous Peacemaking Initiative.  She sharedher wisdom, grace, warmth and humor with us inmany ways.  We honor Barbara’s life by sharingher own words with you.
Historically, the judicial system in America is
the end of the resolution process for the prob-lems of people.  However, in my journey to peace,I have come to believe that the judicial systemshould actually be the beginning of a healingprocess with the end being a peaceful resolution.As I make this journey in search of peace, I amlearning and discovering who I am and why I am.  I have always known my Indian heritage.I have always been proud.  Until recently, I did-n’t realize how thin the knowledge of my historyhas been.  As I rediscover my own cultural baseand I find that it brings to me a “quiet inside”, I realize how important a strong, positive cultur-al base is to every individual.  I do believe strongcultural knowledge is necessary for personalhealing in conflicted situations.
When I began this journey, I thought I knew
who I was.  But, I didn’t understand why I was.
I have come to believe that there can be no soci-
etal healing in conflicted situations without havinghealing for all affected parties, not just for the partybefore the court.  There are many people affected
by a legal conflict, and they all need healing.
As time passes, it becomes apparent to me that
healing does not come with mere passage oftime.  Acquiescence to a non-responsive legalsystem only creates an additional avenue for dis-appointment and anger.  Healing cannot occurunless there is some degree of peace within allthe people affected by the conflict.  And, I don’tbelieve there will be healing with the perpetra-tors unless their victims begin a search for theirown peace.  The peacemaking process mustaddress both sides of healing simultaneously.  
Every person affected by the conflict needs to
be involved in a circle of healing.  To find peace,the hurt and anger inside must be quieted. If there is a quiet inside, the anger is gone. It appears that a search for peace is a search foreach person’s quite inside.  
Just imagine what it would look like if attor-
neys were working toward a peaceful resolutioninstead of for a win.  Attorneys have great per-suasive powers with their clients. They could andshould be working to help their clients bring ahurtful situation to a peaceful resolution.  Theycould and should be counselors of healing. It would be in the best interest of their clients.  If attorneys were trained with a healing baseinstead of an adversarial base, they might take aroll as part of the Peacemaking process and helptheir clients find their way to healing and reso-lution.  However, they would need to have a legalbase founded in peace. 
A Peacemaker must have a personal “quiet
inside” in order to lead other people to peacefulresolutions.  Perhaps the peace starts with thePeacemakers not with conflicted people.
We thank Barbara for these words that she left
behind for us and for her commitment to makethings better of all of us. ❂
PAGE 12                                                                          NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 13NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
PAGE 14                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 15NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
PAGE 16                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDAnita Mitchell is not only the youngest person to
be elected to the Muckleshoot Tribal Council inmany years, but she is also the Tribe’s first attorney.She credits the honor of being elected to growing upin a large family and on the reservation because asone of the oldest granddaughters you learn to takecharge of a situation. She then credits and links heracademic success to the strength and compassionthat all her past tribal leaders have because withoutthem the opportunity wouldn’t have been there. 
Anita Mitchell graduated from the University of
Washington in 2010, where she double majored inAmerican Indian Studies and Political Science andserved as a Student Ambassador for the Office ofMinority Affairs. She received her J.D. from SyracuseUniversity College of law in 2013. While in law
school, Anita served as the President of the BlackLaw Student Association, the NEBLSA Upstate NYSub-Regional Director, and a student attorney forthe Elders Law Clinic.  Anita also spent a summer inWashington D.C. working as a legal intern at theEPA’s American Indian Environmental Office. 
After graduating from law school, Anita moved
back home and began working as a staff attorney forMuckleshoot. At Muckleshoot, Anita briefly workedin the areas of Family Law, Tribal Court jurisdiction,and administrative law before being elected toCouncil. She is admitted to practice law inWashington State. Anita Mitchel is currently servingas a Muckleshoot Tribal Council member.
NEW NARF BOARD MEMBERS
Jefferson Keel , Lieutenant Governor of the
Chickasaw Nation, is a retired U.S. Army officer withover 20 years active duty service.  His combat expe-rience included three years service in Viet Nam as anInfantryman, where he received the Bronze Starwith “V” for valor, two purple hearts and numerousother awards and decorations for heroism.  Lt.Governor Keel has always proven himself as an effec-tive leader.  He is a former Airborne Ranger, andserved as an instructor in the elite US Army Rangers.As an Infantry platoon sergeant and platoon leader,he gained valuable and extensive leadership andmanagement experience.
Lt. Governor Keel has a Bachelors degree from
East Central University and a Master of Sciencedegree from Troy University.  He also completed postgraduate studies at East Central and East TexasUniversities.  He has management experience in theprivate sector and tribal programs and operations.He is extremely proud of his Native American her-itage and often assists other tribes and groups in cul-tural and historic preservation activities.  Lt.Governor Keel is firmly committed to the service ofIndian people and actively supports their desire tobecome self-reliant.  The welfare of the Chickasawpeople is his first priority.  He is keenly aware of theroles and responsibilities expected of tribal leaders
and earnestly believes in the policy of “helping ourpeople through honorable public service.”   
A highly respected tribal leader, Lt. Governor Keel
served two terms as the President of the NationalCongress of American Indians, the nation’s oldestand largest tribal organization.  He was appointed bySenator Harry Reid to serve as a Commissioner onthe Tribal Law and Order Commission.  He serves asChair for the Tribal Interior Budget Committee,serves on the Department of Health and HumanServices Secretary’s Tribal Advisory Committee, theIndian Health Service (IHS) Advisory committee,and the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) TribalConsultation Advisory Committee.
Lt. Governor Keel also serves on the Board of
Regents for Bacone College, East Central Universitythe Foundation Board of Directors, the Self-Governance Advisory Committee, and the NationalIndian Child Welfare Association Board of Directors.He is a Master Mason, a graduate of Leadership Adaand active in his church and the community.  Lt.Governor Keel and his wife, Carol, have three chil-dren and eight grandchildren. 
❂NARF LEGAL REVIEW PAGE 17NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNational Indian Law Library
Free Weekly Indian 
Law Updates
Each week, The National
Indian Law Library provides freeupdates on Indian law throughthe Indian Law Bulletins.Researchers in the libraryuncover the latest legal develop-ments and information relevantto Native Americans, includingrecent cases, legal news andscholarship, federal legislation,and regulatory action fromagencies and departments suchas the Environmental ProtectionAgency, the Bureau of IndianAffairs and the Department ofEducation.  The updates are dis-tributed via email, on our blog,and on the NARF Facebook page.
To receive the Indian Law Bulletins by email,
please sign up through the NILL website:http://narf.org/nill/bulletins/index.html 
Free Searchable Database of Indian Law 
and News
Content from the Indian Law Bulletins is
archived on the NILL website each week, effec-tively creating a searchable database of NativeAmerican law and news.  To begin researching atopic, type your search term into the GoogleSearch box on the right side of the Indian Law Bulletins page.  Topics include ChildWelfare, Education, Economic Development,Environment & Energy, Land & Water,Recognition & Enrollment, and SovereignImmunity. Your results will be organized undernine different tabs that represent individual bulletins.  Most cases, legislation and regulatory actions
are available in full-text.  Many news and lawreview articles are also available online.  If theitem you would like to see is not availableonline, you can use the Research Help link(http://www.narf.org/nill/asknill.html) to requestit from the library.
Support the National Indian Law Library
Your contributions help ensure that the
library can continue to supply free access to
Indian law resources and that it has the financialmeans necessary to pursue innovative andgroundbreaking projects to serve you better.Please visit http://www.narf.org/nill/donate.htmlfor more information on how you can supportthis mission. 
❂Justice Through Knowledge!
PAGE 18 NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNative American Bank
Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians
Alatna Village
American Indian College Fund
American Indian Youth Running Strong,  Inc. 
Chickasaw Nation
Comanche Nation
Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians
Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe of Indians
First Nations Development Institute 
First Nations Oweesta Corporation 
Keweenaw Bay Indian Community
Klamath Tribes
Lac Du Flambeau Band of  Lake Superior Chippewa 
Mohegan Sun
Muckleshoot Indian TribeThe generosity of tribes is crucial in NARF’s 
struggle to 
ensure the freedoms and rights of 
all 
Native Americans. The tribes and 
organizations below 
have made financial 
contributions to the Native American Rights 
Fund in our Fiscal Year ended September 30, 
2015 or 
in our current fiscal year which began October 1, 2015.  We are extremely grateful for 
the support 
of tribes and Native organizations.  
It serves 
as a validation of our work and an 
indication that we are meeting the legal needs of 
Indian Country 
and fulfilling our mission.  
Thank 
you! CALLING TRIBES TO ACTION
National Indian Gaming Association
Nome Eskimo Community
Pechanga Band of Luiseno Mission Indians
Sac and Fox Nation
San Manuel Band of Mission Indians 
San Pasqual Band of Diegueno Mission Indians 
Seminole Tribe
Seven Cedars Casino
Stillaguamish Tribe of Indians
Tanana Chiefs Conference
Tanana Native Council
Tulalip Tribes
Twenty-Nine Palms Band of Mission Indians 
United South and Eastern Tribes 
Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla India n Reservation
Yavapai- Prescott Indian Tribe
Yoche Dehe Wintun NationNARF LEGAL REVIEW PAGE 19NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDTHE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF Annual Report: This is NARF’s major report on its programs and
activities. The Annual Report is distributed to foundations, major 
contributors, certain federal and state agencies, tribal clients, NativeAmerican organizations, and to others upon request. Ray RamirezEditor, ramirez@narf.org.  
The NARF Legal Review is published biannually by the Native American
Rights Fund. Third class postage paid at Boulder, Colorado. Ray Ramirez,
Editor, ramirez@narf.org.  There is no charge for subscriptions, however,contributions are appreciated.
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund is a nonprofit, charitable
organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws of the District of
Columbia.  NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the provi-sions of Section 501 C (3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and contribu-tions to NARF are tax deductible.  The Internal Revenue Service hasruled that NARF is not a “private foundation” as defined in Section509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Main Office: Native American Rights Fund, 1506 Broadway, Boulder,
Colorado  80302 (303-447-8760) (FAX 303-443-7776).  www.narf.org Washington, D.C. Office: Native American Rights Fund, 1514 P Street,
NW (Rear) Suite D, Washington, D.C. 20005 (202-785-4166) 
(FAX 202-822-0068).
Alaska Office: Native American Rights Fund, 745 W. 4th Avenue, Suite
502, Anchorage, Alaska 99501 (907-276-0680) (FAX 907-276-2466).Workplace Campaigns: NARF is a member of America’s Charities, a
national workplace giving federation. Giving through your workplace is
as easy as checking off NARF’s box, #10350 on the Combined FederalCampaign (CFC) pledge form authorizing automatic payroll deduction.  The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is the oldest and
largest nonprofit national Indian rights organization in the coun-
try devoting all its efforts to defending and promoting the legalrights of Indian people on issues essential to their tribal sover-eignty, their natural resources and their human rights. NARFbelieves in empowering individuals and communities whoserights, economic self-sufficiency, and political participation havebeen systematically or systemically eroded or undermined. 
Native Americans have been subjugated and dominated.
Having been stripped of their land, resources and dignity, tribestoday are controlled by a myriad of federal treaties, statutes, andcase law. Yet it is within these laws that Native Americans placetheir hope and faith for justice and the protection of their way oflife. With NARF’s help, Native people can go on to provide lead-ership in their communities and serve as catalysts for just poli-cies and practices towards Native peoples nationwide. From ahistorical standpoint Native Americans have, for numerous rea-sons, been targets of discriminatory practices.
Since its inception in 1970, NARF has represented over 250
Tribes in 31 states in such areas as tribal jurisdiction and recog-nition, land claims, hunting and fishing rights, the protection ofIndian religious freedom, and many others. In addition to thegreat strides NARF has made in achieving justice on behalf ofNative American people, perhaps NARF’s greatest distinguishingattribute has been its ability to bring excellent, highly ethicallegal representation to dispossessed tribes. NARF has been suc-cessful in representing Indian tribes and individuals in cases thathave encompassed every area and issue in the field of Indian law.The accomplishments and growth of NARF over the years con-firmed the great need for Indian legal representation on anational basis. This legal advocacy on behalf of Native Americanscontinues to play a vital role in the survival of tribes and theirway of life. NARF strives to protect the most important rights ofIndian people within the limit of available resources. 
One of the initial responsibilities of NARF’s first Board of
Directors was to develop priorities that would guide the NativeAmerican Rights Fund in its mission to preserve and enforce thelegal rights of Native Americans.  The Committee developed fivepriorities that continue to lead NARF today:
• Preservation of tribal existence
• Protection of tribal natural resources• Promotion of Native American human rights• Accountability of governments to Native Americans• Development of Indian law and educating the public about
Indian rights, laws, and issuesUnder the priority of the preservation of tribal existence, NARF
works to construct the foundations that are necessary to empowertribes so that they can continue to live according to their Nativetraditions, to enforce their treaty rights, to insure their indepen-dence on reservations and to protect their sovereignty. 
Throughout the process of European conquest and coloniza-
tion of North America, Indian tribes experienced a steady dimin-ishment of their land base to a mere 2.3 percent of its originalsize. Currently, there are approximately 55 million acres ofIndian-controlled land in the continental United States and about44 million acres of Native-owned land in Alaska. An adequate landbase and control over natural resources are central componentsof economic self-sufficiency and self-determination, and as such,are vital to the very existence of tribes.  Thus, much of NARF’swork involves the protection of tribal natural resources. 
Although basic human rights are considered a universal and
inalienable entitlement, Native Americans face an ongoing threatof having their rights undermined by the United States govern-ment, states, and others who seek to limit these rights. Under thepriority of the promotion of human rights, NARF strives toenforce and strengthen laws which are designed to protect therights of Native Americans to practice their traditional religion,to use their own language, and to enjoy their culture. 
Contained within the unique trust relationship between the
United States and Indian nations is the inherent duty for all lev-els of government to recognize and responsibly enforce themany laws and regulations applicable to Indian peoples.  Becausesuch laws impact virtually every aspect of tribal life, NARF main-tains its involvement in the legal matters pertaining to account-
ability of governments to Native Americans.
The coordinated development of Indian law and educating the
public about Indian rights, laws, and issues is essential for the
continued protection of Indian rights.  This primarily involvesestablishing favorable court precedents, distributing informa-tion and law materials, encouraging and fostering Indian legaleducation, and forming alliances with Indian law practitionersand other Indian organizations. 
Requests for legal assistance should be addressed to the
Litigation Management Committee at NARF’s main office, 1506 Broadway, Boulder, Colorado 80302.  NARF’s clients areexpected to pay whatever they can toward the costs of legal representation. 
❂NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Moses Haia, Chairman .............................................................................................. Native Hawai ian
Robert McGhee, Vice-Chairman ........................................................ Poarch Band of Creek Indians
Kurt BlueDog ...................................... Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate of the Lake Traverse ReservationTex G. Hall ........................................................................................................ Three Affil iated Tribes
Gary Hayes ………………………………………………………………. Ute Mountain Ute TribeJulie Roberts-Hyslop …………………………………………………… Native Village of TananaJefferson Keel .......................................................................................................... Chickas aw Nation
Stephen Lewis ……………………………………………………... Gila River Indian Community Anita Mitchell.......................................................................................................... Muckles hoot Tribe
Larry N. Olinger .................................................................. Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla IndiansRichard Peterson .................................................................................. Tlingit & Haida Indian TribesPeter Pino ………………………………………………………………………………. Zia PuebloMichael Smith ........................................................................................................ Chickasaw  Nation
Executive Director: John E. Echohawk .................................................................................. Pawnee
NARF LEGAL REVIEW • VOLUME 40, NO. 2 • SUMMER/FALL 2015Native American Rights Fund
1506 Broadway
Boulder, CO 80302Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage
PPAAIIDD
Boulder, Colorado
Permit No. 589
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER
