In August 2019, a federal appeals court in
Louisiana affirmed that the US Constitutionallows Congress to pass laws that protect the bestinterests of Indian children. That seems like acommon-sense notion. One that wouldn’t requirethree distinguished judges and the collective workof hundreds of attorneys from across the country.So why was it necessary for a panel of the FifthCircuit Court of Appeals to resolve this issue?
Because a particular law, the Indian Child Welfare
Act (ICWA), is under attack. It has been attackedby adoption agencies that have financial incentiveto see more Indian children put up for adoption. Ithas been attacked by ideological think tanksintent on undermining all of Indian law. It hasbeen attacked by state attorneys general over theobjections of their own child welfare departments. 
When a law that was put into place to protect
Indian children comes under attack, it requires anationwide response. It requires tribes, tribal orga-nizations, and Indian law practitioners to cometogether with one voice. And it requires a partner-ship with allies in Congress, federal government,state government, child and family services, andacademia that know how well ICWA works. Thistype of coordinated response is one of the thingsthat the Native American Rights Fund does best.
A Shameful History
Since before the founding of the United States,Native communities have witnessed their childrenbeing forcibly removed from their families. Earlyin our nation’s history, policymakers identified theremoval of indigenous children as an efficientstrategy to destroy tribes and erase Native culturesand communities. Starting in the 19th Century,Indian children were relocated to government-sponsored boarding and industrial schools to be
“civilized.” It was the federal government’s officialpolicy to remove American Indian children fromtheir homes and communities. The crisis ofIndian child removals and adoptions arose in largepart from decades of official policy aimed at theforced assimilation of Indians, particularly Indianchildren, into mainstream society.
More recently, children were taken from their
families by a child welfare system that dispropor-tionately removed Native American children
VOLUME 44, NO. 2 SUMMER/FALL 2019NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Protecting the Law that Protects Our Children
Protecting the Law that Protects Our Children
................................................................ page 1
Case Updates .......................................... page 6National Indian Law Library .................. page 9Call to Action ........................................ page 10NARF .................................................... page 11NARF Board .......................................... page 12
from their homes.1In the 1950s, the federal gov-
ernment partnered with state and private agenciesto form the Indian Adoption Project (IAP). It fur-thered the policy of “Indian extraction,” wherebyIndian children would be adopted out primarily tonon-Indian families in order to reduce reservationpopulations, reduce spending on boarding schools,and satisfy a “large demand for Indian children onthe part of Anglo parents.”
2In its ten-year lifes-
pan, the IAP itself took almost 400 Native childrenfrom western states to white families on the otherside of the country. It also facilitated the removalof thousands more Indian children. After years ofstudy, a Congressionally chartered task force in1978 reported, “The removal of Indian childrenfrom their natural homes and tribal setting hasbeen and continues to be a national crisis.”
3
Tribal nations and Native advocates spent yearsworking to raise awareness of the problem. InSenate hearings held in 1974, Native familiesdescribed their children being removed withoutnotice and welfare agents pressuring new mothersto give up their children.
4Further testimony
detailed how state courts allowed removals tooccur without due process. Native parents wereneither advised of their rights nor provided withlegal representation; their children were justtaken. Likewise, tribal authorities often were notgiven notice of these child removals; their mem-ber children just disappeared. 
These child removals devastated families, and the
damage reverberated out to their communities andtribes. As Congressman Morris K. Udall described atthe time, tribes “are being drained of their childrenand, as a result, their future as a tribe and a peopleis being placed in jeopardy.”
5By the time Congress
recognized the problem, more than a quarter of all
Native children had been separated from their families. And even when family members were
willing and able to take these children, 85% wereremoved entirely from their communities.
6
In response to these alarming facts, Congressenacted the Indian Child Welfare Act in October1978. Their goal was to improve the handling ofIndian child welfare cases and the outcomes forIndian children and Indian families. ICWA firstaffirms that Indian tribes have exclusive jurisdic-tion over child welfare proceedings for on-reserva-tion Indian children and Indian children who arewards of tribal courts. ICWA also recognizes tribaljurisdiction, concurrent with that of states, overoff-reservation Indian children, and it encouragesstate courts to transfer Indian child welfare pro-ceedings to tribal courts. When transfer is imprac-tical and state courts retain jurisdiction, ICWAprovides objective, consistent, and transparentstandards to protect Native children and preservefamily/community relations, including:
1. Requiring state courts to give notice to both
tribes and Indian parents of Indian child wel-fare proceedings;
2. Allowing tribes to participate as intervenors in
state-court proceedings;
3. Requiring the testimony of qualified expert 
witnesses and other “active efforts” to preventthe break-up of Indian families; and
4. Establishing preferences for family placement,
tribal placement, and Indian family placementin all foster care and adoption proceedings.
The law promotes keeping families and communi-
ties together when it is safe and possible. Childwelfare experts recognize family reunification aspromoting the best outcomes for all children—Native or non-Native. In light of the incrediblyhigh rate of removals of Native children from
PAGE 2                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
1 Child Welfare Information Gateway. 2016. Racial Disproportionality and Disparity in Child Welfare.
https://www.childwelfare.gov/pubPDFs/racial_disproportionality.pdf (accessed October 1, 2019.)
2 Slaughter, Ellen. 1976. Indian Child Welfare: A Review of the Literature, 61. University of Denver Research Institute. Availa ble at
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED138422.pdf
3 American Indian Policy Review Commission. Report on Federal, State, and Tribal Jurisdiction of the Final Report to the Americ an
Indian Policy Review Commission, 87. Washington, DC: GPO.
4 US Senate. 1974. Subcommittee on Indian Affairs of the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs. Hearing: Indian Child Welfa re
Program. Apr 8-9.
5 Congressional Record. 1978, 124:38102 (statement of Rep. Udall)6 National Indian Child Welfare Association. “About ICWA.” https://www.nicwa.org/about-icwa/ (accessed October 1, 2019)VOLUME 44, NO. 2 PAGE 3NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDtheir families and their communities, ICWA is a
necessary tool to help ensure that these best prac-tices are applied consistently for tribal citizens.Even in cases where biological parents are notavailable, there often are family or communitymembers who are well-suited to serve as thatchild’s caretakers. Years of research and experi-ence have shown that maintaining these familyand community connections, otherwise known askinship placements, best serve a child’s needs.ICWA is considered the gold standard in child wel-fare because it makes family and communityplacement a priority.
7
Quite simply, ICWA was meant to protect the bestinterests of Indian children and encourage stabil-ity in Native families and communities in light ofongoing attempts to destabilize Native communi-ties. ICWA helps block interference with Nativefamilies and communities. It counters years ofgovernment policies meant to end the existence oftribes, and it systemically promotes Native chil-dren’s well-being, which consistently has beenneglected.
Attacks against ICWA
Notwithstanding all of the good that ICWA doesfor Indian children, Indian families, and Indiantribes—not to mention states and their local com-munities, which often benefit from tribes’ exper-tise and assistance in Indian child cases—legalchallenges to ICWA are on the rise. The last fiveyears have seen a rash of lawsuits challenging theconstitutionality of ICWA. And while the nameson the docket are those of non-Native coupleswanting to adopt Native children, many of theselawsuits are backed by wealthy and politicallymotivated interests such as the GoldwaterInstitute (which repeatedly has challenged poli-cies that address systemic discrimination) andprivate adoption attorneys (who have a financialincentive to undermine ICWA). 
In case after case, the courts have affirmed the
validity and importance of ICWA in ensuring thebest interests of Native American children. After
numerous failed attempts (Goldwater has beeninvolved in at least a dozen ICWA cases in recentyears), Brackeen v. Bernhardt (originally
Brackeen v. Zinke ) was filed in North Texas feder-
al court in 2017. Brackeen was brought, inalliance with the Texas Attorney General, by anon-Native couple seeking to adopt an Indianchild. (An amended complaint brought additionalpotential adoptive parents and the States ofIndiana and Louisiana as plaintiffs.) They argued,among other things, that ICWA operates based onrace rather than the unique legal/political statusof Indians under federal law and that ICWArequires state courts to ignore the best interestsof Indian children. 
In October 2018, Judge Reed O’Connor from the
US District Court for the Northern District of
7 Brief of Casey Family Programs, Child Welfare League of America, Children’s Defense Fund, Donaldson Adoption Institute, North
American Council on Adoptable Children, Voice for Adoption, and Twelve Other National Child Welfare Organizations as AmiciCuriae in Support of Respondent Birth Father, Adoptive Couple v. Baby Girl, 570 U.S. 637 (Sup. Ct. 2013) (No. 12-399) athttps://sct.narf.org/documents/adoptivecouplevbabygirl/merits/support_of_respondents/casey_family_programs.pdfTexas ruled in Brackeen that ICWA illegally dis-
criminates based on race, in violation of the FifthAmendment’s equal protection guarantee. JudgeO’Connor also held that ICWA places unconstitu-tional burdens on state agencies and courts andthat ICWA impermissibly delegates Congress’slegislative powers to Indian tribes. 
Defending the Law
Judge O’Connor’s ruling flies in the face ofdecades of established law. To be clear, Indian Lawis not race based. Our tribes predate the UnitedStates; the US Constitution recognizes that tribesare sovereign entities. That political relationship,and the federal trust responsibility toward Indiansthat flows from it, is why Congress may pass lawsthat single out Indians for special treatment.ICWA affirms these principles. It fulfills the trustresponsibility owed to Indian children by estab-lishing minimum federal standards for removaland placement. It respects tribes’ authority tohave a role in protecting their children.
The plaintiffs’ arguments were based on the false
premise that ICWA applies to Indian childrenbecause of their ancestry, but that’s not true.ICWA applies to children who are either (1) tribalmembers, or (2) are both eligible to be tribalmembers and the biological children of a tribalmember. Self-identification as American Indian orAlaska Native is not sufficient to trigger ICWA.That means, when ICWA classifies certain chil-dren as Indian children, it does so because of legaland political circumstances—either tribal mem-bership or eligibility for membership coupledwith having a tribal member parent—not becauseof any racial circumstances. 
The Brackeen plaintiffs also argued that ICWA
forces courts to look past the best interests of chil-dren and blindly adhere to race-based foster andadoptive placement preferences. That’s not trueeither. After years of extensive fact-finding, abipartisan Congress found that ICWA’s standardsserve the best interests of Indian children, whilealso giving courts flexibility when ICWA’s prefer-ences are not the best fit. 
In addition to calling for appropriate placement
and due diligence, ICWA acknowledges the inher-ent power of tribal nations to act as advocates for
their citizens, including children and familieswho find themselves in state child welfare cases.Tribes devote significant resources to these cases.They may know the child’s extended family rela-tions while the state child welfare worker doesnot. Tribes often are well-situated to support thechild’s best interests and a family’s rehabilitation.These tribal resources increasingly are importantfor states that have chronically under-fundedchild welfare programs and often rely on tribes toassist in providing additional resources to tribalchildren who are in state custody. Getting rid of ICWA would deny the child that additionaladvocate and resource. 
In the Brackeen case, ICWA’s reputation for suc-
cess and high standards was made plain in thesupport that it received. In addition to the 325tribal nations and 57 tribal organizations repre-sented on the tribal amicus brief, more than 30leading child welfare organizations, 21 states’attorneys general, and several members ofCongress all filed briefs recognizing that ICWA’srequirements are the absolute best practicesbased on decades of experience and research.
For years, NARF , with partners including the
National Congress of American Indians, theNational Indian Child Welfare Association, andthe Association on American Indian Affairs, hascoordinated strategies to raise awareness aboutthe importance of ICWA. Countering willful mis-information and lack of understanding about thelaw requires unflagging efforts. In all federalICWA cases (including Brackeen), NARF has coor-dinated the amicus strategy and written thetribes’ amicus briefs. Given the history of attackson Native families—and the resulting destructionof Native communities—NARF considers the pro-tection of Native families and communities a toppriority. Attacks against ICWA and tribes’ author-ity to protect their member children and familieswill not go unanswered.
In March 2019, a three-judge panel of the US
Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit heard theappeal from Judge O’Connor’s Brackeen decision.On August 9, 2019, the Fifth Circuit published its decision (available at https://www.narf.org/
PAGE 4                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDVOLUME 44, NO. 2 PAGE 5NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
nill/documents/20190809brackeen-icwa-opin-
ion.pdf). The three-judge panel affirmed ICWA’sconstitutionality, recognized the political statusof tribes and Indians, and upheld the law that is socritical to safeguarding Indian child welfare. Itwas a resounding victory for the law and thosewho fought to protect it, including—most impor-tant—for the tribal nations who work tirelessly toprotect their people and communities. It also is awin for child welfare advocates looking to ensurethe best practices for vulnerable children.
The Fight Continues
Unfortunately, on October 1, 2019, the Brackeenplaintiffs asked the Fifth Circuit to review the casein front of all of the court’s judges instead of athree-judge panel. The plaintiffs advance the samearguments they made before: that ICWA operateson the basis of race, that it unconstitutionally“commandeers” state agencies and state courts,and that it improperly delegates Congressionalauthority to tribes. If the court grants review, itmay either uphold the Fifth Circuit panel’s deci-sion or replace it with a new decision. Regardlessof what happens, we anticipate the plaintiffs will
not stop at the Fifth Circuit and will petition theUS Supreme Court for review. 
Cherokee Nation Principal Chief Chuck Hoskin
Jr., Morongo Band of Mission Indians ChairmanRobert Martin, Oneida Nation Chairman TehassiHill, and Quinault Indian Nation President FawnSharp said in a statement, “We won our case inthe Fifth Circuit . . . on the merits because ICWAis constitutional. ICWA ensures that there is aprocess in place that keeps children close to theirtribal communities, which gives them a sense ofidentity and belonging that cannot be found else-where. It is because of the importance of this crit-ical law that we will continue defending thesechildren. We will remain steadfast in defense ofICWA, no matter what it takes.”
NARF will continue to support the tribes in what-
ever ways that we can as they fight to protect theircitizen children and families. 
❂
PAGE 6                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDCASE UPDATES
On August 9, 2019, the DC Circuit Court of Appeals
struck down an order issued by the FederalCommunications Commission (FCC) that wouldhave exempted construction of the 5G cellular net-work from laws that protect Indian sacred sites,cultural resources, and the environment.
In the past, wireless cellular service depended on
large towers to transmit signals.  The latest gen-eration of wireless service, called 5G, would shiftwireless service to smaller but far more denselypacked wireless facilities. Although they arecalled “small cells,” they are in fact more intru-sive and have greater impacts because they are farmore numerous.  These so-called small cells arealso not small, since most of them will requireentirely new towers be built to position them.The FCC has exclusive control of this entire cellular spectrum.
In order to accelerate the deployment of 5G—to
the benefit of some of the world’s wealthiest com-panies—in March 2018 the FCC issued a newOrder that purported to exempt this entire 5Gnetwork from review under the National HistoricPreservation Act (NHPA) and the NationalEnvironmental Policy Act (NEPA). On the bookssince the 1960s and early 1970s, these laws aremeant to protect all Americans’ cultural heritageand environment. They ensure that citizens’ voicescould be heard in federal government permittingprocesses, such as those that ordinarily occurwhen companies wish to build communicationsinfrastructure throughout the United States.  Inits Order, the FCC sought to excuse itself fromcompliance with these federal laws, meaning thatprivate companies could construct new towersand “small cells” on top of irreplaceable historicsites, and even burials, at will, without having tosecure any federal permission. The FCC’s Orderwas essentially a gift to industry saying ‘buildanywhere you want, no questions asked.’ Thismakes no sense, especially when the cost of typi-cal small cell NHPA and NEPA reviews is only sev-eral hundred dollars. In other words, the impactsare large, the cost
is small, and theFCC still tried towrite itself a hallpass to avoid com-plying with federalenvironmentallaws. On August 9,the DC Circuiteffectively tore upthat ‘hall pass.’
The Tribes sued to
stop implementation of this new Order, and theyprevailed. The DC Circuit ruled:
The Commission failed to justify its determi-
nation that it is not in the public interest torequire review of small cell deployments. Wetherefore grant the petitions in part becausethe Order’s deregulation of small cells is arbi-trary and capricious. The Commission did notadequately address the harms of deregulationor justify its portrayal of those harms as negli-gible. In light of its mischaracterization ofsmall cells’ footprint, the scale of deploymentit anticipates, the many expedients already inplace for low-impact wireless construction,and the Commission’s decades-long history ofcarefully tailored review, the FCC’s characteri-zation of the Order as consistent with its long-standing policy was not “logical and rational.”
The case has now been remanded to the FCC, and
the Tribes look forward to participating in thatprocess.
The Native American Rights Fund and Greenberg
Traurig LLP represent the Blackfeet Tribe,Coushatta Tribe of Louisiana, Fort BelknapIndian Community, Rosebud Sioux Tribe, UteMountain Ute Tribe, and USET (United Southernand Eastern Tribes, Inc.) in the case. Decisionavailable at https://www.narf.org/nill/documents/20190809fcc-decision.pdf
5G Cell Construction Must Follow Federal Laws
VOLUME 44, NO. 2 PAGE 7NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
The Tribal Supreme
Court Project ispart of the TribalSovereigntyProtectionInitiative and isstaffed by the
National Congress of American Indians and theNative American Rights Fund. The Project wasformed in 2001 in response to a series of USSupreme Court cases that negatively affected tribalsovereignty. The purpose of the Project is to pro-mote greater coordination and to improve strategyon litigation that may affect the rights of all Indiantribes. We encourage Indian tribes and their attor-neys to contact the Project to coordinateresources, develop strategy and prepare briefs,especially at the time of the petition for a writ of
certiorari , prior to the Supreme Court accepting a
case for review. You can find copies of briefs andopinions on the major cases we track on the NARFwebsite (https://sct.narf.org). 
On October 1, 2019, the Justices returned for the
opening conference of the October 2019 Term,sometimes called the “long conference.” There, theCourt considered approximately two-thousand peti-tions that were either pending when it recessed inJune or were filed since then. One petition for reviewinvolving Tribal parties was considered in that con-ference and was denied: Oglala Sioux Tribe v.
Fleming (18-1245) ( Younger abstention). 
Looking ahead to the October 2019 Term, the
Court already has granted 44 petitions—close tohalf of the cases it will hear. With several signifi-cant cases already on the Court’s docket involvingthe Second Amendment, employment discrimina-tion, religious freedom, and immigration, manyCourt observers expect this to be an exciting term.At this time, the Court has not granted any newIndian law petitions, but one case argued duringthe previous term will be re-argued: Carpenter v.
Murphy (171107) (reservation disestablishment).
Besides Murphy , there are only four other peti-
tions in Indian law or Indian law-related casespending: Alabama-Coushatta Tribe of Texas v.
State of Texas (19403) (IGRA); California Trout v.Hoopa Valley Tribe (19-257) (Clean Water Act);
Knighton v. Cedarville Rancheria of NorthernPaiute Indians (19-131) (tribal court jurisdiction);
and Buchwald Capital Advisors LLC v. Sault Ste.
Marie Tribe of Chippewa Indians (18-1218) (tribal
sovereign immunity). 
PETITIONS FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI
GRANTED
The Court has granted review in one Indian law
case that has not been decided by the Court:
CARPENTER V. MURPHY (17-1107)
Petitioner: State of Oklahoma 
Petition Granted: May 21, 2018 
Subject Matter: Reservation Disestablishment 
Lower Court Decision: On a petition challeng-
ing his detention by the State of Oklahoma asimproper, the Tenth Circuit Court of Appealsheld that the Muscogee (Creek) Nation reser-vation was not disestablished and, consequent-ly, that the State of Oklahoma lacked jurisdic-tion to prosecute and convict Mr. Murphy, anIndian, for a crime that occurred in Indiancountry, but was instead subject to federaljurisdiction.  Recent Activity: Argument held November 27,
2018. Re-argument was ordered in July 2019. Upcoming Activity: Re-argument (no date set) 
Patrick Murphy, a citizen of the Muscogee (Creek)
Nation, was convicted of murder in OklahomaState court. After exhausting his appeals, he filed ahabeas corpus petition in federal district courtasserting that, because the crime occurred withinthe Muscogee (Creek) Nation’s reservation bound-aries and because he is Indian, the state court hadno jurisdiction. The federal district court deniedhis petition and the Tenth Circuit reversed.  TheTenth Circuit used the three-factor Solem reserva-tion disestablishment analysis and found thatCongress did not disestablish the reservation, andthat statutes and allotment agreements showedthat “Congress recognized the existence of theCreek Nation’s borders.” Likewise, the court heldthat the historical evidence indicated neither aCongressional intent to disestablish the reserva-Tribal Supreme Court Project
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
PAGE 8                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWtion, nor a contemporaneous understanding by
Congress that it had disestablished the reserva-tion. Accordingly, the court concluded that Mr.Murphy’s state conviction and death sentence wereinvalid because the crime occurred in IndianCountry and the accused was Indian.  
The Supreme Court heard oral argument on
November 27, 2018, and, on December 4, 2018, itordered supplemental briefing by the parties, theSolicitor General, and the Muscogee (Creek)Nation addressing two questions: (1) whether anystatute grants the state of Oklahoma jurisdictionover the prosecution of crimes committed byIndians in the area within the 1866 territorialboundaries of the Creek Nation, irrespective of thearea’s reservation status, and (2) whether there arecircumstances in which land qualifies as an Indianreservation but nonetheless does not meet the def-inition of Indian country as set forth in 18 U.S.C.§1151(a). On June 27, 2019, the Court announcedthat the case would
be scheduled forre-argument in theOctober Term 2019but no date hasbeen set.  
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE TRIBAL
SUPREME COURT PROJECT
As always, NCAI and NARF welcome general con-
tributions to the Tribal Supreme Court Project.Please send any general contributions to the NCAIFund, attn: Kurt Sodee, 1516 P Street, NW,Washington, DC  20005. Please contact us if you
have any questions or if we can be of assistance:Derrick Beetso, NCAI General Counsel, 202-630-0318, dbeetso@ncai.org; or Joel West Williams,NARF Senior Staff Attorney, 202-785-4166,williams@narf.org. 
The Native American Rights Fund was proud to
co-host the nation’s first-ever presidential forum,which focused entirely on Native American issues.The Frank LaMere Native American PresidentialForum was held in Sioux City, Iowa, on August 19-20, 2019. In addition to co-hosting, NARFExecutive Director John Echohawk (Pawnee) par-ticipated in the forum as a panelist.
Over the two days, each candidate held an individ-
ual appearance and responded to questions frompanels of tribal leaders and Native American youthand elders. Murdered and Missing IndigenousWomen was the key topic, and many NativeAmerican women tribal and community leaderswere among the panelists.
“This forum isn’t about ‘gotcha’ moments. It’s
about ‘get it’ moments. We want candidates tograsp the challenges and aspirations of IndianCountry. At the two nights of candidate debates inMiami, broadcast to a national audience, not onequestion or one candidate comment addressedNative American issues. Ignoring this forum inIowa is ignoring the millions of First Americans
who are citizens and voters.” said O.J. Semans, Sr.,co-executive director of the national NativeAmerican voting rights organization FourDirections.
Watch the recorded sessions at https://www.
nativevote2020.com/
The Frank LaMere Native American Presidential
Forum is named in honor of Frank LaMere, a well-known and beloved Native American civil rightsactivist from the Sioux City area, who passed inJune 2019. As a nonpartisan event, all majorDemocratic and Republican presidential candi-dates were invited to participate in the forum,including President Donald Trump andRepublican challenger William Weld. Participatingcandidates included Marianne Williamson,Elizabeth Warren, Amy Klobuchar, Steve Bullock,Joe Sestak, Mark Charles, John Delaney, KamalaHarris, Julian Castro, Bill de Blasio, and BernieSanders. 
❂First Native American Presidential Forum
National Indian Law Library (NILL)
Library Director David Selden Retires 
After 21 Years of ServiceLong-time NILL Library Director David Seldenretired last summer after 21 years leading theNational Indian Law Library. David developedcountless relationships with NILL patrons andresearchers over the years, and he will be missedby those who relied upon him.  David has beenrecognized for his work with Indian law and envi-ronmental sustainability. With his expertise onthose topics, he wrote articles and participated innumerous presentations, projects, and commit-tees throughout his career.
Among David’s many accomplishments at NILL
are the development of the Tribal Law Gatewayand the creation of the Indian Law Bulletins. TheGateway is a unique online resource about feder-ally recognized (and some state recognized)tribes. Each tribe’s page includes contact infor-mation for the tribe and their tribal court, as wellas information related to the tribe’s code, consti-tution, and court opinions. The Gateway providestribal leaders, legal practitioners, and the publicwith convenient access to current and accuratetribal law, which enhances the power of tribalcourts and strengthens tribal sovereignty.
The Indian Law Bulletins are the only regularly
published updates on Indian law covering tribalcourts, federal and state courts, federal agencies,US legislation, law review articles, and news.Each week, NILL staff and volunteers scour theweb to find the latest materials related to IndianLaw and choose the most important materials toinclude in the Bulletins. Seven thousand patronsreceive the free weekly updates by email, whileothers access them through the NILL blog/website or NARF’s Facebook page.
Anne Lucke Appointed New Director 
Following David’s retirement, Anne Luckebecame the Library Director in July. Anne hasbeen at NARF for six years and has over 13 yearsof experience working in law libraries. She hasworked with attorneys, judges, professors, students,
and the general public in a variety of environ-ments, including a large corporate law firm, a federal court library, and a law school library.
Additionally, Nora Hickens has been hired as a
Library Assistant through May 2020. Nora beganher career at NILL as an intern during her senioryear at University of Colorado and returned as an employee last spring. Currently, Anne andNora are joined by two volunteers: Amanda Rios-Santiago and Joseph CrowShoe (PiikaniBand of the Blackfoot Confederacy). They both arestudents at the University of Colorado.
Together this small group of staff and volunteers
continues NILL ’s work, including publishing theIndian Law Bulletins, maintaining the Tribal LawGateway, and answering Indian law and tribal law questions from NARF staff, tribal leaders, andthe general public.
Support the National Indian Law Library
Your contributions help ensure that the librarycan continue to supply unique and free access toIndian law resources and pursue innovative pro-jects to serve you better. We are not tax-supportedand rely on individual contributions to fund ourservices. Please visit https://www.narf.org/nill/donate for more information on how you cansupport this mission and provide justice throughknowledge. 
❂Continuing the Legacy
VOLUME 44, NO. 2 PAGE 9NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS
Nora Hickens, Amanda Rios-Santiago, Joseph
CrowShoe, and Anne Lucke at the National
Indian Law LibraryPAGE 10                                                                          NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
AMERIND Risk
Cherokee Nation
Chickasaw Nation
Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma
Confederated Tribes of Grand Ronde
Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians
Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe of Indians
Fort McDowell Yavapai Nation
Miccosukee Tribe of Indians
Mohegan Tribe and Mohegan Sun
National Indian Gaming Association
Nome Eskimo Community
Nottawaseppi Huron Band of the Potawatomi
Pascua Yaqui TribePechanga Band of Luiseño Indians 
Poarch Band of Creek Indians
San Manuel Band of Mission Indians
San Pasqual Band of Mission Indians
Santa Ynez Band of Chumash Indians
Seminole Tribe of Florida
Seven Cedars Casino/Jamestown S'Klallam
Shakopee Mdewakanton Sioux Community
Stillaguamish Tribe of Indians
Sycuan Band of the Kumeyaay Nation
Tanana Chiefs Conference
Yavapai-Prescott Indian Tribe
Tulalip Tribes
Yocha Dehe Wintun NationIt has been made abundantly clear that non-
Indian philanthropy can no longer sustainNARF’s work. Federal funds for specific projectshave also been reduced. To provide legal advocacyin a wide variety of areas such as religious free-dom, the Tribal Supreme Court Project, tribalrecognition, human rights, trust responsibility,voting rights, tribal water rights, Indian ChildWelfare Act, and tribal sovereignty issues, NARFlooks to the tribes to provide the crucial fundingto continue our legal advocacy on behalf ofIndian Country. It is an honor to list those tribesand Native organizations who have chosen to
share their good fortunes with the NativeAmerican Rights Fund and the thousands ofIndian clients we have served. 
We encourage other tribes and organizations to
become contributors and partners with NARF infighting for justice for our people and in keepingthe vision of our ancestors alive. We thank thefollowing tribes and Native organizations fortheir generous support of NARF in the 2019 fiscalyear (October 1, 2018 to September 31, 2019):
CALL TO ACTIONVOLUME 44, NO. 2  PAGE 11NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDTHE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF Annual Report: This is NARF's major report on its programs and
activities. The Annual Report is distributed to foundations, major con-tributors, certain federal and state agencies, tribal clients, NativeAmerican organizations, and to others upon request. 
NARF Legal Review is published biannually by the Native American
Rights Fund. Third class postage paid at Boulder, Colorado. There is nocharge for subscriptions, however, contributions are appreciated.
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund is a nonprofit, charitable
organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws of the District ofColumbia. NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the provisionsof Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and contributions toNARF are tax deductible. The Internal Revenue Service has ruled thatNARF is not a "private foundation" as defined in Section 509(a) of theInternal Revenue Code.www.narf.org 
Boulder, CO (Main) Office: 1506 Broadway, Boulder, CO 80302-6217
(303) 447-8760; FAX (303) 443-7776 
Washington, DC Office: 1514 P Street, NW (Rear) Suite D,
Washington, DC 20005-1910(202) 785-4166; FAX (202) 822-0068
Anchorage, AK Office: 745 W. 4th Avenue, Suite 502, 
Anchorage, AK 99501-1736(907) 276-0680; FAX (907) 276-2466The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is the oldest
and largest nonprofit legal organization defending andpromoting the legal rights of Indian people on issuesessential to their tribal sovereignty, natural resources, andhuman rights. 
Since 1970, we have provided legal advice and representa-
tion to Native American tribes and organizations on issuesof major importance. Our early work was instrumental inestablishing the field of Indian law. NARF—when very fewwould—steadfastly took stands for Indian religious free-dom and sacred places, subsistence hunting and fishingrights, as well as basic human and civil rights. We continueto take on complex, time-consuming cases that othersavoid, such as government accountability, climate change,and the education of our children. We have assisted morethan 300 tribal nations with critical issues that go to theheart of who we are as sovereign nations.
One of the responsibilities of NARF’s first Board of
Directors was to develop priorities to guide the organiza-tion in its mission to preserve and enforce the legal rightsof Native Americans. The committee developed five prior-ities that continue to lead NARF today:
●Preserve tribal existence
●Protect tribal natural resources
●Promote Native American human rights
●Hold governments accountable to Native Americans
●Develop Indian law and educate the public about Indian
rights, laws, and issues
Under the priority to preserve tribal existence , NARF
works to construct the foundations that empower tribesto live according to their traditions, enforce their treatyrights, insure their independence on reservations, andprotect their sovereignty. An adequate land base and control over natural resources
are central components of economic self-sufficiency andself-determination, and are vital to the very existence oftribes. Thus, much of NARF’s work involves protecting
tribal natural resources . 
Although basic human rights are considered a universal
and inalienable entitlement, Native Americans face theongoing threat of having their rights undermined by theUnited States government, states, and others who seek tolimit these rights. Under the priority of promoting
human rights , NARF strives to enforce and strengthen
laws that protect the rights of Native Americans to prac-tice their traditional religion, use their languages, andenjoy their culture. 
Contained within the unique trust relationship between
the United States and Indian nations is the inherent dutyfor all levels of government to recognize and responsiblyenforce the laws and regulations applicable to Indian peo-ples. Because such laws impact virtually every aspect oftribal life, NARF is committed to holding governments
accountable to Native Americans.
Developing Indian law and educating the public about
Indian rights, laws, and issues is essential for the con-
tinued protection of Indian rights. This primarily involvesestablishing favorable court precedents, distributinginformation and law materials, encouraging and fosteringIndian legal education, and forming alliances with Indianlaw practitioners and other Indian organizations. 
Requests for legal assistance should be addressed to
NARF's main office at 1506 Broadway, Boulder, CO 80302.NARF’s clients are expected to pay what they can towardthe costs of legal representation. 
❂NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Robert McGhee, Chairman ..................................................................Poarch Band of Creek Indians
Kurt BlueDog, Vice-Chairman..............Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate of the Lake Traverse ReservationLacey A. Horn, Treasurer ..........................................................................................Cherokee Nat ion
Michael C. Smith ....................................................................................................Chickasaw Nation
Kenneth Kahn ........................................................................Santa Ynez Band of Chumash IndiansAnita Mitchell ..........................................................................................................Muckles hoot Tribe
Rhonda Pitka ..................................................................................................Native Village of  Beaver
Camille K. Kalama ......................................................................................................Native H awaiian 
Derek Valdo ................................................................................................................Pueb lo of Acoma
Rebecca A. Miles ..........................................................................................................Nez P erce Tribe
Robert Miguel ..........................................................................................Ak Chin Indian CommunityMaryAnn K. Johnson ......................................................................................................Portage  Creek
Jamie Azure ..................................................................................Turtle Mountain Band of ChippewaExecutive Director: John E. Echohawk ..................................................................................Pawnee
NARF LEGAL REVIEW  VOLUME 44, NO. 2  SUMMER/FALL 2019Native American Rights Fund
1506 Broadway
Boulder, CO 80302Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage
PAID
Boulder, Colorado
Permit No. 589
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER
