 
1  
Briefing Paper on U. S. Military Commissions 
 
 
Revised June 23, 2006  On July 15, 2005, a U.S. federal appeals court in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld  overturned 
a November 8, 2004 district court ruling that had resulted in the suspension of the 
U.S. military commissions at Guantana mo Bay.  On November 7, the Supreme 
Court agreed to review the case, and is  expected to render a decision on June 28, 
2006. 
Human Rights Watch has raised seri ous due process concerns about the 
Guantanamo military commissions since they were first announced by President Bush in November 2001.  These concerns, restated below, remain valid so long as the military commissions continue under the rules in place on the eve of the 
Hamdan  decision.  
Despite the Bush administration’s oft-repe ated assurances that the “global war on 
terror” will affirm and protect basic hu man rights, the rules for the commissions 
in place on the eve of the Hamdan  decision fell far short of  international standards 
for a fair trial. The U.S. government re placed the U.S. federal court and court-
martial structures and procedures with a wholly new and untried system that assured Department of Defense control over the proceedings, the verdict, most 
appellate review, and ultimately what the public can know about the trials.  Such 
trials, if allowed to go forward under th ese rules, will undermine the basic rights 
of defendants to a fair trial.  They will  yield verdicts – pos sibly including death 
sentences – of questionable legitimacy, and will deliver a message worldwide that 
the fight against terrorism need not respect the rule of law. 
Human Rights Watch has stated before, and we reiterate here, that absent 
significant change in the structure and rules of the military commissions, the United States would be in violation of its obligations under in ternational law to 
try anyone before them. The United States should instead take all the necessary 
steps to ensure that those tried before military commissions receive trials that are 
a credit to American justice,  not a stain on its history. 
Under the president’s directive, the U.S.  Department of Defense has issued a 
series of orders and instructions governi ng most aspects of the commissions, from 
their basic organization to the crimes to be prosecuted to the rules governing defense counsel and appellate review.1  These rules incorporate certain due 
process safeguards into the commissions, including the presumption of innocence, 
proceedings ostensibly open to the public, and the presentation of evidence and cross examination of witnesses.  Importa nt as they are, these provisions cannot 
overcome the cumulative impact of other prov isions that militate against fairness.  
They provide a patina of due process to  proceedings that are otherwise deeply 
flawed.  
Under the Defense Department rules, th e military commissions will or are likely 
to: 
• Improperly subject to military trials  persons apprehended far from any 
battle zone.  
• Try prisoners of war (POWs) in a ma nner that violates the 1949 Geneva 
Conventions.  
• Deprive defense counsel of the means to prepare an effective defense.  
• Prevent the accused from seeing all evidence introduced against them.  
• Impose no obligation on the governme nt to disclose exculpatory 
information.  
• Place review of important interloc utory questions with the charging 
authority rather than an independent adjudicator.  
• Fail to adequately guarantee that evidence obtained via torture or ill-
treatment shall not be used.  
• Allow wide latitude to close procee dings and impose a “gag order” on 
defense counsel.  
• Deprive military defense counsel of normal protections afforded military 
lawyers from improper “command influence.”  
• Restrict the accused’s right to choose legal counsel.  
• Provide lower due process standard s for non-citizens than for U.S. 
citizens. 
In the end, it is unclear how many cases will proceed to full trials before the 
commissions. The lopsided rules plus the threat of capital punishment may 
compel many of those accused to accept plea agreements, even if harsh. Others 
may be convicted on the basis of evidence withheld from the defendant.  This will permit prosecutors to declare victory, but the broader public will be deprived of 
an important opportunity to assess gu ilt or innocence, and fill an important 
historical record. 
                                                
 
1 Since President Bush issued Military Order of November 13, 2001 authorizing military commissions, the 
Department of Defense has released several instructions  setting out the applicable law and procedure:  Military 
Commission Order No. 1 (MCO No. 1), issued March 21, 2002; a draft set of crimes and elements released on 
February 28, 2003 for public comment; a set of nine M ilitary Commission Instructions (MCIs) released on April 
30, 2003 and subsequently, several of which were later re vised;  Military Commission Order No. 3 (MCO No. 3), 
issued February 5, 2004; and Military Commission Instruction No. 10, issued March 24, 2006. Lack of Independent Judicial Oversight  
The military commissions do not guarantee review by a court independent of the 
executive branch of government.  As a result, all interloc utory appeals and 
appeals of the factual basi s of conviction must be made to a specially created 
review panel made up by persons appoint ed by the Secretary of Defense.   
In December 2005, Congress passed the Detainee Treatment Act, which provides 
for some independent judicial review of  military commission convictions in the 
United States Court of Appeals for the Distri ct of Columbia Circuit.  This review 
is extremely limited.   Jurisdiction is disc retionary for cases in which an accused 
is sentenced to less than ten years’ im prisonment, meaning some defendants may 
never have their cases reviewed by any i ndependent court.  Even for those who 
are entitled to judicial revi ew, the scope of review is extremely curtailed.  Review 
is limited to the two narrow questions allowed under the Detainee Treatment Act: whether the military commission followed its own rules, and whether those rules comported with U.S. law and the Constitution. Defendants will not be able to challenge in an independent court the f actual basis for a conviction even if the 
factual basis is clearly erroneous, and ev en if the detainee is facing the death 
penalty as a result of the conviction.  
Improper Use of Military Courts 
President Bush’s Military Order of November 13, 2001 authorizes the use of 
military commissions to try non-U.S. citizens who are or were members of al-Qaeda, who engaged in acts of inte rnational terrorism , or who knowingly 
“harbored” such persons.  Military co mmissions are permitted under international 
law within the context of an armed conflic t in place of civilian courts.  But the 
military order encompasses civilians who had no connection to armed conflict as understood under international humanitarian law and, inde ed, who are accused of 
acts committed far from any actual battlefield.  Using military courts to try such 
persons violates their right to trial by  an independent and impartial court. 
According to the U.N. Human Rights Committee, the body that monitors 
compliance with the International Cove nant on Civil and Political Rights,
2 the use 
of military courts to try civilians “could present serious problems as far as the equitable, impartial and independent admini stration of justice is concerned.  Quite 
often the reason for the establishment of such courts is to enable exceptional procedures to be applied which do not comply with normal standards of justice.”
3  
Such would seem to be the case with the U.S. military commissions.  The Bush 
                                                 
2 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), G.A. res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. 
(No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force Mar. 23, 1976.  The United States became a party to the ICCPR in 1992. 
3 U.N. Human Rights Committee, General Comment 13, art. 14 (Twenty-first session, 1984), administration appears intent on evading the due process protections of U.S. 
federal courts by trying civilians for allege d military offenses that are in fact 
crimes that should be prosecuted in a regular criminal court. 
Under the military commission rules, an  offense prosecutable by the commissions 
must be one that has taken place “in the c ontext of and was associated with armed 
conflict.”4  The definition of an armed conf lict under the commission rules is so 
broad, however, that virtually any terroris t act anywhere in the world would be 
within the commission’s ju risdiction.  The defendant ’s conduct need only be 
distantly or vaguely related to a traditional armed conflict.5 
This explanation leaves open the possibil ity that the Bush administration – which 
has stated it is engaged in a global wa r against terrorism – might well consider 
any act anywhere in the world that is suspected of supporting a terrorist group to 
be “associated with armed conflict.”  Fo r instance, a non-U.S. national living in 
the United States could conceivably be tried by a military commission for the crime of “aiding the enemy”
6 if he sent funds to al-Qaeda, rather than being tried 
under federal anti-terrorism legislation.  The question is  not whether such conduct 
can properly be criminalized, but rather wh ether such crimes can properly be tried 
by a military tribunal.  Under the military commission rules, jurisdiction is defined to include acts that are normally considered civilian crimes and lack the 
necessary nexus to an armed conflict to be war crimes.  The Pentagon has thus 
greatly expanded the range of offenses pr osecutable by the military commissions.  
Such a misuse of military courts to try civilians would be an evasion of U.S. 
obligations to conduct fair trials under international human rights law. 
Military Commission Jurisdiction Over POWs 
The U.S. military order and instructions are inconsistent with  provisions of the 
1949 Geneva Conventions relating to th e prosecution of prisoners of war 
(POWs).  Under the Third Geneva Convention, a POW can be validly sentenced only if tried by “the same courts according to  the same procedure as in the case of 
members of the armed forces of the Detaining Power,”
7 and “shall have, in the 
                                                 
4 MCI, No. 2 (Apr. 30, 2003), 5(C). 
5 Human Rights Watch, Letter to Department of Defens e General Counsel Haynes, March 14, 2002, available 
online at:  http://www.hrw.org/press/2003/03/us031403.htm .  According to MCI, No. 2, 5(C), the nexus between 
the defendant and armed conflict: 
“could involve, but is not limited to, time, location, or purpose of the conduct in relation to the armed 
hostilities…. This element does not require a declar ation of war, ongoing mutual hostilities, or 
confrontation involving a regular national armed force.  A single hostile act or attempted act may 
provide sufficient basis for the nex us so long as its magnitude or severity rises to the level of an 
“armed attack” or an “act of war,” or the number, power, stated intent or organization of the force with 
which the actor is associated is such that the act or attempted act is tantamount to an attack by an 
armed force.”   
 
6 MCI No. 2, 6(B)(5). 
7 Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Pr isoners of War (Third Geneva Convention), 75 U.N.T.S. 
135, entered into force Oct. 21, 1950.Third Geneva Convention, art. 102. same manner as the members of the arme d forces of the Detaining Power, the 
right of appeal or petition from  any sentence pronounced upon him.”8 
Because U.S. service members are tried unde r courts-martial as established by the 
Uniform Code of Military Justice and have  a right of appeal to an independent 
civilian court,9 any POW held by the United States  must also be tried by a court-
martial and have a similar right of appeal .  Military commissions are not the same 
as courts-martial – they were created preci sely to preclude some  of the procedural 
safeguards of courts-martial.  
Detained Taliban soldiers (members of the regular armed forces of the then-
government of Afghanistan) and perhaps ot her detained combatants should have 
been designated by the United States  as POWs under the Third Geneva 
Convention.  Moreover, all captured bell igerents should have been treated as 
POWs unless a “competent tribunal” i ndividually determined otherwise.10  The 
Bush administration instead violated its clear obligations under the Third Geneva 
Convention and made a blanket ruling that  no captured combatants in Afghanistan 
were entitled to POW status.  Denying POW status without convening competent 
tribunals was not only unlawf ul, but it also contravene d both past U.S. military 
practice and recent U.S. military practice in Iraq.  (The Hamdan  appellate court 
accepted as valid the president’s determin ation that none of those detained at 
Guantanamo were entitled to POW status, but also held that the military commissions could be the “competent tr ibunal” to determine POW status under 
the Third Geneva Convention.) 
The failure of the United States to properl y determine whether any persons held in 
connection with the armed conflict in Af ghanistan are POWs does not obviate its 
legal obligation to ensure that any trials  of persons entitled to POW status are 
conducted in courts-martial w ith a right of appeal to  an independent civilian 
court.  “[W]ilfully depriving a prisoner of war of the rights of fair and regular 
trial” is a grave breach of  the Third Geneva Convention.
11 
The improper determination of the legal st atus of captured belligerents also bears 
on the propriety of charges brought against persons prosecuted before the commissions.  Under international huma nitarian law, so-called unlawful or 
unprivileged belligerents do not have any combatant immunity.  That is, they may 
be prosecuted for conduct – such as shooting at U.S. forces – that is not criminal 
when undertaken by members of the armed forces.  The military commission rules state that where an element of a crime requires the absence of combatant 
                                                
 
8 Ibid. art. 106. 
9 See Uniform Code of Military Justice, U.S.C. Title 10, Ch. 47.  Article 2(a)(9) specifically provides military court 
jurisdiction over “[p]risoners of war in custody of the armed forces.” 
10 Third Geneva Convention, art. 5. 
11 Third Geneva Convention, art. 130. immunity, the prosecutor has the burden  of establishing that the accused was 
indeed an unprivileged belligerent.12  The issue must be decided in each case 
based on a fair and independent assessm ent of the specific facts before the 
commission. 
The U.S. government’s high-level, public  assertions that none of the persons 
captured during the international armed c onflict in Afghanistan  are entitled to 
POW status should not play any role in the determinations made by the military 
commission concerning the stat us of individuals being prosecuted before them.  
We are concerned, however, that it will be extremely difficult for a court under the direct authority of the executive bran ch to reach an independent and impartial 
finding on this issue.  
Restrictions on Effective Defense 
The military commission rules impose impor tant limitations on the ability of 
defense counsel – both military and civi lian lawyers – to mount an effective 
defense of their clients.  Many of these re strictions are spelled out in the affidavit 
civilian lawyers for the commissions are required to sign and with which military 
defense counsel must comply. A military order issued on February 5, 2004 revoked some of the worst pr ovisions in the affidavit,  including a broad-based 
infringement of attorney-client confidentia lity and onerous rest rictions on civilian 
defense counsel as to whom they coul d communicate documents or information.
13  
There remain, however, significant restrictions  on the ability of defense counsel to 
fully and fairly present their client’s defense.       
Attorney-Client C onfidentiality:  Perhaps the most important of these restrictions 
is infringement of the confidentiality of attorney-client communications, which will deprive a defendant of that most f undamental of rights:  to have a legal 
representative with whom one can have  full and complete confidence.  In 
February 2004, the Defense Department amended rules that permitted the government to monitor all communications between attorneys and defendants for “security and intelligence purposes.”
14  Such conversations are traditionally 
covered by the attorney-client privilege of  confidentiality, in order to encourage 
clients to confide openly with their attorneys.   
The new rules require that such  monitoring be approved only upon a 
determination that it would “likely produce information” for security or intelligence purposes or that it “may pr event” communications facilitating 
                                                
 
12 MCI No. 2, 4(B). 
13 Military defense counsel are direct ed to conduct their activi ties consistent with the “prescriptions and 
proscriptions” specified in the Affidavit and Agreement by Civilian Defense Counsel.  MCI No. 4 (Apr. 30, 2003), 
3(B)(4).  See Annex B to MCI No. 5 (Feb. 5, 2004). 
14 MCO No. 3 (Feb. 5, 2004), which supercedes MCI No. 5, Annex B, II(I). terrorist operations.  More important, m ilitary and civilian defense counsel must 
now be notified in advance of any monito ring of their communications, and that 
communications solely among defense couns el will never be monitored.  The new 
rules also detail the use and re view of monitored communications.15   
Human Rights Watch welcomes these ch anges, but remains concerned about 
those cases where the government in sists on monitoring attorney-client 
communications. The ability to communicat e candidly and effectively with one’s 
attorney is inherent in the right to counsel, which in turn, helps secure the 
overarching right of due pr ocess and a fair trial.  The U.S. government’s 
willingness to compromise these rights is deeply troubling.   
The commission rules state that any evid ence or information derived from such 
communications “shall not be used in proceedings against the individual who 
made or received the relevant communicati on; and such information shall not be 
disclosed to personnel involved in th e prosecution or underlying prosecution 
investigation of said individual.”16 Restricting the use of information obtained 
from monitoring attorney-client conversa tions does not fully mitigate the harm 
from such monitoring. The mere fact th at a conversation may be monitored will 
likely inhibit candid conversations between the accused (whether guilty or innocent) and his attorney. A defendant wi ll rightly hesitate to name names, 
including those of relati ves and friends who could support his claims, out of 
genuine concern that the U.S. government  might then seek to apprehend those 
persons. Under the plain wording of the pr ovision, information so gathered could 
also be used by the Appointing Author ity prior to commission proceedings 
(regarding a plea agreement) and after proceedings (rega rding early release or a 
pardon).
17  The rights to counsel and to a fair  trial are clearly jeopardized when the 
detaining officials listen in to their conve rsations with their attorneys, regardless 
of the subsequent use to which informa tion gleaned from those conversations is 
put.  
Restrictions on Access to Evidence and Pr oceedings by Civilian Defense Counsel 
and Defendants:  The military commission rules deny civilian counsel with 
appropriate security clearance the sa me access to protected information as 
military counsel.  They authorize the Appointing Authority or the Presiding 
Officer to close proceedings on broad gr ounds, such as to protect “intelligence 
and law enforcement sources, methods, or activities; and other national security 
interests.”18  Civilian defense counsel, unlike military counsel, may be excluded 
from closed military commission proceedings.19  The commission rules also 
                                                 
15 MCO No. 3. 
16 MCO No. 3, 4(F). 
17 Monitored communications and information derived fr om monitored communications “may be disclosed to 
appropriate persons other than those involved in  such prosecutions.” MCO No. 3, 4(F). 
18 MCO No. 1, 6(B)(3). 
19 MCI No. 4, 3(E)(4). authorize the Presiding Officer to issue pr otective orders to safeguard “protected 
information” – a category of informati on that goes beyond classified material – 
including orders to delete the informati on from documents made available to the 
defendant or the defense team.  The commission may not consider protected 
information unless it is presented to the military defense counsel.  But civilian defense counsel may be denied access to such information even when it is 
admitted into evidence.   
While requiring a security clearance is  permissible, Human Rights Watch is 
troubled that attorneys even with high-level security cl earances are not guaranteed 
access to all materials presented in a cas e before the commissions.  We question 
the very basis for restricting access to  evidence and proceedings by civilian 
defense counsel who already have under gone a rigorous secur ity clearance. All 
persons with access to classified informa tion, whether civilians or members of the 
military, must protect that information. Yet, under the rules, civilian defense 
counsel may be excluded from critical portions of the trial and be denied access to protected information admitted against the cl ient, even if they have a high-level 
security clearance.
20  These restrictions clearly im pinge on the ability to provide 
effective representation.  The Department of Defense should instead ensure that 
civilian counsel who have r eceived a security clearance  be given access to all 
commission proceedings, including closed sessions, and to all information 
necessary to their defense work. 
Similarly, the military commission rules permit the exclusion of defendants 
themselves from portions of trials  that are closed to the public.21  The accused may 
not see classified or protected informati on that is used against him.  While the 
assigned military defense counsel is guara nteed to see all evidence used in the 
case, the military lawyer may not discuss protected evidence with his client, which prevents the accused from confron ting the evidence against him. In August 
2005 the Defense Department placed a limitati on on this rule so that an accused 
may not be denied access to evidence if to do so would deny him a “full and fair 
trial.”  However, the definition of what constitutes a “full and fair” trial has never been laid out, and seems hard to square  that requirement with the many provisions 
that allow evidence to be withheld from the defendant. 
Review Panels:  All decisions of the military commissions will be reviewed by a 
review panel that will give the appear ance of an appeals court, but whose 
structure and procedures will not ensu re impartial and competent appellate 
review.  The review panel will consist of three military officers (or civilians 
commissioned for this purpose) ap pointed by the Secretary of Defense.
22  While 
the review panel will issue a written opini on in all cases after reviewing the record 
                                                 
20 MCI No. 5, Annex B, I (B). 
21 MCO, No. 1, 6(B)(3). 
22 MCO, No. 1, 6(H)(4). of the trial,23 only at its discretion will it re view written submissions by the 
prosecution and defense a nd hear oral arguments.24  It is thus not obligated to even 
consider procedural errors raised by the defense counsel  after the trial or gain 
clarification of the issues  though oral argument in a courtroom.  The standard of 
review is also narrow in scope: the panel must disregard procedural errors that 
would not have “materially affected the outcome of the trial.”  Moreover, the 
rules require, absent an extension, that the panel issue its ruling within 30 days of 
receipt of the case.  This gives defens e counsel insufficient time to prepare an 
appeal and have it included within  the review pane l’s deliberations.25  Taken 
together, the review panel will present a f açade of judicial review at the expense 
of providing defense counsel with a genui ne opportunity to bring forth claims of 
error and have them fairly adjudged.  
While the Detainee Treatment Act now allows  civilian judicial review of some 
cases, the review is discre tionary for any defendant se ntenced to under ten years, 
meaning that those detainees may never have an independent review of their 
conviction.  Moreover, any re view is limited to the tw o narrow questions allowed 
under the Detainee Treatment Act: whether the military commission followed its 
own rules, and whether those rules comported with U.S. law and the Constitution.  
Interlocutory Questions Reviewed by Appointing Authority  
The military commission rules allow for important legal issues occurring during 
the trial to be decided by the Appointing Authority, the executive branch official 
who brought the charges against the accuse d.  The Appointing Authority must be 
the Secretary of Defense or his designate,26 and is responsible for supervising the 
military commissions, including approving charges and plea agreements.27  The 
military commission rules provide that the head of the commission shall turn over for decision by the Appointing Authority  “all interlocutory questions, the 
disposition of which would effect a termin ation of proceedings with respect to a 
charge.” The Presiding Officer may also certify other interloc utory questions to 
the Appointing Authority as he deems appropriate.
28   
Important legal questions raised by defens e counsel regarding such matters as the 
jurisdiction of the commission, the charges brought , evidentiary rulings that 
                                                 
23 MCI, No. 9 (Dec. 26, 2003), 4(C)(5). 
24 MCI No. 9, 4(C)(4)(b).  The Review Panel may at its discretion review amicus (f riend of the court) briefs, 
“particularly from the government of the nation of  which the accused is a citizen.”  Id. (4)(c). 
25 MCO No. 1, 6(H)(4). 
26 Defense Secretary Rumsfeld initially appointed then-Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz as the 
Appointing Authority.  In December 2003, as actual  trials became more imminent, former Judge Advocate 
General John Altenburg was named to the post. 
27 The Appointing Authority is responsible for approv ing charges against terrorist  suspects, appointing the 
commission members, revoking eligibility of attorney s to appear, approving plea agreements, and determining 
when to close cases to the media.  See generally, MCO No. 1. 
28 MCO No. 1, 4(A)(5)(d); MCI No. 8 (Apr. 30, 2003), 4(A). would result in the dismissal of a charge , or the elements of a crime would be 
decided not by a judge or judicial panel,  but by the very same executive officer 
who initiated the charges and approved  the prosecution, and who presumably 
believed he was acting in accordance with th e law.  This improper blurring of the 
functions of the prosecutorial and judicial roles violates the ri ght to a trial by an 
independent and impartial tribunal under ar ticle 14 of the International Covenant 
on Civil and Political Rights.  It also sharply contrasts with the U.S. military 
justice system, where the convening author ities (the analogue to the Appointing 
Authority in the military commission pro cess) play a prosecutorial role (and may 
reduce sentences), but have no judicial au thority whatsoever and therefore do not 
rule on questions of law.   
Rulings on interlocutory questions could presumab ly be overturned by the 
commission review panel following the comm ission trial.  Given that the review 
panel is appointed by the Appointing Au thority, however, it is likely to be 
extremely reluctant to overturn a case-dispositive decision on which the 
Appointing Authority has alre ady expressed its views.  
Revisions to the commission rules made in April 2004 add a further complication 
to the role of the Appointing Authority.  The chief prosecutor now answers to the 
Legal Advisor to the Appointing Author ity and, in turn, to the Appointing 
Authority, both administratively and in terms of performance evaluations.29  The 
prosecutorial function of the military commissions is thus subsumed within the Appointing Authority.  Given the judici al powers of the Appointing Authority, 
who will rule on interlocutory questions, placing the office of the chief prosecutor within that of the Appointing Authority ra ises serious questions about whether the 
commission structure favors the prosecu tion on key matters of law that will 
directly affect the outcome of the proceedings.    
Use of Evidence Gathered Through Torture or Ill-Treatment  
Torture and cruel or inhuman treatme nt are absolutely prohibited under 
international law, including the Conven tion against Torture and Other Cruel, 
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punish ment, which the United States ratified 
in 1994.  The United States must ensure that any statements made as a result of torture shall not be used as evidence.
30   
 Until recently, the commission rules did not prohibit the use of evidence that was 
gathered via coercive techniques of in terrogation. On March 24, 2006, in response 
to growing public concer n that evidence acquired through torture might be 
admissible in military commission proceed ings, the general counsel of the 
                                                
 
29 MCI No. 3 (April 15, 2004), 3(B); MCI No. 6 (April 15, 2004), 3(B). 
30 Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, In human or Degrading Treatment, art. 15.  Department of Defense issued Military  Commission Instruction No. 10, “Certain 
Evidentiary Requirements,”  prohibiting th e use of evidence acquired by torture.  
The Instruction tells the prosecutor not to  offer any statement determined by the 
prosecution to have been made as a resu lt of torture. It also instructs the 
commission not to admit as evidence statemen ts established to have been made as 
a result of torture, except in proceedi ngs against a person accused of torture. 
 However, Human Rights Watch is concer ned that the Instruction contains few 
safeguards to make the prohibition mean ingful: the rule lacks many of the 
safeguards contained in rules for courts -martial and federal courts to ensure 
statements acquired through torture or ot her cruel and abusive treatment are not 
admissible in trial.31 
 Despite evidence that the Bush administ ration has approved and used coercive 
interrogation tactics on detainees at  Guantanamo Bay and elsewhere,
32 it is far 
from clear whether the accused will be able to prevent consideration by military 
commissions of evidence gathered thr ough such methods.  There does not appear 
to be any obligation on the prosecution to  disclose that evidence was obtained 
through torture or coercion, and the defe nse is unlikely to have independent 
access to that information, particularly if  the witness’s statement is introduced 
through a hearsay account of what he or sh e said.  In such situations, there is no 
mechanism for defense counsel to questi on the witness as to  the circumstances 
under which the statement was obtained. Defe nse counsel therefore will be hard 
pressed to challenge whether third-part y evidence was obtained through torture 
despite the widespread recognition of th e unreliability of such information. 
Secret Trials and Gag Order for Defense Counsel  
While the commission proceedings are pr esumptively open to the public and 
media, the rules give wide latitude  to the commission members to close 
proceedings to the public and to the accuse d’s chosen defense lawyer.  They also 
limit the ability of defense counsel to  speak publicly about the proceedings. 
The rules give the Pentagon broad discreti on to conduct proceedings in secret in 
order to protect what it determines to be national security interests.  The 
Appointing Authority or Presiding O fficer may not only decide to close 
proceedings, but may exclude the accused, civilian defense counsel, or any other 
person, except the assigned military defense counsel.  The Appointing Authority retains the discretion to decide whethe r the press and the public may attend open 
                                                
 
31 Human Rights Watch, Q & A on Military Commission Instruction No. 10: Will It Keep Evidence Obtained 
through Torture or Cruel Treatment out of Commissi on Trials?, March 31, 2006, available online at:  
http://hrw.org/english/docs/2006/03/31/usdom13109.htm . 
32 Id. See also Human Rights Watch, Supplemental Subm ission to the Committee Against Torture During its 
Consideration of the Second Periodic Report of the United States.  May 4, 2006, available at: 
http://hrw.org/english/docs/2006/05/04/usdom13316.htm proceedings, and whether transcripts of open proceedings will be publicly 
released.33   
The commission rules contain various pr ovisions that prevent defense counsel 
from speaking publicly about their cases or commission proceedings.  Collectively these rules impose a gag orde r on defense attorney s, a dictate of 
silence that contradicts the fair trial purposes of open proceedings.
34  
One commission rule, discussed above, pr events defense counsel from discussing 
information about the case with anyo ne except the defense team, potential 
witnesses and experts.  In addition to c onstraining defense counsel investigations, 
this rule precludes defense counsel from talking to the media or public at large 
about the case.  Another commission ru le prohibits defense counsel – both 
defense and civilian counsel – from ma king statements about military commission 
cases or other matters relating to the comm issions to the news media, unless they 
have received approval from the Appointing Authority or the General Counsel of 
the Secretary of Defense.35    
There is no basis for giving the Defense De partment control over what civilian 
counsel say outside of court. We know of no precedent in either civilian courts or 
the rules of military justice for such a gag order. Judges sometimes impose gag 
orders on attorneys in individual cases to protect the interests of justice, e.g., to 
ensure fair proceedings before an unprejudiced jury. Prohibiting attorneys from revealing protected or classified inform ation to the public is also a familiar 
concept in the U.S. criminal justice sy stem.  As written, however, the commission 
rule is not limited to protect ing sensitive information nor is it necessary to further 
the interests of justice.  
The only apparent purpose of the gag rule is to control what the public may learn 
and understand about commission proceedings. Such a purpose is inconsistent with right of the public to have access to information about what its government is doing, a right that is particularly signifi cant in the context of such nationally and 
internationally important proceedings. Limiting defense counsel's ability to speak to journalists can only impede the media's -- and hence the public's -- 
understanding of the significance of de velopments during the proceedings.  
Additionally, the military commission rules prohibit defense attorneys from ever 
making any public or private statements regarding any closed  sessions of the 
proceedings.
36  Human Rights Watch understands th at the counsel’s right to speak 
                                                 
33 MCO No. 1, 6(B)(3) 
34 As the Manual for Courts-Martial states, opening pr oceedings “to public scrutin y reduces the chance of 
arbitrary or capricious decis ions and enhances public confi dence.” RCM 806(b) (discussion). 
35 MCI No. 4 (5)(C).   In courts martial, military def ense lawyers may speak with the media about a case in 
accordance with professional rules of legal ethics. 
36 MCI No. 5, Annex B, II (F). and the public’s right to know  must be balanced agains t the legitimate Defense 
Department goal of protecting national secu rity information.  Indeed, one of the 
commission rules commits attorneys to ne ver make public or private statements 
regarding classified or protected information.37  But the rules imposed on defense 
attorneys silence far more than the disclo sure of such information.  For example, 
the rule would prevent defense counse l from ever commenting on whether the 
exclusion from closed sessions affected th e counsel’s ability to mount an effective 
defense or whether the rulings during clos ed sessions were fair -- even if no 
classified or protected information woul d be disclosed in such comments. The 
press and the public will not have access to  closed sessions; their only ability to 
evaluate whether justice was served in those sessions will be through comments 
made by defense counsel or the prosecution.  
While the rules suggest defense attorney s may seek prior approval for public 
statements that would otherwise be prohibi ted, they do not contain any criteria to 
guide military authorities considering such requests.  There is, for example, no requirement that any such request must be granted as long as  protected national 
security information is not revealed.  
“Command Influence” and Military Defense Counsel  
Under existing U.S. military law, milita ry defense counsel are protected by 
various means from undue command interfer ence in representing clients.  Crucial 
is the requirement that they report to a defense counsel chain of command that is 
distinct from the normal military chain of command, and serves to distance defense lawyers from senior military or Defense Department officials.  Additionally, Article 37 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice prohibits 
command influence in the judicial  process by superior officers.
38  This article 
effectively prevents a convening author ity or other commanding officer from 
pressuring defense counsel in cases before military tribunals.   
However, under the military commission rules, military defense lawyers remain 
directly in the military chain of comm and.  They report to the Chief Defense 
                                                 
37 MCI No. 5, Annex B, II (F). 
38 UCMJ, art. 37 on “Unlawfully infl uencing action of court,” states: 
(a) No authority convening a general, special, or summary  court-martial, nor any other commanding officer, may 
censure, reprimand, or admonish the court or any member , military judge, or counsel thereof, with respect to 
the findings or sentence adjudged by the co urt, or with respect to any other ex ercises of its or his functions in 
the conduct of the proceedings. No per son subject to this chapter may attempt to coerce or, by any 
unauthorized means, influence the action of a court-martial or any other militar y tribunal or any member thereof, 
in reaching the findings or sentence in any case, or  the action of any convening,  approving, or reviewing 
authority with respect to his judicial acts. … (b) In th e preparation of an effectiveness, fitness, or efficiency 
report on any other report or document used in whole or in part for the purpose of determining whether a 
member of the armed forces is qualified to be advanced, in grade, or in determining the assignment or transfer 
of a member of the armed forces or in determining whether a member of the armed forces should be retained 
on active duty, no person subject to th is chapter may, in preparing any such  report (1) consider or evaluate the 
performance of duty of any such member, as counsel, represented any accused before a court-martial.  
 Counsel who does not incur a ny confidentiality obligations.39  He in turn reports to 
a Deputy General Counsel who reports to the Defense Department General 
Counsel (a political appointee who re ports to the Secretary of Defense).40  These 
officials are responsible for supervisi ng and preparing fitness and performance 
evaluation reports.41  Even without any overt pr essure, this command structure 
could significantly affect the work of military defense counsel.  For instance, 
anything a military defense lawyer tells a superior officer, such as regarding an ethical issue, could be communicated up the chain of command.  This chain of 
command will limit a superior officer’s abil ity to assist subordinate military 
defense counsel and complicate matters in  the event of disciplinary hearings, 
despite the provisions in the military tri bunal rules to protect defense counsel. 
Right to Counsel of Choice 
The military commission instructions provi de for the mandatory appointment of a 
military defense counsel for the defendant.  The defendant may also retain, at his 
own expense, private counsel, but military  counsel would remain assigned to the 
defense team.  As the instructions state, the “[a]ccused must be represented at all 
relevant times” by military defense counsel.
42  
The right to counsel of choice is an in tegral component of a fair trial – one 
recognized in international and U.S. law, including the rules for courts-martial.  
Nevertheless, the Department of Defense instructions for military commissions violate this fundamental right by requiring the accused to accept a military lawyer 
and by denying the accused the right to either represent himself or to be 
represented solely by private counsel.
43  
In the United States, low-income defendant s who cannot afford to retain their own 
private counsel as a practical matter mu st accept lawyers assigned to them by a 
public defender or legal services or ganizations.  Yet these lawyers are 
independent of the government.  In the case of the military commissions, 
however, the accused will be compelled to conduct a defense with counsel provided by, and under the ultimate authority  of, the branch of government that is 
prosecuting and judging them. 
Human Rights Watch does not question th e ability or willingness of military 
defense lawyers to represent zealously and competently anyone brought to trial 
before the military commissions.  Those a ppointed have to date acted as ardent 
                                                
 
39 MCI No. 4, 3(B)(8). 
40 See MCI No. 6, 3(B). 
41 MCI No. 6, 3(B). 
42 MCO No. 1, 4(C)(4).  The defendant would have the right to request a di fferent military counsel. 
43 Article 14 of the ICCPR provides that everyone char ged with a criminal offens e shall have the right “to 
communicate with counsel of his ow n choosing.”  The Human Rights Commi ttee has interpreted this to include 
a right of persons to defend themselves.  See Human Rights Committee, Hill and Hill v. Spain  (526/1993). advocates on behalf of their clients.  But there is no lawful basis for denying a 
defendant tried before military commissi ons the ability of conducting a defense 
without the participation of  military defense lawyers.44  The ability to represent 
oneself or to be represented solely by private counsel takes on added significance 
in the context of non-U.S. citizens who were taken into custody in Afghanistan or other countries and held as military detainees at Guantánamo.  For reasons of culture, personal history, language and the conditions of their imprisonment, 
many of those detainees may never fully trust or cooperate with U.S. military 
counsel assigned to them.  Such trust and cooperation are, of course, vital to an 
effective defense. 
Forcing military defense counsel on the accu sed is not the only way to balance the 
right to counsel with protection of cl assified information. For example, the 
Department of Defense could permit civilia n counsel to have access to classified 
documents subject to serious penalties if they in fact divulge protected 
information. Both civilian courts and courts martial can impose penalties for violating court orders to k eep information confidential. Sensitive information can 
be protected by providing for such penalt ies in the commission rules. Moreover, 
existing rules of professional conduct precl ude violation of confidentiality orders. 
The Department of Defense could also c hoose to use the procedures specified in 
the Classified Information Procedures Act
45 that balance the need to protect 
classified information and the ri ght to a full and fair defense. 
Second-Class Justice for Non-Citizens  
The President’s Military Order authorizing the commissions restricts their 
jurisdiction to persons who are not U.S. c itizens.  U.S. citizens may not be tried 
before the commissions, regardless of whether they were combatants who 
committed war crimes.  This exclusion presumably reflects a political judgment 
that the U.S. public would not accept the truncated justice of commission 
proceedings for U.S. citizens.  Interna tional human rights law, however, does not 
permit countries to discriminate between citizens and non-citizen s with regard to 
their fair trial rights.46  The fact that a person is no t a U.S. citizen should not be 
used as an excuse to weaken protecti ons for their internationally recognized 
rights. 
See also:  
                                                 
44 Persons tried by U.S. courts-m artial may conduct their defense pro se  or proceed solely with civilian counsel 
if they so choose. 
45 Classified Information Procedures Act, PL 96-4 56, 96th Congress, Act of 15 Oct. 1980 - 94 
Stat. 2025, 18 USC Appendix, as amended by Pub. L.  100-690, Title VII, Sec. 7020(G), Nov. 18, 
1988, 102 Stat. 4396, available at http:// www.fas.org/irp/offdocs/laws/pl096456.htm. 
 
46 ICCPR, art. 14 (“All persons shall be equal before the courts and tribunals”). Q & A on Military Commission Instruct ion No. 10: Will It Keep Evidence 
Obtained through Torture or Cruel Treatment out of Commission Trials? 
http://hrw.org/english/do cs/2006/03/31/usdom13109.htm  
U.S.: Military Commissions Changes Ar e ‘Cosmetic’: Commissions Should Be 
Scrapped for Regular Courts 
http://hrw.org/engl ish/docs/2005/08/31/usdom11671_txt.htm   
Letter to Defense Secretary Donald Rums feld on the Military Commissions at 
Guantanamo Bay, September 16, 2004 
http://hrw.org/english/do cs/2004/09/15/usdom9350.htm  
Making Sense of the Guantanamo Bay Tribunals,  http://hrw.org/english/do cs/2004/08/16/usdom9235.htm
 
 
 