              
 
 
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE                               Media Contact : Amory Zschach  
E: amory@nicwa.org  
P: (503) 222 -4044, ext. 133  
W: www.nicwa.org  
 
Joint Press Release from National Native Organizations on the Overwhelming Support for the 
Indian Child Welfare Act  
(Portland, Ore., January 1 8, 2019)—On Wednesday, January 16, 2019 , 325 tribal nations, 57 Native  
organizations, 21 states, 31 child welfare organizations, Indian and constitutional law scholars, and seven 
members of Congress  joined the United States  and four intervenor tribes  in filing  briefs  to urge the United 
States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit to uphold the Indian Child Welfare Act  (ICWA) , the long -
standing federal law protecting the well -being of Native children by upholding family integrity and stability.  
“The Indian Child Welfare Act  (ICWA)  is child welfare best practice. Thirty -one leading  child welfare 
organizations  stated that ICWA serves the best interest of Native children and families  with their 
declar ation that  ICWA is the ‘gold standard’ of child welfare policy ,” said Sarah Kastelic, executive 
director of the National Indian Child Welfare Association . “As experts in research, education, advocacy, 
and providing  service s related to  child welfare, adoption , and court -system reform , these organizations 
know that ICWA ensures  all children  and families receive the protections they deserve and that a ll 
children fare better when placed with family.”  
“The National Congress of American Indians is moved by the overwhelming support to uphold the Indian 
Child Welfare Act, which protects the best interests of American Indian and Alaska Native children.  Tribal 
nations know, firsthand, the positive impact, t he certainty, and stability that ICWA provides to our children 
in state -based child welfare systems,” said Jefferson Keel, president of the National Congress of 
American Indians . “Bottom line, ICWA works and the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals should overturn  the 
erroneous district court decision and support American Indian and Alaska Native children and families 
because it’s the right thing to do.”  
 
“The State of Texas and other Plaintiffs, supported by the Goldwater Institute , bring this litigation against 
the Indian Child Welfare Act  (ICWA ) stating that it seeks to protect the equal rights of American Indian 
children ,” said Shannon Keller O’Loughlin, executive director of the Association on American Indian 
Affairs , “but ICWA is equal rights and human rights legislation . Statistics show t hat state systems continue 
to remove Indian children from their families at greater rates than white children, even though incidents of 
neglect or abuse are similar.  Current s tudies that have researched systemic bias in the child welfare 
system have found that Indian families were two times more likely to be investigated and four times more 
likely to have their children removed and placed in foster care than their white counterparts. ICWA was 
meant to provide protections against this systemic bias and reduc e the overrepresentation  of Indian 
children into these systems .”                 
 
 
“The Native American Rights Fund, along with our co -counsel at Dentons, is honored to represent the 
325 tribal nations and 57 Native organizations that are signatories to the Tribal Amicus Brief,” said Erin 
Dougherty Lynch, senior staff attorney at the Native American Rights Fund. “The district court’s 
interpretation of the Indian Child Welfare Act  (ICWA) has never been adopted by any other court, makes 
no practical sense, is directly contrary to ICWA’s policy and purpose , and finds no support in centuries of 
established federal Indian law.  Indian Country is united in its support for ICWA, and we are confident the 
Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals will overturn the district court’s decision.”  
# # #  
About the National Indian Child Welfare Association  
The National Indian Child Welfare Association works to support the safety, health, and spiritual strength 
of Native children along the broad continuum of their lives. NICWA promotes building tribal capacity to 
prevent child  abuse and neglect through positive systems change at the state, federal, and tribal level. 
For more information, visit  www.nicwa.org  
About the National Congress of American Indians:  
Founded in 1944, the National Congr ess of American Indians is the oldest, largest and most 
representative American Indian and Alaska Native organization in the country. NCAI advocates on behalf 
of tribal governments and communities, promoting strong tribal -federal government -to-government 
policies, and promoting a better understanding among the general public regarding American Indian and 
Alaska Native governments, people and rights. For more information, visit  www.ncai.org . 
About the Association on Ameri can Indian Affairs:  
AAIA is the oldest non -profit serving Indian Country protecting sovereignty, preserving culture, educating 
youth and building capacity. The Association was formed in 1922 to change the destructive path of 
federal policy from assimilatio n, termination and allotment, to sovereignty, self -determination and self -
sufficiency. Throughout its 96 -year history, the Association has provided national advocacy on watershed 
issues that support sovereignty and culture, while working at the grassroots level with Tribes to support 
the implementation of programs that improve lives on the ground. For more information, visit  www.indian -
affairs.org . 
About the Native American Rights Fund:  
Since 1971, the Native A merican Rights Fund (NARF) has provided legal assistance to Indian tribes, 
organizations, and individuals nationwide who might otherwise have gone without adequate 
representation. Throughout its history, NARF has impacted tens of thousands of Indian people  in its work 
for more than 250 tribes. NARF has defended the Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) for decades, and will 
continue to do so. For more information, visit  www.narf.org . 