FACES OFPROFILES:
GUANT ÁNAMO
2022Twenty years after the opening of Guantánamo , Adnan’s 
questions remain unanswered. Adnan is one of the nine men who  
died while in custody at the military prison , taking his own life rather than 
continuing to endure the brutality of indefinite detention. Thirty other men 
have died since being released. Since Bush’s declaration of the so-called War 
On Terror in 2001, seven hundred and eighty Muslim men and boys have been 
imprisoned at Guantánamo. Thirty-nine men remain incarcerated, separated 
from their families and communities, isolated from the world. Twenty-seven have 
never been charged. All have been subjected to torture by the U.S., including 
twenty-six who survived the CIA torture program. Yet numbers can never convey 
the human toll of this monstrous experiment in cruelty, a manifestation of the 
deadly ideology of white supremacy and the politics of domination and impunity.  
Just as Guantánamo serves as a thermometer of our society’s values, so too does 
our continued, collective rejection of this assault on our shared humanity. As 
we mark twenty years of U.S. policy to imprison Muslim men and boys without 
charge in Guantánamo, the Center for Constitutional Rights, together with our 
clients, co-counsel, and partners, honors the human beings behind the numbers. 
Below are the stories that we, as lawyers and advocates, have the privilege to 
hold–our clients’ rich lives that have been suspended for over two decades. 
Their resistance to the inhumanity and injustice of Guantánamo reaffirms our 
commitment to its closure. 
May each of these men be free, and may you join us in making it so.“Where is the world to save us from torture? 
Where is the world to save us from the fire 
and sadness?”
    –Adnan Farhan Abdul Latif
INTRODUCTION
780
9
39Muslim men and boys 
have been imprisoned at 
Guantánamo since Bush’s 
declaration of the so-called 
War On Terror in 2001
Men who have died while  
in custody at Guantánamo  
military prison
Men who remain incarcerated, 
separated from their families 
and communities, isolated from 
the rest of the world3
PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022About Moath
Even as a young boy in Saudi Arabia, Moath enjoyed 
creating things, seeing how things were made, and 
fixing things around the house. His mother wrote to 
him a few years ago, “Do you remember that door you 
fixed? It’s still there.” But feeling that opportunities for a 
Yemeni living in Saudi Arabia were limited, Moath left for 
Afghanistan. When the United States began its bombing 
operation there in late 2001, he 
fled for safety to Pakistan, arriving 
at the border as the United States 
flooded the area with flyers 
offering bounties for “suspicious” 
people (that is, anyone who was 
Arab). Sold to the United States, 
he was taken to Guantánamo 
in January 2002 where he has 
remained, never being charged 
with any criminal conduct, 
although courts found no evidence that he ever used 
arms against the United States or its allies. In a  
rare statement in 2019, U.S. Supreme Court Justice 
Stephen Breyer warned that “al-Alwi faces the real 
prospect that he will spend the rest of his life  
in detention.”
After about a decade of hunger strikes and other 
protests of his imprisonment, Moath began to 
concentrate on developing his talent for art. He began 
during solitary confinement, drawing on the walls of 
his cell. The drawings would be washed off when he 
was taken away for force feeding, and so he would draw again the 
following day. 
The following 
year, he created a 
large “window,” a 
three-dimensional 
collage looking 
out on a sea he 
created, replete 
with islands, 
boats, trees, a house. He started creating furniture–
cabinets, bookshelves, tables, a foot-operated trash 
basket–all out of cardboard, soap, and whatever other 
limited materials were available. And he began teaching 
himself to paint. His creations were destroyed by the 
guard force in 2013, but Moath continued creating art. 
Soon, he began to build meticulous models of tall ships, 
although he has never seen one outside of pictures, 
using threads from his shirts and prayer caps, strings 
from mops, bottle tops, cardboard, and other odds and 
ends. An award-winning short documentary  describes 
the creation of one of these ships, and the freedom 
Moath finds when he creates–the only freedom he has 
known for two decades.
Legal Representation
Moath al Alwi is represented by Beth Jacob from 
Healing and Recovery after Trauma, the CLEAR  Clinic  
at CUNY School of Law, and John Connolly,  
Zuckerman Spaeder. “I was asked, if you had the option between your own release and your artworks’ release, which one would  
you choose?” And without any hesitation, I answered: “I would opt for the release of my artwork because  
as far as I am concerned, I’m done, my life and my dreams are shattered, whereas if my artwork is released,  
it will be the sole witness for posterity.”  MOATH AL ALWI
– Imprisoned at Guantánamo since January 2002 
–  Status: Cleared for release
– Moath Al Alwi
al-Alwi faces 
the real 
prospect that 
he will spend 
the rest of 
his life in 
detention.
MOATH AL ALWII  |  PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022  After about a decade 
of hunger strikes 
and protests at his 
imprisonment, Moath 
began to concentrate  
on developing his  
talent for art. 4
PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022About Zakaria
Zakaria comes from a well-educated, prosperous, 
cosmopolitan family; all of his siblings, including his 
sisters, are college graduates, and most have graduate 
degrees. They are all eagerly awaiting his release and 
committed to supporting him as he rebuilds his life. 
Zakaria is the youngest brother; his father’s death when 
he was only 16 set him adrift, and he ended up going to 
Georgia to support the Chechnyan rebels against Russia. 
He was captured in a violent ambush with three others–
one was shot dead, he and the other two were sold to 
the U.S. government. They were sent to one of the CIA 
dark sites where, as indicated in the Senate Torture 
Report, he was held and tortured for about a year.  
His treatment when he was first taken to Guantánamo  
was little better. Shortly after he arrived, he complained 
of a tooth ache. He was taken to a “dentist,” who 
(without explanation) pulled eight teeth and sent him 
back to his cell.
The government 
now says, “there 
is no information 
indicating that 
[Zakaria] engaged 
in activities 
against the 
United States 
prior to detention.”Now, Zakaria likes to play videogames, especially 
adventures, and watch American movies. He says that 
when he plays the games and watches the movies, he 
is transported to another world–away from prison and 
abuse. In the past few years, he has started painting and 
making dioramas, including a detailed campsite complete 
with camel, 
hookah, and tea 
pot simmering 
on the fire. He 
also enjoys trying 
different coffees 
and cappuccinos, 
within the 
limitations of 
prison. His dream 
is to open a cafe where his customers will be able to 
play video games while drinking their coffee.
Legal Representation
Zakaria al Baidany is represented by Orrick  
(Rene Kathawala), Beth Jacob from Healing and 
Recovery after Trauma, and Marc D. Falkoff.ZAKARIA AL BAIDANY
–  Imprisoned in secret prisons 2002-2003, imprisoned at Guantánamo 
since 2003
–  Status: Cleared for release
“there is no information 
indicating that [Zakaria] 
engaged in activities 
against the United States 
prior to detention.”He says that when he 
plays the games and 
watches the movies, he 
is transported to another 
world–away from prison 
and abuse. 
ZAKARIA AL BAIDANY  |  PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022  5
PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022About Sufyian
Sufyian Barhoumi is an Algerian citizen in his late 40s 
who was born and raised in Algiers, where his mother 
still lives and his late father practiced law. As a young 
man, Sufyian lived in various countries in Europe–Spain, 
France, and England–as a farm worker and then a street 
merchant for about four years. He has been held at 
Guantánamo since June 2002 even though the U.S. 
government cleared him for release in 2016. 
All parties expected Sufyian to be sent home to Algeria 
after his clearance, but unexplained bureaucratic 
problems with the transfer led to him being one of 
five cleared men stranded at Guantánamo when 
Trump took office. By all appearances, diplomatic 
disputes between the U.S. and Algeria appear to be 
responsible for Obama’s failure to send Barhoumi 
home: the government stated in a court filing that the 
failure to transfer Barhoumi at the end of 2016 was 
owing to factors “not related to petitioner himself.” 
Algeria is stable and has been one of the most secure 
places for the U.S. to transfer detainees to, having 
already accepted some fifteen former detainees 
without incident. However, as part of Jared Kushner’s 
Mideast peace plan, the Trump administration agreed 
to recognize Moroccan claims to territory disputed 
with Algeria in exchange for Morocco’s recognizing 
Israel, which appears to have brought U.S. diplomatic 
relations with Algeria to a low point. In his first year in 
office, President Biden has only transferred one man out 
of Guantánamo despite the fact that many more, like 
Sufyian, are cleared for release. Sufyian lost his left hand in a landmine accident 21 
years ago, and he believes the military kept him at 
Guantánamo for so long because they assumed that 
he had blown it off while training to make bombs. 
The government no longer believes that: Sufyian was 
briefly charged before a military commission as part of a 
supposed bomb-making cell in Pakistan, but all charges 
against him and his co-defendants were dropped (and 
one co-defendant was eventually cleared for release 
and sent home to Saudi Arabia). Even when, in 2012, he 
offered to plead guilty to anything to get a fixed date for 
release, prosecutors refused to do so. 
Sufyian is one of the best-liked prisoners among both 
his fellow detainees and the guards, always meeting 
visitors with a smile, and now speaks fluent English. He 
is a soccer enthusiast, and regards himself as the best 
striker at Guantánamo. He has been described as “highly 
compliant” by the prison authorities and told The Wall 
Street Journal, “I don’t have a black heart against America.” 
Sufyian is eager to return to his family in Algeria, a 
country that has successfully received more than a dozen 
of its citizens from Guantánamo. He dreams of hugging 
his mother again, going into business with his brothers, 
and getting married. 
Legal Representation
Sufyian Barhoumi is represented by the Center for 
Constitutional Rights.SUFYIAN BARHOUMI
– Detained at Guantánamo since 2002 
–  Status: Cleared for release by the Obama administration in 2016
“For all these years, this has been my life. Forget the past, it’s behind me.  
I am looking forward to my family and future. I want to get married.  
Everybody has a dream.”– Sufyian Barhoumi
SUFYIAN BARHOUMI  |  PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022  6
PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022About Guled
Guled Hassan Duran is a Somali citizen with prior 
residence in Germany and Sweden. He is a father and 
husband and has family members living throughout 
Canada and the United States, who are eager to be 
reunited with him and will support him when he is 
released. Never designated for prosecution, Guled has 
been detained at Guantánamo without charge or trial 
since September 2006. 
CIA Torture
Guled was captured in March 2004, and disappeared 
into secret CIA detention, where he was physically and 
mentally tortured. Most significantly, he was denied 
urgent medical treatment for an abdominal wound  
suffered in a street robbery in Mogadishu, Somalia prior 
to his capture. He was traveling to seek treatment when 
he was taken into custody, but his captors did not allow 
him to receive the necessary surgery until years later. 
The Senate Select Committee on Intelligence report on 
the CIA Rendition, Detention and Interrogation program 
documented that Guled was among a group of “CIA 
detainees [who] had care delayed for serious medical 
issues” while in detention “[d]ue to a lack of adequate 
medical care at CIA detention sites and the unwillingness 
of host governments to make hospital facilities available.”
In addition, as disclosed in Guled’s public court filings, 
throughout his CIA detention, interrogators withheld 
medical care to pressure him to cooperate. 
Guantánamo
In November 2016, Guled filed a habeas petition in fed-
eral court in Washington, D.C., challenging the legality of his capture and detention. The case is active and ongoing, 
but Guled has been waiting more than two years for rul-
ings on significant motions. No trial date has been set. 
Guled has appeared before the Periodic Review Board 
as part of an administrative process to determine 
whether he should be transferred. Guled presented a 
statement to the Board in July 2021, addressing the 
devastating impact of more than 15 years of indefinite 
detention on him and his family. He asked the Board  
to put itself in his place and consider, for example, that  
“[i]t is very frustrating and demoralizing being held for so 
long when you have no idea when you will be released”; 
that “[t]he last year and a half have been particularly 
difficult because I have had limited contact with my 
family, and continue to be very worried about them 
given the pandemic”; and “what it is like to lose a parent 
or a young child, as I have, while you are in prison with 
no idea when you will be released.” He explained that, 
“[y]ou have no control over what matters most to you in 
life, you feel helpless.”
Current Status
Guled is approved for transfer from Guantánamo and 
continues to litigate his habeas case. He is willing to 
be transferred to any country where he can live a quiet 
life and be reunited with his family. Despite all that he 
has endured, he remains a gentle person and exudes a 
hopeful and positive attitude.
Legal Representation
Guled Hassan Duran is represented by the Center  
for Constitutional Rights, Sabrina P. Shroff, and the 
Military Commissions Defense Organization.“All I want is just to move on with my life. I want to be reunited with my wife and my children.  
I have lost so much time with them . . . . I don’t want to lose the next 20 years, or however much 
time I have left in my life, to Guantánamo. I don’t want to die here, inshallah.”GULED HASSAN DURAN
– Detained at Guantánamo since 2006
– Status: Cleared for transfer
– Guled Hassan Duran
GULED HASSAN DURAN  |  PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022  7
PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022About Asadullah
Asadullah is the last “low-value” Afghan detainee in 
Guantánamo. He spent over nine years in U.S. detention 
before he was able to secure the assistance of an 
attorney. Asadullah has suffered severe physical and 
psychological torture. He has been beaten, hung by 
his wrists, deprived of food and water, and prevented 
from praying. He has also been subjected to sleep 
deprivation, extreme cold, and solitary confinement.
The U.S. Government’s basis for Asadullah’s detention 
was originally his membership in Hezb-e-Islami (HIA), a 
group that has formally been at peace with the United 
States since 2016, and on allegations that he had 
been a part of or substantially supported al Qaeda. 
After the completion of this peace agreement, the U.S. 
government withdrew HIA membership as a basis for 
detention, and shifted its case to claim Asadullah had 
been a member of al Qaeda. 
In 2021, a federal district court determined that the 
United States 
does not have the 
legal authority to 
detain Asadullah 
and granted his 
Petition for a 
Writ of Habeas 
Corpus. The 
Periodic Review 
Board has also 
determined that 
Asadullah should 
be transferred out of Guantánamo.  
His family in Pakistan is eager to welcome him. 
However, there is no indication that the United States has taken meaningful steps to transfer this man whom  
it is detaining unlawfully.
With no legal barrier preventing his release, Asadullah 
eagerly awaits the day he is reunited with his wife and 
daughter, the most important people in his life. He is 
particularly excited to see his daughter, who was only 
an infant when he was detained. He takes great pride 
in her accomplishments and brags to his counsel that 
he helps her with 
homework during 
their family calls. 
His family has 
actively worked 
for his return and 
are committed 
to providing him 
financial and 
other support as 
he rebuilds his 
life. 
Legal Representation
Asadullah Haroon Gul is represented by Tara Plochocki 
of Lewis Baach Kaufmann Middlemiss, Clive Stafford 
Smith, and Reprieve.ASADULLAH HAROON GUL
– Detained at Guantánamo since 2007 
–  Status: Cleared for release by the Biden administration  
in October 2021
His family in Pakistan 
is eager to welcome 
him. However, there is 
no indication that the 
United States has taken 
meaningful steps to 
transfer this man whom it 
is detaining unlawfully.With no legal barrier 
preventing his release, 
Asadullah eagerly awaits 
the day he is reuinted  
with his wife and daughter, 
the most important  
people in his life.
ASADULLAH HAROON GUL  |  PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022  8
PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022About Sharqawi
Sharqawi Al Hajj is a 47 year-old man from Yemen. He is 
from the city of Taiz, from a tight-knit family that is still 
advocating for his release despite thousands of miles of 
distance and two decades apart. 
Sharqawi was 
transferred to 
Guantánamo 
in 2004, after 
being held in CIA 
sites for more 
than two years. 
In those sites he 
was subjected 
to treatment that now seems from another era–for 
example, he was held in complete darkness while 
subjected to continuous ear-splitting sound. The 
cumulative effect of his torture there, and the toll of 
18 years of imprisonment at Guantánamo, have over 
time had physical and mental health effects. In 2018, 
he began making desperate statements to his counsel 
about wanting to hurt himself and having no hope. In 
2019 he cut himself for the first time in all his years 
of difficulty. In desperate moments, he has done it 
again and again. While the argument between his 
counsel and the government became about whether 
he wanted to kill himself, and whether the government 
has adequate measures to prevent him from doing 
so, the point is more fundamentally: the effects of his 
indefinite detention are cruel and at times unbearable after 20 years. Sharqawi is 
someone the government 
has never charged and has 
no intention of charging.
In June 2021, Sharqawi 
was cleared for transfer by 
the Periodic Review Board. 
He will need support for 
rehabilitation wherever he 
is sent, but he is open to 
transfer anywhere he has a 
meaningful chance at recovery and well-being.
Legal Representation
Sharqawi Al Hajj is represented by Pardiss Kebriaei of the 
Center for Constitutional Rights and Sabrina P. Shroff.“Why are we still here? What have we done to die in this place?” 
– Sharqawi Al HajjSHARQAWI AL HAJJ
–  Detained at Guantánamo since 2004, after over two years in CIA sites
–  Status: Cleared for transfer by the Biden administration in June 2021
...the point is more 
fundamentally: 
the effects of his 
indefinite detention 
are cruel and at 
times unbearable 
after 20 years. He is from the city of Taiz, 
from a tight-knit family that 
is still advocating for his 
release despite thousands 
of miles of distance and 
two decades apart. 
SHARQAWI AL HAJJ  |  PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022  9
PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022About Abdulsalam
Abdulsalam Ali Abdulrahman Al-Hela is a Yemeni father, 
husband, businessman, politician, and sheikh. While on 
a business trip to Cairo in September 2002, he called 
his family to say he had met “some people” and that 
“the atmosphere is cloudy and dark over here.” Then 
he disappeared. He was held by the United States in 
secret prisons for two years, kept in total darkness and 
subjected to loud noises for days at a time, chained  
to walls and floors in painful positions, and hung  
from the ceiling, among other abuse. He was taken  
to Guantánamo Bay in 2004. According to the  
Senate Torture Report, he was in CIA custody for  
over 500 days.
In the nineteen years that Abdulsalam has been in U.S. 
custody, he has not been charged with any crime. He 
has not been found to have been a part of al Qaeda, 
the Taliban, or any terrorist organization. The U.S. 
Government has never disclosed why he was abducted 
and held in the first place. In June 2021, almost two 
decades after his abduction, the U.S. Government 
determined that his detention was not necessary and 
that he could be released. Yet he remains imprisoned six 
months later, an imprisonment unnecessary even in the 
eyes of his captors.Abdulsalam filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus 
in 2005. He was finally given a hearing on the validity of 
his detention in 2017. At the hearing, the court explicitly 
denied Abdulsalam the right to due process of law. 
He was never allowed to see the document laying out 
the case against him. The United States presented no 
witnesses. His detention was upheld on secret evidence 
that was never revealed to Abdulsalam or his counsel. 
His appeal of this unconstitutional decision is pending 
before the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit in 
Al-Hela v. Biden, No. 19-5079.
In the time he has been imprisoned, Abdulsalam has 
lost his mother, a brother, and both of his sons. His only 
surviving daughter has grown 
up and gotten married. His 
country’s government has 
collapsed, and he cannot be 
home to care for his wife and 
family. His sole desire is to 
be reunited with his family 
and to begin the process of 
rebuilding their lives together.
Legal Representation
Abdulsalam al Hela is represented by Covington & 
Burling and Beth D. Jacob from Healing and Recovery 
after Trauma.ABDULSALAM ALI ABDULRAHMAN  AL-HELA
–  Imprisoned in secret prisons 2002-2004; imprisoned at  
Guantánamo since 2004
–  Status: Cleared for release
His sole desire is to 
be reunited with his 
family and to begin 
the process of 
rebuilding their  
lives together.
ABDULSALAM ALI ABDULRAHMAN AL-HELA  |  PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 202210
PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022About Sanad
Sanad al-Kazimi, husband, father of four and grandfather 
to four grandchildren he has never met, was disappeared 
and tortured by the United States, then caged without 
trial or any semblance of due process for nineteen years. 
Despite years of threats to prosecute him for war crimes, 
military prosecutors never brought charges. 
Yet, the empty threats blocked Sanad’s release for over 
a decade. Sanad’s detention, ostensibly for the sole 
purpose of preventing return to the battlefield, has 
instead been punishment. From the physical torture 
to the psychological torture of indefinite detention to 
the nineteen years of incarceration, Sanad has been 
punished severely. 
Finally, the national security agencies that make up the 
Periodic Review Board and oversee release decision-
making at Guantánamo have determined that Sanad, 
now over 50 years old, should be released. As Sanad 
has told his lawyer, Martha Rayner, clearance is just 
a piece of paper. He well knows that despite being 
cleared for release, many men have languished for years 
at Guantánamo, living under the psychological pain of 
uncertainty as to when, if ever, release will be made real. 
Sanad now enters this new stage of his detention, which 
may be the most painful of all–being cleared for release 
yet still locked up thousands of miles from home with 
no control whatsoever as to when that will change.What happens next is especially uncertain because 
Sanad is from Yemen, a country deemed unsuitable for 
transfer by the Biden administration because of the 
ongoing civil war and instability. The national security 
agencies that cleared Sanad for release recommend his 
resettlement in Oman, which is adjacent to Yemen and 
known to have a strong resettlement program. Sanad 
would welcome this opportunity to reintegrate in a 
culture close to his own. But just as his release is wholly 
out of his control, so, too, is where he will be sent. 
Whenever and wherever he is sent, his family has 
pledged support. His youngest child was not yet two 
when Sanad was grabbed by shadowy operatives in 
early 2003. His wife and his children, now adults, have 
worked hard to maintain contact with Sanad despite 
challenges due to the civil war in Yemen. As his son 
has expressed it: “Oh how I wish to put your hand in 
my hand and walk together. I wish we could live as any 
happy family in any happy place.”
When Sanad’s lawyer met his wife in Aden, Yemen in 
2007, she had the most reasonable of questions: when 
would Sanad be released? Fifteen years later, with the 
war in Afghanistan over, the United States must answer 
that question. 
Legal Representation
Sanad al-Kazimi is represented by Martha Rayner, 
Clinical Associate Professor of Law, Lincoln Square  
Legal Services, Fordham Law School.“Oh how I wish to put your hand in my hand and walk together.  
I wish we could live as any happy family in any happy place.”
–son of Sanad Al-KazimiSANAD AL-KAZIMI
– Detained at Guantánamo since 2004
–  Status: Cleared for transfer by the Biden administration in  
October 2021
SANAD AL-KAZIMI  |  PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 202211
PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022About Majid
Majid Khan is a Pakistani citizen who has political asylum 
in the United States. He grew up outside of Baltimore, 
Maryland, graduated from Owings Mills High School, 
and lived and worked in the area. Most of his family 
members still live there and are U.S. citizens. He also 
has a wife and a daughter he has never met, who live in 
Pakistan. Imprisoned at Guantánamo since September 
2006, Majid is serving a military commission sentence 
that should conclude in February 2022.
CIA Torture
After the death of his mother in 2001, Majid’s life spiraled 
out of control. He was captured in Pakistan in March 
2003 and disappeared into the CIA Rendition, Deten-
tion, and Interrogation program, where he was brutally 
tortured. His torture is documented extensively in the 
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence report on the 
CIA program. Among other cruelties, the Senate report 
describes instances where Majid was beaten, starved, 
hung by his arms and sleep-deprived for days on end, wa-
terboarded, and sexually assaulted. Majid also described 
his torture at length in his statement to the military jury 
that sentenced him at Guantánamo in October 2021.
Majid has written several poems in Guantánamo, reflect-
ing on his life, his family, and his experience in detention.
Guantánamo Military Commission
After more than three years in CIA detention, Majid was 
transferred to Guantánamo in September 2006, where 
he was denied access to his counsel at the Center for 
Constitutional Rights until October 2007. Majid was charged and pled guilty to various offenses before a 
military commission at Guantánamo in February 2012, 
pursuant to a plea agreement, and has cooperated with 
U.S. authorities for a decade. 
In a practice common to military justice, Majid was 
sentenced by a jury of senior military officers in October 
2021. The jury sentenced him to 26 years of imprison -
ment within a possible range of 25 to 40 years, which, 
under the terms of his plea agreement, the Convening 
Authority for Military Commissions must reduce to a 
maximum of 11 years because of his cooperation. 
Seven of the eight members of the jury who heard 
Majid’s statement about his CIA torture and the parties’ 
sentencing arguments wrote a letter to the Convening 
Authority requesting clemency on his behalf. The letter 
condemned Majid’s treatment as similar to “torture 
performed by the most abusive regimes in modern 
history”; “a stain on the moral fiber of America”; and  
“a source of shame for the U.S. government.” 
Current Status
Majid should complete his military commission sentence 
in February 2022 and will then need to be transferred 
from Guantánamo in a manner that recognizes the U.S. 
government’s humane treatment obligations and his 
cooperator status. 
Legal Representation
Majid Khan is represented by the Center for 
Constitutional Rights, Jenner & Block LLP, and the 
Military Commissions Defense Organization.“I am a husband, a son, a father, and a brother. My only wish is to be  
released so I can see and hug my daughter for the first time. I have  
so many wrongs that I wish to right.” MAJID KHAN
– Detained at Guantánamo since 2006 
–  Status: Awaiting transfer upon completion of Military Commission 
sentence in February 2022
– Majid Khan
MAJID KHAN  |  PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022  12
PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022ABU FARAJ AL-LIBI
– Detained at Guantánamo since 2006
– Status: Not charged with a crime
About Abu Faraj
Abu Faraj Al-Libi is a 51-year-old Libyan citizen who 
lived with his wife and children before he was subjected 
to extraordinary rendition, torture, and interrogation. 
He has been imprisoned incommunicado and without 
charges for over sixteen years. Seized in Pakistan 
on May 2, 2005, Abu Faraj was held by the United 
States in secret black sites where he was tortured and 
interrogated. In September 2006, he was transferred 
to the detention site in Guantánamo Bay. He arrived 
physically wasted and malnourished, weighing only 98 
pounds. 
In United 
States custody, 
Abu Faraj was 
repeatedly 
subjected to 
degrading, cruel, 
and inhumane 
treatment, 
including 
“walling,” a 
practice of 
slamming 
prisoners against 
a wall. Abu Faraj is permanently injured and disabled. 
He suffers from complete hearing loss in his left ear 
and 50 percent hearing loss in his right ear. He incurred 
traumatic brain injury; scans show over 100 injuries. 
He did not receive treatment for the damage done to 
him. To the contrary, when Abu Faraj voiced complaints, he was further brutalized. As reported by the Senate 
Select Committee on Intelligence, “On a number of 
occasions, CIA interrogators applied the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques to Abu Faraj al-Libi when he 
complained of a loss of hearing, repeatedly telling him to 
stop pretending he could not hear well.” 
In addition to permanent hearing loss and brain damage, 
Abu Faraj suffers myriad chronic medical problems 
that have not been adequately addressed, including 
frequent debilitating migraines; inability to gain and 
maintain more than twenty pounds; chronic neck pain 
due to spinal damage; painful gastrointestinal maladies; 
declining eyesight with dry eye; dry throat; foot and joint 
pain; and sleep disruption.
Although Abu Faraj lives with persistent pain caused 
by his mistreatment, he expresses no ill will toward the 
United States. He says he is thankful for every day that 
he can continue to study and worship God, and he 
wishes to live the rest of his life in peace with his family.
Legal Representation
Abu Faraj Al-Libi is represented by Michael Murali,  
Esq., attorneys at Federal Defender Services of  
Eastern Tennessee, Inc., Dana Hansen Chavis,  
Molly Kincaid, Luke Ihnen, and the Military  
Commissions Defense Organization.“On a number of occasions, 
CIA interrogators applied 
the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques 
to Abu Faraj al-Libi when 
he complained of a loss of 
hearing, repeatedly telling 
him to stop pretending he 
could not hear well.” “I wish to spend the rest of my life with my family in peace and in  
worship of Allah.”
–Abu Faraj Al-Libi
ABU FARAJ AL-LIBI  |  PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022  13
PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022About Saifullah
At 74, Saifullah Paracha is the oldest man detained in 
Guantánamo. He was cleared for transfer in May 2021 
by the Periodic Review Board. His family in Pakistan is 
ready and willing to welcome him home, and the Pakistani 
government has expressed its willingness to accept him.
Saifullah was born in 1947 in a rural village in the Punjab 
province of Pakistan. He grew up as an orphan in poverty 
with 9 siblings. Saifullah immigrated to the United States 
in 1971 to study at the New York Institute of Technology. 
After college, Saifullah started a series of successful 
businesses and helped raise four children. He became a 
legal permanent resident of the United States, and to this 
day considers the country his second home. He returned 
to Pakistan in the 1980s.
Wanting to share his success, Saifullah always devoted 
a significant portion of his time and money to charitable 
causes. He was the chairman of the Counsel of Welfare 
Organizations, a charitable organization composed of 
Pakistani businessmen and politicians. He also played a 
significant role in the construction of the Fatima General 
Hospital and Maternity Home and was on its Board of 
Trustees until 2003.
In July 2003, based on false testimony provided by men 
as they were tortured by the United States, Saifullah was 
abducted in Bangkok, Thailand while on a business trip. 
His wife and family spent an agonizing month not knowing 
where he was. He later explained the treatment he had 
endured upon his kidnapping: “Back hand/leg cuffed, 
black big mask on my head up to neck, was thrown on 
floor of station wagon facing down. I am a heart patient/diabetic/high blood pressure / skin disorder, gout, it could 
have been fatal.” “There was,” he concluded, “no human 
consideration at all.”
Saifullah was detained by the U.S. at the Bagram military 
prison in Afghanistan for more than a year and held in 
solitary confinement. In September 2004, he was put 
on a plane to Guantánamo Bay, where he has been 
held without charge or trial ever since. At Guantánamo, 
Saifullah is well-respected and liked by fellow detainees 
and guards, who have referred to him as the grandfather of 
the detention center.
Saifullah suffers from a host of medical conditions which, 
combined with his advanced age, makes his release all 
the more urgent. He has suffered three heart attacks, two 
while in United States custody. The most recent was in 
June 2020, and it is unlikely that he would survive another. 
Saifullah suffers from a range of other medical problems–
many related to the abuse he has suffered in U.S. deten -
tion–including diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease, 
angina pectoris cardiac diastolic dysfunction, hyperlipid -
emia, diverticulosis, allergic rhinitis, gout, and gastroesoph -
ageal reflux disease. He is on several daily medications, 
but Guantánamo lacks proper medical facilities to provide 
adequate treatment for these conditions.
Still, Saifullah remains hopeful that he will be returned to 
his family in Pakistan and reunited with his now-adult sons 
and daughters. 
Legal Representation
Saifullah Paracha is represented by David Remes,  
Clive Stafford-Smith, GT Hunt, Shelby Sullivan-Bennis,  
and Reprieve.SAIFULLAH PARACHA
– Detained at Guantánamo since 2004 
–  Status: Cleared for release by the Biden administration in May 2021
 “I hope to see my family again before I die.”
– Saifullah Paracha
SAIFULLAH PRARACHA  |  PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022  14
PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022About Mohammed
Mohammed al-Qahtani was born in Saudi Arabia in 1979 to 
a large family. Over the 20 years of the U.S. “Global War on 
Terror,” Mohammed remains the only person that the United 
States government has publicly admitted torturing. In an 
interview with The Washington Post, Susan Crawford, a senior 
U.S. Department of Defense official at the time, acknowledged 
that crime: “We tortured Mohammed al-Qahtani.... His 
treatment met the legal definition of torture.” Mohammed was 
subjected to a systematic and sadistic regimen of physical, 
psychological, and sexual abuse, known as the “First Special 
Interrogation Plan,” that had been personally reviewed and 
authorized by U.S. Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld.
As a young adult, Mohammed suffered greatly from mental 
illness, culminating in psychotic episodes and even involuntary 
commitment. The U.S. government was aware of Mohammed’s 
condition when the military and the FBI began to interrogate 
and torture him shortly after his transfer to Guantánamo. In 
August 2002, he was placed in solitary confinement–itself a 
form of torture–and held there for nearly six months. The FBI 
observed Mohammed “talking to non-existent people” and 
“reporting hearing voices” even before military interrogators 
and medical personnel implemented the torture plan that was 
designed to break him.
Interrogation logs leaked to Time magazine in 2005 detail 
Mohammed’s harrowing experience in U.S. custody, which 
included prolonged solitary confinement, sleep deprivation, 
physical violence, and grotesque sexual humiliation, along with 
other forms of psychological torture. One of the psychiatrists 
who helped design his torture program was reportedly in 
the room during his torture. The government’s mistreatment 
of Mohammed capitalized on his medical vulnerability. The torture he experienced exacerbated the hallucinations, suicidal 
thoughts, and depressive episodes caused by his pre-existing 
mental illnesses. It also caused him to develop Post-Traumatic 
Stress Disorder (PTSD). 
In 2020, a U.S. federal judge issued an unprecedented ruling 
in Mohammed’s habeas corpus case, holding that he was 
entitled to an evaluation by a Mixed Medical Commission–  
a body primarily composed of independent experts from 
neutral countries to evaluate whether prisoners are entitled to 
repatriation on medical grounds. Given the complicity of U.S. 
military medical personnel in his torture, Mohammed does not 
have enough trust for effective treatment while he remains 
imprisoned. Dr. Emily Keram, a civilian psychiatrist who has 
conducted an independent examination of Mohammed’s 
mental health, has repeatedly concluded that any recovery 
from PTSD cannot take place at Guantánamo, where  
Mohammed was tortured; that he needs to be treated by 
Saudi doctors who understand his culture and speak Arabic; 
and that effective mitigation of his schizophrenia, a life-long 
condition, requires the involvement and support of  
Mohammed’s family and community.
Even though the U.S. government dropped all charges 
against Mohammed in 2008 based on its admitted torture, it 
continues to imprison him arbitrarily and without fair process. 
Mohammed must be repatriated to psychiatric care in Saudi 
Arabia, where his family eagerly awaits his return and would be 
able and willing to provide support for him as he recovers and 
seeks to rebuild his life.
Legal Representation
Mohammed al-Qahtani is represented by the  
Center for Constitutional Rights and the CLEAR Clinic  
at CUNY School of Law.MOHAMMED AL-QAHTANI
– Imprisoned at Guantánamo since 2002
–  Status: Not charged with a crime
 “I was all alone in the world. I couldn’t find a way to stop the torture.”
– Mohammed Al-Qahtani
MOHAMMED AL-QAHTANI  |  PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022  15
PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022About Khalid
Khalid Qasim has been detained at Guantánamo since 
May 2002. Originally from Yemen, he left in 1999 as a 
young man. This was not uncommon as unemployment 
in Yemen then stood at 40%, and thousands of Yemenis 
were leaving the country in search of a better future.
Khalid was captured by the Northern Alliance in 
Afghanistan in October, 2001. At the time, the United 
States widely distributed bounty fliers in Afghanistan 
and Pakistan. U.S. Department of Defense data shows 
that 86% of Guantánamo detainees were arrested by 
either Pakistan or the Northern Alliance. Khalid came 
into U.S. custody because local groups were seeking 
a pay-out, and the United States frequently detained 
people on minimal or no evidence.
Upon transfer to 
U.S. custody in 
January 2002, 
Khalid was taken 
to the notorious 
U.S. military prison 
at Bagram in 
Afghanistan. At 
Bagram, Khalid was 
kept in a fenced area 
with his hands and 
feet shackled. He 
was unable to walk 
for two months as a result. The conditions at the prison 
were freezing cold, and people were given only one light blanket and forced to sleep standing up. Khalid endured 
extreme sleep deprivation throughout this period.
Khalid has never been afforded a meaningful 
opportunity to contest the allegations against him. His 
case is emblematic of the lack of judicial review within 
Guantánamo.
Still, Khalid has 
persevered. He has 
learned English; 
he can speak and 
write the language 
fluently. Further, he has developed into an incredibly 
skilled artist. Khalid’s art is marked by inventive uses of 
colors, and he has been known to make use of unusual 
materials, such as the gravel that litters the prison 
ground. His work, in his words, is “powered by optimism 
rather than despair.” 
Legal Representation
Khalid Qasim is represented by Tom Wilner of Sherman 
Stearling, Neil Koslowe, Shelby Sullivan-Bennis,  
Clive Stafford Smith, and Reprieve.“Each of my paintings was executed in a crucial time of tense conditions.  
They each carry several meanings ... The more one reflects the more  
meaning one finds.” KHALID QASIM
– Detained at Guantánamo since 2002 
–  Status: Not charged with a crime
– Khalid Qasim
Khalid has never been 
afforded a meaningful 
opportunity 
to contest the 
allegations against 
him. His case is 
emblematic of the 
lack of judicial review 
within Guantánamo.His work, in his words, is 
“powered by optimism 
rather than despair.” 
KHALID QASIM  |  PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022  16
PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022About Ahmed
Ahmed Rabbani is a 51-year old Pakistani national who 
was captured in Karachi in September 2002 and has 
spent the last 19 
years in custody, 
most of that time 
at Guantánamo. 
He is cleared 
for release, and 
his family in 
Pakistan–including 
his 18 year old 
son Jawad whom 
he has never 
touched–anxiously await his return.
His story is one of the darkest in the history of 
Guantánamo. Ahmed only came into U.S. custody 
because he was mistaken for another man, Hassan Gul, 
and sold for a bounty by the Pakistani government. 
This was confirmed in the Senate Select Committee 
on Intelligence report on the CIA Rendition, Detention, 
and Interrogation program. Hassan Gul was himself 
later captured and detained in the “Dark Prison” before 
ultimately being released. 
Ahmed is one of the detainees who was tortured, a fact 
also confirmed in the Senate report. He has described in 
detail his horrific treatment in CIA custody. He was strung 
up by his hands, with his feet barely touching the ground. 
He was kept completely in the dark so that he could not 
tell day from night. His only sensory experiences besides pain were the smell and taste of the blood trickling 
down his face. He was left there for days on end. He 
lost consciousness many times during this ordeal. When 
he was awake, he tried to hit his hand against the wall, 
hoping to break the shackles or cut off his hand to stop 
the pain. He says that he hoped for death. 
His attorneys at Reprieve have documented 62 methods 
of abuse used on him. But Ahmed says his torture has 
still not ended: the mental torture of indefinite detention 
is equal to any of the physical torture he experienced.
Nevertheless, Ahmed refuses to be defined by these 
experiences; he has spent his time in Guantánamo 
developing his skills as 
an artist. His paintings 
are highly detailed and 
large-scale. He takes 
great pride in the fact 
that they are rarely 
reproductions, but come completely from his imagination.
He is also a talented cook, and he hopes to open  
a restaurant when he is released and to continue  
to develop as an artist. His children are anxious to 
welcome him home and “finally try his cooking.” 
Legal Representation
Ahmed Rabbani is represented by Beth Jacob from 
Healing and Recovery after Trauma, Clive Stafford-Smith, 
and Reprieve, Kristin Davis and Gary Thompson of 
Thompson HD.AHMED RABBANI
– Detained at Guantánamo since 2004 
–  Status: Cleared for release by the Biden administration  
in October 2021
 “[My] torture has still not ended: the mental torture of indefinite  
detention is equal to any of the physial torture [I] experienced.”
– Ahmed Rabbani
He is cleared for release, 
and his family in Pakistan–
including his 18 year old 
son Jawad whom he has 
never touched–anxiously 
await his return.
Nevertheless, Ahmed 
refuses to be defined  
by these experiences.
AHMED RABBANI  |  PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022  17
PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022About Uthman
Uthman is now in his 40’s and has spent his entire adult 
life in Guantánamo. He was captured at the Afghanistan 
border and (it appears) sold to the United States by 
Pakistani bounty hunters, as were so many other men 
who were taken to Guantánamo. But allegations based 
on statements elicited through the torture of other 
detainees–a fact that the government does not contest–
have kept Uthman imprisoned for decades.
Nevertheless, Uthman has never been resentful 
because of his imprisonment, recognizing that he also 
made mistakes. 
Instead, he has 
spent the years 
in reflection, 
growing up and 
maturing, and 
taking advantage 
of opportunities 
to learn. He now 
is thoughtful, polite, and open-minded, with a very dry 
and satirical sense of humor. Recently, he has learned 
calligraphy.  
Uthman’s father was murdered by extremists when he 
was a youth, but his mother, siblings, and their children 
form a large and supportive family that deeply misses 
him. And he misses them, especially the food that his 
mother prepares on her decades-old stove that she 
refuses to replace. (He keeps a photograph of the stove 
which he is happy to show visitors.) Despite the war in Yemen, his family  
is ready to help 
him start his 
business and 
rebuild his life. 
Uthman created  
a business plan to start a food truck when he is released, 
and his family already has purchased a van for him  
to use.
Especially with the U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan,  
it is past time for Uthman to be released.
Legal Representation
Uthman Abd al-Rahim Muhammad Uthman  
is represented by Covington & Burling and  
Beth D. Jacob from Healing and Recovery after Trauma.UTHMAN ABD AL-RAHIM  MUHAMMAD UTHMAN
– Imprisoned at Guantánamo since January 2002
–  Status: Cleared for release
“A person who wants to make changes in his life should not expect other people to do it 
for him, but he should make it in his life. I made these changes in myself. I don’t expect 
others to praise me, because the change is for me.”– Uthman Abd al-Rahim Muhammad Uthman
...he has spent the years 
in reflection, growing up 
and maturing, and taking 
advantage of opportunities 
to learn. Despite the war in Yemen, 
his family is ready to help 
him start his business  
and rebuild his life. 
UTHMAN ABD AL-RAHIM MUHAMMAD UTHMAN  |  PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022  18
PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022About Abu Zubaydah
About six months after 9/11, CIA and Pakistani forces 
in the dark of night gunned down Abu Zubaydah (AZ), a 
Palestinian man who grew up in Saudi Arabia, during their 
sweep of guest houses in Faisalabad, Pakistan, wounding 
him so grievously that he came within a hair’s breadth of 
dying. The CIA then reversed course, flying a top trauma 
surgeon from Johns Hopkins thousands of miles to his 
bedside in an ultimately successful effort to save his life. 
As soon as the medical team permitted, FBI Special Agents 
began interrogating him with its time-tested technique: 
rapport building. 
Though AZ was cooperative when interrogated by the 
FBI, the CIA chose to think that he was only pretending. 
Clinging to this belief, the Agency soon pushed the FBI 
aside, insisting that he had crucial information about where 
and when the next attack on the United States would  
be coming. Soon, the CIA retained two psychologists,  
James Mitchell and Bruce Jessen, who had no experience in 
real-life interrogation, to devise a program–the “enhanced 
interrogation techniques” (EITs), now recognized by courts  
as torture–to wring the “truth” out of AZ. 
Since torture was illegal, the CIA came up with a so-
called Psychological Assessment (PA) of its captive, which 
fashioned a panoply of falsehoods in an attempt to justify 
his torment. A few particularly egregious examples follow:
       [AZ], though only 31, rose quickly from very low level 
mujahedin to third or fourth man in al Qaeda. He has 
served as Usama bin Laden’s senior lieutenant… [AZ] 
has been involved in every major terrorist operation 
carried out by al Qaeda… Moreover, he was one of the 
planners of the September 11 attacks.
All of these statements were false. Even the CIA finally 
admitted that its captive was never a member of al Qaeda.But the PA convinced the Justice Department’s compliant 
Office of Legal Counsel to approve ten EITs in an August 
1, 2002 memo to the CIA’s top lawyer. For the next three 
weeks, the CIA subjected AZ to its EITs around the clock: 
83 waterboarding sessions (one nearly killed him); a 20-day 
period during which he was forced to spend 266 hours 
(11 days, 2 hours) in a coffin-size box, and 29 hours in a 
far smaller confinement box; sleep deprivation for as long 
as 180 hours, usually while standing or forced into stress 
positions, and much more. At last, the Agency conceded 
that AZ had been truthful when he claimed that he did not 
possess any information about potential threats to the U.S.  
Mitchell and Jessen nonetheless deemed AZ’s interrogation 
a great success, recommending that the “aggressive phase 
(when the EITs are used continuously) should be used as 
a template for future interrogation of high value captives,” 
not because the CIA’s EITs produced useful information, 
but rather because their use confirmed that AZ did not 
possess the intelligence that CIA HQ insisted he had.
Nonetheless, Mitchell’s recommendation became a reality. 
But the final irony was revealed by Ron Suskind in his 
book The One Percent Doctrine. When advised that al 
Qaeda experts at the CIA had concluded that AZ, after 
all, was nothing but a small fry, President Bush’s private 
disappointment fell on CIA Director George Tenet: “I said 
he was important,” Bush told Tenet at a daily briefing. 
“You’re not going to let me lose face on this, are you?”  
“No sir, Mr. President,” came the dutiful response.
After nearly 20 years of captivity by our government, 
during which AZ has been charged with no criminal 
offense, AZ is still imprisoned.
Legal Representation
Lead counsel Mark P. Denbeaux; Charles R. Church;  
Max Sirianni.ABU ZUBAYDAH
– Detained at Guantánamo since 2006
–  Status: Not charged with a crime
ABU ZUBAYDAH  |  PROFILES:  FACES OF GUANT ÁNAMO 2022  