 1 Morality in new policies addressing trafficking and sex work 
Melissa Ditmore 
Trafficked Persons Rights Project 
 
 
 
Presented at “Women Working to Make a Difference,” IWPR’s Seventh International 
Women’s Policy Research Conference, June 2003 
      
 
Abstract 
 
 The United States is the largest donor in the world (e ven at one of the lowest 
percentages ofgiving based on GNP), and this is continued with recent funding for both 
anti-trafficking initiatives domestically and abroad as well as the U.S. Global AIDS 
Fund. The Bush administration has included lit tle noticed but very politically effective 
constraints on this funding so that none of  this money will go to projects that do not 
explicitily condemn "prostitution and sex tr afficking." These restrictions will defund 
projects recognized as Best Pr actices by the U.S. government. It is unfortunate that the 
U.S. is sacrificing efficacy for morality in the new funding. 
  2  
Introduction  
 
 The recent trend toward globalization has increased interest in legislating 
trafficking in persons. Trafficking in pers ons is modern slaver y. Although the term 
"trafficking in persons" refers to men, women and children, and covers both internal and 
cross-border trafficking for migration and labor, what captures the minds and 
imaginations of the media, the general public  and policy makers remains the specter of 
women and children trafficked for purposes of  sexual slavery. This is reflected in the 
definitions of traffic in persons and sex trafficking in the United States Victims of Trafficking and Violence Pr otection Act. Section 103 (8) defines severe forms of 
trafficking in persons as  
 (A) sex trafficking in which a commercial  sex act is induced by force, fraud, or 
coercion, or in which the person induced to perform such act has not attained 18 years 
of age; or  (B) the recruitment, harb oring, transportation, provisi on, or obtaining of a person 
for labor or services, through the use of fo rce, fraud, or coercion for the purpose of 
subjection to involuntary servitude, peonage, debt bondage, or slavery.  
 Section 103 (9) defines sex trafficking as "t he recruitment, harboring, transportation, 
provisions, or obtaining of a person for a commercial sex act." Section 103 (3) says "The 
term 'commercial sex act' means any sex act on account of which anything of value is 
given to or received by any person."
 
 The focus on sex and sexuality gives a di storted image of both trafficking and sex 
work. Questions of agency in transnational movement are obscured by sensational stories of white slavery. Yet evidence has shown that  people trafficked are not necessarily or 
even usually involuntary or duped participants, but exploited laborers.  Trafficked persons 
work in many industries in cluding agriculture, construc tion, factories and domestic 
service. Sex work is not per se  trafficking, but abuses in th e sex industry can be addressed 
as trafficking. A more nuanced understanding distinguishes trafficking from sex work. 
This problematic conflation arises in recent morally-based restrictions on monies earmaked for overseas anti-traffi cking and HIV/AIDS programs. 
  
New USAID funding policy
 
 
 Earlier this year, a cable signed by Colin  Powell was circulated to USAID field 
officers. This cable stipulated that orga nizations amend their websites to promote 
abstinence over condom use in the struggle against HIV and AIDS. This gained 
widespread notice; however, a less noted stipulation of this  cable was that  
 
Organizations advocating prostitution as an  employment choice or which advocate or 
support the legalization of prostitution are not appropriate partners for usaid anti-
trafficking grants and contracts, or sub-grants and sub-contracts 
  3 A note within the text of the cable refers to USAID trafficking policy, which was released 
after this cable, and which used the exact  same language. The cable goes on to state 
 
Careful review of all programs and public ations should ensure that usaid is not 
perceived as using u.s. taxpayer funds to suppor t activities that cont radict our laws or 
policies, including trafficking of women a nd girls, legalization of drugs, injecting 
drug use, and abortion. 
 There is an underlying equation of trafficking with sex work  and especially prostitution 
in this message and in the minds of many. This conflation is promoted by some anti-
trafficking activists and organi zations who have worked very hard to promote their ideas 
to Congress in speaking engagements and in pr int. It is ironic that  these activists are 
usually strong radical feminists, because these efforts, just like the cable above, reflect a 
general protectionist stance ta ken toward women and neglects  the fact that trafficking 
occurs in many industries, including constr uction, sweatshops, food service and domestic 
labor. It remains deeply upsetti ng to see feminists promote polic y that purports to protect 
women but is in fact detrimental to women.        
Funding restrictions for th e U.S. Global AIDS Fund 
 
 Trafficking in persons is an enormous issue but it affects far fewer people than 
HIV and AIDS. The U.S. is to be applaude d for the creation of the Global AIDS Fund 
and for targeting areas most affected  by HIV and AIDS. However, the funding 
constraints will sabotage the potential progress that could be made.  
 This amendment   (f) Limitation. -- No funds made available to carry out this Act, or any amendment made to this Act, may be used to provide assistance to any group or organization that does not have a policy  explicitly opposing prostitution and sex 
trafficking. 
 was incorporated into the text of the Act, as well as stipulations that  fully one-third of the 
funding provided, $5 billion, be used fo r abstinence only programs, with a non-
discrimination clause to enable organi zations that oppose condom use and condom 
distribution to receive these funds. This marks a willingness to sacrifice lives to 
moralizing about sexual activity, as indicated by the empha sis on abstinence and denial of 
funding to sex work projects. The Uganda ABC model which is supposed to be the 
paradigm for the U.S. Global AIDS Fund does not focus on abstenince maintains a 
realistic view of human beha vior and so encourages condom use and harm reduction.  4  
Feminist activism addr essing these issues 
 
 I do not want to analyze the strange bedfellows phenomenon that arises with 
single-issue politics, that of ra dical feminists allied with the religious right, in promoting 
these policies. This has been discussed elsewhere.  (Chancer 1998, Ditmore 2002, 
Ditmore forthcoming, Ditmore and Wijers 2003)  Fewer strange bedfellows were found in 
the alliance activists, co mmunity-based organizations and non-governmental 
organizations addressing traffic in persons , sex workers rights, reproductive rights, HIV 
and AIDS in a failed bid to change the bill . Arguments against thes e funding restrictions 
were made, but Republicans were able to pus h the legislation thr ough with limitations at 
2:30 am, without allowing new amendments a nd citing the late hour, despite there being 
no impending deadline and despite Democrats' artic ulating that they wanted to change the 
bill.  
Activists and community-based organiza tions addressing trafficking and sex 
work, among many other issues including family  planning and drug use, will be severely 
restricted by these fiscal limitations. Those who promoted these restriction - 
policymakers and lobbyists - will not.These re strictions are a mani festation of a too-
simple analysis that neglected to question "w hat kind of help would be truly helpful?" It 
is imperative to consider who will be hurt and who will benefit from these restrictions. Without becoming mired in the new incarnati on of the so-called sex wars discussing 
whether prostitution is in itself trafficking, it is  important to recognize that it is easy to 
declare that one is "against traffic in wome n" but immensely more difficult to determine 
what would be helpful to those deemed in n eed of help. Historical examples of poor anti-
trafficking policy include women in the U.S.  prosecuted for conspiracy under the White 
Slave Traffic Act of 1910, for the action of buyi ng their own train tickets to cross state 
lines to visit their fiances! (Langum 1994, Gr ittner 1990) Other efforts to demonstrate the 
severity of the problem have attempted to  buy women, not only including a scandal of 
Victorian London but also a 1998 anti-trafficking film, "Bought and Sold."   
 Other highly questionable anti-trafficking efforts are illustrated in reports from 
India that women "rescued" from brothels against their will  end up in greater poverty 
because they lose all their property in this so -called rescue and incur debts when they use 
up resources from "rescue" organizations and try to return to work in the brothels. 
Reports from the Shan Women's Action Ne twork decry anti-trafficking efforts in 
Thailand that detain and interrogate "rescued " women before turni ng them over to police 
who arrest them! These efforts do nothing fo r sex workers in abusive conditions who do 
not want to leave the sex i ndustry but who want to better their conditions. Cambodian sex 
workers use the slogan "Don't talk to me about sewing m achines, talk to me about 
workers' rights!" 
 Effective and documented successful efforts may be undermined depending upon 
the definitions of the terms above. Projects i nvolving sex workers are the most successful 
at combating abuses within the sex industry around the world. One example of a project that may suffer under these new policies is the Durbar Mahila Samanwaya Committee of  5 Kolkata, more widely known as the Sona gachi Project, cited as a "best practices" 
organization by USAID. The Sonagachi Project is one of many projects that exemplify 
pragmatic and effective approaches to reduc ing not only transmissi on of HIV but also 
abuses such as trafficking within sex wor k. The prevalence of HIV among sex workers is 
far lower in Kolkata than elsewhere in India. Their anti-trafficking initiative relies on the 
participation of red light distri ct residents, especially sex wo rkers, to prevent trafficking 
into the red light districts. As of June 15, 2001, 43 trafficked persons had been assisted by 
the Sonagachi Project, 35 of whom were minors (Durbar 2001). The adverse 
ramifications of excluding exemplary projec ts such as the Sonagachi Project from 
USAID contracts would be enormous.   
 Another Asian project enables sex wo rkers to get high school equivalency 
diplomas which are important for those who wa nt to leave the sex industry.  This project 
could be affected by recent funding cha nges. The people who are hurt under these 
policies are not policy makers, lobbyists or activists: they are poor women far from the 
people who make these decisions, women whos e voices and needs were not considered 
when these decisions were made.  
 
 Conclusions 
 
 Trafficking is a complex issue but simp ler analysis is tempting. While simplifying 
issues may help some people understand them , this is to the detriment of complex 
problems - an overly simplistic solution is not  a solution but a seed for new problems. 
The anti-prostitution stance also represents a too-simple and inefficient analysis that 
claims moral high ground while eclipsing the plight of many traffi cked people in other 
industries and trafficked men. This is too gr eat a sacrifice. Yet there are reasons for 
optimism. Trafficking has been established as  a crime that extends beyond the realm of 
prostitution. This is enabled by the move to ac tual conditions and crimes against persons, 
even as sexuality and morality are present in  the law, if not the funding policy. The U.S. 
is increasing funding for AIDS-related initiati ves at an unprecedented rate. While U.S. 
foreign policy has taken a dangerous turn, this is part of a larger continuum of issues. 
Recent trends against women's autonomy in the same arena, particularly addressing 
reproductive rights, have led to a growing ba se of supporters who are working together 
on a variety of issues to promote mo re enlightened policy for the future. 
  Without people versed in both the issues  as they play out on the ground and the 
legal instruments and ramifications, polic y will be crafted errantly. The current 
administration neglected even the recommendations of its own agencies that did not 
conform to its current moral agenda based on an over simplification of trafficking and sex 
work without regard to the consequences of  these actions. Current policies neglect the 
real needs of the people purpor ted to be assisted in thes e programs. Considering the 
disregard for the people pur portedly helped by USAID and Global AIDS Fund monies, it 
is crucial to ask what is the real motivation behind the decisions to sacrifice the very people intended to benefit from thes e funding efforts to a fundamentally immoral moral 
agenda.   6  
References  
Chancer, Lynn (1998). Reconcilable Differences (Berkeley:  University of California). 
 Ditmore, Melissa (forthcoming). "Feminists and Sex Workers: Working Together," in 
Feminist Visions for the Twenty-first Ce ntury, Wakeland, Amy Elaine, editor. (New 
York: Rowman and Littlefield).  Ditmore, Melissa (2002). Trafficking and Se x Work: A problematic conflation. Graduate 
Center of the City University of New York dissertation.  Ditmore, Melissa and Wijers, Marjan (forthcoming 2003). Sex, money, migration and crime. 
The negotiations on the United Nations Protoc ol on Trafficking in Persons. Utrecht: 
Nemesis.  
 Durbar Mahila Samanwaya Committee ( 2001). Background report on trafficking.  
 Empower (2003). A Report By Empower Chia ng Mai On The Human Rights Violations 
Women Are Subjected To When “Rescued” By Anti-Trafficking Groups Who Employ 
Methods Using Deception, Force And Coercion.  Grittner, Frederick K. (1990). White Slaver y Myth, Ideology, and American Law (New 
York: Garland).  Langum, David J. (1994). Crossing Over the Line: Legislating morality and the Mann 
Act (Chicago: University of Chicago). 
 
Shan Women's Action Network (2003). Repor t by the Shan Women's Action Network 
(SWAN) on services provided to Trafcord on May 3, 2003.  
 United States Victims of Trafficki ng and Violence Protection Act (2000). 
 