HUMAN TRAFFICKING FACT SHEET:  RIGHTS OF TRAFFICKED PERSONS• What is human trafficking?Every year, human trafficking brings thousands of people into the United States. International human trafficking is the actof bringing people into one country from another, and then exploiting them through control or coercion, and usingthem to earn money for the traffickers. In New York City, many trafficking victims come from China, Mexico, andEastern Europe.• Why do trafficking victims agree to come over here, only to be exploited?Back in their home country, the trafficker or his/her associates may have lied about the type of job that the traffickedperson will have, or has lied about the conditions under which that person will work. Often, victims do not know that theywill be working in unsafe or slavelike conditions. People agree to pay traffickers large amounts of money so that thetrafficker can bring them to the United States. The victim seeks economic opportunities.• What type of work do trafficking victims do once they’re here?Trafficking victims work in different settings, including brothels, strip clubs, garment sweatshops, restaurants, agriculturalwork, and in private homes as domestic workers.• Why don’t the trafficking victims leave these conditions?Trafficked persons may live in slave-like conditions, or they may live in a climate of fear, where they are subject tothreats against themselves or their families. Even if it appears that the victim has autonomy and can leave the situation,he or she cannot simply leave in most cases. The traffickers have threatened them with violence or with the possibility ofarrest and/or deportation, making them afraid of police and lawyers here in the United States. The victim also owes alarge sum of money to the traffickers, and may be afraid to leave until that debt is paid. The traffickers make it very difficultfor trafficked persons to ask for outside help. Victims often feel isolated think that there is no one whom they can trust, andno one who can help them.• Can trafficking victims get any help?YES.  The law provides for ways to help trafficked persons.  Victims may be able to obtain legal immigration statusand/or other benefits—Victims should not be afraid to speak out.  It is very important to consult a lawyer or otherlegal advocate for help in receiving benefits.© Sex Workers Project—Urban Justice Center 2002For more information, call Juhu Thukral at 646/602.5690, at the Urban Justice Center, to get advice andassistance.         
Urban Justice Center666 Broadway, 10th floor, New York, NY 10012Tel:  (646) 602-5600 • Fax:  (212) 533-4598