1 
 
 
 
NEW YORK STATE ANTI -TRAFFICKING LAW  
 
New York State (NYS), especially New York City (NYC), is a destination for trafficked persons from all over the 
world who are forced into various labor sectors, such as restaurants, agriculture, domestic or sex work.  To address 
this important concern, New York State enacted an anti -trafficking law that took effect on November 1, 2007 .1 This 
document highlights the key changes made to New York State laws.   
 
NEW YORK PENAL LAW  
 
The law adds new sections to the Penal La w, creating the crimes of “Labor Trafficking” and “Sex Trafficking.”   
 
“Labor Trafficking”  
 
 A new N.Y. Penal Law §135.35  creates the crime of “ Labor Trafficking.” A person commits this crime when he 
or she  compels or induces another person to engage in l abor, or recruits, entices, harbors, or transports such 
other person by means of intentionally: ( 1) providing the victim with certain drugs; ( 2) requiring servicing  of a 
debt that is caused by a course of conduct, with intent to defraud such person ; (3) withholding or destroying 
government identification documents; ( 4) using force or engaging in any scheme, plan or pattern to compel or 
induce such person to engage in labor activity by making that person fearful of one of seven actions or 
consequences agains t him or her.  (For the full text of this section, please see Appendix A .) 
 
 N.Y. Penal Law §135.35  makes the crime of “Labor T rafficking ” a class D felony , with a maximum sentence of 
7 years imprisonment.2 In addition, a court may order a defendant to pay a  fine of $5,000 or double the 
defendant’s gain from the commission of the crime.3 
 
 A new N.Y. Penal Law §135.36  provides that a victim of “Labor T rafficking ” is not an accomplice of the 
trafficker.  (For the full text of this section, please see Appendix A .) 
 
“Sex Trafficking”  
 A new N.Y. Penal Law Section §230.34 create s the crime of “Sex Trafficking. ” A person commits this crime 
when he or she intentionally advances or profits from prostitution by : (1) providing the victim with certain 
drugs ;4 (2) making ma terial false statements;5 (3) withholding or destroying government identification 
documents; (4) requiring repayment of a debt;6 (5) using force or engaging in any scheme, plan or pattern to 
compel or induce such person to engage in prostitution  by ma king that person fearful of one of eight  actions or 
consequences against him or her. (For the full text of this section, please see Appendix B.) 
                                                           
1 S.B. 5902, 228th Leg., Reg. Sess. (N.Y. 2007), chaptered on June 6, 2007.  
2 See N.Y. Penal Law §70.00(2)(d).  
3 See N.Y. Penal Law §80.00.  
4 N.Y. Penal Law §230.34(1), relating to drugs, is more detailed in the “Sex Trafficking” provision than in the “Labor Trafficking” 
provision at N.Y. Penal Law §135.35(1).  
5 N.Y. Penal Law §230.34(2), relating to the use of fraud, has no counterpart in the “Labor Traffick ing” provision.  
6 N.Y. Penal Law §230.34(4), relating to repayment of a debt, does not require a “systematic ongoing course of conduct with int ent to 
defraud such person” as required in the “Labor Trafficking” provision at N.Y. Penal Law §135.35(2).  2 
  N.Y. Penal Law §230.34  makes the crime of “Sex T rafficking ” a Class B felony , with a  maximum sentence of 25  
years  imprisonment .7 In addition, a court may order a defendant to pay a fine of $5,000 or double the 
defendant’s gain from the commission of the crime.8     
 A new N.Y. Penal Law §230.36 provides that a  victim of  “Sex Trafficking ” is not an accomplice of the 
trafficker.  (For the full text of this section, please see Appendix B.) 
 
Changes to the Penal Law  Relating to Prostitution  
 
 N.Y. Penal Law §230.25 , “Promoting Prostitution in  the 3rd Degree,”  is amended to  include the  selling of  
traveled -related services , know ing that such services include or are intended to facilitate travel for the purpose 
of patronizing a prostitute . 
 
 Repeals N.Y. Penal Law §230.03 , “Patronizing a Prostitute in the 4th Degree,” and amends §230.04  to make the 
lowest level of “Patronizing a Pr ostitute” a Class A misdemeanor.    
 
NEW YORK SOCIAL SERVICES LAW  
 
The law adds a new  Article 10 -D to the Social Services Law , entitled “Services for Victims of Human Trafficking.”  
New York State Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance (OTDA) and th e Division of Criminal Justice 
Services (DCJS) are entrusted with ensuring that trafficked per sons obtain necessary services. The process of 
determining eligibility for services is called “confirmation.”9 
 N.Y. Soc. Ser. Law  §483 -bb(a)  authorizes OTDA  to coordinate with and assist law enforcement agencies and 
district attorneys’ offices to access appropriate services for trafficked persons.  
 
 N.Y. Soc. Ser. Law  §483 -bb(b)  states that OTDA may enter into contracts with non -governmental 
organizations for providing pre -certified victims of human trafficking services insofar as funds are available.   
 
 N.Y. Soc. Ser. Law  §483 -cc(a)  states that after the first encounter  with a trafficked person, law enforcement or the 
district attorney’s office shall notify OTDA and DCJS that this person may be eligible for services.  
 
 N.Y. Soc. Ser. Law  §483 -cc(b)  further states that upon receipt of notification, DCJS, in consultation with 
OTDA, shall make a preliminary assessment of whether such victim appears to meet criteria for certification as 
stated under federal law (section 7105 of title 22 of U.S. Code). If t he victim meets the criteria, OTDA will 
inform the victim and the law enforcement agency or district attorney’s office. OTDA may also assist in helping 
victim find services. If victim is under age of 18, then OTDA shall notify local department of social se rvices in 
county where child found.  
 
 N.Y. Soc. Ser. Law  §483 -dd states that the state or local law enforcement agency or district attorney’s office 
must provide the victim with the Form I -914B for immigration purposes upon the request of the trafficking 
victim or victim’s representative.  
                                                           
7 See N.Y. Penal Law §70.00(2)(b).  
8 See N.Y. Penal Law §80.00.  
9 See N.Y. Soc. Ser. Law §483 -cc. 3 
 GAPS IN THE LAW  
 
 Labor trafficking is not treated as serious a crime as sex trafficking. DCJS has recommended that some labor 
trafficking cases should be referred to federal law enforcement for prosecution, since those pen alties are more 
substantial.  
 The law does not include an independent private right of action.  
 The law does not provide for restit ution or forfeiture of traffickers ’ assets.  
 There is no provision that allows for victims to vacate prior convictions for conduct involuntarily engaged in as 
a part of the trafficking scheme.   
 There is no specific me chanism  for service providers to make referrals to OTDA directly , meaning that a 
trafficked person must b e involved with law enforcement in order to access services that are available through 
the confirmation process .   
 
WHAT YOU SH OULD DO IF YOU BELIEVE SOMEONE IS TRAFFICKED  
  
 Immediately, reach out to social service providers and attorneys who are experts on trafficking. You can contact 
Safe Horizon, New York Association for New Americans, Sex Workers Project at the Urban Justice C enter, 
City Bar Justice Center, Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund, and The Door.  
 If the trafficked person is in immediate physical danger, call your local law enforcement and emphasize that the 
person is trafficked.   
 If the trafficked perso n is a minor who is not required to cooperate under the law, and does not want to 
cooperate, advocate to ensure his or her rights are not violated.   
 Encourage your organization to receive training on the issue of trafficking in persons and on the new law.    
 If you are with law enforcement or a district attorney’s office, call OTDA and DCJS immediately. In addition, 
call a service provider who is experienced in working with trafficked persons to coordinate provision of 
essential health, housing, food and co unseling resources.   
 If you are OTDA or DCJS, after receiving a referral from law enforcement, confirm the person as trafficked 
and contact appropriate service providers.     
 Law enforcement and/or the district attorneys’ offices must complete an I -914B f orm immediately upon 
identifying a person as trafficked and forward it to either the trafficked person or his or her representative.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
  
NEW YORK STATE ANTI -TRAFFICKING LAW  
APPENDIX A  
 
New York Penal Law §135.35 – Labor Trafficking  
A person  is guilty of labor trafficking if he or she compels or induces another to engage in labor or recruits, entices, 
harbors, or transports such other person by means of intentionally:  
1. Unlawfully providing a controlled substance to such person with intent to impair said person’s judgment;  
2. Requiring that the labor be preformed to retire, repay, or service a real or purported debt that the actor  
    has caused by a systematic ongoing course of conduct with intent to defraud such person;  
3. Withholding, destroying, or confiscating any actual or purported passport, immigration document, or any  
    actual or purported government identification document, of another person with the intent to impair said  
    person’s freedom of movement; provided, however, t hat this subdivision shall not apply to an attempt to   
    correct a social security administration record or immigration agency record in accordance with any local,  
    state, or federal agency requirement, where such attempt is not made for the purpose  of any express or   
    implied threat;  
4. Using force or engaging in any scheme, plan or pattern to compel or induce such person to engage in or  
    continue to engage in labor activity by means of instilling a fear in such person, that if the demand i s not  
    complied with, the actor or another will do one or more of the following:  
(a) cause physical injury, serious physical injury, or death to a person; or  
(b) cause damage to property, other than the property of the actor; or  
(c) engage in other conduct constituting a felony or unlawful imprisonment in the second degree in  
     violation of section 135.05 of this chapter; or  
(d) accuse some person of a crime or cause criminal charges or deportation proceedings to be  
     instituted against such  person; provided, however, that is shall be an affirmative defense to this  
     subdivision that the defendant reasonably believed the threatened charge to be true and that his  
     or her sole purpose was to compel or induce the victim to take reasonab le action to make good  
     the wrong which was the subject of such threatened charge; or  
(e) expose a secret or publicize an asserted fact, whether true or false, tending to subject some  
     person to hatred, contempt or ridicule; or  
(f) testify or p rovide information or withhold testimony or information with respect to another’s  
     legal claim or defense; or  
(g) use or abuse his or her position as a public servant by performing some act within or related to  
     his or her official duties, or by  failing or refusing to perform an official duty, in such manner as  
     to affect some person adversely.   
 
New York Penal law §135.36 – Labor Trafficking Accomplice Liability  
In a prosecution for labor trafficking, a person who has been compelled or in duced or recruited, enticed, harbored 
or transported to engage in labor shall not be deemed to be an accomplice.   
 5 
 APPENDIX B  
 
New York Penal Law §230.34  - Sex Trafficking  
A person is guilty of sex trafficking if he or she intentionally advances or prof its from prostitution by:  
1. Unlawfully providing to a person who is patronized, with intent to impair said person’s judgment:  
(a) a narcotic drug or a narcotic preparation;  
(b) concentrated cannabis as defined in paragraph (a) of subdivision four of se ction thirty -three  
     hundred two of the public health law;  
(c) methadone; or  
(d) gamma -hydroxybutyrate (GHB) or flunitrazepan, also known as Rohypnol;  
2. Making material false statements, misstatements, or omissions to induce or maintain the person being  
    patronized to engage in or continue to engage in prostitution activity;  
3. Withholding, destroying, or confiscating any actual or purported passport, immigration document, or any  
    other actual or purported government identification document  of another person with intent to impair  
    said person’s freedom of movement; provided, however, that this subdivision shall not apply to an  
    attempt to correct a social security administration record or immigration agency record in accordance  
    with any local, state, or federal agency requirement, where such attempt is not made for the purpose of  
    any express or implied threat;  
4. Requiring that prostitution be performed to retire, repay, or service a real or purported debt;  
5. Using force or engaging in any scheme, plan or pattern to compel or induce the person being patronized  
    to engage in or continue to engage in prostitution activity by means of instilling a fear in the person  
    being patronized that, if the demand is not complie d with, the actor or another will do one or more of the  
    following:  
(a) cause physical injury, serious physical injury, or death to a person; or  
(b) cause damage to property, other than property of the actor; or  
(c) engage in other conduct constitut ing a felony or unlawful imprisonment in the second degree in  
      violation of section 135.05 of this chapter; or  
(d) accuse some person of a criminal charges or deportation proceedings to be instituted against  
      some person; provided, however, th at it shall be an affirmative defense to this subdivision that  
      the defendant reasonably believed the threatened charge to be true and that his or her sole  
      purpose was to compel or induce the victim to take reasonable action to make good the w rong  
      which was the subject of such threatened charge; or  
(e) expose a secret or publicize an asserted fact, whether true or false, tending to subject some  
     person to hatred, contempt, or ridicule; or  
(f) testify or provide information or with hold testimony or information with respect to another’s  
     legal claim or defense; or  
(g) use or abuse his or her position as a public servant by performing some act within or related to  
     his or her official duties, or by failing or refusing to pe rform an official duty, in such manner as  
     to affect some person adversely; or  
(h) perform any other act which would not in itself materially benefit the actor but which is  
     calculated to harm the person who is patronized materially with respect  to his or her health,  
     safety, or immigration status.   
 
New York Penal Law §230.36 – Sex Trafficking Accomplice Liability  
In a prosecution for sex trafficking, a person from whose prostitution activity another person is alleged to have 
advanced or a ttempted to advance or profited or attempted to profit shall not be deemed to be an accomplice.   
 