  Urban Justice Center  
123 William Street, 16th floor, New York, NY 10038  
Tel:  (646) 602 -5600 • Fax:  (212) 533 -4598  
 
 
Congress passed the Trafficking Victims Protection Act (TVPA) in 2000 and reauthorized this historic 
legislation in 2003 and 2005.  The  TVPA is once again being reauthorized . The House of Representatives has 
passed its version of the reauthorization of the federal trafficking law, H.R. 3887 : the William Wilberforce 
Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2007 , which includes  many problematic provisions .   
 
The Senate has introduced S.B. 3061, which includes provisions that protect trafficked persons, 
and does NOT  include a dangerous and unnecessary expansion of the Mann Act . Therefore, we 
support S.B. 3061.  
 
Problematic Provi sions in H.R. 388 7 
 
 H.R. 3887 unnecessarily broadens the federal Mann Act, extending criminal penalties to “whoever 
knowingly, in or  affecting interstate …commerce, …persuades, induces, or entices any individual to 
engage in prostitution , for which any perso n can be charged with an offense, or attempts to do so .”1 It 
deceptively and inaccurately calls this prostitution -related  crime “sex trafficking .”  
 The House bill would make prostitution -related activities, even within state borders, a federal crime. 
This confusion of prostitution and trafficking shifts  the focus from helping and protecting trafficked 
persons to using federal resources to prosecute state -level offenses involving consenting adults who 
may not see themselves as victims of a crime.  
 These provi sions would force the Justice Department to investigate and prosecute crimes of 
prostitution that are already being prosecuted under the state laws, thus diverting much needed and 
already scarce resources from actual trafficking cases to prostitution crime s.   
 H.R. 3887 moves the real crime of sex trafficking from the list of 13th Amendment slavery crimes where 
it belongs to join the prostitution offenses in the Mann Act, thereby undermining the scope of 13th 
Amendment protections against modern -day slavery . 
 
Why Support S.B. 3061 and Oppose Provisions in H.R. 3887  
 
 The TVPA of 2000 was intended to protect the most exploited among us – those held in compelled 
labor and minors in the sex sector. However, by equating prostitution with trafficking, H.R. 3887 w ill 
reduce this focus on these most vulnerable individuals – U.S. citizens and immigrants . Victims  who are 
forced to work under horrific conditions of surveillance, barbed wire, physical abuse, and threats to 
themselves and family members will be forced to  compete with tens of thousands of adult sex workers 
for services . Department of Justice prosecutors will have to balance resources between prosecuting 
these trafficking cases  and a new require ment  to prosecute thousands of ordinary prostitution cases.  
 The House bill creates a new federal prostitution crime and calls it “sex trafficking,” even though there 
is no requirement of  force, fraud, or coercion , the cornerstone of human trafficking . This change does 
not help  victims of human trafficking to access h elp. Instead, it creates a federal crime of prostitution  
and broadens the category to pro tect those who are not compelled into prostitution against their will. 
Those  who are in prostitution and  who are under 18 or who experience a culture of control and 
coercion already qualify for protection under existing law.       
 The Department of Justice does not possess the resources to prosecute all prostitution related offenses 
(there were approximately 70,000 arrests nation -wide for such crimes in 2005 alone) wit hout diverting 
resources from areas that need it most: the sexual exploitation of children and actual forced labor of any 
kind. Local and state law enforcement have decades of experience and infrastructure addressing 
prostitution -related crimes . The propos ed expansion duplicates this mandate and will unnecessarily 
burden taxpayers.  The Department of Justice and other law enforcement groups have  sent 
letter s to Congress opposing the provisions  for this reason.  
 Local crimes are constitutionally the province o f the states, as decisions made by individual states 
reflect the priorities of the affected commu nities.  
                                                 
1 Proposed Section 221(f)(1) of H.R. 3887.  
