What Has Been Done — Innocents At RiskHomeAbout UsOur MissionOur StoryOur WorkOur InternsLatest UpdatesPodcast (New)Press and MediaNiños de CristoHuman TraffickingThe FactsWarning SignsWhat Has Been DoneWhat Needs To Be DoneIn the NewsIn BooksOn FilmOn VideoECPAT Code of ConductFlight Attendant InitiativeEventsGet InvolvedDonateInnocents At RiskHomeAbout UsOur MissionOur StoryOur WorkOur InternsLatest UpdatesPodcast (New)Press and MediaNiños de CristoHuman TraffickingThe FactsWarning SignsWhat Has Been DoneWhat Needs To Be DoneIn the NewsIn BooksOn FilmOn VideoECPAT Code of ConductFlight Attendant InitiativeEventsGet InvolvedDonateHuman TraffickingWhat Has Been DoneHuman TraffickingThe FactsWarning SignsWhat Has Been DoneWhat Needs To Be DoneIn the NewsIn BooksOn FilmOn VideoECPAT Code of ConductDeborah Sigmund and Sandra Fiorini (speaking) testify before the Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission at a hearing on human trafficking. Read moreThe U.S. government is a leader in the global fight against human trafficking. In October 2000, the U.S. Congress passed the Trafficking Victims Protection Act, which includes the prevention of trafficking, the prosecution of criminals, and protection and assistance to victims of trafficking, both in the United States and abroad.The U.S. Department of Justice has prosecuted about 400 cases of trafficking since 2000. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services assists victims of trafficking in the United States by funding service programs and through public information campaigns. The U.S. Department of Labor funds anti-trafficking programs overseas and monitors places of employment in the U.S. to identify abusive labor practices. The U.S. Department of State, through its Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking, assesses and reports on the global trafficking situation in its annual Trafficking in Person Report. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security has issued over 1,500 T visas to identified victims of trafficking.“Innocents at Risk is a nonpartisan organization and we have Advisory Board members on both sides of the aisle who care about our mission: protecting women and children from exploitation and trafficking.Since its founding Innocents at Risk has worked closely with Democratic and Republican administrations and we are proud of all our accomplishments.”— Deborah Sigmund, founder and director of Innocents at RiskAnti-Trafficking Legislation (2000-2019)Frederick Douglass Trafficking Victims Prevention and Protection Reauthorization Act of 2018The Frederick Douglass Trafficking Victims Prevention and Protection Reauthorization Act of 2017 was sponsored by Representative Christopher H. Smith (R-NJ) and signed into law in January of 2019. This law authorizes that the U.S. Customs and Border Protection and airlines that contract with the federal government should provide training for employees in regards to recognizing human trafficking incidents and the appropriate measures to take. In addition, local educational agencies are to establish educational programs for children on the dangers of human trafficking. Furthermore, this law authorizes that $430 million will be used in the nationwide fight against human trafficking.“SUCCESS STORIESGrowing numbers of trafficked persons are being rescued because someone recognized that something was not right. The following stories are examples of how good Samaritans are making a difference. On a recent flight, some backpackers asked a flight attendant to help a teenage girl traveling alone. Someone had handed her off to them and she spoke no English. After the plane arrived in Washington, D.C., the attendant noticed no one showed up to meet the girl. She had a number to call, but the man that answered became angry that she had arrived earlier than expected. The flight attendant called the authorities.While taking the train from New York to Washington, D.C., a woman noticed two pretty teenage girls.  Although it was winter, they were not wearing warm clothes. They were coughing and sneezing and looked ill. They were accompanied by a man who watched their every move. The girls seemed afraid and would not make eye contact with the traveler. “I was sure that something was wrong,” she said. She recognized the warning sign, took the initiative and made a call to authorities. A child became separated from her parents in the parking lot of a large theme park. Two men approached her and enticed her over to their truck, offering to help find her parents. She started screaming, but the men forced her into the vehicle and drove away. A passerby noticed the struggle and called the police, providing a detailed description of the truck and the abductors. The child was rescued.”Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2017The Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2017 was sponsored by Senator Bob Corner (R-TN) and signed into law in January of 2019. This law amends the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000 to change the criteria that other countries have to follow in order to meet the minimum standards for the elimination of human trafficking in their countries. Also, this law establishes protection measures for child soldiers in foreign countries.Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2017The Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2017 was sponsored by Senator Chuck Grassley (R-IA) and signed into law in December of 2018. This law establishes grants for domestic trafficking victims and grants to local law enforcement agencies for anti-human trafficking programs. This law also requires that the Department of Justice must publish and submit a report to Congress that will help develop a way to assess the prevalence of human trafficking in the United States and establish a victim screening protocol to use during law enforcement operations. The law also requires the Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Homeland Security Investigations team to report to Congress on human trafficking investigations. Furthermore, this law amends the Victims of Child Abuse Act of 1990 for the Office of Juvenile Justice Delinquency and Prevention to give priority to programs that improve the judicial response to children who are most susceptible to be trafficked.Abolish Human Trafficking Act of 2017The Abolish Human Trafficking Act of 2017 was sponsored by Senator John Cornyn (R-TX) and signed into law in December of 2018. This law authorizes the study of the physical and psychological effects that human trafficking has on victims. Furthermore, it establishes penalties that relate to the sex trafficking and exploitation of children, and the transportation for any illegal sexual activity. In addition, more grants are assigned to states and local agencies for the assistance provided to victims, as well as the establishment of restitution for victims.Missing Children’s Assistance Act of 2018The Missing Children’s Assistance Act of 2018 was sponsored by Senator Chuck Grassley (R-IA) and signed into law in October of 2018. The law amended the Missing Children’s Assistance Act to require the Department of Justice to operate a tip line that would be accessible to individuals and online service providers to report instances of child sexual exploitation. For example, an individual may report instances of online enticement of children for sexual acts, unsolicited obscene material sent to a child, or the possession, manufacture, and distribution of child pornography. The reports received by the tip line must be sent to a law enforcement agency for investigation. In relation to cybersex trafficking, this law establishes methods to initiate internet safety for children.Allow States and Victims to Fight Online Sex Trafficking Act of 2017The Allow States and Victims to Fight Online Sex Trafficking Act of 2017 and Stop Enabling Sex Traffickers Act of 2017 package was sponsored by Representative Ann Wagner (R-MO) and Senator Rob Portman (R-OH) and was signed into law in April of 2018. This law establishes that Section 230 of the Communications Act of 1934 does not legally protect websites when traffickers use said websites to advertise illegal sexual activity with trafficked victims. Also, this law establishes new penalties for sex traffickers. For example, a sex trafficker who has trafficked five or more people may serve up to 25 years in jail.International Megan’s Law to Prevent Child Exploitation and Other Sexual Crimes Through Advanced Notification of Traveling Sex OffendersThe International Megan’s Law to Prevent Child Exploitation and Other Sexual Crimes Through Advanced Notification of Traveling Sex Offenders was sponsored by Representative Christopher H. Smith (R-NJ) and signed into law in February of 2016. This law amends the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act to require sex offenders to give an advanced notice on international travel. This information would then be added to the sex offender registry for public record. In addition, this law requires that the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement establish the Angel Watch Center via the Department of Homeland Security. The Angel Watch Center would identify and provide a list of sex offenders who have traveled outside of the U.S. but have not provided notice of international travel, to the U.S. Marshals Service, who will then share this information with other government agencies. Furthermore, this law amends the William Wilberforce Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2008 to require the State Department to include a visual sex offender designation to passports that are issued to sex offenders.Human Trafficking Survivors Relief and Empowerment Act of 2015The Human Trafficking Survivors Relief and Empowerment Act of 2015 was signed into law in May of 2015 and is an amendment to the Justice for Victims of Trafficking Act of 2015. This law adds new criteria for applicants who apply for grants under the public safety and community-oriented policing grant program of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968. The additional criteria will give preference to applicants from states that have a law on providing a process to human trafficking survivors that allows them to relinquish any arrest or conviction for a nonviolent offense that was committed as a direct result of human trafficking. For example, a human trafficking survivor could vacate an arrest or conviction for prostitution, but the state of the applicant needs to provide a process for them to do so. In addition, preference will be given to applicants from states that have a law establishing that a human trafficking survivor, who has been granted nonimmigrant status as a victim of human trafficking, must be certified by the Health & Human Services of the Department of Justice as a victim of human trafficking. If they are not certified by Health & Human Services, then the survivor must have similar documentation that states that they are in fact a victim of human trafficking. In addition, all arrests or convictions must be vacated for this individual, if they hold any offenses to a human trafficking-related charge. Furthermore, applicants from states who have a law that protects the identify of a human trafficking survivor in public and court records will also be given preference. Finally, preference will be given to applicants from states that have in effect a law that does not require a human trafficking survivor to provide official documentation in order to receive protection from the law.Trafficking Awareness Training for Health Care Act of 2015The Trafficking Awareness Training for Health Care Act of 2015 was signed into law in May of 2015 and is an amendment to the Justice for Victims of Trafficking Act of 2015. This law states that the United States Department of Health and Human Services, particularly the Health Resources and Services Administration, must provide a grant to an accredited school of medicine or nursing who has experience in the treatment, or study of treatment, of human trafficking victims. With this grant, the accredited school of medicine or nursing must establish and execute a pilot program to test for the best practices that health care professionals should take when identifying or treating a victim a human trafficking. These best practices should be evidence-based and the grantee must analyze and report on their effectiveness, as well as the performance of the pilot program as a whole.Human Exploitation Rescue Operations (HERO) Act of 2015The Human Exploitation Rescue Operations (HERO) Act of 2015 was signed into law in May of 2015 and is an amendment to the Justice for Victims of Trafficking Act of 2015. This law requires the Department of Homeland Security to have a Cyber Crimes Center which operates within U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). This center would focus on cyber-related crimes, investigated by ICE, and provide assistance, training, and equipment to support these investigations. The Cyber Crimes Center will also have a Child Exploitation Investigations Unit which focus on child trafficking-related crimes and the prevention of said crimes. In addition, the Child Exploitation Investigations Unit will investigate traveling child sex offenders and offer counseling services to ICE personnel who are involved in child exploitation-prevention initiatives. In addition to the Child Exploitation Investigations Unit, the Cyber Crimes Center will operate a Computer Forensics Unit. This unit will provide training in digital forensics and technical assistance to ICE personnel and other law enforcement personnel in regards to investigations into child trafficking. Also, a Cyber Crimes Unit will be established with the Cyber Crimes Center which will oversee and supervise cyber-related operations and programs for ICE. The Cyber Crimes Unit will also ameliorate current cyber security strategies for ICE.Stop Advertising Victims of Exploitation (SAVE) Act of 2015The Stop Advertising Victims of Exploitation (SAVE) Act of 2015 was signed into law in May of 2015 and is an amendment to the Justice for Victims of Trafficking Act of 2015. This law criminalizes the advertisement, and benefitting financially from said advertisement, of commercial sex acts involving someone who is forced into said sex acts, including any and all minors. In addition, the statute of limitations for civil actions against human traffickers and related perpetrators is extended until the victim is 28 years old, or 10 years after the victim has turned 18 years old. Furthermore, the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention of the Department of Justice must create a database that contains hotline resources, housing resources, legal assistance, and other services that pertain to trafficking survivors. This database must be made readily available to trafficking survivors, advocates for trafficking survivors, law enforcement and crisis hotline personnel, and foster parents.Combat Human Trafficking Act of 2015The Combat Human Trafficking Act of 2015 was signed into law in May of 2015 and is an amendment to the Justice for Victims of Trafficking Act of 2015. This law requires that each program of the Department of Justice that relates to anti-human trafficking be trained by the Department of the Justice on the best methods for how to investigate and prosecute buyers, or johns, of sex trafficking. In addition, each program must be trained on the best methods for supplying physical and mental health services to human trafficking victims.Survivors of Human Trafficking Empowerment ActThe Survivors of Human Trafficking Empowerment Act was signed into law in May of 2015 and is an amendment to the Justice for Victims of Trafficking Act of 2015. This law establishes the United States Advisory Council on Human Trafficking, which will advise the Senior Policy Operating Group that was established under the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000. The United States Advisory Council on Human Trafficking will also advise the President’s Interagency Task Force to Monitor and Combat Trafficking.Justice for Victims of Trafficking Act of 2015The Justice for Victims of Trafficking Act of 2015 was sponsored by Senator John Cornyn (R-TX) and signed into law in May of 2015. This law amends the Victims of Child Abuse Act of 1990 to include human trafficking and the production of child pornography under the definition of child abuse, while also determining that the producers of child pornography are traffickers who are engaged in illicit sexual conduct. Furthermore, the Department of Homeland Security is required to train employees on the signs of human trafficking and how to report human trafficking in the Transportation Security Administration and the U.S. Customs and Border Protection. This law includes the Combat Human Trafficking Act of 2015, the Survivors of Human Trafficking Empowerment Act, the Stop Advertising Victims of Exploitation (SAVE) Act of 2015, the Human Exploitation Rescue Operations (HERO) Act of 2015, the Trafficking Awareness Training for Health Care Act of 2015, and the Human Trafficking Survivors Relief and Empowerment Act of 2015.Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2013The Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2013 was sponsored by Representative Christopher H. Smith (R-NJ) and signed into law in April of 2013. This law establishes and reinforces programs to prevent child marriage, most of which often occurs in foreign countries. In addition, this law establishes and reinforces programs that prevent the purchasing and consumption of products created by human trafficking victims by blocking those products from entering the United States. Also, this law reinforces the partnership of state law enforcement and local law enforcement in the charging, processing, and prosecuting of human traffickers, as was previously established in the Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2000.Violence Against Women Reauthorization Act of 2013The Violence Against Women Reauthorization Act of 2013 was sponsored by Senator Patrick J. Leahy (D-VT) and signed into law in March of 2013. This law amends the Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2005 to the Assistant Attorney General of the Office of Justice Programs to make one-year grants to four state or local governments in the United States to combat the trafficking of minors. This law also amends the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000 to require the Secretary of State to establish plans to prevent child marriage in foreign countries, and to promote the empowerment of girls who are vulnerable to child marriage in foreign countries.William Wilberforce Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2008The William Wilberforce Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2008 was sponsored by Representative Howard Berman (D-CA) and signed into law in December of 2008. This law amends the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000 to require the President to establish anti-human trafficking programs for foreign governments, amends the Immigration and Nationality Act to allow immigrants to apply for T-visas if they are brought into the United States as a witness for an investigation, or are unable to undergo an interview given by law enforcement due to psychological or physical trauma. In regards to penalties against traffickers, this law authorizes extraterritorial jurisdiction for the U.S. courts if the alleged offender or victim is a U.S. citizen or permanent resident, or if the alleged offender is present in the United States. In addition, this law prohibits the allowance of an individual being issued a passport, during a certain post-conviction period, if they have previously been convicted of a federal sexual offense that involved the use of a passport to cross an international border. This law also defines the term child soldier, and establishes protection measures for child soldiers.Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2008The Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2008 was sponsored by Representative Howard L. Berman (D-CA) and signed into law in December of 2008. This law focuses more on labor trafficking than sex trafficking by establishing that people seeking work visas are to be notified of their rights as workers. This was done in hopes that people are to be educated about being labor trafficked into the United States and the dangers of human trafficking before they have even entered the United States. In addition, this law introduces the use of technology to gather information on human trafficking occurrences around the country. Furthermore, the law deals with the international practice of human trafficking in foreign country, like the Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2005. This law defines what a child soldier is and requires the U.S. military to investigate probable cases of child soldiers overseas.Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2005The Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2005 was sponsored by Representative Christopher H. Smith (R-NJ) and signed into law in January of 2006. This law amended the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000 by increasing the protection measures for populations that are heavily trafficked, such as women and children. In addition, the law deals with the international practice of human trafficking and strengthens the rehabilitation and support measures for human trafficking victims of foreign countries, in the foreign country they were trafficked in. Furthermore, the list of health risk effects of human trafficking was updated to include HIV and AIDS.Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2003The Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2003 was sponsored by Representative Christopher H. Smith (R-NJ) and signed into law in December of 2003. This law involves the actions of the President in the fight against human trafficking. For example, the President is required to create programs that support national and international broadcasting measures to inform others in foreign countries that human trafficking and sex tourism is illegal and dangerous. In order to make prosecution easier, the crime of human trafficking, whether it is forced labor or the sex trafficking of children, has been declared to be a racketeering offense.Prosecutorial Remedies and Other Tools to end the Exploitation of Children Today Act of 2003 (PROTECT ACT)The Prosecutorial Remedies and Other Tools to end the Exploitation of Children Today Act of 2003 was sponsored by Senator Orrin G. Hatch (R-UT) and signed into law in April of 2003. This law targets the people who engage in sex tourism with children, whether it be domestically in the United States or internationally in a foreign country. In addition, further details about the Amber Alert System was established, such as the assignment of an Amber Alert Coordinator, by the U.S. Attorney General, who would then establish the guidelines for what Amber Alert messages would include. For example, the Amber Alert message would include the special needs of an abducted child, which would then be distributed to the appropriate group of officials, such as law enforcement or public health officials. In addition, the Amber Alert Coordinator would also establish a geographic area that each Amber Alert would be confined to when initially sent out.Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000The Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000 was sponsored by Representative Christopher H. Smith (R-NJ), and signed into law in October of 2000. This law lays the foundation for the following federal laws that relate to anti-trafficking measures. This law defines human trafficking and states that it is a federal crime, stating the penalties that go along with the crime. It establishes the creation of the Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons, which will help with protecting and helping human trafficking victims. This law also establishes the creation of the Interagency Task Force to Monitor and Combat Trafficking. Additionally, this law establishes the T visa, which allows human trafficking victims who are involved in severe cases of human trafficking and who are not citizens of the United States but have been trafficked in the United States to become a U.S. citizen. The T visa also allows the human trafficking victim to bring their family into the United States, in order to escape danger from the hands of traffickers in their home country, and to maintain the familial bond.Child trafficking is happening in every corner of the world, in major cities and small towns, and in every state and province. Children who have seen so little of life are taken by force or fraud and put into the worst of life: the child sex trade. Every 60 seconds, a child is trafficked into this dark and evil world. We all need to do everything we can to protect all children, to know what to look for and know how to report it. Now more than ever, we need your help to Turn A Million Eyes On Children.Download the PDFSubscribeSign up with your email address to receive news and updates.Email AddressSign UpThank you!Back to TopAdvisory BoardPartnersSponsorsFinancial RecordsGet In Touch1101 30th Street NW, Suite 500, Washington, D.C. 20007Phone: 202.625.4338 Fax: 202.625.4363 e-mail: debsigmund@gmail.com© 2006-2022 Innocents at Risk. All rights reserved.