March 31 , 2020  
 
The Honorable Mark T. Esper  
United States Secretary of Defense  
1010 Defense Pentagon  
Washington, DC 20301 -1010  
 
Dear Secretary Esper:  
 
Our organizations, the Center for Victims of Torture  (CVT)  and Physicians for Human Rights  
(PHR) , were among a  larger group of human rights,  civil liberties , and faith based NGOs  that wrote 
to you in September 2019  to express our grave concern over the then -recent suicide attempt by 
Sharqawi Al Hajj  (ISN 1457 ) at the Guantanamo Bay detention facility .i CVT and PHR are writing 
now because we understand that Mr. Al Hajj’s health has again significantly deteriorated, and to urge 
you to take appropriate steps to mitigate the situation before it becomes catastrophic.   
 
It is our understanding that M r. Al Hajj is a 45 year -old man  with a history of chronic mental health 
problems, including depression, anxiety, and suicidality. On August 19, 2019, Mr. Al Hajj cut his 
wrists with a piece of broken glass during a telephone call with counsel.ii He threatened addition al 
self-harm shortly thereafter.iii At the time, two mental health professionals  with whom Mr. Al Hajj’s 
counsel consulted —psychologists Katherine Porterfield and Jess Ghannam —characterized him as 
“actively” suicidal.iv  According to Mr. Al Hajj and his couns el, while his care would eventually 
improve, Guantanamo staff’s initial response was dangerously inadequate; Mr. Al Hajj alleges that 
he was moved to “isolating conditions” in a “freezing cold” cell, and refused a warm blanket and 
warm clothes, both agains t the recommendations of his doctors  at Guantanamo .v  
 
While w e do not know the full details of Mr. Al Hajj’s current condition —which could be prov ided 
if unprotected copies of his medical records were made available  to appropriate parties  with his 
consent —this deterioration is alarming. In particular, if his mental health has again reached a crisis 
point, we are concerned that COVID -19 related restrictions on travel to Guantanamo , coupled with 
insufficient opportunities for remote access to counsel or to i ndependent medical providers , will 
exacerbate his decline. For example, we understand the legal mail courier service to and from 
Guantanamo was recently suspended, and while temporary measures have been put in place, there 
will be an impact on both the pri vilege and frequency of legal mail to detainees . 
 
Whatever the exact nature of Mr. Al Hajj’s condition —which , again, would be made clear with 
transparent provision of unprotected copies of his medical records  to appropriate parties with his 
consent —his life  and health are the Defense Department’s responsibility. His care , like that of all 
Guantanamo detainees , must me et the standard that President Trump signed into law as part of the 
fiscal year 2020 National Defense Authorization Act : “evaluation and treatm ent that is accepted by 
medical experts and reflected in peer -reviewed medical literature as the appropriate medical 
approach for a condition, symptoms, illness, or disease and that is widely used by healthcare 
professionals ”vi    
 
This requires, first and foremost, providing attentive, humane care that minimizes  the risk of further 
self-harm by Mr. Al Hajj. The Defense Department should als o immediately turn over unprotected 
and unredacted copies of his medical records —including as near to real -time upda tes as 
practicable —so that both counsel and the indepen dent medical experts involved in Mr. Al Hajj’s  case 
can monitor his progress during the period when travel to Guantanamo is effectively impossible.   
Moreover, as a torture survivor, Mr. Al Hajj needs t rusted human connections.vii He cannot form 
those connections with Guantanamo staff —a phenomenon that, as CVT and PHR have documented, 
is far from unique to Mr. Al Hajjviii—both because the United States is responsible for his torture, 
and because U.S. medical personnel were complicit in torture, including at Guantanamo.  
 
To the extent that there are legitimate, COVID -19-related public health justifications for placing 
appropriate limits on Mr. Al Hajj’s ability to meet in person with his counsel or with indepe ndent 
medical providers at this time, we urge you to facilitate those connections remotely to the greatest 
extent possible.  And as soon as r egular travel to Guantanamo resumes , Mr. Al Hajj should be given 
an independent medical evaluation by medical expert s that he trusts.  
 
Thank you for your prompt attention to this situation.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
/S/ Scott Roehm     /S/ Susannah Sirkin  
Director of the Washington, DC Office  Director of Policy and Senior Advisor  
Center for Victims of T orture    Physicians for Human Rights  
 
/S/ Alison Beckman     /S/ Vincent Iacopino, MD, PhD  
Senior Clinician for External Relations   Advisory Council Member  
Center for Victims of Torture    Physicians for Human Rights  
 
CC:  
 
Adm. Craig S. Faller, Commander, U.S. Southern Command  
The Hon. Thomas McCaffery, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs  
Rear Adm. Timothy C. Kuehhas, JTF -GTMO Commander  
Col. Steven Yamashita, JDG Commander  
  
                                                           
i See https://www.cvt.org/sites/default/files/attachments/u101/downloads/al_hajj_coalition_letter.pdf . 
ii Respondent’s Status Report, Ex. 1, Decl. of Lieutenant Commander [REDACTED], MD, FAAFP, Al Hajj v. 
Trump, 09 - cv-745 (RCL) (Sept. 4, 2019).  
iii Id. 
iv Emergency Motion for Status Conference to Report Petitioner’s Recent Suicide Attempt and Obtain Decision on  
Pending Emergency Motion for Independent Medical Relief, Al Hajj v. Trump, 09 -cv-745 (RCL) (Aug. 22, 2019).  
v Emergency Motion for Status Conference to Report Petitioner’s Recent Suicide Attempt and Obtain Decision on 
Pending Emergency Motion for Independ ent Medical Relief, Ex. A, Decl. of Pardiss Kebriaei in Support of 
Petitioner Sharqawi Al Hajj, Al Hajj v. Trump, 09 -cv-745 (RCL) (Aug. 22, 2019).  
vi Public Law No: 116 -92, National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 § 1046.  
vii Al Hajj v. Trump , Case No. 09 -cv-745 (RCL) at 1 -2, (D.D.C. May 23, 2011) (Memorandum Opinion); Human 
Rights Watch, Double Jeopardy, CIA Renditions to Jordan, April 7, 2008, available at 
https://www.hrw.org/report/2008/04/07/double -jeopardy/cia -renditions -jordan ; Deprivation and Despair: The Crisis 
of Medical Care at Guantanamo at 38 -40, available at https://www.cvt.org/DeprivationandDespair .  
viii Deprivation and Despair: The Crisis of Medical Care at Guantanamo at 16 -20, available at 
https://www.cvt.org/DeprivationandDespair . 