 
 
Submitted via email to dhsdeskofficer @omb.eop.gov  
 
May 3, 2019 
 
Department of Homeland Security (USDHS) 
Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) 
Office of Policy and Strategy 
Samantha Deshommes, Chief Regulatory Coordination Division 
 
Re: Agency USCIS, OMB Control Number 1615- 0116 - Public Comment Opposing 
Changes to Fee Waiver Eligibility Criteria, Agency Information Collection Activities: 
Revision of a Currently Approved Collection: Request for Fee Waiver FR Doc. 2019-06657 
Filed 4-4-19; 84 FR 13687, 13687- 13688  
 
Dear Ms. Deshommes:  
 
We are writing on behalf of the Center for Victims of torture (CVT) to oppose the Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS), United States Citizenship and Immigration Services ’ (USCIS) 
proposed changes to fee waiver eligibility criteria, OMB Control Number 1615-0116, published 
in the Federal Register on April 5, 2019.   
 
The proposed rule is designed to limit non-citizens ’ access to immigration benefits, imposing on 
them an unwarranted financial burden. By heightening qualification requirements and 
significantly increasing the burden on immigrants to prove they are eligible for a fee waiver, the 
proposed rule puts access to the legal immigration system out of reach for many survivors of 
torture.  
 
For the reasons detailed in the comments that follow, DHS and USCIS should immediately 
withdraw their current proposal and dedicate their efforts to advancing policies that safeguard 
asylees, TPS and DED holders, and other vulnerable populations.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit comments on the proposed rule.  Please do not hesitate 
to contact CVT with any questions or for further information.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Andrea Carcamo     Scott Roehm                                                          
Senior Policy Counsel     Director of the Washington, DC Office                  
acarcamo@cvt.org     sroehm@cvt.org                                                        
 
 
DETAILED COMMENTS in opposition to USCIS, OMB Control Number 1615 -0116 . Public 
Comment Opposing Changes to Fee Waiver Eligibility Criteria, Agency In formation 
Collection Activities: Revision of a Currently Approved Collection: Request for Fee 
Waiver FR Doc. 2019 -06657 Filed 4 -4-19; 84 FR 13687, 13687 -13688  
 
The Center for Victims of Torture (CVT) welcomes the opportunity to comment on the Notice of 
Proposed Rulemaking on Changes to Fee Waiver Eligibility Criteria, USCIS, OMB Control 
Number 1615 -0116 (“the Notice” or “the proposed rule”).  
 
Founded in 1985 as an independent non -governmental organization, CVT is the oldest and 
largest torture survivor reh abilitation center in the United States and one of the two largest in the 
world.  Through programs operating in the U.S., the Middle East, and Africa —involving 
psychologists, social workers, physical therapists, physicians, psychiatrists, and nurses —CVT 
annually rebuilds the lives of nearly 25,000 primary and secondary survivors.  The vast majority 
of CVT’s clients in the United States are asylum seekers  and refugees .    
 
CVT also conducts research, training and advocacy, with each of those programs rooted in 
CVT’s healing services.  The organization’s policy advocacy leverages the expertise of five 
stakeholder groups: survivors, clinicians, human rights lawyers, operational/humanitarian aid 
providers, and foreign policy experts.  CVT organizes a network of t orture treatment programs 
focused on rebuilding the lives of survivors of torture across the nation. These programs serve, 
among others, asylum seekers, asylee s, TPS and DED holders, and lawful  permanent 
residents.       
 
Background on Current Fee Waiver G uidance and Optional Form I -912, Request for Fee 
Waiver  
 
In 2010, after extensive collaboration with stakeholders, USCIS developed Form I -912, Request 
for Fee Waiver, and then published the current fee waiver guidance. USCIS held public 
teleconferences and  gathered extensive information from stakeholders before making these 
changes.  The guidance replaced ten prior memos that contained contradictory instructions on 
fee waivers, and the new form for the first time allowed applicants a uniform way of applying for 
a fee waiver.  
 
The purpose of the form and the new three -step eligibility analysis was to bring clarity and 
consistency to the fee waiver process. The analysis for fee waiver eligibility currently proceeds 
as follows :  
 
Step 1: the applicant is receiv ing a means -tested benefit; or  
Step 2: the applicant’s household income is at or below 150% of the poverty income 
guideline s at the time of filing; or  
Step 3: the applicant suffers a financial hardship.  
 
USCIS continued to consider applicant -generated f ee waiver requests not submitted on the 
form. The standard for fee waiver eligibility for limited types of USCIS forms is described in the underlying regulation as making fee waivers available when “the party requesting the benefit is 
unable to pay the pre scribed fee.”  
 
Current Revisions  
 
On September 28, 2018 , USCIS published in the Federal Register a Notice of Agency 
Collection Activities; Revision of a Currently Approved Collection: Request for a Fee Waiver; 
Exemptions as a notice under the Paperwork Re duction Act (PRA). The notice stated that 
USCIS intended to eliminate the eligibility ground of receipt of a public benefit for the fee waiver, 
and alter Form I -912 accordingly, but would continue to allow eligibility for financial hardship or 
income of 15 0% or less of the poverty income guidelines.  The agency stated that since different 
income levels were used in different states to determine means -tested benefits, using that 
standard has resulted in inconsistent adjudications. No documentation or analysis  was offered. 
The notice also stated that if USCIS finalized this change, it would eliminate the current USCIS 
Fee Waiver Guidance and replace it. No new proposed guidance was published for public 
comment.  A total of 1,198 comments were filed in response  to the September 28 notice .  
 
On April 5, 2019, the current notice was published, stating that USCIS was proceeding with the 
change, eliminating public benefits receipt as an eligibility ground for the fee waiver, and 
revising  the form. Fee waivers based on “poverty income guidelines threshold and financial 
hardship criteria” will apparently be retained, although no details are offered. The notice also 
announced that the current fee waiver guidance would be rescinded and new guidanc e would 
be issued. There was no discussion of the 1,198 comments received in response to the 
September 28, 2018 notice.   
 
Additional Burdens Created by the Revision  
 
Eliminating eligibility for a means -tested benefit will place a significant burden on survivors of 
torture applying for immigration benefits . 
 
According to the President’s recent report to Congress on FY2019 refugee admissions, since 
1980 the U.S. has admitted more than 3 million refugees and granted asylum status to over 
683,000 individuals. Another 840,000 asylum seekers currently await a decision on their case. 
The Office of Refugee Resettlement at the Administration Children and Families recognizes  that 
44% of refugee s, asylees and asylum seekers are survivors of torture.    
 
The revision eliminates these, and other,  individual’s abilit ies to use proof of receipt of means -
tested public benefits to demonstrate inability to pay the prescribed fee. However, according to 
8 C.F.R. § 103.7(c) , receipt of a means -tested benefit is sufficient eviden ce of inability to pay . 
Proof of receiving means -tested benefits  is by far the most common and straightforward way to 
demonstrate fee waiver eligibility as applicants have already demonstrated the same  by 
providing a copy of the official eligibility letter, or Notice of Action, from the government agency 
administering the benefit.  USCIS fails to provide any evidence  showing  that accepting proof of 
receipt of a means -tested benefit has  led the agency to grant fee waivers to individuals who 
were able to afford the fee.  
 USCIS purports to justify  these revisions  on its claim  that the various income levels used in 
states to grant a means -tested benefit result in inconsistent income levels  being used to 
determine eligibility for a fee waiver. Consequently, a fee waiver may be granted for one person 
who has a certain level of income in one state but denied for a person with that same income 
who lives in another state.  But according to applic able regulations,  the underlying legal standard 
for a fee waiver is the individual’s ability to pay.  Ability to pay isn't the same for two people with 
the exact same income who live in two different states with totally different costs of living. I t is 
both arbitrary and unfair to expect somebody living in  Washington , DC to have equal ability to 
afford a fee waiver as would a person with the same income living in Minnesota. T hat is 
arbitrary and cannot possibly be a fair measure of ability to pay.  Other gove rnment programs 
recognize as much. For  example , the Federal Per Diem Rates  (meals and incidentals) for  
Minnesota are $55. 98, as compared to  $76.00 for the District of Columbia .   
 
Individuals who have  already passed a thorough income eligibility screening by government 
agencies  with ample expertise conducting these screenings  should not be required  to prove 
their eligibility all over again to USCIS. Asylees , refugees  and TPS holders who are survivors o f 
torture face  additional barriers due to the trauma they endure . By eliminating receipt of a 
means -tested benefit to show eligibility, the government will add yet another  burden on 
vulnerable individuals  who are  already  facing significant  economic  challen ges.  
 
USCIS is taking the  position tha t it cannot tell which public benefit programs are means -tested 
and which ones are not. Given that the largest means -tested programs are federal programs 
such as Medicaid or SNAP , this assertion appears more pretense than reality.  
 
Currently, applicants can submit a copy of their most recent federal tax returns  to demonstrate 
eligibility for the fee waiver . Under the proposed changes,  the applicant must procure additional 
new documents , including a federal tax transcript from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) , to 
demonstrate household income at less than or equal to 150% of the federal poverty guidelines. 
The government does not provide any reason as to why a transcript is preferred ove r a federal 
tax return. Federal tax returns are uniform documents and most individuals keep copies on file.  
The proposed require ment will  not account for those individuals who might need assistance 
obtaining a transcript due to lack of access to a compute r or for delays involving delivery of mail . 
 
By placing heavy time and resource burdens on asylees , refugees  and TPS holders —including 
the many torture survivors among them —when seeking to adjust status or renew their TPS 
application, these  proposed change s will discourage eligible individuals from filing fee waivers 
and immigration benefits.  Indeed, they appear to be designed precisely for that purpose.  
 
The proposed modification that would no longer allow filing of the waiver through methods 
outside Form I-912 will place a time and resource burden on indi viduals eligible for fee waivers .  
 
Eliminating the currently accepted applicant -generated fee waiver requests will place yet 
another  unnecessary burden on applicants to locate, complete, and submit Form I -912 when a 
self-generated request that provides all of the necessary information can equally meet the 
requirements.  
 By only accepting fee waiver requests submitted using Form I -912, USCIS will limit the 
availability of fee waivers. Applicants must contin ue to be permitted to submit applicant -
generated fee waiver requests (i.e., requests that are not submitted on Form I -912, such as a 
letter or an affidavit) that comply with 8 C.F.R. § 103.7(c), and address all of the eligibility 
requirements.  
 
This revision will negatively impact survivors of torture eligible for immigration benefits . 
 
The filing fee associated with various immigration benefits can be an insurmountable obstacle 
for an immigration benefi t or naturalization application, especially  for survivors of torture, who 
face additional  obstacles posed by ongoing trauma.  Any adjustment or revision of  the costs 
associated with filing should be designed to ease, rather than exacerbate, these obstacles.  
 
Increasing the burden of applying for a f ee waiver will further limit access to  adjustment of status  
for otherwise eligible  asylees  and refugees . USCIS asserts, without any supporting evidence, 
that individuals can merely “save funds” and apply later if they do not have the funds to apply 
today. This both fails to consider the harm to individuals resulting from the delay in applying and 
unjustifiably assumes individuals applying for fee waivers have disposable income that could be 
set aside. Most CVT clients can barely afford to pay for their basi c needs . They often rely on the 
limited support CVT is able to provide and on support from friends or acquaintances from their 
home countries who often have little extra to give.  
 
Many survivors suffer from long -term mental and physical health problems as a result of the 
torture  they suffered , and these changes will harm them directly . Thirty percent of adults 
receiving government assistance have a disability. For most, that disability limits their ability to 
work . Eliminating the ability to use receipt of a mean -tested benefit as proof of fee waiver 
eligibility, or any new requirements that make the process more onerous or complicated, will 
further burden those with disabilities in accessing immigration benefit s for which they qualify . 
 
The proposed rule will also negatively affect U.S. citizen children : low income immigrants who 
are parents of U.S. citizen children may be forced to choose between pursuing adjustment or 
naturalization with the added security it bri ngs and spending limited resources on their children’s 
needs. This could have devastating consequences for the wellbeing of children and families in 
the United States .    
 
The changes will place a time and resource burden on legal service providers and red uce 
access to legal services, especially in under -resourced locations.  
  
The revisions detailed above will strain immigration attorneys  and in so doing limit the number of  
clients  they can serve , including survivors of torture .  
 
Fee waiver preparation for  low-income immigrants demands hours of work from legal services 
providers. The fee waiver based on receipt of a means -tested benefit is efficient in that the 
provider knows which document will be sufficiently probative for USCIS. The other grounds for a 
fee waiver, financial hardship and a threshold of the poverty income guidelines, are much less 
clear and require far more time to gather sufficient documentation.  Increasing the work needed 
to file a fee waiver will require attorneys to pass the cost throug h their attorney fee, while attorneys providing pro -bono representation will be unable to serve as many clients due to 
added  time constraints.  
 
Conclusion  
 
The proposed rule would have devastating consequences for  asylees, refugees and other 
vulnerab le populations. For torture survivors in particular, among those consequences is t he 
peace of mind that accompanies the ability to adjust status and become naturalized , which  
helps them  along  their healing journey.  
 
USCIS should review the development of the current fee waiver standards and engage in a 
reasoned analysis of how it arrived at its current proposal. Nothing in the current notice 
indicates an understanding of how and why the current form and guidance were created in 
2010, which is critical to p lanning any changes. The Form I -912 request for fee waiver with its 
three -step eligibility formula, and the 2011 guidance, were specifically created to simplify the fee 
waiver adjudication process. The eligibility for receipt of a means -tested benefit was the linchpin 
of that simplified process.  
 
We urge USCIS, rather than implement the revision, to perform public outreach to gather 
information, and then engage in full notice and comment procedures on all substantive changes 
proposed in order to ensure the  fair and efficient adjudication of immigration benefits and 
naturalization.  
 
 