Eternal Emergency: No End to Unaccompanied Migrant Children’s Institutionalization in Canary Islands Emergency Centers | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload this reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload this reportJune 22, 2010Eternal EmergencyNo End to Unaccompanied Migrant Children’s Institutionalization in Canary Islands Emergency CentersAvailable InEnglishEspañolEternal EmergencyNo End to UnaccompaniedMigrant Children’s Institutionalization in CanaryIslands Emergency CentersI.Background and SummaryII.Methodology and TerminologyIII.Conditions at La Esperanza, Tegueste, and Arinaga Emergency CentersEmergencyCenters Restrict Children’s Integration OpportunitiesSubstandardConditions at La Esperanza Emergency CenterTegueste andArinaga Emergency CentersViolence inemergency centersInternationalObligations Regarding Children in CareIV.Insufficient Safeguards against Ill-TreatmentV. Absenceof Effective Guardianship and Legal RepresentationTransfersFailing Children’s Best InterestsViolation ofChildren’s Rights to Residency under National Law..Lack ofAccess to Asylum ProcedureVI.RecommendationsTo theCanary Islands governmentTo theSpanish governmentTo theProsecutor’s OfficeAcknowledgementsI. Background and SummaryThe Canary Islands were in the spotlight of internationalmedia attention in 2006 when more than 30,000 migrants arrived in rickety boatsfrom West Africa. Among them were 928 children who arrived without a parent orcare-giver. These children are entitled to special protection from the stateunder Spanish and international law, and Canary Islands authorities at thattime hastily opened temporary structures to house them—so-calledemergency centers.In 2007 Human Rights Watch documented serious allegations ofill-treatment, substandard accommodation conditions and neglect, andauthorities’ failure to oversee these emergency centers institutions andprotect children from harm.[1]Three years later, the Canary Islands government continuesto keep its emergency centers open. At the time of our research, they housed276 children, with 201 accommodated in large-scale facilities of 50 and morechildren. The authorities have not included the centers within the existinglegal framework that defines minimum standards for temporary care nor have theyestablished occupancy limits. As a result centers provide widely differentconditions, including conditions that fall short of international and nationalstandards. Conditions, practices, and the lack of safeguards against abuse meanthat children’s rights under national and international law are not beingmet.[2]Although these institutions were set up as a temporaryresponse to the sudden arrival of a high number of unaccompanied children, theemergency centers are being used as permanent placements for children.Children’s stay in these facilities is not limited and the Canary Islandsgovernment has no definite plans to close the centers down. Out of the 25children we interviewed, 10 had spent more than a year, six more than twoyears, and two boys had spent more than three years in an emergency center.Under Spanish law, the Canary Islands government is legallyresponsible for the care and protection of unaccompanied migrant children.[3]Since it opened emergency centers in 2006, it has simultaneously tried to findpermanent solution for children outside the Canaries and pushed forchildren’s transfers to other regions in Spain; the central government ofSpain helped broker such transfers.However, ongoing arrivals after 2006 have kept the number ofchildren in the Canaries high and Canary Islands authorities have keptemergency centers in operation. In 2007 the authorities claimed the archipelagocould cope with a maximum of only 300 children. Currently, 250 children aredistributed in permanent small group homes where care is generally adequate, onseven different Islands.[4] Ratherthan provide a permanent solution and adequate care for all unaccompaniedmigrant children on the Islands, the local government has since kept childrenabove the self-declared limit in the emergency facilities.[5]When Human Rights Watch documented serious allegations ofabuse, sub-standard and overcrowded conditions in these emergency centers in2007 and called for their closure, the Canary Islands authorities respondedthat they wanted to close emergency centers. However, they said, thearchipelago was overburdened and could not integrate all children, and so the authoritiescould not close emergency centers unless children were transferred to otherparts of Spain with the assistance from the central government. The position ofCanary Islands authorities is unchanged, and they continue to call for theurgent transfer of children to other regions of Spain and assistance from thecentral government.[6]There have been welcome improvements in emergency centerssince our initial visit in 2007. Conditions at Arinaga emergency center inparticular have improved, one reason being that fewer children are housedthere. Yet with no minimum standards defined, and no occupancy limit governingthe functioning of these centers, conditions at Arinaga center may slip back tobeing overcrowded and substandard, putting children at real risk of violenceagain.Authorities should bring the functioning of Arinaga andTegueste emergency centers into the existing legal framework that limitsoccupancy levels for children in temporary care to 20 children per institutionand the maximum time children may spend in such temporary facilities to 30days, during which the child’s situation is to be assessed and apermanent solution to be identified.In La Esperanza emergency center, which as of early Marchhoused 100 children, the sub-standard conditions, reported frequent violence,low quality of food, lack of heating and hot water, and the restricted numberof blankets per child, violate children’s right to protection fromviolence and may amount to inhuman and degrading treatment, in violation ofbinding international law. Authorities should close down La Esperanza center asa matter of priority.Monitoring of the centers by prosecutors and the ChildProtection Directorate has improved since our initial research, but oversightremains insufficient. None of the emergency centers offers a functioningconfidential complaints mechanism, and children interviewed were largelyunaware of where and how to file a complaint. Several children at La Esperanzaemergency center were afraid to be interviewed by Human Rights Watch during ourvisit, saying they feared negative repercussions if they spoke out aboutconditions.Large-scale emergency centers hinder children’sopportunities for integration into the local community. They contribute to thestigmatization of migrant children by keeping children at a distance from thelocal community, and the local media regularly highlight violent incidents oralleged criminal behavior of children housed there.The children’s guardianship agency, the Canary IslandsChild Protection Directorate, charged with safeguarding children’s rightsand interests, fails to fulfill its mandate. The Child Protection Directorateis part of the regional government that decides on children’s continuedplacement in emergency centers despite an agreement that the level of carethere is inadequate. The guardianship agency also fails to ensure that childrenare granted their residency rights in accordance with Spanish legislation.Unaccompanied migrant children are entitled to temporary,renewable residence permits. But all children we interviewed were issuedpermits that were timed to expire the day they turn 18 years of age. This is adeliberate policy that turns children into irregular migrants the day they haveto leave the center. The impact of this policy is severe and means thatchildren almost inevitably will face homelessness, marginalization, andirregular status upon leaving care structures. Without access to lawyers,children are unable to defend their rights, and they are left without avenuesto challenge authorities’ treatment counter to their rights andinterests. Instead, they are dependent on authorities who are mandated tosafeguard their rights but fail to do so in practice.The head of the Canary Islands Child Protection Directoratedescribed emergency centers as “unregulated” and not offeringproper care for children. Yet, despite the universal recognition among allinterlocutors in the Canary Islands that emergency centers are inadequate,almost four years into their existence, the Canary Islands government still hasno definite plan to close them down.[7]Authorities say the eventual closing of these centersdepends on a variety of external factors: that there are fewer arrivals ofmigrant children; that other regional governments in Spain agree to receivechildren from the Canary Islands; and that those children due to turn 18 leavecenters as expected. If all these conditions are met, we were told, emergencycenters would eventually be closed down, unless and until they are neededagain.[8] Butmigratory flows, and the reluctance of other regional governments to take inmigrant children from the Canaries, make the confluence of all these factorsunlikely for the foreseeable future. Without a concrete plan to close thesecenters or to bring their function in line with existing minimum standards,unaccompanied migrant children arriving in the Canary Islands are likely toremain in limbo for years to come.The Canary Islands has demonstrated that it is capable ofrunning a better system. Parallel to emergency institutions, the Islands runsaround 25 small-scale centers that offer adequate care and integrationopportunities for roughly 250 unaccompanied children.[9]The Canary Islands government has told Human Rights Watchthat it has tried to open additional smaller home-like centers to providepermanent solutions for children but has faced resistance from localcommunities and municipalities.[10] Infact, Canary Islands authorities closed existing smaller centers in Arucas, LaOrotava, and Las Mercedes while keeping a substandard and secluded center likeLa Esperanza up and running.[11] In 2009the government even requested permission from the Ministry of Interior to opena new large-scale center for 500 children.[12] Suchinitiatives are not evidence of the Canary Islands’ stated intention toimprove care for children.Many interlocutors Human Rights Watch met with in theIslands recognized the difficulties in opening care centers for migrantchildren but also expressed the view that the local population prefers smallhome-like residences. And none of them believed that it had been impossible forthe Canary Islands authorities to open smaller and better residences.All interlocutors we spoke to, from employees working inemergency centers to non-governmental organizations and public prosecutors,agreed that the local government deliberately keeps children in emergencycenters. Some were of the view that emergency centers are used as a strategy tokeep up pressure on the central government in Madrid, to claim the archipelagois overburdened, and to continue demanding children’s transfer to otherregions of Spain.[13]The central government in Madrid has helped the CanaryIslands negotiate the transfer of hundreds of children to other autonomouscommunities in Spain, and it has made substantial financial contributions tothe Canary Islands child protection system. In 2009, it covered more than halfof the archipelago’s €26 million budget for unaccompanied migrantchildren.[14] WhileSpain’s support to a region that faces an increasing migration pressureis important, the Spanish government has an obligation under international lawto ensure that all children on its territory are protected from violence andgranted a level of care that ensures their adequate development. The centralgovernment in Madrid therefore also shares the responsibility to ensure theclosure of emergency centers in the Canary Islands or their alignment withestablished minimum standards, in so far as they currently fail to meet thestandards of protection and care owed to children.Human Rights Watch urges the Canary Islands to immediatelycommit to the closing of La Esperanza emergency center as a matter of priority.Due to the substandard infrastructure, its size, and its isolated location, itis inadequate as a care center to ensure children’s well-being, even forshort periods.The Canary Islands should further bring all remainingemergency centers in line with applicable minimum standards (as laid out inDecree 40/2000) and transform them either into small-scale homes for extendedstay or into short-term facilities in which a permanent solution for the childis identified within 30 days.The Spanish central government should link its financialcontribution to the Canary Islands child protection system and its role asnegotiator for children’s transfers to other regions to a policy designedto end the use of emergency centers in the Canary Islands and to align thefunctioning of all centers for unaccompanied migrant children with establishedminimum standards. Detailed recommendations are provided at the end of thisreport.II. Methodology and TerminologyThis report examines the situation for unaccompanied migrantchildren in three large-scale emergency centers in the Canary Islands. Itfollows up on comprehensive research conducted on the Islands in January 2007,published in a July 2007 report: “Unwelcome Responsibilities:Spain’s Failure to Protect the Rights of Unaccompanied Migrant Childrenin the Canary Islands.”Human Rights Watch visited the emergency centers of Teguesteand La Esperanza wing one and two on Tenerife Islands, and the emergency centerof Arinaga (also known as Agüimescenter) on Gran Canaria Islands between February 17-22, 2010. We interviewed atotal of 25 unaccompanied migrant children in- and outside these centers. Allinterviews were conducted in private, and where necessary, with the help ofinterpreters. We also interviewed two former and two current staff members ofemergency centers.This report does not include a detailed assessment ofconditions for unaccompanied migrant children in smaller emergency centers andin regular reception centers, so-called CAMEs (centros de acogida paramenores extranjeros). We visited a large number of CAMEs in 2007, and foundconditions in those centers to be generally satisfactory. We did not visitsmaller emergency centers for this report but spoke to children who had beenhoused there.The children we interviewed were boys, between ages 15 and17. One boy had turned 18 three days before we met him and was awaiting thedecision to leave the center. Children we spoke to originated from thefollowing countries: Guinea-Conakry, Ghana, Mali, Senegal, Morocco, WesternSahara, Ivory Coast, and Mauritania. To protect their identity we have changedtheir names and withheld the date and place of the interview.We met with the general director of the Canary Islands ChildProtection Directorate, and with children’s prosecutors for Santa Cruz deTenerife and Gran Canaria provinces. We further sent a letter to the StateSecretariat for Immigration and Emigration in Madrid, and exchangedcommunication with the Spanish Ombudsman. We also met with severalnon-governmental organizations working with migrants and refugees in the CanaryIslands.In line with international instruments and Spanish law, inthis report the term “child” refers to a person under the age of18.[15]For the purpose of this report, we use the term “unaccompaniedchild” to describe both unaccompanied and separated children as definedby the Committee on the Rights of the Child:“Unaccompanied children” are children, asdefined in article 1 of the Convention, who have been separated from bothparents and other relatives and are not being cared for by an adult who, by lawor custom, is responsible for doing so. “Separated children” arechildren, as defined in article 1 of the Convention, who have been separatedfrom both parents, or from their previous legal or customary primary caregiver,but not necessarily from other relatives. These may, therefore, includechildren accompanied by other adult family members.[16]III. Conditions at La Esperanza, Tegueste, andArinaga Emergency CentersThe three large-scale emergency centers in the CanaryIslands that currently house 50 or more children—La Esperanza, Tegueste,and Arinaga—put children at increased risk of violence and limitchildren’s opportunities for integration into the local communities.There are systemic factors that increase the risk for childrenin these three emergency centers to experience violence: the absence of anoccupancy limit for emergency centers; the lack of confidential complaintsmechanisms; and insufficient monitoring and oversight (these issues arediscussed in the section on insufficient safeguards against ill-treatment).In the case of La Esperanza center, the risk of violence forchildren is immediate. Substandard conditions mean that children housed thereare kept in an environment that violates their right to protection from allforms of violence, and to a standard of living adequate for their development.[17]For decades, studies have shown the inadequacy ofinstitutions and have underscored the risk of violence for institutionalizedchildren.[18]Large-scale and isolated facilities in particular put children at risk ofill-treatment, including from their peers; industrialized countries in WesternEurope and North America have deliberately moved away from this kind of care.[19]Sub-standard conditions in institutions, in themselves a potential violation ofchildren’s rights, are reflective of the low level of importance accordedto institutionalized children, which also manifests itself in inadequatestaffing, poorly trained and motivated employees, and lack of oversight.[20]As of March 1, 2010, the three largest emergency centers inthe Canary Islands accommodated a total of 201 children. La Esperanza center onTenerife was home to 100 children; Tegueste center on the same Islandaccommodated 48 children; and Arinaga center on Gran Canaria housed 53children.[21]Some important improvements have taken place within the pastthree years since Human Rights Watch first visited these facilities. Conditionsat Arinaga center have improved, largely because fewer children are housedthere. Also, children now generally enjoy access to education and vocationaltraining opportunities outside their centers, and emergency centers facilitatechildren’s rapid insertion into training programs through languageclasses starting right after their arrival.That notwithstanding, emergency centers in the CanaryIslands are operated outside regulated minimum standards. There are nooccupancy limits for these centers, and their size and location is notconducive for children’s integration.In contrast, legal minimum standards for small-scaleresidencies, so-called CAMEs (centros de acogida para menores extranjeros),where 250 unaccompanied children are currently accommodated, prescribe a limitof no more than 10 children in a single center, and that these homes be locatedin or close to populated areas.[22] Next toCAMEs, Canary Islands legislation also regulates minimum standards for centersthat provide urgent and temporary placements, so-called centers for immediateplacements (CAI, centros de acogida inmediata). The objective of these centersis to provide immediate protection, for the time strictly necessary, in orderto assess the child’s individual situation and to determine the bestprotection measures. The occupancy limit in these centers is 20, and children’sstay is to be limited to 30 days.[23]Emergency Centers Restrict Children’sIntegration OpportunitiesChildren housed in large-scale facilities face obstacles totheir integration into the local community, both economically and socially.Children’s institutionalization has been described by UNICEF as the mostwidely-used mechanism of social exclusion, and institutions are seen as aninadequate setting to promote life within society.[24]Various serious incidents in emergency centers that areregularly reported in the local press reinforce a negative image of thesechildren and contribute to children’s stigmatization. Incidentshighlighted in the local media over the past two years have included the sexualassault of a boy by two other boys in Icod emergency center; a presumedstabbing attack by a boy from La Esperanza center; the death of a child in LaEsperanza who fell from the second floor; and a series of violent attacks bychildren at Tegueste center.[25]In February 2010, according to local media reports, thecenter director, and the head of the child protection services, approximately30 local residents living in the neighborhood around Arinaga emergency centerended up in a fight with three boys from the center. After other children ranout to help their peers the fight developed into a major scuffle that leftthree children injured.[26] As aresult, children told us, their permission to leave the center and go into thelocal neighborhood was suspended for their own safety and they had to betransported in cars from the center to their destination.[27]The incident prompted the office of the public prosecutor to call on the publicnot to stigmatize children in the center, according to a local newspaperreport.[28]The presence of three emergency centers around the town ofLa Laguna on Tenerife Island resulted in a complaint by the town of La Lagunaabout the presence of large numbers of migrant children.[29]It led centers to restrict the number of children who are granted autonomousleave. Children at La Esperanza wing one for example told us that only 20children, one fourth of all children, were eligible for autonomous leave on aweekend day.[30]Children may spend years in emergency centers before leavingthem, either upon turning 18, or because they are transferred to smaller homeseither in the Canaries or in other regions of Spain. Out of the 25 children weinterviewed in the three largest emergency centers, 10 have spent more than ayear, six more than two years, and two boys had spent more than three years inan emergency center.The consequences of children’s limited integrationopportunities are serious. They are more likely to be without a work contractor housing after turning 18 and upon leaving the center, both requirements torenew their temporary residence permits and secure a regular status after theyturn 18. Although some center staff try to help children find jobs before theyleave the center, the isolated location of these centers restrictinginteraction with the local community, the large number of children in a singlefacility, and the limited job opportunities available within the vicinity ofsuch big centers, makes their task daunting. Without a job and a place to live,children are unable to renew their temporary residence permits. As a result,children leaving these centers at the age of 18 almost inevitably end up livingon the streets and without legal status (these consequences are discussedfurther in the section about the lack of effective guardianship and access tolegal representation).Substandard Conditions at La Esperanza EmergencyCenterThe worst emergency center in terms of infrastructure, size,and location is La Esperanza center, the formerly abandoned juvenile detentioncenter “Nivaria” on Tenerife Island. Tucked away in the woodsleading up to Mount Teide, at more than 900 meters above sea level, it isshielded from populated areas and far from public transportation. At the timeof our visit, the vast facility was separated into two different wings, eachmanaged by a different director. After our visit in late February, wing two wasshut down and children were transferred to wing one, or Tegueste and Arinagaemergency centers. As of March 1, 2010, wing one hosted 100 children after wingtwo was shut down.Human Rights Watch found few changes to the infrastructurecompared to our first visit three years ago. Staff and children alike told usthat they suffer from pervasive cold during the winter months, and there is anon-stop cold draft running through the center’s corridors. The centerwas extremely cold the day of our visit.[31] Somewindow panes in wing two were missing on the day of our visit, whichexacerbated the lack of protection against the cold. “With the exceptionof three months in summer, nights are cold,” one staff who works at LaEsperanza told us.[32]Children told Human Rights Watch that they were so cold thatit prevented them from sleeping at night. “I am cold. Sometimes Idon’t sleep because it’s cold,” a 15-year old boy told us.[33]According to several children interviewed, they are given two sheets and oneblanket and one staff told us that they are not supposed to give children asecond blanket.[34] Severalchildren told us they would not get a second blanket even if they asked for it:It is very hard, especially in the winter … of courseI’m cold at night. I have one blanket … there is no point to askfor another blanket. They won’t give it to you. nobody has twoblankets…. Sometimes it’s so cold you can’t sleep.[35]It’s very cold here, because we’re in the mountains.It’s permanently cold…. At night I’m cold. I have two sheetsand one blanket and another sheet. I have one blanket only. That is what theygave to everybody. That’s the rule. You’re so cold you use thesheet as a blanket. We put on warm clothes before we go to sleep.[36]Toilets and showers are very basic. Although the centerdirector assured us that there was constant hot water, several children saidthat there was only hot water for the handful of children who shower first inthe morning.The water is cold. Those who are courageous shower withcold water. I can only shower when there’s hot water. There’s hotwater only for the first children who shower … afterwards it’scold…. Sometimes I don’t shower because the water is already cold.[37]One staff member told us that it was impossible foremployees to make sure all children regularly took showers and observe personalhygiene.[38] Aformer staff member told us: “Hygiene is a problem. Children are far fromtheir families, they have many problems. They neglect themselves. Someeducators[39] are notprepared to talk to them in an adequate manner. They tell a child ‘youstink, black guy, wash yourself!’ They don’t talk to them in a goodway. It’s normal that these children forget and neglectthemselves.”[40] Despitea striking omnipresence of cleaning ladies the day of our visit to the center,the date of which was arranged in advance, one staff member told us that thereare generally few staff in the center, including cleaning personnel, and thatthe cleanliness was insufficient when the center is overcrowded.[41]One child also told our interpreter that center walls had been painted beforeour visit.Individual rooms for children are bleak. Each room housesbetween two and eight children in bunk beds. Children’s rooms do notcontain desks. The center runs a locker room where children can leave andwithdraw their personal belongings during fixed hours, a change since our lastvisit. But children still have nowhere to lock up their personal belongingsinside their rooms and risk having them stolen if they leave them there. Thecenter contains three barren and windowless classrooms for language classes onthe ground floor next to a walled-in concrete courtyard.The quality of food from a local caterer appears to have improvedsomewhat from three years ago when children reported regular and severe foodpoisoning and stomach problems.[42]Although the center director assured us that the catering company preparesmeals for local schools and that the quality of meals is the same andsupervised by dieticians, what we learnt suggests that there are ongoingconcerns. “The food is not good. Generally, they sometimes serve you foodthat is no longer good. It happened one of these days. That day nobodyate,” 17-year-old Yunus B. told us.[43] He wasnot alone in criticizing the food served at the center. Both a former and acurrent staff member voiced concern over the quality of meals served and toldus that they stopped eating the food after falling ill.Many times we saw food [that seemed bad] and based on whatchildren tell us it’s not really edible. I used to eat [in the center]but after I got sick I stopped. I got sick once…. Some educators eat itbut they can choose what to eat.[44]The food is of very low quality. It’s very bad. I sometimesate it but even my body sometimes threw it up…. Each time I ate that foodI had stomach problems. I felt it was not good for me.[45]Among positive developments, the center offers trainingopportunities outside, which include computer courses, carpentry, and trainingas electricians or kitchen aide. The director told us that some children aremembers of a local soccer club. Due to the high number of children present inthe center, however, such opportunities are limited. Wing one also offers one roomfor religious services. Some children only follow educational courses insidethe center, limited to Spanish language classes. The center director told usthat some had to leave local schools, including because they repeatedly skippedclasses and caused disruption.[46]The following accounts by two children who are not enrolledin training programs outside the center are a strong indication that childrenat La Esperanza are submitted to collective routines rather than being offeredan environment that responds to their individual needs, fosters their autonomyor responsibility, and their reinsertion into training programs.I feel imprisoned. There are many rules and I don’tfeel free. In the morning we wake up at nine and have breakfast. Then they putus down in the courtyard. They lock us outside there until 1pm or 1.30 pm.I’m not motivated to learn Spanish…. When you are locked up what doyou learn?[47]I wake up at 9am and have breakfast at 10am. Then I go downto the courtyard. They lock us out in the courtyard and nobody can go inside.[48]Tegueste and Arinaga Emergency CentersConditions at Tegueste emergency center are better comparedto La Esperanza. Tegueste center is located on the outskirts of the village ofthe same name. Children live in communal rooms with one toilet and shower foreight children in the room. Rooms for children contain no desks and there is noroom in the center that offers children a place to study. The center offers asmall fenced-in courtyard and has an overgrown patio next to it. Contrary to LaEsperanza center, and improved from our visit there three years ago, food atTegueste center is prepared in the center, and children did not raise anycomplaints about the quality or quantity of the food served there. Teguestecenter was home to 48 unaccompanied migrant children on March 1, 2010.Arinaga emergency center, which was home to 53 children asof March 1, 2010, is located 20 kilometers from Las Palmas, in an industrialarea next to a highway and close to a neighborhood of Agüimes municipality. Conditions at thecenter have improved remarkably since our visit there three years ago. Thecenter has opened a computer room, a small library to borrow books or boardgames, a study room, a gym, and it has transformed the outside and back areainto a pretty garden area. It continues to prepare food in the center and alsooffers laundry service. Rooms contain bunk beds for up to eight children whoshare a common bathroom. Due to the low occupancy level, children weredistributed in fewer numbers per room across the center. Children can keeptheir belongings safe in closets inside their rooms. The center has a fenced-inconcrete courtyard and offers an adjacent barrack for religious services.Both centers, if brought in line with established minimumstandards on occupancy and time limit, and after addressing the lack ofsufficient safeguards against ill-treatment (as will be discussed in followingsections), would be adequate for the short-term accommodation of unaccompaniedmigrant children.Violence in emergency centersOur visit to the three largest emergency centers confirmedthat substandard and overcrowded conditions often foster peer violence, andthat the higher the number of children housed in an institution, the greaterthe risk.Arinaga center housed 38 children at the time of our visit,and 10 children were in the process of being admitted from La Esperanza.Children told us in private interviews that there were no fights among childrennor arguments with staff. One child summed up the situation as:“Everybody goes after his own business, we’re all busy.” Yet,these same children had seen Arinaga center with more than 100 or even close to200 children and said there had been a completely different atmosphere at thattime.When there were a many there were a lot of fights—nowit’s going well.[49]I have been here for six months. [before] it was adisaster; we were 200 boys…. It was tense, there were many fights andescapes.[50]Now it’s better here. Before there were many and therewas a lot of noise… before there were only fights. I was involved infights myself [because] they made fun of me. Mainly the difference is thatthere are fewer children and those who made trouble have left. We were 180children at the beginning.[51]There were 198 boys here. It changed slowly…. It wasdifferent then. It was difficult with a lot of sanctions. Really, it wasdifficult. It can’t be the same when there are only 20. There were manyconflicts among children.[52]Similarly, 17-year-old Zubair F. told us about Teguestecenter: “when there were 140 or 150 [children] here there were fightsalmost every day.”[53]There are no established maximum occupancy levels foremergency centers. In the absence of minimum standards to govern thefunctioning of emergency centers, nothing prevents the centers from againbecoming overcrowded and conditions from deteriorating in the future.La Esperanza emergency center in contrast is characterizedby a tense atmosphere with reports of widespread violence among children,recurring theft, routine sanctioning of children for breaking center rules,drug abuse, and in some instances, conflict with staff. One staff memberdescribed the atmosphere in the center as “too tense”.[54]Children at La Esperanza told us that fights with peers werefrequent and that educators regularly had to intervene to separate childrenattacking one another. Children described in detail how staff react in cases ofviolence and immobilize, separate, and calm down aggressive children. One childfelt such interventions were humiliating, but children did not allege violentbehavior by staff.Recently, one boy had problems with an educator. Theydon’t try to understand who’s right and just came and took the boy.They were four and took him from the back and made him fall. They sat on him toimmobilize him. I was so angry I threw myself on the educators. Theyneutralized me and took me here.[55]Children’s descriptions of the climate at La Esperanzacenter differed strongly from those of Tegueste emergency center, where wereceived fewer reports of peer violence, and from those gathered at Arinagaemergency center, where we did not receive any current reports of violenceinside the center.According to children interviewed, a frequent cause forviolence at La Esperanza center is theft. Children told us that their mobilephones, money, or clothes were stolen. The absence of lockers insidechildren’s rooms at the center makes it impossible for children to keeptheir belongings safe at all times. Although La Esperanza center has a centrallocker room where children can deposit and fetch belongings during fixed hours,they naturally do not keep all of their belongings there, such as clothes,mobile phones, or personal effects.Another contributing factor to violent incidents at LaEsperanza center is an apparent policy of transferring difficult and disruptivechildren from other centers to la Esperanza. Several children told us that theyhad been transferred there after they “behaved badly”.A staff confirmed to us this practice. “Children whoare difficult were always sent [to La Esperanza]. My colleagues have the sameimpression. Maybe they suppose we are better prepared [but] it is a lot moredifficult to integrate children once they are in contact with a group whobehaves badly…. and they themselves know they are sent to a worsecenter.”[56]The center director of La Esperanza’s wing oneacknowledged a high presence of difficult children. She estimated that out of79 children who were in wing one on the day of our visit, 10-15 childrenregularly demonstrate disruptive behavior and 30-40 kids displayed suchbehavior from time to time.[57]One former and one current staff member of La Esperanzacenter suggested that some of their colleagues did not always behave professionallyin situations of conflict, with their actions helping to escalate tensionrather than defuse it.[58]There are educators who shouldn’t work there; somebecause they are very aggressive and some because they are very defensivetowards children. Children always provoke or insult you, and some educatorslose their nerves and react…. Some educators entered with the spirit theycould give orders. They found themselves [out of the job and] on the streets;that happened very quickly.[59][Some] educators are not trained to work there.Communication is also difficult. Sometimes educators are not professional, arenot mature enough; they don’t know how to control a situation. Generally,many children are very quiet. The problem starts when an educator is yelling atchildren; children remain quiet, but the educator continues. Then at some pointchildren explode as well…. I saw several times verbal aggressions,[educators] calling children niggers; but I never saw an educator hit anybody.[60]Drug abuse, and specifically the inhalation of paint thinnerfumes by Moroccan children appears to be a problem in all emergency centers wevisited, but particularly in La Esperanza. One staff member of La Esperanzatold us in February that drug abuse, although a recurring phenomenon at thecenter, had been out of control in recent months. In his view, the behavior ofchildren who inhaled such fumes was affected by the drug, and they often turnedviolent.[61]Frequent episodes of violence also take their toll on staffwho work there and who need to confront sometimes dangerous and violentsituations that involve weapons. Paid very little, working in changing shifts,and according to staff, with no legal overtime pay, and in the same substandardconditions as children, La Esperanza neither offers an acceptable environmentfor children to live in, nor an environment where staff can apply their skillsand commitment.[62]The way staff administer sanctions appears to be one reasonfor conflicts among children and staff in the center. Many children were of theview that sanctions were applied unfairly and arbitrarily. Examples of behaviorthat was sanctioned included: refusal to carry out assigned tasks; non-respectof rules; violence; smoking; drug abuse; unauthorized leave; insults; threats;theft. Sanctions range from work assignments in the center such as cleaning orhelping with a task, the withholding of pocket money or phone cards, andrestriction of leave. For serious acts of violence, children may be reported tojudicial authorities and police.[63]Sometimes [educators] come and order you to clean [in thecenter] and if you refuse they sanction you and cut your pocket money. Theylook for a pretext to cut your money…. There were children here who weretreated in such an unjust way. I was very angry about that. What hurts me isthe provocation to look for problems. They find trivial reasons to sanction youand I find that unfair and it hurts me … For example, they draw up a listfor cleaning. If they want to provoke you they put you on the list earlier. Ifyou protest they argue and you get sanctioned.[64]I once returned at 3pm in the afternoon and asked [a staffmember] to open the room to get my jacket. He refused. I started fighting andhe fought back and another educator intervened. They called the police anddenounced me. I also got my pocket money cut.[65]We were not in a position to determine whether the sanctionswere indeed applied unfairly and recognize that centers need to have rules toensure proper functioning. Not all children interviewed were of the view thatsanctions are generally unjustified. However, we received a large number ofcomplaints about unfair and excessive sanctioning at La Esperanza center, instark contrast to Arinaga center, for example, where the majority of childrenfelt that sanctions were applied fairly: “Here, they sanction you in ajust way,” a 17-year-old boy described the sanctions regime there.[66]Both a former and a current staff member at La Esperanzashared children’s assessment that sanctions in the center were not alwaysapplied fairly. One told us:There are many injustices [in the way sanctions areapplied]. Some educators cut pocket money for too long … educators oftenwant to impose sanctions and some cut pocket money for insults…. Some childrenhave a long history of offenses but they did not go to Tabares (juveniledetention facility); others went very quickly to Tabares even though theyhardly did anything…. Recently some children went to Tabares but theydidn’t deserve it, in comparison to others.[67]Several times they sanctioned [children] in an unjustmanner.[68]Our interviews suggest that there is a lack of trust betweenchildren and staff at La Esperanza and a sense of bitterness among childrenstemming from the sanctions regime at La Esperanza. Many were particularlyupset about the cutting of pocket money as a sanction as they tried to savethat money for the day they leave the center to join friends or family membersand to avoid immediate homelessness. With few exceptions, children told us theydid not trust any staff in the center and said they generally avoided talkingto staff, including about their problems.I don’t trust anybody. Sometimes [staff] come and askme whether I have problems and if I’m well. I don’t want to tell themabout my problems. It’s not worth telling them. They won’t solvethem, so why should I tell them?[69]As an example of good practice, the director of Arinagaissued guidelines to staff to ensure staff apply sanctions in a proportionateand fair manner and generally recommended that staff apply sanctions in theform of work rather than the cutting of pocket money.[70]International Obligations Regarding Children inCareStates are obliged under international law to providespecial protection and care for children deprived of a family environment andto take into account children’s best interests as a primaryconsideration. They must also ensure that institutions responsible for the careof children conform with established standards in the areas of safety, healthand suitability, and they must periodically review the treatment of childrenplaced in state care.[71]Under the International Covenant on Civil and PoliticalRights (ICCPR), the European Human Rights Convention, as well as the Conventionon the Rights of the Child, states must also protect persons from inhuman ordegrading treatment.[72]The Canary Islands authorities’ decision to houseunaccompanied migrant children in emergency centers that operate outsideestablished minimum standards, that limit children’s integrationopportunities, and where children are exposed to an increased risk of violence,runs contrary to its duty to ensure children a level of care adequate for theirdevelopment and in their best interests.[73] Theaccommodation of 100 children in substandard conditions at La Esperanzaemergency center for prolonged periods of time, furthermore, may amount toinhuman and degrading treatment.[74]IV. Insufficient Safeguards against Ill-TreatmentAs highlighted in the previous section, the risk of violencecontinues to exist for children housed in Tegueste and Arinaga emergencycenters in the Canary Islands, in particular because of no occupancy limit.Peer violence is a real and present risk for children in La Esperanza emergencycenter. Our 2007 research into these emergency centers not only brought tolight widespread and severe allegations of ill-treatment, in addition, wedocumented an absence of effective oversight by responsible bodies.[75]Monitoring of emergency centers has improved since our lastvisit but not to a satisfactory level. A commendable move was the separation ofyounger children from their older peers with the opening of a center at Icod delos Vinos exclusively for children below age 16. But this policy was apparentlyabandoned when authorities closed a nearby center and transferred children whowere all 16 and 17 years old to the center in Icod. The center is now reportedto house a 10-year-old jointly with much older children.[76]The mixing of different levels of vulnerability among children in institutionsincreases the risk of violence from peers. Such mixing is currently limited toIcod emergency center only, but it means that Canary Islands authorities failto provide separate accommodation for younger children as a safeguard againstpeer violence.One improvement is children’s access to education andtraining outside their centers, compared to undue limitation on such accessdocumented in early 2007, which severely hampered children’s ability toestablish contacts with persons outside the center whom they could have alertedabout serious incidents within the center.[77]The prosecutor of Santa Cruz de Tenerife province told us hevisits residential facilities for unaccompanied migrant children twice a year,unannounced; staff at La Esperanza confirmed that these visits take place. Theprosecutor for children in Gran Canaria province told us that she visited thecenter more often and on an irregular schedule.[78]Public prosecutors hold the mandate of overseeing state guardianship ofchildren. Prosecutors assured us that they would do private and confidentialinterviews with children during their visits to centers but we were unable toconfirm that this is the case for La Esperanza center.Employees at emergency centers further told us that stafffrom the Child Protection Directorate visited centers on a regular basis.None of the emergency centers we visited had a functioningmechanism that would permit children to file a confidential complaint. Arinagaemergency center installed a complaints mailbox upon a proposal by the localprosecutor but children were unaware of its purpose and the mailbox was openthe day of our visit. The center director told us staff would open the mailboxand forward messages without reading them to the child protection services andmentioned that he had received one complaint so far. It is questionable whetherthe opening of the box by center staff is sufficient assurance ofconfidentiality for children who wish to file a complaint.The head of the Child Protection Directorate assured us thather office receives complaints directly from children, but none of the childrenwe interviewed knew who their guardian or the service responsible for theircenter was.[79]The children’s prosecutor on Tenerife, responsible foroverseeing La Esperanza emergency center, told us that he had never received acomplaint about the center. Asked what the reason might be for the totalabsence of complaints, he replied: “[children] are either afraid or theyhave nothing to complain about.” When we asked how children couldcomplain to him he assured us that children there knew him and that he visitedthe center twice a year.[80]With few exceptions, children we spoke to at La Esperanzacenter were unaware of who the prosecutor was or that they could file acomplaint to him. Only the few children who had been summoned to his officeafter being accused of criminal offenses said they knew him. When we asked oneof them, a 17-year-old boy who was critical about conditions at La Esperanza,why he never filed a complaint with the prosecutor, he told us: “Healready knows this is the worst center!”[81]None of the children we spoke to at La Esperanza had everseen the prosecutor in the center, including those who knew him. One possibleexplanation came from a staff member who told us: “We get visits sometimesfrom political bodies…. All [visitors] come in the mornings. Generally,children are out in the mornings. When responsible [authorities] come we doeverything that they come in the morning to avoid them meeting disruptivechildren. We prepare before visitors come to avoid such encounters.”[82]None of the children we spoke to at La Esperanza center hadever been interviewed in private by an outside visitor. Several of themrecalled that they had seen visitors at the center. “Other people came todo interviews with us, these were journalists. I never had a longinterview,” a 17-year-old boy who lived at La Esperanza center told us.[83]Another boy said: “We never had a visitor like you who asked usquestions. Others come to visit the center. I don’t really know who theywere and why they came.”[84]One staff member at La Esperanza told us he didn’trecall that any of the visitors actually interviewed children. A staff memberin another emergency center said that staff from the Child ProtectionDirectorate sometimes came and interviewed specific children whose names theyhad beforehand.[85]Some children were desperate to talk to trusted personsoutside the center about problems they face in their centers. We asked childrenwho stayed at La Esperanza center whether they were confronted with incidentsthat they wanted to share confidentially with a trusted person outside. Theyanswered us:All day I think about that—how to tell somebodyoutside. If only I could talk to somebody how unjust it is. That people hereleave without residence permits […]. I wouldn’t know who to talkto.[86]I can’t talk about it. Here it’s not Africa. InAfrica you have somebody to tell everything like an older brother. Here you can’ttell everything, it will create problems. Yes, it happened that I wanted totalk to somebody—then I thought one day it will be over.[87]The manner in which the [center director] speaks—itmakes me angry. They tell … they tell you ‘you eat for free, sleepfor free, and drink for free, why do you care about that?’ it makes me somad … you don’t have another place to go and where you can talkabout that…. Sometimes I cry a lot because I can’t go anywhere totalk…. It’s quite difficult right now because I don’t haveanybody here. I have friends but they are far away from here. When I’mangry I go outside where nobody is and sit down until it’s over.[88]When we visited La Esperanza center and explained thereasons for our visit and offered private interviews to a group of 15 children,none of them agreed to speak. They told us they were afraid to speak to us.When we stressed that interviews would be confidential and held in private theysaid they all wanted to talk to us but were afraid because center staff wouldwitness who we were talking to. Asked what they were afraid of, they said theyfeared they would not receive their residence permits or a place to stay afterleaving the center. One boy told us later outside the center: “I’mafraid in our center. Educators who are there will know what I have said and ifI said something. Many would like to complain, but they screw up your paperswhen you leave. They will write that you behaved in such and such a way.”[89]The need for children to access a confidential complaintmechanism is not sufficiently recognized by responsible bodies in the CanaryIslands. Directors of emergency centers in Tegueste and La Esperanza told HumanRights Watch they did not provide children with addresses where they might seekhelp. They told us that children trusted staff in the center and could addressgrievances with them. Center directors also told us that children had mobilephones and knew exactly whom to call for help. Yet, several children told usthey did not have mobile phones and the following account by a boy in Teguestecenter shows that there is no system for children to safely file complaints toauthorities in charge:One friend and I were eating breakfast. I didn’t seeexactly what happened but three educators took him into this room andill-treated him. They took his arms behind his back and lifted him up. [heexplains that a number of boys witnessed the scene through the room’swindow]. One boy called the police. The police came and wanted to find out whocalled them. Everybody got sanctioned [afterwards] because the police gave themobile phone number to the director. That was four months ago.[90]We also received information that staffing ratios at LaEsperanza emergency center were inadequate. There is a risk that insufficientnumber of staff in a large-scale facility like La Esperanza may leave peerviolence or harassment among children undetected.Directors of emergency centers assured us that for every tenchildren at the center there is one staff member on duty, day and night. Onestaff member, however, told us confidentially that this has rarely been thecase at La Esperanza center. We were told the situation had improved recentlyonly after the closing of centers made more staff available. In practice,according to the staff, staff ratio was at best one person for 12 children.Often, though, staff would call in sick, in particular for evening shifts thatare seen as more difficult because children are present in the center, and thenthe ratio would drop to one staff member for 18 children. During night shifts,we were told, they ended up at times with only one staffer for 20 children.[91]States are obliged under international law to take allappropriate measure to protect children from all forms of violence, injury orabuse, neglect or negligent treatment while in care. Such measures includeforms of prevention and identification such as reporting and investigationmechanisms.States are furthermoreobliged to ensure that institutions responsible for the care of childrenconform to established standards, are supervised by competent bodies, and thatthe treatment of children placed in care is subject to regular review.[92]The decision by Canary Islands authorities to keep childrenin large-scale institutions where the risk of exposure to violence isincreased, the failure to provide separate accommodation for younger children,the absence of functioning complaint mechanisms, the lack of recognition amongdecision-makers and center directors for the need of such safeguardingmeasures, and the lack of systematic private and confidential interviews withchildren in centers and with the help of interpreters by bodies mandated tooversee conditions are strong indications that authorities are failing to takesteps which would ensure that the standards established under international laware met.There is no evidence that the Canary Islands have adoptedminimum standards that regulate the functioning of emergency centers. The headof the Child Protection Directorate described these centers as“unregulated.”[93] Theprosecutor’s office on Gran Canaria told us the Canary Islands governmentissued an order in March 2006 that defined minimum standards for emergencycenters. Yet, no such order has been published in the Canary Islands officialbulletin and the prosecutor’s office was unable to provide us with a copydespite repeated requests. The absence of minimum standards for emergencycenters, such as maximum occupancy or staffing levels results in an unregulatedlimbo for children housed there and does not allow for effective supervision.It also thwarts children’s ability to seek legal redress for conditionsthat fail to comply with established norms.V. Absence of Effective Guardianship and LegalRepresentationInternational standards also provide guidance on theobligations of guardianship for unaccompanied migrant children. Guardians areresponsible for ensuring the child’s well-being and safety, ensuring thatthe child’s needs are met, the child’s rights respected, and thatthe child’s best interests are taken into account in all decisionsaffecting the child.[94]Guardianship for all unaccompanied migrant children in the Canary Islands isexercised by an institution, the Canary Islands Child Protection Directorate.[95]As mentioned previously, children we interviewed were notaware of who their guardian was or of the body that was responsible for theircenter. It is difficult to see how a guardian’s mandate to safeguardchildren’s best interests is fulfilled in the absence of a directrelationship. Our findings, detailed below, show that the best interests ofchildren in emergency centers are not being met.Children in emergency centers do not enjoy access tolawyers. Children’s status as third-country nationals brings with itcomplex legal questions ranging from participation in training programs thatrequire work permits, access to documentation, and the issuing of residencepermits, questions that require sophisticated legal help. Yet the organizationthat runs emergency centers does not have a lawyer on staff forchildren’s legal matters, nor is there any mechanism to allow children inthe centers to consult with a lawyer.[96]Transfers Failing Children’s Best InterestsEmergency centers do not provide children with the certaintyof a permanent solution, yet the maximum limit of time a child may spend thereis not regulated. Children may be transferred to other centers, including onthe Spanish peninsula, at any point in time, and months after the child’sarrival.There may be valid reasons to move children, including tobetter care arrangements, but because they can take place long after thechild’s arrival and after the child has established new friendships,these transfers may have negative side-effects, such as the interruption of atraining course or separation from support networks that the child hasestablished since his arrival. It appears that the Child Protection Directorateinsufficiently takes into consideration the child’s views about anupcoming transfer, or when such a transfer should be made, and does not make abest interest determination by balancing the various factors before deciding ona child’s move.The director of Arinaga center told us that children who arebetter integrated are less likely to be transferred, and that he himself hadadvised against such transfers in the past. However, without a clear policybased on the primacy of the best interest of the child, children may still betransferred at times which will have unnecessary negative impact on their wellbeing. For example one staffer who works in an emergency center said that inmid-2009 several children were transferred right before they were about tograduate from a vocational training course and that authorities did not takeinto consideration the impact of the transfer on their education. He added,though, that this had not been the case more recently.[97]Both sources told us that children are not properlyconsulted about planned transfers and that children who did not wish to leavethe Canary Islands, sometimes because they did not want to be separated fromfriends or interrupt their education, were compelled to leave.They decide where you go. I wanted to stay at [LaEsperanza] but they decided I should go. They didn’t ask me. That daythey came and took us to Las Mercedes center. I had friends at [La Esperanza]so I didn’t want to go to the other center.[98]I behaved badly… then they sent me here. [Namewithheld] asked me to go with him for a ride. Then he took me here to LaEsperanza but all of my clothes remained there….Nobody told me I’dbe taken to La Esperanza.[99]Transfers that disrupt children’s education or theirsocial networks and take place without proper consultation, are unlikely to bebased on decisions, or procedures, in which the best interest of the child hasbeen properly determined. They also potentially hinder children’sopportunity for integration into local communities and exacerbate their socialexclusion.International standards recommend that authorities limit thechildren’s transfer to different facilities and require that thechild’s views and best interests are taken into account when making suchdecisions.[100]For example, the Committee on the Rights of the Child hasadvised states that when choosing alternative care for children deprived oftheir family environment, “the particular vulnerabilities of such achild, not only having lost connection with his or her family environment, butfurther finding him or herself outside of his or her country of origin, as wellas the child’s age and gender, should be taken into account.” Thecommittee clarifies that changes in residence should be “limited toinstances where such change is in the best interest of the child,” andthat “children must be kept informed of the care arrangements being madefor them, and their opinions must be taken into consideration.”[101]Violation of Children’s Rights to Residencyunder National LawChildren are unable to obtain residence permits inaccordance with their entitlements under Spanish legislation because of anabsence of effective guardianship and lack of access to lawyers. Spanish lawprovides that all unaccompanied migrant children on its territory enjoy legalstatus and that they are entitled to temporary residence permits initiallyvalid for one year, followed by a two-year renewable permit. Their entitlementto such a residence permit starts the day they are placed under stateguardianship.[102]Unaccompanied migrant children who turn 18 and have to leavestate care therefore should possess residence permits that remain valid forbetween one month and two years, depending on when the child was placed understate guardianship.[103] Inreality, however, all children we spoke to had permits of variable length thatwere deliberately timed to expire on their 18th birthday,irrespective of the date on which they were issued.[104]The consequences of this policy are severe. The day they are kicked out ontothe streets most of these children almost inevitably face homelessness andirregular status.[105]The director of Arinaga center told us that the centralgovernment delegation recently changed this practice and now issued residencepermits in compliance with Spanish law, which means that children who nowreceive permits would be given permits with a validity of one or two years,irrespective of the age of the child.[106]We saw no evidence of this changed practice, however. Noneof the children we spoke to, a majority of whom were close to becoming 18, hadresidence permits issued in accordance with the law. Instead their permits wereof varying length with each one expiring on their 18th birthday. Allwere therefore destined to face irregular status the day they leave the center.Even if this practice has changed for those children who apply for residencepermits henceforth, authorities have failed to rectify past violations andreplace permits already issued that expire on children’s 18thbirthdays.Some children we spoke to were undocumented altogether withno residence permit or identity document. Although this did not limit theirability to access health care or training, one boy told us he would not leavethe center on his own before he spoke sufficient Spanish, in case he ran intoan identity check by police: “When I didn’t speak Spanish I stayedwith the educators.”[107]In order to obtain residence permits children need topresent identification documents. All children interviewed said they were toldthey need to bring passports from their countries of origin. Most childrennever possessed identity documents and although most manage to organizepassports through relatives in their home countries, a few said they facedinsurmountable obstacles in trying to obtain these documents.[108]One boy told us that he was simply unable to obtain a passport from his homecountry; a family member then bribed an official from a neighboring country andobtained a fake passport for him.[109]Children generally had scant information about theirentitlements under Spanish law and were largely unaware of the rights theycould claim. One boy told us: “They didn’t tell me much but I foundout anyway,” a 17-year-old boy told us.[110]We asked the Canary Islands Child Protection Directorate,the children’s guardian, what efforts it had undertaken to ensurechildren’s residence permits are issued in compliance with the law.[111]We had received no reply at the time this report went to press.We also asked the responsible prosecutors, mandated tooversee the legality of children’s guardianship, what steps they hadundertaken to address this malpractice. The prosecutor for Santa Cruz deTenerife province told us he had organized several meetings with relevantstakeholders. He added that he had not received any instructions from theoffice of the Prosecutor General to address this issue and could therefore notact on his own. The prosecutor responsible for Gran Canaria province, incontrast, told us they had already pressed child protection services to rectifythose practices and were now considering legal action on behalf of childrenagainst the government.[112]The threat of homelessness, marginalization, and irregularstatus was real for almost all children we met with.[113]The vast majority of boys we spoke to did not know where to go or how tosurvive upon leaving the center. They were clearly distressed about the fateawaiting them and spoke about difficult experiences encountered by theirfriends who had left centers earlier.One staff member also told us that children have to breakoff their participation in educational programs the day they turn 18 and leavethe center, including when as little as one or two months remain to completethe educational cycle and obtain a diploma.[114] A17-year-old boy who had been enrolled in carpenter classes for six months andwas about to turn 18 told us: “I think my course will finish in twomonths. I don’t know if I can stay here after turning 18 andcontinue.”[115]The failure to identify durable solutions for each child andan apparent policy of not letting them complete their training and educationcycles makes their participation in such programs appear futile. Theuncertainty about what would happen after a child turned 18 affectschildren’s motivation to follow rules or participate in trainingprograms. According to one staffer, children’s realization that they maynever be able to finish their training programs has a negative impact on theirmotivation to participate in such courses.[116] Oneboy also told us how he changed his behavior when he realized that he would endup on the streets after turning 18.I have been [in the Canary Islands] for three years. Thefirst two years I created problems. It’s true. Afterwards, I behavedwell. They said I will not be sent to a center for adults [when I turn 18]because I didn’t behave well. I said I was a young boy and made mistakes.When they told me that [there would be no place for me to go to when I turn18], I started to escape [from the center]. I escape to find out what I can dowhen I have to leave [the center].[117]The absence of effective guardianship and the lack of children’saccess to lawyers leave children without guarantees that their best interestswill be taken into account, and it leaves them without legal avenues tochallenge authorities who fail to safeguard their rights. With no lawyerintervening on their behalf, with a guardianship institution that remainspassive in the face of practice that violates children’s rights, childrenend up deprived of numerous entitlements, including their right to temporarylegal residence.International standards ask governments to search for adurable solution for unaccompanied migrant children. Such a durable solutionhas to be in line with the child’s best interests and may include thechild’s return to the home country, family reunification in a thirdcountry, or to the child’s integration in the host country. The UNCommittee on the Rights of the Child urges states to determine measuresfacilitating the integration of children who remain in the host country. Italso states clearly that local integration must be based on secure legalstatus.[118]The Canary Islands has planned in the past the return oflarge numbers of unaccompanied migrant children, but no repatriations have beencarried out. The children’s prosecutor in Gran Canaria told us thatrequirements for return under Spanish law, which require returns to be in thechild’s best interest and that a care-giver for the child to beidentified, had not been met and therefore had not been approved.[119]Lack of Access to Asylum ProcedureUnaccompanied migrant children in emergency centers haveinsufficient access to the asylum procedure and do not receive informationabout the possibility of filing an asylum application. Center directors told usthat their staff in contact with children would detect if a child’sreasons for migration might give rise to a need for international protection.If such cases are found, we were told, the center would contact a local refugeerights organization for assistance. The office of the Spanish Refugee Council(CEAR) in Gran Canaria was aware of only one unaccompanied child who had askedfor asylum in the past. Their office on Tenerife was aware of two children whohad sought asylum during the past three years.[120]Center directors we spoke to were generally aware of thepossibility for children to file an asylum application but the training and thelevel of information provided to staff working at the centers remains verylimited. Few center staff have participated in past training by the UnitedNations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).[121]Children do not receive any information about their right toseek asylum after arriving at a center. Several children furthermore told usthey had never had an extensive, private interview with staff of the center,which calls into question how staff are supposed to detect reasons formigration that may give rise to a need for international protection. The highnumber of children in emergency centers and the negative climate between staffand children at La Esperanza center in particular are not conducive to identifyingchildren in need of international protection.One boy from the Ivory Coast we briefly spoke to at LaEsperanza center said he had fled his country during the war and unsuccessfullytried to apply for refugee protection in Mauritania before reaching Spain. Hewas unaware of his right to seek asylum.One employee of another emergency center told us he knewabout the possibility of seeking asylum but understood the scope ofinternational protection only after participating in UNHCR training. He told usthat after the training he approached an Ivorian boy who originated from aconflict area to check whether the boy wanted to file an asylum application.The boy told him that he had asked earlier to file an asylum application, butwas advised he would need to prepare an asylum application by himself.According to the employee the boy never filed an asylum application and soonafterwards turned 18 and had to leave the center.[122]Human Rights Watch did not seek to determine whether any ofthese children had a valid asylum claim. Instead, we assessed whether they haveaccess to the asylum procedure and receive information about their right toprotection from persecution. The presence of numerous children from WestAfrican countries and from the Western Sahara, combined with the fact thatchildren can be the victims of child-specific forms of persecution require thata functioning mechanism is available for children to access the asylumprocedure. Such a mechanism should include information about internationalprotection in a language children understand, ongoing training for staff inemergency centers, children’s access to lawyers, and proactiveidentification of potential asylum seeking children.[123]VI. RecommendationsTo the Canary Islands governmentClose the center of La Esperanza as a matter of priorityand transfer children to adequate care arrangements.Immediately and publicly commit to bringing all emergencycenters in line with existing regulation on care centers for childrenrequiring protection and designate all remaining emergency centers eitheras CAMEs for long-term placements, or as CAIs for placements of temporarynature, and strictly observe occupancy level and time limits forplacements in accordance with Decree 40/2000.Adopt a program to promote alternative forms of care forunaccompanied migrant children that includes foster care placements, inparticular for younger children.Set up a complaints mechanism in all care institutionsthat is safe, accessible, and confidential and ensure that all children inresidential care receive full information as to whom they can approachoutside their center to file a complaint. Act upon complaints in a swift,confidential, and effective manner.Separate children in residential care centers according totheir age and other vulnerability factors to ensure protection from harmby others, while taking into account family relations or other factorsthat would speak against the separation of children.Ensure that all children in care have access to independentand qualified legal advice and representation and receive full informationabout their rights and entitlements in a language they understand.Ensure that all unaccompanied migrant children in theCanary Islands receive information about the asylum procedure and theirright to seek protection from persecution and rights violations in alanguage they understand, and that they are assisted in filing asylumapplications by competent staff.To the Spanish governmentLink financial support to the Canary Islands childprotection system as well as assistance for children’s transfer toother regions of Spain to a policy by Canary Islands authorities designedto lead to the closure of La Esperanza emergency center and the complianceof the remaining emergency centers with existing legal standardsregulating the care for children on the archipelago. To the Prosecutor’s OfficeConduct an investigation assessing whether the CanaryIslands government’s decision to keep unaccompanied migrant childrenin emergency centers violates the obligations on the government withrespect to the rights of the child, including protection from violence,right to equal treatment, and serves their best interests. Take concretesteps to rectify government policies that are contrary to children’sentitlements under Spanish and international law.Immediately investigate conditions at La Esperanza center,including reports of peer violence, the quality of food, infrastructure,children’s ability to protect themselves from the cold, andchildren’s ability to ensure personal hygiene. Include confidentialinterviews with children and staff members as part of the investigation.Interview children in private and with the help of interpreters,preferably outside the center.Take legal steps against the Child Protection Directorateto ensure that children who are issued residence permits that expire ontheir 18th birthdays are able to replace these by temporarypermits in accordance with Spanish legislation.AcknowledgementsSimone Troller, researcher in the children’s rightsdivision, wrote this report, based on her research.Lois Whitman, executive director of the Children’sRights Division; Benjamin Ward, deputy director in the Europe and Central AsiaDivision; Bill Frelick, director of the Refugee Policy Program; Aisling Reidy, senior legal advisor; Andrew Mawson, deputy program director, edited this report.Cassandra Mikicic and Kyle Knight, associates in theChildren’s Rights Division; Anna Lopriore, creative manager; Grace Choi, publications director; and Fitzroy Hepkins, mail manager, provided productionassistance. Maria Estalayo Vega translated the report, and the translation wasvetted by Cassandra Mikicic.We wish to thank the children who shared their stories andexperience with us. We are also grateful to former and current employees ofemergency centers who made themselves available and agreed to speak to us; andto all non-governmental organizations, UNHCR, and the Spanish Ombudsman office.We also thank Canary Islands authorities and the offices of the publicprosecutors for their cooperation with this research and for generouslyallocating time to speak to us.[1]Human Rights Watch, Unwelcome Responsibilities: Spain’s Failureto Protect the Rights of Unaccompanied Migrant Children in the Canary Islands,vol. 19, no. 4(D), July 2007, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2007/07/25/unwelcome-responsibilities.[2]Mostchildren who now live in emergency centers have arrived after 2006, and thosewho were in centers at the time of our initial research in January 2007 haveturned 18 in the meantime and left these institutions. As of March 1, theCanary Islands government was operating six emergency centers for a total of276 unaccompanied migrant children, all of them boys. In mid-April, it closedthe small-scale emergency center in Las Mercedes .The vast majority ofunaccompanied migrant children who arrive in the Canary Islands are boys. Migrantgirls are not kept in centers for foreign children but are referred toprotection institutions for Spanish girls. Three of those centers arelarge-scale institutions with 50 and more children, accommodating a total of200 children. In 2007 and 2008, 752 and 813 children arrived, and in 2009, thenumber of arrivals hit a low with the arrival of only 242 children. In thefirst three months of 2010, 10 unaccompanied children arrived to the Canary Islands. Email communication from Carmen Steinert Cruz, general director, ChildProtection Directorate, Canary Islands government, to Human Rights Watch, March1, 2010.[3]As of March 1, 2010, a total of 507 unaccompanied migrant children had beentransferred from the Canary Islands to other regions in Spain. Email communication from Carmen Steinert Cruz to Human Rights Watch, March 1, 2010.Adult migrants, in contrast to unaccompanied children, fall under theresponsibility of the central government, are detained and may facedeportation. Spanish law forbids the detention of unaccompanied migrantchildren and obliges authorities to refer them to child protection services. OrganicLaw 2/2009, of December 11, modifying Organic Law 4/2000, of January 11, on theRights and Freedoms of Foreigners in Spain and their Social Integration (Sobre derechosy libertades de los extranjeros en España y su integraciónsocial), art. 35.[4]Canary Islands authorities stated in public that they could cope with a maximumof 300 children; the current agreement with authorities on the seven Islands provides for care places for a total of 250 unaccompanied migrant children. UnwelcomeResponsibilities, p. 16. “The Canary Islands Lament the Lack of Rigorin Human Rights Watch’s report about Centers for Unaccompanied MigrantChildren” (Canarias lamenta la falta de rigor del informe de Human RightsWatch sobre los centros de menores extranjeros), Canary Islands governmentpress release, July 26, 2007, http://www.gobcan.es/noticias/index.jsp?module=1&page=nota.htm&id=25949(accessed March 31, 2010).[5]This limit is the result of an agreement between the Canary Islands governmentand the government of each of the seven Islands (so-called cabildo)determining the number of unaccompanied migrant children that each Island is to provide for.[6]“The Canary Islands Lament the Lack of Rigor in Human RightsWatch’s report about Centers for Unaccompanied MIgrant Children”(Canarias lamenta la falta de rigor del informe de Human Rights sobre loscentros de menores extranjeros), Canary Islands government press release, July26, 2007. José Luis Cámara, “The Social Affairs CounselorDemands the ‘Urgent’ Transfer of Migrant Children” (Bienestarsocial insta al traslado ‘urgente’ de menores inmigrantes), ElDiario de Avisos, January 6, 2009, http://www.diariodeavisos.com/diariodeavisos/content/248737/(accessed March 31, 2010).[7]Human Rights Watch interview with Carmen Steinert Cruz, director general, ChildProtection Directorate, Canary Islands government, Santa Cruz de Tenerife,February 17, 2010.[8]Ibid.[9]Human Rights Watch visited eight such centers on five different Islands inJanuary 2007 and found conditions and care to be generally adequate; UnwelcomeResponsibilities, pp. 3-6, and 16.[10]Contrary to emergency centers, these small-scale home-like centers are managedby the Islands authorities, and not directly by the Canary Islands ChildProtection Directorate. Islands authorities agreed with the Canary Islandsgovernment to provide for the protection of a total of 250 children and theymanage care centers for children on their respective islands. Emailcommunication from Carmen Steinert Cruz to Human Rights Watch, March 1, 2010.For an overview of the division of responsibilities for child protection in theCanary Islands see: Unwelcome Responsibilities, pp. 22-25, and 89-93.[11]We asked the head of the Child Protection Directorate why existing smallcenters had been closed down while La Esperanza emergency center continued tooperate. We have not received a response to our question by the time thisreport went to press. Email communication from Human Rights Watch to CarmenSteinert Cruz, March 9, 2010.[12]Miguel Ángel Autero, “The Canary Islands asks the InteriorMinistry to open Las Canteras for Children” (Canarias pide a interior abrirLas Canteras para los menores), La Opinión, January 8, 2009, http://www.laopinion.es/secciones/noticia.jsp?pRef=2009010800_9_191927__SOCIEDAD-Canarias-pide-Interior-abrir-Canteras-para-menores(accessed March 31, 2010).[13]A local journalist concluded in early January 2009 that Canary Islandsauthorities have an interest in highlighting violent incidents in emergencycenters as a means of pressure on the central government: José LuisCámara, “The Social Affairs Counselor Demands the ‘Urgent’Transfer of Migrant Children” (Bienestar social insta al traslado ‘urgente’de menores inmigrantes), El Diario de Avisos, January 6, 2009.We asked the head of the Child Protection Directoratewhy existing small centers in Arucas and La Orotava had been closed down whileLa Esperanza emergency center continued to operate. We had not received aresponse to our question by the time this report went to press. Emailcommunication from Human Rights Watch to Carmen Steinert Cruz, March 9, 2010.[14]The central government paid €15 million into the budget of the Canary Islands child protection system in 2009, compared to €4 million in 2008. HumanRights Watch meeting with Carmen Steinert Cruz, February 17, 2010 and emailcorrespondence from Carmen Steinert Cruz to Human Rights Watch, March 1, 2010.[15]Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, G.A.Res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, UN Doc. A/44/49 (1989),entered into force September 2, 1990, ratified by Spain on December 6, 1990, art.1. Organic Law 1/1996, on the Legal Protection of the Child (deProtección Jurídica del Menor), Boletín Official delEstado, no. 15, art. 1.[16]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, “Treatment of Unaccompanied andSeparated Children Outside their Country of Origin,” General Comment No.6, UN Doc. CRC/GC/2005/6 (2005), paras. 7-8.[17]CRC, arts. 3, 19, and 27.[18]For a discussion and overview of findings regarding the risk of violence forchildren in institutions see Paulo Sérgio Pinheiro, World Report onViolence against Children (Geneva: United Nations, 2006), pp. 171-230.[19]Ibid., p. 183.[20]Ibid., p. 180-182.[21]Emailcommunication from Carmen Steinert Cruz to Human Rights Watch, March 1, 2010.As of March 1, 2010, the following smaller centers were also classified as emergencycenters: the emergency center in Icod de Los Vinos on Tenerife housed 34children; the emergency center in Las Mercedes on Tenerife housed 25 children;and the emergency center in Salto del Negro on Gran Canaria was home to 16children. Canary Islands authorities closed the center in Las Mercedes inmid-April.[22]Decree 40/2000, of March 15, Approving the Reglementation for theOrganization and Functioning of Attention Centers for Children in the CanaryIslands (por el que se aprueba el reglamento de organización y funcionamientode los centros de atención a menores en el ámbito de la ComunidadAutónoma Canaria), arts. 17-20. Human Rights Watch visitednumerous CAMEs during our 2007 research and found conditions, with fewexceptions, to be satisfactory. See Unwelcome Responsibilities.[23]Ibid., arts. 13-16.[24]United Nations Fund for Children (UNICEF), Children inInstitutions: The Beginning of the End? (Florence: Innocenti ResearchCenter), pp. v-vi.[25] EFE, “Two Children Detained for Sexual Assault against aSubsaharian Child in Icod” (Detenidos dos menores por agrésion sexuala un niño subsahariano en Icod), El Día, April 27, 2008;News Agencies, “A 17-year-old Child is Detained in La Laguna overStabbing” (Un menor de 17 años es detenido en La Laguna acusado deapuñalamiento), La Opinión, July 30, 2009; EFE, “AMigrant Child in Serious Conditions after Falling from Window in a TenerifeCenter” (Un menor inmigrante, grave tras caerse de una ventana en un centrode Tenerife), Canarias 7, October 19, 2008; Pedro Fumero, “Complaintabout Food Provokes Fight in Tegueste Center for Migrants” (La queja porla comida provocó la pelea en el centro de extranjeros de Tegueste), ElDía, October 27, 2009; B. Molina, “Three Fights in TeguesteCenter in Only One Week” (Tres altercados en el centro de Tegueste ensólo una semana), January 28, 2009; Pedro Fumero, “Moroccan ChildDies Due to Fall at Nivaria Center” (Muere en el hospital el menormagrebí que sufrió una caída grave en Nivaria), ElDía, February 14, 2010.[26] Human Rights Watch interview with Gabriel Orihuela, director, Arinagacenter, February 21, 2010; with Carmen Steinert Cruz, director general, ChildProtection Directorate, Canary Islands Government, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, February17, 2010; EFE, “Migrant Children and Neighbors Fight with Sticks andStones” (Inmigrantes menores y vecinos se pelean con palos y piedras), ElDía, February 2, 2010; Europa Press, “Three Migrant Childrenfrom Arinaga Center Charged Over Violent Incident with Neighbors”(Imputados tres menores del centro de inmigrantes de Arinaga por unenfrentamiento con vecinos), Canarias 7, February 4, 2010.[27]This violent incident occurred despite various initiatives by the director ofArinaga center to promote children’s integration into the localneighborhood, such as the painting of houses with local residents.[28]Europa Press, “Three Migrant Children from Arinaga Chargedfor Violent Encounter with Neighbours” (Imputado tres menores del centrode inmigrantes de Arinaga por un enfrentamiento con vecinos), Canarias 7,February 4, 2010.[29]Human Rights Watch interview with Manuel Campos, children’s prosecutor,Santa Cruz de Tenerife, February 18, 2010; with Caroline Miranda, director ofla Esperanza emergency center1, February 18, 2010.[30]Besides autonomous leave, children can leave in groups and accompanied bycenter staff with transportation offered by the center. One boy told us thecenter car takes children to places with few tourists not to create too muchattention. Human Rights Watch interview with Mohamed S. (exact date and placewithheld).[31]One boy who was transferred from La Esperanza to the emergency center of LasMercedes told us that he suffered sometimes as much from the cold in LasMercedes center as in La Esperanza. Human Rights Watch interview with Lakh S.(exact date and place withheld).[32]Human Rights Watch interview with staff of La Esperanza center (name, date, andplace of interview withheld).[33]Human Rights Watch interview with Saliou N. (exact date and place withheld).[34]Human Rights Watch interview with staff of La Esperanza center (name, date, andplace of interview withheld).[35]Human Rights Watch interview with Moussa P. (exact date and place withheld).[36]Human Rights Watch interview with Yunus B. (exact date and place withheld).[37]Human Rights Watch interview with Yunus B. (exact date and place withheld).[38]Human Rights Watch interview with staff of La Esperanza center (name, date, andplace of interview withheld).[39]The term “educator” (educador) refers to general staffworking in residential centers, and not those who provide education forchildren in centers.[40]Human Rights Watch interview with former staff of La Esperanza center (name,date, and place of interview withheld).[41]Human Rights Watch interview with staff of La Esperanza center (name, date, andplace of interview withheld).[42]Unwelcome Responsibilities, pp. 76-78.[43]Human Rights Watch interview with Yunus B. (exact date and place withheld).[44]Human Rights Watch interview with staff of La Esperanza (name, date, and placeof interview withheld).[45]Human Rights Watch interview with former staff of La Esperanza (name, date, andplace of interview withheld).[46]Human Rights Watch interview with Carolina Miranda, director of la Esperanzaemergency center, February 18, 2010.[47]Human Rights Watch interview with Ahmad R. (exact date and place withheld).[48]Human Rights Watch interview with Mohamed S. (exact date and place withheld).[49]Human Rights Watch interview with Ousmane A. (exact date and place withheld).[50]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdul R. (exact date and place withheld).[51]Human Rights Watch interview with Rashid D. (exact date and place withheld).[52]Human Rigths Watch interview with Papis T. (exact date and place withheld).[53]Human Rights Watch interview with Zubair F. (exact date and place withheld).[54]Human Rights Watch interview with a staff member of La Esperanza center (name,date, and place of interview withheld).[55]Human Rights Watch interview with Yunus B. (exact date and place withheld).[56]Human Rights Watch interview with a staff member of La Esperanza center (name,date, and place of interview withheld).[57]Human Rights Watch interview with Carolina Miranda, director of La Esperanzaemergency center, February 18, 2010.[58]The prosecutors on Gran Canaria shared concerns that staff may not always bewell prepared or trained for their work. Human Rights Watch interview with MontserratGarcía Diez, prosecutor for children (fiscal de menores), and withGuillermo Garcia-Panasco Morales, chief prosecutor (fiscal jefe), Las Palmas deGran Canaria, February 22, 2010.[59]Human Rights Watch interview with a staff member of La Esperanza center (name,exact date and place of interview withheld).[60]Human Rights Watch interview with a former staff member of La Esperanza center(name, date, and place of interview withheld).[61]Human Rights Watch interview with staff of La Esperanza center (name, date, andplace of interview withheld). The director of Arinaga center told us that drugabuse was a recurring phenomenon in his center. He has set up a project andsends children to local programs for drug-consuming youths. Human Rights Watchinterview with Gabriel Orihuela, director, Arinaga center, February 21, 2010.[62]According to a former and current staff, educators at La Esperanza emergencycenter earn 860 Euros per month. One staff told us they do not receive extrapay for shifts at night or on weekends. Human Rights Watch interviews withformer and current staff of La Esperanza center (names, dates, and places ofinterview withheld).[63]At the time of our visit, 14 children had been sent to juvenile detentioncenter in Tabares valley.[64]Human Rights Watch interview with Yunus B. (exact date and place withheld).[65]Human Rights Watch interview with Saliou N. (exact date and place withheld).[66]Human Rights Watch interview with Papis T. (exact date and place withheld).[67]Human Rights Watch interview with staff of La Esperanza (name, date, and placeof interview withheld).[68]Human Rights Watch interview with a former staff member of La Esperanza (name,date, and place of interview withheld).[69]Human Rights Watch interview with Moussa P. (exact date and place withheld).[70]Human Rights Watch interview with Gabriel Orihuela, director, Arinaga emergencycenter, February 21, 2010.[71]CRC, arts. 3(1)(3) and 25.[72]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No.16) at 52, U.N. Doc.A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23, 1976, ratified bySpain on April 27, 1972, art. 7. European Convention for the Protection ofHuman Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR), 213 U.N.T.S. 222, entered intoforce September 21, 1970, December 20, 1971, January 1, 1990, and November 1,1998, respectively, ratified by Spain on October 4, 1979, art.3. CRC, art.37(a).[73]CRC, arts. 20, 19, and 27.[74]The Council of Europe’s Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT)assessed conditions for unaccompanied migrant children at La Esperanzaemergency center in September 2007, as part of its periodic visit to Spain. The Spanish government to date has not agreed to make the CPT’s report public.[75]Unwelcome Responsibilities, pp. 55-69, 81-98.[76]EFE, “The Canary Islands are the Guardian for 727 Unaccompanied MigrantChildren” (Canarias tutela a 727 menores inmigrantes no acompañados),El Día, March 31, 2010. “Closure of MigrantChildren’s Center in La Orotava Due to Decrease in Cayucos” (Cierrael centro de menores extranjeros de La Orotava ante el descenso de cayucos), ElDía, December 15, 2009. The center in Icod proved not immuneagainst serious abuses when a local newspaper reported the detention of twoboys for sexual assault of another boy. EFE, “Two Children Detained forSexual Assault against a Sub-Saharan Child in Icod” (Detenidos dos menorespor agrésion sexual a un niño subsahariano en Icod), El Día,April 27, 2008.[77]Unwelcome Responsibilities, pp. 64-67. Because of La Esperanza’sisolated location, children said their leave from 4pm – 8pm was too shortbecause they had to spend a large part of that time on the road to the nearesttown.[78]Human Rights Watch interview with Manuel Campos, children’s prosecutor (fiscalde menores), Santa Cruz de Tenerife, February 18, 2010; Human Rights Watchinterview with Montserrat García Diez, children’s prosecutor (fiscalde menores), and with Guillermo Garcia-Panasco Morales, chief prosecutor (fiscaljefe), Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, February 22, 2010.There is oneprosecutor office for Gran Canaria province, and one for Santa Cruz de Tenerifeprovince. Gran Canaria province covers Gran Canaria and all islands east of it,Santa Cruz de Tenerife province covers Tenerife and all Islands west ofit.[79]Human Rights Watch meeting with Carmen Steinert Cruz, general director of childprotection services, Canary Islands government, Santa Cruz de Tenerife,February 17, 2010.[80]Human Rights Watch interview with Manual Campos, children’s prosecutor, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, February 18, 2010.[81]Human Rights Watch interview with Mohamed S. (exact date and place withheld).[82]Human Rights Watch interview with staff of La Esperanza center (name, date, andplace of interview withheld).[83]Human Rights Watch interview with Mohamed S. (exact date and place withheld).[84]Human Rights Watch interview with Youssouf I. (exact date and place withheld).[85]Human Rights Watch interviews with staff of La Esperanza and with staff ofanother emergency center (names, dates, and places of interview withheld).[86]Human Rights Watch interview with Moussa P. (exact date and place withheld).[87]Human Rights Watch interview with Assane C. (exact date and place withheld).[88]Human Rights Watch interview with Lakh S. (exact date and place withheld).[89]Human Rights Watch interview with Amadou M. (exact date and place withheld).[90]Human Rights Watch interview with Zubair F. (exact date and place withheld).[91]Human Rights Watch interview with staff of La Esperanza center (name, date, andplace of interview withheld).[92]CRC, arts. 3(3), 19, and 25.[93]Human Rights Watch interview with Carmen Steinert Cruz, February 17, 2010.[94]CRC, art.3; UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 6,para. 33. Spanish law goes further than the UN Convention on the Rights of theChild and stipulates that the best interest of the child trumps any otherconsideration. Organic Law 1/1996, art. 2.[95]See Unwelcome Responsibilities, pp. 16-18, 89-93, for a discussion ofguardianship system and residential centers for migrant children in the Canary Islands.[96]Human Rights Watch interview with José Manuel Barreiro Vilas, director,Tegueste emergency center, February 17, 2010; with Carolina Miranda, directorof La Esperanza emergency center, February 18, 2010. We were told that socialworkers in emergency centers sometimes consult with outside lawyers for helpover legal questions. Human Rights Watch interview with Ataretaco Foundation, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, February 19, 2010.[97]Human Rights Watch interview with a staff member of emergency center (name,date and place of interview withheld).[98]Human Rights Watch interview with Lakh S. (exact date and place withheld).[99]Human Rights Watch interview with Mohamed S. (exact date and place withheld).[100]CRC, arts. 3(1) and 12.[101]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 6, para. 40.[102]OrganicLaw 2/2009, of December 11, modifying Organic Law 4/2000, of January 11, on theRights and Freedoms of Foreigners in Spain and their Social Integration (Sobrederechos y libertades de los extranjeros en España y su integraciónsocial), art. 35(7). Royal Decree 2393/2004, of December 30, approving theReglementation of Organic Law 4/2000, of January 11, on the Rights and Freedomsof Foreigners in Spain and their Social Integration, arts. 36 and 37(4). Theissuing of a temporary residence permit for unaccompanied children does notforeclose their possible repatriation, if such is deemed in their bestinterest. Those young adults who turned 18 and need to renew their residencepermit may apply for a new permit up to three months after their residencepermit expired. Requirements to obtain a new permit include proof of a permanentaddress and sufficient economic means, for example through a work contract.[103]Ibid.[104]We documented in 2007 that children are deliberately issued residence permitsthat expire the day they have to leave the center: UnwelcomeResponsibilities, pp. 39-42.[105]There are a couple of centers that offer temporary accommodation for adultmigrants in the Canary Island but places available are very limited and mostchildren are not referred to such centers. One staff member of an emergencycenter also told us that some educators helped children and took them intotheir homes for a limited period of time after they turned 18. Human Rights Watchinterview with staff member of La Esperanza center (name, exact date and placeof interview withheld).[106]Human Rights Watch interview with Gabriel Orihuela, director, Arinaga center,February 21, 2010. The issuing of residence permit is the responsibility of thecentral government representative in the Canary Islands, and does not fallunder the authority of the Canary Islands government.[107]Human Rights Watch interview with Salem R. (exact date and place withheld).[108]The formerSpanish immigration law provided for documentation to be issued by Spain in the absence of an identification document through a foreigner’s diplomaticrepresentation. The revised immigration law adopted in late 2009 is silent onthis question, and no regulation on the new law’s implementation had beenadopted when this report went to press.[109]Human Rights Watch interview with Assane C. (exact date and place withheld).[110]Human Rights Watch interview with Papis T. (exact date and place withheld).[111]Email communication from Human Rights Watch to Carmen Steinert Cruz, March 9,2010.[112]GranCanaria prosecutor office told us they considered taking legal action on behalfof children, but added this may not be successful, as the only body authorizedto file an appeal on behalf of children is their guardianship institution, theCanary Islands Child Protection Directorate. Human Rights Watch interview withMontserrat García Diez and Guillermo Garcia-Panasco Morales, Las Palmasde Gran Canaria, February 22, 2010.[113]The director of Arinaga center told us that few children at the center managedto secure work contracts before leaving. Human Rights Watch interview withGabriel Orihuela, Arinaga center, February 21, 2010.[114]Human Rights Watch interview with staff of emergency center (name, exact dateand place of interview withheld).[115]Human Rights Watch interview with Ousmane A. (exact date and place withheld).[116]Human Rights Watch interview with staff of emergency center (name, exact dateand place of interview withheld).[117]Human Rights Watch interview with Mohamed S. (exact date and place withheld).[118]CRC,art. 3(1), UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No.6,paras. 79-90.[119]HumanRights Watch interview with Montserrat García Diez and GuillermoGarcia-Panasco Morales, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, February 22, 2010.The Canary Islands proposed the return of 288 unaccompanied migrant children in 2008. Ministryof Labor and Immigration (Ministerio de Trabajo e Inmigración),“Unaccompanied Migrant Children” (Menores Extranjeros no Acompañados),February 5, 2009. Thedocument is on file with Human Rights Watch.[120]Human Rights Watch interview with Kimi Aoki, lawyer, CEAR, Las Palmas de GranCanaria, February 22, 2010, and with Rocío Cuellar, lawyer, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, February 19, 2010. Human Rights Watch referred one of the twochildren who had asked for asylum to CEAR after interviewing the boy in 2007.[121]UNHCR has carried out one workshop in 2008, and one in 2009. Approximately 25of the 100 participants in these trainings were staff in direct or indirectcontact with unaccompanied migrant children in care centers, includingemergency centers and CAMEs. Human Rights Watch telephone interview withMargarita de la Rasilla, UNHCR Spain, April 20, 2010. There are almost 30different centers for unaccompanied migrant children on seven different Islands in the Canaries. Due to the large number of centers and because of staff turn-over,the number or percentage of staff who have undergone training and currently areworking with children remains very limited and cannot be quantified.[122]Human Rights Watch interview with staff of emergency center (name, date andplace of interview withheld).[123]UNHCRconcluded in early 2009 that there are no procedures in place to identifyrefugees or potential asylum seekers among unaccompanied migrant children inthe Canary Islands. It concluded these children do not have access to theasylum procedure unless they proactively request to file an asylum application.United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, “Refugee Protection andInternational Migration: a Review of UNHCR’s Role in the Canary Islands, Spain,” PDES/2009/01, April 2009, http://www.unhcr.org/4a1d2d7d6.html(accessed March 30, 2010), p. 17.Child-specific forms of persecution or rightsviolations that may justify the granting of refugee status include under-agerecruitment of children; trafficking of children for prostitution; sexualexploitation or female genital mutilation. UN Committee on the Rights of theChild, General Comment No.6, para. 74. Some scholars argue that the recentjurisprudence expanded the meaning of persecution to include severalchild-specific forms, such as child abuse, child sale and trafficking, orvulnerabilities arising out of being a street child. Also, certain behavior(such as the witnessing the death of close relatives) do not rise to thethreshold of persecution for an adult but may do so for a child. See JacquelineBhabha, "Children, Migration and International Norms," in T.Alexander Aleinikoff & Vincent Chetail, Migration and InternationalLegal Norms (T.M.C.Asser Press: The Hague, 2003), p. 217.Related ContentJune 22, 2010News ReleaseSpain: Migrant Children at RiskAbolish Emergency Regime for Unaccompanied Children in Canary IslandsJune 22, 2010News ReleaseSpain: Migrant Children at RiskRegion / CountryEurope/Central Asia SpainProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch