"I've Never Experienced Happiness": Child Marriage in Malawi | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportMarch 6, 2014"I've Never Experienced Happiness"Child Marriage in MalawiA 14-year-old girl holds her baby at her sister’s home in a village in Kanduku, in Malawi’s Mwanza district. She married in September 2013, but her husband chased her away. Her 15-year-old sister, in the background, married when she was 12. Both sisters said they married to escape poverty© 2014 Human Rights Watch“I’ve NeverExperienced Happiness”Child Marriage in MalawiMap of MalawiGlossarySummaryKey RecommendationsTo the President of MalawiTo the Ministry of Justice andConstitutional AffairsTo the Ministry of Gender, Childrenand Community DevelopmentTo the Ministry of EducationTo the Ministry of HealthTo United Nations Agencies and InternationalDonorsMethodologyBackground: Rights of Women and Girlsin MalawiWomen’s Legal and Social StatusLiteracy and Access to EducationViolence against Women and GirlsReproductive, Maternal, and ChildHealthChild MarriageI. Child Marriage: Harm and RightsViolationsLimited Literacy and Access toEducationSexual Violence, Domestic Abuse, andAbandonmentAdverse Health ConsequencesII. Malawi’s Laws on ChildMarriageExisting LawsMinimum Age for Marriage, SexualConsentCurrent Legal Developments onMarriage AgeDefinition of a ChildBirth and Marriage RegistrationsIII. Right to Redress for ChildMarriage VictimsLack of SheltersProsecution versus Mediation: Policeand Judicial PerspectivesTraining for Law Enforcement OfficersCoordination among GovernmentAgenciesNational Action PlanSeeking Help and Enforcing RightsIV. Malawi’s InternationalLegal Obligations  on Child MarriageObligation to Enforce ConsistentDefinition of a Child, Minimum Marriage Age, and Birth and MarriageRegistrationRights to Equality andNon-DiscriminationRight to Consent to Marriage, Choosea SpouseRight of Children to Express TheirViews FreelyRight to HealthRight to EducationRight to be Free from Physical,Mental, and Sexual ViolenceRecommendationsTo the President of MalawiTo the Ministry of Justice andConstitutional AffairsTo the Ministry of Gender, Childrenand Community DevelopmentTo the Ministry of Home Affairs andInternal SecurityTo the Ministry of EducationTo the Ministry of HealthTo the JudiciaryTo the Malawi Human Rights CommissionTo United Nations Agencies andInternational DonorsMap of MalawiClick to expand ImageGlossaryThis report uses the following definitions:“Child”is used to refer to anyone under the age of 18, consistent with usage underinternational law.“Girl”refers to a female child under age 18.“Childmarriage” refers to a union where either spouse is below 18years of age.“Marriage”is used in its widest sense to cover a betrothal or union between two people,recognized under civil law, religious law, or customary rites, and understoodto be binding by the spouses concerned, their families and the widercommunity, whether or not it has been formally registered in law.“Forcedmarriage” refers to a union in which there is the absence offree and full consent of one or both parties. It encompasses related harmfulpractices such as wife inheritance, bride kidnapping, girl-childcompensation, and marriage as dispute settlement or debt payment, which arepracticed in Malawi.“Sexwork” refers to the commercial exchange of sexual services.“Commercialsexual exploitation” of children refers to sexual abuse by theadult and remuneration in cash or kind to the child or third persons.“Childprotection worker” refers to child protection workers employedby the Malawi Ministry of Gender, Children and Community Development.SummaryTwo years ago, when she was 12 years old, Chimwemwe K.married a 17-year-old boy. She had started a sexual relationship with him whenshe was 10 because, she said, he gave her money and small gifts, while at homeher parents could not afford to buy her clothes or provide enough food.Chimwemwe became pregnant shortly after, and their families forced them tomarry. Chimwemwe said about the marriage: “It was my only solution frompoverty, and I was pregnant.”Chimwemwe today says, “I’ve never experiencedhappiness in my marriage. I’ve never seen the benefit of being married.”Her husband beats her and she almost died when she was giving birth: “Ibled a lot and I was in labor for two days.”Chimwemwe has not reported her husband to the police for theviolence because, “I fear my husband will be arrested and I don’twant to go back to my parents. So I would rather live with him even if he beatsme.” Chimwemwe has never thought of leaving her abusive husband because,“I cannot manage on my own. Also, if I chase him away I will face stigmafrom the community.”Chimwemwe dropped out of school in standard four (equivalentto fourth grade) but says she does not want to go back because “I was notgood with books.”Chimwemwe’s experience reflects a common reality formany girls in Malawi, which has one of the highest rates of child marriage inthe world. On average, one out of two girls in the country will be married byher eighteenth birthday, according to the United Nations. In 2010, half ofwomen aged 20 to 24 years were married or in union before they were 18. Someare as young as 9 or 10 when they are married.Many Malawian communities see child marriage as being in thebest interests of girls and their families. Some families see it as animportant way to improve their economic status, sometimes through payment ofdowry by the groom to the bride’s family, or through continued support bytheir daughter’s husband. For some girls, marriage may suggest a route,often unfulfilled, to escape poverty. Child marriage is also deeply entrenchedin Malawi’s traditions and patriarchal cultures, which encourage earlysexual initiation and marriage and women’s subordination in society, butstigmatize adolescent pregnancy. Marriage is regarded as a means of protectinggirls who get pregnant from undermining family honor.Child marriage has a negative impact on girl’s andwomen’s realization of key human rights, including their rights tohealth, education, to be free from physical, mental, and sexual violence, andto marry only when they are able and willing to give their free and fullconsent. The younger the age of marriage the more serious these impactsare.Girls told Human Rights Watch that marriage interrupted orended their education. Many said that they found it difficult to return toschool after marriage because of lack of money for school fees, lack of childcare, unavailability of flexible school programs or adult classes, and the needto do household chores. Others said that their husbands or in-laws would notallow them to continue school after marriage. In adulthood, many child brides remained financially dependent on often abusive spouses in partbecause they lacked the education and skills needed toprovide for themselves and their families.Human Rights Watch documented cases inwhich child marriage exposed girls to gender-based violence, including domesticand sexual violence. Some girls who rejected forced marriages said theywere threatened, verbally abused, or thrown out of their homes by their families.Others told us they were verbally or physically assaulted by their husbands andin-laws. Still others said their husbands abandoned them and left them to carefor children without any financial support, thus increasing the likelihood oftheir being impoverished. We also learned of cases in which child marriage ledgirls into commercial sexual exploitation and child labor.Many girls we interviewed had suffered emotionally andpsychologically. They said they were unhappy in their marriages and regrettedhaving married early. Health workers described the reproductivehealth harms and risks of early pregnancy when girls marry young, including maternaldeath, obstetric fistula, premature delivery, and anaemia. The shortage ofprenatal and postnatal health care services, especially in Malawi’s ruralareas, increases these risks. Health workers also talked about the avoidablecosts of early pregnancy to the health care system.Based on extensive interviews with girls and women in sixdistricts in Central and Southern Malawi, and with government officials,magistrates, child protection workers, police officers in charge of childprotection, traditional and religious leaders, health workers, and experts,this report describes factors contributing to child marriage, the severeconsequences of child marriage, the risks that girls face when they resistthese marriages, and the abuses they frequently face in marriage. It alsoexamines the absence of protection for victims of child marriage and the manyobstacles they face in attempting to obtain redress; as well as shortcomings inexisting programs to combat child marriage.Malawi has adopted major legislative and policy reforms inthe area of women’s human rights including a Gender Equality Act in 2013that promotes gender equality in the areas of education and reproductivehealth. The government also amended the Penal Code Act in 2011 to raise the ageof sexual consent from 13 to 16 years. Malawi’s laws also have importantprotections for girls and women that prohibit forced marriage, criminalize theabduction of girls under 16, and prohibit discrimination against women andgirls. In addition, parliament in October 2013 passed the Education Bill,making education universal and compulsory for all – a big advancement forgirls’ access to education. Many girls also benefit from a“readmission” policy that allows girls who become pregnant while inschool or who drop out due to marriage to continue with school. However, Malawilacks a comprehensive adolescent reproductive health policy and strategy toaddress its high rates of teenage pregnancy.Human Rights Watch found that Malawi’s government hasfailed to enforce existing legal protections against child marriage, and todevelop and implement a comprehensive national child marriage plan.Although Malawi has adopted some important laws and policiesto protect women’s and girls’ rights, existing laws provide onlypartial protection. Malawi’s laws do not explicitly prohibit childmarriage, and there is no set minimum age of marriage. The laws also fail toconsistently define who is a child, to require free and full consent tomarriage, and to criminalize marital rape. The government has yet to enact theMarriage, Divorce and Family Relations Bill , a comprehensive family lawdeveloped in 2006 that has stronger protections from child and forced marriageand provides 18 as the minimum marriage age.Victims of child marriage in Malawi face many barriers ingetting help from authorities. Many girls and women do not know what theirrights are under the law, or do not know where to look for assistance otherthan from their own families or traditional authorities, who often fail them.The absence of clear family legislation means that most matters relating tomarriage, divorce, maintenance payments, and domestic violence are handled throughcustomary procedures.Neither the customary systems nor the judicial courtssucceed in providing adequate redress to survivors of gender-based violence.Both systems, but especially customary processes, prioritize “familyreconciliation” over prosecution, supposedly because it maintains familyunity and community peace. But this is often at the expense of the security ofsurvivors and their ability to obtain justice for serious harms suffered.These problems are compounded and perpetuated by poorcoordination among government agencies responsible for responding to violenceagainst women; little or no monitoring of cases handled by officials from theseagencies; negligent and dismissive police responses to reports of violenceagainst women; lack of infrastructure, resources, and well-trained personnel inthe justice system; and widespread and deep-seated discriminatory attitudes towardswomen. Moreover, Malawi does not have sufficient specialized safe spaces wherevictims of forced marriage and other gender-related abuses can find shelter andprotection.Today, the government and domestic and internationalnongovernmental organizations with the assistance of international donors areimplementing programs to address child marriage and widespread violence againstwomen in Malawi. But little effort is devoted to evaluating the effectivenessof these programs systematically. Proper evaluation of existing programs wouldassist the government in developing a comprehensive plan or strategy detailingspecific and targeted action to end child marriage.Human Rights Watch calls on the Malawi government to take immediateand long-term measures to protect girls from child and forced marriage andensure the fulfillment of their human rights, in accordance with itsinternational human rights obligations. Reforms are needed now to mitigate thefar-reaching harms of child marriage and its negative implications for Malawi’sfuture development.Key RecommendationsTothe President of MalawiSign into law the Education Bill that was passed byparliament in October 2013.Publicly support the prompt enactment of the Marriage,Divorce and Family Relations Bill, calling on relevant government agenciesto consult and take the required legislative steps for passage.Tothe Ministry of Justice and Constitutional AffairsTake the necessary legislative steps for the enactment ofthe Marriage, Divorce, and Family Relations Bill, and together withrelevant ministries and government agencies, promptly carry out itsprovisions.Together with the Ministry of Home Affairs and InternalSecurity, provide regular training for police and prosecutors on their legalresponsibilities to investigate and prosecute violence against women,including child marriage, under the applicable law. Trainings shouldclarify that child marriage can be prosecuted as a crime in addition tousing Penal Code provisions on defilement and abduction.Tothe Ministry of Gender, Children and Community DevelopmentCreate a national action plan to combat child marriage,with input from women’s and children’s rights groups, healthprofessionals, and other service providers; coordinating efforts among allrelevant ministries; and ensure sufficient resources to implement theplan.Tothe Ministry of EducationAfter the Education Bill becomes law:Develop a comprehensive plan to implement the provisionon compulsory education.Initiate a national awareness raising campaign on the educationlaw, with particular attention to compulsory education.Tothe Ministry of HealthDevelop and implement a national policy and strategy onadolescent reproductive health. Both the policy and the strategy shouldhave a strong focus on the right to access health information andservices, including contraception, and address factors that contribute tounplanned pregnancies.ToUnited Nations Agencies and International DonorsSupport nongovernmental organizations to monitor andevaluate programs on violence against women, including child marriage, andto use this information to improve programing.Support the establishment and maintenance of shelters forsurvivors of gender-based violence.MethodologyThis report is based on field research Human Rights Watch conductedbetween September and December 2013 in Chikwawa, Mangochi, and Mwanza districtsin Southern Malawi; and Dowa, Lilongwe, and Nkhotakota districts in CentralMalawi. Interviews were also conducted by phone and email. Human Rights Watchselected the districts in which to conduct the research in consultation withlocal organizations working on women’s rights and on child marriage. Districtswere selected in order to reflect cultural and religious variations in thecountry.Human Rights Watch also reviewed laws, policies, officialgovernment strategies, and reports by academics, national and internationalorganizations, and United Nations agencies. We conducted an extensive review ofliterature on child marriage in Malawi and other countries in which there aresimilar consequences on the lives of girls and women.Human Rights Watch researchers interviewed 80 girls andwomen: 34 were currently married; 15 had been married but left the marriagesfor various reasons; 17 were unmarried teenage mothers, some of them in school;and 14 were primary or secondary students who had not married or been pregnant.Some girls and women were unsure about their age, but most girls and women weinterviewed were married or became pregnant as children, under the age of 18.Human Rights Watch interviewed women individually and insmall groups. We conducted 53 individual and 27 group interviews. Most groupinterviews involved four to seven girls and women. A key focus of theseinterviews was on girls’ access to education, but interviewees alsorelayed experiences of marriage of their sisters and friends.Individual girls and women were identified with theassistance of local nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) providing services towomen, and by district youth officers. Human Rights Watch conducted mostinterviews in confidential settings. Where we interviewed women in theirvillages, the interviews took place in their homes with as much privacy aspossible. We informed all participants of the purpose of the interview, itsvoluntary nature, and the ways the information would be used. Each orallyconsented to be interviewed. We told participants they could decline to answerquestions or end the interview at any time, particularly where they wererecounting traumatic personal experiences.Interviews lasted between 30 minutes and one hour. HumanRights Watch conducted some interviews in English but most in Chichewa with theassistance of a female interpreter. We took care to minimize the risk to womenand girls who were recounting difficult experiences that could furthertraumatize them. Where appropriate, Human Rights Watch provided contactinformation for organizations offering legal, social, or counseling services.We gave Interviewees no material compensation for participating, but reimbursedthe cost of public transport to and from the interview.Human Rights Watch also interviewed government officials inthe Ministries of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; Home Affairs and InternalSecurity; Education; and Health. We also spoke to the director of public prosecutionsand officials from the Malawi Human Rights Commission. We had hoped to includethe perspectives of the Ministry of Gender, Children and Community Development.But despite repeated requests, the ministry did not grant us a meeting.We interviewed6 magistrates (one in each district wevisited); 19 child protection workers, including 13 police officers in chargeof child protection; 8 social welfare officers; 12 traditional leaders; 2religious leaders; 8 health workers; and 2 district youth officers. We alsoobserved 6 Victim Support Units at police stations. Finally, we alsointerviewed 27 representatives of NGOs working on women’s andchildren’s rights; as well as officials from the United Nations andinternational donor organizations.Some girls were unsure about their exact ages or dates ofbirth. This report uses the estimates provided by the girls – many saidthat their parents had told them their age. Where we felt the estimate was toolow or high we have mentioned that the girl looked older or younger.The report uses pseudonyms to protect the privacy andsecurity of the women and girls interviewed. We selected pseudonyms randomly,and they may not reflect the interviewee’s ethnicity or region. We havealso sometimes withheld the exact dates of interviews, the location ofinterviews, as well as additional identifying details.Background: Rights ofWomen and Girls in MalawiMalawi has a population of 13.2 million people, the great majorityof whom (85 percent) live in rural areas.[1] The country is one ofthe world’s poorest with a gross national per capita income of US$320.[2]More than half (51 percent) of the population is considered poor.[3]More women than men are poor.[4]Most women are employed in the agricultural sector that is the mainstay ofMalawi’s economy, but they earn less than their male counterparts.[5]Of those in non-agriculture waged employment, 21 percent are women, while 79percent are men, and the numbers have not changed in recent years.[6]Malawi’s human development challenges are reflected in its ranking of 170out of 187 countries on the United Nations’ Human Development Index.[7]Women’s Legal andSocial StatusMalawi’s Constitution recognizes women’s rightto full and equal protection by the law, and non-discrimination on the basis oftheir gender or marital status.[8]The constitution calls for legislation to eliminate customs and practices thatdiscriminate against women.[9]The Malawi government has developed laws, policies, and programs that promoteprotection and respect for women’s and girls’ human rights.[10]It is also developing a national gender policy. The government’sblueprint for development, the Malawi Growth and Development Strategy II (MGDS)2011-2016, promotes gender equality and gender mainstreaming in all sectors.[11]In practice, however, women’s rights in Malawi remainlargely curtailed. Malawi is ranked 124 out of 148 countries in the 2012 UN GgenderIinequality Iindex.[12]Patriarchal beliefs and attitudes still prevail and traditional and culturalpractices, many of which are harmful to human rights, shape the lives of womenand girls.[13]The unequal status of women in Malawi is further affected by the inter-lockingfactors of general poverty and discriminatory treatment in the family andpublic life. Both matrilineal and patrilineal systems operate in Malawi’sethnic groups and both perpetuate discrimination against women in the family.[14]Literacy and Access toEducationDespite the government’sefforts to advance the rights of girls’ access to education, there remainsignificant gender disparities in educational opportunities. The proportion ofthose who have never attended school is higher among women, estimated at 28percent, compared to 14 percent of men.[15] More boys than girls enrollin secondary school.[16]Of the 74 percent of the population aged 15 years and above that have notattained any educational qualification, 80 percent are women.[17] Theliteracy rate is 65 percent, and more men (74 percent) than women (57 percent)are literate.[18]Many girls drop out of school as a result of pregnancy. Dataon girls who drop out due to marriage and pregnancy is not comprehensive.However, available data shows that between 2010 and 2013, 27,612 girls inprimary and 4,053 girls in secondary schools dropped out due to marriage.[19]During the same period, another 14,051 primary school girls and 5,597 secondaryschool girls dropped out because they were pregnant.[20]Violence against Women and GirlsViolence against women in Malawi appears widespread. A 2005study of intimate partner violence – the first nationally representativestudy – found that 49 percent of women, or nearly half, have experiencedsome form of abuse by their intimate partner.[21] According to the 2010Demographic Health Survey (DHS), of all women and girls aged 15 - 49 in Malawi,approximately 41 percent have experienced physical or sexual violence.[22]Many have experienced controlling behaviors from a husband or intimate partner,such as insisting on knowing where they are at all times (51 percent), andbeing jealous or angry if they talk to other men (43 percent).[23]A 2012 study looking at domestic violence against pregnant women at a districthospital in southern Malawi found that 59 percent had been psychologically,physically, or sexually abused during pregnancy.[24]The 2010 DHS found that levels of physical and sexualviolence against women have generally not changed since the 2004 DHS.[25]The study also showed that younger women, women who are divorced, separated, orwidowed, and women with less than a secondary education, are more likely toexperience violence.[26]Most violence against women occurs in the home, within the family unit.[27]Common perpetrators of physical and sexual violence against women are currentor former intimate partners.[28]Violence against women is frequently viewed as a private family affair and fewwomen report it.[29]Roughly one in three women, 36 percent, who experience physical or sexual violencenever tell anyone about it, and nearly half, 48 percent, never seek help.[30]Poor implementation of laws,gaps in laws, and cultural attitudes that condone violence against women aremajor challenges in preventing abuse.[31]The Prevention of Domestic Violence Act is thought to have been largelyineffectual in protecting victims of domestic violence.[32]Malawi’s Penal Code criminalizes assault, rape, andattempted rape but does not criminalize marital rape.[33] Itsets the age of sexual consent at 16 for girls.[34] Thedefinition of rape in the Penal Code is limited. It addresses women and girlsonly, and it does not address forced anal sex, or forced non-penile penetrationof the vagina or anus as constituting rape. Malawi lacks a sexual offense lawto address these gaps. However, there is scope to include a broader perspectiveon sexual violence in the Prevention of Domestic Violence Act, which iscurrently being reviewed by the Malawi Law Commission.The government is also reviewing its strategy for addressinggender-based violence, the National Response to Combat Gender-Based Violence,2008-2013. It is not clear what impact this strategy has had. The strategy didnot address child marriage and many of the NGOs with whom Human Rights Watch spokedid not even know that this strategy existed.A number of international andnational NGOs have been trying to address the problem of violence againstwomen, but resources are scarce. The Malawi police service, with support fromvarious government ministries and UN agencies, especially UNICEF, has developedVictim Support Units (VSUs), Community Victim Support Units (CVSUs) and OneStop Centers to help women and child survivors of violence. According toUNICEF, there are 400 VSUs and 250 CVSUs in the country, and four hospitals infour major towns host One Stop Centers.[35]Reproductive, Maternal, andChild HealthMalawi’s government, with substantial international donorsupport, has made efforts to improve the quality and availability of healthservices, including through increased financing to the health sector.[36]There have been specific efforts to improve reproductive health care, forexample, through increasing access to family planning services, and encouragingpregnant women to deliver in health facilities.[37]The Ministry of Health has developed a National Sexual and Reproductive Healthand Rights Policy and a National Sexual and Reproductive Health and RightsStrategy, 2011 - 2016. There is a Road Map for Accelerating the Reduction ofMaternal and Neonatal Morbidity and Mortality in Malawi. The Ministry of Healthdeveloped the Malawi Health Sector Strategic Plan (MHSSP) 2011-2016, whichfocuses on attainment of the UN Millennium Development Goals (MDGs),mainstreaming gender issues in the planning and implementation of all healthprograms, and tracking them for impact.[38] All of these identifychild marriage as a contributing factor to poor health outcomes, including thehigh maternal mortality rate, but without much detail about how to address thisaspect.These efforts have produced some positive results. Malawihas reduced its total fertility rate and infant and child mortality rates, and increasedage at first birth.[39]It has increased the number of women giving birth in health facilities, and thenumber of people living with HIV who are on treatment. The contraceptiveprevalence rate (CPR) has increased,[40]while the maternal mortality rate has significantly decreased, from 984 deathsper 100,000 live births in 2004 to 675 in 2010.[41]Nonetheless, Malawi’shealth indicators remain poor and often vary greatly according to residence,age, wealth, and educational status. Malawi still has high rates of maternalmortality, which represents about 16 percent of all deaths of women aged 15-49.[42]The total fertility rate (TFR) is also high at 5.7births and the rate is higher among women with no education.[43] About1 in 10 people are living with HIV in Malawi, and more women than men areinfected (13 and 8 percent respectively).[44] Earlychild-bearing is common: 7 percent of women aged 25-49 have given birth by age15, while 65 percent have become mothers by age 20.[45]Malawi does not have a comprehensive national policy andstrategy on adolescent reproductive health. The 2007 National Standards for YouthFriendly Health Services guides services for adolescents. A YoungPeople’s Health Strategy expired several years ago.[46] TheMinistry of Health told Human Rights Watch that it is reviewing the NationalStandards for Youth Friendly Health Services to address gaps in implementationand to use that information to review the Young People’s Health Strategy.Many health services – including for reproductive andmaternal health – remain limited, and often of poor quality whenavailable due to a lack of qualified health personnel, equipment, and supplies.[47]Access to reproductive and maternal health services is worse in rural areas dueto inadequate health infrastructure and personnel being largely based in urbanor semi-urban areas, and limited means of transport.[48] Forexample, only 46 percent of the population has access to a health facilitywithin a 5 kilometer radius and only 25 percent of the population lives within25 kilometer of a hospital.[49]Child MarriageMalawi has one of the highest rates of child marriage in theworld. It is ranked eighth of the 20 countries that are considered to have thehighest rates of child marriage by the UN Population Fund (UNFPA).[50]On average, one out of two girls in Malawi will be married by their eighteenthbirthday according to the United Nations.[51] In 2010, half of thewomen (50 percent) aged 20–24 years were married or in union before age18 (compared to 6.4 percent of boys); while 12 percent of women married beforethey were 15 compared to only 1.2 percent of men.[52]Data shows little to no change in child marriage prevalence since 2000 where itstood at 47 percent.[53] Childmarriage is common across all three regions of Malawi, and in both rural andurban areas.[54]Child marriage prevalence in Malawi is also higher than the regional averagefor sub- Saharan Africa (37 percent).[55]In its 2005 study on cultural practices, Malawi’sHuman Rights Commission noted that girls in Malawi may be forced to marry asearly as 9 years old, immediately after attaining puberty, or even before attainingpuberty so long as they look physically mature.[56] Boysof the same background generally got married around the age of 17.[57]The most important reasons why child marriage in Malawi isso prevalent are poverty, teenage pregnancy, traditions and cultures thattolerate violence against girls and women and their subordination, and lack ofadequate education and employment opportunities. These factors are allinterlinked and heightened by a lack of strong judicial and government policyframework to ensure that existing laws designed to prevent and address childmarriage are enforced.Poverty and Teenage PregnancyPoverty contributes to child marriage in many ways. First,many poor families view young girls as a financial burden, prompting them tomarry their daughters off as soon as they can. Girls themselves see marriage asa way out of poverty. Zulu K., 14, married four months before our interview, toldHuman Rights Watch: “I got married because I wanted to end my problems. Iwas going to school, but I did not have school uniform. We didn’t havefood at home. I stay with my father who sells buckets. My parents are separatedand I have nine siblings.”[58]Second, some families believe that marrying their daughtersmay give them a chance for a better life and better prospects for the future.Chaonaine A., 19, married a 21-year-old son of a chief when she was 16. She hasfour siblings, her parents are poor, and she dropped out of school in standardeight because they could not buy her uniform or textbooks. She told HumanRights Watch that, “My parents forced me [to marry]. They said I would bebetter off married.”[59]Chaonane’s husband paid her parents MK 8,000 ($19) as dowry.Third, due to limited economic resources and opportuni­ties,some families also see their daughters as a monetary asset. Countrywide, somepoor families marry off daughters to get money to meet basic needs such as food,and sometimes to get dowry or continued support by their daughter’shusband. A practice known as kupimbira, practiced largely in thenorthern part of Malawi, is a form of debt repayment in which a girl is givento the creditor for marriage for failure to repay a debt.[60]Also, because of poverty, many girls engage is transactionalsex, a commonly accepted practice in Malawi. Sometimes parents also force girlsto have sex with men to get money or food.[61] Because of poorknowledge of sexuality and contraception, as well as lack of power to negotiatesafer sex with the men, many girls end up becoming pregnant and being forced intomarriage. Lucy P., 17, said she dropped out of school in 2011 when she was 15:“I got a boyfriend who could look after me because my parents are poor.After some time he told me to have sex with him. I became pregnant and mymother forced me to marry him.”[62] Whenasked why she did not use protection, Lucy said, “My boyfriend used togive me money so I could not insist that he use condoms.”Tradition and CultureChild and forced marriage are deeply entrenched inMalawi’s traditions and patriarchal cultures, which encourage earlysexual initiation and marriage and women’s subordination in society, butstigmatize adolescent pregnancy.[63]Marriage is regarded as a means of protecting girls who get pregnant from underminingfamily honor. A traditional leader in Lilongwe district told Human Rights Watch,“In my culture, we call a pregnant [unmarried] girl ‘disabled.’”He said that when he learns of a teenage pregnancy, he tries to convince theboy to marry the girl because marriage is the only option for her.[64]One issue contributing to teenage pregnancy and subsequentlychild marriages is girls’ poor knowledge of reproductive health. Many ofthe girls we interviewed lacked accurate reproductive health information. Somedisplayed a lack of basic knowledge about sexuality and contraception, whileothers said they did not have this knowledge before getting married. Girls toldus they did not discuss sex with their parents.Despite a “life skills” program that includessexuality education, some girls who had been to school also lacked correctinformation on sexuality. Patricia K. said she started having sex before shereached puberty, and became pregnant when she was about 14 and in standard five(fifth grade). She said, “I was thinking of it more like playing. I didn’tthink I would get pregnant.”[65] HumanRights Watch interviewed four girls who told us that they became pregnant aftertheir first sexual encounter. All believed that they would not get pregnantbecause it was their first time.EducationWhen girls are not in school, they are more likely to getmarried. Conversely, school helps girls delay marriage. In Malawi, girls aremore likely to be withdrawn from school when families face financialconstraints because of their low social status and the costs of educating them.[66]At the same time, the quality of education in Malawi is largely poor and fewstudents move onto higher education or obtain employment when they completetheir education.[67]As a result, many parents do not see the value of education, whereas children,mainly girls, can contribute to the family’s income through pettytrading, working in family farms, as well as through marriage when they receivedowry and other benefits.[68]A representative from the Forum for Women Educationists inMalawi (FAWEMA) said: “Education is not attractive to girls. They seegirls who finished school staying at home with no jobs and ask: Why should I goto school? If they are not in school, they marry.”[69] AnotherNGO official commented, “Some primary schools have never sent a girl tosecondary school. It is difficult for girls to be motivated.”[70]Alima G., 18, said she dropped out of school when she was 14and in standard eight (eighth grade):I had too much work to do at home. My mother always made meto skip school so that I can go to the farm and cook for my four siblings. Wedid not have money or food. I got a boyfriend who started taking care of me butthen I became pregnant and left school.[71]Alima married a few months after stopping school, but leftthe marriage after one and a half years as her husband was physically andemotionally abusing her.I. Child Marriage: Harm and Rights ViolationsChild marriage violates a range of human rights recognizedunder international law. These include: the right to bodily integrity and to befree from violence; the right to education; the right to decide when and whomto marry; and the right to the highest attainable standard of health.Limited Literacy andAccess to EducationI really want to go back to school so that I can get a joband live a better life. But I’m very busy with housework and my mother-in-lawdoesn’t support my going back to school.—Changamile F., married at 16, Chikwawa district, September2013Child marriage often interrupts girls’ education ordenies them access altogether. Few of the girls we interviewed had returned toschool after marriage or pregnancy. Some of the reasons given by girls for notreturning were lack of money, lack of child care, unavailability of adultclasses or other flexible school programs such as evening classes, and the needto do household chores. Others said that their husbands or in-laws would notallow them to continue school after marriage, or that marriage was incompatiblewith schooling.Kausiwa C., 24, became pregnant when she was 15 after herfather forced her to leave school to look after her sick mother, andimmediately married her 27-year-old boyfriend. She told Human Rights Watch:I was in school in form two before she got sick. Then myfather told me to leave school to look after her. I have two brothers who go toschool. When I left school, I got a boyfriend to take care of me. He used togive me small amounts of money and I fell for it. I became pregnant and marriedhim.[72]Kausiwa said that a local NGO helped her to return to schoolin 2012, but her husband has tried to stop her:He wants me to stop school. He gives me many house chores.He says I’m wasting time going to school and that I will fail at school.I really want to complete schooling but I’m often absent from schoollooking after my mother.[73]Kabwila N., 17, said she left school in standard eight whenshe was 15 because of poverty. She said she could not go back to school becauseshe felt ashamed about having become pregnant: “I would not want to goback to school because I started having sex with my boyfriend while at school.I am not fit to go back.”[74]Gowelo L., about 20, said she studied up to standard four. She said, “Ido not want to go back to school because I am married. My work is to look aftermy husband. I can go to adult school but the adult literacy classes here justteach people how to read and write and I can do that.”[75]Those girls and women who had not returned to school aftermarriage often said they regretted not being able to complete their educationand hoped to do so in the future. Esther B. said she was 18 but looked muchyounger.[76] Sheleft school in standard seven to marry her 28-year-old boyfriend who was marriedwith another wife and children. When Human Rights Watch interviewed her, shewas admitted at the Mwanza District Hospital waiting to give birth to her firstchild. Her husband had abandoned her and returned to his first wife. Esther hadbad anemia and high blood pressure and her mother told us she was struggling tobuy her food. Esther said, “I now know the benefits of education. I havefaced so many problems. I will return to school after I have the baby.”[77]A 2012 study by the Population Council, an internationalorganization that conducts research on HIV/AIDS, gender, and poverty and youthin order to improve reproductive health services, found that in contrast totheir peers who left school for other reasons, girls who had left schoolbecause of marriage were less likely to return to school.[78]Studies have shown that girls who continuetheir education, especially until completing secondary school, are more likelyto invest in their own children’s education, enabling them tobecome economically independent and positive contributors to society.[79]On the other hand, children of young and illiterate mothers tend to face thesame cycle of childhood deprivation and abuse.[80]Malawi has a readmission policy that allows girls who becomepregnant while in school to return after giving birth, but it requires thepregnant girl to withdraw from school for one academic year before applying forreadmission. A deputy school head told Human Rights Watch, “Wedon’t allow pregnant girls to continue with school. We ask her to go homeand return after the baby is born. If she attends pregnant, she can beridiculed by other students and be a bad influence.”[81]Some girls and community members are not aware of the readmissionpolicy. Government monitoring of the implementation of this policy is poor. Forexample, there is no data on the number of teenage mothers that have beenreadmitted to school under the policy, what challenges they face afterreadmission, or how they perform at school including whether they remain inschool or drop out.[82]Many NGOs workers, police officers in charge of childprotection, social workers and teachers told Human Rights Watch that a lawcompelling parents to send children to school was needed if married girls or teenagemothers are to benefit more from the readmission policy, and more generally toensure that parents educate girls. A police officer in charge of childprotection who has helped to rescue girls from child marriage noted:We have able parents who refuse to educate their children.Sometimes they say they don’t have money to take the girl to school aftershe gets pregnant and that she should be married. But when we intervene andinform them that they are breaking the law by forcing her to marry, they sendthe girl to school. The law says that children should be protected from abuse.But when we intervene in cases of marriage and the parent refuses to allow thegirl to go to school, there is no law to compel her because compulsoryeducation is not in our laws. So the girl stays at home doing nothing andeventually gets married.[83]If enacted and implemented, the proposed education law couldaddress this gap.Sexual Violence, Domestic Abuse, and AbandonmentGirls marry because of problems at home. But few girls whoenter marriage are happy. They marry young when they have nothing, and startmaking children whom they cannot feed. So at their parents’ there is nofood, at her husband’s there is no food. They fight a lot and end upbreaking up. It’s a chain of problems.—David Kantcheri, village headman, Chitsatanji, RuralLilongwe, September 2013Violence linked to child marriage happens before and duringmarriage. In Malawi, marriage is usually a family affair. Parents and otherfamily members have a say as to whom and when girls marry, and can choose marriagepartners without the consent or even knowledge of girls. Girls who reject thesemarriages often face violence from their families. A married girl or woman,especially those from patrilineal communities, often leaves her maternal hometo live with her husband and his family. Power and authority in the home iscustomarily held by men and older women, and this can place young married girlsat greater risk of abuse and violence.Violence to Force Girls to MarrySome of the girls and women interviewed by Human RightsWatch said that they were threatened, verbally abused, or thrown out of theirhomes by their family when they refused to marry. Many told us that they hadsuffered emotionally and psychologically as a result of the abuse.Chanika B., now about 18 and married at 15, told HumanRights Watch:My grandmother and sister wanted me to marry a trader bythe lakeside. I refused. They threatened me to leave the house if I did notmarry the man. I went to my mother’s sister but she also said I had tomarry him or leave the house. I accepted because I had nowhere to go.[84]Seventeen-year-old Alinane Y. became pregnant when she was14. Her boyfriend was 20 and refused responsibility for the pregnancy. Her motherwanted her to marry him nonetheless, and, according to Alinane, “she mademy life a living hell.” Alinane broke down crying during the interviewsaying, “My mother really gave me a hard time, she really mistreated me.”She said:My mother was working hard to keep me in school but it wasnot easy. My seven siblings needed food and school fees. Life was verydifficult. When I was in form two I decided to get a boyfriend who could giveme money so that I can be in school. He gave me money, bought me soap andbooks. I became pregnant three months after I met him. My mother was very angrywith me. She said I must marry my boyfriend although he didn’t want me.She was always fighting me, telling me I was useless and marriage was the onlyoption for me. I was so stressed. She threatened to throw me out of the house.I promised I would pay for my school fees and that is how she allowed me tohave the baby and return to school. But she insisted I had to cook, wash, andgo to the farm. I was always tired until I wrote my exams. I am not sure I willpass because I had very little time to study.[85]An official from an organization that works on youth issues,including child marriage, said: “Girls who refuse to get married asrequired by their parents are considered outcasts and are chased away, or facehostile [home] environments.”[86]Girls Forced into Commercial Sexual Exploitation After Escaping ForcedMarriageSome girls run away from forced marriages and then turn tocommercial sexual exploitation or look for work in tobacco farms where they maybe exposed to sexual exploitation and forced labor. Although this aspect ofgender-based violence is not well documented, local rights activists and mediareports indicate that there may be many cases that go unreported.[87]Eighteen-year-old Chikondi R. was 14 when her mother andsister forced her to marry her 19-year-old boyfriend in 2008. She had passedher final primary school exams to go to secondary school. She told us that shewas beaten and neglected by her husband, rejected by her family when she soughthelp for the violence, and forced into commercial sexual exploitation to fendfor herself and her child:After dating for some time my boyfriend asked my sister whowas married and with whom I was living if he could marry me. She said yes. I saidno because I was in school. But my mother and sister pressured me to marry myboyfriend because they wanted to get money. He was a potter and used to give mesome money. My mother used to tell me, “Marry him so that he can assistus in any way.” I did not know anything about marriage. The only advicethat my mother gave me when I was already married was that I should perseverewhen my husband beats me. I was not happy in my marriage because my husbandbeat me every day. He was verbally abusive and used to tell me when Icomplained about the violence: “You should not ask me anything becauseyour mother pushed you to me.” I reported to my mother that my husbandbeats me but she forced me to go back to him saying I should endure becausethat is how marriages are. I left my husband because the beating became toomuch. But I had nowhere to stay after I left him. I went to my sister and mymother but they chased me away and told me to return to him. A friend of mineagreed to accommodate me and my child for three months. After the three monthsshe told me, “Why do you want me to keep looking after you? Whydon’t you do the work that I do?” That is how I started sex work.[88]Human Rights Watch heard similar stories from others. Theexecutive director of a local NGO said, “We helped a girl who turned toprostitution after running away from an early marriage. Her relatives forcedher to get married and she ran away to stay with a friend who encouraged her tostart prostitution.”[89]A project manager at another NGO commented, “We havefound that some of the girls who are forced into child labor were once marriedand are running away from these marriages.”[90]Violence in MarriageMany girls and women told Human Rights Watch that they wereabused by their husbands after getting married. Many complained that they werebeaten or verbally abused. Many also said their husbands had extra-maritalaffairs that caused them great emotional stress. Others said they wereabandoned by their husbands who neglected to support them financially.Elina V., 19, married a 24-year-old man when she was 15. Hewas a fisherman who used to give her money. She was in form two when she becamepregnant by him and her mother forced her to marry him because “it washer only option.” She told Human Rights Watch:I faced a lot of problems in marriage. I was young and didnot know how to be a wife. I was pregnant, had to look after my husband, dohousework, deal with in-laws, and work on the farm. My worst time was when Iwas pregnant; I had to do all this and deal with a pregnancy while I was just achild myself.[91]Elina said, “My husband started beating me and abusingme verbally. His mother told him not to give me money and he stopped supportingme and our child. I left him early this year.”Some girls and women who have been forced into marriage try toleave their marriages; others are abandoned by their spouses. However, they areusually left with the responsibility of raising children without their partners’or family’s financial support, thus making them more likely to live inpoverty. Many of the girls who had left their marriages or had notmarried their partners after becoming pregnant said that the men did notsupport them financially. Many told us that they did not know that they couldsue for maintenance.Leaving Forced MarriagesGirls may run away from their abusive husbands and attemptto go back to their own families’ homes, expecting toreceive help, but are often told to endure their tribulations becauseall married women must tolerate their husbands. Victims of child marriages alsomay be unable to leave abusive marriages because of economic pressures andother social circumstances, increasing their vulnerability.Chanika B., 18, married when she was 15, told Human RightsWatch:I faced a lot of abuse in my marriage. My husband had anaffair. He would beat me when he returned home. Whenever he was drunk, he wouldbeat me for no reason. Every time he beat me, I would pack my clothes and go tomy grandmother’s house but she did not help me. When I talked to myhusband’s relatives, they used to tell me that that is how marriage lifeis and I should go back to my husband.[92]A government study found that many women who experienceviolence seek assistance from their own families and in-laws, but rarely gethelp.[93]Many girls and women told us that when they were gettingmarried they were warned not to deny their husbands sex and to bear theirsuffering whey they faced problems including violence.Seventeen-year-old Kabwila N. married a 21-year-old man whenshe was 15. She told Human Rights Watch, “My sister told me about homemanagement and how to look after my husband. She said that no matter what, Ishould not deny him sex and I should keep the home clean, cook his food welland persevere [accept it] when he beats me.”[94]Chipeta A., 19, married a 23-year-old man when she was 13.She said that her grandmother advised her when she was getting married to “dowhatever your husband tells you to. Don’t say no when he wants sex.Persevere [accept it] when he beats you because there are lots of problems inmarriage.”[95]Research by international organizations, including the WorldHealth Organization (WHO), shows that child brides are more likely toexperience physical and emotional abuse at the hands of their husbands andin-laws. A WHO multi-country study on women’s health and domesticviolence in various countries found that younger women, particularly those aged15 to 19, and those with lower levels of education faced a higher risk ofphysical or sexual violence at the hands of a partner in almost all thecountries studied, than older and more educated women.[96] The2010 Malawi DHS has similar findings.[97]Research suggests that spousal age difference is also a risk factor associatedwith violence and abuse, including marital rape.[98] Childmarriage creates an environment that increases young brides’vulnerability to physical, sexual, psychological, and economic abuse. Becauseearly marriage limits young married girls’ knowledge and skills,resources, social support networks, mobility, and autonomy, they often havelittle power in relation to their husband or his family.Adverse HealthConsequencesIn traditional societies where child marriage is common,including Malawi, girls and women are expected to become pregnant soon aftermarriage. There are serious risks to the health and lives of young mothers andtheir children associated with early pregnancy and childbirth. These increasedrisks are not only related to age, but also to girls’ low levels ofeducation, low social status, and lack of access to health-related informationand health services.A nurse midwife at Nkhotakota district hospitalobserved:In August 2013, we had one girl aged 14, three girls aged15, one aged 16, three aged 17, and five aged 18 who gave birth at thehospital. In September we had one 12-year-old, one 15-year-old and one 16-year-old.The younger ones die more during childbirth in this hospital.[99]Due to physical immaturity, young girls are more susceptibleto obstructed labor, which is a leading cause of maternal mortality globally.[100]Obstructed labor also causes obstetric fistula, a devastating childbirth injurythat leaves its victims with urine or fecal incontinence.[101]Studies show that although factors such as lack of access to timely and qualitymaternity care are predisposing factors, physical immaturity is the key riskfor developing obstetric fistula for girls under 15.[102]Malawi does not maintain reliable statistics on fistula. Anurse and midwife at Chikwawa district hospital told Human Rights Watch aboutcases of obstructed labor at the hospital:We see many girls who come with obstructed labor. We haveto operate on them and this is expensive for the hospital. Sometimes we alsoadvise them to come and wait at the hospital if they are like 8-months pregnant.It takes resources to look after them.[103]Another said, “We see about two or three cases offistula every two to three months. Many girls need a C-section and it is notcheap for the hospital.”[104]Health workers also told us that they see many cases ofanemia among young girls because of poor feeding. One observed, “Younggirls get many problems like obstructed labor, premature labor. They also getanemia a lot because they are not getting enough food at home. Many of themtell us they eat one meal a day or sometimes even go without food.”[105]Others expressed their frustration delivering teenage mothers whom theydescribed as not being emotionally ready for labor and motherhood. For example,one health worker said:Every month we deliver girls who are 14, 15…. Manyare below 18. It is not easy because they are not ready mentally andphysically. They do not understand the labor process. You tell them it is nottime to push and the moment they feel the first contraction they start pushingand end up with large tears and bleeding.[106]Our interviews with girls, including schoolgirls, boys, andtraditional leaders indicate that there is general awareness about reproductivehealth problems associated with child marriage. Almost all the girls that weinterviewed delivered in a health facility. Many said that they were giveninformation about family planning and contraception at the hospital.Research in developing countries shows that complications inpregnancy and childbirth are the leading cause of death for girls and womenaged 15 to 19.[107]Teenagers who are aged 15 to 19 years are twice as likely to die duringpregnancy or childbirth compared to women over 20 years old.[108] Girlsbetween the ages of 10 and 14 are five times more likely to die during deliverythan mothers who are between 20 and 24.[109] The children of youngmothers also face higher mortality rates.[110]Psychological Health ConsequencesChild marriage deprives girls of their childhood andadolescence, a time necessary to develop not only physically, but emotionallyand psychologically. It burdens them with adult responsibilities for which theyare unprepared, including those related to marriage and childbearing. Asmentioned, girls in Malawi are generally considered ready for marriage whenthey reach puberty. Marriage at this time curtails girls’ freedom anddenies them the chance to develop their intellect and independent identities.[111]Child marriage can have profound psychological healthconsequences for girls, particularly younger girls, and these consequences mayimpact women throughout their lives. They may have few options to socialize andparticipate in public life, and experience feelings of worthlessness, regret,and depression.[112]They are expected to take on household chores and care for children andfamilies while they themselves are still children. They often lack support whenfaced with marital problems.Danira T. is now 28 years old. She was 14 when she married a30-year-old man with whom she has three children. She told Human Rights Watch:I did not know what to expect in a marriage and thoughtthat my husband will just take care of me. But I had to do a lot of work in thefarm, look after children, and please my in-laws. I feel very sad when I seesmall girls getting married. They don’t know the hard life that awaitsthem there. When I got married, I was very young. When I look back, I wishsomeone had told me to wait till I was grown up. I regret every day the choiceI made but I have to live with it. I wish I had gone to school. Life could bebetter for me because I could get a job.[113]Many of the girls and women Human Rights Watch interviewedsaid they were unhappy in their marriages and regretted having been marriedearly. Many said they had not understood the implications of marriage, and werenot ready for the responsibilities that came with it. Many broke down cryingduring the interviews when they recalled the suffering they had endured inforced marriages, and their lost opportunities for happiness and personaldevelopment.Unhappyin Marriage: Kalinde J.’s StoryI am 23years old and my husband is 30. I married when I was 15. I have two childrenaged 9 and 18 months. I did not want to marry but I agreed because of povertyat home. We had a marriage ceremony where both our parents came together,talked and agreed that we can marry. During the marriage ceremony, I was toldto respect my husband and never to deny him sex. I was told to bear it when Iget problems because that is how marriages are. I found life very difficultafter marriage. I was a small girl and I did not know anything aboutmarriage. One time, my stomach started getting big and I was having severeheadaches. I was so scared; I did not know what was happening. I went to thehospital and that is when the nurse told me I was 5 months pregnant.My husbandis a builder and I do nothing. I am not happy in my marriage because myhusband goes away without leaving food and takes long to come back home. Myhusband also beats me and is a womanizer. I love him so much but he does notlove me and that is why he has very many women. I want to leave the marriagebut I am waiting for the right time to leave. I am waiting for him to changeand if he does not, I will leave him.When myhusband comes back from other women and wants sex, I just accept because heis my husband. We do not use condoms because he already infected me with HIV.Marriage is not good for girls. There is no happiness. I want change forgirls and that is why I want my story to be heard by all girls out therethinking of marriage.II. Malawi’s Lawson Child MarriageLast month, the 1st grade magistrate handled acase of a 15-year-old girl who got married. The Constitution allows a girl whois 15 years to get married yet the Penal Code says anyone who has carnalknowledge of a girl below 16 commits a crime. The perpetrator was acquittedbased on the Constitution.—Francis Kantikana,magistrate, Dowa district, September 2013The Malawi government has failed to address shortcomings, inconsistencies,and gaps in existing laws that could help to prevent child and forced marriageand protect girls’ and women’s rights in marriage.[114]There are a number of laws, discussed below, that can be read together toprohibit child marriage and sanction those who force children to marry. However,there is a need for more explicit and comprehensive legislation on marriage,including a clear definition of a child and setting a minimum age for marriagethat is consistent with international norms and standards. The government hasfailed to enact new legislation, including the Marriage Bill, also discussedbelow, that would strengthen protections for girls and address gaps in existinglaws.Existing LawsLaws on marriage in Malawi do not explicitly provide forfull and free consent to marriage. For example, Malawi’s Constitutionprovides only that no one shall be forced into a marriage, implying but notspecifically requiring consent. The Child Care, Protection and Justice Act of2010 has a similar provision.[115]The United Nations considers child marriage to be a form of forced marriagesince children are not legally capable of giving free, full, and informedconsent to marriage.[116]As a matter of international law, older children have the right to participatein decisions about whom and when they marry as soon they have the maturity tounderstand the implications of their decisions.[117] Butno matter what their age, the traditionally low status of children, especiallygirls, in many Malawian communities and well-entrenched cultural beliefsundermine their ability to oppose the wishes or opinions of parents, guardians,or community elders. As the accounts in this report show, families often forcegirls into marriage, including those who are lawfully old enough to marry underthe Constitution.Another challenge in preventing and punishing child marriageoffenses in Malawi concerns the recognition of customary law and customarypractices that are discriminatory, harmful, or otherwise violate fundamentalhuman rights.[118]In Malawi, most marriages are entered into under customarylaws or by repute and permanent cohabitation. Few marriages are registered.Customary laws and practices discriminate against women in matters related tomarriage.[119] Forinstance, they generally condone child marriages, and promote practices such aspolygamy and wife inheritance that discriminate against women and may beharmful to their well-being. Customary laws do not recognize marital rape.[120]Furthermore, customary processes generally favor restorative and consensualsolutions over punitive ones. While these are accepted ways of settlingdisputes within communities, the failure of customary procedures to address thecriminal elements of certain gender-based crimes leaves victims without anadequate remedy. In addition, it creates opportunities for families andhusbands to intimidate women, and to coerce them into forced marriages or intocontinuing in marriages that they did not want, with husbands who may beabusive.Nonetheless, the Constitution provides that all laws, includingcustomary laws, are subject to its provisions: “Any act of Government orany law that is inconsistent with the provisions of this Constitution shall, tothe extent of such inconsistency, be invalid,”[121]and that “In the interpretation of all laws … the provisions ofthis Constitution shall be regarded as the supreme arbiter and ultimate sourceof authority.”[122] On theright to equality before the law, the Constitution states, “There shallbe no derogation, restrictions or limitation with regard to … the rightto equality and recognition before the law.”[123]While the provisions of theTransitional Constitution, the Child Care, Protection and Justice Act, and thePenal Code offer guidance for resolving conflicts between customary law andhuman rights protections, there are no published court decisions articulatingthis line of reasoning or offering guidance in interpretation of customary lawsconsistent with the Constitution.Minimum Age for Marriage, Sexual ConsentExisting laws on marriage in Malawi do not provide a clearminimum age for marriage. A clear age would help ensure a coherent applicationof laws protecting women and girls from child and forced marriage consistentwith international human rights law.Under article 22 of theConstitution, a person who is 18 years of age may enter into marriage withoutparental consent, while persons between 15 and 18 must obtain parental consentbefore entering into marriage. The Constitution does not prohibit marriage ofchildren below 15, but provides that the state is obliged merely to “discourage”marriages where either party is under age 15.[124]The 1903 Marriage Act, which sets 21 as the minimumage of marriage, also allows for marriage of children below 18 years withparental consent.[125]The Child Care, Protection and Justice Act does not provide for a minimumage of marriage nor prohibit child marriages, but provides criminal penaltiesfor those who force a child to marry.In practice, as notedearlier, girls in Malawi are often married on attainment of puberty or before.[126]In somecases documented by Human Rights Watch, girls aged 10 to 12 were married.In addition to the lack of a clear minimum age of marriage,existing provisions conflict with the Penal Code provisions on rape and defilement.The Penal Code criminalizes sex with a girl below 16 as defilement, and thoseconvicted under this provision can be sentenced to 14 years in prison.[127]The Penal Code does not discuss the issue of consent in defilement cases, butcase law has established that whether the girl consented to the sexual act ornot is irrelevant and the accused person would still be guilty.[128]All the police officers and magistrates we interviewed told us that consent isimmaterial in defilement cases because according to the Penal Code, girls belowthe age of 16 cannot consent to sex.The Penal Code defines rape as:Anyone who has unlawful carnal knowledge of a woman or girlwithout her consent, or with her consent if the consent is obtained by force ormeans of threats or intimidation of any kind, or by fear of bodily harm, or bymeans of false representations as to the nature of the act, or in the case of amarried woman, by personating her husband, shall be guilty of the felony termedrape.[129]The punishment for rape is life imprisonment or death.[130]The position in Malawi is that marital rape does not exist under the Penal Codebecause its definition of rape does not make any reference to the position ofhusband and wife. The interpretation of consent and the word “unlawful”in the definition of rape results in legal impunity for marital rape.[131]How the current definitions of rape and defilement apply to sexual intercoursein the context of child marriage is unclear.Current Legal Developments on Marriage AgeMalawi’s government has yet to enact the Marriage,Divorce and Family Relations Bill (Marriage Bill), a comprehensive family lawthat was developed in 2006 and has stronger protections from child and forcedmarriage. Among other things, the bill proposes that the minimum age ofmarriage be raised to 18. However, there are uncertainties about this law,which presents issues that need to be addressed before it is enacted.The government of Malawi hascreated a public impression that it supports the Marriage Bill, but its actionsindicate otherwise. President Joyce Banda has made several public commentscommitting her government to passing the bill without delay. In 2012, sheissued a presidential directive that the bill be presented for debate beforeparliament. But on November 1, 2013, during the High Level Task Force forWomen, Girls, Gender Equality and HIV for Eastern and Southern Africa, she madecomments that suggested a change of mind:There is no question about my personal commitment to theraising of the marriage age. I am however aware that this is a delicate issueamong some traditional leaders, conservative communities, faith leaders andsome legislators. That is why, in my opinion, it is best that we do ourhomework by engaging all stakeholders and bring the bill to parliament at theright time for us to succeed.[132]Public support for the Marriage Bill from the Ministry ofGender, Children and Community Development as well as the president raisedexpectations that the bill would be presented for discussion before parliament duringthe session ending in November 2013. However, this did not happen. The ministerof justice told Human Rights Watch that the bill was unlikely to be introducedat the next sitting of parliament in February 2014, parliament’s last sessionbefore general elections in May 2014. The bill is currently being reviewed bythe Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.[133]One challenge to enacting the law seems to be lack ofclarity on the legislative procedure to be followed.[134] TheMinistry of Gender, Children and Community Development, the Ministry of Justiceand Constitutional Affairs, the judiciary, and the Malawi Law Commission do nothave a common position on the legislative process needed to pass the MarriageBill.[135]In fact, they have not come together to agree on a clear way forward,[136]and it is not clear who should make the final decision on a way forward on thisissue.Marriage, Divorce and Family Relations BillThe Marriage Bill defines a child as anyone below the age of18 and sets the minimum age for marriage at 18. This is consistent withinternational and regional human rights treaties that Malawi has ratified. Thebill gives equal status to parties in all marriages recognized under theproposed law, and requires that all marriages, including customary marriages,be registered with a competent authority. However, several important componentsof any law dealing with marriage, divorce, and family relations are notaddressed in the bill.First, the bill does not specifically require the free andfull consent of those entering into marriage, nor define what should constitutefree and full consent; or provide mechanisms necessary to determine thatconsent is freely and fully given. Second, the bill fails to define forced orchild marriage, or define and criminalize related harmful practices. Third, thebill fails to make proof of age compulsory for marriage. Fourth, the bill doesnot create a specific offense of child marriage, and one of forced marriage, orset penalties for them. Doing so would allow the full range of such marriagesto be punishable under the law. Also, the bill does not criminalize thoseinvolved in the arrangement, for example those contracting or registering aforced or child marriage. Nor does the bill prohibit betrothal before the ageof 18; subject to criminal punishment those adults who marry a person who hasnot reached the marriage age; or include specific penalties for those whosolemnize and register child and forced marriages.Finally, the bill does notpenalize and punish acts of violence against girls and women carried out asintimidation or retribution for refusal to marry, which has an important impacton public attitudes, deters such marriages, facilitates the public sectorresponse, grants greater bargaining power to children, and clarifies andfacilitates action against perpetrators.Definition of a ChildA precise legal definition of a child that is consistentwith international human rights law is essential to ensure a coherentapplication of laws protecting children. In the laws of Malawi, there is noconsistent definition of a child. The Constitution and the Child Care,Protection and Justice Act define a child as a person below the age of 16.[137]This definition is inconsistent with the Convention on the Rights of the Child(CRC), ratified by Malawi, which defines a child as anyone below 18. At thesame time, the Prevention of Domestic Violence Act defines a child as a personbelow the age of 18, although our research found that this definition is rarelyapplied in law enforcement. Under the customary laws of Malawi, a child becomesan adult on attainment of puberty.[138]Our interviews with police, child protection workers and staffersfrom NGOs indicate that they do not apply a uniform definition of a child intheir protection work. Here are some responses we received when we asked whatage they use in defining a child:“For me, I use the age of 21, as defined in theMarriage Act, when dealing with cases of child marriage.”[139]“We use the Constitution’s definition of achild as someone below 16 in dealing with issues of child marriage. Whenwe are advocating for other protection issues, we apply the age of20.”[140]“The child care act defines a child as one less than16 years, but I usually use article 183 [of the act] to extend myapplication of the act to protect children between 16 and 18 years.”[141]Birth and Marriage RegistrationsBirth and marriage registration are some of the mostpowerful tools for ensuring equity over a broad scope of services andinterventions for children and women. They are essential components ofcombating child marriage as they assist in proving the age of spouses at thetime of marriage.According to the National Registration Act 2009, all births,marriages, and deaths should be registered and the government is required toestablish a birth registration system.[142] TheChild Care, Protection and Justice Act, which requires local governmentauthorities to keep and maintain a registry of the births and deaths ofchildren in the area of its jurisdiction, makes it the responsibility of everyparent to register their child’s birth.[143] Italso provides guidelines for determining the age of a child in the absence of abirth certificate.[144]However, only 17 percent of children below 18 have their birth registered.[145]Lack of birth registration makes it difficult to take age into account before amarriage.III. Right to Redress for Child Marriage VictimsMy husband beats me and quarrels all the time. He beat mewhen I was pregnant until I got a miscarriage. I went to the police to reporthim but the police didn’t do anything. They said they would discuss itwith my husband and that I should go home. My husband then gave the policemoney and he wasn’t arrested.—Hiwa O., age 15, Chikwawa district, September 2013Girls and women in Malawi face various abuses before andduring marriage. The government of Malawi is committing rights violations by failingto provide girls and women with adequate protection from child and forcedmarriages and marital abuse, and by not providing them with opportunities forredress.Few Malawians have access to the formal legal system.Barriers include the high cost of legal fees, long distances to courts that arelocated mainly in urban areas, lack of awareness about court procedures,inadequate laws, and lack of legal aid. Broader systemic barriers in thecriminal justice system such as lack of infrastructure, government resources,and personnel make it difficult for Malawians to seek and obtain justice.In addition to these obstacles, survivors of gender-basedviolence in Malawi face discrimination in legal processes, and have to overcomelack of awareness about their rights and cultural hurdles – such as thebelief that women are subservient – to seek justice. Most maritalproblems that are adjudicated are handled by traditional leaders who usecustomary laws of Malawi’s ethnic groups. However, because childmarriages are accepted in many Malawian traditions and cultures, customary processesoffer little help.Human Rights Watch heard about many instances whereperpetrators of violence against women pay the parents of the victim, or marrythem in cases of rape and defilement. A child protection officer confirmedthese practices, noting, “Sometimes perpetrators pay the parents. Even indefilement cases, we have seen this happen.”[146]Vague laws on marriage and domestic violence also createbarriers to accessing justice, making it difficult for a girl or woman to knowif her marriage is illegal and what rights she has. The weak application ofexisting protections against child marriage and violence contributes toambiguity about the scope of legal protection survivors of violence have.Commenting on the impact of conflicting laws governing childmarriage, the Ministry of Justice director of public prosecutions told HumanRights Watch: “The law has to have the capacity to be obeyed. If youbring laws that contradict each other, you make it hard for them to beimplemented. You encourage lawlessness.”[147]Survivors of domestic violence who do seek help mayencounter an inadequate, negligent, or even hostile response by the police andthe courts, and a shortage of safe spaces for protection. Tembo K., about 22,said she married when she was about 17. She told Human Rights Watch her husbandused to beat and verbally abuse her. But when she reported this to the police,“they did not do anything because they knew my husband and are friendswith him. They said I must go back to my husband.”[148]A staff member from an NGO that operates a helpline forchildren commented on police indifference to helping survivors of violence:Many times government people don’t follow-up on thecases we refer. For example, police say they don’t have fuel if we callthem to go and help a girl who’s told us she is defiled. In other placesthere is no willingness by police and district officials to follow-up on thecases. We get feedback from the girls saying “I went to the place where youreferred me but I was not helped.”[149]Poverty also hinders womenfrom pursuing justice. For example, police officers at Victim Support Unitssaid that some women bring complaints against their husbands but then withdrawthem for fear that he might be arrested and be unable to provide financialsupport.Lack of SheltersWe face a big challenge of lack of shelters to offer safetyto girls who are chased away from home because of refusing to get married.Kasungu district where we work has no shelters. We have a rehabilitation centerin Lilongwe, where we send some girls. There is a small shelter run by an NGOin Lilongwe. For girls with nowhere to go, we talk to them, identify people whocan talk to their parents or our team goes to counsel parents and ask them totake the girls back.—Desmond Mhango, program manager, Center for Youthand Children Affairs (CEYCA), Lilongwe, September 2013The CRC Committee, the international expert body thatinterprets and monitors compliance with the CRC, has urged governments toprovide shelters to girls who escape from child marriages and to develop andprovide adequate resources to implement “physical and psychologicalrecovery programs for child victims of harmful traditional practices,”including child marriage.[150]There is no data on the number of shelters in Malawi. PoliceVSUs offer temporary accommodation to survivors of gender-based violence –usually only for a few days – and this is inadequate. A police officer describedthe challenges they face offering survivors of violence accommodation at theVSU: “VSU offices are small. We counsel victims in the same room that weuse as our office. Elders and children share the same room. There is no privacy.These people also need food but we don’t have a budget for that.” [151]In other instances, girls who have been rescued from childmarriages are kept at reform centers for juvenile offenders that do not provideappropriate programs for girl victims of child marriage. [152]Shelters are a vital part of state protection for victims ofgender-based violence, including child and forced marriages. Lack of shelters,or safe spaces where girls can seek protection and help when at risk of forcedmarriage, or when they escape from them, is a key barrier to respondingefficiently to forced marriages and domestic violence generally. Girls whoresist forced marriages may face physical, verbal, and psychological violencefrom their families or husbands and are not safe at home.One NGO worker described thechallenge of helping survivors of violence in the absence of shelters:We had a case of a woman whose husband was beating her andmaking her sleep outside the house. She was in so much fear. We decided toremove her from the home, but we had no place to take her. I was asked if I couldaccommodate her at my home. She stayed there for one night. The following daywe arranged for her to go to her rural home to stay with some relatives. Shewas supposed to report to us if she got help from her relatives but she did notreport. So we don’t know what happened to her.[153]A staffer from an NGO thatruns a small shelter and rescues girls from forced marriages said:We have a safe place in Zomba district where we keep girlswe have rescued. We keep girls here for one to two weeks as the police conducttheir investigations. If we didn’t have this small place, it would havebeen very difficult to help girls because where do you take them after therescue? The demand is high and our center can’t take more than 12 people.[154]Several child justice magistrates and social welfareofficers said that they refer children in need of shelter to NGOs: “Whenwe remove a child from an abusive family, we refer to social welfare departmentwho identify NGOs to assist.”[155]Many child protection officers, traditional and religiousleaders, and NGO workers said they also often take in girls needing protectionfrom abuse in their families. A child protection worker in Nkhotakota districtsaid, “Twice I have kept girls needing protection. Chiefs do it almostevery month. This arrangement is not appropriate. The government should make away so that we are not left with the responsibility to care for thesegirls.” [156]Other times, police and other social welfare officersidentify a relative or a community member who can house a girl who has beenremoved from abusive situations. The problem with this arrangement is thatthere is little follow-up to ensure the girl has not been returned to thesituation of abuse.NGOs working on women and children’s rights expressedconcern that the government and foreign donors do not take the issue of lack ofshelters seriously. Some NGOs said they had land to establish shelters but theyhave not received needed support from the government and donors.One NGO director told Human Rights Watch, “We haveprocured land where we want to build a shelter but we don’t have money.We have tried donors but they are not interested in shelters. They see it asconstruction.”[157]Another director made similar comments:There is no political will to protect children [fromabuse]. We used to have a transit center here that provided temporary safety tochildren from the southern region. Police would bring them here. However, thegovernment stopped supporting us, yet we have lots of beds here to offer shelterto children.[158]Because of lack of shelters, some victims end up going backto their homes where they risk further violence. A police officer at a VSU said:“For victims who come into the VSU, we give them a bed and mattress andcooking utensils. The environment is not conducive and many go back to theirhusbands.”[159]Prosecution versusMediation: Police and Judicial PerspectivesThere are traditional mechanisms of dealing with theseissues. Matters of marriage are not easy. There are children involved. Whyshould we lean more towards prosecution?—Zangazanga Chikhosi, principal secretary, Ministryof Home Affairs and Internal Security, October 2013Few child or forced marriage cases have been brought beforeMalawian criminal courts despite existing legislation. Police and magistratestold us that they prefer to prosecute cases of child marriage using Penal Codeprovisions on defilement, and on a few occasions used provisions on abduction.Rarely do they prosecute the crime of child or forced marriage.Some NGOs noted the lack of urgency by thepolice in dealing with child marriage cases. A programmanager remarked: “Our courts have very few convictions for childmarriage. The police are interested in criminal issues mainly, [and] they seemnot to have a good grasp of how to handle child marriage cases.”[160]In every district HumanRights Watch researched, interviewees told us that law enforcement officersprefer to mediate rather than prosecute offenders.[161]Social welfare officers, child protection workers,NGOs, and traditional and religious leaders also undertake mediation for childmarriage and related abuses, often only referring a case to the police forprosecution when mediation has failed.[162]Human Rights Watch witnessed police officers atVSUs mediating cases. There are no guidelines or mechanisms to document andmonitor how mediation is done, nor have those doing mediation been trained.One of the reasons given for preferring mediation overprosecution is that it preserves family unity and community relations. A policeinspector in Mangochi district told us, “There are cases where we feellike prosecuting, but then you have to consider the plight of the girl. If youprosecute an uncle who is forcing a girl to marry, the relatives might turnagainst her and chase her away from the home. Here you create another problem.”[163]A magistrate at a child justice court in Dowa districtcommented on a defilement case, providing insight into attitudes towards abuseof girls among judicial officials:I handled a case of a 15-year-old pregnant girl in Tambanithat was brought by the girl’s father. I considered that the girl waspregnant and the child will need care when it’s born. I convicted the manof defilement and sentenced him to four years in prison. The conflict I facedis that under the Penal Code it is an offense to have sex with a girl below 16.But what about our culture? They say if a girl is mature, has attained puberty,she can do what she wants. This girl was 15, she was mature. So the law is conflictingwith culture. There is also the civil side of it: if you imprison this man, whowill maintain the baby?[164]Mediation can be a potentially useful tool where criminalpunishments are unwarranted. But mediation, just as with the criminal justicesystem, can be rendered unfair by the unequal power relationships of theparties. Placing the matter in mediation should not serve to perpetuate thenotion that child marriage is a personal or family issue and not a matter ofbroader concern to the state. And mediation can lead to further harm to victimsif there is not sufficient follow-up to protect against renewed violence.Law enforcers and government officials said they preferredto mediate cases of gender-based violence because in many instances women withdrawcases that have been forwarded for prosecution because they lack financialsupport at home and fear the imprisonment of a breadwinner. In a justice systemwhere the resource burden is placed on the victim instead of on the state, the government’slack of resources contributes to the many cases of gender-based violence goingthrough mediation. The director of public prosecutions said:[Police prefer mediation] because the state does not haveenough resources to follow through these cases. For example, if police domediation, it means less paper work, fuel, custody time, pens to write, tonerto print documents, and the cases will end the same day. So they chosemediation. It is not that they favor mediation but cannot afford due process.But if they send the case to me I follow due process. So they would rather notaccelerate them to my office and end them at mediation.[165]Some magistrates expressed concern that police officerssometimes mediate cases that are criminal in nature. A magistrate in Chikwawa noted,“Many cases reported to police stay at the police station and are notbrought before a magistrate. The police prefer to counsel victims andperpetrators and yet some of these cases have criminal elements.”[166]The director of public prosecutions told Human Rights Watchthat although there are no guidelines on the types of cases that police canmediate, in practice murder, defilement, and incest cases must be prosecuted.[167]However, police do mediate such cases. Police officers at a VSU who said theyhave never prosecuted any child marriage cases described the mediation of adefilement case:The man had befriended a 15-year-old girl and she had movedinto his house. Her father reported the case to us. We decided to just counselhim [mediate] and not take him to court because he is looking after fourorphans.[168]A magistrate told us about cases in which police allowparents to withdraw defilement or rape complaints being forwarded forprosecution. But he made clear the courts were not at the mercy of thosebringing the case: “In cases of rape and defilement, even if parents orrelatives tell police to withdraw the case, many times I refuse andsentence.”[169]Training for Law Enforcement OfficersWe have not received any training. Sometimes we attend ameeting and they talk about a law and say we should use it. Can you call thattraining?—Esau Kamwando, child protection officer, NkhotakotaVSU, Nkhotakota district, September 2013Legal prohibitions on child marriage are only effective ifthey are enforced and training is a vital component of an enforcement strategy.Almost all child protection workers, including police officers and magistratesinterviewed by Human Rights Watch, said they lacked adequate training onwomen’s and children’s rights. A child protection worker inNkhotakota district said,I have been in this job for six months now and Ihaven’t received any training. I would like training about specific childrights issues, the law, and how to work with the community. I feel I can domediation because I was briefed by the office but I need to be properlytrained.[170]A staffer for an NGO that runs a child helpline in Mangochidistrict said, “We see many community child protection workers who areuntrained.”[171]Mangochi district’s social welfare officer also noted, “Socialworkers need to be trained. Some of them are not qualified social workers. Feware graduates.”[172]A magistrate in Dowa district said: “We have not received any training since2008 on how to handle cases of children. The Child Care Act was passed in 2010but we have not been trained on it.”[173]Special training is needed to ensure that law enforcementand child protection officials understand the various manifestations of gender-basedviolence and how to deal with domestic violence cases, including casesinvolving child marriage. Training is also needed on the various laws thatprotect girls and women against forced marriage and marital abuse, and to ensurethat police and judges fully understand the laws on child marriage and domesticviolence more generally so that they can properly enforce them.The importance of the institutionalization of gender-basedviolence training was illustrated by law enforcement officers’ approach tothe laws, the procedures for handling cases, and attitudes towards childmarriage and related abuses.Some police and judicial officers we interviewed displayed alack of understanding of laws. An NGO program manager told us, “Some[police officers] do not understand the legal framework. Some charge on a wrongoffense, for example child trafficking instead of abduction. Some use laws thatdo not exist. Government does business as usual and does not look at theseproblems.”[174]Coordination among Government AgenciesThe problems in the systemto protect children are compounded by the lack of clarity among governmentministries and agencies as to where responsibilities lay. Various government entities,officially coordinated by the Ministry of Gender, Children and CommunityDevelopment, are mandated to tackle violence against women, including childmarriages. The Ministry of Justice is responsible for the prosecutors, theMinistry of Gender, Children and Community Development for child protectionworkers, and the Ministry of Interior for the police. To respond effectively toviolence against women, these agencies need to be well coordinated at variouslevels, including planning, training, data collection, monitoring andevaluation, and resource allocation. Lack of a comprehensive strategy on childmarriage detailing specific and targeted action adds to the problem of poorcoordination.[175]National Action PlanThe government,international donors, and national and international NGOs are implementingprograms to address child marriage and violence against women. There are directprograms targeted at ending child marriage, and others that address issues thatfoster child marriage.[176]The impact of these programs is unclear, partlybecause few of them have been evaluated. For example, the effectiveness andequitable enforcement of community by-laws is unclear and the way some of them areimplemented may violate girls’ rights.[177] Ongoing monitoring ofprograms is also poor, such as with respect to programs around the schoolreadmission policy. Some interventions have limited scope. For example, accordingto NGO officials, few NGOs have programs on income-generating activities, safespaces for violence survivors, or engaging men to end gender-based violence.They also noted there are few programs supporting teenage mothers who have notreturned to school to improve their literacy, for example through non-formalschooling programs.Some NGOs expressed concernthat donors preferred to fund certain programs even when NGOs had shown thatthey were not effective. An official of an NGO that works in Mangochi district said:We worked on child marriage in Mangochi for 12 years. Wedid community sensitization on the dangers of early and forced marriage ofgirls. We did a lot of whistleblowing so police could do their work and arrestperpetrators. But we were not very successful because religion and culturesupporting early marriage is deeply rooted in Mangochi. There is no willingnessfrom most people in Mangochi to end early marriage. What Mangochi needs ispublic interest litigation where perpetrators can be taken to court andpunished to deter others.[178]Malawi needs a comprehensiveapproach to child marriage, which should be set out in a national action plan.This will help ensure meaningful progress by the government, its agencies,civil society, and development partners in ending child marriage. Such anapproach should include legal reforms and programmatic initiatives that addressthe causes and consequences of child marriage, as well as protection for girlsand women who seek redress through the justice system. A national action planis also important to ensure scarce resources are used effectively. It will alsoidentify priorities and guide efforts of all players. As one NGO officialcommented: “It would be great to have a national action plan on childmarriage so best practices can be documented and NGOs can come together to workwith one aim.”[179]Seeking Help and Enforcing RightsAlmost all the child protection workers, social welfareofficers, and NGO staffers working with women and children who spoke to HumanRights Watch mentioned a lack of awareness about rights as a key barrier togirls and women reporting child and forced marriages and other domesticviolence. The majority of the girls we interviewed knew nothing about the lawson child marriage and that they could report their families for forcing them tomarry. Many girls who had been abandoned by their husbands or whose boyfriendshad refused to support their children did not know that they could apply formaintenance orders from the courts.For example, Chanika B., whose grandmother and sister forcedher to marry at 15 said, “I did not know I could report them.”[180]A police officer commented, “Girls usually do not report when they areforced to marry because they do not know about their rights. The people whousually report child marriages cases to us are teachers, child protectionworkers, chiefs or parents who are not happy with the marriage.[181]IV. Malawi’s International Legal Obligationson Child MarriageThe government of Malawi hasobligations under international and regional human rights law to protect therights of girls and women. These include the rights to equality andnon-discrimination, to the highest attainable standard of health, to education,to information, to free and full consent to marriage, to choose one’sspouse, to be free from physical, mental, and sexual violence, and to beprotected from slavery, trafficking, and sale. Those whose rights are violatedare entitled to an effective remedy. The inadequate fulfillment and protectionof these rights is both a cause and consequence of child marriage in Malawi.Malawi is a party to the coreinternational treaties that protect women’s and girls’ humanrights. Malawi has ratified the International Covenant on Civil and PoliticalRights (ICCPR), the International Covenant on Economic, Social and CulturalRights (ICESCR), the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discriminationagainst Women (CEDAW), and the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC).[182]Among the regional treaties to which Malawi is a party is the African Charteron Human and Peoples’ Rights (African Charter), the African Charter onthe Rights and Welfare of the Child (ACRWC), and the Protocol to the AfricanCharter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa(Maputo Protocol).[183]International human rights law recognizes stateaccountability for abuses by private actors and requires states to show duediligence in preventing and responding to human rights violations. Forinstance, the CEDAW Committee in a general recommendation concluded that:“States may also be responsible for private acts if they fail to act withdue diligence to prevent violations of rights or to investigate and punish actsof violence.”[184]CEDAW explicitly acknowledges social and cultural norms asthe sources of many women’s rights abuses, and obliges governments totake appropriate measures to address such abuses. It obliges states to“modify the social and cultural patterns of conduct of men and women,with a view to achieving the elimination of prejudices and customary and allother practices which are based on the idea of the inferiority or thesuperiority of either of the sexes or on stereotyped roles for men andwomen.”[185] The argument thatsome practices are cultural norms and thus impervious to alteration cannotjustify a government’s failure to address discriminatory practices. TheHuman Rights Committee affirms that governments “should ensure thattraditional, historical, religious or cultural attitudes are not used tojustify violations of women’s right to equality before the law and toequal enjoyment of all Covenant rights.”[186]Obligation to Enforce Consistent Definition of a Child,Minimum Marriage Age, and Birth and Marriage RegistrationThe CRC Committee has repeatedly addressed the need forcountries to establish a definition of a child in all domestic legislation thatis consistent with the provisions of the CRC, as anyone below the age of 18years.[187]It has also endorsed 18 as the minimum age for marriage, regardless of parentalconsent.[188]At the Africa regional level, the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare ofthe Child explicitly requires governments to take effective action, including throughlegislation, to specify the minimum age of marriage as 18 years.[189]The Maputo Protocol also specifies that governments are to “enactappropriate national legislative measures to guarantee that the minimum age of marriagefor women shall be 18 years.”[190]The CEDAW Committee addressed the need for Malawi to takeall necessary measures to expedite the enactment of outstanding bills,including the Marriage, Divorce and Family Relations Bill, which defines achild as any person below 18 years and sets the minimum age of marriage at 18years.[191]Malawi should also implement the legislation making theregistration of births and marriages compulsory. The Convention on Consent toMarriage, Minimum Age for Marriage, and Registration of Marriages states thatall marriages should be registered by a competent authority.[192] TheMaputo Protocol also calls on governments to ensure that all marriages arerecorded in writing and registered in accordance with national laws.[193]The CRC committee has also addressed States parties in general, and to Malawiin particular, the obligation to make the registration of all births andmarriages compulsory and to put in place measures to enforce implementation.[194]Rights to Equality and Non-DiscriminationMalawi has obligations under international law to ensurewomen’s rights to equality and non-discrimination. The ICCPR calls for“the equal right of men and women to the enjoyment of all civil andpolitical rights set forth in the … Covenant,” including the rightto birth registration, to free and full consent to marriage, to equality ofrights and responsibilities of spouses during marriage and at its dissolution,to life, to liberty and security of the person, and to freedom of expression.[195]The ICESCR contains similar provisions againstdiscrimination.[196]The CRC recognizes the right of children to be free from discrimination,including on the grounds of sex and age.[197] The ACRWC statesthat, “Child marriage and the betrothal of girls and boys shall be prohibited.”[198]Prohibitions on child marriage and non-discrimination are also included in theMaputo Protocol and the African Charter.[199]The CEDAW Committee hasexplained that “[i]nherent to the principle of equality between men andwomen, or gender equality, is the concept that all human beings, regardless ofsex, are free to develop their personal abilities, pursue their professionalcareers and make choices without the limitations set by stereotypes, rigidgender roles and prejudices.”[200]Child marriage is considered a form of gender-baseddiscrimination because the practice disproportionately affects girls, andnegatively impacts the realization of girls’ and women’s many otherhuman rights. The impact of these violations is felt by women throughout theirlives, and extends to their families and societies.Right to Consent toMarriage, Choose a SpouseThe right to marriage based on “full and freeconsent” of the spouses is recognized in several internationalinstruments.[201]Article 16 of CEDAW includes the equal right of men and women to enter intomarriage, and the Convention on the Consent to Marriage further specifies thateach spouse must give his or her consent “in person...as prescribed bylaw.”[202]The Maputo Protocol specifies that “no marriage shall take place withoutthe free and full consent of both parties.”[203]The UN Human RighCsCommittee, which monitors the implementation of the ICCPR, clarified in Generalcomment No. 19 that the marriageable age for both men and women shall be basedon the ability of both spouses to give their full and free consent.[204]In its General Comment No. 28 it affirms states’ obligation to treat menand women equally with regard to marriage.[205] CEDAW General CommentNo. 21 on the right to marriage reiterates men and women’s equal right toenter into marriage, conditioned on their free and full consent.[206]Consent cannot be “free and full” when one ofthe parties involved is not sufficiently mature to make an informed decisionabout a life partner; or the meaning and responsibility of marriage. Testimoniesin this report indicate that many girls, including older girls who are of theConstitutional legal marriage age, were unaware of the implications of marriageand the responsibilities that come with it.Right of Children to Express Their Views FreelyThe right of children to express their views is set out inthe CRC, which stipulates that they have this right in all matters affectingthem, according to their age and maturity.[207] The CRC Committee’sGeneral Comment No. 12 on the right of the child to be heard affirms this rightin any judicial or administrative proceeding affecting their well-being.[208]In its comment, the committee goes on to set out the obligations of governmentsto establish reporting mechanisms such as telephone help lines and supportmechanisms to assist children to express their views. This includes access tophysicians and to teachers who can offer a safe space for children to expresstheir views freely or to seek help in any matter related to their well-being.[209]Child marriage is incompatible with international humanrights law, even if children do “consent” to the marriage. Thisdoes not mean however that Malawi should not respect the right of children toexpress their views. Instead, the government should take policy andprogrammatic measures to ensure children’s right to be heard in mattersconcerning marriage.Right to HealthThe right to health isenshrined in numerous treaties. The ICESCR specifies that everyone has a right“to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical andmental health,” and obligates governments to implement the right withoutdiscrimination on the basis of sex, age, or other prohibited grounds.[210]The CRC recognizes children’s rights to health and to access healthservices, and notably the right to be protected from traditional practicesprejudicial to the health of the child. [211] CEDAW obligatesgovernments to take all appropriate measures to eliminate discriminationagainst women in the field of women’s health.[212]Several treaties and authoritative interpretationsspecifically note that reducing maternal mortality rates and improving maternalhealth services should be considered priorities in the progressive realizationof the right to health.[213]The CRC Committee has called on governments to reduce childmortality,[214] and toraise the age of sexual consent to prevent forced marriage and ensure thehealth of children.[215]The CEDAW Committee has specifically addressed the need forMalawi to make every effort to raise awareness of and increase women’saccess to healthcare facilities, to put in place measures to reduce maternalmortality by identifying and addressing causes of maternal death and toeradicate harmful traditional practices and customs against women.[216]The CRC Committee also addressed the need for Malawi to take legislative andawareness-raising measures to prohibit and eradicate traditional practices,including child and forced marriages that are harmful to the health, survivaland development of children, boys as well as girls, and the need to strengthensex education and reproductive and mental health counseling services.[217]The risk of child marriage – and subsequentlyreproductive health problems – often begins when young girls get pregnantearly and are pressured by family members to marry or girls themselves feelmarriage is the best option for them. One of the factors leading to earlypregnancy and childbearing is the lack of accurate reproductive healthknowledge. Although there is a life skills program in Malawian schools coveringsexuality and reproductive health, human rights, and gender-based violence– including child marriage and sexual harassment – it is notwell-implemented and the government of Malawi lacks a comprehensive policy onadolescent reproductive health.Right to EducationInternational law provides that everyone has the right tofree primary education and the right to equal opportunity ineducation.[218]The Maputo Protocol specifically places obligations on governments to eliminateall forms of discrimination against women and guarantee them equal opportunityand access to education and training.[219]The CRC Committee explains that the purpose of education is todevelop a child’s “personality, talent, mental and physicalabilities to full potential” and to prepare a child to assumelife’s responsibilities.[220]It remarks that an education provides children with life skills such ascritical thinking, the ability to make well-balanced decisions, to develop ahealthy lifestyle and good social relationships; and empowers them bydeveloping their self-esteem and confidence.[221]Child and forced marriages are major contributors toMalawi’s low rates of school enrollment among girls, particularly at thesecondary level. They therefore also contribute to low rates of literacy amongwomen. Such marriages are also a major cause of school dropout for girls. Byfailing to curb child and forced marriages, Malawi is failing in its obligationto ensure access to education for boys and girls on an equal basis.Rightto be Free from Physical, Mental, and Sexual ViolenceUnder international and regional law, the government ofMalawi has an obligation to prevent, investigate, prosecute, and punishviolence against girls and women.[222]The responsibility is grounded in the rights of non-discrimination andequality, security of person, health, and freedom from torture and otherill-treatment provided in treaties that Malawi has ratified.The CRC obligates governments to protect children fromphysical, mental, and sexual abuse or exploitation through legislation andother social and educational measures. The obligation to protect children fromviolence includes protection from parents or other caregivers.[223] TheCRC also sets out the obligation of governments to protect children from sexualexploitation and abuse.[224]The Maputo Protocol calls on states to adopt legislative,administrative, social, and economic measures as may be necessary to identifythe causes and consequences, and ensure the prevention, punishment, anderadication of all forms of violence against women, including sexual violencewhether it occurs in private or public.[225] It specifically obligatesgovernments to take measures to protect women who are at risk of beingsubjected to harmful practices or all other forms of violence, abuse andintolerance, and to establish mechanisms and accessible services for effectiveinformation, rehabilitation, and reparation for victims of violence againstwomen.[226]In its general comment on the right of the child to freedomfrom all forms of violence, the CRC Committee explains “sexual abuse andexploitation” to include forced marriage, sexual exploitation, and sexualslavery. Included among “harmful practices” are forced marriage andearly marriage.[227]As this report shows, girls in Malawi who are subjected tochild marriage may experience violence from their spouses, in-laws, and otherfamily members. This includes physical, verbal, sexual, and psychologicalabuse. Girls and women often do not report violence to the authorities due to anumber of cultural and legal barriers as noted. Nonetheless, some women doreport abuse, including forced marriages, but they rarely get redress.Malawi’s obligations to prevent, investigate,prosecute, and punish violence against girls and women includes ensuring thatstate actors, such as the police, the justice system, and traditional courtstake all reasonable steps to provide everyone within its territory witheffective protection against such violence by private parties. This obligation includesthat a government effectively investigate such violence in a manner capable ofleading to the identification, prosecution, and punishment of thoseresponsible.[228]The inaction of governmentauthorities, police, prosecutors, and customary bodies in the face of violenceagainst women creates an atmosphere of impunity facilitating further abuse, anddissuades women from seeking help. Their failure to act exposes girls and womento further violence.RecommendationsTo the President ofMalawiSign into law the Education Bill that was passed byparliament in October 2013.Publicly support the prompt enactment of the Marriage,Divorce and Family Relations Bill, calling on relevant government agenciesto consult and take the required legislative steps for passage.To the Ministry ofJustice and Constitutional AffairsTake the necessary legislative steps for the enactment ofthe Marriage, Divorce, and Family Relations Bill, and promptly carry outits provisions.Revise the Marriage, Divorce and Family Relations Billbefore it goes through the legislative process to include the following:A provision that clearly establishes the requirement forfull and free consent of both partners to a marriage. A provision that would require young persons todemonstrate proof of age before obtaining a marriage license.A clear definition of forced marriage that is broadenough to include a definition of free and full consent and the wholearray of related harmful practices.A specific offense of child marriage and forced marriage,and criminalization of adults involved in the arrangement, contracting orsolemnizing and registering of a child marriage or forced marriage.Provision that the betrothal and the marriage of a childshall have no legal effect.Penalties and punishment for acts of violence against anyonecarried out as intimidation or retribution for refusal to marry; provisionsto assist victims of attacks with legal, medical, and psycho-socialservices.Use the opportunity of the current review of thePrevention of Domestic Violence Act to expand protections against sexualviolence.Seek revisions to the Penal Code to recognize marital rapeas a criminal offense, stating specifically that no marriage or otherrelationship shall constitute a defense to a charge of sexual assault.Together with the Ministry of Home Affairsand Internal Security, and the Ministry of Gender, Children and CommunityDevelopment, provide regular trainings for police and prosecutors on theirresponsibilities to investigate and prosecute violence against women, includingchild marriage, under the applicable law. Trainings should clarify that childmarriage can be prosecuted as a crime, in addition to using Penal Codeprovisions on defilement and abduction; and aim to address negative attitudestowards domestic violence.To the Ministry of Gender, Children and CommunityDevelopmentCreate a national action plan tocombat child marriage, with input from women’s and children’srights groups, health professionals, and other service providers;coordinating efforts among all relevant ministries; and ensure sufficientresources to implement the plan.Develop and implement mechanisms for improvingcoordination among various government agencies working on violence againstwomen, including child marriage.Establish a national budget line specifically aimed atcombating violence against women on national, district, and traditionalauthority levels.Establish more safe spaces, such as shelters, for girlsthreatened by early and forced marriages or other forms of domesticviolence.Together with the Ministry of Education, develop andimplement childcare support programs to enable girls who have children toattend school.In coordination with the Ministry of Home Affairs andInternal Security, establish a central database on violence against womento record the number of cases of violence against women reported and addressedthrough prosecution or mediation and their outcomes; ensure such data ispublicly available.Together with the Ministry of Justice and ConstitutionalAffairs, initiate a national awareness raising campaign on violenceagainst women, including child marriage, focusing on the rights of victimsas well as the responsibilities of law enforcement, prosecution, and otherrelevant authorities.Create, with the assistance of nongovernmentalorganizations, a database of violence against women programs, identifyinggaps in such programming to promote international good practices.To the Ministry of Home Affairs and InternalSecurityProvide, in coordination with the Ministry of Gender,Children and Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, regulartrainings for police and prosecutors on their responsibilities toinvestigate and prosecute violence against women, including childmarriage, under the applicable law. Trainings should clarify that childmarriage can be prosecuted as a crime, in addition to using Penal Codeprovisions on defilement and abduction; and aim to address negativeattitudes towards domestic violence.Together with the Ministry of Gender, Children andCommunity Development, initiate a national awareness-raising campaign onviolence against women, including child marriage, focusing on the rightsof victims as well as the responsibilities of law enforcement,prosecution, and other relevant authorities.In coordination with the Ministry of Gender, Children andCommunity Development, establish a central database on violence againstwomen to record the number of cases of violence against women reported andaddressed through prosecution or mediation and their outcomes; ensure suchdata is publicly available.To the Ministry of EducationAfter the Education Bill becomes law:Develop a comprehensive and costed plan to implement theprovision on compulsory education.Initiate a national awareness raising campaign on the educationlaw, with particular attention to compulsory education.Expand efforts to provide continuing formal education andvocational training opportunities for married girls and women, for exampleby initiating evening classes or part-time classes.Together with the Ministry of Gender, Children andCommunity Development, expand child care for teenage mothers so they canattend school.Monitor implementation of the readmission policy for girlswho leave school because of pregnancy or marriage.Improve monitoring and data collection on girls who dropout of school due to pregnancy or marriage and readmission, as well as ongirls’ attendance and completion rates.Monitor and ensure competent teaching of “lifeskills” lessons in schools.To the Ministry of HealthDevelop and implement a national policy and a nationalstrategy on adolescent reproductive health. Both the policy and thestrategy should have a strong focus on the right to access healthinformation and services, including contraception, and address factorsthat contribute to unplanned pregnancies.Improve access to reproductive health services andinformation for all girls and women, including access to emergencyobstetric care and family planning.Provide tailored health information to young mothers aboutproper nutrition and care for their health and the health of their babies.Raise awareness among health workers and the public on theimportance of registering all births, including home deliveries.To the JudiciaryIssue judicial circulars to raise awareness among judicialofficials that:Clarify the provision in the Child Care, Protection andJustice Act, article 183, that, “A court may, on application or onits own motion, extend the application of this Act to persons that areabove sixteen years of age but below twenty-one years of age.”Provide regular training for judges on their legal responsibilitiesto punish violence against women, including child marriage, under theapplicable law. Trainings should clarify that child marriage can bepunished as a crime in addition to using Penal Code provisions ondefilement and abduction.To the Malawi Human RightsCommissionIncrease monitoring of child marriage cases. Investigateand publish reports on the issue of child marriages and gaps in protectionand access to justice for victims.To United NationsAgencies and International DonorsUrge the government to enact and implement the Marriage,Divorce and Family Relations Bill.Urge the government to develop a comprehensive nationalstrategy for combating child marriage, and support programs to implementthe national action plan once it is developed.Support the development and implementation of a nationaladolescent reproductive health policy and a strategy that has a strongfocus on preventing teenage pregnancy.Support nongovernmental organizations to monitor andevaluate programs on violence against women and to use this information toimprove programing.Support efforts to assist girls in seeking legal remediesfor forced marriage and abuse, obtaining maintenance, and in continuingtheir education, including through support for public interest litigation.Support the establishment and maintenance of shelters forsurvivors of gender-based violence.AcknowledgementsThis report was written by Agnes Odhiambo, Africa researcherin the Women’s Rights Division of Human Rights Watch. The report is basedon research conducted by Agnes Odhiambo and Women’s Rights researchfellow Brenda Akia. Specialist review was provided by Megan McLemore, seniorresearcher with the Health and Human Rights Division; Juliane Kippenberg,senior researcher with the Children’s Rights Division; and TisekeKasambala, Southern Africa director. The report was edited by Liesl Gerntholtz,director of the Women’s Rights Division; James Ross, legal and policy director;and Tom Porteous, deputy program director.Report production and editorial assistance was provided by CamillePendley, associate in the Women’s Rights Division; Kathy Mills, publications specialist; and FitzroyHepkins, administrative manager.Human Rights Watch would like to express our deepappreciation to all of the individuals who agreed to be interviewed for thisreport, particularly the girls and women who told us their personal stories. Wealso wish to thank the local women’s rights activists, district youthofficers, and NGO representatives who helped to facilitate our research in Malawi.[1]Government of Malawi, National Statistical Office (NSO), “IntegratedHousehold Survey 2010-2011: Household Socio Economic CharacteristicsReport,” 2012,http://www.nsomalawi.mw/images/stories/data_on_line/economics/ihs/IHS3/IHS3_Report.pdf(accessed September 3, 2013), p. 11.[2]World Bank, “Malawi,” undated,http://data.worldbank.org/country/malawi (accessed September 12, 2013).[3]NSO, “Integrated Household Survey 2010-2011,” p. 206. On average, aMalawian consumes about Malawian Kwacha (MK) 150 (US$0.45) per day.Ibid., p. 97[4]Ministry of Gender, Children and Community Development and the NSO,“Gender and Development Index 2011,” June 2012,http://www.nsomalawi.mw/images/stories/data_on_line/economics/Gender/MALAWI_GENDER_AND_DEVELOPMENT_INDEX%20-June%202012.pdf(accessed November 28, 2013), p. 24.[5]Ibid.  The study also notes that compared to men, women spend about sixtimes more time doing domestic work and attributes this to their low levels ofeducation , p. 25. as much, time in domestic, care and volunteer activities ascompared to men.[6]Ibid., p. 25.[7]United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), “Human Development Report2013,”http://www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/library/corporate/HDR/2013GlobalHDR/English/HDR2013%20Report%20English.pdf(accessed September 2, 2013), p. 147.[8]Malawi Constitution, art. 24. Discrimination on the basis of sex is alsoprohibited. Ibid., art. 20 (1).[9]Ibid., art. 20(1).[10]Since 2010, Malawi adopted the Gender Equality Act 2013, the Deceased Estates(Wills, Inheritance and Protection) Act 2011, the Child Care Protection andJustice Act 2010, and the Legal Aid Act 2010.[11]Government of Malawi, “MGDS II 2011-2016,” 2012, http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2012/cr12222.pdf(accessed October 30, 2013), p. 50.[12]UNDP, Human Development Report 2013: p. 4.[13]For more information see, Malawi Human Rights Commission (MHRC), “CulturalPractices and their Impact on the Enjoyment of Human Rights, Particularly theRights of Women and Children in Malawi,”2005, http://www.medcol.mw/commhealth/publications/cultural_practices_report.pdf(accessed September 3, 2013). Also see National Youth Council of Malawi,“Report on Profiling Early Marriages in Malawi: Making a Case to‘Stop’ Early Marriages”, 2009, http://www.nycommw.org/reports/Report-20Profiling%20Early%20Marriages%20MW.pdf(accessed August 21, 2013) pp. 5 and 11.[14]See, for example, Ngeyi Ruth Kamyongolo and Bernadette Malunga, “TheTreatment of Consent in Sexual Assault Law in Malawi,” May 2011,http://theequalityeffect.org/pdfs/ConsentPaperMalawi.pdf (accessed September12, 2013), p. 12.[15]Ibid., p. 22.[16]NSO, “Integrated Household Survey 2010-2011: Household Socio EconomicCharacteristics Report,” p. 35.[17]Ibid., p. 25.[18]Ibid., p. 21.[19]Human Rights Watch email communication with Chandiwira Nyirenda, Department ofPlanning, Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, Lilongwe, November 20,2013.[20]Ibid.[21]Pelser E. et al., “Intimate Partner Violence: Results from a NationalGender-Based Violence Study in Malawi,” 2005, http://www.issafrica.org/uploads/Book2005PartnerViolence.PDF(accessed August 10, 2013), p. 10.[22]NSO and ICF Macro, “Malawi Demographic and Health Survey 2010,” p.246.[23]Ibid., p. 248.[24]Robert Chasweka et al., “Magnitude of Domestic Violence against PregnantWomen in Malawi,” Journal of Research in Nursing and Midwifery, July2012, Vol. 1(2), p. 18.[25]Ibid., pp. 242,  247, 248 and 249.[26]Ibid., pp. 240-53.[27]Government of Malawi, Ministry of Health, “Malawi Health Sector StrategicPlan, 2011 – 2016: Moving towards Equity and Quality,” 2011, p. 29.[28]NSO and ICF Macro, “Malawi Demographic and Health Survey 2010,” pp.242 and 245.[29]Ministry of Health and UNICEF, “Assessment of the Capacity of the HealthSector to Respond to Violence against Women and Children in Malawi,” p.14; and NSO and ICF Macro, “Malawi Demographic and Health Survey 2010,”p. 259.[30]Ibid.[31]Ibid., p. 239. Also see NSO and ICF Macro, “Malawi Demographic and HealthSurvey 2010,” p. 239.[32]Human Rights Watch interview with Fahad Assani,  minister of justice andConstitutional affairs, Pacharo Kayira, chief state advocate, and ChipiliroThombozi, economist, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Lilongwe,October 29, 2013.  Also see, Ministry of Health and UNICEF,“Assessment of the Capacity of the Health Sector to Respond to Violenceagainst Women and Children in Malawi,” pp. 25 -26 for analysis of gapsand challenges in implementing this law.[33]Penal Code Act, arts. 132 and 133, p. 9.[34]Penal Code Act, 2011, art. 138(1), states, “Any person who carnally knowsany girl under the age of sixteen years shall be guilty of a felony and shallbe liable to imprisonment for life.”[35]UNICEF, “Protecting Children in Malawi: A Report on the Major Findings ofthe Mapping and Assessment of the National Child Protection System,” July2012, http://www.unmalawi.org/pdf/2012%20Malawi%20Child%20Protection%20System%20Mapping%20and%20Assessment%20Report.pdf(accessed August 23, 2013), p. 11. VSUs are specialized units, which are situatedat police stations, and are staffed by officers trained to investigate andmediate or prosecute cases involving women and children. They also offercounseling and referral services for survivors. CVSUs are specialized unitsbased at the community level and do prevention interventions, counseling, andreferral of cases to the police for prosecution. VSUs and some CVSUs offeraccommodation to survivors of violence. One Stop Centers are based at hospitalsand ensure that women and girls survivors of violence access various services,including legal information, medical care, and psychosocial support in oneplace.[36]Government of Malawi, Ministry of Health, “Malawi Health Sector StrategicPlan, 2011 – 2016: Moving towards Equity and Quality,” 2011, http://medcol.mw/commhealth/publications/3%20Malawi%20HSSP%20Final%20Document%20%283%29.pdf(accessed October 31, 2013). p. 31.[37]Ministry of Health, “Malawi Health Sector Strategic Plan, 2011 –2016,” p. 127.[38]Ministry of Health, “Malawi Health Sector Strategic Plan, 2011 –2016,” pp. XI and 47.[39]Ministry of Health, Malawi Health Sector Strategic Plan, 2011 – 2016:Moving towards Equity and Quality, 2011, p. 12; NSO and ICF Macro,“Malawi Demographic and Health Survey 2010,” pp. 44, 49 and 221;WHO et al., “Trends in Maternal Mortality: 1990 – 2010,” pp.41.[40]NSO and ICF Macro, “Malawi Demographic and Health Survey 2010,” p.57. The CPR increased from 33 percent in 2004 to 46 percent in 2010. The CPR isthe proportion of women of reproductive age who are using (or whose partner isusing) a contraceptive method at a given point in time. See, http://www.who.int/whosis/whostat2006ContraceptivePrevalenceRate.pdf(accessed September 1, 2013).[41]Ibid., p. 221.[42]Ibid.[43]Women with more than a secondary education have a TFR of 2.1 compared withwomen with no education who have a TFR of 6.9. ibid., p. 44. The totalfertility rate represents the number of children that would be born to a womanif she were to live to the end of her childbearing years (15-49) and bearchildren in accordance with current age-specific fertility rates. See WorldBank, “Indicators,” undated, http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.DYN.TFRT.IN.(accessed September 12, 2013).[44]HIV prevalence among adults aged 15 to 49 is 11 percent. NSO and ICF Macro,2011, “Malawi Demographic and Health Survey 2010,” p. 196.[45]Ibid., p. 49.[46]Human Rights Watch interview with Hans Katengeza, reproductive health officer responsiblefor youth and adolescents, Ministry of Health, Lilongwe, October 28, 2013.[47]Ministry of Health, “Malawi Health Sector Strategic Plan, 2011 –2016,” p. 30.[48]Ibid., pp. 1-2.[49]Ministry of Health, “National Sexual and Reproductive Health and RightsStrategy, 2011 – 2016, 2012,” p. 1.[50]United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), “Marrying too Young: End ChildMarriage,” 2012,http://www.unfpa.org/webdav/site/global/shared/documents/publications/2012/MarryingTooYoung.pdf(accessed January 8, 2014), p. 23.[51]UNFPA, “Profiles of 10 Countries with the Highest Rates of Child Marriage,”undated, http://www.unfpa.org/webdav/site/global/shared/documents/publications/2012/ChildMarriage_8_annex1_indicator-definition.pdf(accessed July 15, 2013), p. 8.[52]NSO and ICF Macro, “Malawi Demographic and Health Survey 2010,” p.76.[53]UNFPA, “Profiles of 10 Countries with the Highest Rates of ChildMarriage,” undated, p. 8.[54]Ibid.[55]Ibid.[56]Ibid.[57]MHRC, “Cultural Practices and their Impacton the Enjoyment of Human Rights, Particularly the Rights of Women and Childrenin Malawi,” pp. 25, 33, 34 and 78.[58]Human Rights Watch Interview with Zulu K., Chikwawa district, September 18,2013.[59]Human Rights Watch interview with Chaonaine A., Nkhotakota district, September24, 2013.[60]MHRC, “Cultural Practices and their Impact on the Enjoyment of HumanRights, Particularly the Rights of Women and Children in Malawi,” p. 25.[61]See Stephenson R.  et al., “Community Environments ShapingTransactional Sex among Sexually Active Men in Malawi, Nigeria, and Tanzania,”2012, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23215551 (accessed January 2, 2014).[62]Human Rights Watch interview with Lucy P., Nkhotakota district, September 24,2013.[63]See MHRC, “Cultural Practices and their Impact on the Enjoyment of HumanRights, Particularly the Rights of Women and Children in Malawi,” for acomprehensive analysis of cultural and traditional practices that promote childmarriage.[64]Human Rights Watch interview with David Kantcheri, village headmanChitsatanji., Lilongwe district, September 22, 2013.[65]Human Rights Watch interview with Patricia K., Chikwawa district, September 18,2013.[66]According to a government survey, in 2011 in primary and secondary schools, 15percent of females (compared to 2.1 percent of males) dropped out of schoolbecause of marriage, and  7.7 percent of females (compared t0 3.6 ofmales) left to help with house chores.  NSO, “Integrated HouseholdSurvey 2010-2011,” p. 38.[67]Ibid.[68]See Stephenson R et al., “Community environments shaping transactionalsex among sexually active men in Malawi, Nigeria, and Tanzania,” 2012, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23215551(accessed January 2, 2014).[69]Human Rights Interview with Hendrina M. Givah., FAWEMA, Lilongwe, September 23,2013.[70]Human Rights Watch interview with Boniface Mandere, head of advocacy, Eye ofthe Child, Blantyre, September 16, 2013. A government study found that in 2011,45 percent of students who dropped out of primary school cited lack of interestin studying. NSO, “Integrated Household Survey 2010-2011,” p.38.  The study does not have sex disaggregated data on this issue.[71]Human Rights Interview with Alima G., Nkhotakota district, September 24, 2013.[72]Human Rights Interview with Kausiwa C., Mwanza district, September 17, 2013. Malawioperates an 8-4-4 system of education (eight years in primary school, four insecondary school, and another four in university). The first year of primaryschool, standard one, is equivalent to grade one in the United States, whileform one equals grade 9.[73]Human Rights Interview with Kausiwa C., Mwanza district, September 17, 2013.[74]Human Rights Watch interview with Kabwila N., Lilongwe distict, September 22,2013.[75]Human Rights Watch interview with Gowelo L., Lilongwe district, September 22,2012.[76]Human Rights Watch had been told by a local NGO official who knew her case thatfrom their investigations she should be about 15 years.[77]Human Rights Interview with Esther B., Mwanza district, September 17, 2013.[78]According to the study, only 2.8 percent of 253 girls who dropped out becauseof marriage had gone back to school. Satvika Chalasani et al., “AdolescentPregnancy and Education Trajectories in Malawi,” September 21, 2012, http://paa2013.princeton.edu/papers/132776(accessed January 3, 2014), p. 7.[79]UNICEF, “The State of the World’s Children,” p. 64; UNICEFInnocenti Digest, “Early Marriage: Child Spouses,” No. 7, March2001, http://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/digest7e.pdf (accessed April20, 2012), p. 16.[80]Ibid.[81]Human Rights interview with Kenneth Tengani Malemia, deputy head teacher,Dyeratu Primary School, Chikwawa district, September 18, 2013.[82]An official from the Ministry of Education told us, “This data is notavailable. It is important but it has been overlooked.” Human Rightsinterview with Mr. Kandiwira,  Statistical unit, Ministry of Education,September 29, 2013; Human Rights interview with Hendrina M. Givah, nationalcoordinator, FAWEMA, Lilongwe, September 23, 2013.[83]Human Rights Watch interview with Esau Kamwandoand Matthews Chinangwa, child protection officers, Nkhotakota VSU, Nkhotakotadistrict, September 25, 2013.[84]Human Rights Watch interview with Chanika B., Mangochi district, September 21,2013.[85]Human Rights Watch interview with Alinane Y., Nkhotakota district, September24, 2013.[86]Human Rights Watch group interview with Marcel Chisi, executive director, andChristopher Misuku, project officer, Active Youth Initiative for SocialEnhancement, Blantyre, September 16, 2013.[87]See Dyson Mthawanji, “Malawi: Child Labour and Child Marriage PerpetuateGender Inequality,” June 12, 2013, http://allafrica.com/stories/201306120761.html(accessed January 16, 2014); Malawi Voice, “Girls’ EmpowermentNetwork Launches Girls’ Publication,” March 14, 2013,http://www.malawivoice.com/2013/03/14/girls-empowerment-network-launches-girls-publication-44145/(accessed January 16, 2014).[88]Human Rights Watch Interview with Chikondi R., Blantyre, September 18, 2013.[89]Human Rights Watch interview with Ephraim Chimwaza, executive director, Centerfor Social Concern and Development (CESOCODE), Blantyre, September 16, 2013.[90]Human Rights Watch group interview with Peter Ngalawa Phiri, C-SEP projectmanager, and Irene Banda, CM and CB project manager, Save the Children Malawi,Blantyre, September 16, 2013.[91]Human Rights Watch interview with Elina V., Mangochi district, September 21, 2013.[92]Human Rights Watch interview with Chanika B., Mangochi district, September 21,2013.[93]NSO and ICF Macro, “Malawi Demographic and Health Survey 2010,” p.259.  According to the survey, women aged 15 – 19 are less likely toseek help from the police.[94]Human Rights Watch interview with Kabwila N., Lilongwe district September 22,2013.[95]Human Rights Watch interview with Chipeta A., Lilongwe district, September 22,2013.[96]WHO, “Multi-country Study on Women’s Health and Domestic Violenceagainst Women: Initial Results on Prevalence, Health Outcomes and Women’sResponses: Summary Report,” 2005,http://www.who.int/gender/violence/who_multicountry_study/summary_report/summary_report_English2.pdf(accessed November 10, 2013), p. 8. The multi-country study found that in allthe countries studies, except Japan and Ethiopia, girls in this age bracketwere more vulnerable to physical and sexual abuse by a partner, non-partner, orboth, than older women. Also see, (UNICEF), “Early Marriage, A HarmfulTraditional Practice, A Statistical Exploration,” pp. 22-23.[97]See NSO and ICF Macro, “Malawi Demographic and Health Survey 2010,”pp. 240-53.[98]Robert Jensen and Rebecca Thornton, “Early Female Marriage in theDeveloping World,” Gender and Development, July 2003, vol. 11, No.2, pp. 9-19.[99]Human Rights Watch interview with Mary Makwawa, nurse and midwife, NkhotakotaDistrict Hospital, Nkhotakota district, September 25, 2013.[100]Nawal Nour, “An Introduction to Maternal Mortality,” Journal ofObstetrics and Gynecology, vol. 1, No. 2 (2008), pp. 77-81.[101]See Amy Tsui et al., “The Role of Delayed Childbearing in the Preventionof Obstetric Fistulas,” International Journal of Gynecology and Obstetrics,vol. 99 (2007), p. 98; WHO, “Obstetric Fistula: Guiding Principles forClinical Management and Programme Development,” p.3; and UNFPA,“Marrying too Young: End Child Marriage,” p. 22.[102]Nawal Nour, “An Introduction to Maternal Mortality,” p. 12.[103]Human Rights Watch interview withEliza Hiwa, midwife, Chikwawa District Hospital, Chikwawa district,September 18, 2013.[104]Human Rights Watch interview withHelen Mtonga, nurse and midwife, Mwanza District Hospital, Mwanzadistrict, September 17, 2013.[105]Ibid.[106]Ibid.[107]Ibid., p. 4.[108]WHO, “WHO Guidelines on Preventing Early Pregnancy and Poor ReproductiveOutcomes Among Adolescents in Developing Countries,” 2011, http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2011/9789241502214_eng.pdf(accessed January 8, 2014), p. 2.[109]Ibid. Studies on other countries show that women who marry early have thehighest proportion of unfavorable pregnancy outcomes at all stages throughouttheir childbearing years. S. Shawky and W. Millat, “Early TeenageMarriage and Pregnancy Outcome,” Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal,2000, vol. 6, issue 1, http://www.emro.who.int/publications/emhj/0601/06.htm(accessed January, 8, 2014), pp. 46-54.[110]Young mothers are less likely to get prenatal care and oftendo not have enough information about proper nutrition while pregnant to nurturethemselves and babies. Babies born to young mothers run a 30 percentincreased risk of dying during their first year of life.  Babies may havea low birth weight as a consequence of their mother’s poor nutritionalstatus while pregnant, and babies with low birth weight are 5 to 30 times morelikely to die than babies of normal weight. See Population ActionInternational, “How Family Planning Protects the Health of Women andChildren,” May 1, 2006, http://www.populationaction.org/Publications/Fact_Sheets/FS2/How_Family_Planning_Protects_the_Health_of_Women_and_Children.pdf(accessed March 12, 2012), pp. 1-2; Nawal M. Nour. “Health Consequencesof Child Marriage in Africa,” November 2006, http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/12/11/06-0510_article.htm.[111]See UNICEF Innocenti Digest, “Early Marriage: Child Spouses,” No.7, March 2001, http://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/digest7e.pdf (accessedApril 20, 2012), p. 12.[112]Population Council, “Understanding Sex Without consent Among Young People:A Neglected Priority,” Brief No. 7, July 2007,http://www.popcouncil.org/pdfs/TABriefs/PGY_Brief07_NonconsensualSex.pdf(accessed September 12, 2012), p. 3.[113]Human Rights Watch interview with Danira T., Mwanza district, September 16,2013.[114]Currently, there are three regimes of marriage under Malawi law: statutory,customary, and by repute and permanent cohabitation. In the absence of acomprehensive family law in Malawi, the choice of applicable law is determinedby the type of marriage in question.[114]Eachtype of marriage has varied marriage formalities, and confers different rightsand obligations during marriage and at its dissolution.  These marriagesare governed by laws developed in the colonial era and include: the MarriageAct, Chapter 25: 01; the African Marriage (Christian Rites)Registration, Chapter 25: 02; and The Asiatics (Marriage, Divorce andSuccession) Act, Chapter 25:03. See generally, Malawi Law Commission, “Reportof the Law Commission on the Review of Laws on Marriage and Divorce.”[115]Child Care, Protection and Justice Act, art. 81 (a).[116]See UN Women, “Developing Legislation on Violence against Women and Girls,“May 2011, http://www.endvawnow.org/uploads/modules/pdf/1355776748.pdf (accessedFebruary 3, 2014), p. 359. It states, “As a child under the age of 18 isnot capable of giving her valid consent to enter into marriage, child marriagesare considered to be forced marriages.”[117]The Convention on the Right of the Child in article 12 states that governments shallassure a child who is capable of forming his or her views the right to freelyexpress those views in accordance with the age and maturity of the child. CRC,art. 12. However, there are challenges in determining the age a child should bebefore he or she can “consent” fully and freely to marriage andsexual relations, and with full understanding of the implications of such aunion, including the risks of underage marriage. See UNICEF Innocenti Digest,“Early Marriage: Child Spouses,” pp. 9-11, for a discussion on thedifficulty of determining full and free consent to marriage for differentcategories of children under the age of 18.[118]The Constitution in article 200 provides for the continuedapplication of the customary law in force at the time the Constitution wasadopted. Further, the Constitution in article 10 enjoins courts to have dueregard to the principles and provisions of the Constitution when applying anddeveloping the same.[119]See Women and Law in Southern Africa Research and Educational Trust, “TheSituation of Women,” undated, http://wlsamw.wordpress.com/situation-of-women/(accessed November 10, 2013).[120]Ngeyi Ruth Kamyongolo and Bernadette Malunga, “The Treatment of Consentin Sexual Assault Law in Malawi,” p. 12.[121]Constitution of the Republic of Malawi (2004), art. 5.[122]Ibid., art. 10.[123]Ibid., 44(1).[124]Constitution, art. 22(8).[125]The Marriage Act in article 19 states: “If either partyto an intended marriage, not being a widower, widow or divorced person, is notover eighteen years of age, the written consent of the father or mother, or ifboth be dead or of unsound mind or absent from Malawi, of the guardian of suchparty, must be produced annexed to such affidavit as aforesaid, before alicence can be granted or a certificate issued.”[126]MHRC, “Cultural Practices and their Impact on the Enjoyment of HumanRights, Particularly the rights of Women and Children in Malawi,” p. 88;and Malawi Law Commission, “The Report of the Malawi Law Commission onthe Review of Laws on Marriage and Divorce,” p. 13.[127]Penal Code Act, art. 138 (2).[128]See Ngeyi Ruth Kamyongolo and Bernadette Malunga, “The Treatment ofConsent in Sexual Assault Law in Malawi,” pp. 13-14.[129]Penal Code, art. 132.[130]Penal Code, art. 133.[131]However, there have been convictions for offenses that amount to marital rapealthough courts have not characterized them as such. See Ngeyi Ruth Kamyongoloand Bernadette Malunga, “The Treatment of Consent in Sexual Assault Lawin Malawi,” p. 9.[132]Yamikani Yapuwa, “Joyce Banda Forms Education Committee,” AllAfrica,November 1, 2013, http://allafrica.com/stories/201311030198.html (accessedDecember 7, 2013).[133]Human Rights Watch interview with Fahad Assani,  minister of justice andConstitutional affairs, Pacharo Kayira, chief state advocate, and ChipiliroThombozi, economist, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Lilongwe,October 29, 2013.[134]The minister of justice and the chief state advocate told Human Rights Watchduring a meeting in October 2013 that there has to be a constitutionalamendment to raise the minimum age of marriage and definition of a child to 18– as proposed in the Marriage Bill – before it can pass. However,there are conflicting views among Malawian lawmakers and legal experts on thisissue. Some say that the Marriage Bill can be passed and enacted without suchan amendment, while others noted that such a move would render the enacted lawtoothless since the Constitution is the supreme law of Malawi. There is alsoconfusion as to whether, should the Constitution need to be amended to allowthe Marriage Bill to be passed and enacted, what procedure should be used: areferendum or a two-thirds majority vote by parliament.[135]The four entities are the most relevant in pushing forward the MarriageBill.  One of the roles of the Ministry of Justice and ConstitutionalAffairs is to coordinate legal reform to bring laws in conformity with theConstitution. Once drafted, the ministry presents laws to cabinet andparliament. Article 132 of the Constitution, which establishes the LawCommission, states that the commission shall have, “the power to reviewand make recommendations relating to the repeal and amendment of laws and whichshall have such powers and functions as are conferred on it by thisConstitution and any other Act of Parliament.” According to article108(1), “The High Court shall have original jurisdiction to review anylaw, and any action or decision of the Government, for conformity with thisConstitution, save as otherwise provided by this Constitution and shall havesuch other jurisdiction and powers as may be conferred on it by thisConstitution or any other law.” The Ministry of Gender, Children andCommunity Development is mandated to provide policy guidance on women andchildren. Malawi’s judiciary is an independent body and article 9 of theConstitution mandates it with “the responsibility of interpreting,protecting and enforcing this Constitution and all laws and in accordance withthis Constitution in an independent and impartial manner with regard only tolegally relevant facts and the prescriptions of law.” The Constitutionstatesin article 103(2) that, “The judiciary shall have jurisdiction overall issues of judicial nature and shall have exclusive authority to decidewhether an issue is within its competence.”  In its report on reviewof laws on marriage and divorce, the Law Commission stated:It is the Commission’s view that theConstitution sets the minimum standard for the protection of children fromearly marriage. It would not be amiss for a law regulating marriage to set ahigher standard. Nonetheless, the Commission also recommends that subsection(7) of section 22 of the Constitution should be amended so that children agedbelow the age of eighteen years must be prohibited from entering into marriage.The Commission also recommends that subsection (5) of section 23 of theConstitution should be amended so that the threshold on the minimum age for “child”should be raised from sixteen years of age to “eighteen.”[136]Human Rights Watch phone interview with Eric Chisazo, assistant chief lawreform officer, Malawi Law Commission, Lilongwe, December 3 and December 10,2013.[137]Ibid., art. 23 (5) and Child Care, Protection and Justice Act, art. 2.[138]MHRC, “Cultural Practices and their Impact on the Enjoyment of HumanRights, Particularly the Rights of Women and Children in Malawi,” p. 28.[139]Human Rights Watch interview with Francis Kantikana, magistrate, Dowa district,September 26, 2013.[140]Human Rights Watch interview with Alex Malizani, Alfred Kapenta and Mary Phiri,child protection workers, Nkhotakota police VSU, Nkhotakota distirct, September25, 2013.[141]Human Rights Watch interview with Fred Juma Chilowetsa, magistrate, Nkhatokotadistrict, September 25, 2013. Article 183 of the Child Care, Protection andJustice Act on extension of the application of the act states, “ A courtmay, on application or on its own motion, extend the application of this Act topersons that are above sixteen years of age but below twenty-one years ofage.” Only this magistrate said he applied this article in childprotection work.[142]National Registration Act, 2009, arts. 3(1), 24(1), 30, 31 and 33-35.[143]Child Care, Protection and Justice Act, arts. 122–124.[144]Ibid., arts. 76 (1) and 3 (2).[145]UNICEF, Child Protection and Mapping Report, p. 22.[146]Human Rights Watch interview with Esau Kamwandoand Matthews Chinangwa, child protection officers, Nkhotakota VSU, Nkhotakotadistrict, September 25, 2013.[147]Human Rights Watch interview with Bruno Kalemba, director of publicprosecutions, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Lilongwe, October29, 2013.[148]Human Rights Watch interview with Tembo K., Mangochi district, September 21,2013.[149]Human Rights Watch interview with Charles Banda, media networking and advocacyofficer, YONECO, Mangochi district, September 21, 2013.[150]CRC Committee, Concluding Observations: Burkina Faso, para. 59(e), U.N.Doc. CRC/C/BFA/CO/3-4 (2010); Cameroon, para. 60(d), U.N. Doc.CRC/C/CMR/CO/2 (2010).[151]Human Rights Watch interview with inspector Mark Munana, coordinator, communitypolicing; Esnarth Wiz, crime prevention desk officer; and George Sinalo, childprotection officer, Chikwawa Police Station, Chikwawa district, September 19,2013.[152]Human Rights Watch interview with Esmey Tembenu,Magistrate, and Alex Mlangere, child protection and probation officer, Blantyrechild justice court, Blantyre, September 16, 2013.[153]Human Rights Watch interview with Anthony Chiseko and Felix Gama, paralegalofficers, Women’s Voice, Blantyre, September 16, 2013.[154]Human Rights Watch interview with Charles Banda, media networking and advocacyofficer, YONECO, Mangochi district, September 21, 2013.[155]Human Rights Watch interview with Esmey Tembenu, Magistrate, and Alex Mlangere,child protection and probation officer, Blantyre child justice court, Blantyre,September 16, 2013.[156]Human Rights Watch interview withShabani Mtila, child protection worker, Nkhotakota district, September25, 2013.[157]Human Rights Watch interview with Joyce Phekani, director, Center forAlternatives for Victimized and Abused Women and Children, Blantyre, September16, 2013.[158]Human Rights Watch group interview with Marcel Chisi, executive director,Active Youth Initiative for Social Enhancement (AYISE); and Christopher Misuku,project officer, AYISE, Blantyre, September 16, 2013.[159]Human Rights Watch interview with Enoc Tembo, inspector of police and VSUcoordinator, Mangochi district, September[160]Human Rights Watch interview with Desmond Mhango, program manager, Center forYouth and Children Affairs, Lilongwe, September 23, 2013.[161]Mediation, as used in law, is a form of alternative dispute resolution; a wayof resolving disputes between parties. It is structured and has concreteeffects. Typically, a third neutral party assists the parties to negotiate asettlement. The term “mediation” is used in this report broadly torefer to any instance in which a third party helps others reach agreement.[162]Human Rights Watch interviews with Aaron Mackeka, assistant social welfareofficer, Mwanza district, September 17, 2013; Harvey Mbwezo, assistant socialwelfare officer, Mangochi district, September 20, 2013; Nyuma Phiri, childprotection officer, Nkhotakota district, September 25, 2013; John Washali,district social welfare officer, Dowa district, September 26, 2013; and AnthonyChiseko and Felix Gama, paralegal officers, Women’s Voice, Blantyre,September 16, 2013.[163]Human Rights Watch interview with Enoc Tambo, police inspector and coordinatorof the VSU, and Teresa Nsukwu, police officer at the VSU, Mangochi policestation, Mangochi district, September 20, 2013.[164]Human Rights Watch interview with DDH Dzowera, magistrate, Mwanza child justicecourt, Mwanza district, September 17, 2013.[165]Human Rights Watch interview with Bruno Kalemba, director of publicprosecutions, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Lilongwe, October29, 2013.[166]Human Rights Watch interview with Gladstone Chirundu, magistrate, Chikwawa,September 18, 2013.[167]Human Rights Watch interview with Bruno Kalemba, director of public prosecutions,Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Lilongwe, October 29, 2013.[168]Human Rights Watch interview with Enoc Tambo, police inspector and coordinatorof the VSU, and Teresa Nsukwu, police officer at the VSU, Mangochi policestation, Mangochi district, September 20, 2013.[169]Human Rights Watch interview with Dwhon Mwenyali , magistrate, Mangochi district,September 20, 2013.[170]Human Rights Watch interview with Shabani Mtila, child protection worker,Nkhotakota district, September 25, 2013.[171]Human Rights Watch interview with Charles Banda, media networking and advocacyofficer, YONECO, Mangochi district, September 21, 2013.[172]Human Rights Watch interview with Macloud Mphande, district social welfareofficer, Mangochi district, September 20, 2013.[173]Human Rights Watch interview with Francis Kantikana, magistrate, Dowa district,September 26, 2013.[174]Human Rights Watch interview with Desmond Mhango, program manager, Center forYouth and Children Affairs, Lilongwe, September 23, 2013.[175]In its mapping report on child protection in Malawi, UNICEF found that poorcoordination is a key challenge to protecting children from abuse. See UNICEF,“Protecting Children in Malawi: A Report on the Major Findings of theMapping and Assessment of the National Child Protection System,” p. 10.[176]Human Rights Watch did not conduct a comprehensive review of programs andinitiatives addressing child marriage. This analysis is based on interviewswith 30 NGOs that mentioned they were implementing such programs.[177]For example, a village headman in Dowa district told us about issuing an orderfor a girl to be tested for pregnancy against her will. He told us, “Myniece got pregnant. She was at school. We have older women who check girls forpregnancy. They asked her if she was pregnant and wanted to inspect her but mysister was against it. However, I went ahead and issued the order for her to bechecked and she was found to be pregnant.  My sister was fined a goat.After the baby was born, I told my sister to look after the child and send thegirl back to school. She is now in form four.” Human Rights Watchinterview with Mchighly Kalama, village headman Kayeseramgunda, Dowa district,September 25, 2013. However, community bylaws/local regulations signal acommunity concern that can be capitalized on and possibly generate more effectiveprevention strategies.[178]Human Rights Watch group interview with Marcel Chisi, executive director,Active Youth Initiative for Social Enhancement; and Christopher Misuku, projectofficer, Blantyre, September 16, 2013. Mangochi has a large Muslim population.[179]Eunice Chamgono, coordiantor, NGO Gender Coordination Network, Lilongwe,September 23, 2013.[180]Human Rights Watch interview with Chanika B., Mangochi district, September 21,2013.[181]Human Rights Watch interview with inspector Mark Munana, coordinator, communitypolicing; Esnarth Wiz, crime prevention desk officer; and George Sinalo, childprotection officer, Chikwawa Police Station, Chikwawa district, September 19,2013.[182]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December 16,1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc.A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S.171, entered into force March 23, 1976, ratified byMalawi on December 22, 1993; International Covenant on Economic, Social andCultural Rights (ICESCR), adopted December 16, 1966, G.A. Res.2200A (XXI), 21U.N. GAOR Supp. (No.16) at 49, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966) 993 U.N.T.S. 3, enteredinto force January 3, 1976, ratified by Malawi on December 22, 1993;International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discriminationagainst Women (CEDAW), adopted December 18, 1979, G.A. Res. 34/180, enteredinto force September 3, 1981, ratified by Malawi March 12, 1987; Convention onthe Rights of the Child (CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, G.A. Res. 44/25, annex,44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered intoforce September 2, 1990, ratified by Malawi January 2, 1991.[183]African (Banjul) Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR), OAU Doc.CAB/LEG/67/3 rev. 5, 21 (1982), entered into forced October 21, 1986, ratifiedby Malawi February 23, 1990;  African Charter on the Rights and Welfare ofthe Child (ACRWC), OAY Doc. CAB/LEG/24.9/49 (1990), entered into force November29, 1999, ratified by Malawi September 16, 1999; and Protocol to the AfricanCharter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on The Rights of Women in Africa(the Maputo Protocol), adopted July 11, 2003, entered into force November 2005and ratified by Malawi May 20, 2995.[184]Committee on the Elimination of Violence Against Women (CEDAW Committee),General Recommendation No. 19, Violence against women, (Eleventh session,1992), Compilation of General Comments and General Recommendations Adopted byHuman Rights Treaty Bodies, U.N. Doc. HRI\GEN\1\Rev.1 at 84 (1994), (containedin document A/47/38), para. 9. See also see ICCPR, HRC, General Comment 31,Nature of the general legal obligation on states parties to the Covenant, para.9, U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.13 (2004); UN Committee Against Torture,General Comment No. 2: Implementation of Article 2 by States Parties, 24January 2008.CAT/C/GC/2. Regarding the responsibility of states extending toall within their jurisdiction, see ICCPR, art. 2(1).[185]CEDAW, art. 5.[186]HumanRights Committee, General Comment No. 28, para. 5.[187]CRC, art. 1. In the context of the CRC, “a child means every human beingbelow the age of eighteen years unless under the law applicable to the child,majority is attained earlier."[188]See, for example, UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 4,Adolescent Health and Development in the Context of the Convention on theRights of the Child, (Thirty-third session, 2003), para. 20 (“TheCommittee strongly recommends that States parties review and, where necessary,reform their legislation and practice to increase the minimum age for marriagewith and without parental consent to 18 years, for both girls and boys”).There is an evolving consensus in international law that 18 should be theminimum age for marriage.[189]ACRWC, art. 21(2).[190]Maputo Protocol, art. 6(a).[191]CEDAW, “Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Parties underArticle 18 of the Convention, Concluding Observations, Malawi,”January 22, 2010,  http://sim.law.uu.nl/SIM/CaseLaw/uncom.nsf/fe005fcb50d8277cc12569d5003e4aaa/70143da9ad8bd5a7c12576cf00356bb9?OpenDocument(accessed November 6, 2013) paras. 14 and 15.[192]Convention on Consent to Marriage, art. 3.[193]Maputo Protocol, art. 16 (d).[194]For the specific recommendation to  Malawi see UN Committee on the Rightsof the Child, “Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Parties underArticle 44 of the Convention, Concluding Observations, Malawi,”March 27 2009, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/crc/docs/co/CRC-C-MWI-CO2.pdf(accessed January 31, 2014), paras. 36 and 37. For other countries  seefor example, UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, “Consideration ofReports Submitted by States Parties under Article 44 of the Convention,Concluding Observations, Myanmar,”  March 14, 2012, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/crc/docs/co/CRC_C_MMR_CO_3-4.pdf(accessed January 31, 2014), paras. 43 and 44;  and “Considerationof Reports Submitted by States Parties under Article 44 of the Convention,Concluding Observations, Djibouti, ” October 7, 2008, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/crc/docs/AdvanceVersions/CRC.C.DJI.CO.2.pdf(accessed January 31, 2014), paras. 33 and 34.[195]ICCPR, arts. 3, 6, 9, 19, 23 and 24.[196]ICESCR, art. 2.[197]CRC, art. 2.[198]ACRWC, art. 21.[199]The Maputo Protocol in article 6 calls on governments to develop laws thatestablish 18 as the minimum age of marriage. The African Charter in article 18 obligatesgovernments to “ensure the elimination of every discrimination againstwomen and also ensure the protection of the rights of the woman and the childas stipulated in international declarations and conventions.”[200]CEDAWCommittee, General Recommendation No. 28: the core obligations of statesparties under article 2 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms ofDiscrimination against Women, 47th Sess., U.N. Doc. CEDAW/C/ GC/28, 2010, para.5.[201]Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted December 10, 1948, G.A. Res.217A(III), U.N. Doc. A/810 at 71 (1948), art. 16; ICCPR, art. 23; ICESCR, art.10(1).[202] CEDAW,art.16, and Convention on Consent to Marriage, art. 2.[203]Maputo Protocol, art. 16.[204] UNHuman Rights Committee, General Comment No. 19 (The Family), Protection of theFamily, the Right to Marriage and Equality of the Spouses, (Article 23),(Thirty-ninth session, 1990), Compilation of General Comments and Generalrecommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty bodies, UN Doc.HRI/Gen/1/Rev.7(2004), p. 149, para. 4.[205] UNHuman Rights Committee, General Comment No. 28, Equality of Rights Between Menand Women (Article 3), (Sixty-eight session, 2000), Compilation of GeneralComments and Recommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, UNDoc.HRI/GEN/1/Rev.7 (2004), p. 178, para. 27.[206] CEDAWCommittee, General Recommendation No. 21, Equality in Marriage and Family Relations,(Thirteenth Session, 1994), Compilation of General comments and GeneralRecommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, UNDoc.HRI/GEN/1/Rev.1(2004), paras. 16, 1 (a) and (b).[207]CRC, art. 12.[208]Committeeon the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 12, The Right of the Child toBe Heard, U.N. Doc.CRC/C/GC/12(2009), para. 2.[209]Ibid.[210]ICESCR, art. 12.[211]CRC, art. 24; see also, CESCR, General Comment No. 14,  The right to thehighest attainable standard of health (Twenty-second session, 2000), U.N. Doc.E/C.12/2000/4 (2000), reprinted in Compilation of General Comments and GeneralRecommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, U.N. Doc.HRI/GEN/1/Rev.6 at 85 (2003), para. 22.[212]CEDAW, art. 12(1).[213]CESCR, General Comment  No. 14, , paras. 14 and 21.[214]CRC Committee, General comment No. 15: The Right of the Child to the Enjoymentof the Highest Attainable Standard of Health (art. 24), CRC/C/GC/14 (2013),para. 33.[215]CRC Committee, Concluding Observations: Costa Rica, paras.27, 28, U.N. DocCRC/C/CRI/CO/4 (2011).[216]CEDAW Committee, “Concluding Observations of the Committee to End AllForms of Discrimination against Women, Malawi,” January 22, 2010, http://sim.law.uu.nl/SIM/CaseLaw/uncom.nsf/fe005fcb50d8277cc12569d5003e4aaa/70143da9ad8bd5a7c12576cf00356bb9?OpenDocument(accessed November 6, 2013), paras 35, 37 and 41.[217]CRC Committee, “Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Partiesunder Article 44 of the Convention, Concluding Observations, Malawi,”January 24, 2002, http://www.bayefsky.com/pdf/malawi_t4_crc.pdf (accessedNovember 6, 2013), paras. 425 (b) and 429.[218]ICESCR, art. 13; CRC, art. 28 and CRC, art. 29; African Charter, art. 17; MaputoProtocol, art. 12; ACRWC, art. 11.[219]African Charter, art. 17; ACRWC, art. 11; CEDAW, art. 10; Maputo Protocol, art.12.[220]CRC Committee, General Comment No. 1, The Aims of Education (Article 29(1)),(Twenty-sixth session, 2001), Compilation of General Comments and Generalrecommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, UN Doc. HRI/gen/1/rev.7,p.294, para. 1(a).[221]Ibid., para. 2.[222]Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 31, Nature of the general legalobligation on states parties to the Covenant (hereinafter "General Comment31"), para. 9, U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.13 (2004); UN CommitteeAgainst Torture , General Comment No. 2: Implementation of Article 2 by StatesParties, 24 January 2008.CAT/C/GC/2.[223]CRC, art. 19.[224]Ibid., art. 34.[225]Maputo Protocol, arts. 4(2 and b) and 3(4).[226]Ibid., arts. 5(d) and 4(2f).[227]Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 13 (2011) on theRight of the Child to Freedom from all Forms of Violence (Article 19), U.N.Doc. CRC/C/GC/13, paras 25(d), and  29(e).[228]See generally, the European Court of Human Right, Kaya v. Turkey,judgment of February 19, 1998, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1998-I, p.324; Jordan v. the United Kingdom, No. 24746/94, judgment of May 4,2001; Finucane v. the United Kingdom, No. 29178/95, judgment of July 12003; Isayeva v. Russia, 57950/00, judgment of July 27, 2004; Adaliv. Turkey, 38187/97, judgment March 31, 2005.Related ContentMarch 6, 2014News ReleaseMalawi: End Widespread Child MarriagePass Marriage Law, Adopt Comprehensive ApproachMarch 6, 2014News ReleaseMalawi: End Widespread Child MarriageRegion / CountryAfrica MalawiProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch