UsHUMANRIGHTS VIOLATIONS IN THE UNITED STATESMODERNCAPITAL OF HUMAN RIGHTS?Abusesin the State of GeorgiaCopyright © July 1996by Human Rights Watch.All rights reserved.Printed in the United Statesof America.ISBN 1-56432-169-XLibrary of Congress CatalogCard Number: 96-77034ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThis report was edited by HRW program directorCynthia Brown and HRW senior researcher Allyson Collins and formatted byHRW associate Nandi Rodrigo. The authors of each chapter offer their acknowledgmentsbelow.Police AbuseThe author, HRW senior researcher AllysonCollins, wishes to thank interviewees from the Office of Professional Standardsof the Atlanta Police Department, the Georgia Bureau of Investigations,the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the U.S. Justice Department's CivilRights Division, the Federal Public Defender's office in Atlanta, the FultonCounty Public Defender's office, the Atlanta City Public Defender's office,the U.S. Attorney's offices, the Fulton County District Attorney's officeand the Office of Community Affairs of Atlanta. The author would also liketo thank community activists who provided valuable information and insights,and attorneys Brian Spears and George Weaver. Special thanks to the AmericanCivil Liberties Union of Georgia and the Transactional Records Access Clearinghouseof Syracuse, New York.Death PenaltyThe author, attorney Stephen Bright, wishesto thank the entire staff of the Southern Center for Human Rights, wherehe serves as director. He also wishes to thank his capital punishment classat Yale Law School.Race and Drug Law EnforcementThe author, HRW associate counsel JamieFellner, wishes to thank Chief Justice Robert Bentham, District AttorneyDaniel Porter, District Attorney Spencer Lawton, Police Maj. William Shannon,Walter Britt, Gregory Smith and the other prosecutors, defense attorneysand police personnel in Georgia who provided critical insights and information.We also wish to acknowledge the generous assistance and data provided byTimothy Carr, of the Department of Corrections, and Willene White-Smithof the Crime Information Center of the Georgia Bureau of Investigations.Dr. Joseph Katz provided invaluable help with the statistical analysesthat are the core of this chapter.Treatment of PrisonersThe author, HRW associate counsel JoanneMariner, gratefully acknowledges the help of Bob Cullen, counsel for theplaintiffs in innumerable Georgia prison cases; Robert Bensing and RobinToone, staff attorneys with the Southern Center forHuman Rights; John ColeVodicka, director of the Prison and Jail Project, and Gerry Weber, legaldirector of the American Civil Liberties Union of Georgia.Sexual Abuse of Women PrisonersThe author, HRW associate counsel JoanneMariner, wishes to thank Bob Cullen and Lisa Boardman Burnette, counselfor the plaintiffs in the federal class action Cason v. Seckinger,whose generous provision of time and information greatly facilitated thepreparation of this chapter. Deborah Blatt, a former consultant with theWomen's Rights Project of Human Rights Watch, conducted the original researchthat was updated for this chapter. Dorothy Q. Thomas, director of the Women'sRights Project of Human Rights Watch, edited the chapter.Children in ConfinementThe author, HRW consultant Mina Samuels,wishes to thank the many organizations and individuals in Georgia and otherparts of the United States who assisted us in researching this issue. Inparticular, we would like to thank Judge Virgil Costley, Kathleen Dumitrescu,Richard McDevitt, Dorothy Murphy, George Napper, Linda Pace and ProfessorJanet Pratt. We also appreciate the assistance and suggestions providedby members of the advisory committee of the Children's Rights Project ofHuman Rights Watch.Lesbian and Gay RightsThe author, attorney Suzanne Goldberg,wishes to thank Larry Pellegrini, John Greaves, Johnny Fambro, Chip Rowan,Jane Morrison, Pat Hussain, Duncan Teague, Stephanie Swann, Melanie Rosen,Phillip Rush, Phil Rashoon, Donna Narducci, Charles Gossett, Dr. JamesStark, Lyn Stoesen, Donna Drumm, Lisa Kung, Phillip Rush and Walter Reeves.The organization for which the author works, Lambda Legal Defense and EducationFund, plans to open a Southern Regional office in Atlanta next year.Attacks on Freedom of ExpressionThe author, HRW on-line research associateKaren Sorensen, wishes to thank Julie Edelson at Planned Parenthood inAtlanta, Donna Pistolis in the Office for Intellectual Freedom at the AmericanLibrary Association in Chicago, and Alison Biers of People for the AmericanWay in Washington, D.C.SUMMARYWhen Atlanta set out to host the 1996 SummerOlympic Games, its application stated that "for many," the city is "themodern capital of human rights." This is big talk, even for a city thatin many respects symbolizes the social progress of the American South sincethe civil rights movement of the 1960s. A claim so large begs for evaluation.In this report, one of a series on the United States, Human Rights Watchoffers an assessment of how Atlanta, and the state of which it is capital,actually treat human rights.Human rights issues may seem unrelatedto a sporting event, but the Olympic Games have historically showcasedthe international community's respect for what Atlanta's application calledthe "justice and equality inherent in fair play." At the same time, theOlympics have often been a lightning rod for political controversy-forNazi racist supremacism (Berlin 1936), for black-power salutes (MexicoCity 1968), for anti-Israeli terrorism (Munich 1972), and for reciprocalboycotts by the U.S. and Soviet Union (Moscow 1980 and Los Angeles 1984),among others.Beijing lost its bid to host the 2000 Olympicsbecause of China's gross and systematic violations of human rights, andHuman Rights Watch was among the organizations that campaigned for takingits human rights record into account. As the world's attention focuseson an Olympic site, it follows naturally that the host country's humanrights record is of interest. And so it should be: as South Africa underapartheid discovered, a country that wishes to participate in the worldsporting system should also participate in the international human rightssystem and strive to meet the standards of that system.It may interest visitors to Atlanta toknow that the likely invisibility of homeless people will be largely dueto city ordinances that prohibit entering a vacant building or crossinga parking lot without owning a car parked there; ordinances that assistpolice in clearing homeless people off the downtown streets. And controversyhas already arisen this year, due to local politics in the U.S. that contradictOlympic principles. By decision of the organizing committee, the Olympictorch, on its journey from Los Angeles to Atlanta for the opening of thegames, will bypass at least one county in Georgia because of a county resolutionthat denigrates gay people. This, and much else about Atlanta, the stateof Georgia, and the U.S., will become more widely known because of thegames.It is to be hoped that world attentionmay lead to improvements. For Human Rights Watch finds that state officialsand public policies contravene fundamental human rights principles in awide range of settings in Georgia. For example:* Atlantapolice officers have used excessive force, including unjustified shootingsand severe beatings, and have otherwise abused their power without comingbefore external civilian review and without punishment through internaldepartment procedures, such that in Atlanta the performance of the policeis now a controversial and divisive issue.* Georgia'sdeath penalty law, upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1976, has led tocapital punishment primarily for the poor and for African-Americans-particularlywhen the victim of the crime is white-and this discriminatory impact compoundsthe abuse inherent in the death penalty itself.* Drug lawsare enforced disproportionately against black drug offenders, who, forexample, are arrested for cocaine-related offenses at seventeen times therate of whites (even though more whites are cocaine offenders) and whoreceive 98 percent of the life sentences handed down in drug cases.* State-runjails are so overcrowded and physically deteriorated, and local jail officialshave neglected prisoners' welfare so shamefully in so many areas, thatthe U.S. government has threatened to sue eleven Georgia counties overjail conditions.* Women inprison suffer sexual harassment and intimidation, and sometimes rape, atthe hands of their guards, a situation which has improved greatly sincean amended lawsuit was brought against the state in 1992 but which continuesto be serious.* Minors instate custody face extremely poor custodial conditions, are subjected tocruel restraints and punishment forbidden by international standards, areheld in overcrowded facilities with little educational or other programsto occupy them, without appropriate psychological attention, and are virtuallyignored as candidates for rehabilitation, which is supposed to be the goalof juvenile confinement.* Lesbiansand gay men face hostility that ranges from harassment under the state'santi-"sodomy" law, to openly discriminatory firing of gay employees bystate officials and others, to verbal threats and physical attacks. Victimsof discriminatory treatment in most parts of Georgiahave no effective recoursebecause the state does not prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexualorientation.* Freedomof expression is undermined by local school boards, in contravention offederal law but without federal action to end it, and by state Assemblyresolutions that have condemned the state's public broadcasting systemand have opened up broad new possibilities to prosecute Internet usersfor a variety of hitherto common practices.These problems are not unique to the cityof Atlanta or to Georgia. The custodial abuse, official neglect, discriminationand intolerance we have found in Georgia occur in many other parts of theUnited States, and those who commit abuses often go unpunished. The deathpenalty is available in thirty-eight of the fifty states; twenty-five ofthese permit the execution of offenders who were under eighteen at thetime of the crime. Forty states lack laws to prohibit discrimination basedon sexual orientation, and no state is immune from police brutality.In Georgia, as elsewhere in the U.S., thefederal government's and courts' performance is uneven. There have beensome successes in Georgia, like state court-orders that have reduced prisonguards' previously flagrant sexual abuse of women inmates. But there havealso been setbacks; efforts by local groups to improve the treatment ofchildren in confinement have not been successful to date. As to the deathpenalty, the abuse is permitted by the U.S. Supreme Court, though somelocal features of its application are peculiarly Georgian. And regardingdiscrimination against lesbians and gay men or local actions against certainbooks or topics in art, the federal government is distant from the events,when it should be acting to protect vulnerable groups and crucial rights,and to challenge restrictive state laws and resolutions.Several pieces of legislation passed bythe U.S. Congress during the current 104th session and signed by PresidentClinton, have undermined basic human rights protections throughout theU.S. For example, despite the fact that deplorable prison and custodialconditions and abusive treatment are routinely ignored by officials inGeorgia and other states until lawsuits are successful, the Prison LitigationReform Act, which is now law, makes initiating lawsuits to improve treatmentand monitoring of court orders to improve conditions stemming from thoselawsuits more difficult. The Communications Decency Act, signed into lawas part of the Telecommunciations Act of 1995, criminalizes on-line communicationthat is "obscene," "indecent," or "patently offensive" if the recipientof the communication is a minor. The constitutionality of the law is nowbeing challenged by groups, including Human Rights Watch, arguing that"indecent"speech is protected by both the U.S. Constitution and international law.Finally, as described more fully in this report's chapter on the deathpenalty, the federal government recently passed new habeas corpus restrictionsthat are unprecedented. The new law limits the ability of death row prisonersand other inmates to appeal state-court decisions to federal courts onconstitutional grounds, despite the large number of state-court decisionsthat are currently overturned by federal courts due to state-court errors.Several of the most persistent practiceswe found contradict Georgia state law and/or U.S. federal law and the Constitution.They also violate international human rights law, which is grounded inprinciples that the United States, and the state of Georgia, are presumedto share-principles like the individual's guarantee of free expression,the prohibition on cruel and unusual punishment, the right to due processof law, and the right to be free from discrimination. We hold the stateof Georgia accountable for abusive practices under international law becausethe commitments made by the United States to the international communityare binding on all its states and municipal governmental units. We alsohold the federal government accountable because, under international humanrights law, the national government is responsible to the internationalcommunity for compliance with international obligations by all entitieswithin its jurisdiction. Federal arrangements for the distribution of powerare not an excuse for non-compliance.International Law: Americans Need NotApplyThe standards of international law citedthroughout this report in some cases offer better human rights guaranteesthan U.S. law. Over the past fifty years, the principles adopted by theUnited Nations in 1948-as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights-havebeen formalized in treaties and protocols, reflecting an increasingly unifiedinternational consensus that basic rights must be guaranteed for all. Afterthe treaties are ratified by a country, they become domestic law.The United States has helped create thesestandards, but has been slow to apply them to itself. And when the UnitedStates has ratified key covenants, it has done so with such important reservationsthat U.S. citizens cannot use international law for their own protection.In recent years, the United States hasratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),the Convention Against Torture or other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatmentor Punishment, and the International Convention on the Elimination of allForms of Racial Discrimination (CERD). The administration of PresidentGeorge Bush saw to the ratification of the ICCPR, and the incumbent Clintonadministration pushed through Congress the ratification of the TortureConvention and CERD. But both administrations, Republican andDemocratic,have imposed reservations, declarations and understandings that carve awayany expanded protections for Americans. Principal among these is the declarationthat none of the provisions are self-executing, meaning that they are notautomatically available for Americans to invoke upon ratification. Theyrequire passage of implementing legislation before they can be appliedby courts. At the same time, the Executive Branch specifically declaresthat no implementing legislation is necessary. The effect is that ratificationis more or less meaningless for Americans who would invoke the treatiesto see their rights protected.If, for example, residents of Georgia couldinvoke CERD's provisions, the disproportionate impact on African-Americansin the application of the death penalty and dramatic racial discrepanciesin arrests and sentencing of blacks and whites for drug offenses couldbe challenged in court, because to prove discrimination under CERD requiresproof of discriminatory intent or effect, while the U.S. Constitutionhas been interpreted by courts to require proof of both intent andeffect. The Torture Convention prohibits "cruel, inhuman and degradingtreatment," as does the U.S. Constitution's Bill of Rights in slightlydifferent language-but regarding the specifics of what constitutes suchtreatment, international standards that are considered the authoritativedefinition of minimally decent conditions for detainees and prisoners aremore specific and protective of rights than is U.S. law; so are internationalstandards regarding the treatment of juveniles in confinement. And theICCPR, which has been interpreted as covering discrimination based on sexualorientation, could help to protect lesbians and gay men from such discriminationand lead to the invalidation of Georgia's "sodomy" prohibition.While it is not the primary subject ofthis report, the U.S. government's unwillingness to fully adopt internationalhuman rights standards is a denial of full rights to U.S. citizens andother U.S. residents. We urge that the federal government reconsider itsposition and remove its reservations to the ICCPR, the Torture Conventionand CERD. We also urge early and unreserved ratification of pending humanrights instruments-including the Convention on the Elimination of All Formsof Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), the Convention on the Rights ofthe Child, the American Convention on Human Rights, and the InternationalCovenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.FindingsPolice AbusePolice officers and sheriffs' deputiesin Georgia who commit human rights violations are subjected only to thepublic scrutiny provided by the media. This is particularly notable inthe case of Atlanta, the state's capital and largest city, wherethere hasbeen no functional citizen review agency for the past several years. Mostof the smaller cities and rural areas are entirely dependent upon internalreview by police and sheriffs' departments. This lack of transparency protectsabusive officers and poor police managers.State criminal prosecution of police officersin Georgia is made more difficult than in most other states by the useof special grand jury proceedings that benefit accused officers and reducethe number of indictments in police brutality cases. The chief of speciallitigation of the Georgia Attorney General's office objects to the specialtreatment given police accused of misconduct, and has labeled it "outrageous."These procedures contribute to impunity for police officers accused ofserious abuses, as described in this report.Federal criminal civil rights prosecutionof law enforcement officers is rare in the United States generally, butthe rate of prosecution appears to be particularly low in Georgia. Since1994, the U.S. Justice Department reports that only two civil rights caseswere prosecuted in Georgia. Despite the difficulties in prosecuting thesecases successfully-because jurors are predisposed to believe police officers,and the legal standard is rigorous in requiring willful deprivation ofthe victim's civil rights-this is an alarmingly low number of prosecutionsin light of the serious abuses we describe in this report.Death PenaltyThe application of the death penalty inGeorgia is discriminatory, characterized by a denial of due process thatparticularly affects the poor and black defendants. It follows on a traditionof unequal justice for African-Americans that results in capital punishmentbeing sought and imposed most frequently in that small portion of homicideswhere the victim is white and the accused is black. That such partialityin the justice system leads to unequal sentencing is serious enough; whenit leads to execution it blatantly violates the most basic principles ofinternational human rights law and the U.S. Constitution.Like race, poverty can be a serious handicapfor the accused in a capital case in Georgia. The system fails to provideadequate legal representation for the indigent, and in trial after trial,where decent representation could have led to a reduced sentence, poordefendants have been given the death penalty. Poor, mentally impaired defendantsin capital cases have received the death penalty because court-appointedlawyers have failed to offer evidence about mental impairments that mighthave resulted in reduced sentencesDrug Law EnforcementDrug laws in Georgia are not enforced equallyagainst black and white drug offenders. Official arrest and incarcerationdata analyzed by Human Rights Watch demonstrate the starkly disproportionateimpact of the state's efforts to use the criminal law to curtail the consumptionand distribution of illicit drugs. Both African-Americans and white Georgiaresidents use and distribute drugs, but black offenders have a much greaterlikelihood of being arrested and incarcerated.Although more whites than blacks use drugs,including cocaine, blacks account for two-thirds of the arrests for drugpossession and 84 percent of the arrests for cocaine possession. The disproportionateimpact of arrest patterns is mirrored in imprisonment rates: African-Americansaccount for three-quarters of the persons admitted to prison for drug offenses.They also received the most onerous sentences: 98 percent of all life sentencesfor drug offenses were given to African-Americans, in most cases for offensesinvolving miniscule drug amounts.Federal and Georgia state law enjoins discriminationon the basis of race. International human rights law is also implicated:one of the overarching principles of international human rights is thatof equality before the law. The International Convention on the Eliminationof All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD), to which the U.S. is signatory,calls on national governments to take steps to eliminate discriminationin practice. The shocking statistics found in Georgia lead us to believethat, at least in this state, the U.S. is not in compliance with CERD'sprovisions.Jail and Prison ConditionsAt adult facilities, and particularly inlocal jails, prisoners are held in dangerous, filthy and deterioratingconditions. In one county jail investigated by the U.S. Justice Department,inmates were left unsupervised up to six hours of every eight-hour shift.If there had been a fire, medical emergency or prisoner unrest of any kind,the prisoners (and surrounding communities) would have been in danger.The jail was also filled to twice its capacity, and prisoners were forcedto sleep on dilapidated mats on the concrete floor. Prisoners at the jailwere not housed to separate dangerous inmates from vulnerable ones, butthe jail was racially segregated by the authorities.During the past decade, Georgia experiencedexplosive growth in its prison population; in the last three years alone,the number of inmates has increased by about 9,000-one of the fastest ratesof growth in the nation. This dramatic growth has been accompanied by toughertreatment of prisoners, and by allegations of physical abuses during intensivesearches, described as "shakedowns," held atcorrectional facilities aroundthe state and designed to uncover weapons, drugs, money and other contraband.Sexual Abuse of Women PrisonersPrior to a federal class action lawsuitin 1992, state officials entrusted with custodial power over the women'sprison population in Georgia engaged in flagrant sexual abuse of theircharges, abuse that included rape, sexual assault, sexual harassment andviolations of the right to privacy. Although Georgia criminal law formallyprohibited sexual contact between prison officials and prisoners, the lawwas not enforced, and the efficacy of departmental policies intended toprevent such abuse was belied by the impunity with which prison staff,including supervisory staff, engaged in sexual relations with prisoners.Following the 1992 lawsuit, there was significantpublic and judicial attention to the spectacle of custodial sexual abuse,compelling Georgia to take meaningful steps to put a stop to it. Becauseof these efforts, the overall atmosphere in its women's prisons has greatlyimproved from that existing prior to the suit. Nonetheless, sexual contactbetween officers and prisoners remains a recurring problem and, in someinstances, amounts to rape or sexual assault. Moreover, prisoners who reportsexual misconduct still face a persistent bias against their testimonyand may suffer punishment. This is in contrast to the officials and guardsaccused of sexual assaults, most of whom have escaped full criminal prosecutionand all of whom have avoided prison sentences.Children in ConfinementGeorgia officials refused access to children'sfacilities by Human Rights Watch investigators. Nonetheless, through ourresearch we were able to ascertain that many children are confined in shamefullyovercrowded, squalid and unsanitary conditions in detention and correctionalfacilities in Georgia. As a result of overcrowding, institutions are dangerousplaces for younger children who are sometimes preyed upon by older offenders.In some facilities four boys share housing space intended for one.Inappropriate and excessive disciplinarymeasures are used, including an overuse of isolation (sixty-three daysin one case) and locking children in their cells for long periods of time.In addition, four-point restraints, with children bound to a bed by wristsand ankles, are used as disciplinary measures; the same practice is usedto restrain children who are believed to be suicidal. Educational and otherprogramming is inadequate. Children with psychological disorders have beenpunished or ignored instead of being treated by medical personnel. Despiteat least one successful lawsuit against officials responsible for abysmalconditions at oneof the facilities, neither the federal government norstate officials have implemented enforceable standards to ensure the safetyand well-being of children in the custody of the state.Lesbians and Gay MenLesbians and gay men in Georgia, as in manyparts of the country, are confronted with animosity from fellow residentsand officials, and most lack even basic protections from discriminatorytreatment. A so-called "sodomy" law that criminalizes certain sexual behavior,and state and local resolutions that condemn "gay lifestyles," promotean atmosphere of hostility; this is reinforced by the state's unwillingnessto provide anti-discrimination protections to gays and lesbians. As a result,gay men and lesbians, except for public employees in Atlanta and two surroundingcounties, have no recourse if they are fired from their jobs on groundsof their sexual orientation. One large restaurant chain fired all knowngay men and lesbians in 1991. Soon after that, the state's attorney generaldismissed a newly hired lawyer after learning she was a lesbian.As state and local politicians pass laws andresolutions condemning lesbians and gay men, attacks against members ofthe gay community have continued, often escalating from verbal taunts tophysical violence, and sometimes murder. The police response to these crimeshas been uneven. There have been some welcome convictions of assailantswho targeted lesbians or gay men, but in other cases the police have notresponded adequately.Freedom of ExpressionIn recent years, socially conservativegroups, parents, and elected officials have sought to restrict Georgiaresidents' freedom of expression in several areas, especially artisticfreedom of expression and sex education. These efforts have resulted inattacks on freedom of expression by state, country and local governments,and at public schools and public libraries. The situation in Georgia isconsistent with a national trend.Reductions in Georgia state funding forthe arts have targeted groups or artists that discuss homosexuality orAIDS and HIV. Art exhibits focusing on contemporary social issues havebeen removed from public spaces, and books and other literary works withsexual themes have been banned by directors of public libraries under pressurefrom school boards and parents. The free flow of information via electroniccommunication has also been curtailed: citing concerns ranging from terrorismto trademark theft, Georgia lawmakers have recently passed laws that restrictrights to free expression and privacy on-line.Conclusion and RecommendationsAs described thoroughly in this report,for many-particularly the poor, racial minorities, gays and lesbians, andvirtually anyone jailed or imprisoned in the state-Georgia is hardly ahuman rights mecca. In addition to the specific recommendations found ineach chapter, we make the following recommendations:Improving Accountability· Effective complaints proceduresmust be established and adequate outreach must be initiated to inform individualsabout their right to file complaints when their rights have been violatedby police and corrections officers.· In light of the inaction of Georgiaauthorities to complaints of abuse that are made, unless those complaintsare part of a successful lawsuit, officials should consider institutingcitizen review boards or creating a governmental agency or commission dedicatedto receiving and investigating abuse complaints involving police and correctionsofficers. Furthermore, the mandate of Atlanta's long-moribund CivilianReview Board, now newly tasked with reviewing the department's own investigationof complaints, should be revised dramatically by allowing it to receiveinitial complaints from alleged victims, granting it subpoena power, andproviding it with staff and resources to carry out its responsibilities,among other necessary reforms.· Supervisors must be responsiblefor the actions of their subordinates. Abusive police or corrections officersmust be disciplined appropriately and consistently. If local prosecutorsfail to prosecute, federal prosecutors must consider whether criminal civilrights violations have occurred and should prosecute accordingly.· Local detention facility administratorsmust be held accountable for ignoring deplorable living conditions. TheJustice Department's recent reports on its investigation of conditionsat county jails in Georgia are a clear indication that local officialshave abdicated their responsibility to provide humane conditions. If federalinvestigations are necessary to bring about essential improvements in adultor children's facilities, they should continue, but local personnel whohave engaged in misconduct or management that has failed to protect inmates'or detainees' basic rights must not go unpunished.· Independent human rights investigatorsshould be allowed access to both adult and juvenile facilities.The Death Penalty and Discrepanciesin the Criminal Justice System· Georgia should abolish the deathpenalty.· An independent, state-wide publicdefender system should be established to take responsibility for indigentdefense in the state to ensure that impoverished defendants are representedby lawyers able and willing to devote the time, resources and skills necessaryin capital cases. At the very least, the pre-existing Multi-County Defender'soffice should be provided with the staff and other resources necessaryto fulfill its duties in representing poor defendants in capital cases.· Georgia's public officials, lawmakersand the public at large should scrutinize the means used to enforce druglaws and then assess the necessity of these means in light of the state'sdrug objectives. The inquiry should consider how the current disparateracial impact could be reduced by adopting policy alternatives. As partof this examination, officials should review reporting mechanisms and datacollection to ascertain whether sufficient information has been compiledto be able to ascertain the racial impact of drug law enforcement.Discrimination and Intolerance· Georgia should repeal O.C.G.A.Sec. 16-2-2 (the criminal prohibition of "sodomy").· Georgia communities should repealall explicitly anti-gay ordinances and restrictions.· The U.S. Congress should passthe Employment Non-Discrimination Act, which prohibits discrimination basedon sexual orientation in employment.· Freedom of expression should notbe inhibited unnecessarily by individuals or groups who have been allowedto arbitrarily choose which artworks, books or theater productions aresuitable for the community at large.· To ensure that artistic expressionin Georgia is protected from political interference, Georgia lawmakersshould reject content-based restrictions on funding or other forms of supportfor the arts.International Human Rights Protections· The U.S. Congress should introduceimplementing legislation for the International Covenant on Civil and PoliticalRights, the Convention Against Torture and Cruel, Inhuman and DegradingTreatment and theInternational Convention on the Elimination of all Formsof Racial Discrimination.· The U.S. should ratify all relevantinternational human rights treaties not yet approved, including Conventionon the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, the AmericanConvention on Human Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social,and Cultural Rights, and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.POLICE ABUSEGeorgia's law enforcement agents have committedserious human rights violations, including unjustified shootings, severebeatings, and other applications of excessive force. Yet, according tothe information available to the public, officers are rarely disciplinedadequately by police management for such offenses and are even less likelyto be prosecuted criminally. In these ways, Georgia's police abuse problemis typical of states throughout the nation.Georgia is unusual, however, in that thereis little independent review of its police forces. This is particularlynotable in the case of Atlanta, its capital and largest city, where therehas been no functional citizen review agency for the past several years.State criminal prosecution of police officers in Georgia is made more difficultthan in most other states by grand jury proceedings that grant accusedofficers special procedural privileges that are unavailable to other personswho may be targets of grand jury investigations, reducing the number ofindictments in police brutality cases. And, although federal civil rightsprosecution of abusive police officers is rare in the United States generally,the rate of prosecution appears to be particularly low in Georgia.In the first section of this chapter weexamine police abuse and accountability problems within Atlanta by describing:incidents of alleged abuse by Atlanta police officers; the newly formedCivilian Review Board; the role of the Atlanta Police Department's internalaffairs unit (which is responsible for investigating police misconduct);and efforts to prosecute Atlanta police officers accused of criminal offenses.The next section describes police brutality cases from around the statethat illustrate flawed practices and procedures leading to impunity forabusive officers. The federal government's role in addressing police abusein Georgia is then examined. Finally, we provide recommendations to therelevant government authorities to improve accountability for brutal officersand reduce incidents of abuse.Constitutional and International StandardsIn addition to violating state and federallaw, as described below, police abuse also violates constitutional rightsand international norms and treaties to which the U.S. is party. The EighthAmendment of the U.S. Constitution prohibits the infliction of "cruel andunusual punishment," and the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments prohibit anystate from depriving "any person of life, liberty, or property, withoutdue process of law." Furthermore, the Fourth Amendment forbids the "unreasonable"seizure of any person.Two major international human rights treatiespertain to police abuse. In 1993, the U.S. ratified the International Covenanton Civil and Political Rights. Article 7 of the covenant states: "No oneshall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatmentor punishment...."1 Similar protections are includedin the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or DegradingTreatment or Punishment, which the U.S. ratified in 1994.2AtlantaOn December 7, 1995, plainclothes Atlantapolice officer Willie T. Sauls entered a motorcycle shop, his gun drawn.Sauls and his fellow officers reportedly suspected a robbery was in progress,and when he entered the store, shouting obscenities, an employee thoughtthe police surrounding the store were themselves robbers, thus leadingto a gunfight. By the time the shooting stopped, a customer at the store,Jerry Jackson, was dead and two others, including Officer Sauls, were wounded.3What began as a botched raid became a significantscandal when witnesses who viewed some of the incident from a nearby buildingcontacted reporters weeks after the shooting stating that they had attemptedto provide police investigators with their eyewitness accounts but wereignored. The witnesses claimed that police spokespeople quoted in the presswere misleading the public because they did not want to acknowledge whatthe witnesses had seen: Sauls's partner, Officer Waine Pinckney, shootingJackson as he lay prone and unarmed on the sidewalk outside the store,apparently posing no risk.4The shooting exposed serious shortcomingsin investigative procedures used by the Atlanta Police Department.5It raised questions about the training of Atlanta's police officers becauseso many mistakes were apparently made during this one incident. The Decembershooting also highlighted the absence of any external check on the policedepartment generally, because unlike most U.S. major cities, Atlanta hadno functional citizen review mechanism.Perhaps because of Atlanta's promotionas a "convention" city and the related need for a positive image, the AtlantaPolice Department and the city's leaders appear eager to dismiss chargesof police brutality as insignificant. In January, Mayor Bill Campbell boastedof a low complaint rate of just forty-five complaints for 1995.6He correctly stated, "For a police department our size, percapita, that'sa phenomenally low record."7 While such a lowrate of complaints may indicate an extraordinarily well-behaved policeforce, an unusually low complaint rate often indicates that citizens havelost faith in the police department's interest in pursuing abuse allegationsand have stopped filing complaints.It is difficult to gauge how prevalentthe problem of police abuse is in Atlanta because the complaint-intakeprocess is flawed and the police department resists public disclosure ofinformation about the cases it has received and investigated. Accordingto the department's internal affairs unit, the Office of Professional Standards(O.P.S.), each precinct is allowed to decide which cases are serious enoughto submit to the O.P.S. without any set guidelines. And, as in many citiesaround the United States, there is a public perception that the internalaffairs unit is not interested in pursuing complaints against police officers,resulting in distrust of the O.P.S. in many affected communities. Becausevictims of police abuse may not believe the O.P.S. will handle their casesproperly, many do not file formal complaints. Another important contributingfactor in the low number of complaints filed with the O.P.S. may be itsrequirement that only the victim of abuse may file a complaint. Since manyvictims have criminal charges pending against them, they fear providinginformation in their complaint that may be used against them.One attorney who handles many civil caseson behalf of victims of police abuse in Atlanta told Human Rights Watchthat he receives between five and fifteen police abuse complaints fromaround the state each week.8 The city's PublicDefender'sOffice reports that many of its clients claim abuse.9Yet no independent agency, commission or nongovernmental organization regularlymonitors police brutality allegations or attempts to tally the number andtypes of complaints in Atlanta. Some sort of consistent external reviewwould seem to be in order, as in most major cities in the country.10Civilian Review BoardIn response to many Atlantans' outrageover the Jackson shooting, Mayor Campbell called for the creation of acivilian review board, apparently without realizing one already existed(thus proving how marginal the pre-existing board had become). Once theexistence of the board was acknowledged, the mayor signed an administrativeorder to "continue" the Civilian Review Board (C.R.B.).11As proposed, the C.R.B. will not receive initial complaints of brutalityfrom the public, will not have a staff, will not have subpoena power, willnot meet in public and will not necessarily make its findings or recommendationsavailable to the public.12 The review board will"receive reports from the O.P.S. and may receive requests for review fromcitizens who are dissatisfied with the result of the O.P.S. review."13After its "investigation" without its own investigators, the board willrecommend to the mayor whether there is "probable cause for [administrative]chargesto be brought by the City against the affected officer[s]...."14If administrative charges have been proffered against the affected officer(s),the review shall be made only by the C.R.B. chair to determine whetherdepartment policy changes should be recommended. There is no possibilityfor the C.R.B. to review cases where victims or others protest the leniencyof any administrative charges applied.In addition to awaiting the conclusionof O.P.S.'s own investigation into brutality claims, the C.R.B. will beprohibited from completing its review while any "litigation arising fromthe complaint against the City, its officers, or employees" is pending.15Since the C.R.B.'s mandate is limited to allegations of excessive force,serious bodily injury, and death, nearly all of the cases it is authorizedto review will involve civil suits and some will lead to criminal charges;such delay renders the C.R.B. useless, since litigation in these casesmay span several years. If the C.R.B. is intended to ease public anxietiesfollowing cases like the Jackson shooting, it will have little effect inpractice, since, according to its own mandate, it would not be permittedto review the Jackson case until the federal criminal civil rights investigation,now underway, is completed and any civil actions are concluded.In explaining why the C.R.B. does not needsubpoena power, which would require the Atlanta Police Department and Departmentof Corrections, over which the C.R.B. has jurisdiction, to provide allrelevant files or access to "problem officer" tracking systems, the mayor'sOffice of Community Affairs explained that such power was not necessarybecause O.P.S. has always been cooperative.16Yet a sergeant in the O.P.S. told Human Rights Watch that he had littleknowledge of the review board and stated he "never had any interest inthe Civilian ReviewBoard."17 A former memberof the C.R.B. told Human Rights Watch that, at some point, O.P.S. stoppedforwarding relevant cases to the board and that recommendations made byC.R.B. members were often ignored by police management.18The absence of any provision for publicdisclosure of information regarding complaints of abuse or any public accessto the hearings that the C.R.B. may hold undermines one of the centralgoals of civilian review-improving public confidence through enhanced informationabout police handling of abuse complaints. Despite the appointment of prominentand respected members of the community, this sort of secrecy and the board'sstaff and mandate limitations, as described above, will not enhance police/communityrelations in Atlanta. While some in the community derided the C.R.B. asa "paper tiger" when it was announced in January, that label would suggestthat, on paper, the board has powers that it will not have in practice.19In fact, its powers as described are hardly impressive; the C.R.B. requiresmajor revisions to live up to its name and stated goal.Office of Professional StandardsThe O.P.S., the internal affairs divisionof the Atlanta Police Department (A.P.D.), is divided into units that investigateallegations of corruption, brutality and other serious misconduct. O.P.S.currently has a staff of twenty that is tasked with investigating the 1,500-officerpolice force.The aftermath of the Jackson case and widespreadcriticism of the A.P.D. emerging from that case coincided with the trialof officers, primarily from Zone 3 (one of six police zones in the city),who were accused of corruption. The trial raised new questions about O.P.S.'seffectiveness. One sergeant, in his testimony against another officer,explained that members of the "bad cop ring" did not fearan O.P.S. investigationbecause they knew how to circumvent it: "As a supervisor, I knew my processesand I knew O.P.S.'s processes....It'd be the officer's word versus thecitizen's and the officer would win out since there were no witnesses."20At least six officers involved in the corruptionscandal had personal experience with O.P.S. procedures and had good reasonto believe O.P.S. would ignore or tolerate their criminal behavior, accordingto an investigation by the Atlanta Journal-Constitution.21Despite many allegations of brutal treatment or violent behavior, theseofficers remained on the force until they faced corruption charges. Whilespecific information about abuse complaints usually is not made availableto the public, this information was sought and revealed as a result ofthe corruption prosecution of the officers; this unusual glimpse into theA.P.D.'s apparent tolerance of violent behavior is cause for concern.One of the officers, Edgar Allen Jr., wasthe subject of five brutality complaints. One complainant alleged thatAllen and his partner drove him to a deserted location where Allen unzippedthe man's pants and Allen's partner grabbed the suspect's testicles andsqueezed while asking questions; the officers also reportedly kicked andchoked the man. Despite similar complaints by other suspects, O.P.S. dismissedall five complaints as unfounded because there were no witnesses otherthan police officers.22Another officer involved in the corruptionring, Michael D. Williams of Zone 6, also had a record of brutality. InJuly 1991, he was charged with battering his live-in girlfriend, and inMarch 1993 faced the same charge from another girlfriend.23According to newspaper reports, both times he was suspended with pay andreinstated when the women chose to drop the charges.24A leader of the ring, Ronald B. Grimes,was arrested in DeKalb County for allegedly battering his wife, leadingto a court-ordered psychological profile, which stated that Grimes hadbeen in seventy-five fistfights, on and off duty. Hiswife recanted, andprosecutors dropped charges against him. After the corruption scandal broke,Atlanta police reopened an internal investigation into the 1993 shootingdeath of a criminal suspect, Christopher Eugene Smith. Smith was shot fivetimes by Grimes after a foot chase, three times in the back at a distanceof two and a half feet. Nonetheless, despite a file full of complaints,Grimes was praised by superiors in annual performance reports for his "gungho" attitude.Three more officers involved in the corruptionring-Willie D. Jackson, Marquis Wadley and David Entrekin-had been clearedby O.P.S. in a 1993 shooting incident that crippled Sameth Svay. Svay wasshot by police during an investigation into illegal gambling. In filesturned over to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, Svay's sworn statementabout the incident was missing (he had been charged with assaulting anofficer and illegal gambling, but charges were later dropped), and thefiles show that he was never interviewed by O.P.S. during its inquiry thatled to the officers' exoneration.25When Human Rights Watch asked LieutenantLyle of O.P.S. how these officers consistently avoided serious disciplinarysanctions or termination for these alleged abuses, Lyle suggested thatthe brutality complaints helped to spur the federal corruption investigation.If this is the case, it raises an obvious question: Why did brutality complaintslead to a corruption investigation instead of a civil rights probe? Thiscomment may reveal a great deal about the priorities of both federal investigatorsand the Atlanta Police Department.26There are reasons to believe that the O.P.S.is not neutral in its investigations. An O.P.S. representative told HumanRights Watch during an interview in November 1995, "People make complaintsto get out of trouble."27 When Human Rights Watchquestioned the low number of complaints received by the Atlanta policeand the O.P.S.'s assertion that the sustained rate is very low,O.P.S. asserted,"We don't have a brutal police force here."28The same sergeant from O.P.S. was not aware of any brutality case leadingto dismissal.The O.P.S. does maintain an early warningsystem. If three or more maltreatment complaints are filed against an officerin a one-year period, whether or not the complaints are sustained, a reviewis initiated. Similarly, four firearms discharges by an officer in a five-yearperiod result in a review. Of course, if the review of an officer resultsin no re-training or disciplinary sanction (as seems to have been the casewith the "bad cop ring" in Zone 3), procedures leading to review may notbe sufficient.In Atlanta, as in many police departmentsaround the United States, there is no linkage between the filing or settlingof civil lawsuits alleging police brutality and the involved officer'spersonnel or disciplinary record. This means that a plaintiff may win alarge civil settlement, either pre-trial or post-verdict, but neither theofficer's supervisor nor the O.P.S. is officially notified. An effectiveearly warning system to identify problem officers would benefit from theautomatic initiation of an O.P.S. investigation upon the filing of eachbrutality lawsuit, or at least following a substantial settlement or aftera jury finds in favor of the plaintiff by the "preponderance of the evidence,"the standard used in civil cases.The City Attorney's office does not maintainreadily accessible data regarding the amount paid by the city to settlepolice brutality lawsuits, revealing an apparent lack of interest in thefinancial implications of such lawsuits. In response to a Human RightsWatch request, the City Attorney's office pulled together a compilationof pre- and post-verdict settlements for 1994 and 1995. Atlanta paid $610,368in police brutality settlements in 1994, and $67,000 in 1995, a relativelysmall figure. As a representative from the City Attorney's office notes,the city "litigates aggressively."29 The settlementsare paid out of general funds, not by an insurer, which may contributeto the city's interest in fighting such lawsuits vigorously.If an officer leaves the department duringan investigation into brutality charges (a common response), the O.P.S.claims that there are checks in place to prevent the A.P.D. from re-hiringthat individual. Nothing, however, prevents an officer from resigning fromthe A.P.D., or from any other police force in Georgia,and applying fora law enforcement job elsewhere in the state. (See the James W.Jackson case below.)Criminal ProsecutionThe already difficult task of prosecutingpolice officers who commit criminal offenses is compounded by Georgia statelaw that allows special privileges for public officials, including policeofficers, during grand jury proceedings.30 Defendantpolice officers are allowed to be present, with legal counsel, throughoutthe proceedings. At the conclusion of the hearing, the defendant may makea statement to the jurors and the state is not allowed to rebut the officer'saccount. Experts interviewed by Human Rights Watch stated that these proceduresare unique and were unaware of other states in which public officials aregranted these privileges.31Prosecutors dislike the special rules forpublic officials, and acknowledge that it serves as a barrier in theirprosecution efforts.32 The chief of special litigationof the Attorney General's office objects to the special treatment and believesit is "outrageous that public officials are given greater rights than thoseprovided to ordinary citizens. It gives them a shot to prevent indictmentat a stage when no one else has that right."33He believes that public officials might be entitled to a small privilege,but testimony the state cannot rebut, "is wrong."34The Fulton County District Attorney's officemay share that view, following a grand jury's recent decision not to indictthe officers involved in theJerry Jackson shooting.35The defendants were able to gain the sympathy and support of the grandjurors. Not only did the jurors decide not to indict; one juror told reportersthat she thought the officers "should be given medals" for their hard work.36A spokesperson with the Fulton County DistrictAttorney's office, Melvin Jones, told Human Rights Watch that he couldrecall only three cases, including the Jackson shooting, prosecuted bythe district attorney during the past five years.37He stated that few excessive-force cases reach the stage of charges beingfiled because they seem to "wash out" with the O.P.S. When asked why hebelieves the cases do not hold up, Jones stated that it's "the police lookingout for themselves."38Brutality Cases from Around the StateWhile the Zone 3 corruption ring and theJerry Jackson shooting have drawn widespread attention by revealing serioustraining and supervision flaws, other cases in Atlanta and in other partsof Georgia demonstrate poor accountability for abusive police officersand sheriffs' deputies. Many of the smaller police and sheriffs' departmentsin the state do not have internal affairs divisions, so there are evenfewer checks on abusive behavior than in Atlanta. The following examplesby no means exhaust the large number of reported abuse cases, but theydo exemplify flawed practices and procedures leading to impunity for brutalofficers.Charles Cunningham: A civil lawsuitfiled on behalf of Charles Cunningham alleges that the plaintiff was beatenwith a flashlight by Atlanta PoliceOfficer Charles Traylor on June 11,1993.39 According to Cunningham, he was a bystanderduring a fistfight outside a nightclub in Atlanta when Officer Traylorarrived at the scene. Officer Traylor allegedly hit another individualwith a flashlight, and Cunningham protested from some distance (posingno threat to the officer). Officer Traylor then struck Cunningham withthe flashlight. The blow cut completely through Cunningham's lip, requiringan operation.Traylor was found psychologically unfitfor police work by several psychologists, one of whom warned that "persistentdemands to cope with stressful or demanding situations might lead to outburstsof emotion."40 Traylor's behavior improved aftermedication was prescribed for his attention deficit disorder, yet at leastone psychologist's warning that Traylor was still not fit for full dutywas ignored.This was not the first time Officer Traylorhad been accused of brutal behavior. In 1988 he was convicted of simplebattery after he fought with another driver over a parking space.41In 1989, Traylor fought with another officer after an argument over racerelations and was hospitalized for his injuries. That fight resulted ina three-day suspension. Over half a dozen complaints had been filed againstthe officer, but none resulted in discipline. In one startling off-dutyincident, Traylor reportedly shot at another vehicle on an interstate highway.He later stated that he thought he saw a revolver in the other vehicle;no firearm was found. As of late March 1996, Officer Traylor was stillon the force and working out of Zone 6.Roderick Stewart: On the eveningof November 5, 1993, Roderick Stewart reportedly sustained a black eyeand other injuries after Atlanta police officers stopped his vehicle, followinga two-mile chase, because they suspected he was driving under the influenceof alcohol; officers reportedly had seen Stewart push someone from hiscar in a parking lot. The unusual aspect of this case is that the allegedbeating was videotaped by cameras mounted on the police vehicles. Afterviewing the tape, then-Police Chief Eldrin Bell stated, "The tape showsexcessive force was used."42Despite the videotaped beating, a FultonCounty grand jury chose not indict the officer, Scott Laster, on an aggravatedassault charge. After the grand jury failed to indict Laster, the FultonCounty District Attorney stated, "The grand jury just isn't after policeofficers."43 As described above, police officersbrought before a grand jury enjoy special privileges, encouraging grandjurors to choose not to indict.James William Jackson: On July 10,1993, James William Jackson, while serving as a Douglas County sheriff'sdeputy in Douglasville, Georgia reportedly assaulted Richard Beardslee,resulting in bodily injury.44 Jackson resignedbefore the department's investigation was completed and applied for workwith the Haralson County sheriff's department. Jackson provided the nameof a friendly colleague as a reference, and the Haralson County sherifffailed to check with his counterpart in Douglas County. Just months later,as a sheriff's deputy in Haralson County, Jackson was accused of assaultingDonald Bridges in September 1993.On February 20, 1996, Jackson pleaded guiltyto the assault charge in Douglas County, and the second count was droppedby federal prosecutors as part of the agreement. The negotiated plea calculateshis sentence should be between thirty-seven and forty-six months, withfinal sentencing pending as of April 1996. This was one of the few federalcivil rights prosecutions in Georgia during the past several years. (Seebelow.)Wesley Hill: On April 12, 1994,Wesley Hill, age twenty-two, was shot and killed by DeKalb County Sheriff'sDeputy David Aderhold. According to the civil lawsuit filed by Hill's fiancée,Uwanna Randolph, the plainclothes sheriff'sdeputies arrived mid-morningat a hotel as she and Hill were leaving.45 DeputyAderhold ordered Wesley back into the hotel room, and the two were alonein the room. A shout came from the room, and the other deputies kickedout a window and entered, as did Randolph. One of the deputies found agun near a window, according to the lawsuit. Randolph states that Hillwas handcuffed and kneeling when she saw Deputy Aderhold shoot him in theback, point-blank.According to Randolph's attorney, the casehas been referred to the Criminal Section of the Civil Rights Divisionof the Department of Justice. But this attorney and his client had notbeen contacted by investigators as of March 1996.46Deputy Aderhold is still on the force.Gwinnett County Police Department:Beginning in 1993, several officers from the Northern Precinct of the GwinnettCounty Police Department, based in Buford, became involved in corrupt activities,and in one case murder. Officer Michael Harold Chapel was convicted onmurder and robbery charges in September 1995 for murdering a fifty-three-year-oldwoman whom he also robbed.47 The victim, EmogeneThompson, had reported a burglary to Officer Chapel in April 1993. Butinstead of investigating the alleged crime, Chapel tricked the woman intogiving him her remaining cash. He arranged to meet her in a parking lotto retrieve the money, but instead shot and killed her.After Chapel was charged with the murder,a colleague who was known to keep a journal on his computer committed suicide.48Another officer, David Bodie Hurst, volunteered to investigate the suicidebut instead erased files from the dead man's computer that investigatorsbelieved may have contained informationabout himself or a friend.49The precinct was investigated, and among other findings, the investigatorscontend that Chapel's supervisor was aware that he was engaging in misconductbut tolerated it. The supervisor, Sgt. Donald Stone, is still on the force.In fact, all of the officers involved inthe scandal had been involved in misconduct prior to these incidents andwere at times disciplined for infractions. Nonetheless, they were not deterredfrom engaging in further misconduct and were not supervised closely enoughto prevent the violations from escalating in severity. During the Chapeltrial, in an apparent attempt to reassure residents, Gwinnett Police ChiefCarl White stated, "I realize now is a bad time for law enforcement, buteveryone should remember that police are policing themselves."50It would appear, at least in the case of Officer Chapel, that the chief'sstatement is inaccurate.William "Wade" Wallace: On July27, 1995, William Wallace led Cumming police officers and Forsyth Countysheriff's deputies on a low-speed chase that ended when Wallace drove hiscar into a ditch. Cumming Police Officer J.D. Swansey reportedly beat Wallacewith a flashlight as Forsyth County sheriff's deputies looked on; Wallacesubsequently died of his injuries. One of the deputies eventually cameforward to report the beating by Swansey, who, according to a Georgia Bureauof Investigations spokesperson, was known to have a serious drinking problem.51In early September 1995, following the exhumation and autopsy of Wallace'sbody, Swansey turned himself in and was charged with murder, aggravatedbattery, aggravated assault and providing false statements.To his credit, Forsyth County Sheriff JerryPadgett attempted to fire one officer for failing to report the fatal beatingand the officer's supervisor for allowing the officer to ignore his ordersto ensure the reports were accurate. Hisdecision was overturned by theCivil Service Board, which ordered Padgett to reinstate the fired officers.52Travis Ashley: In October 1991,Travis Ashley was traveling as a passenger in a taxi cab that was stoppedby then-uniformed Police Officer David Stewart of the Floyd County PoliceDepartment based in Rome. Officer Stewart then beat Ashley, who suffereda fractured leg and a laceration to his head.53Stewart claimed that Ashley assaulted him while in a state of intoxicationand that Ashley's leg fractured when they both toppled to the ground. Thecase went to trial in March 1994, and the jury found in favor of Ashley,awarding him a total of $547,382. Ashley's attorney reports that the FloydCounty Police Department took no disciplinary action against Officer Stewartas a result of the judgment or the allegations made by the alleged victim.In fact, Officer Stewart was subsequently promoted to the rank of inspector.The Federal RoleWhen local prosecutors fail to pursue policebrutality cases, it is the responsibility of the federal government toprosecute cases where an individual's civil rights may have been violated.Specifically, the Criminal Section of the Civil Rights Division of theJustice Department is responsible for prosecuting these cases. Yet, asin states throughout the nation, federal prosecution for criminal civilrights violations in Georgia is difficult and rare.54Statistics gathered by the TransactionalRecords Access Clearinghouse (TRAC, a private research group that has collectedDepartment of Justice statistics through Freedom of Information Act requests)do not inspire confidence in thefederal government's interest in, or abilityto, prosecute civil rights cases. The data indicate that only one civilrights case in 1994, out of 169 referrals by the FBI to the Justice Department,was prosecuted in Georgia.55 That case didnot involve a police officer or sheriff's deputy, according to the AssistantU.S. Attorney who brought the case.56 Accordingto the Justice Department, no civil rights cases were prosecuted in Georgiain 1995, and the James W. Jackson guilty plea (see above) is the only 1996case so far.57 Despite the difficulties in prosecutingthese cases successfully-because jurors are predisposed to believe policeofficers, and the legal standard is rigorous in requiring willful deprivationof the victim's civil rights-this is an alarmingly low number of prosecutions.According to Justice Department nationaldata, of 8,575 complaints reviewed under the federal civil rights statutesin 1994, a scant seventy-six cases were filed for prosecution-less than1 percent.58 Figures in previous years were similar.59During an April 8, 1996 meeting with Richard Roberts, chief of the CriminalSection of the Civil Rights Division, Human Rights Watch asked aboutthislow rate of prosecution. Roberts stated that the data do not "tell thefull story," because every complaint that arrives at his office is counted,regardless of its merit.60 Roberts provided anumber of reasons why these cases can be difficult to prosecute, includinglack of physical evidence and the shortage of credible witnesses. Victimsin these cases, said Roberts, "are not the best kinds of witnesses," sincethey may be engaged in criminal behavior or may have criminal backgrounds.Still, Roberts contends that he does not shy away from strong cases, evenif they involve unsympathetic victims.Federal civil rights prosecutions alsorequire "proof of specific intent" to deprive an individual of his or hercivil rights, according to Roberts. When asked whether such a requirementmakes these cases too difficult to prosecute and thereby undermines theintent of civil rights protections, Roberts contended that, while the casesare difficult, his office is able to pursue them; he does not advocaterevising the civil rights statutes. When asked about the small number ofprosecutions in Georgia, Roberts stated that he knew of no reason why civilrights prosecutions should be any more difficult there than in other states.There are thirty-two attorneys with theCriminal Section of the Civil Rights Division. While the number of attorneyshas slowly increased over the years, it does not appear to correlate withincreasing numbers of police officers around the country.61As of 1993, there were approximately 630,000 sworn officers, nationwide.62This means that there are roughly 20,000 police officers for every CivilRights Division attorney responsible for overseeing and prosecuting criminalcivil rights violations.Following the reaction to the Rodney Kingcase63, the FBI initiated a four-hour civil rightstraining course for new and current police officers from throughout Georgia.Jerry Miles of the FBI's Atlanta office noted that four hours are not enough,but stated that police chiefs do not want to lose officers for a full day.64While much of the information provided in the course's lesson plan is useful,statements such as "civil rights investigations account for less than onepercent of the FBI's investigative efforts" and "historically ninety-fivepercent of the civil rights allegations made to the FBI are determinedto be unfounded," seem intended to reassure police officers that they shouldnot fear investigation or prosecution by federal authorities. Further,while the lesson plan states the FBI is unbiased in such investigations,a section of the plan provides defenses available to officers accused ofbrutality.Conclusion and RecommendationsAs described in this chapter, Georgia'slaw enforcement agents have committed serious human rights abuses, in violationof both domestic and international laws. Nonetheless, too many abusivepolice officers and sheriffs' deputies have avoided disciplinary sanctionsand have enjoyed impunity for their actions. We urge the relevant authoritiesto implement the following recommendations that should help to make lawenforcement officers from around the state accountable to the citizensthey are sworn to serve and protect.To Atlanta Mayor Bill Campbell:* We urgeyou to issue a new administrative order that will permit the Civilian ReviewBoard (C.R.B.) to operate as an authentic external check on the AtlantaPolice Department. At a minimum, the C.R.B. should be provided with itsown staff (including investigators), subpoena power and a public forum.Ideally, the C.R.B. should receive complaints directly from the publicat the outset of an investigation, not just after its completion when acomplainant is dissatisfied with the Office ofProfessional Standards' investigation.The C.R.B. should also be allowed to examine cases without having to waituntil criminal and civil cases are completed by implementing rules thatwould preserve valuable evidence and testimony.To Atlanta Police Chief Beverly Harvard:* We urgeyou to request that the City Attorney's office notify O.P.S. about everycivil lawsuit filed against an Atlanta police officer, the department,or the city by an individual alleging excessive force. The O.P.S. shouldinterview the officers named in these types of complaints and initiatean investigation into the allegations unless the complaint is clearly frivolous.In any excessive-force case settled in favor of the plaintiff, an O.P.S.investigation must be initiated.* Direct theO.P.S. to provide a report to the public, at least annually, that includesstatistics on the number of complaints received and the number sustained.The report should include the number of shooting cases, with brief descriptions,and the status of related investigations or criminal prosecutions. Publicreports from the O.P.S. should also provide information to the public abouthow to file complaints of abuse.To Georgia Governor Zell Miller:* We urgeyou to direct the Georgia Bureau of Investigations or appropriate agencyto create a state-wide system to track officers who resign from policeor sheriffs' departments once investigations into the officers' allegedmisconduct, including the use of excessive force, have been initiated.The tracking system should also include the name of each officer who isdismissed for engaging in misconduct such as excessive force. The governorshould issue an executive order requiring the reporting of such cases tothe G.B.I., and this information should be used by all police administratorsas part of background checks on new officers or sheriffs' deputies.* Introducelegislation that would revise state law regulating grand jury procedures(O.C.G.A. Title 45-11-4 addresses police officers, and refers to Title17-7-52 which describes special grand jury procedures for public officials).This legislation should remove the special privileges afforded police officerswho are allowed to be present throughout grand juryproceedings, to makestatements at the conclusion of the proceedings, and are not subjectedto questions or rebuttals from prosecutors.To United States Attorney General JanetReno:* We urgethe Justice Department to compile and provide data regarding police abuseallegations around the country, as required by the Violent Crime Controland Law Enforcement Act of 1994. Because the Civil Rights Division wasunable to provide Human Rights Watch with data on a specific state, Georgia,we must emphasize that this data should be collected so that it can bedisaggregated in a number of ways, including by state. Furthermore, theCivil Rights Division and the Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys shouldbe instructed to compile and distribute information in a coordinated fashion-thecurrent practice of compiling data using different databases and codesresults in conflicting information from each office and in duplicationof effort.* Examinewhether the federal statutes (18 U.S.C. §§241 and 242), as written,are protecting the civil rights of individuals as intended. Given the extraordinarilylow rate of federal criminal civil rights prosecutions in Georgia and nationally,we believe such a review is essential.THE DEATH PENALTY1Georgia has the distinction of having carriedout over 650 legal executions in this century, more than any other statein the U.S. Under its current, broadly worded death penalty law, whichwas upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court twenty years ago,2Georgia has carried out twenty executions by electrocution. Another 120people on Georgia's death row await execution.As in most of the thirty-eight states inthe United States where the death penalty is permitted, its applicationin Georgia is discriminatory, characterized by a denial of due processthat particularly affects defendants who are poor or black. It followson a tradition of unequal justice for African-Americans that frequentlyresults in all-white juries condemning African-American defendants to death,and in capital punishment being sought and imposed most frequently in thatsmall portion of homicides where the victim is white and the accused isblack. Further, it is imposed almost exclusively on the poor-and since30 percent of African-Americans in Georgia live below the U.S. povertylevel-these discrepancies compound the problem of racial discrimination.3Discrimination in the application of thedeath penalty in Georgia endures due to: underrepresentation of African-Americansin the judiciary, in prosecutors' offices and on juries, wide discretionexercised by prosecutors who seek the death penalty, and inadequate legalrepresentation for the poor accused of capital crimes. These are seriousfaults in the judicial system which are not unique to Georgia; thestate'sfailure to offer equal protection to black or poor defendants is a microcosmof that problem throughout the United States. Unequal sentencing is seriousenough; when it leads to execution it violates the most basic principlesof the U.S. Constitution and international human rights law.International Human Rights StandardsThe Universal Declaration on Human Rightsdictates that "everyone has the right to life," and "no one shall be subjectedto ...cruel, inhuman or degrading...punishment."4The U.S. is also party to the International Covenant on Civil and PoliticalRights (ICCPR). This covenant permits the death penalty "only for the mostserious of crimes" and prescribes that it can "only be carried out pursuantto a final judgement rendered by a competent court."5Moreover, the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR, opened for signaturesin 1989, expressly directs: "No one within the jurisdiction of a stateparty to the present [second optional] protocol shall be executed."6As of 1995, twenty-nine nations had ratified or acceded to the protocol.7The U.S. is also party to the InternationalConvention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD).8CERD is the most comprehensiveinternational codification of the human rightsprinciple of racial equality.9 It calls on governmentsto take steps to eliminate discrimination and to seek to prohibit discriminationunder the law as well as to guard against discrimination arising as a resultof the law.10 As described more fully below,at least in Georgia, the U.S. is not meeting its obligations under thistreaty in its application of the death penalty.The American Convention on Human Rightsdoes not prohibit the death penalty, but seeks to limit its usage by: prohibitingits extension to crimes not already within its purview; barring its re-introductionin countries that had abolished capital punishment; and proscribing itsuse for "political offenses."11 Thirteen yearsafter passage of the convention, these safeguards were recognized as onlynascent steps, setting in motion "a progressive and irreversible process...[designedto reduce] the application of the penalty to bring about its gradual disappearance."12In furtherance of this objective, the Protocol to the American Conventionon Human Rights to Abolish the Death Penalty was opened for signaturesin 1990. The protocol's preamble explains that it constitutes a progressivedevelopment of the convention's death penalty provisions and is aimed atconsolidating the increasing practice among American states of not applyingthe death penalty.13Many of the United States' closest alliesare parties to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rightsand Fundamental Freedoms (European Convention), which originally allowedfor the use of the death penalty.14 More recently,the Sixth Protocol to the European Convention directs that "the death penaltyshall be abolished. No one shall be condemned to such penalty or executed."15Authoritative guidance regarding the applicationof the death penalty is provided by the U.N. Safeguards guaranteeing protectionof the rights of those facing the death penalty.16The resolution requires that the death penalty only be carried out "pursuantto a final judgement rendered by a competent court after legal processwhich gives all possible safeguards to ensure a fair trial...includingthe right of anyone suspected of or charged with a crime for which capitalpunishment may be imposed to adequate legal assistance at all stages ofthe proceedings."17 The execution of juvenileoffenders and the "insane" is prohibited by the resolution.18Scholars of public international law havealso begun characterizing the rapid pace of abolition since the 1980s asbeing analogous to those developments that eventually led to the universalacceptance, within customary international law, of the proscription againstslavery and torture. Civilized nations around the globe have been steadilyconcluding that no amount of procedural or substantive precaution can guardsufficiently against the discrimination, arbitrariness andinherent crueltyof the application of the death penalty.19 Nonetheless,the United States, and Georgia, have ignored this marked internationaltrend away from the use of the death penalty.Background of the Death Penalty in GeorgiaGeorgia's death penalty is a direct descendantof racial oppression, racial violence and lynching.20From colonial times until the Civil War ended in 1865, Georgia law expresslydifferentiated between crimes committed by and against blacks and whites.21The law provided that the rape of a free white female by a black man "shallbe" punishable by death, while the rape of a free white female by anyoneelse was punishable by a prison term not less than two, nor more than twenty,years. The rape of a black woman was punishable "by fine and imprisonment,at the discretion of the court."22Disparate punishments-exacted by both thecourts and by the mob-based upon the race of victim and the race of defendantcontinued in practice after the abolition of slavery in 1865. The threatthat Congress might pass an anti-lynching statute in the early 1920s ledGeorgia and other southern states to "replace lynchings with a more `[humane]. . . method of racial control'- the judgment and imposition of capitalsentences by all-white juries."23 As historianDan Carter of Emory University observed:Southerners . . . discovered that lynchingswere untidy and created a bad press. . . . [L]ynchings were increasinglyreplacedby situations in which the Southern legal system prostituted itselfto the mobs' demand. Responsible officials begged would-be lynchers to'let the law take its course,' thus tacitly promising that there wouldbe a quick trial and the death penalty . . . . [S]uch proceedings retainedthe essence of mob murder, shedding only its outward forms.24The process of "legal lynchings" was sosuccessful that in the 1930s, two-thirds of the people being executed wereblack.25As racial violence was achieved increasinglythrough the criminal courts, Georgia carried out more executions than anyother state in the twentieth century. There were 673 executions in thestate between 1900 and the end of 1995.26 Georgiaadopted electrocution as its means of punishment in 1924. Between 1924and 1972, Georgia executed 337 black people and seventy-five white people.27In part because of this history of discrimination,as well as other serious defects, the United States Supreme Court concludedin 1972 in a case from Georgia that the death penalty violated the prohibitionagainst "cruel and unusual punishments" contained in the Eighth Amendmentof the United States Constitution.28 But thisstop at what Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshallcalled "a major milestonein the long road up from barbarism" was only temporary. New death penaltystatutes were enacted almost immediately by Georgia and a number of otherstates, and the Supreme Court upheld those statutes in 1976.Current PracticesGeorgia's current death penalty statuteallows imposition of the death penalty for any murder accompanied by arobbery, burglary, rape, or kidnapping, as well as any murder considered"outrageously horrible, vile and inhuman."29These provisions give each of Georgia's forty-six elected prosecutors injudicial districts throughout the state vast discretion to decide whetherto seek the death penalty in the many cases for which it is authorized;no state-wide standards establish in which cases death can be sought. Allforty-six local prosecutors are white. Some prosecutors seek the deathpenalty frequently, while others seldom or never seek it.30A person facing the death penalty who cannotafford a lawyer is assigned a lawyer by the presiding judge. The lawyersassigned are inadequately compensated for the demanding task of defendinga capital case and often are provided no funds to investigate the caseor present expert testimony. Many of the attorneys appointed to defendcapital cases lack the competence and skills necessary to try a complexcapital case. In trial after trial poor defendants have been given thedeath penalty because court-appointed lawyers have failed to present evidencein mitigation of punishment.Because of the inadequacy of the lawyersappointed and the lack of resources, the mental illness or mental retardationof a defendant facing the death penalty may go unnoticed or may not beadequately addressed. Those impoverished defendants for whom mental impairmentmay be a a reason not to impose the death sentence are seldom providedexpert witnesses with which to inform the jury as to the defendant's mentalcondition. Georgia put to death twomentally retarded men before passinga law in 1988 that prohibits further execution of the mentally retarded.31Several mentally ill defendants, however, have been executed under Georgia'sdeath penalty law, and Georgia law still does not prohibit execution ofthe mentally ill. Georgia law also still allows the execution ofjuvenile offenders as young as seventeen, with the Georgia Assembly recentlyconsidering lowering the age to sixteen.32The Case of Wilburn DobbsThe case of Wilburn Dobbs, one of the condemnedon Georgia's death row, starkly illustrates the racial discrimination andincompetent legal representation that is tolerated in capital cases inGeorgia. Dobbs, an African-American man accused of killing a white man,was referred to at his May 1974 trial as "colored" and "colored boy" bythe judge and the defense lawyer and called by his first name by the prosecutor.33Two of the jurors who sentenced Dobbs to death admitted after the trialthat they used the slur "niggers" when referring to African-Americans.Dobbs stood trial for his life only twoweeks after being indicted for murder and four other offenses. He was assigneda court-appointed lawyer who later admitted that he did not know for certainuntil the day of trial that he was going to represent Dobbs, and "didn'tknow for sure what he was going to be triedfor."34On the morning set for trial, the lawyer asked for a postponement, sayingthat he was "not prepared to go to trial" and that he was "in a betterposition to prosecute the case than defend it." Nevertheless, the trialcourt denied the motion, and the case proceeded to trial.A federal court described the defense lawyer'sattitude toward African-Americans as follows:Dobbs's trial attorney was outspoken abouthis views. He said that many blacks are uneducated and would not make goodteachers, but do make good basketball players. He opined that blacks areless educated and less intelligent than whites either because of theirnature or because "my granddaddy had slaves." He said that integrationhas led to deteriorating neighborhoods and schools and referred to theblack community in Chattanooga as "black boy jungle." He strongly impliedthat blacks have inferior morals by relating a story about sex in a classroom.He also said that when he was young, a maid was hired with the understandingthat she would steal some items. He said that blacks in Chattanooga aremore troublesome than blacks in Walker County [Georgia]. . . .The attorneystated that he uses the word "nigger" jokingly.35During the penalty phase of Dobbs's trial,when the jury could have heard anything about his life and background andany reasons Dobbs should not have been sentenced to death, the lawyer forhis defense presented no evidence. Nonetheless, despite the racism andthe wholly inadequate legal representation, the courts of Georgia-and federalcourts on habeas corpus review-repeatedly upheld Dobbs's conviction andsentence.36Racial DiscriminationRace makes a case that would otherwisenot be a capital case into one. Although interracial murders are only asmall percentage of total homicides in the state, Georgia prosecutors seekthe death penalty in 70 percent of cases involving black defendants andwhite victims, and in less than 35 percent of cases involving other racialcombinations.37 Sixty percent of those executedby Georgia (twelve of twenty) have been African-American, and all twentywere poor. Six of the twelve African-Americans executed by Georgia since1976 were sentenced to death by all-white juries.38And, although over 65 percent of the victims of murders in Georgia eachyear are African- American,39 eighteen of thetwenty cases in which executions have been carried out involved white victims,and over 80 percent of those on Georgia's death row are there for the murdersof white victims.40Two definitive studies-one examining nationaldata and the other focusing on Georgia-have found racial discriminationin the application of the death penalty. In 1990, the U.S. General AccountingOffice (G.A.O.) analyzed twenty-eight studies about capital sentencingand found a pattern of racial disparities throughout the country. For example,eleven of the first fourteen persons executed in neighboring Alabama since1976 have been African-American.41 Threeof the four executed by Mississippi have been African-American.42The report concludes:In 82 percent of the studies, race of thevictim was found to influence the likelihood of being charged with capitalmurder or receiving the death penalty, i.e., those who murdered whiteswere found to be more likely to be sentenced to death than those who murderedblacks. This finding was remarkably consistentacross data sets, states,data collection methods, and analytic techniques.43Also in 1990, in a study accepted by theSupreme Court as authoritative, Prof. David Baldus of the University ofIowa, found that defendants in Georgia charged with murders of white personsreceived the death penalty in 11 percent of those cases, while defendantscharged with murders of blacks received the death penalty in only 1 percentof the cases.44 Controlling for all other variables,Baldus found defendants in Georgia charged with killing white victims were4.3 times more likely to receive a death sentence than defendants chargedwith killing blacks.45 The exhaustive Baldusstudy controlled for 230 variables, leaving no doubt that race was thedeterminant factor in harsher sentencing.All of Georgia's judges, at both the trialand appellate level, are popularly elected. As a result, capital casesare often tried before judges who may be more interested in winning thenext election than in enforcing the protections provided by the Bill ofRights of the United States Constitution.46Concern about the electorate's reaction to a judge's decision is heightenedin high-profile capital cases. In discussing this problem, U.S. SupremeCourt Justice John Paul Stevens stated:The "higher authority" to whom present-daycapital judges may be "too responsive" is a political climate in whichjudges who covet higher office-or who merely wish to remain judges-mustconstantly profess their loyalty to the death penalty....he danger thatthey will bend to political pressureswhen pronouncing sentence in highlypublicized cases is the same danger confronted by judges beholden to KingGeorge III.47African-Americans are underrepresentedin the state's judiciary.48 The lack of racialdiversity among judges, jurors, prosecutors and lawyers has a substantialimpact on the quality of justice that blacks and other minorities receivein Georgia's courts. An African-American member of the Georgia SupremeCourt has observed, "When it comes to grappling with racial issues in thecriminal justice system today, often white Americans find one reality whileAfrican-Americans see another."49 Yet despitethe fact that the criminal justice system often decides whether an African-Americanwill lose his life or freedom, the decision is often based only on theversion of "reality" seen by white people.For the most part, African-Americans haveno voice in the two most important decisions which determine sentencing:decisions by prosecutors with regard to (1) whether to seek the death penaltyand (2) whether to settle a case with a plea bargain in which the prosecutoragrees to forgo the death penalty if the defendant agrees to plead guilty.And even after prosecutors make those decisions, African-Americans maybe excluded from later decisions by juries about whether to impose death.This underrepresentation has contributedto the handing down of more severe sentences for African-Americans andgreater attention to cases in whichwhites have been victims.50For example, an investigation of all of the murder cases prosecuted between1973 and 1990 in Georgia's Chattahoochee Judicial Circuit, which includesColumbus, revealed how race played a role in the imposition of the deathpenalty.51 Although African-Americans were thevictims of 70 percent of the homicides in the judicial circuit that includesColumbus, 85 percent of the capital cases in that circuit were white-victimcases.The study also found that in cases involvingthe murder of a white person, prosecutors often met with the victim's familyand discussed whether to seek the death penalty.52In a case involving the murder of the daughter of a prominent white contractor,the prosecutor asked the contractor if he wanted to seek the death penalty.When the contractor replied in the affirmative, the prosecutor said thatwas all he needed to know. He obtained the death penalty at trial. He wasrewarded with a contribution of $5,000 from the contractor when he ransuccessfully for judge in the next election.53The contribution was the largest received by the district attorney.In other cases in Columbus, the districtattorney issued press releases announcing that he was seeking the deathpenalty after meeting with the family of a white victim. But prosecutorsdid not meet with African-Americans whose family members had been murderedto determine what sentence they wanted. The same study found that manyAfrican-American families were not even notified when cases involving themurder of a loved one were resolved.Symbolism in Georgia's courtrooms onlyreinforces the racially charged context, with capital trials usually triedbefore a white judge sitting in front of theConfederate battle flag.54Georgia adopted the Confederate battle flag as part of its state flag in1956 to symbolize its rejection of the federal Constitution and the SupremeCourt's decision in Brown v. Board of Education, which requiredracial integration of U.S. public schools.55The flag was described as follows by a federal judge:The predominant part of the 1956 flag isthe Confederate battle flag, which is historically associated with theKu Klux Klan. The legislators who voted for the 1956 bill knew that thenew flag would be interpreted as a statement of defiance against federaldesegregation mandates and an expression of anti-black feelings.56Despite the fact that the flag representsdenial of equal protection of the laws to African-Americans and defianceof federal authority, it is displayed in most Georgia courtrooms. A fewjudges, mostly those of African descent, have removed the flag from theircourtrooms. But African-Americans are underrepresented in the judiciary,in prosecutors' offices and in the bar, and it is thus unlikely that thissymbol of unequal justice will be removed by state order in the near future.It is, unfortunately, a reflection of the quality of justice actually metedout in some capital cases involving blacks accused of crimes against whites.Jury SelectionEven though African-Americans are oftendefendants in capital cases, they do not sit as jurors in some cases. Localprosecutors in predominately white suburban communities are among thosewho most frequently seek the death penalty. In those communities, suchas Cobb and Douglas Counties, there are so few African-American residentsthat there is little likelihood they will be represented on the jury. Buteven in communities where there is a substantial number of African-Americansor other minorities in the population, prosecutors often succeed in preventingor minimizing their participation. Once a group of people have been qualifiedfor jury service, each side is given a number of discretionary strikesto remove potential jurors. The prosecution is given ten strikes in a capitalcase in Georgia. Many prosecutors use these discretionary strikes to removeAfrican-Americans from jury service.When a prosecutor is allowed to use theoverwhelming majority of his jury strikes against a racial minority, thatpart of the community is prohibited from participating in the process andthe jury does not reflect the conscience of the community as required underU.S. law. For example, Joseph Briley, the prosecutor in Georgia's OcmulgeeJudicial Circuit, tried thirty-three death penalty cases in his tenureas district attorney in the circuit between 1974 and his resignation in1994. Of those thirty-three cases, twenty-four were against African-Americandefendants.57 In the cases in which the defendantswere black and the victims were white, Briley used 94 percent of his jurychallenges-ninety-six out of 103-against black citizens.58A study of jury strikes in Chatahoochee judicial circuit found that, incapital cases involving black defendants, prosecutors used 70 percent ofjury strikes against African-Americans, obtaining all-white juries in sixcapital cases involving African-American defendants in a community thatis 30 percent black.59For a number of years, judges in the cityof Columbus appointed one particular lawyer to capital cases who consistentlyfailed to challenge theunderrepresentation of black citizens in the jurypools for fear of incurring hostility from the community.60As a result, six African-Americans were tried by all-white juries in capitalcases in that judicial circuit, and others were tried before juries inwhich African-Americans were substantially underrepresented.Because of the history of discriminationin selecting juries in Georgia and elsewhere, the U.S. Supreme Court in1986 adopted in Batson v. Kentucky a procedure that required prosecutorsto justify jury strikes if they struck a disproportionate number of blackjurors. The trial judge then decides if the strikes are due to race orto some legitimate reason having nothing to do with race. Nonetheless,Georgia judges at both the trial and appellate levels have readily acceptedalmost any excuse offered by prosecutors for striking African-Americanjurors. In Lingo v. State, for example, the Georgia Supreme Courtupheld a prosecutor's use of all ten of his jury strikes against African-Americansto obtain an all-white jury in a capital case.61And federal courts have upheld a numberof specious explanations for jury strikes presented by prosecutors. Therefore,even though the Supreme Court, in Batson, prohibited racially basedjuror strikes, in practice prosecutors continue to exclude African-Americansfrom juries in capital, and other, trials.Sentencing DisparitiesAs described in both the G.A.O. reportand in the Baldus study described above, racial disparities are particularlyevident in death penalty cases. Nevertheless, the United States SupremeCourt, by a 5-4 vote, held in McCleskey v. Kemp that Georgia couldcarry out its death penalty law despite such racial disparities.62The court accepted the racial disparities as "an inevitable part of ourcriminal justice system" and expressed its concern that "McCleskey's claim,taken to its logical conclusion, throws into serious question the principlesthat underlie our entire criminal justice system." Justice William Brennan,in dissent, characterized this concern as "a fear of too much justice."Since McCleskey, courts have beenunwilling to examine issues of racial bias. For example, William HenryHance was executed by Georgia in 1994, even though jurors admitted in affidavitsthat racial slurs had been used during deliberations.63No court even held a hearing on the racial attitudes of the jurors whosentenced Hance to death. In another case, where racial slurs were usedby jurors during their deliberations, the Georgia Supreme Court upheldthe deathsentence, contending that even though individual jurors had racialbiases, they had not entered into deliberations.64Indeed, public officials and courts inGeorgia, as elsewhere in the U.S., have been remarkably indifferent toracial discrimination in the criminal justice system. After it was discoveredin 1978 that a prosecutor instructed jury commissioners in one county tounderrepresent black citizens on the master jury lists, Georgia AttorneyGeneral Michael Bowers defended the prosecutor's actions for ten yearsall the way to the United States Supreme Court, seeking to carry out thedeath sentence imposed on an eighteen-year-old youth. Although the U.S.Supreme Court struck down the conviction and sentence due to the racialdiscrimination,65 no action was taken againstthe prosecutor by the attorney general's office, the judiciary or the Georgiabar.Legal Representation for the PoorInadequate legal representation leavesthe poor without due process of law protections in cases where their livesare at stake. Procedural rules require that lawyers identify legal issuesat trial; failure to identify an issue will result in the refusal of thecourts to consider it on appeal. Therefore, the mistakes made by the lawyerrepresenting a defendant in a capital case are usually not corrected onappeal. Furthermore, the lack of adequate legal representation at the post-convictionphase-a problem that has recently been exacerbated due to the eliminationof federal funding for post-conviction legal assistance centers-has leftmany accused in capital cases virtually undefended.The quality of both private and assignedrepresentation in capital cases in Georgia is so bad that it was singledout by a 1990 American Bar Association study of the capital punishmentprocess and described as follows:Georgia's recent experience with capitalpunishment has been marred by examples of inadequate representation rangingfrom virtually no representation at all by counsel, to representation byinexperienced counsel, to failures to investigate basic threshold questions,to lack of knowledge of governing law, to lack of advocacy on the issueof guilt, to failure to present a case for life at the penalty phase. Evenin cases in which the performances of counsel have passed constitutionalmuster . . . and executionshave been carried out, the representation providedhas neverthe less been of very poor quality. In some instances, mistakesby counsel have resulted in the execution of one person while that person'scodefendant has obtained relief on the identical issue.66The vice president of the Georgia TrialLawyers Association described the simple test used in a lot of countiesto show if a defendant receives adequate counsel, called the mirror test."You put a mirror under the court-appointed attorney's nose, and if themirror clouds up, that's adequate counsel."67Georgia has no state-wide, independentpublic defender system. Each county is allowed to have its own scheme forproviding indigent defense. In most capital cases judges simply appointmembers of the bar in private practice to defend indigents accused of crimes.The lawyers appointed may not want the cases, may receive little compensationfor the time and expense of handling them, may lack any interest in criminallaw, and may not have the skill to defend those accused of crime. In contrastto the virtually unlimited access to experts and investigative assistanceby the prosecution, the lawyer defending the indigent accused in a capitalcase may not have any investigative and expert assistance to prepare fortrial and present a defense. As a result, the poor are often representedby inexperienced lawyers who view their responsibilities as unwanted burdens,have no inclination to help their clients, and have no incentive to developcriminal trial skills.The 1990 American Bar Association reportpointed to numerous capital trials in Georgia in which attorneys appointedto defend a capital case failed to offer any evidence in mitigation, wereunaware of the law, distanced themselves from their clients, and gave argumentsthat either conceded guilt or did more harmthan good.68Some people were sentenced to death at trials where they were representedby attorneys trying their first cases, by attorneys who slept during partsof the trials, or by attorneys who were absent during parts of the trials.In one case, two attorneys presented different and conflicting defensesfor the same client. One attorney, a former Grand Dragon of the Ku KluxKlan, presented a non-credible alibi defense, while the other lawyer asserteda mental health defense that acknowledged the accused's participation inthe crime.69One person who received inadequate representationwas Gary Nelson, an African-American who spent eleven years on Georgia'sdeath row without anything like adequate proof of guilt. Nelson was representedat his capital trial in 1980 by a lawyer who had never tried a capitalcase. The lawyer was paid at a rate of only $20 per hour. The defendant'srequest for a second lawyer on the case was denied.The case against Nelson was based solelyon the questionable opinion of an expert who found a hair on the victim'sbody he claimed came from Nelson. Nevertheless, the lawyer assigned todefend Nelson was not provided funds for an investigator and, knowing arequest would be denied, did not seek funds for a forensic expert. Thelawyer's closing argument was only 255 words long. He was later disbarredfor other reasons.Fortunately for Nelson, some lawyers volunteeredto handle the post-conviction proceedings in his case without compensationand spent their own money to investigate his case. They discovered thatthe hair found on the victim's body, which had been linked to Nelson, lackedsufficient characteristics for microscopic comparison. Indeed, the FederalBureau of Investigation had examined the hair and found that it could notbe compared.70 As a result, Gary Nelson wasreleased after eleven years on death row. But many are not as fortunateas Nelson, and even such blatant errors may not be discovered.The first person executed under Georgia'scurrent death penalty law, John Eldon Smith, who was white, was sentencedto death by an unconstitutionally composed jury, as was another personinvolved in the same crime who was tried separately in the same county.The other defendant's lawyers challenged the jurycomposition in state court;Smith's lawyers did not because they were unaware of a U.S. Supreme Courtdecision prohibiting gender discrimination in juries.71A new trial was ordered for the co-defendantby the federal court of ap peals.72 At thattrial, a jury which fairly represented the community imposed a sentenceof life imprisonment. The federal courts refused to consider the identicalissue in Smith's case because his lawyers had not challenged the exclusionof women in the state courts because they did not know the law. (The federalcourts refuse to examine points of law that have not been presented firstto the state courts.) Thus, because the co-defendant's lawyer knew thelaw and raised the point in state court, it was later considered by thefederal court; because Smith's lawyer in state court was unaware of thelaw, it was not considered when another lawyer presented the issue to thefederal judges. Smith was executed. Had the co-defendant been representedby Smith's lawyers in state court and Smith by the co-defendant's lawyers,the co-defendant would likely have been executed and Smith would have receiveda new trial.73The second person executed in Georgia wasa mentally retarded offender, convicted despite a jury instruction whichunconstitutionally shifted the burden of proof on intent. He was deniedrelief because his attorney did not preserve the issue for review.74The more culpable co-defendant was granted a new trial on the very sameissue.75 Again, as with the case of John EldonSmith, a switch of the lawyers could have reversed the outcomes of thecase.Other cases in which executions have beencarried out have had the same poor quality of legal representation. Forexample, John Young, who was sentenced to death in 1976 in the samecounty as John Eldon Smith, was represented at his capital trial by anattorney who was dependent on amphetamines and other drugswhich affectedhis ability to concentrate, suffering severe emotional strain, physi callyexhausted, and distracted because of marital problems, child custody arrangements, difficulties in a relationship with a lover, and the pressures ofa family business.76 Young was sentenced todeath. A few weeks later, Young met his attorney at the prison yard inthe Bibb County Jail. The lawyer had been sent there after pleading guiltyto state and federal drug charges. Georgia executed John Young on March20, 1985.The Mentally Impaired Poor77The mentally impaired are particularlyaffected by poor legal representation and the denial of expert assistancewhich is necessary to document and present a diagnosis of mental illnessto the jury. Lawyers appointed to defend capital cases may be unaware ofthe symptoms of schizophrenia, fetal alcohol syndrome, brain damage, andother mental disorders suffered by their clients. Georgia judges oftendeny funds for mental examinations and expert witnesses, thus denying juriescritical information which is necessary for their decision between lifeimprisonment and death.One tragic example was the case of JamesMesser. He was provided with a court-appointed lawyer who, at the guiltphase, gave no opening statement, pre sented no defense case, conductedcursory cross-examination, made no objections, and then emphasized thehorror of the crime in some brief closing remarks. Even though Messer'ssevere mental impairment was important to issues at both the guilt andpenalty phases, the lawyer presented no evidence regarding it because hefailed to make an adequate showing to the judge that he needed a mentalhealth expert.78 He also failed to put on evidenceof Messer's steady employment record, military record, church attendance,and cooperation with police, and in closing repeatedly hinted that deathwas the most appropriate punishment for his own client.79Thecourts rejected a claim that this was ineffective counsel, and Messerwas executed July 28, 1988.Despite these and other shocking instancesof inadequate representation, the judiciary, the bar and the legislaturein Georgia have done little to improve the situation. Although, in 1992,a Multi-County Defender office was established within the Georgia IndigentDefense Council (a governmental office) to provide specialists to defendcapital cases, the office has never been given sufficient resources togrow beyond four attorneys. There are usually over one-hundred capitalcases pending pre-trial in Georgia at any one time, thus the impact ofthe office is quite limited. As a result, most poor people facing the deathpenalty in Georgia continue to receive poor quality representation.Under Gideon v. Wainwright,80all states must provide counsel to indigent defendants-including in capitalcases-up through their direct appeal to the state's highest court. However,as described above, quality of defense is not guaranteed in practice. Insubsequent state post-conviction proceedings, or in the U.S. Supreme Court,there is no constitutional right to representation and volunteer counseloften must be recruited.81 Clearly the workof qualified counsel at these later stages is crucial. However, since 1988,this role had been filled by post-conviction defender organizations, fundedby federal grants. They were recently de-funded, making the prospects foradequate defense of the indigent at the crucial later stages of appealvery slight indeed.Georgia provides no statutory right tocapital post-conviction counsel and no state compensation for representation.The two remaining lawyers at the Georgia Resource Center (a post-convictiondefender organization) represent twenty-four prisoners in state post-convictionproceedings. Attorneys representing defendants in capital cases are overwhelmed,with one stating, "We're doing acrude kind of triage, trying to stay withthe cases where we have time invested and can do our best with our limitedresources...."82Recent Developments Regarding HabeasCorpus RestrictionsThe quality of justice is expected to declinein the future as a result of less oversight by the federal courts of deathsentences imposed in state courts. In April, President Clinton signed intolaw the Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996, which containednew restrictions on habeas corpus appeals for all defendants, includingthose facing execution. The new law seeks to expedite the review of capitalcases by limiting federal review of state court convictions except forcases where the previous state court decision was unreasonably wrong. Thenew law, in most instances, prohibits federal courts from hearing factualevidence not heard during trial but necessary to deciding whether the Constitutionwas violated. These restrictions were proposed despite the fact that approximately40 percent of state capital cases reviewed in federal habeas corpus arefound to contain harmful constitutional errors and are overturned.83The new law also sets rigid time limitsboth on counsel and federal courts that will make it difficult for lawyersor the courts to perform effectively and will most likely deter many lawyersfrom handling such cases. Coupled with the recent elimination of federalsupport for legal programs that provided representation for persons facingthe death penalty, this has left many death row prisoners without essentiallegal advice. There have been countless examples of poor representation;the new restrictions will only make this situation worse.Furthermore, as described above, internationalhuman rights standards permit capital punishment only in exceptional casesand require that the legal procedures used in the application of the deathpenalty include extraordinary safeguards to avoid error. The new habeascorpus restrictions not only ignore the international trend away from capitalpunishment, but also violate the spirit of international norms by proposingto make executions more common and errors in capital cases more likely.Conclusion and RecommendationsGeorgia should abolish the death penalty,which is a cruel and unusual punishment. Failing a change in the law, Georgiacould take a number of interim steps to reduce the arbitrariness and racialdiscrimination in the infliction of its death penalty and to provide moreequal treatment for all its citizens:* An independent,state-wide public defender system should be established to take responsibilityfor indigent defense in the state to ensure that impoverished defendantsare represented by lawyers able and willing to devote the time, resourcesand skills necessary in capital cases. At the very least, the Multi-CountyDefender's office should be provided with the staff and other resourcesnecessary to fulfill its duties in representing poor defendants in capitalcases.* The governorshould appoint a preview panel tasked with overseeing the decisions oflocal prosecutors who seek the death penalty to ensure that race, passionsof the moment, and local politics have not entered into the decision.* The statecourts should adopt standards for hearing and resolving claims of racialdiscrimination in capital cases that comport with common sense and reality.In keeping with international human rights obligations, the courts mustconsider the effects of racial discrepancies in the application of thedeath penalty.* The Georgiajudiciary must take steps to end prosecutors' practice of removing a disproportionatenumber of African-Americans from capital case juries and to seek diversityin capital case juries.RACE AND DRUGLAW ENFORCEMENTIntroductionThe impact of crime control policies onminorities is among the most important, disturbing and contentious socialissues facing the United States. Overwhelming data establish the strikingproportion of African-Americans entangled in the criminal justice system-onany given day one in three young black American males is either in prisonor jail, on probation or parole.1 Drug lawsand enforcement policies are among the most important causes of this nationalcrisis. As one expert has noted, "Urban black Americans have borne thebrunt of the War on Drugs. They have been arrested, prosecuted, convicted,and imprisoned at increasing rates since the early 1980s, and grossly outof proportion to their numbers in the general population or among drugusers." 2The national pattern of racial disproportionin the "war on drugs" is replicated in the state of Georgia.3As we document in this report, both black and white Georgia residents useand distribute drugs, but black residents are far more likely to be arrestedand incarcerated for drug offenses.4 Black residentsof Georgia are arrested for all drug offenses at a rate five times greaterthan white residents of the state. For cocaine-related offenses, they arearrested at seventeen times the rate of whites. Blacks are imprisoned fordrug offenses at twice the rate of whites and have received 98 percentof the mandatory life sentences that have been imposed for those offenses.Fifty young black men between the ages of eighteen and twenty-one havereceived life sentences.The operation of the criminal justice systemin Georgia is governed by state and federal law, both of which enjoin discriminationon the basis of race. International human rights law is also implicated:one of the overarching principles of international human rights is thatof equality before the law.5 The InternationalConvention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD),to which the United States is a signatory, is the most comprehensive internationalcodification of the human rights principle of racial equality.6It calls on national governments to take steps to eliminate discriminationand to seek to prohibit discrimination under the law as well as to guardagainst discrimination arising as a result of the law. 7In this report we examine drug law enforcementin Georgia in light of CERD and the requirement of non-discrimination,focussing primarily on the years 1990 to 1995. Drawing on computerizedstatewide databases,8 we have compiled statisticson the racial dimension of arrests and imprisonment for drug offenses inGeorgiathat have never been published before.9 Becauseof the limitations in the data, however, our figures should be consideredas estimates illuminating the general contours of the racial patterns indrug law enforcement. The nature of the data available to us also precludesan analysis of the role race may play in the many decision points in thecriminal justice system between arrest and sentencing.10The disparate racial impact we are able to document at the end points ofthe criminal justice system-arrest and incarceration-suffices, however,to raise a warning flag concerning the fairness and equity of Georgia'sdrug law enforcement.Georgia Drug LawsGeorgia imposes criminal penalties forthe unauthorized possession, manufacturing, distribution, sale and traffickingof controlled substances which, following the federal model, are placedwithin one of five categories or "schedules."11Purchasing or possession of a controlled substance in schedule I, or ofcertain drugs in schedule II (e.g. cocaine),12is a felony punishable by not less than two years of imprisonment and notmore than fifteen. A second or subsequent conviction for possession ispunishable by between five and thirty years in prison.More serious punishment is levied on themanufacture, sale, or possession with intent to sell of drugs such as cocaine.The first offense is punishable by five to thirty years. Conviction ofa second or subsequent offense has been punishable, in theory, by mandatorylife imprisonment. The law also establishes a penalty of one to ten yearsof imprisonment for marijuana possession, distribution, sale or possessionwith intent to distribute or manufacture. Penalties for trafficking, ie.the production or sale of twenty-eight grams or more of controlled substances,are set according to the quantity of the drug involved. Sentences rangefrom a minimum of five years to a maximum of thirty, in addition to finesnot to exceed US one million dollars.Drug Offense ArrestsAlthough by their terms Georgia's druglaws are racially neutral, the enforcement and application of these lawstell a different story. State-wide arrest figures reveal a striking disparitybetween the numbers of African-Americans and whites arrested for drug offenses.13Before the so-called "war on drugs" was launched across the nation in themid 1980s, more whites than blacks were arrested for drug offenses. Bythe end of the decade, the total number of arrests for drug offenses hadincreased dramatically and, as shown in Figure 1, the racial compositionof those arrested had reversed: the number of blacks arrested for drugswas more than double that of whites. Over the decade, the annual numberof white arrests increased only marginally, from 10,376 to 11,850. In contrast,the number of blacks arrested for drug offenses increased from 5,689 in1980 to 24,512 in 1989.The disparity in the numbers of blacksand whites arrested for drug offenses continued between 1990 and 1995.During this period, at least 200,243 persons were arrested in Georgia forthe illegal possession or sale of drugs. Although blacks constitute lessthan one-third of the population of Georgia,1464.2 percent of those arrested for drugs were black men and women. Only35.6 percent were white men and women.The best measure with which to assess therelative impact of drug arrests on blacks and whites is the ratio of arreststo population. Figure 2 shows shows the comparative ratios of arrests fordrug offenses per 100,000 of the white and African-American adult populationsin the years 1990-1995. In each year, blackswere arrested at a rate five times greaterthan whites. Our analysis of the arrest data also reveals a strong differenceby race in the number of arrests according to the drug involved. The drugof most significance is cocaine-the drug whose use fueled the "war on drugs"nationwide as well as in Georgia and the drug involved in the greatestnumber of arrests. As shown in Table 1, blacks constituted 83.7 percentof all the arrests in Georgia between 1990 and 1995 for possession of cocaine,and constituted 87 percent of the arrests for its sale .15Table 1: Total Drug Offense Arrestsby Race 1990-1995BlackWhiteNumberof ArrestsPercentof Total ArrestsRatePer 100,000Numberof ArrestsPercentof Total ArrestsRatePer 100,000CocainePossession57,70183.67%4,95711,14616%319Sale31,55987%2,7114,48712%128All89,26085%7,66815,63314.9%447MarijuanaPossession25,35042.7%2,17833,83357%968Sale4,86636%4188,57864%245All30,21641.5%2,59642,41158%1,213OtherDrugsPossession1,35427.7%1163,53272%101Sale8,01444.8%6899,82355%281All9,36841%80513,35558.6%382TOTAL128,84564.2%11,06971,39935.6%2,043Source: Arrest data fromGeorgia Crime Information CenterComparison of the ratio of arrests to populationreveals an even starker racial discrepancy: blacks were arrested for cocaineoffenses at a rate of 7,668.4 per 100,000 black adults. Whites, in contrast,were arrested at a rate of 447.2 per 100,000 white adults or one-seventeenththe rate of blacks.16 The rate of black arrestsper 100,000 black adults for marijuana offenses is more than double therate of white arrests per 100,000 white adults, even though, in absolutenumbers, morewhites than blacks were arrested for marijuana possessionand sale.17 The dramatic difference betweenblacks and whites in the ratios of arrests by drug type to population isdepicted in Figure 3.Source: Arrest data from Georgia Department of Corrections. Populationfrom 1990 Census. Rates calculated on basis of populations of black andwhite adults eighteen and over.Rate of Arrests Compared to Rate ofOffending ConductThe difference between black and whitearrest rates is stunning. But the greater number and rate of arrests ofblacks compared to whites by themselves donot establish discriminationor unequal treatment. If blacks were arrested more frequently because theybreak the law more frequently, that is, if different arrest rates for blacksand whites reflected different rates of criminal conduct, then the datawould not suggest discrimination in the enforcement of the drug laws. Unfortunately,there are no specific data on the number and racial composition of drugusers and sellers in Georgia.18 However, anecdotalinformation available for Georgia and national drug surveys do establishan approximation of the racial composition of the Georgia drug market.Police, prosecutors, defense attorneysand ethnographers in Georgia interviewed by Human Rights Watch agree thatdrug use in Georgia is spread across racial and socio-economic lines. Cocaineis used by both races. In its crack form, cocaine is prevalent in lower-incomeblack communities, although white use of crack is increasing. The districtattorney for Gwinnett County, for example, told Human Rights Watch thata "sting" in 1992 in which law enforcement personnel posed as crack sellersin a black neighborhood resulted in the arrest of some five dozen peoplein the first two hours. Two-thirds of those arrested were white.19Powder cocaine, which is more expensive than crack, is primarily consumedby middle- and upper-income individuals, who in Georgia are primarily white.The monitoring of drug trends by the U.S.Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP) also indicates multi-racialuse of drugs in Georgia. For example, in the Fall 1995 Pulse Checkpublished by ONDCP, ethnographers reported that in Atlanta powder cocainewas used by "white snorters" and crack cocaine was used by African-Americansin their twenties. The preceding Pulse Check had summarized cocaineusers in Atlanta as: "late teens, early 20s, whites; older African-Americans."20While valuable, the anecdotal informationcannot be used as a basis for comparison with arrest statistics. In theabsence of Georgia specific drug possession statistics, we have utilizeddrug use rates taken from national household surveys to draw comparisonswith Georgia arrest rates. By all accounts, drug use in Georgia does notappear to differ appreciably from national rates. 21In an equitable criminal justice system,we would expect that racial proportions in arrest rates for possessionwould resemble racial proportions in drug use.22In Georgia, however, we find a startling discrepancy. Using the most recentnational rates for current illicit drug use, we estimate that in 1994,for example, at least 7,300 black Georgians per 100,000 were current usersof illicit drugs compared to 6,000 whites per 100,000.23Thus blacks apparently use drugs at a rate about 20 percent higher thanwhites. Yet blacks were arrested for possession of illicit drugs at a proportionalrate that was 500 percent greater than whites.As shown in Table 2, African-Americansin Georgia are also arrested at rates greatly disproportionate to theirestimated share of the total drug using population. 24In 1994, for example, although blacks constituted approximately 14percentof all current drug users, they constituted 58 percent of persons arrestedfor drug possession.25 Conversely, whites represented76 percent of the drug users in Georgia, yet they accounted for only 41percent of those arrested. In other words, a black drug user had a muchgreater likelihood of being arrested for drug possession than a white druguser.Table 2: Comparison by Race of DrugUse and Possession Arrest, 1991-1995YearBlackWhitePercentof CurrentUsersPercentof ArrestsPercentof Current UsersPercentof Arrests199116.97%67%72.4%32.6%199213.7%63.5%76.4%36.2%199313%61.5%74%38.1%199414%58.3%76.5%41.3%1995N/A59%N/A40%Source: Arrests from GeorgiaCrime Information Center. Figures on drug use calculated from SAMHSA data.Data covers all illicit drugs.The discrepancy between use and arrestrates for whites and blacks is even greater if we look at the comparativerates for cocaine. Blacks use cocaine at a rate that is two and a halftimes greater than the rate of whites.26 Yetblacks are arrested for cocaine possession at a rate that is fifteen timesgreater than whites.27 Furthermore, as shownin Table 3, black users are arrested at a rate greatly in excess of theirestimated share of the total population of cocaine users, while whites,conversely, are arrested at a rate substantially less than their shareof users.Table 3: Comparison by Race of CocaineUse and Possession ArrestsYearBlackWhitePercentof Total Current Cocaine UsersPercentof Total ArrestsPercentof Total Current Cocaine UsersPercentof Total Arrests199137.6%85.1%57%14.8%199217.6%84.3%65.9%15.5%199321.8%83.3%57.9%16.4%199422%79.0%62%20.8%1995N/A80.6%N/A19%Source: Arrest data fromGeorgia Crime information Center. Figures on druguse calculated from SAMHSAdata.Marijuana arrests present similar racialdisproportions. Between 1990 and 1995, blacks accounted for a larger percentageof the total arrests for marijuana possession than they did of the populationof marijuana users. (See Table 4.) In addition, blacks were arrested atan annual rate of 363 per 100,000 compared to a rate of 161 per 100,000for whites. Although more whites, in absolute numbers, were arrested thanblacks, their arrest rates were not comensurate with their share of themarijuana using population.Table 4: Comparison by Race of Ratesof Marijuana Use and Possession ArrestsYearBlackWhitePercentof UsersPercentof ArrestsPercentof UsersPercentof Arrests199117%40%73%59%199218%38.6%77%61%199314%40%74%59.5%199413.7%42%76%57.5%1995N/A46%N/A53%Source: Arrest data fromGeorgia Crime Information Center.Figures on drug use calculatedfrom SAMHSA data.Given the high number of arrests that arefor drug sales and the more serious penalties attached to sales, we haveattempted to compare the racial proportions of arrests with the racialproportions of the drug-selling population. The effort must be seen as,at best, a crude approximation, because there are no reliable analysesof the drug-selling population by race. Nevertheless, the anecdotal andstatistical data that do exist indicate that the drug selling populationin Georgia is more mixed racially than the population that is actuallyarrested by the police.According to anecdotal information fromlaw enforcement personnel and defense lawyers in Georgia, whites constitutea significant proportion of drug sellers. Police personnel in the Atlantametropolitan area told Human Rights Watch that at the retail level, thatis, regarding sales to individuals purchasing primarily for their own use,blacks dominate the sale of crack cocaine but both blacks and whites sellpowder cocaine and marijuana to drug consumers. Methamphetamine, or "redneckcocaine," a drug whose use is growing, is sold almost entirely by whites.The ONDCP's Pulse Check also confirms that in Atlanta, at least,both whites and blacks sell drugs. In the Pulse Check publishedin the summer of 1995, for example, ethnographers reported that white dealersin Atlanta were selling powder cocaine and young African-Americans wereselling crack.28Data on the prevalence of drug sellersnationwide is available from SAMSHA for the three-year period 1991 to 1993.29SAMHSA figures, based on answers to questions during their voluntary householdinterviews, indicate that whites may have comprised 82 percent of the totalnumber of drug sellersnationwide, and blacks comprised 16 percent.30Given the nature of the population surveyed by SAMHSA, these figures undoubtedlyundercount the actual percentage of black sellers. Nevertheless, they suggest,at the very least, that whites constitute at least as many sellers as blacks.If we assume, as seems reasonable, thatthe racial composition of the total drug-selling population in Georgiadoes not differ dramatically from that obtaining nationwide, then the racialbreakdown of arrests for drug sales in Georgia is startling. As indicatedin Table 1, in the past six years twice as many African-Americans havebeen arrested for drug sales as whites. Eighty-seven percent of the personsarrested for cocaine sales are black, compared to 12 percent white. Onlywith regard to sales of marijuana does the whites' percentage of arrests(69.9 percent) begin to resemble their estimated share of the selling population.Firm conclusions would be inappropriate given the speculative nature ofthe seller population data. Nevertheless, the available data does suggestthat black sellers may be arrested in numbers disproportionate to theirshare of the drug selling population.Why the Disparate Impact?Arrest rates reflect both drug-market activityand the choices of police enforcing the drug laws. Taken together, thedata discussed above indicate that blacks in Georgia have been arrestedat rates far higher than their rate of criminal conduct. Discriminatorypurpose or racial bias- conscious or unconscious31-maycontribute to police drug law enforcement practices, but we have no validmeans of assessing its presence or the extent of its influence. Law enforcementofficials interviewed by Human Rights Watch denied their practices wereracially biased. Almost every single person Human Rights Watch interviewedin Georgia, including police officials, stated that the racially skewedarrest statistics flowed from one central reality in drug law enforcement:it is easier to make drug arrests in low-income neighborhoods. Accordingto this view, black offenders are not targeted because they are black.Rather, black offenders are arrested morefrequently because the circumstancesof their lives and drug transactions make them easier to arrest.We were told that most of the drug arrestsby Georgia police are of lower-level drug dealers and buyers, such as "retail"sellers and consumers, and that most of these arrests occur in low-incomeminority areas. Retail drug sales in these neighborhoods frequently occuron the streets and between sellers and buyers who do not know each other.That is, the transaction is public and the clientele for street sellersincludes many strangers (black and white) who will walk or drive up toa seller at a known location to buy a small amount of drugs for personalconsumption. Most of these sellers are black. In contrast, white drug sellerstend to sell indoors, in bar and clubs and within private homes, and tomore affluent purchasers, also primarily white.A number of tactical considerations makeit easier to arrest drug offenders who engage in criminal conduct on thestreets: they are easier to find and monitor (and catch on videotape).Uniformed police arrest individuals they encounter whom they see engagedin unlawful drug transactions. Undercover officers typically arrest a sellerafter making one or more drug purchases from that seller, and it is easierfor an officer to arrange a buy from sellers accustomed to sell to strangers."[I]n poor urban minority neighborhoods, it is easier for undercover narcoticsofficers to penetrate networks of friends and acquaintances than in morestable and closely knit working-class and middle-class neighborhoods. Thestranger buying drugs on the urban street corner or in an alley, or overcominglocal suspicions by hanging around for a few days and then buying drugs,is commonplace... Police undercover operations can succeed [in working-and middle-class neighborhoods], but they take longer, cost more and areless likely to succeed."32In other words, blacks may be arrestedmore frequently because they more frequently engage in drug transactionsthat are easier to detect and bust.33 Facedwith a choice between going after offenders who are easier (faster, cheaper)toarrest versus offenders who will take much more effort, Georgia policenot surprisingly have opted for the former.That choice-concentrating on drug offendersin low-income rather than more affluent neighborhoods-has also been politicallypragmatic. As Chief Justice Robert Benham of the Georgia Supreme Courttold Human Rights Watch, a concerted effort to root out drug dealing inmiddle-class enclaves would undoubtedly generate considerable oppositionand criticism.34 In contrast, there is no "hueand cry" when the police target low income neighborhoods for drug law enforcement.Indeed, attacking drug dealing in inner city neighborhoods is supportedby the neighborhood itself, the general public, the media and politicalleaders.The violence, disorder, nuisance and assaultson the quality of life that often accompany public drug markets in low-incomecommunities produce pressure on police departments to commit more resourcesto those neighborhoods. According to Atlanta police, for example, policedepartments are complaint-driven organizations.35They receive few complaints that relatively affluent individuals are engagedin private drug transactions in a bar or office building; those transactionsdo not create the kind of visible public nuisance and generate the publicoutrage that prompts complaints. In contrast, residents of low income neighborhoodsplagued by drug dealing do complain to public officials and to the policeas they seek to free their streets of individuals who make it difficultfor them and their children to lead safe and peaceful lives. To their voicesare added those of the media, politicians and others who for many differentreasons-legitimate concern, the quest for political gain, and so on-pointto crime and drug dealing in low income neighborhoods and call for policecrackdowns.It may be that, on closer examination,the racial disparities in arrests are disparities of class. In Georgia,as in many states in the U.S., race and class are to a great extent conflated:a law enforcement system focused on economically disadvantaged individualsis one that more seriously affects minorities, and vice versa.36But justice is no more served when the poor are disproportionately targetedthanwhen one minority is. To the extent that police choose to concentrate druglaw enforcement in poor and/or black neighborhoods as opposed to more affluentwhite neighborhoods, those choices raises the question of equal justice.Where the disparate racial impact is readily foreseeable, even if not expresslyintended, equal rights principles are implicated.37ImprisonmentThe racially disparate impact of law enforcementevident from the arrest data is also reflected at the other end of thecriminal justice system, in the pattern of incarceration.38Over the last twenty-four years, between 1972 and March 1996, the stateof Georgia has sent approximately 41,000 persons to prison for drug offenses.39Some 27,657 (or 67.3 percent) of those were black. Among those incarceratedwere 4,865 young adults between the ages of eighteen and twenty-one. Ofthese, 3,135 (or 64.4 percent) were black. As shown in Figure 4, more whiteoffenderswere admitted than blacks from 1972 untilthe late 1980s. Then, with the rise in arrests of blacks for drug offensesthat has accompanied the "war on drugs," the number of blacks incarceratedjumped and has since remained consistently higher than that of whites.Since 1990, as shown in Table 5, blacks have consistently accounted formore than three-quarters of persons admitted to prison for drug offenses.40Table 5: Comparison of Whites and BlacksAdmitted to Prison for Drug OffensesYearWhiteBlackTotalNumberadmittedPercentof admittedNumberadmittedPercentof admitted19901,04525%3,07974%4,148199194020.9%3,50678.6%4,455199298120.3%3,82179.3%4,81619931,01219.4%4,16080.1%5,19219941,19219.8%4,79379.9%5,99219951,25920%5,00679.7%6,280TOTAL6,42920.8%24,36578.9%30,883Source: Georgia Departmentof Corrections.As shown in Table 6, young black adultsconsistently accounted for more than 84.9 percent of the admissions ofall young adults for all drug offenses over the decade ending in 1995.Table 6: Admission of Young Adults toPrison for Drug Offenses 1985-1995BlackWhiteNumberPercentNumberPercentAllDrug Offenses2,57184.9%45915.1%Possession1,39987.2%20612.8%Sales1,17282.2%25317.8%Source: Georgia Departmentof CorrectionsThe data show that between 1990 and 1995,black drug offenders were incarcerated at more than twice the rate of whitedrug offenders: 8.8 percent of blacks compared to 3.6 percent of whitesarrested for drug offenses were ultimately admitted to prison (See Table7). As a result, blacks constitute a growingproportion of those admittedto prison even though they account for a declining proportion of the totalnumber of drug arrrests.41Table 7: Comparison by Race of DrugOffender Arrests and Imprisonment, 1990-1995YearBlackWhitePercentof Total ArrestsPercentof PrisonAdmissionsPercentof Total ArrestsPercentof Prison Admissions199068%74%31.7%25%199169.6%78.6%30%20.9%199264%79.3%35%20.3%199362.5%80.1%37%19.4%199460.8%79.9%38.9%19.8%199559.9%78.9%39.8%20%Source: Arrest data fromGeorgia Crime Information Center. Prison data from GeorgiaDepartment of Corrections.At first blush the significant differencein incarceration rates is troubling and suggests unwarranted discriminationin sentencing. Upon closer examination, however, most of the discrepancyappears in fact to originate with different incarceration rates accordingto the drug involved. As indicated in Table 8, on the average, 11.34%Table 8 : Rate of Incarceration of ArrestedDrug Offenders, 1990-1995Drug OffenseAverage Rate ofImprisonmentRate of Black ArresteesImprisonedRate of White ArresteesImprisonedCocaine11.34%12%7.5%Marijuana2.07%1.6%2.3%Other Drugs2.04%.4%3.1%Source: Arrest data fromGeorgia Crime Information Center. Prison admissions datafrom Georgia Department ofCorrections. Note: average rate of imprisonment calculatedby aggregating black andwhite offenders and their corresponding rates.of the persons arrested for cocaine offensesare sent to prison compared to 2.07% of those arrested for marijuana offenses.42Many (59 percent) of the white drug offenders in the 1990-1995 period werearrested for marijuana offenses and only 21.8 percent for cocaine. By contrast,only 23 percent of black drug offenders were arrested for marijuana offenses,while 69 percent were arrested for cocaine. (See Table 1). That is, a muchgreater percentage of black offenders than white were arrested for thedrug offenses carrying the highest imprisonment rate.Using the average imprisonment rates bydrug type to compute the expected number of offenders who would be incarceratedgiven the drugs for which they were arrested, we calculate that 2,923 whitearrestees should have been imprisoned between 1990 and 1995. 43In fact, 2,590-or 11 percent fewer-were sent to prison. By the same calculations,we would expect that 10,939 of the black arrestees should have been incarcerated.In fact, 11,275 were (a difference of 3 percent).The difference between the expected andactual number of incarcerated white and black drug offenders reflects thatdifference between the average rates of imprisonment in all races comparedto the actual rate for each race. As shown in Table 8, black cocaine offenderswere imprisoned at a rate marginally higherthan the average, and whitecocaine offenders were imprisoned at a rate substantially lower than theaverage. Black marijuana offenders were incarcerated at a rate mariginallylower and white marijuana offenders were incarcerated at a rate marginallyhigher than the average.Numerous factors that legitimately influencecase processing decisions and outcomes may have produced the actual ratedifferential. Unfortunately, computerized statewide data does not existthat would enable us to examine differences among offenders with regardto their prior criminal histories44, seriousnessof arrest charges, number of counts charged, or youthful offender statuseligibility. Without being able to control for these and other relevantrace-neutral variables, we are not able to assess, for example, whetherblack cocaine offenders are incarcerated more frequently than comparablysituated whites.45Length of SentenceExcluding life sentences, the differencebetween the length of sentences given white and black drug offenders wassmall.46 As shown in Table 9, thegreatest differencewas for sale of cocaine, for which blacks received a mean sentence thatwas two years longer than that given whites. Whites received somewhat longersentences than blacks for the possession of narcotics. Official databasesdo not, however, provide that data needed to determine the extent to whichrace-neutral factors, such as the number of counts charged in each caseor prior criminal histories, may have contributed to these sentencing disparities.Table 9: Comparison by Race of Sentencesfor Drug Offenses, 1990-1995SalePossessionTraffickingCocaineNarcoticMarijuanaCocaineNarcoticMarijuanaCocaineNarcoticMarijuan aBlack5.94.73.43.72.73.213.1--White4.04.43.23.23.43.213.1--Source: Georgia Departmentof Corrections. Where data not included, the number of admissions too smallfor statistical reliability.Life SentencesThe racial disparity in life sentencesimposed for drug offenses is shocking. In the past fourteen years, 560blacks were sentenced to life in prison for drug offenses compared to 13whites.47 That is, 97.7 percent of the lifesentences for drug offenses were given to African-Americans.Until March of 1996, drug offenders convicteda second or subsequent time of the sale of certain controlled substances,including cocaine, faced a mandatory life sentence under O.C.G.A. 16-13-30(d).Through a procedural loophole, however, what was to have been a mandatorysentence became discretionary in practice. For a defendant to receive alife sentence for a second conviction, the prosecutor had to give noticeprior to trial that he or she intendedto seek the enhanced punishment basedon past convictions.48 In most cases, prosecutorschose not to seek the aggravated sentence.49If the prosecutor filed the pretrial notice requesting a life sentence,the judge had no choice but to impose it if the defendant were convicted.Many prosecutors objected to the law, considering it "ham-fisted"50and "stupid."51 Perhaps as a result, over 85percent of those who were eligible to be sentenced to life were in factsentenced to lesser terms. 52 But as shownin Table 10, of those who were given life, almost all were African-American.Table 10: Life Sentences for Drug OffensesYearBlackWhiteAll199044246199159261199213331361993121112219941243127199579281All56013573Source: Georgia Departmentof Corrections.The disproportionate number of blacks receivinglife compared to whites did not mirror the racial distribution of offenderswho were eligible for a penalty of life imprisonment. Only 3 percent ofthe whites who were convicted a second or subsequent time of a qualifyingdrug offense were sentenced to life imprisonment. By contrast, 15 percentof the blacks who were eligible received lifesentences. 53In other words, a life-eligible black was five times more likely to receivea life sentence than a life-eligible white.The injustice apparent from the racialpattern of life sentences is even greater when we look at the ages of thosereceiving life terms. Since 1982, fifty young adults between the ages ofeighteen and twenty-one were sentenced to life . All fifty were black.The convictions which sent them to prison did not include any serious non-drugcrimes. Drug sale offenses crimes sufficed within theGeorgia criminal justicesystem to have young people at the threshold of their adult lives condemnedto life imprisonment.54According to an analysis prepared by theGeorgia State Board of Pardons and Paroles in August, 1993, most of thedrug offenders who received life sentences were convicted for offensesinvolving small amounts of drugs. That is, the law was not being used topunish serious offenders. (Indeed, those who deal in greater quantitiesof drugs, the traffickers, are not covered by the mandatory life sentencestatute). Seventy-seven percent of the offenses leading to the first convictionand 79 percent of the offenses leading to the second conviction involvedlessthan one gram of a controlled substance. Sixty percent of the cases involveddrug values of less than US$50.55Application of the mandatory life sentencestatute has been challenged several times as violative of the equal protectionguarantees of the federal and state constitutions.56Despite strong statistical proof of a discriminatory impact, the courtsconsistently refused to make a finding of unconstitutionality, citing theabsence of proof that the prosecutors were motivated by a discriminatorypurpose.57The shocking racial disparity in the mandatorysentences eventually forced the Georgia legislature to act. In March 1996,the state legislature passed legislation to revise O.C.G.A. 16-13-30(d)that was supported by both the prosecutor and defense attorney associations.Under the revised statute, conviction of a second or subsequent drug saleoffense, is punishable by ten to forty years or life.58Prosecutors can recommend a life sentence, but the judge will be able todecide whether or not to impose it. Defense attorneys and civil rightsactivists hope the new legislation will lead to a less racially skewedpattern of sentencing because the sentencing decision will no longer beconcentrated in a single decision-maker: the prosecutor can seek a lifesentence, but the judge will now be able to decide whether to impose it.Although they supported the legislativereform, prosecutors never publicly conceded that the racial pattern oflife sentences reflected racial bias. On the other hand, they have neveroffered an explanation for how relevant race-neutral factors might havecaused the dramatic racial disparity. It remains to be seen, of course,whether granting judges more leeway in sentencing second-time drug offenderswill lead to a more racially equitable imposition of life sentences. Thediscrimination apparent in the imposition of the death penalty in Georgiasuggests that more fundamental reforms are needed to ensure racial equity.59Conclusion and RecommendationsThe data Human Rights Watch has compiledon drug law enforcement in Georgia, albeit necessarily incomplete, suggesta disturbing pattern of racially disparate impact. The question ariseswhether Georgia public officials enforce facially neutral drug laws ina discriminatory manner. Human Rights Watch recognizes that law enforcementofficials face incessant and evolving challenges to help safeguard communitiesfrom crime and disorder. Of necessity, they must set priorities and makecontinual choices about which crimes and criminals to target and what strategiesto adopt to deter crime and to bring criminals to justice. Although discretionis essential to effective performance of their duties, that discretionis not unfettered. It is limited, inter alia, by the principlesof equal protection and due process contained in federal and state lawand international human rights treaties.Under federal and Georgia state constitutionallaw, the racially disparate enforcement of drug laws violates equal protectionguarantees if it is undertaken with discriminatory intent or purpose. Contemporaryracism in public institutions, however, is frequently subtle, diffuse,and systemic and less likely to be the result of the conscious prejudicesof individual actors. As a result, the requirement of proof of intent hasbeen a formidable barrier for victims of discrimination seeking judicialrelief.60International human rights law wisely doesnot impose the requirement of discriminatory intent. The InternationalConvention on the Elimination of All forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD)defines discrimination as conduct that has the "purpose or effect" of restrictingrights on the basis of race.61 CERD has beeninterpreted as requiring the elimination of practices which have an unjustifiabledisparateimpact upon a racial group. It proscribes, for example, race-neutral practicescurtailing fundamental rights that unnecessarily create statistically significantracial disparities.62Assessing whether the harsh impact of druglaw enforcement on blacks is justified or necessary requires scrutiny ofthe goals of that enforcement and the methods used. Because the fundamentalhuman right of equal protection of the law is at stake, more justificationis required than, for example, the advantages to the police of followingthe path of least resistance-inasmuch as drug arrests are easier in certainneighborhoods which only coincidentally happen to be black. It is difficultto conceive of any justification for a pattern of life sentences in whichsuch serious punishment is imposed almost exclusively on black offenderswho are primarily small-scale, street level dealers.In the context of growing debates nationwideover the use of the criminal law to address drug use, doubts about thefairness and justice of enforcing those laws disproportionately againstminorities take on even greater significance. There are numerous policyalternatives to current patterns of criminal law enforcement that wouldreduce adverse racial disparities while continuing to respond to socialconcerns about public drug dealing and drug abuse.Advocating specific drug policies is beyondthe mandate of Human Rights Watch. As an international human rights group,however, we insist that the right to be free of discrimination cannot besacrificed to drug control strategies. We recognize Georgia's interestin addressing the public health and social consequences of drug abuse.But the development of drug policies, including the nature and enforcementof criminal laws, must be built on the foundation of respect for racialequality. To assist Georgia to ensure that its drug policies are consistentwith international human rights, we recommend:* Georgia'spublic officials, lawmakers and the public at large should scrutinize themeans used to enforce drug laws and when they have a disparate racial impact,assess their necessity in light of the state's drug objectives. Policiesand practices that have a racially disparate impact and are not necessaryto meet the state's drug control goals should be modified.* Georgiashould institute police department reporting mechanisms, for the largercities at least, that will enable the state to monitor the racial impactof drug law enforcement choices made by the departments.* Georgiashould review the collection of data within the criminal justice systemand undertake revisions regarding the design of reporting mechanisms anddatabases that are needed to improve the availability of accurate informationrelevant for research and policy analysis, including on the racial impactof drug law arrests, prosecution and sentencing decisions. At the veryleast, the state should ensure that data is gathered and made availablethat will enable assessment of whether life sentences for drug offensesare imposed in a non-discriminatory manner.TREATMENTOF PRISONERSWhile the custodial sexual abuse of womeninmates remains the most notorious problem affecting Georgia prison andjail facilities, other abuses have also been reported.1Most notably, inmates of numerous local jails have been held in dangerous,filthy and deteriorating conditions, violating their constitutional rightsas well as their rights under international law. Moreover, in Georgia'sprisons-which, in contrast to its jails, are mostly in good physical statebecause of a massive prison construction effort-a recent "get tough onprisoners" campaign shows signs of stepping over the line into abuse. Unfortunately,except regarding custodial sexual misconduct, public opinion seems unresponsiveto these problems. Indeed, rather than pressuring the authorities to investigateand remedy violations of prisoners' rights, the Georgia public appearsmore inclined to applaud them.2Relevant Legal StandardsIn challenging abusive conditions or treatment,prisoners and their advocates generally base their claims on the EighthAmendment to the U.S. Constitution, which prohibits cruel and unusual punishment,although in some instances they rely upon the Fourteenth Amendment's guaranteeof due process of law or the Fourth Amendment's protection of privacy.In general, under the Eighth Amendment, prisoners may not be subjectedto conditions that are incompatible with "evolving standards of decency"or that deprive them of basic human needs.3The protection afforded to prisoners by the Eighth Amendment, however,is qualified by the requirement that defendants in prison lawsuits (suchas prison or jail officials) must be shown to have acted with aculpable state of mind. In otherwords, abusive conditions or treatmentalone-absent sufficient subjective intent-will not be found unconstitutional.The primary international legal instrumentsprotecting the rights of prisoners are the International Covenant on Civiland Political Rights (ICCPR), ratified by the United States in 1992, andthe Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatmentor Punishment, ratified in 1994. In addition, the more detailed provisionscontained in the U.N. Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners4and Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons Under Any Formof Detention or Imprisonment5 provide authoritativeguidance to interpret customary and treaty law standards on the humanetreatment of prisoners. All of these instruments require that prisonersbe treated humanely. Notably, their prohibition on cruel, inhuman or degradingtreatment is not qualified by any intent requirement: abusive treatmentof prisoners-whatever the state of mind of the person responsible for thetreatment-is simply barred.JailsPrisoners awaiting trial in Georgia, aswell as some post-conviction inmates, are held in county and city jailfacilities. Many of these facilities date from the 1920s through 1940sand are physically dilapidated, severely overcrowded, poorly maintainedand dangerously understaffed; certain of them, in the words of attorneysfrom the Civil Rights Division of the Justice Department who recently investigatedtheir conditions, are "unfit for human habitation."6To the Justice Department's credit, this investigation was initiated afterlocal prisoners' rights advocates forwarded complaints to the Civil RightsDivision. The Justice Department's wide-ranging investigation and strongrecommendations are commendable.In reviewing conditions at the MuscogeeCounty Jail (MCJ) last year, for example, the Department of Justice foundthat the facility (which houses male prisoners) operated at 200 percentof its capacity, with prisoners being forced to sleep on "dilapidated matson concrete floors."7 At the same time, thejail was chronically understaffed; inmates were left unsupervised for upto six hours of every eight-hour shift. Indeed, the Justice Department'scorrections consultant found the MCJ to be "one of the most dangerouslyunderstaffed urban jails that I have ever evaluated."8Besides the obvious security hazard created by the lack of personnel, italso meant that inmates were precluded from all possibility of outdoorexercise.The MCJ had no classification system bywhich to segregate dangerous inmates from those vulnerable to abuse, furtheraggravating inmates' risk of harm. But the system was capable of segregatinginmate housing units on another basis-race. African-American inmates, whomake up the overwhelming majority of the jail population in southwest Georgia,where Muscogee County is located, were held separately from white inmates.Stressing that this segregation should immediately end, the Justice Department'sfindings letter pointed out: "There is no penological basis for such adeplorable practice."In all, the Justice Department noted twentyareas in which the jail needed to improve its treatment of prisoners, includingstaffing, sanitation, fire safety, health care, ventilation, pest controland correctional policies and procedures. It summed up conditions at thefacility as being "particularly egregious" and affirmed that they deprivedinmates of their constitutional rights. Concluding with three pages ofrecommendations, the department's letter warned that unless improvementswere forthcoming the federal government would consider initiating a lawsuitto remedy the unlawful conditions.9Conditions at the MCJ, though shocking,are not unique. At the same time that the Justice Department reported itsfindings to the Muscogee County authorities, its lawyers wrote similarletters to nine other Georgia counties-Calhoun, Clay, Dooly, Harris, Lee,Marion, Mitchell, Terrell and Turner-threatening to sue if these countiesdid not improve conditions in their jails.10Later in 1995, the Justice Department returned to Georgia to investigatethe Coffee County Jail, which houses men, women and, for short periods,juveniles: it found that numerous housing areas were dirty and unsanitary;that juveniles were normally held in the "hole," a small, dark and unsanitarypunishment cell; that numerous inmates reported not having been allowedoutdoor exercise in months; and that the facility wrongly withheld mealsas a method of punishment and had recently eliminated inmate lunches afterreceiving complaints about the food.11 Soonafter, in March 1996, the ACLU of Georgia filed suit to remedy conditionsat the Pike County Jail. The complaint in that case described broken windows,leaking toilets, exposed wires, and inmates forced to sleep on the floor.PrisonsDuring the past decade, Georgia experiencedexplosive growth in its prison population; in the last three years alone,the number of inmates has increasedby about 9,000-one of the fastest ratesof growth in the nation.12 Preoccupied withthe crime rate, Georgians want more criminals to go to prison and to staythere longer.13 State politicians, accordingly,vie with one another to offer the toughest, most rigid and most punitivepenal policies.14Besides tougher sentencing laws, Georgiahas also followed the national trend toward tougher treatment of prisoners.Beginning last year, the Georgia Department of Corrections (GDC) beganimplementing a series of restrictions designed to reassure the public thatlife in a state prison is punishment: removing weightlifting equipment,limiting television and telephone use, charging for medical care of non-indigentinmates, and marking the backs of inmates' shirts to indicate they areprisoners. "Inmates are in prison to be punished for crimes they have committed,"declared Gov. Zell Miller in mandating the changes, "and punishment firstand everything else second should always be at the center of the CorrectionsDepartment."15 This renewed punitive emphasisrapidly led GDC Commissioner Allen Ault, a strong advocate of inmate education,training and rehabilitiation, to resign.In December 1995, Ault was replaced byWayne Garner, the former head of the Georgia Board of Pardons and Paroles,who once rescinded a promised parole after the prisoner's sarcastic letterpraising prison life was published in alocal newspaper.16Although Garner opposed a proposed bill to revive the chain gang in Georgia,which failed to pass the state legislation this year, he otherwise hasset a markedly harsher tone than his predecessor. Bluntly stating in hisfirst public speech as commissioner that one-third of the state's prisoners"ain't fit to kill," Garner immediately instituted mandatory work assignmentsand daily four-mile walks for the inmate population, and later ended thelong-standing practice of allowing certain trustworthy inmates to takebrief visits to their families over the holidays.17A more troubling aspect of this "tough"treatment has surfaced during a series of intensive searches, describedas "shakedowns," held at correctional facilities around the state and designedto uncover weapons, drugs, money and other contraband.18These searches, conducted by special squads of guards dressed in black,and personally overseen by the commissioner, have resulted in a numberof complaints of physical abuse. Some inmates claim that guards have usedexcessive force against them during the searches: throwing punches, bangingheads into walls, jumping on inmates and kicking them.19Commissioner Garner'spersonal attendance during these bouts of violenceis said to help set a tone, suggesting that excessive force, or at leastborder-line excessive force, is an acceptable measure when it facilitatescontrol. To the GDC's credit, however, it should be noted that one prisonofficial was fired for abusing an inmate.20Conclusion and RecommendationsIt is heartening that Georgia officials,unlike officials in neighboring Alabama, resisted the temptation to reinstitutethe chain gang this year. With the chain gang, the abusive treatment ofprisoners is reduced to theater, demonstrating to an anxious public-usingthe spectacle of men shackled together with heavy chains-that crime begetspunishment.21 Tough talk is another way toreassure the public. In Georgia's current political climate, however, officialsmust take special care to ensure that facile political grandstanding doesnot culminate in serious violations of the human rights of members of theprisoner population.Other forms of mistreatment of prisoners,by contrast, are not caused by the desire to grab attention but by inattentionand indifference. When jails are old, decaying and overcrowded, and theauthorities have other priorities for the funds at their command, prisonersmay be subjected to enormous and unjustified hardship. At present, Georgianeeds to take steps to remedy the results of years of neglect of many ofits jail facilities and to ameliorate their inhumane conditions.In light of both of these considerations,Human Rights Watch makes the following specific recommendations for ensuringthe humane treatment of Georgia prisoners:* The CorrectionsCommittees of the Georgia state legislature should hold hearings to investigatethe substandard conditions existing in many localjail facilities, withthe goal of pressuring local authorities to take steps to remedy them.For its part, the GDC should certify that every local facility that itrelies upon to house excess convicted prisoners is maintained in accordancewith domestic and international standards. Local facilities that do notmeet such standards should not be used to house inmates under the authorityof the GDC.* The Georgiastate legislature should create mandatory and enforceable state standardsfor county and city jails. The states of Texas and Florida have implementedsuch standards, and relevant officials from those states could provideguidance in creating standards for adequate conditions and treatment.* Local officialscharged with supervising county and city jail facilities should stop barringindependent monitors from entering their facilities and examining conditionsthere. It should not require the intervention of the Justice Departmentto bring to light the serious problems existing in many facilities.* GDC officialsshould investigate and punish instances of guard misconduct.* The GDCshould reinstitute furloughs, allowing nonviolent trustworthy inmates afew days home with their families. Georgia's furlough policy had provedto be remarkably trouble-free, and the family ties strengthened duringfurloughs prove their worth in prisoners' easier reinsertion into societyupon release, and lower likelihood of recidivism. For similar reasons,the GDC should rescind the limitations imposed on inmates' telephone use.SEXUAL ABUSEOF WOMEN PRISONERSOverviewFor women held in Georgia prisons, incarcerationentails not only the loss of liberty but also the possible loss of physicalsecurity, dignity and sexual autonomy. Prior to 1992, state employees entrustedwith custodial power over the women's prison population engaged in flagrantsexual abuse of their charges, abuse that included rape, sexual assault,sexual harassment and violations of the right to privacy. Although Georgiacriminal law formally prohibited sexual contact between prison officialsand prisoners, the law was not enforced, and the efficacy of departmentalpolicies arguably barring such abuse was belied by the impunity with whichprison staff, including supervisory staff, engaged in sexual relationswith prisoners.After a federal class action lawsuit broughtsignificant public and judicial attention to the spectacle of custodialsexual abuse in 1992, Georgia was compelled to take meaningful steps toput a stop to it. Because of these efforts, the overall atmosphere in itswomen's prisons has greatly improved from that existing prior to the suit.Nonetheless, sexual contact between officers and prisoners remains a recurringproblem and, in some instances, amounts to rape or sexual assault. Moreover,on issue after issue, class counsel have had to prod the Georgia Departmentof Corrections (GDC) to institute the required reforms. The GDC's somewhatbegrudging attitude toward compliance with the mandates of the lawsuitsuggests that these reforms may not be deep-rooted nor permanent.The abuses described in this chapter-includingrape, sexual assault, sexual harassment and infringements on prisoners'privacy-clearly violate international human rights law. They also violateU.S. constitutional provisions protecting prisoners against cruel and unusualpunishment and guaranteeing the right to privacy. Yet not only has Georgialargely failed to conform to these international and domestic standards;until recently it even failed to enforce its own criminal law provisionprohibiting custodial sexual contact.1Custodial EnvironmentConsistent with a national pattern, thenumber of women in Georgia prisons has increased dramatically in the lastfifteen years.2 As of March 1996, women constituted6 percent, or over 2,000 prisoners, of a total state inmatepopulation ofabout 35,000.3 Until 1989, however, Georgiaoperated only one prison for women-the Georgia Women's Correctional Institution(GWCI) at Hardwick-in conjunction with a nearby camp facility, Colony Farm.Now it has three prisons: the Washington Correctional Institution (WashingtonCI), the Metro Correctional Institution (Metro), and the Pulaski CorrectionalInstitution (Pulaski). The GWCI has been converted to a men's facility.Georgia, like other states, permits maleofficers to work in its women's prisons.4 Untilvery recently, male guards outnumbered female guards in two out of threeGeorgia women's facilities, with only Pulaski having more women than menofficers. In late March 1996, however, GDC Commissioner Wayne Garner begantransferring male guards out of Washington CI and replacing them with femaleguards; he plans to continue these staff transfers-and to effect similartransfers at Georgia's other two women's prisons-until there are no malestaff in contact positions with women inmates.5This new policy is being challenged by theGeorgia State Employees Unionon anti-discrimination grounds, however, and its future validity is uncertain.6Although the use of male staff in manypositions in women's prisons may be compelled by national anti-discriminationlaws, such laws do not prevent states from formulating policies and proceduresto ensure against custodial sexual misconduct.7Without question, the custodial context, in which officers are grantedsignificant power over the daily lives and welfare of their charges, hasan inherent potential for abuse. The state, having established a fundamentallyunequal relationship between prison staff and prisoners, is responsiblefor ensuring that staff members do not wrongfully exploit this inequality.The personal histories of many women prisonersfurther heighten the potential for custodial sexual abuse. A high proportionof incarcerated women-and, according to Cason class counsel, anoverwhelming proportion of the women singled out for abuse-enter the correctionalsystem with a prior history of sexual victimization. Lisa Boardman Burnette,an attorney with Zimring, Ellin & Miller litigating the class action,explained that these women have little awareness of their rights: "[Theydo not] realize what rape [is], let alone sexual harassment."8State Legal and Regulatory ProtectionsUnder Georgia law, custodial sexual abuseis a felony punishable by one to three years' imprisonment. Section 16-6-5.1of Georgia's criminal code provides that a person commits sexual assaultwhen:he engages in sexual contact with anotherperson who is in the custody of the law . . . or who is detained in [an]institution and such actor has supervisory or disciplinary authority oversuch other person.Sexual contact is defined as "any contactfor the purpose of sexual gratification of the actor with the intimateparts of a person not married to the actor." The consent of the personin custody is irrelevant.Until January 1995, when new standard operatingprocedures were adopted pursuant to a consent order in the Casonlitigation, Georgia's statutory ban on sexual contact with a prisoner wasnot incorporated explicitly into GDC departmental policy. Rather, whenseeking to discipline officers and employees for misconduct, the GDC reliedon broad provisions barring "personal dealings" with prisoners.U.S. Constitutional ProtectionsThe Eighth Amendment to the Constitution,which bars cruel and unusual punishment, has been interpreted by U.S. courtsto protect prisoners against rape and sexual assault. This constitutionalshield is further augmented by the Fourth Amendment's guarantee of theright to privacy and personal integrity, which, in a series of lower courtcases, has been interpreted to prohibit male guards from strip-searchingfemale prisoners or conducting intrusive pat-frisks.9These constitutional protections are enforceablevia lawsuits filed by or on behalf of prisoners, or by the U.S. Departmentof Justice (DOJ). Historically, U.S. prisoners have achieved most of theirlandmark victories through private litigation, particularly by suits litigatedby prisoners' rights groups such as the National Prison Project of theAmerican Civil Liberties Union.Yet if certain stringent intent requirementsare met, the DOJ may criminally prosecute abusive prison officials undergeneral federal civil rights provisions.10In addition, the DOJ has the statutory right to investigate and institutecivil actions under the Civil Rights of Institutional Persons Act (CRIPA)wheneverit finds that a state facility engages in a pattern or practiceof subjecting prisoners to "egregious or flagrant conditions" in violationof the Constitution.11International Legal ProtectionsThe primary international legal instrumentsprotecting the rights of U.S. prisoners are the International Covenanton Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), ratified by the United States in1992, and the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or DegradingTreatment or Punishment, ratified in 1994. Both treaties bar torture andcruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, which authoritativeinternational fora have interpreted as including sexual abuse. To constitutetorture, an act must cause severe physical or mental suffering and mustbe committed for a purpose such as obtaining information from the victim,punishing her, or intimidating or coercing her. Cruel, inhuman or degradingtreatment or punishment includes acts causing a lesser degree of sufferingthat need not be committed for a particular purpose.Abuses Prior to March 1992Until March 1992, sexual relations betweenstaff and prisoners were an accepted occurrence in the Georgia women'sprison system. At GWCI and Colony Farm, members of the prison staff fondledand groped female prisoners, sexually propositioned them, and coerced theminto sexual relationships either upon threat of retaliation or in exchangefor contraband, favorable treatment and attention. They manipulated women'swork schedules and freely called women from their units or work detailsfor sex. A substantial number of GDC employees, including a handful ofwomen, were finally implicated for involvement in custodial sexual misconduct.As Bob Cullen, Cason class counsel, described the situation, "Yougetthe impression from the staff at GWCI that it was a sexual smorgasbordand they could pick and choose whom they wanted."12Disciplinary hearings conducted by theGDC after the Cason suit was filed reveal that it was often thosein supervisory positions who exploited their position to coerce prisonersinto sexual relations. The hearings showed that three men-Lt. James Philyaw,Deputy Warden Cornelius Stanley, and Ray Griffin, then senior ranking officerat Colony Farm-were particularly notorious offenders.Lt. Philyaw was the night shift supervisorfor security at GWCI. According to testimonies at his disciplinary hearing,Philyaw had sex with at least seven prisoners over a five-year period,from 1987 to 1991, while employed at GWCI and Colony Farm. In approachingthese women for sex, Philyaw reportedly employed a mixture of compliments,offers of assistance and threats. His relationship with Jane Doe 14 isillustrative. Over a three-month period, he had sexual intercourse withher on repeated occasions. When asked at Philyaw's disciplinary hearingwhy she submitted to his advances, Jane Doe 14 replied "because he wasa lieutenant . . . he could do anything he wanted to me, and no one wasgoing to believe me just like he said."Similarly, evidence presented at the disciplinaryhearing of Deputy Warden Cornelius Stanley indicates that on one occasionStanley called Jane Doe 39 into his office to discuss problems she washaving, groped her breasts and genital area, and said, "I want to fuckyou." He then forced her to have sexual intercourse. On later occasions,Stanley visited Jane Doe 39's cell and groped or raped her. Ray Griffinmaintained a sexual relationship with Jane Doe 11 both while she was incarceratedand during her parole. According to the disciplinary record, Griffin regularlyhad sex with her in places such as the storage closet, the restroom, oran office.In at least one instance prior to March1992, a prisoner at GWCI was impregnated by a corrections officer. JaneDoe 1 was raped in 1989 by the supervisor on her work assignment. Whenshe told him that she thought she was pregnant, he responded, "I couldalways beat it out of you."13 Not long after,Jane Doe 1 was reportedly called into the warden's office early in themorning and told that if "[she] did not get an abortion then [she] wouldnot get parole." Despite her unwillingness to undergo the procedure, shewas subsequently taken from the prison to have an abortion. She describedthe whole experience as emotionally wrenching.Finally, the abuse of women prisoners atGWCI during this period extended beyond sexual contact to privacy violations.In violation of international and domestic standards, women incarceratedin the Mental Health Unit at GWCI, perceived to be suicide risks, wereforcibly stripped by male and female staff and placed in restraints, includingstraightjackets or four-point restraints. In some cases, women were strippedand left hog-tied in their cell.14 The womenwere then left naked for up to three days where they could be viewed bymembers of the opposite sex. Although attorney Bob Cullen believes thatit is virtually impossible to obtain an accurate assessment of the numberof women who were treated this way, since many of the GDC's logbooks vanished,he found that at least sixty-four women incarcerated at GWCI were forciblystripped and restrained over an eight-month period from 1991-1992.Impunity for Abuses Prior to March 1992Sexual misconduct in Georgia women's prisonswas facilitated prior to March 1992 by the utter failure of complaint mechanisms,as well as the routine indifference of the leadership at GWCI and withinthe GDC more generally to allegations of rape and sexual assault. Wherewomen attempted to report abuse, they were met with a general GDC presumptionthat prisoners lie and that, without staff corroboration, their assertionsshould per se be dismissed. The few prison employees who attemptedto report sexual misconduct by their colleagues were often ignored andeven harassed. Only in cases where the abuse simply could not be ignored,as in cases of pregnancy or where another member of the staff happenedupon a colleague in the act, was any action taken. Even in these cases,however, the GDC permitted the individual to resign or to transfer to anotherfacility, instead of taking more serious disciplinary action.The GDC's grievance procedure, institutedby court order in 1990, purports to allow prisoners to complain about "anycondition, policy, procedure oraction over which the department of correctionshas control."15 Nonetheless, the mechanism'sdesign, which favors conciliation and internal departmental solutions,renders it inappropriate for complaints of custodial sexual misconduct;it was thus rarely if ever employed in this context.A few allegations of sexual misconductprior to 1992 were addressed via internal investigations. The GDC had nowritten policy or procedure covering such investigations, and they wereoften conducted by the warden, who would interview the prisoner makingthe allegation or the implicated officers.16Many of these cases never went any further, though a few of them were turnedover to the GDC Internal Affairs division (IAD) located in Atlanta.17Whatever the procedure, charges against prison staff were rarely substantiatedbecause the testimony of incarcerated women was rarely deemed credible.Where an allegation involved the prisoner's word against the employee's,the GDC seldom took disciplinary action.18Even where there were compelling reasonsto believe that allegations were well-founded, investigations were oftenblocked. A GDC senior investigator and the current and former directorsof Internal Affairs testified in February 1994, in a disciplinary hearing,that prior to March 1992 it was GDC practice to terminate an investigationif the employee resigned.19 The lack of investigationmeant, moreover, that the case would not be referred to the district attorneyfor prosecution, even where the employee admitted to sexual contact withan inmate in violation of the state's felony provision. Bobby Whitworth,then commissioner of corrections, stated that it was:the policy of [the GDC] prior to 1990 reallynot to press for prosecution. It was a policy that if we had an officeror a staff member who engaged in sexual relations with a prisoner [he was]either terminated or fired.20In other words, department employees wereable to sexually assault prisoners only at the risk of losing their jobs.Even then, it appears that they may have risked only a temporary loss ofemployment. In numerous incidents, the deputy commissioner closed investigationswhere charges of misconduct were substantiated, upheld minor disciplinarysanctions and failed to refer credible allegations to the district attorneyfor prosecution. Moreover, on at least two occasions, employees who receivedonly minor reprimands persisted in their misconduct.In short, the GDC actively and knowinglyfailed to protect women in its custody from the criminal acts of its employees.The GDC's failure to sanction employees appropriately, by dismissing themand referring their cases as appropriate to the district attorney, amountedto complicity in the staff's misconduct and abuse.Legal Action to Expose and Prevent AbusesMarch 1992 marked a turning point in Georgia'shandling of custodial sexual misconduct. In that month, an amended complaintwas filed in Cason v. Seckinger, a federal class action lawsuitagainst the GDC.21 The complaint alleged rape,sexual assault and coerced sexual activity, involuntary abortions, andretaliation or threats of retaliation against women who refused to participatein the sexual activities within the prison. Supporting the complaint werethe affidavits of ten women, identified only as Jane Does, who either wereforced to engage in sexual relations with prison staff or who had directknowledge of ongoing sexual misconduct within the prison.22The lawsuit, which was still pending atthe time this report went to print, has never resulted in a full trial,though numerous hearing have been held. Under the supervision of the magistratejudge hearing the case, plaintiffs' attorneys and the GDC have worked togetherto address many of the concerns raised by the suit. The magistrate hasalso issued a number of orders requiring the GDC to institute reforms.Most notably, in March 1994, he issued a novel order permanently enjoiningsexual contact, sexual abuse and sexual harassment of all women incarcerated,now and in the future, by any staff, employee, agent or contractor of theGDC.23 He found that in light of past and continuingproblems with sexual abuse such an injunction was necessary to guaranteewomen prisoners their constitutional rights.Official Response to CasonThe prisoners' allegations in Casonwere reported almost immediately in the Atlanta Journal-Constitutionand other local press; then in March 1993 the story was aired on nationaltelevision. Under intense public scrutiny, the GDC, in negotiation withthe plaintiffs' attorneys, launched an investigation and entered a periodof internal review. This internal review included a reexamination of somepast allegations, disciplinary action against certain staff, and a numberof reforms. During the review process, certain key prison officials resignedor retired.Investigations and Disciplinary ActionIn March 1992 the GDC deployed an investigator,Andie Moss, to examine allegations raised by and predating the Casonsuit.24 Many of these allegations, found unsubstantiatedprior to March 1992, were substantiated upon reinvestigation, and disciplinaryaction was initiated. According to plaintiffs' attorney Bob Cullen, thechange in response to these allegations was due in large part to the GDC'snew willingness to give weight to inmate testimony.25Fifteen employees, including Philyaw, Griffin and Stanley, were suspendedand eventually fired or otherwise disciplined for misconduct associatedwith the litigation.Beginning in 1994, however, the fired ordisciplined employees began to return. In July 1994, Cornelius Stanleywas rehired as a lieutenant at a Georgia men's prison. His dismissal forsexual misconduct against female prisoners had no impact on his job statusor his pay scale. In fact, he received over $58,000 in back pay, plus damages,when he was rehired.26Next, in December 1994, the GDC reinstatedJackie Lee, who had been suspended for nearly two years on charges involvingcustodial sexual misconduct; she too claimed the right to back pay anddamages (in a negotiated settlement, she received just over $10,000 inback pay, along with leave and retirement benefits).27Similarly, Warden Gary Black, who was demoted and reassigned to anotheroffice, later filed suit in federal court seeking his job back, as wellas $500,000 in pain and suffering and $1 million in punitive damages.28Failed ProsecutionsFor the first time, the GDC also referredmany cases of sexual misconduct to the district attorney for criminal prosecution.In October and November 1992, indictments were handed down against fourteenformer GWCI or Colony Farm employees on state law charges ranging fromsodomy and sexual assault against a person in custody to rape, and a fifteenthdefendant was indicted soon after.29 Thealleged acts took place between 1983 and 1992 and involved over twenty-fiveprisoners. Yet notwithstanding this encouraging start, no Georgia correctionsemployee ever served time in prison for these charges, and only two ofthe defendants were even brought to trial.Lt. James Philyaw, the first defendantto be tried, was charged with twenty-one counts of sexual assault and sodomyinvolving eight women over a period of five years. He was acquitted inJune 1993, despite extensive testimony against him.30The jury deliberated only twenty minutes.Philyaw's trial was marred by a numberof irregularities. To begin with, there were difficulties in seating animpartial jury since the trial was held, pursuant to Georgia law, in thecounty where GWCI was located-a county that is heavily dependent on thestate correctional system for employment. As a result, the jury was heavilyweighted with jurors who had friends or relatives working as correctionalofficers. Moreover, according to witnesses, Baldwin County District AttorneyJoseph Briley did not vigorously prosecute Philyaw.31The original indictments resulted in onlytwo convictions: both based on guilty pleas, with both men sentenced toprobation. Indictments in other caseslanguished: some were expressly dismissed,others expired. Briley himself was forced to resign in August 1994 afterhe was caught on tape making sexual advances to a female staff member.32The last defendant was finally acquitted of all charges in April 1996.Not all implicated GDC employees were indictedfor allegations of sexual misconduct. According to press reports, shortlyafter Philyaw was acquitted in June 1993, a Telfair County grand jury declinedto indict eight people accused of sexually abusing women incarcerated atMilan CI (a facility opened in 1989 to ease overcrowding at GWCI, whichhas since closed).33 Briley ascribed the jury'sfailure to indict to a reluctance among jurors to prosecute or punish correctionsemployees for acts against convicted criminals.34In July 1993, in the wake of these unsuccessfulprosecutions, GDC Commissioner Allen Ault asked the Department of Justiceto conduct a federal inquiry into the situation in Georgia women's prisons.35Nonetheless, the federal government never invoked its authority under theCivil Rights of Institutionalized Persons Act (CRIPA) to investigate theprisons for violations of federal civil rights, nor did it ever chargeany Georgia corrections officer or other GDC employee with federal civilrights violations. At present, even were the will to prosecute to be mustered,the DOJ's slow response has effectively foreclosed federal criminal actionon most allegations predating Cason, as there is a five-year statuteof limitations on such prosecutions. The inaction by the Justice Departmentin response to requests for an investigation into Georgia's women's prisonsis in stark contrast to its welcome investigation of county jails in thestate.Changes in GDC Leadership and StaffingThe GDC underwent various changes in leadershipafter March 1992, many of them caused by the Cason litigation andrelated publicity. In April of that year, a female warden was appointedat GWCI, becoming the first female warden of a women's prison in Georgia.The GDC also created a new supervisory post -that of assistant deputy commissionerfor women's services-to oversee the treatment of female prisoners underits jurisdiction. The post proved only temporary, however.In July 1993, following the airing of anABC "Day One" television segment on sexual abuse at GWCI, Deputy CommissionerLanson Newsome resigned and Commissioner Bobby Whitworth was reassignedto the parole board by the governor.36 Whitworth'sposition on the parole board raises concerns. A number of prominent JaneDoes, including Jane Doe 1, who have come before the parole board since1993 have been denied parole. Although it is impossible to attribute theseparole denials to Whitworth's influence, particularly since parole boardpolicies have tightened overall, attorney Bob Cullen told us that a generalperception exists within the women's prisons that women are or will bedenied parole because of their involvement in the lawsuit.37Such a perception is likely to have a chilling effect on prisoners whoare considering filing complaints.Continuing Abuses After March 1992The initial publicity and subsequent courtorders stemming from the Cason lawsuit led to significant improvementsin the environment at Georgia women's prisons.38Advocates monitoring the situation noted a reduction in thefrequency andseverity of custodial sexual misconduct.39Most notably, incidents of forced sexual intercourse declined precipitously,almost disappearing. Problems nonetheless persist: attorney Bob Cullenestimates that there have been approximately 370 reported incidents ofsexual misconduct since March 1992.40The following reports are indicative: InMay 1993 two kitchen workers at Washington CI were suspended for allegedsexual misconduct with incarcerated prisoners.41The following month, a teacher at GWCI/Baldwin was suspended and ultimatelyfired after he forced a prisoner to have sexual relations with him.42In September 1993 one corrections officer was fired from GWCI/Baldwin,allegedly for engaging in "sexually explicit and suggestive" conversationswith a prisoner, sending her cards and flowers, and giving her his homephone number. Another GWCI/Baldwin officer was transferred to a men's facilityfor sexual misconduct with prisoners and later fired.43At Metro, a prisoner reportedly had sexual relations with a male correctionsofficer and a maintenance worker in March and April 1994.44In addition, there have been at least three cases of a prison employeeimpregnating an inmate since Cason was filed. In one incident, whichoccurred in 1994, a male teacher on staff at Washington CI had sex witha woman prisoner; helater brought her a substance thought to be quininein hopes of inducing a miscarriage.45Various environmental factors contributeto the continuing problem of custodial sexual misconduct. Prisoners' difficultiesin obtaining goods, even relatively minor items, enhance their vulnerabilityto pressure from prison staff. Unlike other states we visited, prisonersin Georgia do not receive a stipend for their work. As a result, they lackfinancial independence: they must either rely on state allocations to providethem with personal items, including clothing and personal hygiene supplies,or on their families or friends to purchase them. Until the last coupleof years, the women's prisons were sporadically plagued with shortagesof sanitary products, including toilet paper. The lack of basic sanitarynecessities encouraged problems of sexual misconduct. Similarly, a surprisingproportion of the reported instances of sexual misconduct during 1995 stemmedfrom a new state prison policy banning cigarettes. Imposed in July 1995,it immediately created a tremendous black market in cigarettes and a tradein sex for cigarettes.46Slow Trend Toward Compliance with CasonDecreesAfter media attention to the Casoncase died out, doubts began to arise regarding the extent to which Georgiaremained committed to the reforms begun in 1992 and 1993. In particular,the GDC's initial enthusiasm for internal scrutiny appeared to waver, andthe department had to be compelled, under threat of a contempt citation,to establish a systematic notification process to inform staff and otheragents of the court's order banning sexual misconduct, and to institutethe necessary staff training on such misconduct. Fortunately, Casonclass counsel and the court have remained vigilant and aggressive inpursuing reforms.Handling of InvestigationsFor over two years after the allegationsin Cason surfaced, the GDC failed to develop an adequate policyor mechanism for investigating sexual misconduct. Although in the summerof 1993 a special investigator was assigned to monitor theissue, she wasgiven no specialized training regarding sex crimes, no written guidelinesfor conducting investigations, and little material assistance.47Finally, in November 1994, more than ayear after plaintiffs had drafted and proposed a policy to the GDC, thedepartment agreed to adopt new standard operating procedures for investigatingallegations of custodial sexual abuse. The investigative procedure thatwent into effect in January 1995 distinguishes, for the first time, betweenpersonal dealings and sexual misconduct, specifically defining what constitutessexual contact, sexual abuse, sexual harassment, and personal dealings.48It imposes a strict obligation on staff immediately to report incidentsof sexual misconduct to the warden or other designated persons and providesfor disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal, for failing todo so. Under the policy, a prisoner may be disciplined as a result of filinga report of abuse only if it is determined that she "made a false allegationor made a material statement which she, in good faith, could not have believedto be true."During 1995, 156 complaints of sexual misconductwere filed under the new investigative procedure. The resulting investigationshad the following outcomes: three cases were referred to the district attorneyfor prosecution, nine staff were terminated, thirteen staff resigned, fivewere transferred, one receiveda written reprimand and three were subjectto other disciplinary action.49 While he remainsconcerned that investigators have shown a marked reluctance to credit prisonertestimony, attorney Bob Cullen told us that they have been "roughly abidingby the guidelines" and have been doing a decent job in evaluating complaints.50In April 1996, however, the lead special investigator resigned from theGDC amid concerns that the department was attempting to undermine the integrityof the investigative process.51Another potentially serious problem thatbegan to crop up in late 1995 is a trend toward assessing disciplinaryreports (DRs) when prisoners' reports of sexual misconduct are found tobe unsubstantiated. Obviously the possibility of receiving a DR-which typicallyresults in three weeks of disciplinary segregation-works to discouragewomen inmates from filing complaints. Class counsel in Cason areseriously concerned about the possibility of the abusive imposition ofDRs for good-faith complaints.52Notification and TrainingUntil mid-1995, the GDC failed fully tocomply with the March 1994 order in Cason. Under the terms of theorder, the GDC was to notify its staff about the case and obtain statementsfrom them acknowledging that they read and understood the court's orderpermanently enjoining sexual misconduct. In April 1995 attorneys on theCason litigation filed a contempt motion asserting that the GDChad not obtained the requisite acknowledgments from many of the employeesworking in the women's prisons and that it was seeking unilaterally tolimit the scope of the court order. Cason class counsel had learnedof the department's low level of compliance upon investigating a case ofcustodial sexual assault that occurred at Metro CI. The prison employee,a member of the print shop staff, admitted having sex with an inmate butclaimed that he had never received noticeof the order barring such conduct.Because he had no notice of the order, he could not be held in contemptof court for violating it.53Plaintiffs' pressure led the GDC to greatlyimprove their notification procedures. At present, no one can enter a women'sfacility without signing a form acknowledging awareness of the rules andof the Cason suit. In addition, notices regarding the suit are postedon the outer gates of the facilities.The April 1995 contempt motion also showedthat the GDC had largely failed to provide the necessary training on custodialsexual abuse to staff and agents working in the women's prisons. Underthe pressure of renewed litigation, the GDC recently improved its trainingprogram. The department also agreed to educate women prisoners about theirright not to be sexually abused and their right to report instances ofmisconduct.Conclusion and RecommendationsMuch of the custodial sexual abuse describedabove amounts to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishmentand is therefore prohibited by the primary international human rights treatiesthat the United States has ratified. Moreover, as found in Cason,it also constitutes cruel and unusual punishment under the U.S. Constitution.Georgia has taken important steps toward ending such abuse. Nonetheless,past practices linger: rape, sexual assault and sexual harassment stilloccur, while those instances falling within the scope of the criminal lawprohibition are not adequately prosecuted.Human Rights Watch thus strongly urgesthe Georgia authorities responsible for the corrections and criminal justicesystems to act with greater diligence in preventing and prosecuting suchabuse. In particular, we believe that the GDC should:* refer toprosecution all cases of sexual misconduct that fall within the statutorydefinition;* use extremecaution in assessing disciplinary reports against prisoners whose complaintsof sexual misconduct are found to be unsubstantiated,and discipline onlythose prisoners whose complaints are manifestly false or made in bad faith;* publishregular reports of the results of its sexual misconduct investigationsand of disciplinary actions taken as a result of such investigations;* improveits screening procedures for hiring corrections staff;* collaboratewith attorneys litigating Cason to develop further the trainingprograms for staff and women prisoners regarding sexual misconduct; and* ensure thevigorous enforcement of the new investigative procedure for allegationsof custodial sexual abuse.In addition, Governor Zell Miller shouldintroduce legislation allowing prisoners to be paid for their work.For their part, Georgia prosecutors shouldstrictly enforce Section 16-5-5.1 of the Georgia Penal Code, which prohibitssexual assault against a person in custody.Finally, the United States Senate shouldratify the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of DiscriminationAgainst Women.CHILDRENIN CONFINEMENTIn February 1996, the Human Rights WatchChildren's Rights Project initiated an investigation into the conditionsin which children are confined in detention and correctional facilitiesin Georgia, examining the human rights aspects of their incarceration.1We concluded that many children are confined in shamefully overcrowded,squalid and unsanitary institutions with inadequate programming. As a resultof the overcrowding, institutions can be dangerous places for weaker childrenwho are preyed upon by older, tougher juvenile offenders; in some of thefacilities, four boys share housing space intended for one.Moreover, we found disciplinary measuresthat are inappropriate and excessive. These included an overuse of isolation(sixty-three days in one case) and locking children in their cells forlong periods of time. In addition, four-point restraints, with childrenbound to a bed at wrists and ankles, are used as disciplinary measures;the same practice is used to restrain children who are believed to be suicidal.Correction officers have also used pepper gas to restrain children. Childrenwith psychological disorders have been punished or ignored instead of beingtreated by medical personnel.Despite at least one successful lawsuitagainst officials responsible for abysmal conditions at one of the facilities,neither the federal government nor state officials have implemented enforceablestandards to ensure the safety and well-being of children in the custodyof the state of Georgia. In 1995, the Department of Children and YouthServices' $8.3 million budget for new programs was spent exclusively onthe bricks and mortar of building new facilities, while the conditionsin those institutions remained overcrowded and filthy and the childrenwere all but ignored.2In the early stages of our investigation,we requested permission to visit juvenile facilities and to conduct interviewswith the children living in them, but the Department of Children and YouthServices (DCYS) refused to give us access. In response to our request,Commissioner Eugene Walker wrote, "I would not find your intervention helpfulat this time; rather, I believe it would be unintentionallyinimicable[sic]to the broad based political support which I currently have to improveconditions of confinement...."3 In Fulton County,Justice Glenda Hatchett refused Human Rights Watch access to the facilityunder her authority.4 This refusal to permitaccess is a retrograde practice and one that we believe should be changed.Because Georgia officials would not giveHuman Rights Watch reasonable access to the juvenile facilities, this reportis incomplete. Without access, Human Rights Watch is unable to make a fullevaluation of the following issues:* The impactof overcrowding in the facilities;* The adequacyof the physical environment, including the sleeping arrangements, food,natural light, square footage, toilet facilities, clothing and footwear,bedding, climate control, privacy, freedom to correspond and use the telephone,visitation rights and contacts with the community;* The useof disciplinary restraints;* The useof disciplinary isolation;* The adequacyof educational, recreational and vocational programming; and* The adequacyof medical care, including treatment for psychological problems.Despite the lack of access, Human RightsWatch was able, through documents and interviews, to obtain sufficientinformation to raise serious concerns about the conditions in which childrenare confined in Georgia. During the course of its investigation, HumanRights Watch conducted interviews with lawyers, judges, staff of the juvenilecourts, former and current Georgia state government officials, and expertsinvolved in the juvenile justice system in Georgia and in the U.S. in general.Overview of Georgia's Juvenile JusticeSystemIn Georgia, a child is considered a juvenilefor purposes of delinquency adjudication up to the age of seventeen. Thestated object of the juvenile court code is to rehabilitate children, sothat they are "secure law-abiding members of society."5There is a separate juvenile court which adjudicates issues related tochildren, including delinquency and unruly actions cases, though not familylaw. In many of the 159 counties of Georgia the juvenile court is not afull-time independent court, but is either staffed by part-time judgesor superior court judges presiding over juvenile court cases. The juvenilecourt has concurrent jurisdiction with the superior court over capitalfelonies, except in the case of seven enumerated offenses, for which thesuperior court has exclusive jurisdiction and the child is tried as anadult.The state's Juvenile Justice Reform Act,enacted in 1994 but still known as Senate Bill 440 (SB440), requires thata child between the ages of thirteen and seventeen be tried as an adultfor murder, voluntary manslaughter, rape, aggravated sodomy, aggravatedchild molestation, aggravated sexual assault, or armed robbery with a gun.6Other capital felonies may be waived into adult court at the discretionof the district attorney.DCYS has jurisdiction over children whohave been adjudicated delinquent. When a child is adjudicated delinquenthe is committed to the state by the judge. The state under the auspicesof the DCYS determines whether a child will be confined and, if confined,for how long and where, or placed on probation in an alternative program.Since the passage of SB440 in 1994, Georgia'sjuvenile justice system has become more punitive, undermining its statedrehabilitative goal. The law allows juvenile court judges to mandate upto five years of confinement for juveniles convicted under the state'sDesignated Felony Act.7 Prior to the enactmentofSB440, the limit was eighteen months. SB440 also gives judges the authorityto sentence any juvenile adjudicated delinquent to ninety days of confinementin a youth development campus without first committing the child to DCYS,thus removing the DCYS's authority to determine whether to confine juveniles,in some cases.International StandardsThe United Nations Convention on the Rightsof the Child (CRC) deals directly with confinement conditions by declaringthe child's right to be free from torture and, when detained, to be treatedhumanely.8 Five other international documentsare relevant to children in confinement: the U.N. Rules for the Protectionof Juveniles Deprived of Their Liberty (U.N. Rules);9the U.N. Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice(Beijing Rules);10 the U.N. Guidelines forthe Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency (Riyadh Guidelines);11the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (Prisoners' Rules);12andthe Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons Under Any Formof Detention or Imprisonment (Principles).13All of the international standards emphasize that children in confinementare entitled to rehabilitative treatment and that states are obliged toprovide such treatment. The objective of the treatment is to facilitatea successful reintegration into society.Federal Responsibility For InstitutionalStandardsUnder international law, when a governmenttakes someone into its custody, it has an obligation to ensure that theconditions in which the person is confined do not violate the person'shuman rights and that, at the very least, minimal standards of decencyare guaranteed. Yet the U.S. federal government has not established specificand enforceable standards for the treatment of children in confinementin the U.S.The U.S. courts, however, have establishedgeneral standards under the United States Constitution. The Eighth Amendmentto the United States Constitution protects adult prisoners from conditionsthat amount to "cruel and unusual punishments." Children are entitled toa higher standard of care, as they are not "convicted" of crimes. U.S.constitutional law protects incarcerated children from conditions that"amount to punishment" under the Fourteenth Amendment.14Although children used to have a constitutional right to rehabilitationandtreatment, the obligation to provide treatment has been overturned.15Now, under the constitution, children are only protected from "unreasonablerestraint."16Two departments within the U.S. Departmentof Justice are concerned with the conditions in which children in the justicesystem are confined. The first, the Office of Juvenile Justice and DelinquencyPrevention (OJJDP), was established in 1974 under the Juvenile Justiceand Delinquency Prevention Act (the 1974 Act).17The mandate of the 1974 Act is extremely broad. Its stated purposes include:providing for evaluation of federally assisted juvenile justice and delinquencyprevention programs; developing national standards for the administrationof juvenile justice; and assisting state and local governments in improvingthe administration of justice. States that are assisted under the formulagrants program established by the 1974 Act used to be monitored by theOJJDP to ensure that status offenders are not held in secure confinementand that children are not held with adults.18Originally, compliance with these requirementswas monitored by the OJJDP. Since the 1980s, however, compliance has beenverified essentially through self-reporting by the states, although OJJDPreports that it does conduct periodic field audits to check on the states'reports ensuring that status offenders are properly assigned and that childrenare not held with adults.19 Otherwise, thereis no federal monitoring of the conditions in which children adjudicateddelinquent are confined.While the OJJDP itself has not establishedstandards for the conditions in which children are confined, in 1994 itgranted funds to a consulting firm, Abt Associates, Inc. to develop performance-basedstandards for institutions detaining juveniles. The consultants conducteda comprehensive study about conditions in U.S. children's facilities duringthe early 1990s for the OJJDP, and weresubsequently commissioned to developthe standards suggested by its study. The project is underway, but to dateno standards have been set.In 1996, Georgia will receive approximately$1.7 million from the OJJDP.20 The fundingis used for non-institutional programs focusing on prevention and earlyintervention. The Children and Youth Coordinating Council, an office affiliatedwith the Georgia governor's office, is responsible for administering theformula grants from the OJJDP. It is also responsible for monitoring statecompliance with OJJDP requirements that status offenders not be held insecure confinement. Human Rights Watch was told that the state is generallyin compliance with OJJDP guidelines for status offenders.21The other Justice Department unit involvedwith the children in the justice system is the Civil Rights Division -Special Litigation Section, which operates under a mandate to enforce theCivil Rights of Institutionalized Persons Act (Institutionalized PersonsAct).22 Under the authority of the InstitutionalizedPersons Act, the Special Litigation Section can bring actions for equitablerelief, such as injunctions and court orders, against any state or politicalsubdivision of a state, or any official of the state, responsible for violatingthe constitutional rights of persons or any other federal laws protectingthe rights of institutionalized persons. Essentially, the InstitutionalizedPersons Act provides an enforcement mechanism for the constitutional rightsof children in confinement, one that is underutilized by the Departmentof Justice. One attorney with the Department of Justice told us that inher opinion, the department was ignoring children, partly because therewas very little sympathy in the current and former administrations forprisoners' rights, and even less interest in protecting child prisoners.Conditions in Secure Institutions forChildren in GeorgiaThere are twenty-one regional youth developmentcenters (RYDCs) in Georgia that hold both boys and girls.23These are the facilities in which children are incarcerated prior to adjudicationby a juvenile court and, in many cases, following a finding of delinquencywhile awaiting placement. There are seven youth development campuses (YDCs)which provide secure confinement after commitment to the Department ofChildren and Youth Services in varying types of facilities, which includetwo boot camps and the maximum-security Eastman facility, which is runby the Department of Corrections (DOC) but houses juveniles. Only the MaconYDC holds girls.24The conditions in some of these facilitiesare in violation of international and U.S. constitutional standards. InMarch 1993, Legal Aid of Cobb County brought a suit against the MariettaRYDC alleging unconstitutional conditions including overcrowding, unsafeand unsanitary conditions, lack of heat, inadequate bathroom and sanitaryaccommodations, structural fire hazards, inadequate medical and psychiatricservices, inadequate educational services and inadequate access to thecourts.25 A similar suit was filed againstthe Lawrenceville RYDC in March 1996.As a result of the court's intervention,through orders and the preparation of a comprehensive consent decree, theconditions at the Marietta RYDC have improved significantly.26Most notably the facility's population no longer exceeds its official capacity.27Unfortunately for children at other RYDCs, the overcrowding problem atMarietta was solved by transferring children into already crowdedfacilities.Attorneys, judges, social workers and others involved in the juvenile justicesystem with whom Human Rights Watch spoke during the course of its investigationsaid the poor conditions that used to prevail at the Marietta RYDC lawsuitare currently the norm at most of the RYDCs.Overcrowding and Physical ConditionsRules 27 to 37 of the U.N. Rules for theProtection of Juveniles Deprived of Their Liberty (U.N. Rules) deal specificallywith the physical environment that should be created by facilities detainingchildren. The U.N. Rules generally require that the physical environmentpromote health and human dignity and to that end the design of the facilitiesis to be in keeping with the rehabilitative aim of the juvenile justicesystem. Facilities are required to be small enough to enable individualizedtreatment, and children should sleep in small dormitories or individualrooms. U.S. constitutional law addresses the symptoms of overcrowding,such as the failure to provide education or the failure to provide sanitaryconditions.28 Nonetheless, officials explainthat, even though each facility has a designated capacity, in practicethere is no way of keeping the population below capacity.During 1995, the RYDCs operated on averageat 191 percent of capacity.29 The YDCs-whichhouse the children committed to the state-were generally not overcrowded,but the trend in these facilities too is toward overcrowding, due in partto the high number of ninety-day commitments now allowed.30Judges often use the short-term commitment as an easily available punishment,occasionallyeven for status offenders.31 Atthe Irwin YDC, the program is intended as "shock incarceration, a paramilitaryprogram aimed at accelerating the understanding of crime and punishment."32Ironically, children committed for ninety days often serve little timein the specially tailored program at a YDC, because they spend most oftheir ninety days at an RYDC waiting for bed space at a YDC to become available.As a result of the gross overcrowding andthe dilapidated state of many of the RYDC buildings, the conditions inwhich the children are incarcerated have been described as abysmal andsqualid. At the Marietta RYDC prior to the court orders many of the childrenwere sleeping on the floor on old mattresses or thin foam pads. Similarconditions were reported during the first months of this year by visitorsto the DeKalb County RYDC and the Fulton County RYDC.33At the Lawrenceville RYDC, four boys are frequently held in a room intendedfor one person.34In the Marietta RYDC children were housedin cells with the toilet facilities outside the cells and were often deniedaccess to those facilities.35 According toa child held there, the whole facility smelled of urine.36Human Rights Watch was told that a similar strong odor currently existsat the FultonCounty RYDC, particularly during the summer months.37At the Marietta RYDC there was often no heat, showers and toilets werefrequently out of order, and there were serious leaks in many places thatcaused mildew and mold to collect on the walls. There were infestationsof cockroaches, ants and other insects, according to a child held thereand visitors.38 The statistical evidence showingRYDCs across the state at 191 percent of capacity gives Human Rights Watchreason to believe that many of the children held at these facilities aresuffering conditions similar to those found at Marietta before the lawsuit.The inadequate classification of childrenin the facilities can often turn the overcrowding into a highly dangeroussituation for the juveniles. Late in 1995 at the Lawrenceville RYDC, athirteen-year-old status offender who was incarcerated for five days forrunning away from home was placed in a single-occupancy cell with threeother boys. One of the larger, tougher boys raped and sodomized the boytwice. No formal charges have been brought against the alleged assailant.39Four additional sexual assaults by juveniles against other juveniles arecurrently under investigation by DCYS officials for the first three monthsof 1996 at the Lawrenceville RYDC alone.40This is a strong indication that the Lawrenceville RYDC has failed to providea safe environment for the children that it holds.In this overcrowded and sometimes dangerousenvironment, the children are not provided with activities adequate todivert them or to assist in their rehabilitation. Educational programs,which should be provided by the state Department of Education, are inadequate.Children often are not tested to identifytheir educational level, and schoolingis often provided for only a very short period during the day.41The internationally recognized right toeducation in incarceration is detailed in U.N. Rules 38 through 46. Thepurpose of the right, set out in Article 26.6 of the Beijing Rules, isthat children should not leave an institution at an educational disadvantage.The institutions in Georgia do not appear to be in compliance with theseprovisions.Mental Health CareIn April 1995, two suicides occurred amongGeorgia's confined juvenile population during a single weekend, one atthe DeKalb County RYDC and one at the Richmond County RYDC. Suicide preventionis frequently handled with inappopriate restraints and a complete absenceof rehabilitative therapy or care. In one cellblock at the Irwin YDC, suicidaljuveniles are actually stripped naked and tied by their wrists and anklesto bare bunks. They share the cellblock with juveniles assigned there astroublemakers.42 The same practice was usedat the Marietta RYDC prior to the court orders and as of early 1996, wasbeing used at the Gainesville RYDC.43 Suicidewatch at the Fulton County RYDC generally involves stripping a child tohis underwear and locking him in a cell by himself with no blankets andno sheets.44At the Fulton County RYDC, an incidentwas described to Human Rights Watch in which a child became non-responsive,blocked his toilet with a blanket, spread excrement around his cell andmay have eaten some of it. In response to this behavior, staff of the facilityordered him to clean up his room. When he remained unresponsive he wasleft in his cell in its filthy condition. The initialassessment of hismental condition by a social worker sent to speak with him was that hewas "faking it." Only after several hours was he finally removed to theGeorgia Mental Health Institution, where it was determined that he sufferedfrom acute drug withdrawal-related problems.45Other children at the facility were instructed to clean up the disturbedchild's cell.In the wake of the April suicides, CommissionerEugene Walker of the DCYS described the department's mental health resourcesas "feeble at best."46 Several of those interviewedby Human Rights Watch had serious concerns about the absence of adequatemental health care. The problem is greatly exacerbated by the severe overcrowdingand acute understaffing. This is disturbing because these facilities housea group of children who are particularly in need of psychiatric assistanceand who are more likely to suffer psychological disorders.47DisciplineIncarcerated children should be subjectto different disciplinary standards from those that apply to adults, becauseunder international standards the purpose of a child's confinement is notpunishment but rehabilitation and treatment.48Rule 67 of the U.N. Rules prohibits cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.It specifically prohibits corporal punishment and the use of solitary confinementunder any circumstances.U.S. constitutional law also protects childrenfrom conditions that amount to punishment. U.S. constitutional law caseshave found that children may not be placed in isolation for purely disciplinarypurposes. 49 Rather, they "may only be placedin isolation when they pose immediate threats to themselves or otherpeople."50Moreover, isolation should be for as short a period of time as is necessaryfor a child's violent mood to subside.Although it is usually not intended asa disciplinary measure, children at the RYDCs may spend long periods oftime locked into their cells. Due to the overcrowding and understaffing,there are many occasions on which the children are locked down for hoursat a time, or even for a full day, because there are not enough staff tomonitor the children if they are allowed out of their cells.51Though the intent is different, this is equivalent to locking a child inhis cell for isolation purposes and clearly does not meet the internationaland U.S. constitutional standards discussed above. Lock-downs have alsobeen used as a disciplinary measure. At the Marietta RYDC prior to thelawsuit initiated in 1993, lock-downs could last for an indefinite periodof time, meaning that a child was confined alone, often in his own cellwithout any indication of how long the confinement would last.52At another facility, Human Rights Watchinterviewed a child who had been sent to a segregation cell for sixty-threedays for engaging in minor fights with other juveniles and for insubordinatebehavior that did not involve violence, such as failing to place his handsbehind his back when security staff called him to attention, failing tolook up at security staff, and "mouthing off." He described his time inthe isolation cell as "just like eating and sleeping in a bathroom" becausethe toilet was so close to the bed and he had to eat all his meals in thecell. He was given no books or writing materials in isolation; he couldnot participate in outdoor recreation, and he was prohibited from usingthe phone, receiving visitors, or purchasing anything from the store.53Four-point restraints, with children boundto a bed at the wrists and ankles often face down for several hours, areused as discipline, in contravention of DCYSpolicy.54Children have been chemically restrained by guards using pepper gas atthe DeKalb RYDC.55 Under the DCYS's writtenpolicy and procedure manuals, the use of pepper gas is allowed, subjectto requirements that other means of control have been exhausted. The policyrequires that "other less forceful means of control have been either attemptedor ruled out...when imminent or actual danger to either persons or propertyoccurs."56Children Confined in Adult FacilitiesSB440, the new juvenile justice reformlegislation, has created a new set of problems for the children who arebeing tried as adults; under the legislation, a child is tried as an adultif he has committed one of the seven enumerated crimes listed above. Suchchildren are held in pre-trial detention at an RYDC (if there is one locally)or in the adult jail of the county in which they are being held. Followingsentencing, boys are sent to Lee-Arrendale Correctional Institution (CI),a facility for male adults. Girls are sent to the Metro CI, the women'sprison in Atlanta. Under international standards57and the 1974 Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act, childrenare supposed to be kept separate from adults,but in practice there is somemixing of the children with the adults in the facility generally, thoughnot in the housing cells. In the DeKalb County jail, where children maybe held in pre-trial detention, there is a glass partition between thecommon area of the wing used for children and the adult sections of thefacility. At Lee-Arrendale CI, children attend school with the adults.Only one girl under eighteen has been convictedunder SB440; she is incarcerated at Metro CI. Initially she was placedin solitary confinement to segregate her from the adult population. Subsequentlyshe was allowed to mix with the rest of population, though she sleeps separately.58Overlong Detention in Regional YouthDetention CentersThe children charged under SB440 who arenot held in an adult facility may spend inordinate periods of time in theRYDCs awaiting trial, sometimes living for more than a year in a facilitythat is not equipped to provide educational or other programs for suchlong periods of confinement. Their continued presence in the facilitiesalso contributes to overcrowding problems. There are no adequate data collectedby DCYS about how long it is taking for children to get to trial, wherethey are all being held, what conditions they are held in, and what ishappening to them when they are sent to the adult facilities to serve theirsentences. There is not even a clear idea among corrections departmentofficials of how many are being held in the adult facilities.59There are no statistics available on these juveniles and therefore no wayfor the state or federal governments to take their situation into accountin the formulation of programs or projection of budgets.Lack of Services for Children Convictedas AdultsThe overall neglect of the children convictedunder SB440 is reflected in the lack of educational or other activitiesprovided for them once incarcerated for the long term; there is no separatebudget at the Department of Corrections forjuvenile services.60No programming provisions have been made for the period of detention ofthe one girl held at Metro CI.61 The boys,all of whom are currently held at Lee-Arrendale CI, are hardly better off.They are educated with the adults, and in many cases they are involvedin the same counseling programs as the adults.62Very few programs aimed at the developmental issues facing thirteen- toseventeen-year-olds, such as problem-solving and anger management, havebeen instituted at Lee-Arrendale CI by the Department of Corrections, butthese efforts need to be expanded greatly.For the most part, the Georgia correctionsdepartment apparently has decided that the children will eventually becomepart of the adult population and part of the adult programs, so that itis not necessary to spend resources on separate programming. It seems unlikely,however, that teenagers who enter an institution at the age of fifteenand leave as adults at the age of twenty-five will successfully participatein society, after being locked up and ignored.Conclusion and RecommendationsGeorgia's failure to meet basic internationalhuman rights standards is a cause for grave concern because those standardsplace heavy emphasis on the goal of preparing children for their returnto society, with treatment as the goal of incarceration, not punishment.Furthermore, the principle of "normalization" in the international standardsrequires an institution to minimize the differences between life insideand life outside the institution, and to accord children treatment withrespect and dignity. Georgia's state laws also require a focus on rehabilitation.63Yet the conditions described above do not achieve this goal, and the resultis, as one Atlanta corrections expert pointed out in 1994, that "youthswho enter the stateyouth prisons come out of the system more angry andbitter than they went in, and intent on further terrorizing and victimizingcitizens."64Human Rights Watch offers the followingrecommendations regarding the human rights aspects of the confinement ofchildren in Georgia.To the state of Georgia:* The Georgiastate government should develop mandatory standards for the administrationof juvenile justice. These standards should at minimum comply with internationalstandards on the conditions of confinement for children and be applicableto all public and private facilities. These standards should include arequirement that detailed and comprehensive statistics be maintained onthe children involved in the juvenile justice system.* Childrenshould not be confined with adults.* Isolationshould never be used as a disciplinary measure.* Instrumentsof restraint should be used only where all other control methods have beenexhausted and have failed, and only where necessary to prevent the childfrom causing self-injury or injury to others.* Physicaland chemical restraint should never be used as punishment; the practiceof using four-point restraints-tying children to beds by wrists and ankles-aspunishment or to prevent suicide must be stopped immediately.* The physicalenvironment in which the children are confined should ensure that eachchild has his own bed and mattress and that single-person rooms be usedonly for one child.* Sanitaryfacilities must not be substandard and must provide privacy to children;insect infestations must be eliminated.* Institutionsmust protect children from assaults by others and, when such an assaultoccurs, appropriately discipline the offenders and provide appropriatetrauma counseling to the victim.* The institutionsshould provide adequate programming and educational instruction.* Childrenmust receive adequate medical and psychiatric care; potentially suicidalchildren must receive immediate and adequate psychiatric care.* Childrenshould be treated by staff with respect and dignity.To the U.S. Justice Department:* The Officeof Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention should, in accordance withthe stated purposes of the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency PreventionAct, develop mandatory standards for the administration of juvenile justice.These standards should at minimum comply with international standards onthe conditions of confinement for children and be applicable to all publicand private facilities. These standards should include a requirement thatdetailed and comprehensive statistics be maintained on the children involvedin the juvenile justice system.* The Officeof Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention should, in accordance withthe stated purposes of the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency PreventionAct, assist state and local governments in improving the administrationof justice.* The Officeof Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention should, in accordance withthe Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act, monitor the statesthat participate in the formula grants program to ensure that status offendersare not held in secure confinement and that children are not held withadults.To the U.S. Congress:* Congressshould pass legislation expanding the mandate of the Office of JuvenileJustice and Delinquency Prevention to include a requirement to monitorthe actual conditions of confinement for children in the justicesystemand states' compliance with U.S. constitutional law in the conditions ofconfinement for children.* The Departmentof Justice, in accordance with the mandate of the Civil Rights of InstitutionalizedPersons Act, should regularly initiate investigations into the conditionsin which children are confined to determine that they are in compliancewith U.S. constitutional law.* The Senateshould ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Child and should declareit self-executing or enact implementing legislation so that it is availableto children requiring its protections.LESBIAN ANDGAY RIGHTSIn Georgia, as in most of the rest of theUnited States, lesbians and gay men lack many basic human rights protections.Anti-gay hate crimes are common, some state legislation and local resolutionscondemn gay people, and general prohibitions against discrimination gounenforced when the victims are gay men or lesbians. Still, in large numbersin Atlanta and smaller numbers in communities around the state, lesbiansand gay men are speaking out for equality. Unfortunately, this increasedvisibility has been accompanied by a rise in anti-gay violence and anti-gaylegislation and-absent sanctions for sexual orientation-based harms-gaypeople lack remedies for violence and discrimination against them.This chapter will review the climate ofhostility faced by lesbians and gay men in most of Georgia, anti-gay legislationrecently introduced, as well as the persistent violence, harassment, anddiscrimination that shape the lives of lesbians and gay men in the state.Many of the problems highlighted here affect lesbians and gay men elsewherein the United States.Law and LegislationAs discussed below, only one city and twocounties in Georgia prohibit any form of discrimination based on sexualorientation. Moreover, no federal legislation prohibits discriminationin employment, housing, public accommodations or other areas in which gaypeople are frequently targeted for discriminatory treatment.By contrast, international human rightsinstruments recognize that gay people are entitled to live free of arbitrarydiscrimination. For example, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights1and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),2while not explicitly referring to gay men andlesbians, both protect therights of privacy, expression and freedom from discrimination that areessential to the ability of lesbians and gay men to enjoy their human rights.Discrimination may occur either where alaw explicitly singles out certain persons for different treatment or whenthe law is enforced unequally. As applied, Georgia's state law prohibiting"sodomy" has such a discriminatory effect on lesbians and gay men.3This law does not explicitly target gay people; it subjects to criminalliability anyone in the state who engages in oral or anal sex (including,therefore, anyone visiting Georgia to attend the Olympic Games who engagesin the proscribed activities).4 Georgia's anti-"sodomy"law has served as a rallying point for those who seek to condemn gay peopleand is frequently cited by legislators in support of proposed anti-gaylegislation.5 At times, it also appears toserve as a tool for police to harass gay people, as illustrated by frequentallegations that police solicit gay men and seek to entrap them into violatingthe law.6 In addition, because many gay men(and others) fear the stigma and discrimination that might result frombeing charged with violating the "sodomy" law, they reportedly enter pleabargains for lesser charges and pay hefty fines rather than challenge groundlessarrests.7The "sodomy" law first became the subjectof national attention when, in 1982, Atlanta police entered the home ofcity resident Michael Hardwick, found him engaged in sex with another man,and arrested him. Although the districtattorney eventually dropped thecharges, Hardwick challenged the law, asserting that he could facethe same charges in the future. He argued that the U.S. Constitution'sguarantee of the right to privacy protected his right to engage in intimatesexual activity with another consenting adult in his own home. In 1986,the U.S. Supreme Court rejected this argument and upheld the law in a casecalled Bowers v. Hardwick. In doing so, the court proclaimed thatnegative "majority sentiments about the morality of homosexuality" justifiedthe law's restrictions.8 On March 11, 1996,the Georgia Supreme Court reiterated that conclusion in a case called Christensenv. State. In that case, the court rejected a challenge that the lawviolated the privacy rights of all Georgia residents, gay and non-gay alike,as protected in Georgia's state constitution.9Despite its criminalization of particularacts, regardless of who engages in them, Georgia's "sodomy" law is commonlyviewed as a legislative condemnation of gay people. State officials andprivate actors frequently rely on the law to justify anti-gay actions ina wide variety of contexts, from employment to family law, regardless ofthe fact that the victim of discrimination has never been charged withor convicted of violating the law.10 For example,in a 1991 case that is discussed further below, Georgia's attorney generalwithdrew an employment offer he had made to an attorney upon discoveringshe was a lesbian and had held a commitment ceremony with another woman.He defended his action by arguing that, because she had made her lesbianrelationship known to others, the general public might assume that shewas violating the "sodomy" prohibition.Thus, even where criminal charges or sexualbehavior are not directly at issue, the law often underlies negative treatmentof lesbians and gay men in and outof court. Lesbians and gay men throughoutGeorgia report that the "sodomy" prohibition reinforces anti-gay sentimentthroughout the state, and add that safety, let alone equality, will bean elusive goal for as long as the law is in place.11The "sodomy" law is the product of an earlierera. But as the movement for gay and lesbian equal rights becomes morevisible nationally and internationally, and activists' demands for equaltreatment enter the area of "family values," backlash has more recentlybeen expressed in new legislative proposals, which add to a climate ofhostility towards gay people. With nearly unanimous approval of the statelegislature, for example, Gov. Zell Miller recently signed into law a billbarring recognition of same-sex couples who may someday marry in otherstates, though no such marriage is yet legal in another state.12Suspicion and animus toward lesbians and gay men among some Georgia officialswere also reflected in several other bills that came before the state'slegislature in the 1995-96 session. These included, among others:* A bill toimpose criminal penalties on any librarian who provided minors with accessto certain material intended for adults. Although the legislation did notspecify which material would be subject to the law, representatives supportingit highlighted several books written for children and young adults thatinclude lesbian or gay characters as being the target of this proposedmeasure. The legislation was passed by the state Senate without the criminalpenalties but with a provision authorizing civil suits to challenge circulationof particular books. Because it stalled in a House committee, the legislationwas never sent to the governor for signature.13* A provision-proposedindividually and in the form of riders to numerous other bills-intendedto prohibit state support for any programs that would provide education,entertainment, counseling or health care intended for lesbians or gay men.The proposed measure would have banned expenditure of state funds for "anythingthat tends to assist, support or condone" anything against the law-i.e.the "sodomy" law-in Georgia. Speaking in support of the legislation, onerepresentative explicitly linked its introduction to the state's "sodomy"prohibition and also held out children's books that include gay or lesbiancharacters in an attempt to gain increased support for the bill. Althoughthe provisions passed in both houses of the legislature, none of the billsto which they were attached gained full legislative approval.14While such efforts did not succeed, legislationthat would provide protection to gay people has also been unsuccessful.15A 1991 proposal to enhance penalties for bias-motivated violence failedin the legislature because it would have covered hate crimes based on sexualorientation. Of the seven points made in a statement circulatedby opponents of the hate crimes bill, six of them criticized the bill'sinclusion of sexual orientation.16In the meantime, although bills were introducedto repeal the "sodomy" law in each legislative session from 1985 through1995, not one has been approved by the committee to which it was firstsent.17Local MeasuresThe city of Atlanta is one of the few placesin Georgia that provides some protections from discrimination for lesbiansand gay men, having established a domestic partnership registry in 1993to permit unmarried couples (including gay and lesbian couples)to register their partnership with the city18and having passed an ordinance in 1986 that prohibits discriminationbased on sexual orientation in city employment. In preparation for theOlympic games and other events, and in response to the city's gay community,the city plans to open a gay and lesbian visitor center in the summer of1996. The city also attempted to provide equal employment benefits forcity employees with domestic partners, which would have benefited partnersof all sexual orientations, but the Georgia Supreme Court struck down thisprovision in March 1995, after finding that it exceeded the city's authority.19Elsewhere in Georgia, reinforcing (andreinforced by) the state, local communities have been explicit in theirefforts to condemn and stigmatize their gay residents. Cobb County is perhapsthe most notorious of these communities. Home to more than fifteen whitesupremacist groups, which oppose equality for gay people as part of theiragendas, Cobb County is also responsible for Georgia's first explicitlyanti-gay community resolution. Backed by supporters carrying signs declaring"Jesus Doesn't Want a 'Queer' Nation" and "Thank God for AIDS," Cobb Countycommissioners adopted a resolution in August 1993 providing that"lifestylesadvocated by the gay community...are incompatible with the standards towhich this community subscribes."20The campaign surrounding that resolutionhighlighted the prevalence of local hostility against gay people. Typicalthreats of death and destruction left on the Cobb Citizens Coalition'stelephone answering machine after the organization posted a billboard saying"Rescind the Resolution" included:Come get my signature. I'll sign it witha twelve-gauge [shotgun].Look. We want queers to stay out of CobbCounty or we're going to drive you out. Keep your AIDS in midtown. Notin Cobb County.Listen you bunch of goddamn faggots....We don't want your gay asses running around here. ... Y'all come messingaround here too much, we'll get the boys on you. Y'all need to get yourasses out of here. We don't want you around here. Y'all's kind don't belonghere. So get the hell on. Bye faggot fairy bastards.21Opponents of the resolution were not deterred,and following their intensive lobbying, the Atlanta Committee for the OlympicGames withdrew its plan for Cobb County to host the Olympic volleyballmatches, and rejected plans to have the Olympic torch carried through thecounty.22The Wayne County Commission, however, passeda resolution identical to the one approved by Cobb County. Among otherfindings, the Wayne and Cobb County resolutions state:That lifestyles advocated by the gay communityare not in fact family units and these matters should not be endorsed bygovernment policy makers, because they are incompatible with the standardsto which this community subscribes; andThat gay lifestyle units are directly contraryto state laws.Based on these findings, the counties declaredtheir plans:[to] openly and vigorously support[s] thecurrent community standards and established state laws regarding gay lifestyles;[and]not to fund those activities which seekto contravene these existing community standards.23Faced with the prospect of having the Olympictorch bypass Wayne County, the commissioners rescinded this resolutionin May 1996, despite vigorous protest from some community members, whichincluded death threats to one of the commissioners.24Hate CrimesWith attacks ranging from stalking, verbalintimidation and tire-slashing to murder, anti-gay violence is a seriousproblem in Georgia. However, because many lesbians and gay men fear discriminationand social ostracism stemming from being identified as gay, most victimsof anti-gay bias crimes remain silent. According to community activists,in some cases police fail to investigate or to take seriously crimes wherethe victims are gay or lesbian, often leaving those crimes that are actuallyreported unsolved.25 The regularity and widespreadnature of these incidents in Georgia, as in much of the United States,are alarming.26Although in many cases the attacks or intimidationare carried out by private citizens, the state's failure to establish anti-discriminationprotections for lesbian and gay men is a contributing factor. Moreover,public expressions of anti-gay hostility by state and local officials sendthe message that discrimination, harassment, and violence are permissible.Judicial decisions upholding anti-gay legislation also reinforce socialacceptance of such abuse.In addition to government inaction, thesocial context of this anti-gay violence is also highly relevant. SomeGeorgia residents identify some of the fundamentalist churches as fomentingthese attacks. While these churches do not instruct worshippers directlyto engage in vandalism or harassment, some gays and lesbians in Georgiabelieve that the churches' insistent condemnation and dehumanization oflesbians and gay men creates an atmosphere in which those attending churchfind the commission of anti-gay attacks to be understandable, acceptableor even laudable. In particular, gay rights advocates believe that commentssuch as "Homosexuals are an abomination," "The Bible says that homosexualsdeserve the death penalty," and "Gay people have no dignity" tend to encourageabuse of lesbians and gay men without pastors' directly calling for violence.27The following are a few examples that representthe types of hate-crime attacks suffered by lesbians and gay men in Georgiain recent years. All were carried out by private actors, so far as is known.In some cases, the attackers were identified, tried and punished; in others,the crimes remain unsolved. What is consistent is bias as a motivation.* Gay menare frequently beaten by hostile individuals in and outside gay bars inAtlanta, according to local gay rights activists. In early 1996, for example,a gay psychologist was attacked while leaving a midtown Atlanta bar. Assailantsseriously injured the man's legs by jumping on him repeatedly and brokehis wrists, all the while calling him "faggot" and other anti-gay slurs.28* In a 1993incident, three teenagers tried to enter a gay bar in the city of Macon.When asked to leave because they were below drinking age, they began tauntingbar patrons with anti-gay slurs, then shot two lesbian women, killing oneand wounding the other. The perpetrators were caught and imprisoned.* OutsideMacon in Bibb County, a gay man suffered repeated abuse at the hands ofhis neighbor. After his car was spray painted with the word "fag," andhis house vandalized, the neighbor shot and nearly killed him. The victimidentified the perpetrator for police, yet no charges were brought.29* In Willacoochee,a small south Georgia town, a month-long stretch of harassment of a gaycouple in the summer of 1993 began when their mailbox was vandalized. Typicalof anti-gay harassment, the attacks escalated quickly in intensity-a weeklater a cross was burned in their front yard. The following month, deaththreats accompanied by vulgar insults about the men being gay were lefton their telephone answering machine; shortly after that, their house burneddown in a fire, the source of which remains unidentified.30The prosecutor's office refused to bringcharges, claiming that there wasinsufficient evidence to arrest anyone in connection with these crimes.31* Outsideof Carrollton, in Bowden, during 1995 there were frequent attacks on customersat a local gay bar; patrons were threatened inside the bar and assaultedin the parking lot.* Driverswith car stickers picturing a rainbow flag-a popular symbol of gay identity-arefrequently the targets of hostile drivers who try to run them off the road.In 1994, in Cobb County, a gay driver was chased and then forced off ofthe road. Although the crimes and the suspect's license plate number werereported to the police, local officials declined to press charges, citinglack of evidence.32As several of the examples suggest, theresponse of law enforcement agencies is often sluggish. In 1993 in Macon,when a prominent business owner, who was bisexual, was murdered, policeultimately arrested a suspect and the case was determined to be bias-related,but the result came only after the local gay and lesbian community repeatedlypressed local police to conduct a thorough investigation.33It is not lost on activists that numerous murders of gay men in the Atlantaarea-including at least five murders of African-American men who identifiedas transgendered or dressed in drag-have gone unsolved in the past decade.Given the pervasiveness of social hostility,and their often legitimate fear of police hostility or indifference, mostgay victims do not report crimes against them. A telling example suggeststhe extent of this problem: In 1994, after a patron of an Atlanta bar frequentedby gay men was beaten and robbed in the bar's parking lot, and did reportthe crime, a police monitor caught his assailants and learned that-thoughthe men admitted to committing thirty such crimes previously-not one hadbeen reported. What is required to combat hate crimes is action by lawenforcement bodies to engender confidence among the gaycommunity, to guaranteeprotection for persons who do report hate crimes, and to prosecute instancesof hate crimes vigorously after thorough, impartial and aggressive investigations.34In addition to verbal and physical attacksagainst persons and vandalism of their homes, hate crimes include vandalismagainst businesses or other institutions that the attackers identify asserving gay and lesbian communities. In October 1994, a brick was thrownthrough the window of Outwrite, the only gay bookstore in Georgia. Theincident was reported, but the Atlanta police were not able to identifythe perpetrator.35 Likewise, because many peopleerroneously view HIV/AIDS as a "gay disease," all but a few hospices intendedto serve people with AIDS have been forced to close down by local communities.While discriminatory community pressure of this kind is not, of itself,a hate crime, there have been criminal expressions of these same feelings:in Albany, for example, a proposed AIDS hospice was burned down prior toopening.Employment DiscriminationBecause Georgia, like forty other U.S.states, does not prohibit sexual orientation discrimination, when lesbiansand gay men are fired for being gay they have little or no redress. Onlythe city of Atlanta, along with Fulton County and DeKalb County, prohibitsexual orientation discrimination against public employees. None of theother 157 counties in the state prohibits discrimination based on sexualorientation, and gay activists report that anti-gay employment discriminationis common.36 As a consequence, most gay peopleattempt to hide their sexual orientation out of fear that they will loseall prospects of employment. This is particularly true in smaller communities,but many Atlanta residents also take care to remain "closeted" (ie. tohide their sexual orientation from others).National attention first turned to anti-gayemployment discrimination in Georgia in February 1991, when the CrackerBarrel restaurant chain decided to fire its gay employees. The companyissued a press release announcing that it was "founded upon a concept oftraditional American values" and that it would not "continue to employindividuals whose sexual preferences [sic] fail to demonstrate normalheterosexual values which have been the foundation of families in our society."37Immediately thereafter, every employee known to be gay or lesbian was fired.Cheryl Summerville, who worked as a cook for Cracker Barrel for nearlyfour years, was among those dismissed. Her termination notice read: "Thisemployee is being terminated due to violation of company policy. The employeeis gay."38 Despite vocal public objection,Cracker Barrel refused to rescind its policy or rehire the terminated employees.Although Cracker Barrel maintains that its employment policies are confidential,it is widely believed that the policy remains in place today.39Several months after Cracker Barrel announcedits decision to fire gay employees, the Georgia attorney general decidedthat he, too, did not want a lesbian working for him as an attorney inthe Georgia Department of Law. In this case, the attorney general, MichaelBowers, offered Robin Shahar a permanent position as a Department of Lawattorney following her graduation from law school. Shortly before she wasto start work, Shahar was called into the attorney general's office andnotified that her employment offer was being withdrawn based on Shahar's"purported marriage ... [to] another woman."40Shahar filed suit, asserting that by firingher for holding a religious ceremony of commitment to another woman, Bowershad violated her rights to freedom of association and freedom of religionas well as her rights to equal protection and due process of law. Bowersresponded that the public might think Shahar was violating the state's"sodomy" law, which would harm the department's efficiency and credibility.The federal district court agreed, finding that "theefficient and credibleoperations of the Department require attorneys to refrain from any conductwhich appears improper or inconsistent with Department efforts in enforcingGeorgia law."41 This argument could presumablybe used continuously by Bowers and other state officials to deny lesbiansand gay men employment based on their presumed violation of the "sodomy"law. Notably, however, the parallel presumption that non-gay people mightalso violate the law has never been asserted by Georgia government officials.Shahar's claim is now pending before a full panel of a federal appealscourt.Anti-gay discrimination even extends torelatives of gay men or lesbians. In Warner Robins, a city south of Macon,Nancy Rodriguez took part in an advertising campaign organized by Parentsand Friends of Lesbians and Gays (PFLAG) in 1995 to educate about, andprotest, anti-gay violence. In the ad campaign, Rodriguez told of her experienceas the mother of a son who was murdered by a group of teens with baseballbats in an incident the Federal Bureau of Investigation classified as anti-gayviolence. When every Atlanta area media outlet refused to run the ads,PFLAG held a press conference at which Rodriguez spoke. In November 1995,the day after the press conference was broadcast in south Georgia, Rodriguezwas fired from her position with an automotive supply and service business.42Because sexual orientation discrimination is not prohibited in Warner Robins,Rodriguez had no recourse when she lost her job even though she had merelyopposed violence based on sexual orientation and acknowledged that herson was gay.Gay YouthCommenting on what it would be like fora young person to be openly gay in a high school in rural Georgia, onerespondent said simply, "You'd lose your head."43Lesbian and gay youth face tremendous hostility in Georgia, as is alsotrue elsewhere in the United States.School, whether junior high or high school,whether public or private, is a particularly difficult battleground foralmost all gay youth. Each day requires a struggle against verbal harassment,threats of violence and actual physical abuses. The damage to personaldignity, as well as the risk to personal safety, are considerable and constant.In Atlanta, a leader of a youth support group reported that one studenthad to change schools four times seeking a safe place in which to attemptto learn.44 Further, junior divisions of theKu Klux Klan, which encourage harassment of gay students, among others,are still evident in junior high and high schools in various parts of thestate, including the Atlanta metropolitan area.45Children of gay and lesbian parents, regardlessof whether they themselves are gay, are also at risk. School authoritiesreportedly told one lesbian parent that they could not guarantee her son'ssafety from junior Klan members and other students and encouraged her tosend her son to private school.46Still, no public school system in Georgiahas adopted policies specifically to prohibit sexual orientation-basedharassment. Absent a clear message from school authorities that such harassmentis prohibited, other students come to believe that gay youth "deserve"hostile treatment. Predictably, verbal jabs quickly escalate into physicalassaults. When school officials fail to punish these assaults as well,they tolerate a climate in which the assailants believe their acts arecondoned, gay students live in terror, and victims' families believe thereis no legal recourse so do not pursue complaints.So scarce are support services for lesbianand gay youth that some young people travel two or more hours to participatein the two support groups that meet in Atlanta.47Not surprisingly, outside of Atlanta and other major cities, such assistanceis even harder to find. This atmosphere underlies a federal governmentstudyshowing that lesbian and gay youth "are 2 to 3 times more likely to attemptsuicide than other young people."48Conclusion and RecommendationsDespite increased recognition of the civilrights of lesbians and gay men in some parts of the United States, Georgiaremains an unfriendly place for its gay and lesbian population. It is timefor state and local governments to act to prevent anti-gay discriminationand violence, both by official and private actors. Officials, up to andincluding the Governor, should address the atmosphere of hostility againstgay citizens by rigorously refraining from commentary or conduct that fomentssuch hostility, and criticizing such commentary or conduct when it arises.Further, to promote the basic rights oflesbians and gay men in Georgia, we urge Gov. Zell Miller to include inhis legislative package bills to:* repeal O.C.G.A.§16-2-2 (the criminal prohibition of "sodomy");* assure that,in prosecution of bias crimes, the victim's identity as gay or lesbiandoes not result in failure to prosecute or mitigation of penalties;* prohibitdiscrimination based on sexual orientation;* prohibitharassment and abuse of lesbian and gay youth in public, and in any youthprograms that receive state funding, as well as urging the adoption ofrelated policies at the school district level; and* assure securityfor AIDS hospices throughout the state.We urge local Georgia communities to:* repeal allexplicitly anti-gay ordinances and restrictions;* improvemonitoring of and response to bias crime, including anti-gay bias crime;* enact ordinancesprohibiting sexual orientation discrimination; and* adopt policiesin local school districts prohibiting harassment and abuse of lesbian andgay youth in schools.We urge the U.S. Department of Justiceto:* activelysupport reauthorization of the Federal Hate Crimes Statistics Act, whichincludes a provision requiring collection of statistics regarding anti-gaybias crime; and* undertakefull investigations of bias crimes in Georgia, including anti-gay biascrime, and other actions wherever appropriate.Finally, we urge the U.S. Congress to:* pass theEmployment Non-Discrimination Act, which prohibits employment discriminationbased on sexual orientation;* pass legislationand support policies that secure safety and equality for lesbian and gayyouth in schools and oppose passage of any contrary bills; and* supportreauthorization of the Federal Hate Crimes Statistics Act.ATTACKS ONFREEDOM OF EXPRESSIONIn recent years, socially conservativegroups, parents, and elected officials have sought to restrict Georgiaresidents' freedom of expression in several areas, especially artisticfreedom of expression and sex education. These efforts have resulted inattacks on freedom of expression by state, county and local governments,and at public schools and public libraries. The situation in Georgia isconsistent with a national trend. According to recent reports, attemptsto restrict free expression and access to information are at record levelsand are occurring all across the United States.1Reductions in Georgia state funding forthe arts have targeted groups or artists that discuss homosexuality orAIDS and HIV. Art exhibits focusing on contemporary social issues havebeen removed from public spaces, and books and other literary works withsexual themes have been banned by directors of public libraries under pressurefrom board members and parents. Access to information through electroniccommunication has also been restricted: citing concerns ranging from terrorismto trademark theft, Georgia lawmakers have recently passed laws that restrictrights to free expression and privacy on-line.These impediments to the free flow of informationviolate domestic and international free expression guarantees. Accordingto the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution:Congress shall make no law respecting anestablishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; orabridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the peoplepeaceably to assemble, and to petition the government for a redress ofgrievances.Article 19 of the Universal Declarationof Human Rights states:Everyone has the right to freedom of opinionand expression: this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interferenceandto seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media andregardless of frontiers.2Artistic WorksArtistic works with sexual content, particularlycontent having to do with homosexuality or AIDS, have been attacked asillegitimate in Georgia. As the following examples indicate, legislatorsat the state and county levels have sought to silence particular groupsby withdrawing public funding for the arts and media, and local officialshave prohibited artists from publishing their work.* In 1994,the State General Assembly passed a resolution condemning the state's publicbroadcasting service's decision to air Tales of the City, a miniseriesbased on the works of Armistead Maupin that contained no explicit sex scenesbut did contain brief nudity and adult language and, as a direct resultof the broadcast, eliminated over $19.6 million from the state budget thathad already been approved and designated for a new Georgia Public Televisionfacility.* In August1993, Cobb County commissioners-after officially condemning homosexuality-eliminatedfunds for the arts at the urging of a commissioner who warned that thearts were helping to further a "gay agenda."3The actions were taken following citizens' complaints about a productionat the Theater in the Square of the acclaimed off-Broadway play by TerrenceMcNally, "Lips Together, Teeth Apart," which discusses AIDS. Theater inthe Square had received general support funds from the Cobb County ArtsCommission.* In the cityof Marietta in 1995, an assistant principal refused to allow a middle schoolstudent's poem, "H.I.V.," to be published in the school's literary journalbecause it contained the words "queer" and "dyke" to illustrate the persecutionof people with HIV/AIDS.4 The school contendedthat those two words were incompatible with the Cobb County anti-gay resolution.5Sex EducationPublic education in the United States isregulated primarily by state and local-rather than federal-laws. Stategovernments have the primary responsibility for education, including settingminimum standards of education quality, but they may delegate authorityto local districts.Sex education has been a particularly volatileissue in Georgia for at least a decade, including decisions about whetherthe state or local communities should have control over the content ofthe instruction. Conservative parents have led a fight to restrict accessto information about such issues as contraception, sexually transmitteddiseases, and abortion. The current state sex education policy, which wasimplemented in 1989, requires a minimum course of study in sex educationand AIDS prevention-for example, information about HIV infection is introducedin the sixth grade curriculum.In early 1996, a state senate committeeconsidered a bill that, among other changes, would have required localboards, rather than the state board, to develop courses; required localboards to hold public hearings before making decisions about sex education;prohibited instruction on contraception, AIDS and sexually transmitteddiseases below seventh grade (ninth, if local boards desired); and prohibitedthe presentation of premarital sex or homosexuality as "acceptable" or"inevitable."6 The bill was rejected by thecommittee, but state Sen. Sallie Newbill,a sponsor of the rejected legislation,told the press that sex education reform legislation would "absolutely"return in the next legislative session.7Under the existing law, a great deal ofleeway in sex education curricula is given to local boards. This has createdsharp differences in the policies adopted in different communities. Since1993, each school district has had a sex education advisory committee,with non-teaching parents making up more than half the membership. Thecommittee must approve the curriculum, and parents may preview materialsbefore classes begin. The law requires that students take sex educationunless parents ask in writing for them to be exempted. However, most CobbCounty schools, for example, require parents to give permission beforetheir children may participate in a sex education class. State law allowsbirth control to be described and demonstrated, subject to local approval,but, as in other parts of the U.S., many Georgia school systems choosenot to include demonstrations in their curricula.* In 1994,the Clayton County school board approved a significantly reduced list ofsupplemental materials for use in the sex education curriculum. The thirteenvideos recommended by a newly formed sexuality advisory committee, whichfocus on abstinence, include films produced by Focus on the Family, a largeconservative ministry based in Colorado Springs. A Clayton County healthteacher noted, "We are being limited not only in what we can show, butin what we can say."8* In Gainesville,during the 1993-94 school year, a school superintendent prohibited theperformance of The First Time Club, by K. T. Curran, an AIDS-awarenessplay created for performance in county schools. His objections relatedto the play's sexual content and its lack of emphasis on abstinence. Theplay, intended to be performed for teen and young adult audiences, wasto be sponsored jointly by the Gainesville Theater Alliance and the NortheastGeorgia Medical Center. The sponsors had given a copy of the script tothe superintendent to review. As noted above, sex education materials usedin the county schools are to be submitted to a sex education review committee.After reading the script, however, thesuperintendent refused to submitit to the review committee, and, instead, wrote a memo to district teachersprohibiting them from booking the play. Upon hearing about the potentialcontroversy, the hospital withdrew its sponsorship, and the play was notperformed.9* HumanSexuality, a standard textbook, was approved by the Georgia Board ofEducation for use in high schools, and teachers in Fulton County had beenusing it for five years, when in June 1994, the school board voted unanimouslyto ban it from schools. A parent had objected to the book for use in highschool health education classes for being a "how-to book" and for beingtoo graphic. A committee of school-system curriculum experts had unanimouslyrecommended that schools continue to use the book, but board members complainedthat the book placed too little emphasis on abstinence.10School CurriculaBooks with sexual and supernatural themeshave been the main targets in Georgia schools. In 1994-95, Georgia's schoolsranked fifth from the top in the number of books found objectionable bystudents' parents, according to People for the American Way.11In Gwinnett County, parents have succeeded in having removed or restrictedseventeen books mainly dealing with abortion or teenage sex.The following are examples of some effortsaround the state to restrict access to books:* Agnesthe Sheep, by William Taylor, a1991 book written for children aged ten and up, was banned in 1994 fromthe media center at Nesbit Elementary School in Gwinnett County. The followingyear, the school board upheld the decision of a local school media committee,which hadremoved the book after a parent complained about the book's useof the words "hell" and "damn."12* Songof Solomon, a novel by Nobel Prize winner Toni Morrison, was removedfrom required reading lists and library shelves in the Richmond CountySchool District in 1994 after a parent complained that passages from thebook were "filthy and inappropriate."13Adults have also been denied access tobooks that contain sexual references:* Nancy Friday'sbook, Women on Top: How Real Life Has Changed Women's Fantasies,was removed from the Chestatee Regional Library System in Gainesville in1994 because patrons complained that the book on women's sexual fantasieswas "pornographic and obscene" and lacked "literary merit."14* Three booksby Anne Rice, Beauty's Punishment, Beauty's Release, andThe Claiming of Sleeping Beauty, were removed from the shelves ofthe Lake Lanier Regional Library system in Gwinnett County in 1992, followingcomplaints by patrons about the books' sexual content.15The InternetLaws intended to regulate the Internethave been passed by the U.S. Congress and the Georgia state legislatureduring the past two years. In February 1996, President Clinton signed intolaw the Communications Decency Act (CDA), an amendment to a sweeping telecommunicationsreform bill.16 The CDA criminalizes on-linecommunication received by a minor that is deemed "obsceneor indecent" or"patently offensive." The law is now being challenged by Human Rights Watchand other groups on the grounds that "indecent" speech is protected byboth the U.S. Constitution and international law.17In Georgia, two troubling new laws seekto regulate the Internet.18 A 1995 law prohibitsthe use of computers to provide information that promotes "terroristicacts." The law does not define what might constitute "promoting" terroristicacts, which could presumably be interpreted to include a wide range ofconstitutionally protected communication, such as reporting about terrorismor providing World Wide Web links to such information.19Another problematic aspect of the law is that it does not exempt Internetservice providers from liability for messages that pass through their services.20On April 18, 1996, Governor Miller signedthe so-called "Internet Police Bill."21 Thelaw contains language that will inhibit the free speech and privacy rightsof Internet users, and violates accepted rules of Internet communication.22Accordingto the law, the sender of an electronic mail (e-mail) message is no longerpermitted to "falsely identify" him or herself, even though e-mail userscommonly use pseudonyms, rather than their full names, in their e-mailaddresses. The law also makes it illegal to link a World Wide Web sitewith another site, without first obtaining permission from the originalsite. The vague wording of the bill may even make it a crime to mentionanother person or organization without permission.23In the realm of on-line media, such a restriction is akin to prohibitingindividuals from communicating about or even mentioning one another. Suchrestrictions would be unthinkable in other media. The Internet (includingthe World Wide Web), as a public forum, should not unnecessarily impedethe free flow of information, which until now Internet users have enjoyed.In a letter to Governor Miller, the Electronic Frontier Foundation, anorganization that works to protect freedom of expression and privacy onthe Internet, compared the law tomaking it illegal to take a copy of a newspaperthat is labeled "free" on the top without first obtaining permission fromthe publisher. Or like making it illegal to look up a friend's phonenumberin the phone book and put it into a neighborhood directory or a bridgeclub newsletter. The problem is that H.B. 1630 would make criminals outof virtually everyone with a web site (for all web sites link to others)when the sites being linked to would always give permission for the link"makes criminals of the vast majority of us who communicate online."24Conclusion and RecommendationsThe right to free expression is enshrinedin the U.S. Constitution and in the Universal Declaration of Human Rightsbecause without the free flow of information, the exercise of all otherrights is impaired. Artistic achievement, education, public discourse,private reading, and communication among individuals over the Internetall rely on the ability of the individual to seek and transmit opinions,ideas and information freely. Officials in Georgia have not adequatelysafeguarded this right, and are likely to face pressure for further restrictionsfrom socially conservative groups. State officials must be willing to facepublic criticism and to hold communities responsible when those communitiesseek to infringe on the right to freedom of expression.Human Rights Watch makes the followingrecommendations to the Georgia government:* To ensurethat artistic expression in Georgia is protected from political interference,Georgia lawmakers should reject content-based restrictions on funding andother forms of support for the arts;* Educationauthorities at the state level should take the necessary steps to ensurethat local officials are not permitted to restrict important sex educationtopics and that their policies are consistent with national standards;* Public educationalefforts should stress the protections regarding expression afforded bythe First Amendment and other relevant laws; and* Recent legislationto regulate the Internet should be rejected as impermissible infringementson Georgians' rights to free expression and privacy, and should be repealed.AppendixA:InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political RightsAdopted and opened for signature, ratification,and accession by United Nations General Assembly resolution 2200A (XXI)on 16 December 1966. Entered into force 23 March, 1976 in accordance witharticle 49.PREAMBLEThe States Parties to thepresent Covenant,Considering that, in accordancewith the principles proclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations, recognitionof the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of allmembers of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peacein the world,Recognizing that these rightsderive from the inherent dignity of the human person,Recognizing that, in accordancewith the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the ideal of free humanbeings enjoying civil and political freedom and freedom from fear and wantcan only be achieved if conditions are created whereby everyone may enjoyhis civil and political rights, as well as his economic, social and culturalrights,Considering the obligationof States under the Charter of the United Nations to promote universalrespect for, and observance of, human rights and freedoms,Realizing that the individual,having duties to other individuals and to the community to which he belongs,is under a responsibility to strive for the promotion and observance ofthe rights recognized in the present Covenant,Agree upon the followingarticles:PART IArticle I1. All peoples have the rightof self-determination. By virtue of that right they freely determine theirpolitical status and freely pursue their economic, social and culturaldevelopment.2. All peoples may, for theirown ends, freely dispose of their natural wealth and resources withoutprejudice to any obligations arising out of international economic co-operation,based upon the principle of mutual benefit, and international law. In nocase may a people be deprived of its own means of subsistence.3. The States Parties tothe present Covenant, including those having responsibility for the administrationof Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories, shall promote the realizationof the right of self-determination, and shall respect that right, in conformitywith the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.PART IIArticle 21. Each State Party to thepresent Covenant undertakes to respect and to ensure to all individualswithin its territory and subject to its jurisdiction the rights recognizedin the present Covenant, without distinction of any kind, such as race,color, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, nationalorsocial origin, property, birth or other status.2. Where not already providedfor by existing legislative or other measures, each State Party to thepresent Covenant undertakes to take the necessary steps, in accordancewith its constitutional processes and with the provisions of the presentCovenant, to adopt such legislative or other measures as may be necessaryto give effect to the rights recognized in the present Covenant.3. Each State Party to thepresent Covenant undertakes:(a) To ensure that any personwhose rights or freedoms as herein recognized are violated shall have aneffective remedy, notwithstanding that the violation has been committedby persons acting in an official capacity;(b) To ensure that any personclaiming such a remedy shall have his right thereto determined by competentjudicial, administrative or legislative authorities, or by any other competentauthority provided for by the legal system of the State, and to developthe possibilities of judicial remedy;(c) To ensure that the competentauthorities shall enforce such remedies when granted.Article 3The States Parties to thepresent Covenant undertake to ensure the equal right of men and women tothe enjoyment of all civil and political rights set forth in the presentCovenantArticle 41 . In time of public emergencywhich threatens the life of the nation and the existence of which is officiallyproclaimed, the States Parties to the present Covenant may take measuresderogating from their obligations under the present Covenant to the extentstrictly required by the exigencies of the situation, provided that suchmeasures are not inconsistent with their other obligations under internationallaw and do not involve discrimination solely on the ground of race, color,sex, language, religion or social origin.2. No derogation from articles6, 7, 8 (paragraphs I and 2), 11, 15, 16 and 18 may be made under thisprovision.3. Any State Party to thepresent Covenant availing itself of the right of derogation shall immediatelyinform the other States Parties to the present Covenant, through the intermediaryof the Secretary-General of the United Nations, of the provisions fromwhich it has derogated and of the reasons by which it was actuated. A furthercommunication shall be made, through the same intermediary, on the dateon which it terminates such derogation.Article 51. Nothing in the presentCovenant may be interpreted as implying for any State, group or personany right to engage in any activity or perform any act aimed at the destructionof any of the rights and freedoms recognized herein or at their limitationto a greater extent than is provided for in the present Covenant.2. There shall be no restrictionupon or derogation from any of the fundamental human rights recognizedor existing in anyState Party to the present Covenant pursuant to law,conventions, regulations or custom on the pretext that the present Covenantdoes not recognize such rights or that it recognizes them to a lesser extent.PART IIIArticle 61. Every human being hasthe inherent right to life. This right shall be protected by law. No oneshall be arbitrarily deprived of his life.2. In countries which havenot abolished the death penalty, sentence of death may be imposed onlyfor the most serious crimes in accordance with the law in force at thetime of the commission of the crime and not contrary to the provisionsof the present Covenant and to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishmentof the Crime of Genocide. This penalty can only be carried out pursuantto a final judgement rendered by a competent court.3. When deprivation of lifeconstitutes the crime of genocide, it is understood that nothing in thisarticle shall authorize any State Party to the present Covenant to derogatein any way from any obligation assumed under the provisions of the Conventionon the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.4. Anyone sentenced to deathshall have the right to seek pardon or commutation of the sentence. Amnesty,pardon or commutation of the sentence of death may be granted in all cases.5. Sentence of death shallnot be imposed for crimes committed by persons below eighteen years ofage and shall not be carried out on pregnant women.6. Nothing in this articleshall be invoked to delay or to prevent the abolition of capital punishmentby any State Party to the present Covenant.Article 7No one shall be subjectedto torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Inparticular, no one shall be subjected without his free consent to medicalor scientific experimentation.Article 81. No one shall be held inslavery; slavery and the slave-trade in all their forms shall be prohibited.2. No one shall be held inservitude.3. (a) No one shall be requiredto perform forced or compulsory labor;(b) Paragraph 3 (a) shallnot be held to preclude, in countries where imprisonment with hard labormay be imposed as a punishment for a crime, the performance of hard laborin pursuance of a sentence to such punishment by a competent court;(c) For the purpose of thisparagraph the term "forced or compulsory labor" shall not include:(I) Any work or service,not referred to in subparagraph (b), normally required of a person whois under detention in consequence of a lawful order of a court, or of aperson during conditional release from such detention;(ii) Any service of a militarycharacter and, in countries where conscientious objection is recognized,any national service required by law of conscientious objectors;(iii) Any service exactedin cases of emergency or calamity threatening the life or well-being ofthe community;(iv) Any work or servicewhich forms part of normal civil obligations.Article 91. Everyone has the rightto liberty and security of person. No one shall be subjected to arbitraryarrest or detention. No one shall be deprived of his liberty except onsuch grounds and in accordance with such procedure as are established bylaw.2. Anyone who is arrestedshall be informed, at the time of arrest, of the reasons for his arrestand shall be promptly informed of any charges against him.3. Anyone arrested or detainedon a criminal charge shall be brought promptly before a judge or otherofficer authorized by law to exercise judicial power and shall be entitledto trial within a reasonable time or to release. It shall not be the generalrule that persons awaiting trial shall be detained in custody, but releasemay be subject to guarantees to appear for trial, at any other stage ofthe judicial proceedings, and, should occasion arise, for execution ofthe judgement.4. Anyone who is deprivedof his liberty by arrest or detention shall be entitled to take proceedingsbefore a court, in order that court may decide without delay on the lawfulnessof his detention and order his release if the detention is not lawful.5. Anyone who has been thevictim of unlawful arrest or detention shall have an enforceable rightto compensation.Article 101. All persons deprived oftheir liberty shall be treated with humanity and with respect for the inherentdignity of the human person.2. (a) Accused persons shall,save in exceptional circumstances, be segregated from convicted personsand shall be subject to separate treatment appropriate to their statusas unconvicted persons;(b) Accused juvenile personsshall be separated from adults and brought as speedily as possible foradjudication.3. The penitentiary systemshall comprise treatment of prisoners the essential aim of which shallbe their reformation and social rehabilitation. Juvenile offenders shallbe segregated from adults and be accorded treatment appropriate to theirage and legal status.Article 11No one shall be imprisonedmerely on the ground of inability to fulfil a contractual obligation.Article 121. Everyone lawfully withinthe territory of a State shall, within that territory, have the right toliberty of movement and freedom to choose his residence.2. Everyone shall be freeto leave any country, including his own.3. The above-mentioned rightsshall not be subject to any restrictions except those which are providedby law, are necessary to protect national security, public order (ordrepublic), public health or morals or the rights and freedoms of others,and are consistent withthe other rights recognized in the present Covenant.4. No one shall be arbitrarilydeprived of the right to enter his own country.Article 13An alien lawfully in theterritory of a State Party to the present Covenant may be expelled therefromonly in pursuance of a decision reached in accordance with law and shall,except where compelling reasons of national security otherwise require,be allowed to submit the reasons against his expulsion and to have hiscase reviewed by, and be represented for the purpose before, the competentauthority or a person or persons especially designated by the competentauthority.Article 141. All persons shall be equalbefore the courts and tribunals. In the determination of any criminal chargeagainst him, or of his rights and obligations in a suit at law, everyoneshall be entitled to a fair and public hearing by a competent, independentand impartial tribunal established by law. The press and the public maybe excluded from all or part of a trial for reasons of morals, public order(ordre public) or national security in a democratic society, or when theinterest of the private lives of the parties so requires, or to the extentstrictly necessary in the opinion of the court in special circumstanceswhere publicity would prejudice the interests of justice; but any judgementrendered in a criminal case or in a suit at law shall be made public exceptwhere the interest of juvenile persons otherwise requires or the proceedingsconcern matrimonial disputes or the guardianship of children.2. Everyone charged witha criminal offense shall have the right to be presumed innocent until provedguilty according to law.3. In the determination ofany criminal charge against him, everyone shall be entitled to the followingminimum guarantees, in full equality:(a) To be informed promptlyand in detail in a language which he understands of the nature and causeof the charge against him;(b) To have adequate timeand facilities for the preparation of his defense and to communicate withcounsel of his own choosing;(c) To be tried without unduedelay;(d) To be tried in his presence,and to defend himself in person or through legal assistance of his ownchoosing; to be informed, if he does not have legal assistance, of thisright; and to have legal assistance assigned to him, in any case wherethe interests of justice so require, and without payment by him in anysuch case if he does not have sufficient means to pay for it;(e) To examine, or have examined,the witnesses against him and to obtain the attendance and examinationof witnesses on his behalf under the same conditions as witnesses againsthim;(f) To have the free assistanceof an interpreter if he cannot understand or speak the language used incourt;(g) Not to be compelled totestify against himself or to confess guilt.4. In the case of juvenilepersons, the procedure shall be such as will take account of their ageand the desirability of promoting their rehabilitation.5. Everyone convicted ofa crime shall have the right to his conviction and sentence being reviewedby a higher tribunal according to law.6. When a person has by afinal decision been convicted of a criminal offense and when subsequentlyhis conviction has been reversed or he has been pardoned on the groundthat a new or newly discovered fact shows conclusively that there has beena miscarriage of justice, the person who has suffered punishment as a resultof such conviction shall be compensated according to law, unless it isproved that the non-disclosure of the unknown fact in time is wholly orpartly attributable to him.7. No one shall be liableto be tried or punished again for an offense for which he has already beenfinally convicted or acquitted in accordance with the law and penal procedureof each country.Article 151 . No one shall be heldguilty of any criminal offense on account of any act or omission whichdid not constitute a criminal offense, under national or internationallaw, at the time when it was committed. Nor shall a heavier penalty beimposed than the one that was applicable at the time when the criminaloffense was committed. If, subsequent to the commission of the offense,provision is made by law for the imposition of the lighter penalty, theoffender shall benefit thereby.2. Nothing in this articleshall prejudice the trial and punishment of any person for any act or omissionwhich, at the time when it was committed, was criminal according to thegeneral principles of law recognized by the community of nations.Article 16Everyone shall have the rightto recognition everywhere as a person before the law.Article 171. No one shall be subjectedto arbitrary or unlawful interference with his privacy, family, home orcorrespondence, nor to unlawful attacks on his honor and reputation.2. Everyone has the rightto the protection of the law against such interference or attacks.Article 181. Everyone shall have theright to freedom of thought, conscience and religion. This right shallinclude freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice,and freedom, either individually or in community with others and in publicor private, to manifest his religion or belief in worship, observance,practice and teaching.2. No one shall be subjectto coercion which would impair his freedom to have or to adopt a religionor belief of his choice.3. Freedom to manifest one'sreligion or beliefs may be subject only to such limitations as are prescribedby law and are necessary to protect public safety, order, health, or moralsor the fundamental rights and freedoms of others.4. The States Parties tothe present Covenant undertake to have respect for the liberty of parentsand, when applicable, legal guardiansto ensure the religious and moraleducation of their children in conformity with their own convictions.Article 191. Everyone shall have theright to hold opinions without interference.2. Everyone shall have theright to freedom of expression; this right shall include freedom to seek,receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers,either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or through anyother media of his choice.3. The exercise of the rightsprovided for in paragraph 2 of this article carries with it special dutiesand responsibilities. It may therefore be subject to certain restrictions,but these shall only be such as are provided by law and are necessary:(a) For respect of the rightsor reputations of others;(b) For the protection ofnational security or of public order (ordre public), or of public healthor morals.Article 201. Any propaganda for warshall be prohibited by law.2. Any advocacy of national,racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination,hostility or violence shall be prohibited by law.Article 21The right of peaceful assemblyshall be recognized. No restrictions may be placed on the exercise of thisright other than those imposed in conformity with the law andwhich arenecessary in a democratic society in the interests of national securityor public safety, public order (ordre public), the protection of publichealth or morals or the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.Article 221. Everyone shall have theright to freedom of association with others, including the right to formand join trade unions for the protection of his interests.2. No restrictions may beplaced on the exercise of this right other than those which are prescribedby law and which are necessary in a democratic society in the interestsof national security or public safety, public order (ordre public), theprotection of public health or morals or the protection of the rights andfreedoms of others. This article shall not prevent the imposition of lawfulrestrictions on members of the armed forces and of the police in theirexercise of this right.3. Nothing in this articleshall authorize States Parties to the International Labor OrganizationConvention of 1948 concerning Freedom of Association and Protection ofthe Right to Organize to take legislative measures which would prejudice,or to apply the law in such a manner as to prejudice, the guarantees providedfor in that Convention.Article 231. The family is the naturaland fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection bysociety and the State.2. The right of men and womenof marriageable age to marry and to found a family shall be recognized.3. No marriage shall be enteredinto without the free and full consent of the intending spouses.4. States Parties to thepresent Covenant shall take appropriate steps to ensure equality of rightsand responsibilities of spouses as to marriage, during marriage and atits dissolution. In the case of dissolution, provision shall be made forthe necessary protection of any children.Article 241. Every child shall have,without any discrimination as to race, color, sex, language, religion,national or social origin, property or birth, the right to such measuresof protection as are required by his status as a minor, on the part ofhis family, society and the State.2. Every child shall be registeredimmediately after birth and shall have a name.3. Every child has the rightto acquire a nationality.Article 25Every citizen shall havethe right and the opportunity, without any of the distinctions mentionedin article 2 and without unreasonable restrictions:(a) To take part in the conductof public affairs, directly or through freely chosen representatives;(b) To vote and to be electedat genuine periodic elections which shall be by universal and equal suffrageand shall be held by secret ballot, guaranteeing the free expression ofthe will of the electors;(c) To have access, on generalterms of equality, to public service in his country.Article 26All persons are equal beforethe law and are entitled without any discrimination to the equal protectionof the law. In this respect, the law shall prohibit any discriminationand guarantee to all persons equal and effective protection against discriminationon any ground such as race, color, sex, language, religion, political orother opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status.Article 27In those States in whichethnic, religious or linguistic minorities exist, persons belonging tosuch minorities shall not be denied the right, in community with the othermembers of their group, to enjoy their own culture, to profess and practicetheir own religion, or to use their own language.PART IVArticle 281. There shall be establisheda Human Rights Committee (hereafter referred to in the present Covenantas the Committee). It shall consist of eighteen members and shall carryout the functionshereinafter provided.2. The Committee shall becomposed of nationals of the States Parties to the present Covenant whoshall be persons of high moral character and recognized competence in thefield of human rights, consideration being given to the usefulness of theparticipation of some persons having legal experience.3. The members of the Committeeshall be elected and shall serve in their personal capacity.Article 291 . The members of the Committeeshall be elected by secret ballot from a list of persons possessing thequalifications prescribed in article 28 and nominated for the purpose bythe States Parties to the present Covenant.2. Each State Party to thepresent Covenant may nominate not more than two persons. These personsshall be nationals of the nominating State.3. A person shall be eligiblefor renomination.Article 301. The initial election shallbe held no later than six months after the date of the entry into forceof the present Covenant.2. At least four months beforethe date of each election to the Committee, other than an election to filla vacancy declared in accordance with article 34, the Secretary-Generalof the United Nations shall address a written invitation to the StatesParties to the present Covenant to submit their nominations for membershipof the Committee within three months.3. The Secretary-Generalof the United Nations shall prepare a list in alphabetical order of allthe persons thus nominated, with an indication of the States Parties whichhave nominated them, and shall submit it to the States Parties to the presentCovenant no later than one month before the date of each election.4. Elections of the membersof the Committee shall be held at a meeting of the States Parties to thepresent Covenant convened by the Secretary General of theUnited Nationsat the Headquarters of the United Nations. At that meeting, for which twothirds of the States Parties to the present Covenant shall constitute aquorum, the persons elected to the Committee shall be those nominees whoobtain the largest number of votes and an absolute majority of the votesof the representatives of States Parties present and voting.Article 311. The Committee may notinclude more than one national of the same State.2. In the election of theCommittee, consideration shall be given to equitable geographical distributionof membership and to the representation of the different forms of civilizationand of the principal legal systems.Article 321. The members of the Committeeshall be elected for a term of four years. They shall be eligible for re-electionif renominated. However, the terms of nine of the members elected at thefirst election shall expire at the end of two years; immediately afterthe first election, the names of these nine members shall be chosen bylot by the Chairman of the meeting referred to in article 30, paragraph4.2. Elections at the expiryof office shall be held in accordance with the preceding articles of thispart of the present Covenant.Article 331. If, in the unanimous opinionof the other members, a member of the Committee has ceased to carry outhis functions for any cause other than absence of a temporary character,the Chairman of the Committee shall notify the Secretary-General of theUnitedNations, who shall then declare the seat of that member to be vacant.2. In the event of the deathor the resignation of a member of the Committee, the Chairman shall immediatelynotify the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who shall declare theseat vacant from the date of death or the date on which the resignationtakes effect.Article 341. When a vacancy is declaredin accordance with article 33 and if the term of office of the member tobe replaced does not expire within six months of the declaration of thevacancy, the Secretary-General of the United Nations shall notify eachof the States Parties to the present Covenant, which may within two monthssubmit nominations in accordance with article 29 for the purpose of fillingthe vacancy.2. The Secretary-Generalof the United Nations shall prepare a list in alphabetical order of thepersons thus nominated and shall submit it to the States Parties to thepresent Covenant. The election to fill the vacancy shall then take placein accordance with the relevant provisions of this part of the presentCovenant.3. A member of the Committeeelected to fill a vacancy declared in accordance with article 33 shallhold office for the remainder of the term of the member who vacated theseat on the Committee under the provisions of that article.Article 35The members of the Committeeshall, with the approval of the General Assembly of the United Nations,receive emoluments from United Nations resources on such terms andconditionsas the General Assembly may decide, having regard to the importance ofthe Committee's responsibilities.Article 36The Secretary-General ofthe United Nations shall provide the necessary staff and facilities forthe effective performance of the functions of the Committee under the presentCovenant.Article 371. The Secretary-Generalof the United Nations shall convene the initial meeting of the Committeeat the Headquarters of the United Nations.2. After its initial meeting,the Committee shall meet at such times as shall be provided in its rulesof procedure.3. The Committee shall normallymeet at the Headquarters of the United Nations or at the United NationsOffice at Geneva.Article 38Every member of the Committeeshall, before taking up his duties, make a solemn declaration in open committeethat he will perform his functions impartially and conscientiously.Article 391. The Committee shall electits officers for a term of two years. They may be re-elected.2. The Committee shall establishits own rules of procedure, but these rules shall provide, inter alia,that:(a) Twelve members shallconstitute a quorum;(b) Decisions of the Committeeshall be made by a majority vote of the members present.Article 401. The States Parties tothe present Covenant undertake to submit reports on the measures they haveadopted which give effect to the rights recognized herein and on the progressmade in the enjoyment of those rights:(a) Within one year of theentry into force of the present Covenant for the States Parties concerned;(b) Thereafter whenever theCommittee so requests.2. All reports shall be submittedto the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who shall transmit themto the Committee for consideration. Reports shall indicate the factorsand difficulties, if any, affecting the implementation of the present Covenant.3. The Secretary-Generalof the United Nations may, after consultation with the Committee, transmitto the specialized agencies concerned copies of such parts of the reportsas may fall within their field of competence.4. The Committee shall studythe reports submitted by the States Parties to the present Covenant. Itshall transmit its reports, and such general comments as it may considerappropriate, to the States Parties. The Committee may also transmit tothe Economic and Social Council these comments along with the copies ofthe reports it has received from States Parties to the present Covenant.5. The States Parties tothe present Covenant may submit to the Committee observations on any commentsthat may be made in accordance with paragraph 4 of this article.Article 411. A State Party to the presentCovenant may at any time declare under this article that it recognizesthe competence of the Committee to receive and consider communicationsto the effect that a State Party claims that another State Party is notfulfilling its obligations under the present Covenant. Communications underthis article may be received and considered only if submitted by a StateParty which has made a declaration recognizing in regard to itself thecompetence of the Committee. No communication shall be received by theCommittee if it concerns a State Party which has not made such a declaration.Communications received under this article shall be dealt with in accordancewith the following procedure:(a) If a State Party to thepresent Covenant considers that another State Party is not giving effectto the provisions of the present Covenant, it may, by written communication,bring the matter to the attention of that State Party. Within three monthsafter the receipt of the communication the receiving State shall affordthe State which sent the communication an explanation, or any other statementin writing clarifying the matter which should include, to the extent possibleand pertinent, reference to domestic procedures and remedies taken, pending,or available in the matter;(b) If the matter is notadjusted to the satisfaction of both States Parties concerned within sixmonths after the receipt by the receiving State of the initial communication,eitherState shall have the right to refer the matter to the Committee, by noticegiven to the Committee and to the other State;(c) The Committee shall dealwith a matter referred to it only after it has ascertained that all availabledomestic remedies have been invoked and exhausted in the matter, in conformitywith the generally recognized principles of international law. This shallnot be the rule where the application of the remedies is unreasonably prolonged;(d) The Committee shall holdclosed meetings when examining communications under this article;(e) Subject to the provisionsof subparagraph (c), the Committee shall make available its good officesto the States Parties concerned with a view to a friendly solution of thematter on the basis of respect for human rights and fundamental freedomsas recognized in the present Covenant;(f) In any matter referredto it, the Committee may call upon the States Parties concerned, referredto in subparagraph (b), to supply any relevant information;(g) The States Parties concerned,referred to in subparagraph (b), shall have the right to be representedwhen the matter is being considered in the Committee and to make submissionsorally and/or in writing;(h) The Committee shall,within twelve months after the date of receipt of notice under subparagraph(b), submit a report:(I) If a solution withinthe terms of subparagraph (e) is reached, the Committee shall confine itsreport to a brief statement of the facts and of the solution reached;(ii) If a solution withinthe terms of subparagraph (e) is not reached, the Committee shall confineits report to a brief statement of the facts; the written submissions andrecord of the oral submissions made by the States Parties concerned shallbe attached to the report.In every matter, the reportshall be communicated to the States Parties concerned.2. The provisions of thisarticle shall come into force when ten States Parties to the present Covenanthave made declarations under paragraph I of this article. Such declarationsshall be deposited by the States Parties with the Secretary-General ofthe United Nations, who shall transmit copies thereof to the other StatesParties. A declaration may be withdrawn at any time by notification tothe Secretary-General. Such a withdrawal shall not prejudice the considerationof any matter which is the subject of a communication already transmittedunder this article; no further communication by any State Party shall bereceived after the notification of withdrawal of the declaration has beenreceived by the Secretary-General, unless the State Party concerned hasmade a new declaration.Article 421. (a) If a matter referredto the Committee in accordance with article 41 is not resolved to the satisfactionof the States Parties concerned, the Committee may, with the prior consentof the States Parties concerned, appoint an ad hoc Conciliation Commission(hereinafter referred to as the Commission). The good offices of the Commissionshall be made available to the States Parties concerned with a view toan amicablesolution of the matter on the basis of respect for the presentCovenant;(b) The Commission shallconsist of five persons acceptable to the States Parties concerned. Ifthe States Parties concerned fail to reach agreement within three monthson all or part of the composition of the Commission, the members of theCommission concerning whom no agreement has been reached shall be electedby secret ballot by a two-thirds majority vote of the Committee from amongits members.2. The members of the Commissionshall serve in their personal capacity. They shall not be nationals ofthe States Parties concerned, or of a State not Party to the present Covenant,or of a State Party which has not made a declaration under article 41.3. The Commission shall electits own Chairman and adopt its own rules of procedure.4. The meetings of the Commissionshall normally be held at the Headquarters of the United Nations or atthe United Nations Office at Geneva. However, they may be held at suchother convenient places as the Commission may determine in consultationwith the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the States Partiesconcerned.5. The secretariat providedin accordance with article 36 shall also service the commissions appointedunder this article.6. The information receivedand collated by the Committee shall be made available to the Commissionand the Commission may call upon the States Parties concerned to supplyany other relevant information.7. When the Commission hasfully considered the matter, but in any event not later than twelve monthsafter having been seized of the matter, it shall submit to the Chairmanof the Committee a report for communication to the States Parties concerned:(a) If the Commission isunable to complete its consideration of the matter within twelve months,it shall confine its report to a brief statement of the status of its considerationof the matter;(b) If an amicable solutionto the matter on tie basis of respect for human rights as recognized inthe present Covenant is reached, the Commission shall confine its reportto a brief statement of the facts and of the solution reached;(c) If a solution withinthe terms of subparagraph (b) is not reached, the Commission's report shallembody its findings on all questions of fact relevant to the issues betweenthe States Parties concerned, and its views on the possibilities of anamicable solution of the matter. This report shall also contain the writtensubmissions and a record of the oral submissions made by the States Partiesconcerned;(d) If the Commission's reportis submitted under subparagraph (c), the States Parties concerned shall,within three months of the receipt of the report, notify the Chairman ofthe Committee whether or not they accept the contents of the report ofthe Commission.8. The provisions of thisarticle are without prejudice to the responsibilities of the Committeeunder article 41.9. The States Parties concernedshall share equally all the expenses of the members of the Commission inaccordance with estimates to be provided by the Secretary-General of theUnited Nations.10. The Secretary-Generalof the United Nations shall be empowered to pay the expenses of the membersof the Commission, if necessary, before reimbursement by the States Partiesconcerned, in accordance with paragraph 9 of this article.Article 43The members of the Committee,and of the ad hoc conciliation commissions which may be appointed underarticle 42, shall be entitled to the facilities, privileges and immunitiesof experts on mission for the United Nations as laid down in the relevantsections of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the UnitedNations.Article 44The provisions for the implementationof the present Covenant shall apply without prejudice to the proceduresprescribed in the field of human rights by or under the constituent instrumentsand the conventions of the United Nations and of the specialized agenciesand shall not prevent the States Parties to the present Covenant from havingrecourse to other procedures for settling a dispute in accordance withgeneral or special international agreements in force between them.Article 45The Committee shall submitto the General Assembly of the United Nations, through the Economic andSocial Council, an annual report on its activities.PART VArticle 46Nothing in the present Covenantshall be interpreted as impairing the provisions of the Charter of theUnited Nations and of the constitutions of the specialized agencies whichdefine the respective responsibilities of the various organs of the UnitedNations and of the specialized agencies in regard to the matters dealtwith in the present Covenant.Article 47Nothing in the present Covenantshall be interpreted as impairing the inherent right of all peoples toenjoy and utilize fully and freely their natural wealth and resources.PART VIArticle 481. The present Covenant isopen for signature by any State Member of the United Nations or memberof any of its specialized agencies, by any State Party to the Statute ofthe International Court of Justice, and by any other State which has beeninvited by the General Assembly of the United Nations to become a Partyto the present Covenant.2. The present Covenant issubject to ratification. Instruments of ratification shall be depositedwith the Secretary-General of the United Nations.3. The present Covenant shallbe open to accession by any State referred to in paragraph 1 of this article.4. Accession shall be effectedby the deposit of an instrument of accession with the Secretary-Generalof the United Nations.5. The Secretary-Generalof the United Nations shall inform all States which havesigned this Covenantor acceded to it of the deposit of each instrument of ratification or accession.Article 491. The present Covenant shallenter into force three months after the date of the deposit with the Secretary-Generalof the United Nations of the thirty-fifth instrument of ratification orinstrument of accession.2. For each State ratifyingthe present Covenant or acceding to it after the deposit of the thirty-fifthinstrument of ratification or instrument of accession, the present Covenantshall enter into force three months after the date of the deposit of itsown instrument of ratification or instrument of accession.Article 50The provisions of the presentCovenant shall extend to all parts of federal States without any limitationsor exceptions.Article 511. Any State Party to thepresent Covenant may propose an amendment and file it with the Secretary-Generalof the United Nations. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shallthereupon communicate any proposed amendments to the States Parties tothe present Covenant with a request that they notify him whether they favora conference of States Parties for the purpose of considering and votingupon the proposals. In the event that at least one third of the StatesParties favors such a conference, the Secretary-General shall convene theconference under the auspices of the United Nations. Any amendment adoptedby a majority of the States Parties present and voting at the conferenceshall be submitted tothe General Assembly of the United Nations for approval.2. Amendments shall comeinto force when they have been approved by the General Assembly of theUnited Nations and accepted by a two-thirds majority of the States Partiesto the present Covenant in accordance with their respective constitutionalprocesses.3. When amendments come intoforce, they shall be binding on those States Parties which have acceptedthem, other States Parties still being bound by the provisions of the presentCovenant and any earlier amendment which they have accepted.Article 52Irrespective of the notificationsmade under article 48, paragraph 5, the Secretary-General of the UnitedNations shall inform all States referred to in paragraph I of the samearticle of the following particulars:(a) Signatures, ratificationsand accessions under article 48;(b) The date of the entryinto force of the present Covenant under article 49 and the date of theentry into force of any amendments under article 51.Article 531. The present Covenant,of which the Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equallyauthentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the United Nations.2. The Secretary-Generalof the United Nations shall transmit certified copies of thepresent Covenantto all States referred to in article 48.AppendixB:OptionalProtocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political RightsAdopted and opened for signature, ratification,and accession by United Nations General Assembly resolution 2200 A (XXI)on 16 December 1966. Entered into force on 23 March 1976 in accordancewith article 19.The States Parties to thepresent Protocol,Considering that in orderfurther to achieve the purposes of the International Covenant on Civiland Political Rights (hereinafter referred to as the Covenant) and theimplementation of its provisions it would be appropriate to enable theHuman Rights Committee set up in part IV of the Covenant (hereinafter referredto as the Committee) to receive and consider, as provided in the presentProtocol, communications from individuals claiming to be victims of violationsof any of the rights set forth in the Covenant.Have agreed as follows:Article IA State Party to the Covenantthat becomes a Party to the present Protocol recognizes the competenceof the Committee to receive and consider communications from individualssubject to its jurisdiction who claim to be victims of a violation by thatState Party of any of the rights set forth in the Covenant. No communicationshall be received by the Committee if it concerns a State Party to theCovenant which is not a Party to the present Protocol.Article 2Subject to the provisionsof article 1, individuals who claim that any of their rights enumeratedin the Covenant have beenviolated and who have exhausted all availabledomestic remedies may submit a written communication to the Committee forconsideration.Article 3The Committee shall considerinadmissible any communication under the present Protocol which is anonymous,or which it considers to be an abuse of the right of submission of suchcommunications or to be incompatible with the provisions of the Covenant.Article 41. Subject to the provisionsof article 3, the Committee shall bring any communications submitted toit under the present Protocol to the attention of the State Party to thepresent Protocol alleged to be violating any provision of the Covenant.2. Within six months, thereceiving State shall submit to the Committee written explanations or statementsclarifying the matter and the remedy, if any, that may have been takenby that State.Article 51. The Committee shall considercommunications received under the present Protocol in the light of allwritten information made available to it by the individual and by the StateParty concerned.2. The Committee shall notconsider any communication from an individual unless it has ascertainedthat:(a) The same matter is notbeing examined under another procedure of international investigation orsettlement;(b) The individual has exhaustedall available domestic remedies. This shall not be the rule where the applicationof the remedies is unreasonably prolonged.3. The Committee shall holdclosed meetings when examining communications under the present Protocol.4. The Committee shall forwardits views to the State Party concerned and to the individual.Article 6The Committee shall includein its annual report under article 45 of the Covenant a summary of itsactivities under the present Protocol.Article 7Pending the achievement ofthe objectives of resolution 1514(XV) adopted by the General Assembly ofthe United Nations on 14 December 1960 concerning the Declaration on theGranting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the provisionsof the present Protocol shall in no way limit the right of petition grantedto these peoples by the Charter of the United Nations and other internationalconventions and instruments under the United Nations and its specializedagencies.Article 81. The present Protocol isopen for signature by any State which has signed the Covenant.2. The present Protocol issubject to ratification by any State which has ratified or acceded to theCovenant. Instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the Secretary-Generalof the United Nations.3. The present Protocol shallbe open to accession by any State which has ratified or acceded to theCovenant.4. Accession shall be effectedby the deposit of an instrument of accession with the Secretary-Generalof the United Nations.5. The Secretary-Generalof the United Nations shall inform all States which have signed the presentProtocol or acceded to it of the deposit of each instrument of ratificationor accession.Article 91. Subject to the entry intoforce of the Covenant, the present Protocol shall enter into force threemonths after the date of the deposit with the Secretary-General of theUnited Nations of the tenth instrument of ratification or instrument ofaccession.2. For each State ratifyingthe present Protocol or acceding to it after the deposit of the tenth instrumentof ratification or instrument of accession, the present Protocol shallenter into force three months after the date of the deposit of its owninstrument of ratification or instrument of accession.Article 10The provisions of the presentProtocol shall extend to all parts of federal States without any limitationsor exceptions.Article 111. Any State Party to thepresent Protocol may propose an amendment and file it withthe Secretary-Generalof the United Nations. The Secretary-General shall thereupon communicateany proposed amendments to the States Parties to the present Protocol witha request that they notify him whether they favor a conference of StatesParties for the purpose of considering and voting upon the proposal. Inthe event that at least one third of the States Parties favors such a conference,the Secretary-General shall convene the conference under the auspices ofthe United Nations. Any amendment adopted by a majority of the States Partiespresent and voting at the conference shall be submitted to the GeneralAssembly of the United Nations for approval.2. Amendments shall comeinto force when they have been approved by the General Assembly of theUnited Nations and accepted by a two-thirds majority of the States Partiesto the present Protocol in accordance with their respective constitutionalprocesses.3. When amendments come intoforce, they shall be binding on those States Parties which have acceptedthem, other States Parties still being bound by the provisions of the presentProtocol and any earlier amendment which they have accepted.Article 121. Any State Party may denouncethe present Protocol at any time by written notification addressed to theSecretary-General of the United Nations. Denunciation shall takeeffectthree months after the date of receipt of the notification by the Secretary-General.2. Denunciation shall bewithout prejudice to the continued application of the provisions of thepresent Protocol to any communication submitted under article 2 beforethe effective date of denunciation.Article 13Irrespective of the notificationsmade under article 8, paragraph 5, of the present Protocol, the Secretary-Generalof the United Nations shall inform all States referred to in article 48,paragraph I, of the Covenant of the following particulars:(a) Signatures, ratificationsand accessions under article 8;(b) The date of the entryinto force of the present Protocol under article 9 and the date of theentry into force of any amendments under article 11;(c) Denunciations under article12.Article 141. The present Protocol,of which the Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equallyauthentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the United Nations.2. The Secretary-Generalof the United Nations shall transmit certified copies of the present Protocolto all States referred to in article 48 of the Covenant.AppendixC:Second OptionalProtocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aimingat the abolition of the death penaltyAdopted and opened for signature by theUnited Nations General Assembly on 15 December 1989. Entered into forceon 11 July 1991 in accordance with article 8 (1).The States Parties to thepresent Protocol,Believing that abolitionof the death penalty contributes to enhancement of human dignity and progressivedevelopment of human rights,Recalling article 3 of theUniversal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted on 10 December 1948, andarticle 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,adopted on 16 December 1966,Noting that article 6 ofthe International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights refers to abolitionof the death penalty in terms that strongly suggest that abolition is desirable,Convinced that all measuresof abolition of the death penalty should be considered as progress in theenjoyment of the right to life,Desirous to undertake herebyan international commitment to abolish the death penalty,Have agreed as follows:Article 11. No one within the jurisdictionof a State Party to the present Protocol shall be executed.2. Each State Party shalltake all necessary measures to abolish the death penalty within its jurisdiction.Article 21. No reservation is admissibleto the present Protocol, except for a reservation made at the time of ratificationor accession that provides for the application of the death penalty intime of war pursuant to a conviction for a most serious crime of a militarynature committed during wartime.2. The State Party makingsuch a reservation shall at the time of ratification or accession communicateto the Secretary-General of the United Nations the relevant provisionsof its national legislation applicable during wartime.3. The State Party havingmade such a reservation shall notify the Secretary-General of the UnitedNations of any beginning or ending of a state of war applicable to itsterritory.Article 3The States Parties to thepresent Protocol shall include in the reports they submit to the HumanRights Committee, in accordance with article 40 of the Covenant, informationon the measures that they have adopted to give effect to the present Protocol.Article 4With respect to the StatesParties to the Covenant that have made a declaration under article 41,the competence of the Human Rights Committee to receive and consider communicationswhen a State Party claims that another State Party is not fulfilling itsobligations shall extend to the provisions of the present Protocol, unlessthe State Party concerned has made a statement to the contrary at the momentof ratification or accession.Article 5With respect to the StatesParties to the first Optional Protocol to the International Covenant onCivil and Political Rights adopted on 16 December 1966, the competenceof the Human Rights Committee to receive and consider communications fromindividuals subject to its jurisdiction shall extend to the provisionsof the present Protocol, unless the State Party concerned has made a statementto the contrary at the moment of ratification or accession.Article 61. The provisions of thepresent Protocol shall apply as additional provisions to the Covenant.2. Without prejudice to thepossibility of a reservation under article 2 of the present Protocol, theright guaranteed in article 1, paragraph 1, of the present Protocol shallnot be subject to any derogation under article 4 of the Covenant.Article 71. The present Protocol isopen for signature by any State that has signed the Covenant. 2. The presentProtocol is subject to ratification by any State that has ratified theCovenant or acceded to it. Instruments of ratification shallbe depositedwith the Secretary-General of the United Nations.3. The present Protocol shallbe open to accession by any State that has ratified the Covenant or accededto it.4. Accession shall be effectedby the deposit of an instrument of accession with the Secretary-Generalof the United Nations.5. The Secretary-Generalof the United Nations shall inform all States that have signed the presentProtocol or acceded to it of the deposit of each instrument of ratificationor accession.Article 81. The present Protocol shallenter into force three months after the date of the deposit with the Secretary-Generalof the United Nations of the tenth instrument of ratification or accession.2. For each State ratifyingthe present Protocol or acceding to it after the deposit of the tenth instrumentof ratification or accession, the present Protocol shall enter into forcethree months after the date of the deposit of its own instrument of ratificationor accession.Article 9The provisions of the presentProtocol shall extend to all parts of federal States without any limitationsor exceptions.Article 10The Secretary-General ofthe United Nations shall inform all States referred to in article 48, paragraph1, of the Covenant of the following particulars:(a) Reservations, communicationsand notifications under article 2 of the present Protocol;(b) Statements made underarticles 4 or 5 of the present Protocol;(c) Signatures, ratificationsand accessions under article 7 of the present Protocol:(d) The date of the entryinto force of the present Protocol under article 8 thereof.Article 111. The present Protocol,of which the Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish textsare equally authentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the UnitedNations.2. The Secretary-Generalof the United Nations shall transmit certified copies of the present Protocolto all States referred to in article 48 of the Covenant.AppendixD:StandardMinimum Rules for the Treatment of PrisonersAdopted by the First United Nations Congresson the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders on 30 August1955, and approved by the Economic and Social Council by its resolutions663C (XXIV) of 31 July 1957 and 2076 (LXII) of 13 May 1977.Preliminary Observations1. The following rules arenot intended to describe in detail a model system of penal institutions.They seek only, on the basis of the general consensus of contemporary thoughtand the essential elements of the most adequate systems of today, to setout what is generally accepted as being good principle and practice inthe treatment of prisoners and the management of institutions.2. In view of the great varietyof legal, social, economic and geographical conditions of the world, itis evident that not all of the rules are capable of application in allplaces and at all times. They should, however, serve to stimulate a constantendeavor to overcome practical difficulties in the way of their application,in the knowledge that they represent, as a whole, the minimum conditionswhich are accepted as suitable by the United Nations.3. On the other hand, therules cover a field in which thought is constantly developing. They arenot intended to preclude experiment and practices, provided these are inharmony with the principles and seek to further the purposes which derivefrom the text of the rules as a whole. It will always be justifiable forthe central prison administration to authorize departures from the rulesin this spirit.4. (1) Part I of the rulescovers the general management of institutions, and is applicable to allcategories of prisoners, criminal or civil, untried or convicted, includingprisoners subject to "security measures" or corrective measures orderedby the judge.(2) Part II contains rulesapplicable only to the special categories dealt with in each section. Nevertheless,the rules under section A, applicable to prisoners under sentence, shallbe equally applicable to categories of prisoners dealt with in sectionsB, C and D, provided they do not conflict with the rules governing thosecategories and are for their benefit.5. (1) The rules do not seekto regulate the management of institutions set aside for young personssuch as Borstal institutions or correctional schools, but in general partI would be equally applicable in such institutions.(2) The category of youngprisoners should include at least all young persons who come within thejurisdiction of juvenile courts. As a rule, such young persons should notbe sentenced to imprisonment.PART IRULES OF GENERAL APPLICATIONBasic principle6. (1) The following rulesshall be applied impartially. There shall be no discriminationon groundsof race, color, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, nationalor social origin, property, birth or other status.(2) On the other hand, itis necessary to respect the religious beliefs and moral precepts of thegroup to which a prisoner belongs.Register7. (1) In every place wherepersons are imprisoned there shall be kept a bound registration book withnumbered pages in which shall be entered in respect of each prisoner received:(a) Information concerninghis identity;(b) The reasons for his commitmentand the authority therefor;(c) The day and hour of hisadmission and release.(2) No person shall be receivedin an institution without a valid commitment order of which the detailsshall have been previously entered in the register. Separation of categories8. The different categoriesof prisoners shall be kept in separate institutions or parts of institutionstaking account of their sex, age, criminal record, the legal reason fortheir detention and the necessities of their treatment. Thus,(a) Men and women shall sofar as possible be detained in separate institutions; in an institutionwhich receives both men and women the whole of the premises allocated towomen shall be entirely separate;(b) Untried prisoners shallbe kept separate from convicted prisoners;(c) Persons imprisoned fordebt and other civil prisoners shall be kept separate from persons imprisonedby reason of a criminal offense;(d) Young prisoners shallbe kept separate from adults.Accommodation9. (1) Where sleeping accommodationis in individual cells or rooms, each prisoner shall occupy by night acell or room by himself. If for special reasons, such as temporary overcrowding,it becomes necessary for the central prison administration to make an exceptionto this rule, it is not desirable to have two prisoners in a cell or room.(2) Where dormitories areused, they shall be occupied by prisoners carefully selected as being suitableto associate with one another in those conditions. There shall be regularsupervision by night, in keeping with the nature of the institution.10. All accommodation providedfor the use of prisoners and in particular all sleeping accommodation shallmeet all requirements of health, due regard being paid to climatic conditionsand particularly to cubic content of air, minimum floor space, lighting,heating and ventilation.11. In all places where prisonersare required to live or work,(a) The windows shall belarge enough to enable the prisoners to read or work by natural light,and shall be so constructed that they can allow the entrance of fresh airwhether or not there is artificial ventilation;(b) Artificial light shallbe provided sufficient for the prisoners to read or work without injuryto eyesight.12. The sanitary installationsshall be adequate to enable every prisoner to comply with the needs ofnature when necessary and in a clean and decent manner.13. Adequate bathing andshower installations shall be provided so that every prisoner may be enabledand required to have a bath or shower, at a temperature suitable to theclimate, as frequently as necessary for general hygiene according to seasonand geographical region, but at least once a week in a temperate climate.14. All pans of an institutionregularly used by prisoners shall be properly maintained and kept scrupulouslyclean at all times.Personal hygiene15. Prisoners shall be requiredto keep their persons clean, and to this end they shall be provided withwater and with such toilet articles as are necessary for health and cleanliness.16. In order that prisonersmay maintain a good appearance compatible with their self-respect, facilitiesshall be provided for the proper care of the hair and beard, and men shallbe enabled to shave regularly.Clothing and bedding17. ( I ) Every prisonerwho is not allowed to wear his own clothing shall be provided with an outfitof clothing suitable for the climate and adequate to keep him in good health.Such clothing shall in no manner be degrading or humiliating.(2) All clothing shall beclean and kept in proper condition. Underclothing shall be changed andwashed as often as necessary for the maintenance of hygiene.(3) In exceptional circumstances,whenever a prisoner is removed outside the institution for an authorizedpurpose, he shall be allowed to wear his own clothing or other inconspicuousclothing.18. If prisoners are allowedto wear their own clothing, arrangements shall be made on their admissionto the institution to ensure that it shall be clean and fit for use.19. Every prisoner shall,in accordance with local or national standards, be provided with a separatebed, and with separate and sufficient bedding which shall be clean whenissued, kept in good order and changed often enough to ensure its cleanliness.Food20. (1) Every prisoner shallbe provided by the administration at the usual hours with food of nutritionalvalue adequate for health and strength, of wholesome quality and well preparedand served.(2) Drinking water shallbe available to every prisoner whenever he needs it.Exercise and sport21. (1) Every prisoner whois not employed in outdoor work shall have at least one hour of suitableexercise in the open air daily if the weather permits.(2) Young prisoners, andothers of suitable age and physique, shall receive physical and recreationaltraining during the period of exercise. To this end space, installationsand equipment should be provided.Medical services22. (1) At every institutionthere shall be available the services of at least one qualified medicalofficer who should have some knowledge of psychiatry. The medical servicesshould be organized in close relationship to the general health administrationof the community or nation. They shall include a psychiatric service forthe diagnosis and, in proper cases, the treatment of states of mental abnormality.(2) Sick prisoners who requirespecialist treatment shall be transferred to specialized institutions orto civil hospitals. Where hospital facilities are provided in an institution,their equipment, furnishings and pharmaceutical supplies shall be properfor the medical care and treatment of sick prisoners, and there shall bea staff of suitable trained officers.(3) The services of a qualifieddental officer shall be available to every prisoner.23. (1) In women's institutionsthere shall be special accommodation for all necessary pre-natal and post-natalcare and treatment. Arrangements shall be made wherever practicable forchildren to be torn in a hospital outside the institution. If a child isborn in prison, this fact shall not be mentioned in the birth certificate.(2) Where nursing infantsare allowed to remain in the institution with their mothers, provisionshall be made for a nursery staffed by qualified persons, where the infantsshall be placed when they are not in the care of their mothers.24. The medical officer shallsee and examine every prisoner as soon as possible after his admissionand thereafter asnecessary, with a view particularly to the discovery ofphysical or mental illness and the taking of all necessary measures; thesegregation of prisoners suspected of infectious or contagious conditions;the noting of physical or mental defects which might hamper rehabilitation,and the determination of the physical capacity of every prisoner for work.25. (1) The medical officershall have the care of the physical and mental health of the prisonersand should daily see all sick prisoners, all who complain of illness, andany prisoner to whom his attention is specially directed.(2) The medical officer shallreport to the director whenever he considers that a prisoner's physicalor mental health has been or will be injuriously affected by continuedimprisonment or by any condition of imprisonment.26. ( I ) The medical officershall regularly inspect and advise the director upon:(a) The quantity, quality,preparation and service of food;(b) The hygiene and cleanlinessof the institution and the prisoners;(c) The sanitation, heating,lighting and ventilation of the institution;(d) The suitability and cleanlinessof the prisoners' clothing and bedding;(e) The observance of therules concerning physical education and sports, in cases where there isno technical personnel in charge of these activities.(2) The director shall takeinto consideration the reports and advice that the medical officer submitsaccording to rules 25 (2) and 26 and, in case he concurs with the recommendationsmade, shall take immediate steps to give effect to those recommendations;if they are not within his competence or if he does not concur with them,he shall immediately submit his own report and the advice of the medicalofficer to higher authority.Discipline and punishment27. Discipline and ordershall be maintained with firmness, but with no more restriction than isnecessary for safe custody and well-ordered community life.28. (1) No prisoner shallbe employed, in the service of the institution, in any disciplinary capacity.(2) This rule shall not,however, impede the proper functioning of systems based on self-government,under which specified social, educational or sports activities or responsibilitiesare entrusted, under supervision, to prisoners who are formed into groupsfor the purposes of treatment.29. The following shall alwaysbe determined by the law or by the regulation of the competent administrativeauthority:(a) Conduct constitutinga disciplinary offense;(b) The types and durationof punishment which may be inflicted;(c) The authority competentto impose such punishment.30. (1) No prisoner shallbe punished except in accordance with the terms of such law or regulation,and never twice for the same offense.(2) No prisoner shall bepunished unless he has been informed of the offense alleged against himand given a proper opportunity of presenting his defense. The competentauthority shall conduct a thorough examination of the case.(3) Where necessary and practicablethe prisoner shall be allowed to make his defense through an interpreter.31. Corporal punishment,punishment by placing in a dark cell, and all cruel, inhuman or degradingpunishments shall be completely prohibited as punishments for disciplinaryoffenses.32. (1) Punishment by closeconfinement or reduction of diet shall never be inflicted unless the medicalofficer has examined the prisoner and certified in writing that he is fitto sustain it.(2) The same shall applyto any other punishment that may be prejudicial to the physical or mentalhealth of a prisoner. In no case may such punishment be contrary to ordepart from the principle stated in rule 31.(3) The medical officer shallvisit daily prisoners undergoing such punishments and shall advise thedirector if he considers the termination or alteration of the punishmentnecessary on grounds of physical or mental health.Instruments of restraint33. Instruments of restraint,such as handcuffs, chains, irons and strait-jacket,shall never be appliedas a punishment. Furthermore, chains or irons shall not be used as restraints.Other instruments of restraint shall not be used except in the followingcircumstances:(a) As a precaution againstescape during a transfer, provided that they shall be removed when theprisoner appears before a judicial or administrative authority;(b) On medical grounds bydirection of the medical officer;(c) By order of the director,if other methods of control fail, in order to prevent a prisoner from injuringhimself or others or from damaging property; in such instances the directorshall at once consult the medical officer and report to the higher administrativeauthority.34. The patterns and mannerof use of instruments of restraint shall be decided by the central prisonadministration. Such instruments must not be applied for any longer timethan is strictly necessary.Information to and complaintsby prisoners35. (1) Every prisoner onadmission shall be provided with written information about the regulationsgoverning the treatment of prisoners of his category, the disciplinaryrequirements of the institution, the authorized methods of seeking informationand making complaints, and all such other matters as are necessary to enablehim to understand both his rights and his obligations and to adapt himselfto the life of the institution.(2) If a prisoner is illiterate,the aforesaid information shall be conveyed to him orally.36. (1) Every prisoner shallhave the opportunity each week day of making requests or complaints tothe director of the institution or the officer authorized to representhim.(2) It shall be possibleto make requests or complaints to the inspector of prisons during his inspection.The prisoner shall have the opportunity to talk to the inspector or toany other inspecting officer without the director or other members of thestaff being present.(3) Every prisoner shallbe allowed to make a request or complaint, without censorship as to substancebut in proper form, to the central prison administration, the judicialauthority or other proper authorities through approved channels.(4) Unless it is evidentlyfrivolous or groundless, every request or complaint shall be promptly dealtwith and replied to without undue delay.Contact with the outsideworld37. Prisoners shall be allowedunder necessary supervision to communicate with their family and reputablefriends at regular intervals, both by correspondence and by receiving visits.38. (1) Prisoners who areforeign nationals shall be allowed reasonable facilities to communicatewith the diplomatic and consular representatives of the State to whichthey belong. (2) Prisoners who are nationals of States without diplomaticor consular representation in the country and refugees or stateless personsshall be allowed similar facilities to communicate with the diplomaticrepresentative of the State which takes charge of their interests or anynational orinternational authority whose task it is to protect such persons.39. Prisoners shall be keptinformed regularly of the more important items of news by the reading ofnewspapers, periodicals or special institutional publications, by hearingwireless transmissions, by lectures or by any similar means as authorizedor controlled by the administration.Books40. Every institution shallhave a library for the use of all categories of prisoners, adequately stockedwith both recreational and instructional books, and prisoners shall beencouraged to make full use of it.Religion41. (1) If the institutioncontains a sufficient number of prisoners of the same religion, a qualifiedrepresentative of that religion shall be appointed or approved. If thenumber of prisoners justifies it and conditions permit, the arrangementshould be on a full-time basis.(2) A qualified representativeappointed or approved under paragraph (1) shall be allowed to hold regularservices and to pay pastoral visits in private to prisoners of his religionat proper times.(3) Access to a qualifiedrepresentative of any religion shall not be refused to any prisoner. Onthe other hand, if any prisoner should object to a visit of any religiousrepresentative, his attitude shall be fully respected.42. So far as practicable,every prisoner shall be allowed to satisfy the needs of his religious lifeby attending the servicesprovided in the institution and having in hispossession the books of religious observance and instruction of his denomination.Retention of prisoners'property43. (1) All money, valuables,clothing and other effects belonging to a prisoner which under the regulationsof the institution he is not allowed to retain shall on his admission tothe institution be placed in safe custody. An inventory thereof shall besigned by the prisoner. Steps shall be taken to keep them in good condition.(2) On the release of theprisoner all such articles and money shall be returned to him except inso far as he has been authorized to spend money or send any such propertyout of the institution, or it has been found necessary on hygienic groundsto destroy any article of clothing. The prisoner shall sign a receipt forthe articles and money returned to him.(3) Any money or effectsreceived for a prisoner from outside shall be treated in the same way.(4) If a prisoner bringsin any drugs or medicine, the medical officer shall decide what use shallbe made of them.Notification of death, illness,transfer, etc.44. (1) Upon the death orserious illness of, or serious injury to a prisoner, or his removal toan institution for the treatment of mental affections, the director shallat once inform the spouse, if the prisoner is married, or the nearest relativeand shall in any event inform any other person previously designated bythe prisoner.(2) A prisoner shall be informedat once of the death or serious illness of any near relative. In case ofthe critical illness of a near relative, the prisoner should be authorized,whenever circumstances allow, to go to his bedside either under escortor alone.(3) Every prisoner shallhave the right to inform at once his family of his imprisonment or histransfer to another institution.Removal of prisoners45. (1) When the prisonersare being removed to or from an institution, they shall be exposed to publicview as little as possible, and proper safeguards shall be adopted to protectthem from insult, curiosity and publicity in any form.(2) The transport of prisonersin conveyances with inadequate ventilation or light, or in any way whichwould subject them to unnecessary physical hardship, shall be prohibited.(3) The transport of prisonersshall be carried out at the expense of the administration and equal conditionsshall obtain for all of them.Institutional personnel46. (1) The prison administration,shall provide for the careful selection of every grade of the personnel,since it is on their integrity, humanity, professional capacity and personalsuitability for the work that the proper administration of the institutionsdepends.(2) The prison administrationshall constantly seek to awaken and maintain in the minds both of the personneland of the public the conviction that this work is asocial service of greatimportance, and to this end all appropriate means of informing the publicshould be used.(3) To secure the foregoingends, personnel shall be appointed on a full-time basis as professionalprison officers and have civil service status with security of tenure subjectonly to good conduct, efficiency and physical fitness. Salaries shall beadequate to attract and retain suitable men and women; employment benefitsand conditions of service shall be favorable in view of the exacting natureof the work.47. (1) The personnel shallpossess an adequate standard of education and intelligence.(2) Before entering on duty,the personnel shall be given a course of training in their general andspecific duties and be required to pass theoretical and practical tests.(3) After entering on dutyand during their career, the personnel shall maintain and improve theirknowledge and professional capacity by attending courses of in-servicetraining to be organized at suitable intervals.48. All members of the personnelshall at all times so conduct themselves and perform their duties as toinfluence the prisoners for good by their example and to command theirrespect.49. (1) So far as possible,the personnel shall include a sufficient number of specialists such aspsychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, teachers and trade instructors.(2) The services of socialworkers, teachers and trade instructors shall be secured on apermanentbasis, without thereby excluding part-time or voluntary workers.50. (1) The director of aninstitution should be adequately qualified for his task by character, administrativeability, suitable training and experience.(2) He shall devote his entiretime to his official duties and shall not be appointed on a part-time basis.(3) He shall reside on thepremises of the institution or in its immediate vicinity. (4) When twoor more institutions are under the authority of one director, he shallvisit each of them at frequent intervals. A responsible resident officialshall be in charge of each of these institutions.51. (1) The director, hisdeputy, and the majority of the other personnel of the institution shallbe able to speak the language of the greatest number of prisoners, or alanguage understood by the greatest number of them.(2) Whenever necessary, theservices of an interpreter shall be used.52. (1) In institutions whichare large enough to require the services of one or more full-time medicalofficers, at least one of them shall reside on the premises of the institutionor in its immediate vicinity.(2) In other institutionsthe medical officer shall visit daily and shall reside near enough to beable to attend without delay in cases of urgency.53. (1) In an institutionfor both men and women, the part of the institution set aside for womenshall be under the authority of aresponsible woman officer who shall havethe custody of the keys of all that part of the institution.(2) No male member of thestaff shall enter the part of the institution set aside for women unlessaccompanied by a woman officer.(3) Women prisoners shallbe attended and supervised only by women officers. This does not, however,preclude male members of the staff, particularly doctors and teachers,from carrying out their professional duties in institutions or parts ofinstitutions set aside for women.54. (1) Officers of the institutionsshall not, in their relations with the prisoners, use force except in self-defenseor in cases of attempted escape, or active or passive physical resistanceto an order based on law or regulations. Officers who have recourse toforce must use no more than is strictly necessary and must report the incidentimmediately to the director of the institution.(2) Prison officers shallbe given special physical training to enable them to restrain aggressiveprisoners.(3) Except in special circumstances,staff performing duties which bring them into direct contact with prisonersshould not be armed. Furthermore, staff should in no circumstances be providedwith arms unless they have been trained in their use.Inspection55. There shall be a regularinspection of penal institutions and services by qualified and experiencedinspectors appointed by a competent authority. Their task shall be in particularto ensure that these institutions are administered in accordance with existinglawsand regulations and with a view to bringing about the objectives of penaland correctional services.PART IIRULES APPLICABLE TO SPECIALCATEGORIESA. PRISONERS UNDER SENTENCEGuiding principles56. The guiding principleshereafter are intended to show the spirit in which penal institutions shouldbe administered and the purposes at which they should aim, in accordancewith the declaration made under Preliminary Observation I of the presenttext.57. Imprisonment and othermeasures which result in cutting off an offender from the outside worldare afflictive by the very fact of taking from the person the right ofself-determination by depriving him of his liberty. Therefore the prisonsystem shall not, except as incidental to justifiable segregation or themaintenance of discipline, aggravate the suffering inherent in such a situation.58. The purpose and justificationof a sentence of imprisonment or a similar measure deprivative of libertyis ultimately to protect society against crime. This end can only be achievedif the period of imprisonment is used to ensure, so far as possible, thatupon his return to society the offender is not only willing but able tolead a law-abiding and self-supporting life.59. To this end, the institutionshould utilize all the remedial, educational, moral, spiritual and otherforces and forms of assistance which are appropriate and available, andshould seek to apply them according to the individual treatment needs ofthe prisoners.60. (1) The regime of theinstitution should seek to minimize any differences between prison lifeand life at liberty which tend to lessen the responsibility of the prisonersor the respect due to their dignity as human beings.(2) Before the completionof the sentence, it is desirable that the necessary steps be taken to ensurefor the prisoner a gradual return to life in society. This aim may be achieved,depending on the case, by a pre-release regime organized in the same institutionor in another appropriate institution, or by release on trial under somekind of supervision which must not be entrusted to the police but shouldbe combined with effective social aid. 61. The treatment of prisoners shouldemphasize not their exclusion from the community, but their continuingpart in it. Community agencies should, therefore, be enlisted whereverpossible to assist the staff of the institution in the task of social rehabilitationof the prisoners. There should be in connection with every institutionsocial workers charged with the duty of maintaining and improving all desirablerelations of a prisoner with his family and with valuable social agencies.Steps should be taken to safeguard, to the maximum extent compatible withthe law and the sentence, the rights relating to civil interests, socialsecurity rights and other social benefits of prisoners.62. The medical servicesof the institution shall seek to detect and shall treat any physical ormental illnesses or defects which may hamper a prisoner's rehabilitation.All necessary medical, surgical and psychiatric services shall be providedto that end.63. (1) The fulfilment ofthese principles requires individualization of treatment andfor this purposea flexible system of classifying prisoners in groups; it is therefore desirablethat such groups should be distributed in separate institutions suitablefor the treatment of each group.(2) These institutions neednot provide the same degree of security for every group. It is desirableto provide varying degrees of security according to the needs of differentgroups. Open institutions, by the very fact that they provide no physicalsecurity against escape but rely on the self-discipline of the inmates,provide the conditions most favorable to rehabilitation for carefully selectedprisoners.(3) It is desirable thatthe number of prisoners in closed institutions should not be so large thatthe individualization of treatment is hindered. In some countries it isconsidered that the population of such institutions should not exceed fivehundred. In open institutions the population should be as small as possible.(4) On the other hand, itis undesirable to maintain prisons which are so small that proper facilitiescannot be provided.64. The duty of society doesnot end with a prisoner's release. There should, therefore, be governmentalor private agencies capable of lending the released prisoner efficientafter-care directed towards the lessening of prejudice against him andtowards his social rehabilitation.Treatment65. The treatment of personssentenced to imprisonment or a similar measure shall have as its purpose,so far as the length of the sentence permits, to establish in them thewill to lead law-abiding and self-supportinglives after their release andto fit them to do so. The treatment shall be such as will encourage theirself-respect and develop their sense of responsibility.66. (1) To these ends, allappropriate means shall be used, including religious care in the countrieswhere this is possible, education, vocational guidance and training, socialcasework, employment counseling, physical development and strengtheningof moral character, in accordance with the individual needs of each prisoner,taking account of his social and criminal history, his physical and mentalcapacities and aptitudes, his personal temperament, the length of his sentenceand his prospects after release.(2) For every prisoner witha sentence of suitable length, the director shall receive, as soon as possibleafter his admission, full reports on all the matters referred to in theforegoing paragraph. Such reports shall always include a report by a medicalofficer, wherever possible qualified in psychiatry, on the physical andmental condition of the prisoner.(3) The reports and otherrelevant documents shall be placed in an individual file. This file shallbe kept up to date and classified in such a way that it can be consultedby the responsible personnel whenever the need arises.Classification and individualization67. The purposes of classificationshall be:(a) To separate from othersthose prisoners who, by reason of their criminal records or bad characters,are likely to exercise a bad influence;(b) To divide the prisonersinto classes in order to facilitate their treatment with a view to theirsocial rehabilitation.68. So far as possible separateinstitutions or separate sections of an institution shall be used for thetreatment of the different classes of prisoners.69. As soon as possible afteradmission and after a study of the personality of each prisoner with asentence of suitable length, a programme of treatment shall be preparedfor him in the light of the knowledge obtained about his individual needs,his capacities and dispositions.Privileges70. Systems of privilegesappropriate for the different classes of prisoners and the different methodsof treatment shall be established at every institution, in order to encouragegood conduct, develop a sense of responsibility and secure the interestand co-operation of the prisoners in their treatment.Work71. (1) Prison labor mustnot be of an afflictive nature.(2) All prisoners under sentenceshall be required to work, subject to their physical and mental fitnessas determined by the medical officer.(3) Sufficient work of auseful nature shall be provided to keep prisoners actively employed fora normal working day.(4) So far as possible thework provided shall be such as will maintain or increase the prisoners,ability to earn an honest living after release.(5) Vocational training inuseful trades shall be provided for prisoners able to profit thereby andespecially for young prisoners.(6) Within the limits compatiblewith proper vocational selection and with the requirements of institutionaladministration and discipline, the prisoners shall be able to choose thetype of work they wish to perform.72. (1) The organizationand methods of work in the institutions shall resemble as closely as possiblethose of similar work outside institutions, so as to prepare prisonersfor the conditions of normal occupational life.(2) The interests of theprisoners and of their vocational training, however, must not be subordinatedto the purpose of making a financial profit from an industry in the institution.73. (1) Preferably institutionalindustries and farms should be operated directly by the administrationand not by private contractors.(2) Where prisoners are employedin work not controlled by the administration, they shall always be underthe supervision of the institution's personnel. Unless the work is forother departments of the government the full normal wages for such workshall be paid to the administration by the persons to whom the labor issupplied, account being taken of the output of the prisoners.74. (1) The precautions laiddown to protect the safety and health of free workmen shall be equallyobserved in institutions.(2) Provision shall be madeto indemnify prisoners against industrial injury, including occupationaldisease, on terms not less favorable than those extended by law to freeworkmen.75. (1) The maximum dailyand weekly working hours of the prisoners shall be fixed by law or by administrativeregulation, taking into account local rules or custom in regard to theemployment of free workmen.(2) The hours so fixed shallleave one rest day a week and sufficient time for education and other activitiesrequired as part of the treatment and rehabilitation of the prisoners.76. (1) There shall be asystem of equitable remuneration of the work of prisoners.(2) Under the system prisonersshall be allowed to spend at least a part of their earnings on approvedarticles for their own use and to send a part of their earnings to theirfamily.(3) The system should alsoprovide that a part of the earnings should be set aside by the administrationso as to constitute a savings fund to be handed over to the prisoner onhis release.Education and recreation77. (1) Provision shall bemade for the further education of all prisoners capable of profiting thereby,including religious instruction in the countries where this is possible.The education of illiterates and young prisoners shall be compulsory andspecial attention shall be paid to it by the administration.(2) So far as practicable,the education of prisoners shall be integrated with theeducational systemof the country so that after their release they may continue their educationwithout difficulty.78. Recreational and culturalactivities shall be provided in all institutions for the benefit of themental and physical health of prisoners.Social relations and after-care79. Special attention shallbe paid to the maintenance and improvement of such relations between aprisoner and his family as are desirable in the best interests of both.80. From the beginning ofa prisoner's sentence consideration shall be given to his future afterrelease and he shall be encouraged and assisted to maintain or establishsuch relations with persons or agencies outside the institution as maypromote the best interests of his family and his own social rehabilitation.81. (1) Services and agencies,governmental or otherwise, which assist released prisoners to re-establishthemselves in society shall ensure, so far as is possible and necessary,that released prisoners be provided with appropriate documents and identificationpapers, have suitable homes and work to go to, are suitably and adequatelyclothed having regard to the climate and season, and have sufficient meansto reach their destination and maintain themselves in the period immediatelyfollowing their release.(2) The approved representativesof such agencies shall have all necessary access to the institution andto prisoners and shall be taken into consultation as to the future of aprisoner from the beginning of his sentence.(3) It is desirable thatthe activities of such agencies shall be centralized or coordinated asfar as possible in order to secure the best use of their efforts.B. INSANE AND MENTALLYABNORMAL PRISONERS82. (1) Persons who are foundto be insane shall not be detained in prisons and arrangements shall bemade to remove them to mental institutions as soon as possible.(2) Prisoners who sufferfrom other mental diseases or abnormalities shall be observed and treatedin specialized institutions under medical management.(3) During their stay ina prison, such prisoners shall be placed under the special supervisionof a medical officer.(4) The medical or psychiatricservice of the penal institutions shall provide for the psychiatric treatmentof all other prisoners who are in need of such treatment.83. It is desirable thatsteps should be taken, by arrangement with the appropriate agencies, toensure if necessary the continuation of psychiatric treatment after releaseand the provision of social-psychiatric after-care.C. PRISONERS UNDER ARRESTOR AWAITING TRIAL84. (1) Persons arrestedor imprisoned by reason of a criminal charge against them, who are detainedeither in police custody or in prison custody (jail) but have not yet beentried and sentenced, will be referred to as "untried prisoners,' hereinafterin these rules.(2) Unconvicted prisonersare presumed to be innocent and shall be treated as such.(3) Without prejudice tolegal rules for the protection of individual liberty or prescribing theprocedure to be observed in respect of untried prisoners, these prisonersshall benefit by a special regime which is described in the following rulesin its essential requirements only.85. (1) Untried prisonersshall be kept separate from convicted prisoners.(2) Young untried prisonersshall be kept separate from adults and shall in principle be detained inseparate institutions.86. Untried prisoners shallsleep singly in separate rooms, with the reservation of different localcustom in respect of the climate.87. Within the limits compatiblewith the good order of the institution, untried prisoners may, if theyso desire, have their food procured at their own expense from the outside,either through the administration or through their family or friends. Otherwise,the administration shall provide their food.88. ( I ) An untried prisonershall be allowed to wear his own clothing if it is clean and suitable.(2) If he wears prison dress,it shall be different from that supplied to convicted prisoners.89. An untried prisoner shallalways be offered opportunity to work, but shall not be required to work.If he chooses to work, he shall be paid for it.90. An untried prisoner shallbe allowed to procure at his own expense or at the expense of a third partysuch books, newspapers, writing materials and other means of occupationas are compatible with the interests of the administration of justice andthe security and good order of the institution.91. An untried prisoner shallbe allowed to be visited and treated by his own doctor or dentist if thereis reasonable ground for his application and he is able to pay any expensesincurred.92. An untried prisoner shallbe allowed to inform immediately his family of his detention and shallbe given all reasonable facilities for communicating with his family andfriends, and for receiving visits from them, subject only to restrictionsand supervision as are necessary in the interests of the administrationof justice and of the security and good order of the institution.93. For the purposes of hisdefense, an untried prisoner shall be allowed to apply for free legal aidwhere such aid is available, and to receive visits from his legal adviserwith a view to his defense and to prepare and hand to him confidentialinstructions. For these purposes, he shall if he so desires be suppliedwith writing material. Interviews between theprisoner and his legal advisermay be within sight but not within the hearing of a police or institutionofficial.D. CIVIL PRISONERS94. In countries where thelaw perm its imprisonment for debt, or by order of a court under any othernon-criminal process, persons so imprisoned shall not be subjected to anygreater restriction or severity than is necessary to ensure safe custodyand good order. Their treatment shall be not less favorable than that ofuntried prisoners, with the reservation, however, that they may possiblybe required to work.E. PERSONS ARRESTED ORDETAINED WITHOUT CHARGE95. Without prejudice tothe provisions of article 9 of the International Covenant on Civil andPolitical Rights, persons arrested or imprisoned without charge shall beaccorded the same protection as that accorded under part I and part II,section C. Relevant provisions of part II, section A, shall likewise beapplicable where their application may be conducive to the benefit of thisspecial group of persons in custody, provided that no measures shall betaken implying that re-education or rehabilitation is in any way appropriateto persons not convicted of any criminal offense.AppendixE:InternationalConvention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial DiscriminationAdopted and opened for signature, ratification,and accession by United Nations General Assembly resolution 2106A (XX)on 21 December 1965. Entered into force on 4 January 1969 in accordancewith Article 19.The States Parties to thisConvention,Considering that the Charterof the United Nations is based on the principles of the dignity and equalityinherent in all human beings, and that all Member States have pledged themselvesto take joint and separate action, in co-operation with the Organization,for the achievement of one of the purposes of the United Nations whichis to promote and encourage universal respect for and observance of humanrights and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction as to race,sex, language or religion,Considering that the UniversalDeclaration of Human Rights proclaims that all human beings are born freeand equal in dignity and rights and that everyone is entitled to all therights and freedoms set out therein, without distinction of any kind, inparticular as to race, color or national origin,Considering that all humanbeings are equal before the law and are entitled to equal protection ofthe law against any discrimination and against any incitement to discrimination,Considering that the UnitedNations has condemned colonialism and all practices of segregation anddiscrimination associated therewith, in whatever form and wherever theyexist, and that the Declaration on theGranting of Independence to ColonialCountries and Peoples of 14 December 1960 (General Assembly resolution1514 (XV)) has affirmed and solemnly proclaimed the necessity of bringingthem to a speedy and unconditional end,Considering that the UnitedNations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discriminationof 20 November 1963 (General Assembly resolution 1904 (XVIII)) solemnlyaffirms the necessity of speedily eliminating racial discrimination throughoutthe world in all its forms and manifestations and of securing understandingof and respect for the dignity of the human person,Convinced that any doctrineof superiority based on racial differentiation is scientifically false,morally condemnable, socially unjust and dangerous, and that there is nojustification for racial discrimination, in theory or in practice, anywhere,Reaffirming that discriminationbetween human beings on the grounds of race, color or ethnic origin isan obstacle to friendly and peaceful relations among nations and is capableof disturbing peace and security among peoples and the harmony of personsliving side by side even within one and the same State,Convinced that the existenceof racial barriers is repugnant to the ideals of any human society,Alarmed by manifestationsof racial discrimination still in evidence in some areas of the world andby governmental policies based on racial superiority or hatred, such aspolicies of apartheid, segregation or separation,Resolved to adopt all necessarymeasures for speedily eliminating racial discrimination in all its formsand manifestations, and to prevent and combat racist doctrines and practicesin order to promote understanding between races and to build an internationalcommunity free from all forms of racial segregation and racial discrimination,Bearing in mind the Conventionconcerning Discrimination in respect of Employment and Occupation adoptedby the International Labor Organization in 1958, and the Convention againstDiscrimination in Education adopted by the United Nations Educational,Scientific and Cultural Organization in 1960,Desiring to implement theprinciples embodied in the United Nations Declaration on the Eliminationof Al l Forms of Racial Discrimination and to secure the earliest adoptionof practical measures to that end,Have agreed as follows:PART IArticle I1. In this Convention, theterm "racial discrimination" shall mean any distinction, exclusion, restrictionor preference based on race, color, descent, or national or ethnic originwhich has the purpose or effect ofnullifying or impairing the recognition,enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing, of human rights and fundamentalfreedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural or any other fieldof public life.2. This Convention shallnot apply to distinctions, exclusions, restrictions or preferences madeby a State Party to this Convention between citizens and non-citizens.3. Nothing in this Conventionmay be interpreted as affecting in any way the legal provisions of StatesParties concerning nationality, citizenship or naturalization, providedthat such provisions do not discriminate against any particular nationality.4. Special measures takenfor the sole purpose of securing adequate advancement of certain racialor ethnic groups or individuals requiring such protection as may be necessaryin order to ensure such groups or individuals equal enjoyment or exerciseof human rights and fundamental freedoms shall not be deemed racial discrimination,provided, however, that such measures do not, as a consequence, lead tothe maintenance of separate rights for different racial groups and thatthey shall not be continued after the objectives for which they were takenhave been achieved.Article 21. States Parties condemnracial discrimination and undertake to pursue by all appropriate meansand without delay a policy of eliminating racial discrimination in allits forms and promoting understanding among all races, and, to this end:(a) Each State Party undertakesto engage in no act or practice of racial discrimination against persons,groups of persons or institutions and to en sure that all public authoritiesand public institutions, national and local, shall act in conformity withthis obligation;(b) Each State Party undertakesnot to sponsor, defend or support racial discrimination by any personsor organizations;(c) Each State Party shalltake effective measures to review governmental, national and local policies,and to amend, rescind or nullify any laws and regulations which have theeffect of creating or perpetuating racial discrimination wherever it exists;(d) Each State Party shallprohibit and bring to an end, by all appropriate means, including legislationas required by circumstances, racial discrimination by any persons, groupor organization;(e) Each State Party undertakesto encourage, where appropriate, integrationist multiracial organizationsand movements and other means of eliminating barriers between races, andto discourage anything which tends to strengthen racial division. 2. StatesParties shall, when the circumstances so warrant, take, in the social,economic, cultural and other fields, special and concrete measures to ensurethe adequate development and protection of certain racial groups or individualsbelonging to them, for the purpose of guaranteeing them the full and equalenjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms. These measures shallin no case en tail as a con sequence the maintenance of unequal or separaterights fordifferent racial groups after the objectives for which they weretaken have been achieved.Article 3States Parties particularlycondemn racial segregation and apartheid and undertake to prevent, prohibitand eradicate all practices of this nature in territories under their jurisdiction.Article 4States Parties condemn allpropaganda and all organizations which are based on ideas or theories ofsuperiority of one race or group of persons of one color or ethnic origin,or which attempt to justify or promote racial hatred and discriminationin any form, and undertake to adopt immediate and positive measures designedto eradicate all incitement to, or acts of, such discrimination and, tothis end, with due regard to the principles embodied in the Universal Declarationof Human Rights and the rights expressly set forth in article 5 of thisConvention, inter alia:(a) Shall declare an offensepunishable by law all dissemination of ideas based on racial superiorityor hatred, incitement to racial discrimination, as well as all acts ofviolence or incitement to such acts against any race or group of personsof another color or ethnic origin, and also the provision of any assistanceto racist activities, including the financing thereof;(b) Shall declare illegaland prohibit organizations, and also organized and all other propagandaactivities, which promote and incite racial discrimination, and shall recognizeparticipation in such organizations or activities as an offense punishableby law;(c) Shall not permit publicauthorities or public institutions, national or local, to promote or inciteracial discrimination.Article 5In compliance with the fundamentalobligations laid down in article 2 of this Convention, States Parties undertaketo prohibit and to eliminate racial discrimination in all its forms andto guarantee the right of everyone, without distinction as to race, color,or national or ethnic origin, to equality before the law, notably in theenjoyment of the following rights:(a) The right to equal treatmentbefore the tribunals and all other organs administering justice;(b) The right to securityof person and protection by the State against violence or bodily harm,whether inflicted by government officials or by any individual group orinstitution;(c) Political rights, inparticular the right to participate in elections-to vote and to stand forelection-on the basis of universal and equal suffrage, to take part inthe Government as well as in the conduct of public affairs at any leveland to have equal access to public service;(d) Other civil rights, inparticular:(i) The right to freedomof movement and residence within the border of the State;(ii) The right to leave anycountry, including one's own, and to return to one's country;(iii) The right to nationality;(iv) The right to marriageand choice of spouse;(v) The right to own propertyalone as well as in association with others;(vi) The right to inherit;(vii) The right to freedomof thought, conscience and religion;(viii) The right to freedomof opinion and expression;(ix) The right to freedomof peaceful assembly and association;(e) Economic, social andcultural rights, in particular:(i) The rights to work, tofree choice of employment, to just and favorable conditions of work, toprotection against unemployment, to equal pay for equal work, to just andfavorable remuneration;(ii) The right to form andjoin trade unions;(iii) The right to housing;(iv) The right to publichealth, medical care, social security and social services;(v) The right to educationand training;(vi) The right to equal participationin cultural activities;(f) The right of access toany place or service intended for use by the general public, such as transporthotels, restaurants, cafes, theaters and parks.Article 6States Parties shall assureto everyone within their jurisdiction effective protection and remedies,through the competent national tribunals and other State institutions,against any acts of racial discrimination which violate his human rightsand fundamental freedoms contrary to this Convention, as well as the rightto seek from such tribunals just and adequate reparation or satisfactionfor any damage suffered as a result of such discrimination.Article 7States Parties undertaketo adopt immediate and effective measures, particularly in the fields ofteaching, education, culture and information, with a view to combatingprejudices which lead to racial discrimination and to promoting understanding,tolerance and friendship among nations and racial or ethnical groups, aswell as to propagating the purposes and principles of the Charter of theUnited Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the United NationsDeclaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, andthis Convention.PART IIArticle 81. There shall be establisheda Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (hereinafter referredto as the Committee) consisting of eighteen experts of high moral standingand acknowledged impartiality elected by States Parties from among theirnationals, who shall serve in their personal capacity, consideration beinggiven to equitable geographical distribution and to the representationof the different forms of civilization as well as of the principal legalsystems.2. The members of the Committeeshall be elected by secret ballot from a list of persons nominated by theStates Parties. Each State Party may nominate one person from among itsown nationals.3. The initial election shallbe held six months after the date of the entry into force of this Convention.At least three months before the date of each election the Secretary-Generalof the United Nations shall address a letter to the States Parties invitingthem to submit their nominations within two months. The Secretary-Generalshall prepare a list in alphabetical order of all persons thus nominated,indicating the States Parties which have nominated them, and shall submitit to the States Parties.4. Elections of the membersof the Committee shall be held at a meeting of States Parties convenedby the Secretary-General at United Nations Headquarters. At that meeting,for which two thirds of the States Parties shall constitute a quorum, thepersons elected to the Committee shall be nominees who obtain the largestnumber of votes and an absolute majority of the votes of the representativesof States Parties present and voting.5. (a) The members of theCommittee shall be elected for a term of four years. However, the termsof nine of the members elected at the first election shall expire at theend of two years; immediately after the first election the names of thesenine members shall be chosen by lot by the Chairman of the Committee;(b) For the filling of casualvacancies, the State Party whose expert has ceased to function as a memberof the Committee shall appoint another expert from among itsnationals,subject to the approval of the Committee.6. States Parties shall beresponsible for the expenses of the members of the Committee while theyare in performance of Committee duties.Article 91. States Parties undertaketo submit to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, for considerationby the Committee, a report on the legislative, judicial, administrativeor other measures which they have adopted and which give effect to theprovisions of this Convention: (a) within one year after the entry intoforce of the Convention for the State concerned; and (b) thereafter everytwo years and whenever the Committee so requests. The Committee may requestfurther information from the States Parties.2. The Committee shall reportannually, through the Secretary General, to the General Assembly of theUnited Nations on its activities and may make suggestions and general recommendationsbased on the examination of the reports and information received from theStates Parties. Such suggestions and general recommendations shall be reportedto the General Assembly together with comments, if any, from States Parties.Article 101. The Committee shall adoptits own rules of procedure.2. The Committee shall electits officers for a term of two years.3. The secretariat of theCommittee shall be provided by the Secretary General of the United Nations.4. The meetings of the Committeeshall normally be held at United Nations Headquarters.Article 111. If a State Party considersthat another State Party is not giving effect to the provisions of thisConvention, it may bring the matter to the attention of the Committee.The Committee shall then transmit the communication to the State Partyconcerned. Within three months, the receiving State shall submit to theCommittee written explanations or statements clarifying the matter andthe remedy, if any, that may have been taken by that State.2. If the matter is not adjustedto the satisfaction of both parties, either by bilateral negotiations orby any other procedure open to them, within six months after the receiptby the receiving State of the initial communication, either State shallhave the right to refer the matter again to the Committee by notifyingthe Committee and also the other State.3. The Committee shall dealwith a matter referred to it in accordance with paragraph 2 of this articleafter it has ascertained that all available domestic remedies have beeninvoked and exhausted in the case, in conformity with the generally recognizedprinciples of international law. This shall not be the rule where the applicationof the remedies is unreasonably prolonged.4. In any matter referredto it, the Committee may call upon the States Parties concerned to supplyany other relevant information.5. When any matter arisingout of this article is being considered by the Committee, the States Partiesconcerned shall be entitled tosend a representative to take part in theproceedings of the Committee, without voting rights, while the matter isunder consideration.Article 121. (a) After the Committeehas obtained and collated all the information it deems necessary, the Chairmanshall appoint an ad hoc Conciliation Commission (hereinafter referred toas the Commission) comprising five persons who may or may not be membersof the Committee. The members of the Commission shall be appointed withthe unanimous consent of the parties to the dispute, and its good officesshall be made available to the States concerned with a view to an amicablesolution of the matter on the basis of respect for this Convention;(b) If the States partiesto the dispute fail to reach agreement within three months on all or partof the composition of the Commission, the members of the Commission notagreed upon by the States parties to the dispute shall be elected by secretballot by a two-thirds majority vote of the Committee from among its ownmembers.2. The members of the Commissionshall serve in their personal capacity. They shall not be nationals ofthe States parties to the dispute or of a State not Party to this Convention.3. The Commission shall electits own Chairman and adopt its own rules of procedure.4. The meetings of the Commissionshall normally be held at United Nations Headquarters or at any other convenientplace as determined by the Commission.5. The secretariat providedin accordance with article 10, paragraph 3, of this Convention shall alsoservice the Commission whenever a dispute among States Parties brings theCommission into being.6. The States parties tothe dispute shall share equally all the expenses of the members of theCommission in accordance with estimates to be provided by the Secretary-Generalof the United Nations.7. The Secretary-Generalshall be empowered to pay the expenses of the members of the Commission,if necessary, before reimbursement by the States parties to the disputein accordance with paragraph 6 of this article.8. The information obtainedand collated by the Committee shall be made available to the Commission,and the Commission may call upon the States concerned to supply any otherrelevant information.Article 131. When the Commission hasfully considered the matter, it shall prepare and submit to the Chairmanof the Committee a report embodying its findings on all questions of factrelevant to the issue between the parties and containing such recommendationsas it may think proper for the amicable solution of the dispute.2. The Chairman of the Committeeshall communicate the report of the Commission to each of the States partiesto the dispute. These States shall, within three months, inform the Chairmanof the Committee whether or not they accept the recommendations containedin the report of the Commission.3. After the period providedfor in paragraph 2 of this article, the Chairman of the Committee shallcommunicate the report of the Commission and the declarations of the StatesParties concerned to the other States Parties to this Convention.Article 141. A State Party may at anytime declare that it recognizes the competence of the Committee to receiveand consider communications from individuals or groups of individuals withinits jurisdiction claiming to be victims of a violation by that State Partyof any of the rights set forth in this Convention. No communication shallbe received by the Committee if it concerns a State Party which has notmade such a declaration.2. Any State Party whichmakes a declaration as provided for in paragraph I of this article mayestablish or indicate a body within its national legal order which shallbe competent to receive and consider petitions from individuals and groupsof individuals within its jurisdiction who claim to be victims of a violationof any of the rights set forth in this Convention and who have exhaustedother available local remedies.3. A declaration made inaccordance with paragraph 1 of this article and the name of any body establishedor indicated in accordance with paragraph 2 of this article shall be depositedby the State Party concerned with the Secretary-General of the United Nations,who shall transmit copies thereof to the other States Parties. A declarationmay be withdrawn at any time by notification to the Secretary-General,but such a withdrawal shall not affect communications pending before theCommittee.4. A register of petitionsshall be kept by the body established or indicated in accordance with paragraph2 of this article, and certified copies of the register shall be filedannually through appropriate channels with the Secretary-General on theunderstanding that the contents shall not be publicly disclosed.5. In the event of failureto obtain satisfaction from the body established or indicated in accordancewith paragraph 2 of this article, the petitioner shall have the right tocommunicate the matter to the Committee within six months.6. (a) The Committee shallconfidentially bring any communication referred to it to the attentionof the State Party alleged to be violating any provision of this Convention,but the identity of the individual or groups of individuals concerned shallnot be revealed without his or their express consent. The Committee shallnot receive anonymous communications;(b) Within three months,the receiving State shall submit to the Committee written explanationsor statements clarifying the matter and the remedy, if any, that may havebeen taken by that State.7. (a) The Committee shallconsider communications in the light of all information made availableto it by the State Party concerned and by the petitioner. The Committeeshall not consider any communication from a petitioner unless it has ascertainedthat the petitioner has exhausted all available domestic remedies. However,this shall not be the rule where the application of the remedies is unreasonablyprolonged;(b) The Committee shall forwardits suggestions and recommendations, if any, to the State Party concernedand to the petitioner.8. The Committee shall includein its annual report a summary of such communications and, where appropriate,a summary of the explanations and statements of the States Parties concernedand of its own suggestions and recommendations.9. The Committee shall becompetent to exercise the functions provided for in this article only whenat least ten States Parties to this Convention are bound by declarationsin accordance with paragraph I of this article.Article 151 . Pending the achievementof the objectives of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence toColonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, the provisions of this Convention shallin no way limit the right of petition granted to these peoples by otherinternational instruments or by the United Nations and its specializedagencies.2. (a) The Committee establishedunder article 8, paragraph 1, of this Convention shall receive copies ofthe petitions from, and submit expressions of opinion and recommendationson these petitions to, the bodies of the United Nations which deal withmatters directly related to the principles and objectives of this Conventionin their consideration of petitions from the inhabitants of Trust and Non-Self-GoverningTerritories and all other territories to which General Assembly resolution1514 (XV) applies, relating to matters covered by this Convention whichare before these bodies;(b) The Committee shall receivefrom the competent bodies of the United Nations copies of the reports concerningthe legislative, judicial, administrative or other measures directly relatedto the principles and objectives of this Convention applied by the administeringPowers within the Territories mentioned in subparagraph (a) of this paragraph,and shall express opinions and make recommendations to these bodies.3. The Committee shall includein its report to the General Assembly a summary of the petitions and reportsit has received from United Nations bodies, and the expressions of opinionand recommendations of the Committee relating to the said petitions andreports.4. The Committee shall requestfrom the Secretary-General of the United Nations all information relevantto the objectives of this Convention and available to him regarding theTerritories mentioned in paragraph 2 (a) of this article.Article 16The provisions of this Conventionconcerning the settlement of disputes or complaints shall be applied withoutprejudice to other procedures for settling disputes or complaints in thefield of discrimination laid down in the constituent instruments of, orconventions adopted by, the United Nations and its specialized agencies,and shall not prevent the States Parties from having recourse to otherprocedures for settling a dispute in accordance with general or specialinternational agreements in force between them.PART IIIArticle 171. This Convention is openfor signature by any State Member of the United Nations or member of anyof its specialized agencies, by any State Party to the Statute of the InternationalCourt of Justice, and by any other State which has been invited by theGeneral Assembly of the United Nations to become a Party to this Convention.2. This Convention is subjectto ratification. Instruments of ratification shall be deposited with theSecretary-General of the United Nations.Article 181. This Convention shallbe open to accession by any State referred to in article 17, paragraph1, of the Convention. 2. Accession shall be effected by the deposit ofan instrument of accession with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.Article 191. This Convention shallenter into force on the thirtieth day after the date of the deposit withthe Secretary-General of the United Nations of the twenty-seventh instrumentof ratification or instrument of accession.2. For each State ratifyingthis Convention or acceding to it after the deposit of the twenty-seventhinstrument of ratification or instrument of accession, the Convention shallenter into force on the thirtieth day after the date of the deposit ofits own instrument of ratification or instrument of accession.Article 201. The Secretary-Generalof the United Nations shall receive and circulate to all States which areor may become Parties to this Convention reservations made by Statesatthe time of ratification or accession. Any State which objects to the reservationshall, within a period of ninety days from the date of the said communication,notify the Secretary-General that it does not accept it.2. A reservation incompatiblewith the object and purpose of this Convention shall not be permitted,nor shall a reservation the effect of which would inhibit the operationof any of the bodies established by this Convention be allowed. A reservationshall be considered incompatible or inhibitive if at least two thirds ofthe States Parties to this Convention object to it.3. Reservations may be withdrawnat any time by notification to this effect addressed to the Secretary-General.Such notification shall take effect on the date on which it is received.Article 21A State Party may denouncethis Convention by written notification to the Secretary-General of theUnited Nations. Denunciation shall take effect one year after the dateof receipt of the notification by the Secretary General.Article 22Any dispute between two ormore States Parties with respect to the interpretation or application ofthis Convention, which is not settled by negotiation or by the proceduresexpressly provided for in this Convention, shall, at the request of anyof the parties to the dispute, be referred to the International Court ofJustice for decision, unless the disputants agree to another mode of settlement.Article 231. A request for the revisionof this Convention may be made at any time by any State Party by meansof a notification in writing addressed to the Secretary-General of theUnited Nations.2. The General Assembly ofthe United Nations shall decide upon the steps, if any, to be taken inrespect of such a request.Article 24The Secretary-General ofthe United Nations shall inform all States referred to in article 17, paragraph1, of this Convention of the following particulars:(a) Signatures, ratificationsand accessions under articles 17 and 18;(b) The date of entry intoforce of this Convention under article 19;(c) Communications and declarationsreceived under articles 14, 20 and 23;(d) Denunciations under article21.Article 251. This Convention, of whichthe Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic,shall be deposited in the archives of the United Nations.2. The Secretary-Generalof the United Nations shall transmit certified copies of this Conventionto all States belonging to any of the categories mentioned in article 17,paragraph 1, of the Convention.* * *1 InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political Rights, A/RES/2200 A (1966). In Centrefor Human Rights, Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments,Vol. I, ST/HR/1/Rev.5 (New York: United Nations, 1994), p. 20. Also availableat http://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty/.2 Inaddition, the U.N. Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials providesthat, "In the performance of their duty, law enforcement officials shallrespect and protect human dignity and maintain and uphold the human rightsof all persons..." (Article 2) and "Law enforcement officials should useforce only when strictly necessary and to the extent required for the performanceof their duty." (Article 3) The code also states: "No law enforcement officialmay inflict, instigate or tolerate any act of torture or other cruel, inhumanor degrading treatment or punishment...." (Article 5). Its preamble provides"[t]hat every law enforcement agency...should be held to the duty of discipliningitself...and that the actions of law enforcement officials should be responsiveto public scrutiny...." While the code is not binding, it provides authoritativeguidance about international human rights norms regarding policing. InCentre for Human Rights, Human Rights: A Compilation of InternationalInstruments, Vol. I, ST/HR/1/Rev.5 (New York: United Nations, 1994),p. 312. Also available at http://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty/.3 Thisdescription of events has been questioned by some observers, who note thatthe police knew and must have recognized Jerry Jackson (the man who waskilled) and were actually following him, not merely responding to a presumedrobbery. This scenario may be supported by the aggressive tactics usedin the past by another officer on the scene at the motorcycle shop shootout,Officer Ivant Fields. Even though Fields was under investigation for hissecond shooting in a sixteen-month period, he was not removed to desk duty.[See R. Robin McDonald, "In 16 months, 2 shootings," AtlantaJournal-Constitution, February6, 1996.] Fields's presence at the sceneraises additional questions since, according to Lt. Scott Lyle of the Officeof Professional Standards (O.P.S.), officers involved in shooting incidentsare removed from situations that may require the use of firearms untilinvestigations are completed. [Human Rights Watch telephone interview withLieutenant Lyle, March 26, 1996.]4 RonaldSmothers, "Atlanta police face criticism in recent killing by an officer,"Atlanta Journal-Constitution, December 29, 1995.5 Afterthe seriously flawed investigation into the Jackson shooting, Mayor Campbellpromised changes at the Atlanta Police Department. In February, the commanderof the homicide section, Lt. Rodney G. Christian, was transferred to theOffice of Professional Standards (O.P.S.), the internal affairs unit, wherehe had previously served. It is unclear why, if Lieutenant Christian wasresponsible for mishandling the Jackson shooting investigation, he hasnow been transferred to a senior position in the O.P.S.6 Accordingto Lieutenant Lyle of the O.P.S., his office initiated forty-seven unauthorized-use-of-forceinvestigations in 1995. There has been a downward trend during recent years:134in 1991; 125 in 1992; eighty-three in 1993; and sixty-one in 1994.7 KathyScruggs, "Angry Harvard changing policies," Atlanta Journal-Constitution,January 11, 1996. Compare this low rate of complaints to the San FranciscoPolice Department, which has a slightly larger force-approximately 2,000sworn officers with the San Francisco force compared to 1,500 with theAtlanta Police Department. Yet the San Francisco Police Commission's Officeof Citizen Complaints receives 1,000 complaints each year, with approximatelyhalf of the complainants alleging unnecessary force or unauthorized actionby the police. The San Jose (California) Police Department, which has approximately1,200 sworn officers, received 198 unnecessary force complaints in 1994and 122 last year. In other words, the San Jose force is 20 percent smallerthan Atlanta's but, if Atlanta's official tally is to be believed, receivesthree times as many unnecessary force complaints.8 HumanRights Watch interview with attorney Brian Spears, Atlanta, March 5, 1996.9 Thosewith physical signs of mistreatment are photographed by the Public Defender'sOffice and brought to the attention of the O.P.S.10 SeeSamuel Walker and Betsy Wright, Citizen Review of the Police, 1994:A National Survey (Washington, D.C.: Police Executive Research Forum,January 1995), p. 2. Walker and Wright found that 72 percent of the fiftylargest cities in the U.S. have some form of citizen review of the police.11 AdministrativeOrder No. 96-1, "An Administrative Order to Continue the Civilian ReviewBoard, Define its Composition and to Establish the Criteria and Scope ofReview for this Board," January 5, 1996.12 Indiscussing the C.R.B.'s shortcomings, a former member told Human RightsWatch that it was his understanding that the mayor and police administratorsare counting on community policing to address the problem of brutality.While community policing may improve relations with affected communities,there is no reason not to pursue both the C.R.B. and community policinginitiatives seriously.13 AdministrativeOrder No. 96-1. The administrative order does not delineate who may "appeal"an O.P.S. finding.14 Ibid.15 HumanRights Watch interview with Mike Langford, director of the mayor's Officeof Community Affairs, which is responsible for re-starting the C.R.B.,Atlanta, March 4, 1996. See Administrative Order, Section 3(d).16 Thisis not a view shared by others interviewed by Human Rights Watch. Whenthe Atlanta Journal-Constitution requested O.P.S.'s files on forty-fourshooting cases, there were delays and the newspaper was not provided withall of the information it requested, as required by state law. Photographs,transcripts of 9-1-1 (emergency) calls, medical examiners' reports andother documents were missing from files. The newspaper was able to ascertainwhat was missing because O.P.S. did not remove file indices listing theitems that should have been in each file.17 HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Sgt. Dennis Mullen, O.P.S., Atlanta,November 1, 1995.18 Therewas unanimous opinion among everyone interviewed by Human Rights Watchthat the Civilian Review Board, as it existed during the past several yearsat least, was worthless. This was the view of attorneys who represent allegedvictims of police brutality, reporters who cover the police, public defenderswhose clients have been abused by police, at least one former member ofthe C.R.B., and police officers themselves, most of whom did not know theC.R.B. even existed.19 CharmagneHelton and Lyda Longa, "Mayor appoints board to review killing by police,"Atlanta Journal-Constitution, January 6, 1996.20 BillTorpy, "Jailed cop tells of thefts by police," Atlanta Journal-Constitution,February 23, 1996.21 BillRankin, "Badges for sale," Atlanta Journal-Constitution, February18, 1996. In the absence of any other police monitoring group in the city,the Atlanta Journal-Constitution has played an unusually activerole in obtaining information about police misconduct.22 Ibid.23 Ibid.24 Ibid.25 Ibid.26 Nationalstatistics suggest that federal prosecutors are much more likely to pursueofficial corruption cases than civil rights prosecutions. In fiscal year1994, for example, approximately 35 percent of official corruption casesreferred by the F.B.I. to U.S. Attorneys were prosecuted, compared to approximately3 percent of civil rights referrals. (Information collected from the ExecutiveOffice of the U.S. Attorney's office by the Transactional Research AccessClearinghouse, a private research group.)27 HumanRights Watch interview with Sgt. Dennis Mullen, O.P.S., Atlanta, November1, 1995.28 Ibid.Despite repeated requests, the O.P.S. was unable or unwilling to provideus with a precise, or even estimated, sustained rate for abuse complaints.Sergeant Mullen's statement that the sustained rate is "very low" was theonly response provided.29 HumanRights Watch telephone interview with June Green, public safety divisionof the City Attorney's office of Atlanta, April 5, 1996.30 Policeofficers are designated with same rights as public officials in OfficialCode of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.) Title 45-11-4, which refers to Title17-7-52, describing special grand jury procedures for public officials.31 Accordingto the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers' grand jury expertDavid S. Rudolph of Rudolph and Maher, Chapel, South Carolina and Prof.Frederick Lawrence, Boston University School of Law.32 Georgiastate law does not contain a statute specifically addressing use of forceby peace officers. The statutes which address use of force are genericand apply to use of force by any person. O.C.G.A. 16-3-21, 16-3-23 and16-3-24.33 HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Terry Lloyd, chief of special litigationfor the state's Attorney General's office, March 29, 1996.34 Ibid.35 SeeThe State v. Waine L. Pinckney and Willie T. Sauls, Murder, felonymurder and aggravated assault with a deadly weapon (eight counts) No Bill(no indictment), February 8, 1996, Fulton County Superior Court, NB 003050.Most of Atlanta is part of Fulton County.36 RhondaCook, "Officers should get medals, says grand juror on case," AtlantaJournal-Constitution, March 2, 1996.37 HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Melvin Jones, spokesperson with theFulton County District Attorney's office, April 1, 1996. It is worth notingthat the Atlanta Journal-Constitution and the O.P.S. have reportedthat files regarding police shootings sent to the District Attorney's officein recent years have been lost, which may help explain the lack of actionin such cases.38 Ibid.39 Cunninghamv. City of Atlanta, Eldrin Bell (former A.P.D. Chief of Police), OfficerCharles Traylor, U.S. District Court, Northern District (Atlanta Division)94-CV-1018-RHH, May 1, 1995. Information provided by the American CivilLiberties Union of Georgia, which represents the plaintiff in this case.The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) is a nationwide, nonpartisanorganization dedicated to preserving and defending the principles set forthin the U.S. Constitution's Bill of Rights.40 Ibid.41 Ibid.42 BillRobinson, "2 Atlanta officers face probe after beating is videotaped,"Atlanta Journal-Constitution, November 11, 1993.43 SandraMcIntosh, "Atlanta officer cleared of alleged excessive force," AtlantaJournal-Constitution, February 2, 1994.44 SeeU.S. v. James William Jackson, Indictment 96-CR-001, U.S. DistrictCourt, Northern District (Atlanta Division), filed January 2, 1996.45 UwannaRandolph, et. al. v. County of DeKalb, Jarvis, Aderhold, Hammonds, Navas,Ivy, U.S. District Court, Northern District (Atlanta Division) 94-CV-3272,filed December 9, 1994. Prior to this encounter the deputies had attempted,unsuccessfully, to apprehend Hill for several weeks.46 HumanRights Watch telephone interview with attorney Rufus Smith, Atlanta, February29, 1996.47 MariaElena Fernandez, "Convicted cop to plead for his life today," AtlantaJournal-Constitution, September 19, 1995.48 MariaElena Fernandez, "A precinct rocked by scandal," Atlanta Journal-Constitution,March 19, 1994.49 Ibid.50 MariaElena Fernandez, "Sentencing phase begins after ex-cop found guilty ofmurder," Atlanta Journal-Constitution, September 9, 1995.51 HumanRights Watch telephone interview with John Bankhead, Georgia Bureau ofInvestigations spokesperson, Atlanta, March 28, 1996. The Georgia Bureauof Investigations is responsible for assisting local law enforcement agenciesin investigating crimes.52 Civilservants may request review by civil service boards when they believe theyhave been fired or disciplined inappropriately.53 SeeAshley v. Stewart, U.S. District Court, Northern District of Georgia,4:92-CV-0119, filed January 1992.54 See18 USC §§241 and 242. §241 states: "If two or more personsconspire to injure, oppress, threaten or intimidate any person in any State,Territory, or District in the free exercise or enjoyment of any right orprivilege secured to him by the Constitution or laws of the United States,or because his having so exercised the same...." and §242 states inrelevant part: "Whoever, under color of any law, statute, ordinance, regulation,or custom, willfully subjects any person in any State, Territory, or Districtto the deprivation of any rights, privileges, or immunities secured orprotected by the Constitution or laws of the United States...shall be finedunder this title or imprisoned...."55 Accordingto the TRAC data, fifty-seven matters were pending at the end of 1994.The TRAC data were obtained from the Justice Department's Executive Officefor U.S. Attorneys. The Civil Rights Division maintains a separate database,with different coding. The Civil Rights Division was unable to providethe same information for 1994 and 1995, as requested by Human Rights Watch,because their data cannot be sorted by state. In an April 8, 1996 meeting,Civil Rights Division representatives did indicate that there had beenone indictment of a police officer in a civil rights case in Georgia during1994.56 AssistantU.S. Attorney Thomas Withers of Georgia's Southern District, in telephoneinterview on April 5, 1996.57 Federalprosecutors are now considering bringing charges against the officers involvedin the Jerry Jackson shooting.58 1996Department of Justice Congressional Authorization and Budget Submission,Volume I, Civil Rights Division, p. G-8. The Justice Department data arenot broken down by the target of the complaint or investigation (e.g. localpolice officer, federal police officer, corrections officer, etc.), butthe report does state that "police and other official misconduct, whichconstitutes the majority of the complaints reviewed by the Program, continuedto receive substantial attention. Law enforcement officials were defendantsin nearly half the cases filed in 1994." Nearly half of the total casesfiled (seventy-six) would be approximately 35.59 Ibid.For example, Fiscal Year 1993 figures show 10,206 complaints reviewed,with fifty-nine cases filed, approximately half of 1 percent. Justice Departmentestimates for 1995 are identical to the 1994 statistics provided.60 Aswe noted in our discussion with Roberts, many victims of police abuse donot file formal complaints with any entity, or file complaints only withinternal affairs divisions which usually do not forward cases to the JusticeDepartment, leading us to conclude that the complaints received by theJustice Department are only a portion of the actual abuse incidents.61 Infact, the Fiscal Year 1996 Department of Justice Congressional Authorizationand Budget Submission, Volume 1, indicates a loss of four positionsin the Criminal Section of the Civil Rights Division during Fiscal Year1995.62 Accordingto the Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sourcebook of Criminal JusticeStatistics 1994, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C. 1995. Thisfigure includes local full-time police officers, sheriffs' deputies, statepolice officers, and federal agents.63 InMarch 1991, black motorist Rodney King was beaten severely with policebatons, kicked and shot with a non-lethal gun called a taser by Los Angelespolice after a high-speed chase; the beating was captured on videotapeand caused a national uproar and renewed attention on the problem of policebrutality. The subsequent acquittal of the brutal officers in state courtwas followed by violence and looting in Los Angeles and other cities, includingAtlanta; two of the officers were eventually convicted in federal court.64 HumanRights Watch interview, Jerry Miles, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Atlanta,March 1, 1996.1 HumanRights Watch opposes capital punishment in all circumstances because ofits inherent cruelty. Furthermore, we believe that it is often carriedout in a discriminatory manner and that the inherent fallibility of allcriminal justice systems assures that even when full due process of lawis respected, innocent persons are sometimes executed. Because an executionis irreversible, such miscarriages of justice can never be corrected. Forthese reasons, Human Rights Watch opposes all executions under law, irrespectiveof the crime and the legal process leading to their implementation.2 TheGeorgia death penalty provisions were signed into law by Gov. Jimmy Carterin March 1973. The Supreme Court upheld that statute on July 2, 1976, inthe case of Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153 (1976). The same day,the court upheld the capital punishment statutes of Florida and Texas.Proffitt v. Florida, 428 U.S. 242 (1976); Jurek v. Texas,428 U.S. 262 (1976).3 Inits 1995 report, the Georgia Supreme Court Commission on Racial and EthnicBias in the Court System found that Georgia's criminal justice system "isbiased against economically disadvantaged individuals." See GeorgiaSupreme Court Commission, Let Justice Be Done, August 1995, p. 4.Poverty level based on the 1990 census.4 Articles3 and 6, G.A. Res. 217, U.N. Doc. 1/177 (1948). In Centre for Human Rights,Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments, Vol. I,ST/HR/1/Rev.5 (New York: United Nations, 1994), p. 1. Also available athttp://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty/.5 Article6, G.A. Res. 2200, U.N. GAOR, 21st Sess., Annex, Supp. No. 16 at 52, U.N.Doc. A/6316 (1966). In Centre for Human Rights, Human Rights: A Compilationof International Instruments, Vol. I, ST/HR/1/Rev.5 (New York: UnitedNations, 1994), p. 20. Also available at http://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty/.6Article 1, G.A. Res. 128,U.N. GAOR, 44st Session (1989). In Centre for Human Rights, Human Rights:A Compilation of International Instruments, Vol. I, ST/HR/1/Rev.5 (NewYork: United Nations, 1994), p. 46. Also available at http://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty/.7 Aspresented on the United Nations web site (http://www.un.org/), May 3, 1996.8 GARes. 2106 A (1965). In Centre for Human Rights, Human Rights: A Compilationof International Instruments, Vol. I, ST/HR/1/Rev.5 (New York: UnitedNations, 1994), p. 66. Also available at http://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty/.9 CERDhas been described as "the international community's only tool for combatingracial discrimination which is at one and the same time universal in reach,comprehensive in scope, legally binding in character, and equipped withbuilt-in measures of implementation." 33 UN GAOR Supp. (No.18) at 108,109 UN Doc. A/33/18 (1978) cited in Theodor Meron, "The Meaning and Reachof the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of RacialDiscrimination," 79 The American Journal of International Law 283,American Society of International Law, Washington, D.C., April 1985.10 U.N.Doc. CERD/C/SEWER.967 at par.32 (introductory comments of Mr. Wolfrum).11 Article4, American Convention on Human Rights, January 7, 1970, O.E.A./Ser. K/XVI/1.1,Doc. 65, Rev. 1, Corr. 1. Of the hemisphere's thirty-five countries, ten,including the U.S., have not ratified this convention.12 Inter-AmericanCourt of Human Rights, Restrictions to the Death Penalty, Advis.Op., OC-3/83, Series A, No. 3, pp. 80-81.13 GinoJ. Naldi, "Prohibition on the Death Penalty in International Law," NetherlandsInternational Law Review, (Dordecht, Netherlands: Tmcasser Instituute,1991), Vol. 38, p.377. See William A. Schabas, Abolition of theDeath Penalty in International Law (Cambridge, England: Grotius Publications,1993).14 EuropeanConvention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms,November 4, 1950, Article 2, Europ. T.S. No. 5.15 SixthProtocol to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and FundamentalFreedoms Concerning the Abolition of the Death Penalty, April 28, 1983,Article 1, Europ. T.S. No. 114.16 U.N.Economic and Social Council,U.N. Safeguards guaranteeing protectionof the rights of those facing the death penalty, Resolution 1984/50,May 25, 1984.17 Ibid.18 Ibid.19 Asof the end of 1992, 44 percent of countries in the world had abolishedthe death penalty in law or practice. See Amnesty International Report1993, (London: Amnesty International, 1993), p. 17.20 Inthe U.S. context, African-Americans were typically killed by lynchings,usually involving a white mob and the hanging of the victim from a treelimb.21 A.Leon Higginbotham, Jr., In the Matter of Color: Race in the AmericanLegal Process, (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978), p. 256.22 Ibid.23 DouglasL. Colbert, Challenging the Challenge: Thirteenth Amendment as a ProhibitionAgainst the Racial Use of Peremptory Challenges, 76 Cornell Law Review1, (1990), p. 79 quoting Michael Belknap, Federal Law and Southern Order(Athens, Georgia: University of Georgia Press, 1987), pp. 22-26.24 DanT. Carter, Scottsboro: A Tragedy of the American South (BatonRouge, Louisiana: Louisiana State University Press, 1979), p. 115.25 Colbert,p. 80. W. Fitzhugh Brundage, Lynching in the New South: Georgia andVirginia, 1880-1930 (Urbana, Illinois: University of Illinois Press,1993).26 "ThePace of Executions: Since 1976 . . and Through History," The New YorkTimes, December 4, 1994, Section 4, p. 3 (supplemented by author withexecutions which occurred in 1995).27 PrenticePalmer & Jim Galloway, "Georgia electric chair spans 5 decades,"The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, December 15, 1983, p. 15A (observingthat Georgia "set national records for executions over a 20-year periodin the 1940s and 1950s.")28 Furmanv. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238 (1972). The five judges that made up the majorityin Furman concluded that the death penalty was being imposed sodiscriminatorily, 408 U.S. at 249-252 (Douglas J., concurring), ibid. at310 (Stewart, J., concurring), ibid. at 364-366 (Marshall, J., concurring),so arbitrarily, ibid. at 291-295 (Brennan J., concurring), ibid. at 306(Stewart, J., concurring), and so infrequently, ibid. at 310 (White, J.,concurring), thatany given death sentence was cruel and unusual. JusticeBrennan also concluded that because "the deliberate extinguishment of humanlife by the State is uniquely degrading to human dignity" it is inconsistentwith "the evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturingsociety." Ibid. at 270, 291.29 OfficialCode of Georgia Annotated §§ 16-5-1, 17-10-30.30 Themost death sentences have come from the Chattahoochee Judicial Circuit,which includes Columbus. Four people sentenced to death in Columbus, threeof them African-Americans, have been executed.31 ToGeorgia's credit, it was the first state to approve a blanket ban on theexecution of mentally retarded persons, but only after the 1986 executionof Jerome Bowden. The ban does not go far enough, however, since internationalhuman rights law prohibits the execution of anyone who is mentally ill.See United Nations Economic and Social Council Resolution1989/64 specifically prohibiting the execution of the mentally ill.32 Internationalhuman rights law prohibits the execution of juvenile offenders. Article6(5) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights states:"Sentence of death shall not be imposed for crimes committed by personsbelow eighteen years of age...." Article 4(5) of the American Conventionon Human Rights states: "Capital punishment shall not be imposed upon personswho, at the time the crime was committed, were under 18 years of age...."33 Dobbsv. Zant, 720 F. Supp. 1566, 1578 (N.D. Ga. 1989), aff'd, 946 F.2d,1519, 1523 (11th Cir. 1991), remanded, 113 S.Ct. 835 (1993). These practicescarry a historical implication of contempt, as African-American men undersegregation and back into the era of slavery were often addressed by whitesas "boy" or by their first names only.34 Transcriptof Dobbs trial, page 85, part of the record on appeal in Dobbs v. Zant.35 Dobbsv. Zant, 720 F. Supp. at 1577.36 Morethan twenty years after his original trial, the Dobbs case is still pendingafter the Supreme Court reversed the appellate court's ruling, but notthe conviction, finding that the case warranted further consideration inlight of new evidence about what transpired during his trial.37 McCleskeyv. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279 (1987).38 Accordingto the 1990 U.S. census, whites constitute about 71 percent, blacks constitute27 percent, and all other races combined constitute 2 percent of Georgia'spopulation.39 UniformCrime Reporting Program, Federal Bureau of Investigation, 1994.40 NAACPLegal Defense and Education Fund, Death Row USA, (New York: NAACPLDF, Winter 1995).41 Ibid.42 Ibid.43 U.S.General Accounting Office, Death Penalty Sentencing: Research IndicatesPattern of Racial Disparities, (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government PrintingOffice, February 1990), p. 5.44 Thestudies are discussed extensively in Baldus et al. Equal Justice andthe Death Penalty (Boston: Northeastern University, 1990), and in theSupreme Court's decision in McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279 (1987).45 Balduset al. Equal Justice and the Death Penalty (Boston: Northeastern University,1990).46 Fora discussion of the political pressures that often affect state court judges,see Stephen B. Bright & Patrick J. Keenan, "Judges and the Politicsof Death: Deciding Between the Bill of Rights and the Next Election inCapital Cases," Boston University Law Review, Vol. 75, 1995, p.759.47 Harrisv. Alabama, 115 S. Ct. 1031, 1039 (1995), as described in The Crisisin Capital Representation, The Record of the Association of the Barof the City of New York, Vol. 51, No. 2 (March 1996), pp. 182-3.48 OfGeorgia's 169 Superior Court judges, only fifteen are African-American,with six presiding in Atlanta. Thus, though African-Americans make up 27percent of the population of Georgia, and a majority of the victims anddefendants in criminal cases, only 9 percent of the Superior Court judgesare black. It is important to note that there are two African-Americanson the Georgia Supreme Court, one of whom is the Chief Justice.49 Lingov. State, 437 S.E.2d 463, 468 (Ga. 1993) (Sears-Collins, J., dissenting,in case in which the majority of the court upheld a prosecutor's strikingof eleven African-Americans during jury selection in a capital case).50 Asthe Georgia Supreme Court's Commission on Racial and Ethnic Bias recentlyconcluded, "there are still areas within the state where members of minorities,whether racial or ethnic, do not receive equal treatment from the legalsystem." Georgia Supreme Court Commission on Racial and Ethnic Bias, LetJustice Be Done: Equally, Fairly, and Impartially, Atlanta, August1995, p. 9.51 Theevidence was gathered and presented in the case of State v. Brooks,Super. Ct. of Muscogee Co., Ga., Indictment Nos. 3888, 54606 (1991). SeeDeath Penalty Information Center, Chattahoochee Judicial District: TheBuckle of the Death Belt, Washington, D.C., 1991.52 Ibid.53 ClintClaybrook, "Slain girl's father top campaign contributor," Columbus(Ga.) Ledger-Enquirer, August 7, 1988, p. B-1.54 TheConfederacy, the short-lived self-proclaimed government that the Confederateflag represents, was the collection of states and territories that foughtagainst the central U.S. government between 1861 and 1865 to preserve slavery,among other goals.55 347U.S. 483 (1954) (held that racial segregation in the public schools violatesthe Equal Protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution);Brown v. Board of Education, 349 U.S. 294, 300 (1955) also calledBrown II, required that desegregation of the public schools proceed"with all deliberate speed."56 Colemanv. Miller, 885 F. Supp. 1561, 1569 (M.D. Ga. 1995). See also JuliusChambers, Protection of Civil Rights: A Constitutional Mandate for theFederal Government, 87 Mich. L. Rev. 1599, 1601 n.9 (1989). The KuKlux Klan is a racist white-supremacist organization historically activein the southern U.S. states and engaged in violent harassment of African-Americans,with methods including racially motivated murder and torture.57 Chartsshowing most of the prosecutor's capital trials are included in Hortonv. Zant, 941 F.2d 1449, 1468-70 (11th Cir.1991), cert. denied, 117L.Ed.2d 652 (1992). Two other capital cases were tried against white defendantsbefore the prosecutor left office. Tharpe v. State, 416 S.E.2d 78(Ga. 1992); Fugate v. State, 431 S.E.2d 104 (Ga. 1993).58 Hortonv. Zant, 941 F.2d at 1458.59 ChattahoocheeJudicial District: The Buckle of the Death Belt published by the DeathPenalty Information Center, Washington, D.C., 1991.60 Accordingto the attorney's testimony in Gates v. Zant, 863 F.2d 1492, 1497-1500(11th Cir. 1989), rehearing en banc denied, 880 F.2d 293 (1989), cert.denied, 493 U.S. 945 (1989).61 Lingov. State, 437 S.E.2d 463, 468 (Ga. 1993). See Thompson v.State, 390 S.E.2d 253 (Ga. App. 1990) (state's striking of a socialworker who might identify with persons of lower socioeconomic circumstancesdeemed race-neutral); Berry v. State 435 S.E.2d 433 (Ga. 1993) (state'sstriking of [seven black] women over the age of fifty based on argumentthat they might be overly sympathetic to a young defendant or might findthe defense attorney's demeanor and style appealing was found to be race-neutral);Minor v. State, 442 S.E.2d 745 (Ga. 1994) (court upheld the prosecution'sstrike of an unemployed nightclub singer who hadn't worked in more thanthree years based on the justification that the juror had a "lack of commitmentand dedication to the community" and was more of a "free spirit" than someonein a "more traditional job"); Trice v. State, 464 S.E.2d 205 (Ga.1995) (state's striking of panelmember who was Job Corps employee, whereprosecutor alleged prior experience of lack of cooperation by Job Corpsemployees, deemed race-neutral); Ellerbee v. State, 449 S.E.2d 874(Ga.App. 1994) (striking of real estate agent, based upon third party (policeofficer) claim that many real estate agents are arrested for driving drunkafter having been out with clients); Kelly v. State, 434 S.E.2d743 (Ga.App. 1993) (striking of panelmember who had been in present jobonly four months and might be "unstable member of the community"); Lewisv. State,440 S.E.2d 664 (Ga. 1994) (third party [victim's widow] onwhom state relied in executing two strikes could not, upon questioningat remand hearing eighteen months after trial, recall reasons for strikingone of them; strike upheld); Burgess v. State, 390 S.E.2d 92 (Ga.App.1990) (no requirement that state's racially neutral explanations be supportedby transcript of voir dire); Howie v. State, 459 S.E.2d 179(Ga.App.1995)(state's striking of the only two black panelmembers, because theyworked in the legal field [even though one was merely a copier for a legalcopy service] and were young, deemed race-neutral); Green v. State,464 S.E.2d 21 (Ga.App. 1995) (state's striking of panelmembers eitherpreviously prosecuted for welfare fraud or the same age as defendant deemedrace-neutral); and Smith v. State, 448 S.E.2d 179 (Ga. 1994) (state'sstriking of panelmembers who were divorced, childless, lived in a particularpublic housing complex, or lived in same area as defendant all deemed race-neutral).62 481U.S. 279 (1987).63 Hancev. Zant, 463 U.S. 1210 (1994) (Blackmun, J., dissenting from denialof certiorari); Bob Herbert, "Mr. Hance's 'Perfect Punishment,'" TheNew York Times, March 27, 1994, p. D17; Bob Herbert, "Jury Room Injustice,"The New York Times, March 30, 1994, p. A15.64 Spencerv. State, 398 S.E.2d 179 (Ga. 1990).65 Amadeov. Zant, 486 U.S. 214 (1988).66 AmericanBar Association, "Toward a More Just and Effective System of Review inState Death Penalty Cases," American University Law Review (Washington,D.C.), Volume 40, No. 1, 1990, pp. 65-67. For further discussion of theimpact of poverty on the imposition of the death penalty due to the qualityof representation provided by court-appointed counsel see, Stephen B. Bright,"Counsel for the Poor: The Death Sentence Not for the Worst Crime but forthe Worst Lawyer," Yale Law Journal (New Haven, Connecticut), Volume103, 1994, p. 1835.67 HalStrauss, "Indigent legal defense called `terrible,'" Atlanta Journal-Constitution.,July 7, 1985, pp. A1, A12.68 AmericanBar Association, "Toward a More Just and Effective System of Review inState Death Penalty Cases," American University Law Review, Volume40, No. 1, 1990.69 Rossv. Zant, 260 Ga. 213, 393 S.E.2d 244, 245 (1990).70 Nelsonv. Zant, 261 Ga. 358, 405 S.E.2d 250 (1991).71 Smithv. Kemp, 715 F.2d 1459, 1469 (11th Cir. 1983) (observing that the unconstitutionaljury "provision applied to both juries"), application denied, 463 U.S.1344 (1983), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 1003 (1983).72 Machettiv. Linahan, 679 F.2d 236, 241 (11th Cir. 1982), cert. denied, 459 U.S.1127 (1983).73 Smithv. Kemp, 715 F.2d at 1469-1472. See also id. at 1476 (Hatchett, J.,dissenting).74 Stanleyv. Kemp, 737 F.2d 921 (11th Cir.), application for stay denied, 468U.S. 1220 (1984).75 Thomasv. Kemp, 800 F.2d 1024 (11th Cir. 1986).76 Youngv. Kemp, Civ. No. 85-98-2MAC (M.D. Ga. 1985) (affidavit of CharlesMarchman, Jr.), aff'd, 758 F.2d 514 (11th Cir. 1985), cert. denied,470 U.S. 1066 (1985).77 Asnoted above, the execution of mentally ill persons does not meet internationalhuman rights standards.78 Messerv. Kemp, 831 F.2d 946, 951 (11th Cir. 1987) (en banc), cert. denied,485 U.S. 1029 (1988).79 Messerv. Kemp, 760 F.2d 1080, 1097 (11th Cir. 1985) (Johnson, J., dissenting),cert. denied, 474 U.S. 1088 (1986) (Marshall, J., dissenting from denialof certiorari).80 372U.S. 335 (1963).81 In1988, Congress enacted amendments to the Criminal Justice Act creatinga statutory right to counsel for federal habeas corpus challenges in capitalcases. But, according to federal habeas corpus requirements, the defendantmust put every possible and even remote issue into the state post-convictionpleading or risk waiver, meaning that even if a prisoner is provided withfederal habeas corpus representation, he or she may not have a claim ifno state post-conviction counsel was available or qualified.82 StephenBayliss, Co-Director of the Georgia Resource Center, as quoted in TheCrisis in Capital Representation, p. 202.83 McFarlandv. Scott, 114 S. Ct. at 2789 (1994) (Blackmun, J., dissenting). SeeBenjamin R. Civiletti, Amicus Curiae Brief for Frank Robert West in Wrightv. West, 505 U.S. 277 (1992), as cited in The Crisis in CapitalRepresentation, p. 192.1 SeeMarc Mauer and Tracy Huling, Young Black Americans and the CriminalJustice System: Five Years Later, (Washington, D.C.: The SentencingProject, October 1995). According to their analysis, African-Americansconstitute 34.7 percent of arrests for drug possession nationwide and African-Americansand Hispanics constitute almost 90 percent of drug possession offenderssentenced to state prison.2 MichaelTonry, Malign Neglect: Race, Crime and Punishment in America, (NewYork: Oxford University Press, 1995), p.105. See also, Alfred Blumstein,"Racial Disproportionality of U.S. Prison Populations Revisited," 64 Universityof Colorado Law Review 743 ( 1993).3 Inpreparing this report, Human Rights Watch conducted a series of interviewsin Georgia with police officials, prosecutors, defense attorneys and thechief justice of the Georgia Supreme Court.4 Weuse the term "drug" to refer to controlled substances covered by Chapter13 of Title 16 of the criminal code of Georgia.5 See,for example, Article 2, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; Article2, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; Article 1, AmericanConvention on Human Rights. See generally, Warwick McKean, Equalityand Discrimination under International Law, (Oxford, England: ClarendonPress, 1983).6 CERDhas been described as "the international community's only tool for combatingracial discrimination which is at one and the same time universal in reach,comprehensive in scope, legally binding in character, and equipped withbuilt-in measures of implementation." 33 UN GAOR Supp. (No.18) at 108,109 UN Doc. A/33/18 (1978) cited in Theodor Meron, "The Meaning and Reachof the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of RacialDiscrimination," 79 The American Journal of International Law 283(1985).7 U.N.Doc. CERD/C/SEWER.967 at par.32 (introductory comments of Mr. Wolfrum).In an October 27, 1995 letter to Secretary of State Warren Christopher,Human Rights Watch, the International Human Rights Law Group and the NAACPLegal Defense and Educational Fund urged the United States to address thequestion of racial discrimination in the enforcement of drug laws in itssubmission reporting on U.S. law and practice relating to race discriminationto the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination.8 Theraw arrest data utilized in this report was provided by the uniform crimereporting program of the Georgia Crime Information Center (GCIC), a divisionof the Georgia Bureau of Investigation. Incarceration data was providedby the Georgia Department of Corrections (GDC).9 Thisreport looks only at statewide aggregate data. It does not address localvariations in law enforcement practices or drug markets.10 Areview of possible racial bias in different aspects of the Georgia criminaljustice system was undertaken by the Georgia Supreme Court Commission onRacial and Ethnic Bias in the Court System, Let Justice Be Done: Equally,Fairly, and Impartially, (Atlanta: Administrative Office of the Courts,August 1995).11 OfficialCode of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.)§§16-13-24, 30 and 31 (1995).12 Georgialaw does not distinguish between forms of cocaine, e.g., crack and powder.13 Dataprovided by the GCIC include the number of arrests by Georgia police, raceof arrestees and drug offenses involved. Arrests by federal agents arenot included. The GCIC classifies an arrest according to the most seriouscrime or charge. If, for example, a person is arrested possessing marijuanaand trying to sell cocaine, the arrest is classified as a cocaine salearrest.14 Accordingto the 1990 U.S. census, the total population of Georgia is 6,478,216.The number of people classified as white is 4,600,148 ( 71 percent of thetotal); the number of people classified as black is 1,746,565 ( 27 percentof total), and the number of people classified as all other races combinedis 131,503 ( 2 percent of the total). In this report, we address only theimpact of the criminal justice system on whites and blacks. The numberof persons from other races arrested and imprisoned for drug offenses isminuscule. Neither the GCIC nor the GDC classify hispanics separately fromblacks and whites.15 GCICfigures on the number of arrests for cocaine include arrests for opiumand its derivatives (e.g. heroin). Most of the arrests in this categoryare, however, for cocaine.16 Rateswere calculated on basis of figures for white and black adults over theage of eighteen contained in 1990 census.17 Thetotal number of arrests for marijuana is considerably less than for cocaine,even though one can assume that in Georgia, as in the nation, marijuanais the most widely used drug. For example, in 1994, marijuana users comprisedapproximately 80 percent of current (past month) drug users nationwide.The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration ( SAMHSA)of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, "Preliminary Estimatesfrom the 1994 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse," (Rockville, MD:SAMHSA, September 1995), p. 20. SAMHSA conducts annual surveys of druguse based on voluntary household interviews with a nationwide statisticalsample. On the basis of these surveys, SAMHSA publishes calculations ofthe rate or prevalence of drug use by different population categories,including by race, as well as estimates of the total numbers of drug userswithin those population categories.18 Ahousehold survey of drug use in Georgia has been initiated by the Divisionof Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse of the GeorgiaDepartment of Human Resources and is scheduled to be completed in September,1996.19 HumanRights Watch interview, Daniel Porter, district attorney for Gwinnett County,Lawrenceville, Georgia, March 5, 1996.20 Officeof National Drug Control Policy, Pulse Check: National Trends in DrugAbuse (Washington, D.C.: Fall, 1995), p.22; Pulse Check, Summer, 1995,p.20. Pulse Check reports on illegal drug use trends based on informationONDCP obtains from police, ethnographers and epidemiologists working inthe drug field. Trends in Atlanta are routinely included. The reports donot, however, provide statistical data on the total numbers or proportionsof different races using controlled substances. See also, Claire Sterk-Elifson,KathleenDolan, "Metropolitan Atlanta Drug Abuse Trends," in Proceedings of theCommunity Epidemiologic Working Group (National Institute of Drug Abuse,December, 1994).21 Inthe mid-1980s, federal government surveys found significant regional differencesin drug use. By the mid 1990s, however, those differences, particularlywith regard to cocaine use, had largely disappeared.22 Druguse rates provide a reasonable proxy for possession rates.23 TheSAMHSA household surveys provide the most comprehensive national data ondrug use, but they do not include institutionalized persons, homeless personsnot living in shelters and people with less stable residences generally.In this report, Human Rights Watch has used the SAMHSA national figuresfor the years 1991-1993 and the preliminary estimates for 1994.24 SAMHSAdefines current users as those using drugs at least once within the monthpreceding the survey date. Human Rights Watch calculated the use percentagesfor each race from SAMHSA figures on the estimated total number of drugusers and the figures for each race. The total drug-using population nationallyincludes other race and ethnic groups. The SAMSHA surveys also count Hispanicsas a separate drug using population. We have not included their use inour calculations both because other races and Hispanics constitute lessthan2 percent of the population in Georgia and because they are a small percentageof the total population of drug users nationwide.25 SAMHSA'ssurveys have consistently shown that in absolute numbers, far more whitesuse illicit drug, including cocaine, than blacks. SAMHSA data also beliesthe stereotype prevalent in the U.S. media that crack users are poor African-Americans.According to the 1994 survey, for example, 292,000 whites were currentusers of crack cocaine compared to 161,000 blacks. SAMHSA, PopulationEstimates for 1994, September 1995, Table 5 B and D.26 SAMHSAsurveys indicate that between 1991 and 1994, the average percentage ofblacks who were current cocaine users was 1.35 percent or 1,350 per 100,000;for whites the average was .55 percent or 550 per 100,000.27 Theaverage annual arrest rate for cocaine possession for blacks was 826 per100,000 versus 53 per 100,000 for whites. Even assuming the figures onblack use may differ from actual use by a factor of 100 percent, the differencebetween the arrest rates and the use rates for blacks would still be significant.28 ONDCP,Pulse Check, Summer 1995.29 Beginningin 1991, during the household survey SAMHSA asked respondents whether theyhad sold any illicit drugs during the preceding year. One can assume thatself-reporting on illegal conduct may be conservative, and that withholdinginformation would more prevalent with regard to drug selling.30 PatrickLangan, "The Race Disparity in U.S. Drug Arrests," unpublished manuscript,September 21, 1995. Langan is a senior statistician with the Bureau ofJustice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice. According to Joseph Gfroerer,Chief of Prevalence Branch, Office of Applied Studies, SAMSHA, the resultsof the questions on drug selling, along with other questions on criminalactivity, are not included in the published household survey reports, butare available from SAMSHA.31 SeeCharles R. Lawrence, "The Id, the Ego, and Equal Protection: Reckoningwith Unconscious Racism," 39 Stanford Law Review 317 (1987).32 M.Tonry, Malign Neglect, p. 106. See also, Alfred Blumstein, "YouthViolence, Guns, and the Illicit-Drug Industry", 86 The Journal of CriminalLaw and Criminology 10, 29 (1995). Other logistical factors may be importantas well. For example, low-income purchasers of cocaine buy the drug inthe cheap form of single or several hits of crack. They must engage infar more illegal transactions to satisfy their desire for drugs than middle-classconsumers of powder cocaine who have the resources to buy larger and longerlasting supplies. The greater frequency of purchases may affect the arrestrates. See A. Blumstein, "Youth Violence," p. 30.33 Asone Georgia public official, who requested anonymity, succinctly explainedto Human Rights Watch:"When you want to catch fish, you go where the fishingis easiest."34 HumanRights Watch interview with Robert Benham, chief justice of the SupremeCourt of Georgia, Atlanta, March 4, 1996.35 HumanRights Watch interview with Police Maj. William Shannon, Atlanta, March4, 1996.36 Accordingto the 1990 census, the per capita income of white persons in urban Georgiawas three times that of blacks and twice that of blacks in rural areas.One-third of all blackGeorgians are below the poverty line, compared toless than 10 percent of white persons. At the other end of the income scale,approximately 55,000 black households had incomes of more than $50,000compared to 475,000 white households. We are not aware of any statisticalstudies of the econmic status of people arrested and incarcerated in Georgiafor drug offenses-or other crimes. The consensus, however, is that mostof the drug offenders who are arrested are low income.37 Lawprofessor Michael Tonry argues cogently that policy makers should be heldaccountable morally and politically for the foreseeable racially disparateimpact of the "war on drugs". He advocates the approach used, for example,in criminal law, where acting with knowledge of likely effect can be asculpable as acting with specific intent to cause that effect. Tonry, MalignNeglect, pp.4-5.38 Thereare no reliable, comprehensive data available with which to evaluate theracial impact of decisions made at the numerous decision points in thecriminal justice system following arrest and prior to incarceration39 Thetotal of 41,068 persons does not include persons of races other than whiteand African-American. According to statisticians with the Georgia Departmentof Corrections, there are extremely few inmates classified as neither whitenor black.40 Table5 includes persons who may have been convicted of more than one drug offenseand who may also have been convicted of non-drug offenses. Data from theDepartment of Corrections suggests that between 1990 and 1995 blacks receivedapproximately half of the straight probation sentences that were awardedto drug offenders.41 Incarcerationrates were calculated by Human Rights Watch on the basis of Georgia CrimeInformation Center arrest data and Georgia Department of Corrections prisonadmission data. In order to permit the most acurate comparison possiblewith arrest data, calculation of imprisonment rates was based on prisonerswith only one drug offense type for the current conviction and who werenot also serving time for a non-drug felony. The actual number of inmatesserving time at least in part because of one or more drug offenses is greater.If we use that larger pool of imprisoned offenders, the incarceration ratefor blacks is 18.9 percent and for whites is 8.5 percent.42 Thisis not surprising, as marijuana is commonly considered the least dangerousof the illicit drugs, Georgia law punishes marijuana offenses less harshlythan cocaine, and prosecutors and judges reputedly are also more lenientin charging and sentencing decisions for marijuana.43 Foreach drug (cocaine, marijuana and other), the average imprisonment ratewas calculated by aggregating black and white offenders. The three averageimprisonment rates were used to compute the expected number of white andblack offenders who would be imprisoned after being arrested for a drugoffense.44 Departmentof Corrections data suggest there is little difference between white andblack drug offenders with regard to prior incarcerations. They show that,between 1990 and 1995, 61 percent of black offenders and 67 percent ofwhite offenders admitted to prison had not previously been incarcerated.On the other hand, 77 percent of black offenders and 39 percent of whiteoffenders who were incarcerated for a drug offense conviction also wereserving time for a non-drug felony. Department of Corrections databasesdo not include data that would permit us to ascertain whether drug inmateswere previously convicted for other crimes, whether their history includedconvictions for which no prison time was served, or even how many timesthey had been previously incarcerated.45 Thedifferent incarceration rates for white and black drug offenders may, ofcourse, also reflect biases that are not specific to drug cases but whichoperate throughout the criminal justice system. As the Georgia SupremeCourt Commission on Racial and Ethnic Bias concluded, for example,"thereare still areas within the state where members of minorities, whether racialor ethnic, do not receive equal treatment from the legal system...[M]orefrequently than intentional acts, there are incidences of bias which appearto result from unintentional conduct or conduct resulting from a lack ofawareness....[Moreover,] the system is biased against economically disadvantagedindividuals." Georgia Supreme Court Commission, Let Justice Be Done,p. 9.46 Totry to get as accurate a picture as possible of sentences for comparabledrug offenses by comparable offenders within the limitations of the availabledata, we have looked at the sentence length of inmates who have no currentnon-drug felony conviction, have no prior record of incarceration, whodid not receive a life sentence, and who have only one drugoffense typefor the current conviction.47 TheDepartment of Corrections records do not specify whether a life sentencewas imposed under O.C.G.A..§§ 16-13-30(d) for drug offenses orfor some other offense such as murder or kidnaping. We added a non-drugoffense variable to the data classification to screen out any offenderswho might have been sentenced for a drug offense but who received a lifesentence for a non-drug crime.48 SeeMays v. State, 262 Ga. 90 (1992). In Stephens v. State, 265Ga. 356, 360 (1995), Justice Thompson noted in his concurring opinion that"O.C.G.A.§§ 16-13-30(d) has been converted from a mandatory lifesentence statute into a statute which imposes a life sentence only in thosecases in which a district attorney, in the excercise of his or her discretion,informs a defendant that the state is seeking enhanced punishment."49 HumanRights Watch's review of the life sentences given in different judicialcircuits suggests considerable variation in the practices of district attorneys,with some rarely seeking life sentences and others applying the law moreconsistently.50 HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Spencer Lawton, district attorneyfor the eastern judicial circuit of Georgia and president of the ProsecutingAttorneys' Council, Savannah, December, 1995.51 HumanRights Watch interview with Daniel Porter, district attorney for GwinnettCounty, Lawrenceville, March 5, 1996. Porter objected particularly to factthat under the statute small dealers faced mandatory life sentences whilemajor trafficker did not.52 Percentagecalculated from Georgia Department of Corrections data.53 Limitationsin the Department of Corrections database preclude a definitive calculationof the number of offenders who were eligible for life sentences under O.C.G.A..§§16-13-30(d). Our calculations are based on the most currentdata available, through December 1995, and reflect the most careful analysispossible within the constraints imposed by the coding of relevant variablesin the database. The number of persons eligible for life sentences wasconsidered both by the Georgia Supreme Court and by Georgia's Supreme CourtCommission on Racial and Ethnic Bias in the Court System. In Stephensv. State, a 1995 case, the court was presented with data indicatingthat a "life eligible" African-American had a one in six chance and aneligible white had a one in 167 chance of receiving a life sentence. 265Ga.356, at 359. The data before the court, however, overcounted the numberof persons "eligible" for life sentences because it included offendersconvicted of marijuana offenses, although marijuana offenses are not includedwithin the life sentence statute. The Supreme Court Commission looked atdata that were broader than that considered in Stephens (it includedindividuals whose convictions may have included probation or split sentences,whereas the Stephens court looked only at convictions resultingin incarceration) and that covered a longer time frame. The Commission'sanalysis showed that 0.5 percent of the white offenders having two or moreconvictions for drug sales received a life sentence compared to 5.7 percentof black offenders.54 Personssentenced to life imprisonment for drug offenses are eligible for parole.Human Rights Watch does not have figures indicating how long, on the average,inmates sentenced to life actually serve before release on parole. Thosereleased on parole, however, face a life-long threat of being returnedto prison for any subsequent infraction or crime.55 LisaReid, "Drug Offenders with Life Sentences: A Profile," a report preparedby the Georgia State Board of Pardons and Paroles in 1992 and updated asof May 4, 1994.56 TheSupreme Court Commission concluded that the statistics it had reviewedon application of life sentence statute "demonstrate that the outcome ofthese drug offense cases differ significantly along racial lines" and calledfor further study on the issue. Supreme Court Commission, Let JusticeBe Done, p. 165.57 E.g.Stephens v. State, 265 Ga. 356 (1995); Hailey v. State, 263Ga. 210 (1993); Hall v. State, 260 Ga. 596 (1992).58 Thenew legislation also expanded the number of drugs that would be coveredby the statute.59 HumanRights Watch, Modern Capital of Human Rights? Abuses in the State ofGeorgia (New York: Human Rights Watch, June 1996), pp.35-59.60 See"Developments in the Law: Race and the Criminal Process," 101 HarvardLaw Review 1520 (1988).61 InternationalConvention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, Par.I, Article 1, 3. In Centre for Human Rights, Human Rights: A Compilationof International Instruments, Vol., ST/HR/1/REV.5 (New York: UnitedNations, 1994), p. 66. Also available at http://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty/.62 SeeCERD, General Recommendation XIV(42) on article 1, paragraph 1, of theConvention, U.N. GAOR, 48th Sess., Supp. No. 18, at 176, U.N. Doc. a/48/18(1993).See also, Theodor Meron, "The Meaning and Reach of the International Conventionon the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination," 79 TheAmerican Journal of International Law 283, 287-88 (1985).1 HumanRights Watch did not conduct an on-site investigation of Georgia prisonand jail conditions. Our conclusions in this chapter are based on documentarymaterial, news articles, and interviews with lawyers and others who monitorGeorgia's treatment of prisoners.2 See,for example, Rhonda Cook, "County Jails Deplored, Defended," AtlantaJournal-Constitution, September 19, 1995; Rhonda Cook, "Georgia PrisonersLose Weightlifting Gear: Get-Tough Program Also Restricts TV, Use of Telephones,"Atlanta Journal-Constitution, September 22, 1995. It should be notedthat in calling for the harsher treatment of prisoners the Georgia publicis following a national trend.3 SeeEstelle v. Gamble, 429 U.S. 97 (1976).4 ECOSOCRes. 663 C (XXIV), July 31, 1957, and 2076 (LXII), May 13, 1977. In Centrefor Human Rights, Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments,Vol. I, ST/HR/1/Rev.5 (New York: United Nations, 1994), p. 243. Also availableat http://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty/.5 G.A.Res. 43/173, December 9, 1988. In Centre for Human Rights, Human Rights:A Compilation of International Instruments, Vol. I, ST/HR/1/Rev.5 (NewYork: United Nations, 1994), p. 265. Also available at http://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty/.6 Letter,Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights Deval L. Patrick to John L.Leach III, Chair, Lee County Commission, June 1, 1995.7 Letter,Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights Deval L. Patrick to ActingCity Manager Iris Jessie, Columbus, Georgia, June 1, 1995.8 Ibid.9 Theauthorities responsible for managing the MCJ state that since receivingthe letter they have made an effort to redress some of the deficienciesfound, although they disagree with some of the Justice Department's findingsand feel hemmed in by budgetary constraints. Explaining that the county"has been caught off guard by the explosion in crime and in the inmatepopulation," one authority acknowledged that the jail was still at least200 prisoners over capacity. Because of this overcrowding, she said thatit was impossible to let inmates exercise on a daily basis, and admittedthat some inmates still end up sleeping on the floor. However, she saidthat the MCJ staff had been increased by about ten deputies, remedyingsome of the jail's problems, and that medical services had been improved.She also said that the Georgia Department of Corrections was responsiblefor some of the overcrowding because it is slow to pick up convicted prisonersthat fall under its authority. Human Rights Watch telephone interview,Iris Jessie, Acting City Manager, Columbus, Georgia, May 7, 1996.10 TheMuscogee facility is the largest of this group, with an inmate capacityof 575; altogether, a total of 19,000 inmates spent time in the facilitylast year. Ibid. According to John Cole Vodicka, director of the Prisonand Jail Project in Americus, Georgia, who monitors conditions at thesefacilities and who filed numerous complaints with the Justice Departmentto initiate the Department's investigation, many counties are resistingall pressure to make improvements. Indeed, the sheriff of the Terrell CountyJail, one of the worst facilities, reacted to Vodicka's complaints by denyingVodicka access to the facility and detaining him in handcuffs for severalhours one afternoon in mid-1994. Human Rights Watch telephone interview,John Cole Vodicka, April 30, 1996.11 Letter,Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights Deval L. Patrick to John Moore,chairman, Coffee County Commission, April 23, 1996.12 Georgiacurrently has a prison population of about 38,000 inmates and probationoffenders, spread among thirty-eight state correctional institutions aswell as a number of county facilities, transitional centers, boot campsand others facilities. Georgia Department of Corrections, GDC Factsat a Glance, March 1996 Update.13 See,for example, Rhonda Cook, "Crime and Punishment: Lock 'Em Up, It's theRallying Cry of the '90s," Atlanta Journal-Constitution, March 26,1995. The article cites polls showing that most Georgians consider crimethe state's most important problem.14 Forexample, the Republican challenger in the 1994 gubernatorial election promisedto end parole in Georgia, while incumbent Zell Miller touted his new crimeinitiative, which sends repeat offenders to prison for life. Julie Hairston& Michael Hinkelman, "Crime Reform's Price Tag," Atlanta BusinessChronicle, October 21, 1994.15 RhondaCook, "Georgia To Make its Prisons Tougher Places," Atlanta Journal-Constitution,September 8, 1995.16 InmateRodney Hall Sr. had received tentative notice that he would be awardedparole, but, after he wrote a letter to a local newspaper sarcasticallylauding the prison system, then-parole board Chairman Garner informed himthat his parole request was denied. In fact, wrote Garner, "It is my pleasureto inform you [that] you are going to continue your service in prison.Your maximum release date on the sentence you received is the year 2008- enjoy!" Rhonda Cook, "Inmate Sues After Parole Rescinded," AtlantaJournal-Constitution, August 12, 1995. The ACLU of Georgia is now handlingHall's First Amendment challenge to the retaliatory parole denial. Telephoneinterview, Gerry Weber, Legal Director, ACLU of Georgia, April 9, 1996.17 CharlesWalston, "Prison Chief Wants Inmates Walking, Working: Daily 4-Mile TrekNow Part of the Jail `Experience,'" Atlanta Journal-Constitution,January 3, 1996.18 Theirresults have varied substantially from facility to facility, but seriouscontraband has been found in some instances. Celia Sibley, "State ConductingSearches for Prison Contraband: Safer Facilities Are Crackdown's Goal,"Atlanta Journal-Constitution, March 6, 1996.19 HumanRights Watch telephone interview, Robert Bensing, attorney, Southern Centerfor Human Rights, April 8, 1996; telephone interview, Gerry Weber, attorney,ACLU of Georgia; see also Rhonda Cook, "Inmates Allege Abuse byGuards; Corrections Chief Witnessed Search, Denies Charges of Beatings,Damage," Atlanta Journal-Constitution, January 27, 1996.20 Theofficial, a deputy prison warden, reportedly forced an inmate to stripto his underwear and stand outside in subfreezing weather for half an hour.Rhonda Cook, "Inmate Reportedly Forced Out in Cold in Underwear," AtlantaJournal-Constitution, January 20, 1996.21 HumanRights Watch believes that chain gangs-which cause inmates unnecessarypsychological and physical pain-constitute cruel, inhuman or degradingtreatment in violation of international human rights standards. Besidesviolating the general prohibition on such treatment contained in the InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political Rights, the use of chain gangs violatesthe specific injunctions of Article 33 of the U.N. Standard Minimum Rulesfor the Treatment of Prisoners, which provides that: "Instruments of restraint,such as handcuffs, chains, irons and straitjackets, shall never be appliedas punishment. Furthermore, chains or irons shall not be used as restraints."1 Ourinvestigation of custodial sexual abuse in Georgia, part of a larger five-statestudy of the issue, took place within the context of the federal classaction lawsuit aimed at putting a stop to such abuse. Cason v. Seckinger,Civil Action File No. 84-313-1-MAC. In conducting our research, we interviewedcurrent and former prisoners, attorneys and a clinical social worker activein Cason and in the civil damages suits spawned by the abuses atissue in Cason; a former prosecutor responsible for trying prisonstaff indicted for criminal sexual contact with prisoners; the former assistantdeputy commissioner forwomen's services of the Georgia Department of Corrections(GDC); and other individuals with firsthand knowledge about the abuses,including a former GDC employee. We also reviewed the records of disciplinaryhearings of correctional officers that corroborate or augment the testimonyof the prisoners we interviewed. In accordance with a protective courtorder in the class action suit, all of the women we interviewed are identifiedby a pseudonym or by their Jane Doe numbers.Neither the Casonlawsuit nor our investigation has systematically examined the problem ofcustodial sexual abuse in Georgia jails. Jail abuses occurring on a systemicscale are much more difficult to address via litigation than are prisonabuses. To begin with, there are over 200 city and county jails in Georgia,each with a separate set of responsible authorities and thus a separateset of potential defendants. In addition, jails hold a much more transientpopulation than do prisons-detainees may be held for very short periods-sothat, in the absence of constant monitoring, abuses are likely to remainconcealed. In short, it would require a large and continuing investmentof resources to investigate jail abuses and to initiate legal action toremedy them. Given the absence of an adequate oversight mechanism to monitorjail abuses, however, and given the generally bad state of Georgia jails,we are greatly concerned about the possibility of custodial sexual abusein the jail system. Indeed, press reports and other sources suggest thatsuch abuse is a recurring problem. See, for example, David Corvette,"Upson County Jailer Charged with Sexual Assault on Inmate," AtlantaJournal-Constitution, July 7, 1992; Scott Marshall, "Some DeputiesRehired at Gwinnett County Jail: All Accused of Sexual Improprieties,"Atlanta Journal-Constitution, January 23, 1993; Doug Payne, "WomanWas Twice Victimized by Jailer, her Lawyer Says," Atlanta Journal-Constitution,February 11, 1993 (Marietta City Jail); "Swainsboro: Sheriff Calls forInvestigation of Jail-Sex Allegations," Atlanta Journal-Constitution,May 29, 1993 (Emanuel County Jail); Scott Marshall, "Former Chief JailerIndicted on Sex Assault Charges," Atlanta Journal-Constitution,September 16, 1993 (Clayton County Jail); Cason v. Seckinger, Affidavit,Jane Doe 187, November 4, 1993 (stating that she had sex with a bailiffwhile held at the Chatham County Jail). In light of the reforms institutedin the Georgia prison system, we urge Georgia officials to accord likeattention to addressing the problem of custodial sexual abuse in Georgiajails.2 GeorgiaDepartment of Corrections, "Ten-Year Trend Analysis: Georgia's Female OffenderPopulation Calendar 1983-1992," October 19, 1993.3 GeorgiaDepartment of Corrections, GDC Facts at a Glance, March 1996 Update.4 Fewother countries allow male guards to hold contact positions in women'sprisons. Indeed, the U.N. Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners,an authoritative interpretion of international law norms mandating humanetreatment and respect for the human dignity of prisoners, specificallybars the practice. Article 53(3), Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatmentof Prisoners, approved by the Economic and Social Council by resolutions663 C, July 31, 1957 and 2076, May 13, 1977. [In Centre for Human Rights,Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments, Vol. I,ST/HR/1/Rev.5 (New York: United Nations, 1994), p. 20. Also available athttp://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty/.] Human Rights Watch, nonetheless, is notper se opposed to the use of male staff in women's prisons, as longas the authorities take appropriate precautions to ensure that women prisoners'rights are not compromised by their use.In Georgia prisons, certainstaff positions are restricted to staff of the same sex as the prisonerssupervised. Generally such positions are "limited to posts or special securitytasks involving frequent or prolonged physical contact with, and/or visualobservation of unclothed inmates, and/or where potential invasion of theinmate's privacy is unavoidable in the course of normal facility operations."GDC Standard Operating Procedures, "`Same Sex Contact' Positions," Ref.No. IV002-005 (effective date April 1, 1992). In addition, the GDC recentlyagreed to a Consent Order in the Cason suit by which only femalestaff will be assigned to women's housing units. Cason v. Seckinger,Consent Order signed March 7, 1996.5 HumanRights Watch telephone interview, Mike Light, GDC spokesman, April 17,1996.6 Becauseof the transfers, women correctional officers who had had less than a fifteen-milecommute to work found themselves with a forty-five-mile commute. Representedby the employees' union, a number of these women filed suit in Fulton CountySuperior Court to block the transfers, claiming that gender-based transfersviolate their right to equal employment opportunity, protected by stateand national anti-discrimination laws. On April 8, 1996, the court deniedthe women guards' motion for a temporary restraining order to enjoin thetransfers. Without reaching the womens' substantive claims, it found thetransfers would not cause irreparable injury to the women. Five women havesince filed claims with the federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commissionseeking to have the policy reversed. Their cases are presently pending.Human Rights Watch telephone interview, David Finz, attorney, Georgia StateEmployees Union, April 18, 1996.7 Wenote, in addition, that the problem of custodial sexual abuse is not limitedto male prison staff, although such abuse is more frequent.8 HumanRights Watch telephone interview, Lisa Boardman Burnette, May 9, 1995.9 See,e.g., Canedy v. Boardman, 16 F.3d 183 (7th Cir. 1994); Fortner v.Thomas, 983 F.2d 1024 (11th Cir. 1993).10 See18 U.S.C. §§ 241 & 242.11 See42 U.S.C. § 1997 et seq. Most recently, the Violent Crime Controland Law Enforcement Act of 1994 gave the Justice Department authority tosue corrections departments and their employees civilly if they have engagedin a "pattern or practice of conduct . . . that deprives persons of rights,privileges or immunities secured or protected by the Constitution or lawof the United States." 42 U.S.C. § 14141. Under Section 14141, theJustice Department can obtain a court injunction barring abusive practices.Justice Department representatives take the position that the law appliesto corrections officers because they are law enforcement officials, eventhough the law appears to require a lower standard of proof than CRIPA.Human Rights Watch telephone interview, Department of Justice, May 8, 1995.12 HumanRights Watch interview, Atlanta, August 4, 1994.13 HumanRights Watch interview, Jane Doe 1, Atlanta, March 1994.14 RhondaCook, "Official directive to stop hog-tying prisoners ignored," AtlantaJournal-Constitution, September 16, 1992. This method of restraintis called hog-tying because the prisoners are tied like animals in a rodeo:their hands are tied behind their back at the wrists: their knees are bentand their legs are tied around at the ankles; and their ankles are thentied to their wrists. Women prisoners restrained in this manner were lefton their stomach, often completely nude. Human Rights Watch telephone interview,Lisa Boardman Burnette, June 6, 1995.15 GeorgiaDepartment of Corrections, Standard Operating Procedures, Reference No.IIB05-0001, November 1, 1990.16 Depositionof Gary Black, former warden at GWCI, February 21, 1994.17 HumanRights Watch interview, Lisa Boardman Burnette, Atlanta, August 5, 1994.18 Ibid.19 Testimonyof Richard Richards, Edward Walker and Thomas Walton, in the disciplinaryhearing of Thomas Walton, February 9, 1994. According to attorney LisaBurnette, this approach did not necessarily prevent the GDC from rehiringthe employee at a future date. Human Rights Watch interview, Atlanta, August5, 1994.20 Interviewaired on ABC's "Day One," "In the Custody of the State," March 14, 1993.21 Thecase was originally filed by attorneys with Georgia Legal Services in 1984to challenge the constitutionality of Georgia prison conditions. (GeorgiaLegal Services no longer conducts prison litigation; attorney Bob Cullen,who continues to act as the lead lawyer on Cason, is now in privatepractice.)22 Sincethe complaint was filed, the number of "Jane Does" has risen to over 200and the pool of plaintiffs has broadened to include prisoners incarceratedat other facilities. The number of Jane Does does not precisely reflectthe number of women who have comeforward with allegations of abuse, however.Since January 1995, when a new investigative procedure was instituted,numerous complainants have not felt it necessary to become plaintiffs.23 Theorder defines sexual contact as any intentional touching, either directlyor through the clothing, of the genitalia, anus, groin, breast, inner thighs,or buttocks, intended to abuse, humiliate, harass, degrade, or arouse orgratify the sexual desire of any person. Sexual abuse, as defined in theorder, includes subjecting any person to sexual contact when the personis unable to consent as a result of her custodial status; through the useof coercion; physical or mental incapacitation; or any forceful sexualcontact. Sexual harassment is broadly defined as "unwelcome sexual advances,requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexualnature." Cason v. Seckinger, Civil Action File No. 84-313-1-MAC,Permanent Injunction, March 7, 1994.24 HumanRights Watch interview, Andie Moss, then assistant deputy commissionerfor women's services, Georgia Department of Corrections, Atlanta, March22, 1994.25 HumanRights Watch interview, Atlanta, August 4, 1994.26 RhondaCook, "Prison guard accused of abusing female prisoners is rehired," AtlantaJournal-Constitution, July 12, 1994.27 HumanRights Watch telephone interview, Karen Kirk, GDC spokesperson, April 30,1996.28 "PrisonSystem Sued," Atlanta Journal-Constitution, December 30, 1994. Thecase has not yet gone to trial. Human Rights Watch telephone interview,Joseph Ferraro, attorney, Georgia Department of Corrections, February 29,1996.29 UnderGeorgia's penal code, rape, sexual assault against a person in custodyand sodomy are three distinct criminal offenses. Oral and anal intercourseare criminalized as sodomy. Where an employee allegedly engages in oralor anal intercourse with a prisoner, the employee is charged with sodomyas well as sexual assault against a person in custody.Although Human Rights Watchapplauds the criminal prosecution of prison staff guilty of sexual contactwith inmates, we believe that the crime is predicated on the abuse of custodialauthority, not on distinctions between oral, anal and vaginal sex thatare irrelevant to this key issue. We are also cognizant of the abusiveapplication of sodomy laws against sexual minorities, particularly in Georgia.For that reason, we believe that instances of custodial sexual abuse shouldbe prosecuted only under Georgia's sexual assault provision, not underits sodomy laws.30 RhondaCook, "Prison guard acquitted on all counts: Prisoners who alleged abuse'unbelievably upset,'" Atlanta Journal-Constitution, June 24, 1993.31 HumanRights Watch interview, woman prisoner, March 1994.32 "OcmulgeeDA was told to quit, GBI report says," Atlanta Journal-Constitution,October 11, 1994.33 RhondaCook, "Federal civil rights probe targets ex-prison worker," AtlantaJournal-Constitution, August 10, 1993.34 HumanRights Watch interview, Joseph Briley, March 24, 1994.35 HumanRights Watch interview, Andie Moss, Atlanta, March 22, 1994.36 Dr.Allen Ault, who had served as GDC commissioner years earlier, became thenew commissioner. He resigned in 1995, however, and in December of thatyear Wayne Garner was appointed commissioner. Judging from Garner's earlypolicies and initial public statements, his primary emphasis in runningthe Georgia correctional system is on cutting costs and toughening punishments.Neither of these focuses bodes particularly well for efforts to curb custodialsexual abuse.37 HumanRights Watch interview, Atlanta, August 4, 1994. It is also notable thatthe parole board has no women members-although Governor Miller has madea total of six appointments to it, all of them have been men. "Voice MissingFrom Parole Board," Atlanta Journal-Constitution, March 26, 1996.38 Thesuccess of the Cason litigation in curbing serious custodial abusedeserves particular emphasis in light of recent legislative efforts torestrict the ability of federal courts to remedy constitutional violationsin the prisons. Given the ineffectiveness of many administrative grievanceprocedures, lawsuits like Cason are often prisoners' only meaningfulavenue for obtaining relief from mistreatment. Recently, despite the successof prison litigation in rectifying abuse and inhumane conditions previouslyignored by officials, Congress passed the Prison Litigation Reform Act,which was signed into law by President Clinton on April25, 1996. The newlaw, which purports to curtail frivolous prisoner lawsuits, will also severelylimit the ability of prisoners with legitimate complaints to remedy egregioushuman rights violations.39 HumanRights Watch interview, Lisa Boardman Burnette, Atlanta, August 4, 1994.40 HumanRights Watch interview, Atlanta, February 7, 1996. A substantial proportionof the complaints, particularly the more recent complaints, involve patsearches conducted by female officers.41 RhondaCook, "Two employees suspended over new claims of inmate sex," AtlantaJournal-Constitution, May 1, 1993.42 Cook,"Prison guard acquitted . . . ."43 Cook,"Two guards disciplined at prison for women: Charges involving sex leadto firing, transfer," Atlanta Journal-Constitution, September 30,1993.44 HumanRights Watch telephone interview, Robin Hutchinson, attorney, February16, 1995.45 HumanRights Watch interview, Bob Cullen, Atlanta, August 4, 1994; Human RightsWatch telephone interview, Lisa Boardman Burnette, April 10, 1996.46 Asof February 1, 1996, however, the ban was lifted: all facilities now permitsmoking in the outdoor areas.47 HumanRights Watch telephone interview, Bob Cullen, February 16, 1995.48 Thepolicy provides that sexual contact shall include, but shall not be limitedto:the intentional touching,either directly or through clothing, of the genitalia, anus, groin, breast,inner thighs, or buttocks of any person with an intent to abuse, humiliate,harass, degrade, or arouse or gratify the sexual desire of any person.Sexual abuse is defined toinclude, but not be limited to:subjecting another personto sexual contact by persuasion, inducement, enticement, or forcible compulsion;subjecting to sexual contact another person who is incapable of givingconsent by reason of her custodial status; subjecting another person tosexual contact who is incapable of consenting by reason of being physicallyhelpless, physically restrained, or mentally incapacitated; and raping,molesting, prostituting, or otherwise sexually exploiting another person.The policy provides thatsexual harassment shall include, but not be limited to, "unwelcome sexualadvances, requests for sexual favors, or other verbal or physical conductof a sexual nature." Personal dealings are defined as "contact or businessdealings with sentenced females in violation of GDC [policy]. This includes,but is not limited to, giving, receiving, selling, buying, trading, barteringor exchanging anything of value with any sentenced female." Georgia Departmentof Corrections Standard Operating Procedures, "Investigations of Allegationsof Sexual Contact, Sexual Abuse and Sexual Harassment," November 23, 1994.49 HumanRights Watch interview, Lisa Boardman Burnette, Atlanta, February 6, 1996.50 HumanRights Watch interview, Atlanta, February 7, 1996.51 Asthis report was going to press, Cason counsel were planning to deposemembers of the investigative team to ascertain whether the GDC had in anyway impeded or compromised their investigations. Human Rights Watch telephoneinterview, Lisa Boardman Burnette, May 1, 1996.52 Ibid.53 Hedid, however, plead guilty to sexual assault under Section 16-6-5.1 andwas sentenced to first-offender probation. He was also fired from his employmentwith the GDC, receiving a hiring code that bars him from ever again beingemployed by the GDC or any other state agency. Human Rights Watch interview,Lisa Boardman Burnette, Atlanta, February 6, 1996.1 Theword "children" is used in this chapter to mean any person under the ageof eighteen. Article 1 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights ofthe Child defines a child as "every human being below the age of eighteenyears unless, under the law applicable to the child, majority is attainedearlier."2 HumanRights Watch interview, Judge Virgil Costley, Juvenile Court of NewtonCounty, Covington, Georgia, February 26, 1996.3 Letterto Human Rights Watch from Commissioner Eugene Walker, December 14, 1995.4 TheFulton County Regional Youth Detention Center was the only facility towhich Human Rights Watch attempted to gain access which was not under thecontrol of the DCYS. As chief judge of the Fulton County Juvenile Court,Justice Hatchett had the authority to permit access for Human Rights Watch.Justice Hatchett's clerk cited confidentiality as the reason for her denial,yet access to the juvenile courtrooms was permitted; there, details aboutthe juvenile's personal and family history might be discussed openly bythe judge.5 GeorgiaLaws 1971. The purpose of the juvenile court code includes: "(1) That childrenwhose well-being is threatened shall be assisted and protected and restored,if possible, as secure law-abiding members of society."6 OfficialCode of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.) 15-11-5.7 O.C.G.A.15-11-37. Under the Designated Felony Act, the juvenile court and the superiorcourt have concurrent jurisdiction. The district attorney may choose totry a child as an adult instead of as a juvenile. The designated feloniesare: kidnapping, attempted kidnapping, arson, aggravated assault, aggravatedbattery, robbery, armed robbery withouta firearm, attempted illegal possessionof a firearm and illegal possession of a firearm.8 Section37, G.A. Res. 44/25, November 20, 1989; entered into force September 2,1990. In Centre for Human Rights, Human Rights: A Compilation of InternationalInstruments, Vol. I, ST/HR/1/Rev.5 (New York: United Nations, 1994),p. 174. Also available at http://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty/.9 G.A.Res. 45/113, April 2, 1991. In Centre for Human Rights, Human Rights:A Compilation of International Instruments, Vol. I, ST/HR/1/Rev.5 (NewYork: United Nations, 1994), p. 275. Also available at http://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty/.10 G.A.Res. 40/33, November 29, 1985. In Centre for Human Rights, Human Rights:A Compilation of International Instruments, Vol. I, ST/HR/1/Rev.5 (NewYork: United Nations, 1994), p. 356. Also available at http://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty/.11 G.A.Res. 45/112, March 28, 1991. In Centre for Human Rights, Human Rights:A Compilation of International Instruments, Vol. I, ST/HR/1/Rev.5 (NewYork: United Nations, 1994), p. 346. Also available at http://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty/.12 ECOSOCRes. 663 C (XXIV), July 31, 1957, and 2076 (LXII), May 13, 1977. In Centrefor Human Rights, Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments,Vol. I, ST/HR/1/Rev.5 (New York: United Nations, 1994), p. 243. Also availableathttp://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty/.13 G.A.Res. 43/173, December 9, 1988. In Centre for Human Rights, Human Rights:A Compilation of International Instruments, Vol. I, ST/HR/1/Rev.5 (NewYork: United Nations, 1994), p. 265. Also available at http://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty/.All of these standards, exceptfor the Prisoners' Rules, have been recognized by the international communityby adoption as General Assembly resolutions. The Prisoners' Rules wereapproved by the Economic and Social Council by resolutions in 1957 and1977.14 Bellv. Wolfish, 441 U.S. 520, 99 S.Ct. 1861 (1979). Sue Burrell, StaffAttorney at the Youth Law Center in San Francisco, Legal Issues Relatingto Conditions of Confinement for Detained Children, presented at theNJDA 6th Annual National Juvenile Services Training Institute, 1994. Seealso Soler et al., Representing the Child Client, (New York: MatthewBender Publishing, 1994). The Fourteenth Amendment incorporates by referencethe standards of the Eighth Amendment, as they apply to children.15 Penav. New York State Division for Youth, 419 F. Supp. 203 (S.D.N.Y. 1976).16 Youngbergv. Romeo, 457 U.S. 307, 102 S.Ct. 2452 (1982).17 42U.S.C. 5601.18 Astatus offense is an action which, if carried out by an adult, would notbe illegal; for example, truancy or running away from home are status offenses.19 HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Barbara Allan Hagan, OJJDP, May 16,1996.20 HumanRights Watch interview, staff member, Children and Youth Coordinating Council,Atlanta, February 26, 1996.21 HumanRights Watch interview, staff member, Children and Youth Coordinating Council,Atlanta, February 26, 1996. Human Rights Watch was not able to verify thisindependently because its investigators were not allowed access to thefacilities.22 42U.S.C. 1997. The Special Litigation Section also has the authority to enforcethe right to special education under the Individuals with DisabilitiesEducation Act (IDEA), 20 U.S.C. 1401, and has used that act to enforceeducational rights of children with disabilities in confinement. However,most of the IDEA litigation is undertaken by private organizations andlaw firms at the instigation of the aggrieved individuals.23 Girlsaccount for approximately 17 percent of the population at RYDCs. GeorgiaDepartment of Children and Youth Services, Regional Youth DetentionCenter Statistical Report, Annual, 1995.24 Girlsaccount for approximately 15 percent of the population at YDCs. GeorgiaDepartment of Children and Youth Services, Youth Development CampusStatistical Report, Annual, 1995.25 JohnDoe 1 et al. v. George Napper Jr. et al. Civil Action 193-CV-642-JEC,filed March 26, 1993.26 Inthe remainder of this report, references to conditions in the MariettaRYDC describe the situation prior to the litigation in 1993.27 HumanRights Watch interview, Kathleen Dumitrescu and Kathy Vandenberg, LegalAid of Cobb County, Marietta, February 23, 1996.28 Bellv. Wolfish, 441 U.S. 520, 99 S.Ct. 1861 (1979).29 GeorgiaDepartment of Children and Youth Services, Regional Youth DetentionCenter Statistical Report, Annual, 1995. On March 8, 1996, when HumanRights Watch interviewed a DCYS staffmember, the state of Georgia had bedspace for 2,109 children in its RYDCs and YDCs, but on that day 3,024 childrenwere incarcerated in those youth facilities, meaning that facilities wereat approximately 150 percent capacity on that day. Human Rights Watch telephoneinterview, staff member, Department of Children and Youth Services, Atlanta,March 11, 1996.30 GeorgiaDepartment of Children and Youth Services, Youth Development CampusStatistical Report, Annual, 1995.31 HumanRights Watch interview, staff member, Department of Children and YouthServices, Atlanta, March 11, 1996.32 JeffGraves, "Giving young criminals the `boot'," Atlanta Herald, May7, 1995.33 HumanRights Watch interview, public defender in DeKalb County, Decatur, February21, 1996. Human Rights Watch interview, public defender in Fulton County,Atlanta, February 22, 1996. According to Robert Cullen, an attorney inAtlanta who monitors custodial situations, 92 boys are held in space designedfor 28. Children are forced to sleep on the floors of the lawyer interviewrooms and the children are locked down eighteen hours each day. Human RightsWatch telephone interview, May 6, 1996.34 HumanRights Watch telephone interview, Edgar Perkerson, Juvenile Court of GwinnettCounty, Lawrenceville, Georgia, March 20, 1996.35 Affidavitof Jane Roe 1, dated February 22, 1993.36 Affidavitof John Doe 1, dated January 14, 1993.37 HumanRights Watch interview, public defender in Fulton County Juvenile Court,Atlanta, February 21, 1996.38 Affidavitof Jane Roe 1, dated February 22, 1993. Affidavit of John Doe 2, datedJanuary 28, 1993. Human Rights Watch telephone interview, Kathleen Dumitrescu,Legal Aid of Cobb County, Marietta, September 26, 1995.39 HumanRights Watch telephone interview, Edgar Perkerson, Juvenile Court of GwinnettCounty, Lawrenceville, March 20, 1996.40 Publicstatement by spokesperson for the Department of Children and Youth Services,Jacki Vickers, March 18, 1996.41 HumanRights Watch interview, EW, February 22, 1996. EW is a child incarceratedby the state of Georgia who requested anonymity. Human Rights Watch telephoneinterview, Edgar Perkerson, Juvenile Court of Gwinnett County, Lawrenceville,March 20, 1996. Human Rights Watch interview, public defender in DeKalbCounty, Decatur, February 22, 1996.42 JeffGraves, "Giving young criminals the `boot'," Atlanta Herald, May7, 1995.43 HumanRights Watch interview, Kathleen Dumitrescu and Kathy Vandenberg, CobbCounty Legal Aid, Marietta, February 23, 1996.44 HumanRights Watch interview, public defender in Fulton County Juvenile Court,Atlanta, February 21, 1996.45 HumanRights Watch interview, James Fraley, director, Fulton County RYDC, Atlanta,February 22, 1996. Human Rights Watch interview, public defender in FultonCounty Juvenile Court, Atlanta, February 21, 1996.46 MarkSilk, "Two suicides bring probe of lockups," Atlanta Journal-Constitution,April 25, 1995.47 MarkSilk, "Study: Kids in jail often suffer psychological disorders," AtlantaJournal-Constitution, February 28, 1996.48 U.N.Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice.49 Bellv. Wolfish, 441 U.S. 520, 99 S. Ct. 1861 (1979).50 Penav. New York Division for Youth, 419 F. Supp. 203 (S.D.N.Y. 1976); Thomasv. Mears, 474 F. Supp. 908 (E.D. Ark. 1979); and Burrell, LegalIssues Relating to Conditions of Confinement for Detained Children,p. 29.51 Affidavitof John Doe 1, sworn January 14, 1993. Human Rights Watch interview, publicdefender in DeKalb County, Decatur, Georgia, February 22, 1996. Human RightsWatch interview, public defender in Fulton County, Atlanta, Georgia, February21, 1996.52 JohnDoe 1, et al. v. George Napper Jr., et al. Civil action no. 1 93-CV-642-JEC53 HumanRights Watch interview, EW, February 22, 1996.54 HumanRights Watch interview, Kathleen Dumitrescu, Legal Aid of Cobb County,Marietta, September 26, 1995 (by telephone) and February 23, 1996 (in person).Human Rights Watch interview, EW, February 22, 1996. Georgia Departmentof Children and Youth Services, RYDC Policy & Procedure Manual,Policy No. 9.13, effective January 18, 1996. Georgia Department of Childrenand Youth Services, Division of Campus Operations, YDC Policy Manual,Policy No. 1018, effective January 18, 1996.55 HumanRights Watch telephone interview, public defender in DeKalb County, Decatur,January 31, 1996. Human Rights Watch interview, EW, February 22, 1996.The use of such restraints violates U.N. Rules 64 and 67 which prohibitthe use of restraints except where all other control methods have beenexhausted and failed, and never in the case where it would cause humiliationor degradation or compromise the physical or mental health of the juvenile.56 GeorgiaDepartment of Children and Youth Services, Division of Campus Operations,YDC Policy Manual, Policy No. 1019, Section VI.2, effective January18, 1996. Georgia Department of Children and Youth Services, RYDC Policy& Procedure Manual, Policy No. 9.12, Section VI.2, effective January18, 1996.57 U.N.Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice, Rules13.4 and 26.3; U.N. Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of theirLiberty, Rule 29; and U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child, Article13(c).58 HumanRights Watch telephone interview, staff member, Children and Youth CoordinatingCouncil, Atlanta, February 12, 1996.59 HumanRights Watch telephone interview, Michael Shapiro, executive director,Georgia Indigent Defense Council, Atlanta, Georgia, February 12, 1996.Human Rights Watch interview, staff member, Department of Corrections,Atlanta, February 26, 1996.60 HumanRights Watch interview, staff member, Department of Corrections, Atlanta,February 26, 1996.61 HumanRights Watch interview with staff member, Department of Corrections, February26, 1996.62 Forexample, they attend sex-offender counseling and substance abuse treatmentwith adults.63 GeorgiaLaws 1971.64 GeorgeNapper, "Commitment to crime prevention falls victim," Atlanta BusinessChronicle, October 28, 1994. Napper was formerly the DCYS Commissioner.1 UniversalDeclaration of Human Rights, A/RES/217 A, Arts. 2, 19-20 (1948). In Centrefor Human Rights, Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments,Vol. I, ST/HR/1/Rev.5 (New York: United Nations, 1994), p. 1. Also availableat http://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty/.2 InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political Rights A/RES/2200 A, Arts. 2, 19, 21, 22,26 (1966). In Centre for Human Rights, Human Rights: A Compilation ofInternational Instruments, Vol. I, ST/HR/1/Rev.5 (New York: UnitedNations, 1994), p. 20. Also available at http://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty/.Even though sexual orientation is not explicitly noted as one of the categorieson which discrimination is banned, the U.N. Human Rights Committee-thebody that monitors and interprets the ICCPR-has considered itincluded underthe category of "sex." See, e.g., Toonen v. Australia, No. 488/1992,50th Sess. (1994).3 Theword "sodomy" is placed within quotes throughout this chapter because thereis no consistent legal definition for sodomy, with states around the countryusing the term to describe a variety of sexual acts.4 Thelaw makes criminal "any sexual act involving the sex organs of one personand the mouth or anus of another." Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.)§ 16-2-2. The penalty for a conviction ranges from one to twenty years.5 Authortelephone interview with Larry Pellegrini, lobbyist, Georgia Equality Project,Atlanta, May 3, 1996.6 Authortelephone interview with John Greaves, Lesbian and Gay Public Safety TaskForce, Atlanta, February 16, 1996.7 Ibid.8 Incontrast, the U.N. Human Rights Committee and the European Court of HumanRights have both held that laws, such as Georgia's, which criminalize consensualsexual conduct between adults, violate international human rights guarantees.See, e.g., Toonen v. Australia, No. 488/1992, 50th Sess. (1994);Modinos v. Cyprus, 259 Eur. Ct. H.R. (ser.A)(1993); Norris v.Ireland, 142 Eur. Ct. H.R. (ser.A)(1981); Dudgeon v. United Kingdom,45 Eur. Ct. H.R. (ser.A)(1981).9 Advocatesmaintain that the Georgia law plainly violates constitutional privacy guarantees.In addition, because of the disparate enforcement of the law against gaypeople and the law's uniquely stigmatizing effect on lesbians and gay men,advocates also believe that the law violates federal and state guaranteesof equal protection of the laws.10 Authortelephone interview with John Greaves, Atlanta, February 16, 1996, regardinglesbian and gay parents being deprived of custody of their children eitherby courts directly or by intimidating threats of former spouses.11 Authortelephone interview with John Greaves, Atlanta, February 16, 1996; PatHussain, Atlanta, February 21, 1996. Nineteen other states have "sodomy"laws in place.12 TheGeorgia law was passed to address the possibility that Hawaii may recognizesame-sex marriages at some point in the future. Specifically, the Georgialaw provides:(a) It is declared to bethe public policy of this state to recognize the union only of man andwoman. Marriages between persons of the same sex are prohibited in thisstate.(b) No marriage between personsof the same sex shall be recognized as entitled to the benefits of marriage.President Clinton has announcedthat he does not support equal marriage rights for same-sex couples. ToddS. Purdum, "President Would Sign Legislation Banning Homosexual Marriages,"The New York Times, May 23, 1996.13 Authortelephone interview with Larry Pellegrini, Atlanta, May 3, 1996.14 Ibid.15 Ina related development, on May 20, 1996, the U.S. Supreme Court, in Romerv. Evans (No. 94-1039), struck down a provision of the Colorado Constitution,(approved by voters in a 1992 state-wide referendum), that not only nullifiedexisting civil rights protections for lesbians, gay men and bisexuals inthe state, but also barred the passage of new laws or policies prohibitingdiscrimination against gay people. In that decision, Justice Anthony M.Kennedy, commenting on the extra constitutional burden placed on homosexualswho seek legislative protection, wrote, "A state cannot so deem a classof persons a stranger to its laws." As this report went to press, the preciseeffect of the court's decision on Georgia law and practice was unclear.16 Authortelephone interview with Larry Pellegrini, Atlanta, May 3, 1996. At thefederal level, the 1990 Hate Crimes Statistics Act authorized collectionof statistics for bias crimes,including those based upon sexual orientation.28 U.S.C. §534. Although the act's effective period ended last year,there is bi-partisan support in Congress for its reauthorization. Authortelephone interview with Nancy Buermeier, Human Rights Campaign, April19, 1996.17 Ibid.18 Theonly benefit enjoyed as a result of registration is city jail visitationrights.19 Cityof Atlanta v. McKinney, 454 S.E.2d 517 (Ga. 1995).20 SeeCobb County Board of Commissioners, Resolution, August 10, 1993. Seealso Peter Applebome, "Vote in Atlanta Suburb Condemns Homosexuality,"The New York Times, August 12, 1993.21 Authorinterview with Pat Hussain, Atlanta, February 16, 1996. A member of theCobb Citizens Coalition, Gary Spahn, who had a "Rescind the Resolution,"sticker on the bumper of his car found a new bumper sticker placed thereone night, stating, "The Knights of the Ku Klux Klan Are Watching You-andWe Don't Like What We See." Dan Hulbert, "`Cobb County Stories,'" AtlantaJournal-Constitution, May 30, 1996, p. D1.22 PeterFreiberg, "Tiny Group's Olympic Feat," The Washington Blade, August5, 1994, p. 1.23 SeeCobb County Board of Commissioners, Resolution, August 10, 1993. Effortsto introduce a similar measure were rejected by the Macon City Councilin November 1993. Author telephone interview with Larry Pellegrini, Atlanta,February 12, 1996.24 KevinSack, "Vote Dares Committee to Reroute the Torch," The New York Times.May 15, 1996. Author interview with Larry Pellegrini, Atlanta, May 3, 7,1996. On May 13, 1996, the county council of Spartanburg, South Carolinapassed a resolution similar to those approved in Cobb and Wayne counties.The councilman who introduced the resolution, which was rescinded fourdays later, told reporters that he was reacting to the Olympic Committee'sdecision to bypass Cobb County because of its anti-gay proclamation. NeighboringGreenville County, South Carolina passed a resolution identical to CobbCounty's on May 21, 1996, with a councilmember declaring that he supportedtraditional family values and would not "support extremism." "County VoteSets Up Olympics Showdown," The New York Times, May 23, 1996.25 Authortelephone interview with John Greaves, Atlanta, February 15, 1996.26 FederalBureau of Investigation, Hate Crimes Statistics 1993, Washington,D.C., p. 14.27 Authortelephone interviews with lesbians and gay men in Georgia who requestedanonymity to protect their personal safety, February and March 1996.28 Authorinterview with John Greaves, Atlanta, February 16, 1996.29 Authorinterview with Johnny Fambro, director, The Rainbow Center, Macon, February29, 1996. The Rainbow Center is an HIV/AIDS prevention and service organizationfor rural and middle Georgia.30 KCWildmoon, "Couple finds home in Valdosta," The Washington Blade,October 28, 1994, p. 18.31 Authorinterview with Larry Pellegrini, Atlanta, May 3, 1996.32 Authorinterview with Walter Reeves, Education and Outreach co-chair of NeighborsNetwork, a non-profit volunteer organization working to counter hate crimesand hate group activity, Atlanta, May 30, 1996.33 Authortelephone interview with Johnny Fambro, February 29, 1996.34 Althoughadvocates have made police aware of the low crime reporting rates by lesbiansand gay men, police departments in the state have refused to pursue suggestedalternative assessment techniques to enable crime victims to notify thepolice without fear that their identity as gay or lesbian will be disclosedpublicly. Author telephone interview with John Greaves, Atlanta, February15, 1996.35 Authortelephone interview with Phil Rashoon, co-owner of Outwrite bookshop, Atlanta,April 5, 1996.36 Authortelephone interviews with lesbians and gay men in Georgia who requestedanonymity to protect their personal safety, February and March 1996.37 PeterKilborn, "Gay Rights Groups Take Aim at Restaurant Chain That's Hot onWall Street," The New York Times, April 9, 1992, p. A12.38 Ibid.See also E. Holtzman, "Bias is Bad Business," The Advocate,April 20, 1993.39 Authortelephone interview with Larry Pellegrini, Atlanta, May 3, 1996.40 Shaharv. Bowers, 836 F. Supp. 859, 861 (N.D. Ga. 1993), partially affirmedand partially vacated, 70F. 3d 1218 (11th Cir. 1995), vacated and rehearingen banc granted, 78 F.3d 499 (11th Cir. 1996).41 Ibid.at 865.42 Authortelephone interview with counsel for Rodriguez, Jane Morrison, Atlanta,February 16, 1996.43 Authortelephone interview with a gay man in rural Georgia, who requested anonymityto protect his personal safety, March 4, 1996.44 Authortelephone interview with Stephanie Swann, L.M.S.W., founder and directorof YouthPride, an organization serving lesbian, gay, and bisexual youthand young adults through outreach, education, and social services, Atlanta,April 5, 1996.45 Authortelephone interviews with lesbians and gay men in Georgia who requestedanonymity to protect their personal safety, February and March 1996.46 Authorinterview with Larry Pellegrini, Atlanta, May 3, 1996.47 Authortelephone interview with Stephanie Swann, Atlanta, April 5 1996, and MelanieRosen, Executive Director, Atlanta Gay and Lesbian Community Center, Atlanta,April 10, 1996.48 PaulGibson, "Gay Male and Lesbian Youth Suicide," in Report of the Secretary'sTask Force on Youth Suicide, 3-110, 3-115 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Departmentof Health and Human Services, 1989). As students grow older andare able to leave school and gain independence from their families, theincidence of contemplated and attempted suicide tapers off dramatically.Joyce Hunter & Robert Schaecher, "Gay and Lesbian Adolescents," inEncyclopedia of Social Work 1055, 1060 (Washington, D.C.: NationalAssociation of Social Workers Press, 1995).1 See,for example, People for the American Way, Attacks on the Freedom toLearn 1994-1995 Report (URL: http://www.pfaw.org), Executive Summary.2 Thesame right is enshrined in Article 19(2) of the International Covenanton Civil and Political Rights, which states: "Everyone shall have the rightto freedom of expression; this right shall include freedom to seek, receiveand impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers,either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or through anyother media of his choice." In Centre for Human Rights, Human Rights:A Compilation of International Instruments, Vol. I, ST/HR/1/Rev.5 (NewYork: United Nations, 1994), p. 20. Also available at http://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty/.3 AssociatedPress, "County that Condemned Gays Eliminates Arts Funding," August 25,1993.4 Peoplefor the American Way, Artistic Freedom Under Attack, Vol. 4, (Washington,DC: 1996), p. 58.5 Seechapter above on "Lesbian and Gay Rights."6 CherylWetzelstein, "Georgia kills sex-ed reform," Washington Times, March13, 1996, and Senate Bill 392 (URL: http://www.ganet.state.ga.us/incoming/legmainl.htm).7 CherylWetzelstein, "Georgia kills sex-ed reform, Washington Times, andHuman Rights Watch telephone interview, Julie Edelson, Planned Parenthood,Atlanta, March 29, 1996.8 Peoplefor the American Way, Attacks on the Freedom to Learn, 1993-1994 Report,(Washington, DC: 1995).9 Ibid.10 BetsyWhite, "Schools drop sex-ed book," The Atlanta Journal-Constitution,June 16, 1994. Elizabeth Winship, Human Sexuality (New York: WorkmanBooks, 1990).11 Peoplefor the American Way, Attacks on the Freedom to Learn,1994-1995 Report.12 GailHagans Towns, "School Watch," The Atlanta Journal-Constitution,November 28, 1995.13 AmericanLibrary Association, Banned Books Resource Guide, (Chicago: 1995),p. 60.14 Ibid.,p. 39.15 Ibid.,p. 67.16 U.S.Code, Title V, Subsection A, Section 502 "Obscene or Harassing Use of TelecommunicationsFacilities Under the Communications Act of 1934."17 HumanRights Watch also opposes the CDA because it could impede the work of ourown and similar organizations that transmit graphic accounts of human rightsabuses.18 Georgiais, in effect, attempting to regulate the Web nation-wide or world-widesince no Internet user is able to determine with certainty whether hisor her communications will be viewed in Georgia.19 TheWorld Wide Web's ability to link sites is one of its defining characteristicsand chief assets. It permits anyone with access to move seamlessly amonga wide range of Web sites-regardless of the physical location of theirhost computers-to access related information.20 OfficialCode of Georgia Annotated at 16-11-37-1 (1995), "Dissemination of informationrelating to terroristic acts," states: "It shall be unlawful for any personknowingly to furnish or disseminate through a computer or computer networkany picture, photograph, or drawing, or similar visual representation orverbal description of any information designed to encourage, solicit, orotherwise promote terroristic acts as defined in Code Section 16-11-37."21 OfficialCode of Georgia Annotated at 16-9-93.1, "Computer or telephone network;transmitting misleading data."22 Accordingto Article 17 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights:1. No one shall be subjectedto arbitrary or unlawful interference with his privacy,family, home orcorrespondence, nor to unlawful attacks on his honor and reputation.2. Everyone has the rightto the protection of the law against such interference or attacks.23 Section1(a) of the law states:It shall be unlawful forany person, any organization, or any representative of any organizationknowingly to transmit any data through a computer network or over the transmissionfacilities or through the network facilities of a local telephone networkfor the purpose of setting up, maintaining, operating, or exchanging datawith an electronic mailbox, home page, or any other electronic informationstorage bank or point of access to electronic information if such datauses any individual name, trade name, registered trademark, logo, legalor official seal, or copyrighted symbol to falsely identify the person,organization or representative transmitting such data or which would falselystate or imply that such person, organization, or representative has permissionor is legally authorized to use such trade name, registered trademark,logo, legal or official seal, or copyrighted symbol for such purpose whensuch permission or authorization has not been obtained . . . .24 ElectronicFrontier Foundation, April 16 letter to Gov. Zell Miller (URL: http://kragar.eff.org/pub/EFF/Newsletters/EFFector/HTML/current.html).