A Violent Education: Corporal Punishment of Children in US Public Schools | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload this ReportDownload this Report with CoverDonate NowDownloadsDownload this ReportDownload this Report with CoverAugust 19, 2008A Violent EducationCorporal Punishment of Children in US Public SchoolsA Violent EducationCorporal Punishment of Children in US PublicSchoolsI. Summary and Key RecommendationsCorporal Punishment in US Public SchoolsA Violent and Degrading School EnvironmentDiscrimination in the Classroom..Lack of RecourseLegality and Reform..Key RecommendationsII. MethodologyIII. Corporal Punishment in US Public SchoolsThe Mechanics of Corporal PunishmentThe Paddles and the Position of the ChildClothing as Protection against BlowsNumber of BlowsOther Instruments UsedOther Physical Force Used against StudentsPersons Administering Corporal PunishmentThe Atmospherics of Corporal PunishmentIntimidation and ThreatsWitnesses to Paddling"The Devil's Bargain": Choosing to Be BeatenWhy Students Opt for BeatingsIV. Offenses Leading to Corporal PunishmentDisproportionate Responses to Minor MisbehaviorVague Offenses and Arbitrary Use of CorporalPunishmentCorporal Punishment for Serious Offenses,including ViolenceV. Prevalence of Corporal Punishment in US PublicSchoolsData on Corporal PunishmentConstant and High Levels of Paddling in SomeSchoolsVI. Impact of Corporal PunishmentLasting Injuries and Immediate PainDepression and AngerAcademic Disengagement and Drop OutLinks to Domestic ViolenceVII. Best Practices in School DisciplinePositive Disciplinary ApproachesEducators' Views on Corporal PunishmentVIII. The Use of Corporal Punishment againstSpecific GroupsBoys Paddled More Than GirlsRaceDiscriminatory Learning EnvironmentParticular Issues Raised by the Paddling of GirlsCase Study: Allison GuthrieSpecial Education Students and Students withDisabilitiesIX. Regulating Discipline in SchoolsRegulations and Training on School DisciplineEducators Who Disagree are without RecourseCase Study: Ralph McLaneyParental ChoiceMethods of Opting Out of Corporal PunishmentParental Struggles to Opt OutParental Preferences against Corporal PunishmentIgnoredX. Seeking Redress for Corporal PunishmentSchool District Response to Parental ComplaintsImmunity for PerpetratorsLack of Adequate Responses from Police or CourtsParents' Inability to Protect ChildrenXI. Banning Corporal Punishment: InternationalHuman Rights Law and US Constitutional Standards102International Human Rights Law.. 102Freedom from Cruel, Inhuman, or DegradingTreatment or Punishment103The Right to Freedom from Physical Violence104The Inherent Dignity of the Child and the Rightto Education105Non-discrimination and Equality107Parents' Rights108The United States and International Human RightsLaw.. 109US Law Permitting Corporal Punishment113Cruel and Unusual Punishment113Due Process115Trends to Abolish Corporal Punishment116XII. Conclusion and Recommendations118To Legislatures in States with Corporal Punishment119To Governors and Departments of Education inStates with Corporal Punishment120To Police, District Attorneys, and State Courts121To the President of the United States121To the United States Congress121To the US Department of Education, Office forCivil Rights122To School Boards, Superintendents, Principals,and Teachers122To Teachers' Colleges and Teacher TrainingPrograms124To Professional Bodies Working in Education124To Private and Non-Profit Foundations that FundUS Public Education or Advocate for Improvements in Education   124Acknowledgments126I. Summary and Key RecommendationsOn August 18, 2003, 10-year-old Tim L. started the fifthgrade at his public elementary school in rural east Texas. On the fourth day of school, Timrefused to run in gym class because he did not have his asthma medication. Whenthe gym coach confronted him, Tim said, "coach sucks." The coach then took awooden paddle and beat Tim severely on the buttocks. Faye L., Tim's mother,reported, "There was blood in his underpants…. I had to pull the underwear offhis behind from the dried blood."[1]Though Tim had always been an enthusiasticstudent, he begged his mother not to make him get on the school bus the nextday. Three days later, with his bruises still fresh, Tim was hit again, thistime by a teacher, for playing with a pen during band class. His genitals werebruised and swollen. With her son physically injured and terrified of school,Faye decided she could not risk sending him back. She began to teach himherself, at home.Faye wanted school authorities to hold theteachers accountable. They reminded her, however, that corporal punishment islegal in their district, and refused to take disciplinary action against thetwo teachers who had hit her son. When she tried to file assault charges, thepolice dissuaded her, saying she had to "follow school procedure." Next, sheattempted to pursue private litigation, but her claims were dismissed in courtbecause the law provides immunity for teachers who paddle.Faye was left feeling that she had no way toseek justice for the injuries her son had already sustained, and no way toprotect him from future harm. Though Tim asked to go back to school, Faye feltshe could not offer him a guarantee of safety in their public school district."The law is supposed to be there to protect you. How do you explain this toyour son, after this? 'Well, I'm sorry, honey.' That's all you can say."[2]*          *          *Tim's mother's tenacity and commitment to protectingher son's rights make this story extraordinary. Yet in other ways, Tim's storyis far from unique. In school districts in many states, students of all agesare routinely subjected to corporal punishment.[3]Though some states have outlawed the practice, it is permitted by some federaland state laws. Hundreds of school districts allow students to be beaten, andstate legislatures provide specific legal protection for educators who injurestudents when using corporal punishment. Studies show that beatings can damage thetrust between educator and student, corrode the educational environment, andleave the student unable to learn effectively, making it more likely he or shewill leave school. African-American students are punished at disproportionatelyhigh rates, creating a hostile environment in which minority students struggleto succeed.The United States is out of step withinternational practice and jurisprudence on the use of corporal punishment inschools. Today 106 countries outlaw the practice, including the United Kingdomand other European countries, following rulings on corporal punishment by theEuropean Court of Human Rights. Experts charged with issuing definitiveinterpretations of international human rights treaties also consistently haveconcluded that corporal punishment by school officials and teachers violatesgovernmental obligations to protect children from physical violence and cruel,inhuman, and degrading treatment. The disproportionate use of corporalpunishment against African-American students in particular violates the rightto non-discrimination in accessing education.CorporalPunishment in US Public SchoolsAsstudents across the UnitedStates return to school each year, they,like their parents, are hoping for academic success. Policymakers and educatorshave the important responsibility of creating an educational environment basedon respect, including an effective disciplinary system. Yet for many students,"discipline" means extensive use of violence.According to the Office for Civil Rights atthe US Department of Education, 223,190 students nationwide received corporalpunishment at least once in the 2006-2007 school year, including 49,197students in Texasalone, the largest number of any state. In Mississippi, 7.5 percent of public schoolstudents were paddled during this period, the highest percentage in the nation.The actual numbers almost surely are higher: Human Rights Watch intervieweesreported that corporal punishment is often administered in a chaoticenvironment in which many instances of the practice are not recorded. Oneadministrator reported that 37 students in a single day were sent to his officefor corporal punishment. A high school student in another district estimatedthat as many as 60 students a day are paddled at her school.Today 21 US states permit corporalpunishment to be used in schools. Corporal punishment usually takes the form ofpaddling (also called "swats," "pops," or "licks"). A teacher or administratorswings a hard wooden paddle that is typically a foot-and-a-half long againstthe child's buttocks, anywhere between three and 10 times. Paddling can happenin the office or elsewhere, as noted by one Mississippi teacher: "The principal would doit in the hallway, in the classroom, in the band room. He would patrol thehallways with a paddle."[4] Studentscan be physically punished for a wide range of misbehavior, including minorinfractions such as chewing gum, being late, sleeping in class, talking back toa teacher, violating the dress code, or going to the bathroom withoutpermission.Even students who are not punished findthemselves in a hostile, violent environment designed to instill fear. Onestudent told us that "licks would be so loud and hard you could hear it throughthe walls." A teacher reported that a principal turned on the loud speakerwhile paddling a student: "It was on the intercom in every class in the school….He was trying to send a message … [l]ike, 'you could be next.'"A Violent andDegrading School EnvironmentMinor bruising andstinging are the most common results of corporal punishment. Some children aremore seriously injured. Some parents we interviewed sought medical care fortheir children who, like Tim L., sustained bleeding and deep bruising to thebuttocks. Other children sustained blows to other parts of their bodies,including their hands or arms when they reached back to protect themselves.Corporal punishment can also impact students' mental health, especially forsome special education students.For hundreds of thousands of school childrenin the US,violence inflicted by those in authority is a regular part of their experienceat school. All corporal punishment, whether or not it causes significantphysical injury, represents a violation of each student's rights to physicalintegrity and human dignity. It is degrading and humiliating, damaging thestudent's self-esteem and making him or her feel helpless.A number of teachers told us that asstudents are beaten, or see those around them beaten, the trust between administrators,teachers, and students is often destroyed. Over time, students may become lessengaged in school and less interested in exploring and discovering new academicconcepts. Corporal punishment may result in the student failing to thriveacademically and may contribute to school drop out.Though some educators believe that corporalpunishment is an effective way to deter students from misbehavior, includingstudents who may engage in physically disruptive and harmful behaviors likefighting, corporal punishment teaches students that violence is legitimate. Researchsuggests that children who are physically punished are more inclined to engagein aggressive conduct toward their siblings, parents, teachers, andschoolmates.As a consequence of the helplessness andhumiliation felt by students who experience corporal punishment, some studentsbecome angry: students told Human Rights Watch that it only makes them want tolash out against teachers or other students. Others become depressed orwithdrawn; still others become immune to the constant violence, accepting it asa part of their daily lives.Some parents are concerned that the use ofcorporal punishment in schools could also legitimize domestic violence in thehome. One mother observed: "What are we teaching our young women when a schoolprincipal can swat … on the behind? We're saying that it's okay for a man tobeat a woman … [that's] something we don't want in our families."Discriminationin the ClassroomCorporalpunishment in the USdisproportionately affects African-American students, and in some areas, NativeAmerican students. In the 2006-2007 school year, African-American students madeup 17.1 percent of the nationwide student population, but 35.6 percent of thosepaddled. In the same year, in the 13 states with the highest rates of paddling,1.4 times as many African-American students were paddled as might be expectedgiven their percentage of the student population. Although girls of all races werepaddled less than boys, African-American girls were nonetheless physicallypunished at more than twice the rate of their white counterparts in those 13states during this period. These disparities violate students' right tonon-discrimination in access to education, making it harder for these studentsto succeed and undermining the social fabric of schools.Special education students-students withmental or physical disabilities-also receive corporal punishment atdisproportionate rates. For instance, in Texas,the number of special education students who were beaten in the 2006-2007school year amounted to 18.4 percent of the total number of students whoreceived corporal punishment statewide. However, special education students madeup only 10.7 percent of the Texasstudent population, meaning almost twice as many were beaten as might beexpected. Corporal punishment damages these students' education as much asother students, and it may also adversely affect some students' underlyingphysical or psychological conditions.Lack of RecourseStudents, parents, andteachers encounter obstacles when trying to limit corporal punishment. Forinstance, teachers who work in schools that use corporal punishment may findthemselves without alternative ways of disciplining particularly troublesomestudents. We interviewed teachers who wanted to send chronically misbehavingstudents out of the classroom, but were reluctant to do so knowing they wouldbe beaten. While some teachers believe corporal punishment is an effectivetool, other teachers concur with academic research showing that positive formsof discipline such as counseling and mediation are more effective in addressingthe student's underlying issues. Yet if the school does not support these formsof discipline, individual teachers face obstacles implementing them on aclassroom-by-classroom basis.Students are sometimes asked to choosebetween corporal punishment and other forms of discipline such as suspensionsor detentions, decisions children should not be asked to make. One elementaryteacher described her pupils' decision process as follows: "I take the fivelicks because I'm nine and I want to go outside and play."[5]Older students choose paddling because they want to seem tough or because theirparents are less likely to find out about the underlying infraction. While itis a recognized principle of human rights that children should have a voice inmaking the policies to which they are subjected (and that participation isincreasingly important as they get older), giving children of any age a starkchoice between being beaten and other forms of discipline is not appropriate.Rather, it is a form of coercion that exploits vulnerable young people withunderdeveloped decision-making capabilities, asking them to trade away theirright to be free from beatings by school personnel.Parents in some school districts are givenmethods of "opting out" of the use of corporal punishment on their children.However, these mechanisms are inadequate: parents report that opt-out forms areignored and that their children are beaten anyway. Parents have virtually nolegal recourse when opt-out forms are ignored, or when their children arebeaten severely with or without an opt-out form. Human Rights Watchinvestigated several cases in which parents said school districts were unwillingto provide adequate responses, police were reluctant to investigate, and courtswere unable to offer redress. Some parents we interviewed, like Faye L., feltthey had no recourse but to withdraw their children from school and teach themat home.Legality and ReformWhile corporalpunishment is prohibited in most USjuvenile detention centers and even foster care settings, it continues to beallowed in certain USpublic schools. Many parents and teachers hold to the belief that corporalpunishment in public schools has an instructive purpose, providing thediscipline "necessary" for children to learn. The fact that many people believethat corporal punishment has a genuine pedagogical function does not diminishthe fact that it violates children's human rights.International instruments, including theUnited Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, the UN Convention againstTorture, and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, prohibitthe use of cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment, regardless of circumstance.Corporal punishment in US public schools also violates other human rights,including the right to freedom from physical violence and the right to non-discrimination.Corporal punishment infringes on the right to education, and educationalexperts have concluded that the use of corporal punishment hinders learning,encourages children to drop out of school, and generally undermines thepurposes of education as articulated by a broad spectrum of US educators andembodied in international law.Standards set by the US government and many states oncorporal punishment fall far below the best practices counseled by educationalexperts and the obligations inherent in international human rights law. Thoughmore than half the states prohibit the use of corporal punishment in schools,federal law does not ban the practice. The US Supreme Court has refused toimpose constitutional restrictions on the practice of "reasonable" corporalpunishment.[6]Some state laws criminalize the impositionof excessive corporal punishment, but the standard of "excessiveness" is hardfor students to prove. While some school districts have attempted to regulatecorporal punishment, for example by placing limits on the number of blows achild may receive or requiring that the paddler not beat the child in anger,these regulations have proved difficult if not impossible to enforce. And suchattempts do not address the basic fact that a child's rights are violatedwhenever he or she is beaten by school authorities.While some Americans might believe firmly inthe adage "spare the rod, spoil the child," corporal punishment hasincreasingly been prohibited in many states and municipalities. In fact, 95 ofthe 100 largest school districts in the country have banned corporalpunishment, including Houston, Dallas,Memphis, Atlanta,and MobileCounty.[7]Twenty-nine states and Washington,DC, have banned the practice,[8] ashave many school districts within states that permit corporal punishment.Outside of the US,as noted above, 106 countries reject the use of corporal punishment in publicschools.[9]Teachers in districts that use corporalpunishment may want the best for their students, and may genuinely believe thatcorporal punishment can help to educate them. Likewise, parents and evenchildren want orderly, safe school environments in which students can learn.But corporal punishment is not the answer. The practice hurts students, itdamages the cohesive school culture that they need in order to learn, it isdiscriminatory, and it teaches violence as an appropriate response to problems.Poverty and lack of resources help createconditions that lead to corporal punishment in schools. Teachers may haveovercrowded classrooms and lack resources such as counselors to assist withparticularly disruptive students or classroom dynamics. These conditions do notfacilitate effective discipline, and they may explain why teachers feel it isnecessary to subject students to beatings, but they do not excuse such actions.Better approaches to school discipline areavailable. Effective discipline does not require paddling of students. Nationwide,teachers and administrators increasingly have been using positive disciplinemethods that foster nurturing school cultures, which allow students to thrive.With appropriate funding, training, and support, teachers and administratorscan implement discipline systems that respond to students' fundamental needsand do better at producing environments in which every student can maximize hisor her academic potential.Key RecommendationsThe president of the United States, the USCongress, state legislatures, and governors should take all necessarysteps to ban explicitly the use of corporal punishment in schools. There shouldbe no exceptions for "reasonable" force or corporal punishment "tomaintain discipline."Untila complete ban on corporal punishment has been instituted, federal andstate legislatures, governors, and boards of education should establish animmediate moratorium on corporal punishment for special educationstudents, in light of their particular vulnerability and additionalpotential for serious physical or psychological injury.Untila complete ban is adopted, state legislatures, governors, and boards ofeducation should require school districts to respect parents' wishes notto have their children beaten by school officials, at a minimum byestablishing an "opt-in" scheme requiring parents affirmatively to agreebefore their child could be subjected to this practice.Statelegislatures, police, district attorneys, state courts, and local schoolboards should remove obstacles that prevent victims of corporal punishment(and their parents) from pursuing redress. Lawmakers should repeallegislation that grants educators who use corporal punishment immunityfrom civil or criminal laws. Law enforcement officials and courts should treatcorporal punishment complaints as any other assault complaint.Stateboards of education, local school boards, superintendents, principals, andteachers should prohibit the use of corporal punishment in all schools andclasses under their control, and provide educators with extensive trainingand support for effective, non-abusive discipline techniques.Stateboards of education and local school boards should implement statisticalreview systems that track every instance of corporal punishment, and takemeasures to ensure that students of color are not punished atdisproportionate rates.Federaland state governments, local school boards, superintendents, principals,and teachers should conduct comprehensive and sustained awareness-raisingcampaigns among parents and children on the right not to be disciplinedphysically, including appropriate programs according to the age of thechild.II. MethodologyFor this report, researchers from Human Rights Watch and theAmerican Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) conducted 181 in-person and telephoneinterviews with experts and individuals directly affected by corporalpunishment, including parents, students, teachers, and administrators. Seventy-oneinterviewees were current students, recent high school graduates, or youngpeople who left school without obtaining a diploma. Of the current and formerstudents we interviewed, 34 were between the ages of 9 and 17, and 37 werebetween 18 and 26. All of these young people were interviewed in person in Mississippi or Texas,where corporal punishment is widely used.We spoke with 40 parents of students in school districtsthat use or used corporal punishment, 24 teachers who have relevant experience,12 officials (including current and former school board members and current orformer superintendents or assistant superintendents), and three schooladministrators. In addition, we spoke with lawyers, advocates, and educationalexperts to obtain information on all sides of the issue. Finally, we contacted40 school districts with high rates of paddling in Mississippiand Texas byemail, fax, and telephone, and received nine responses to our queries.We chose to focus on Mississippiand Texasafter examining data from the US Department of Education's Office for CivilRights (OCR), which measure prevalence of corporal punishment (and other schooldiscipline and educational tracking data) by school district, by race, and bygender. As discussed in this report, the OCR data likely undercount the numberof incidents of corporal punishment that take place in a year, because someinstances of school corporal punishment are not recorded by schools and thusnot included in these data, and because the data are recorded per student peryear, and therefore do not record occurrences where a student is hit multipletimes in one year. Nonetheless, the OCR data provide the most reliable numbers presentlyavailable on the use of corporal punishment in US public schools. According tothese data, Mississippi has the largest percentageof students who receive corporal punishment each year and Texas has the largest absolute number ofstudents subjected to corporal punishment. We also decided to focus on Mississippi and Texasafter discussions with advocates against corporal punishment and other expertsin educational policy in each state.Within each of the target states, we focused on particularschool districts that had high rates of corporal punishment. First, we lookedat the OCR data to locate districts with high rates of corporal punishment(both absolute and as a percentage of the student population); and second, welooked at districts where African-American boys and girls were punished atdisproportionate rates. We measured disproportionality by comparing the rate atwhich a racial or gender group appeared among students who are physicallypunished to that group's proportion of the student population, on adistrict-by-district basis. We also traveled to districts with high rates ofcorporal punishment and interviewed teachers, administrators, or school boardmembers in those districts.We conducted in-person research in Mississippiin December 2007 and in Texasin February 2008. We conducted additional interviews with individuals inlocations throughout the UnitedStates by telephone between September 2007and May 2008. All students were interviewed in person; some adults wereinterviewed by telephone. Interviews were conducted in one-on-one settings inalmost all circumstances, although some children, particularly younger children,were interviewed in the presence of their parents. We conducted several groupdiscussions with students for background information but comments from thesediscussions were not used directly in the report.Within the targeted school districts, students, parents, andteachers were referred to us by one another or through assistance fromnon-profit organizations or community members. Occasionally, current and formerstudents were approached on college campuses or at shopping malls in thetargeted districts. All interviews were conducted in English.Before interviewing any subject, we obtained written or oralconsent to use the information obtained in the interview, and we determinedwhether the interviewee wished to remain anonymous. We obtained written consentfrom all in-person interview subjects, oral consent from those interviewed bytelephone, and parental consent to speak to minors aged 16 or younger.Participants did not receive any material compensation in return for speakingwith us. All participants were informed of the purpose of the interview, itsvoluntary nature, and the ways in which the data would be collected and used.Care was taken not to retraumatize affected children.All children interviewed are identified in this report withpseudonyms to safeguard their privacy and ensure there is no retaliationagainst them. Neither the first names nor last initials we use in such casescorrelate in any way with the child's actual name. In some cases certain otheridentifying information such as school, town, or grade level also has beenwithheld for the same reasons. In addition, all parents,teachers, administrators, school board members or other adults who requestedconfidentiality are identified with pseudonyms. Where interviewees gave consentto use their real names, we have so indicated in the relevant citations.III.Corporal Punishment in US Public SchoolsThe Mechanics of Corporal PunishmentCorporal punishment in US public schools[10]usually takes the form of a student hit on the buttocks and upper thighs with awooden paddle. David F., an eighth grader in Texas, was beaten in seventh grade againsthis mother's expressed wishes. It happened when David and another student weresent by their teacher to the principal's office for shooting rubber bands ateach other. Though school policy required an adult witness in addition to thepaddler, David said:[The Principal] did it on his own. When I went in we didn'ttalk. He just yelled, "What the heck were you doing that for?" and then he said"I get two swats." So I had to bend over and put my arms on the hands of thechair … it probably hurt for at least another school period.[11]The mechanics of corporal punishment in public schools helpto illustrate why it is a poor choice for disciplining children. Theinstruments used and the position of the child during the beatings are designedto cause pain and humiliation to the child. This, combined with the fact thatblows are administered by mostly male school officials who are supposed to setan example, lead to an atmosphere of humiliation, violence, and degradation.This atmosphere, in some cases tinged with sexual undertones-as when teenagegirls are paddled by men-is not conducive to creating a learning environmentcharacterized by safety and mutual respect.The Paddles andthe Position of the ChildAs in David F.'s case,described above, students are typically hit on their buttocks with a woodenpaddle, approximately 15 inches long, between two and four inches wide, andone-half inch thick, with a six-inch handle at one end. The size of paddles canvary. For instance, one teacher in a Mississippihigh school stated that his "principal uses a paddle with a flat head and athin neck and handle. It's about four feet long and it's made of wood."[12]The SouthDeltaSchool District, a different Mississippi district,specifies dimensions in its official policy: paddles must be 14-15 inches long,two inches wide, and 1/4-3/8 inches thick.[13]Click to expand ImagePicture of standard paddle. © 2008 Alice Farmer/Human RightsWatch.Students describe the paddle as "a big ole long wooden thingwith a handle,"[14]and say "the paddle looks like an oar, but smaller."[15] Onestudent noted, "They use a short one for girls and a long one for the boys."[16]One former teacher in Texastold Human Rights Watch that he found shaved down baseball bats that were beingused as paddles, similar to those depicted in the following photograph.[17]-Paddles made from shaved down baseballbats; keys indicate size. © 2008 Alice Farmer/ Human Rights Watch.As analyzed later in this report, international human rightsstandards state that the use of force against students is only permissible as arestraint in exceptional circumstances, and even then only to a minimal degree.[18]Any force with intent to punish is impermissible,[19]meaning that the use of corporal punishment in public schools in the United Statesviolates international human rights law.In a vain attempt to limit the suffering caused to childrenby paddling, some school district policies specify that the type of paddle usedmust not injure the child. For instance, the RankinCountySchoolDistrict in Mississippispecifies, "Any instrument used to administer corporal punishment shall be suchas not to cause either temporary or permanent physical injury."[20]Likewise, the MeridianPublicSchool Districtin Mississippispecifies that the administrator "should use an instrument approved by theprincipal which will produce no physical injury to the child."[21]A former administrator in Meridiancommented on the logical inconsistency of his district's policy: "that's acatch-22. Essentially … any striking of a child that causes pain would be aninjury."[22]Sometimes the paddle is modified to improve the paddler'sswing or to inflict greater pain. The paddle might have holes in it,[23]allowing it to move faster and therefore hurt more. One student noted, "It hasholes in it, so the air can just woosh through."[24]Part or all of the paddle can be covered with duct tape to prevent the woodfrom splitting or to improve the paddler's grip.[25] Amiddle school boy in Mississippireported that this contributes to the pain of the impact: "They duct tape allaround the paddle and it makes it have a grip and that's why it hurts."[26]MakingPaddles in SchoolPaddles are not commonly available from school supply companiesfor purchase,[27] and educators may keep their paddles for anumber of years.[28] One Mississippisuperintendent noted, "You're not going to find them in school supply stores,they don't want to be sued. They're mostly made in woodshop."[29] We received multiple reports of studentsmaking paddles as a part of their woodworking ("shop") class. One high schoolteacher reported, "the kids would make them in shop class and have all theirfriends sign them."[30] A former principal noted, "I made mypaddles myself, in woodshop. There were no specifications that I knew of fordimensions, wood, etc."[31] Another teacher noted that a student gave ateacher a paddle: "One of her students had a woodshop in his family and he gaveit to her as a gift."[32] The fact that students might make paddlesthemselves underscores the extent to which corporal punishment has become partof school culture.Sometimes teachersgive their paddles nicknames such as "Dr. Pepper."[33] A student told us that "one man had a big, bigpaddle with a print on it that said, 'Mr. Whoopin.'"[34] A former teacher in Mississippi reported that one of hercolleagues "had Big Bob and Little Bob,"[35] while another former teacher noted that hiscolleagues referred to paddles as "their 'boards of education.'"[36]When a student ispaddled, he or she is typically told to stand with his or her hands on a deskor a chair, so that the student is bent over, exposing the buttocks.[37] One former student in Texas described being hit in ninth grade:"This one time, like the other times, I had to stand up, and put my hands onthe chair … and then, 'pop, pop.'"[38] These stances are submissive, placing thestudent in a position with no opportunity for self defense, even though theyare being subjected to violent blows. In addition, the experience of being hiton the buttocks, an inherently private part of the body, can be particularlyhumiliating.Occasionally,students might be paddled in other positions. For instance, students might bepaddled against the wall when a principal is patrolling the hallways.[39] One boy who was paddled in the second gradefor laughing when his friend threw something at a teacher, said, "[Theprincipal] took me into the office and gave me three licks…. He made me holdonto the wall and he paddled me. It hurt for about two hours, it felt like fireunder my butt."[40]Some students arepaddled in even more submissive positions. One sixth-grade student who waspaddled in gym class was forced to line up with other students and bend overwith her hands on her knees.[41] An elementary school student reportedseeing two peers paddled: "My teacher left the door wide open … I could seewhat was happening. [The teacher] had her legs wide open and then she closedthem and put their head in between her legs. The kids had to get on their kneeson the floor and she holds you down."[42]Students arerequired to remain in position throughout the administration of the beating;this condition is hard to meet as moving is a natural defense to physicalviolence. A Mississippiboy reported that "some teachers ask for hands in pockets-so you can't move."[43] A teacher at a Mississippi high school noted that it isdifficult for children to stay still when being beaten: "I saw the principalgiving licks once in the hallway. He was paddling a girl…. He would hit her andshe would jump away and shout that it hurt."[44]If students moveduring beatings they may receive additional blows and injuries. One eleventh-gradegirl in Mississippireported that in the course of a beating, her wrist was injured: "One time Igot hit on my wrist with the paddle, and he told me, 'I told you not to besticking your hand back there.' Well, I had my hands on the table and he wasabout to swing and hit me, and I reached back and he hit my arm with the paddleby mistake ... it hurt!"[45] Another Mississippi girl told us, "[The principal]reared back and paddled me once and I stood up and he said, 'No, bend over.'And I said, 'No, I can't take no more-that really hurt.'… [H]e paddled meagain."[46]Clothing as Protection against BlowsWhile Human RightsWatch did not receive any reports of students being asked to undress completelyfrom the waist down prior to paddling, some students reported that they weretold to hold their pants tight across the buttocks or that the paddler used onehand to tighten their pants. The fact that paddlers initiate this tightening ofthe fabric demonstrates the intent to cause pain or discomfort, a prohibitedact under international law.[47] A Mississippihigh school girl stated that the principal "tightened my pants and paddled me.He … went 'pow.' He grabs pants to make them tighter on your behind. It hurtsmore then."[48] A Texasstudent agreed: "The principal pulled my pants tight-it gives you a wedgie. Bymaking things tight, it hurts more."[49]Students take stepsto mitigate blows, well aware of the painful punishments they may face. Onemiddle school boy who receives regular beatings reported that "I wear two pairsof gym shorts under my pants to protect against the paddling," and that duringone paddling in sixth grade, all of his clothing except for the second pair ofgym shorts were removed.[50]Number of BlowsSome schooldistricts' corporal punishment policies limit the number of blows a student canreceive. For example, the MarshallIndependentSchool Districtin Texaslimits corporal punishment to two swats.[51] Students in the GrandPrairieIndependentSchool District near Dallas, Texas,cannot receive more than three licks per day.[52]DrewSchool District in Mississippi states that "[n]o more than five(5) licks will be given to elementary students and no more than seven (7) lickswill be given to students in grade 7-12."[53] The SouthDeltaSchoolDistrict in Mississippispecifies that "[n]o student shall receive more than a maximum of five (5)licks of the paddle and only to the fleshy parts of the buttocks."[54]In other districts,we received reports of students being subjected to large numbers of consecutiveblows, and/or accelerating numbers of blows. A former high school teacher inthe Mississippi Delta noted that students might accumulate a number of licks:"Say they had 30 licks, they could choose 10 today, 10 more the next day."[55] Some students reported acceleratingpunishments. One Mississippihigh school girl said, "If it's your first time, then you get like, threelicks. And then if you continue to go, it'd increase to like, three, five,seven, ten."[56] Another girl noted, "He got to give youfrom three to nine licks. And most time for curses, he's got to give you threelicks for every letter in the curse word you say…. You got to be beat down."[57] Corporal punishment always carries somerisk of serious harm;[58] increasing the number of blows exacerbatesthat risk.Other Instruments UsedHuman Rights Watch received some reports of students beingstruck with objects other than a paddle, including rulers and a belt. We heardmultiple reports of students being hit by teachers with rulers, especiallyamong younger children. A Mississippimiddle school boy was hit in fifth grade with a set of rulers taped together:"I was talking, it was a group of students and she [the teacher] told us tocome up to her desk and she popped us on our palms … this was with four rulerstaped together."[59]A girl in Texasnoted that "in kindergarten … they hit us with rulers on the hands … I saw itall the time in class."[60]One former teacher in rural Mississippireported that hitting children with rulers was prevalent in her school, notingthat "in my district, this happened all the way through high school."[61]Other Physical Force Used against StudentsHuman Rights Watch received reports that students were subjectedto other forms of physical force in addition to paddling. A Texas middle schoolboy, for example, reported that, after some gym students were misbehaving, histeacher made the whole class perform "'gut checks,' where we bear crawl" acrossthe yard; the dry grass left some students bleeding on their hands and knees.[62]Because corporal punishment is defined as any punishment involving physicalforce "intended to cause some degree of pain or discomfort,"[63]such punishments, seemingly portrayed as part of routine physical education,amount to corporal punishment because of the intent to cause pain.Persons Administering Corporal PunishmentStudents are typically beaten by administrators (principals,vice principals, or assistant principals)[64] andin some cases, by coaches.[65]Students are usually referred to the principal's office (or the disciplineoffice) by a teacher; teachers also administer corporal punishment,[66]particularly among younger students.[67]According to our interviewees, coaches beat students on their teams[68]as well as non-athlete students referred to them by teachers.[69]One recent graduate explained, "In high school, it was usually the coaches whopaddled. Everyone had P[hysical] E[ducation] or was on a team, so everyone hadcontact with the coaches…. If a teacher had a problem, they'd send that personto the coaches."[70]The majority of paddlers in incidents described by ourinterviewees were male. One Mississippiteacher and mother noted that the "swats are given by grown men; some of them[are] good swingers."[71]One former teacher reported that at her Mississippi Delta high school, thefemale basketball coach administered corporal punishment to the girls.[72]One teacher noted there was a policy of having a female witness whenever girlswere hit,[73]though this was not common in other districts we visited.Given these school environments, in which corporalpunishment is an accepted means of punishment, and in which teachers and schooladministrators are perceived as community leaders entitled to respect, it isnot surprising that Human Rights Watch received multiple reports of parents andguardians who cooperated with administrators by coming to school to beat theirchildren themselves.[74]One mother in rural east Texasdescribed one such situation:There was an incident the last year when the principalasked me whether she could paddle my child. I said no, but said that I wouldcome over there and use the paddle myself…. I don't remember what he did but Igave him two pops and told him to cut it out. I used her paddle in theprincipal's office, she was there.[75]Parents may discipline their children on school premises toshow their commitment to the child's education. One teacher and mother in Mississippi reported,"Some parents get called in and they will give their child swats in front ofthe administrators to show that they take discipline seriously."[76]A teacher noted that parents might also volunteer to paddle their children athome for infractions committed at school: "If I call parents about a kid with adiscipline problem, 80 percent of the time the parent will say, 'Okay, I'mgonna give him a few good licks.' It's a way of showing respect to theteacher."[77]It is natural that parents want to engage in their children's education, andshow their commitment to helping their children succeed. However, endorsingthis sort of punishment undermines the learning environment by sending themessage that violence and humiliation are appropriate and tolerated.The Atmospherics of Corporal PunishmentThe size and shape of paddles, the identity of personsadministering corporal punishment, and the bodily positions of children, asdiscussed above, all contribute to a school atmosphere of harm and degradation.Beyond these mechanical elements, corporal punishment can set a tone ofintimidation and humiliation in schools, as other students see and hear thepunishment.Intimidation and ThreatsStudents are constantly aware of the possibility of beingbeaten, a threat that discourages an open, trusting relationship betweenstudents and educators. One mother noted, "[my sons] talk about it all thetime. It's always there in the school, and even in the classrooms. Some of mysons' teachers like to walk around holding their paddle."[78]Some teachers display paddles while making verbal threats. A seventh-grade boyin Mississippireported that a teacher had a paddle: "He used to have it in the cabinet but hebrought it out when kids started acting out towards the beginning of the schoolyear. It gives us the signal that if we talk some, we going to get a whuppin.'"[79]One fifth-grade girl said her teacher leaves the paddle on her desk: "I feel[it] ain't supposed to be there because I don't like paddles, I just don't."[80]Many students report specific threats of violence. Forinstance, a tenth grader reported she was told by her principal, "'Y'all goback to class before I tear you all up.'"[81] Arecent graduate recalled that her cheerleading coach threatened her with asorority paddle.[82]Some parents instructed the school not to paddle their children, but thosestudents were nonetheless threatened: a fifth-grade boy reported that hisprincipal "told me that 'if I could paddle you I would beat you black andblue.'"[83]Witnesses to PaddlingIn some instances, the administration of corporal punishmentrequires that another adult at the school witness the beating. Neither Texas nor Mississippilaw requires such a witness, since both states delegate responsibility toschool districts for determining the parameters of the administration ofcorporal punishment.[84]However, the school board associations in both states provide sample policiesthat individual districts may use in drafting their discipline policies andthose sample policies call for a witness.The Mississippi Association of School Boards recommends thatany paddling be witnessed by at least one certified school employee at alltimes.[85]The Texas Association of School Boards suggests that "[c]orporal punishmentshall be administered in the presence of one other District professionalemployee."[86]One teacher in Mississippireported that the witness rule existed in her district in order to ensure thepaddler is not hitting "in anger,"[87] butthe presence of an adult witness cannot guarantee lack of anger on the part ofthe individual administering the blows.Sample policies in Texasspecifically dictate that corporal punishment should occur "in a designatedplace out of view of other students,"[88] andmany school districts we visited adopted that language.[89]Sample policies in Mississippi do not give thesame guidance, but some individual districts in Mississippi also require students to bepaddled "not in the view"[90]of other students.[91]Despite these attempts to preserve the privacy of students,many students we interviewed in other districts had witnessed their peers beingbeaten. A fifth-grade girl in rural Mississippidescribed witnessing a friend's paddling because "my teacher left the door wideopen." She noted, "It made me mad, angry, and sad to see her get hit by apaddle."[92]Frequently, students are beaten in hallways: one middle schooler saw studentspaddled in the hallway through the crack of a door.[93]Even in districts that prohibit students from witnessingpaddling, students nonetheless hear their peers being beaten. An 18-year-oldremembered high school paddlings: "I didn't see it but I could hear it. Lickswould be so loud and hard you could hear it through the walls. You could hearthe moans and yelling through the walls."[94]Allowing students to hear beatings may have been intentional, according to oneformer Mississippihigh school teacher:One time [the principal] was paddling this kid and put iton the loud speaker. It was on the intercom in every class in the school. Youcould hear him paddling this kid, talking bad to this kid. Oh yes, he did it onpurpose. It lasted a minute or two. He was trying to send a message. I don'tknow … like, "you could be next."[95]Some students are forced to wait for their own punishmentwhile listening to the beatings of others, as one Mississippi middle school boy described, "Youhave to stand in line for like 30 minutes, waiting to get paddled while you'relistening to everyone else."[96]As another middle school boy noted, "sometimes you hear five or six licks, andyou're like, damn."[97]A tenth-grade girl in Texasnoted that in ninth grade, "there was this separate waiting room. We'd hear it,the other kids getting hit. It sounds like dropping books on the floor. We'd alllaugh, be like, 'damn, that's hurtin' today.'"[98]Some students and teachers have seen or heard paddling so oftenthat they are no longer outwardly affected by the experience. A former Mississippi teacherdescribed how another teacher came into her classroom and paddled a student.The rest of the class's reaction was "normal. They got quiet and watched. For aselect few I know they feared, but most of them laughed."[99]Another teacher noted, "Once you've been in it for a while, I don't know … youget immune to it happening around you."[100]"The Devil's Bargain": Choosing to Be BeatenIn many districts, students are given a choice of corporalpunishment or another punitive form of discipline. Students in both Mississippi and Texasmay be asked to choose between corporal punishment and detention,[101] in-school suspension[102] or out-of-school suspension.[103] We also heard reports of elementarystudents being asked to choose between getting beaten and losing recess,[104] and of high school students being asked tochoose between being paddled and getting worse grades.[105]In some districts,the alternatives to corporal punishment, such as out-of-school suspension, arenot desirable for students or for educators who prefer to keep their studentsin the classroom setting. In other cases, schools have such limited resourcesthat alternative disciplinary measures are not an option, thereby increasingthe frequency of corporal punishment. Whether or not students are mature enoughto make these decisions, they should never be put in the position of bargainingaway their human right not to be beaten by school officials.Typically,interviewees reported that three to five blows are equivalent to one day ofin-school or out-of-school suspension.[106] The "exchange rate" of physical strikes toalternative punishment can vary, however. At a high school in Mississippi, students were given the choicebetween five blows or five days away from school.[107] At another Mississippi high school, students were askedto choose between five blows or 15 minutes in lunch detention.[108]Our interviewsindicate that students often choose beatings over other forms of punishment.This is not surprising since the costs of refusing to be beaten and taking asuspension instead can be high. If a student is suspended, he or she is forcedto miss class and teachers are not obliged to provide make-up work, meaningthat students may fail. An 18-year-old boy in Mississippi noted that at his high school,"my friends who refused to be paddled got ISS [in-school suspension] or a zeroday-that meant your parents had to bring you back [to school]."[109]In fact, proponentsof corporal punishment often justify their views by citing the undesirabilityof suspension, and pointing out that corporal punishment means the studentreturns to class faster. For example, one superintendent asked if a student ishome alone, suspended from school, "is that really what's best educationally?"[110] This argument ignores the students' basicrights, and the fact that other options are available. Ultimately, schoolsshould not be forcing students to make this difficult choice, and shouldinstead be using effective positive discipline measures.[111]Students may be inducedto use corporal punishment as a bargaining chip. One interviewee in Texas took paddling toreduce the number of days in detention: "The principal said I could take twolicks and get some of the days reduced. I didn't want to stay for theafter-school detention, so I took the deal."[112] A seventh-grade boy in Mississippi watched a teacher paddle hispeers in class: "He [the teacher] gave them the option of getting one lick inor three licks out. This was Social Studies. The kids were talking too much….He told them to come up and he said 'do you want one in here or three out thedoor?' So they chose one lick. The class started laughing."[113]Why Students Opt for BeatingsStudents weinterviewed chose corporal punishment for reasons that ranged from wanting tokeep good grades to wanting to keep their parents from finding out; some simplydid not know how much paddling would hurt. A twelfth-grade girl said she chosepaddling the first time because "that meant I got my lunch detention erased."She noted, however, "I would have made a different decision if I had known howmuch it would hurt."[114]Many students saidthey chose corporal punishment in order to avoid missing classroom instructionor suffering other academic consequences. A recent graduate in Texas told us, "I choselicks. If I had got written up, and suspended, I would have had to play catch-up.I would have missed class."[115] One student saw paddling as the betteracademic option: "I would take the paddling because I ain't trying to flunk outor anything."[116] An honors student at a Texas high school explained the calculationshe and her friends make:[My school] usescorporal punishment as a way to get out of SAC [StudentAssignmentCenter, or in-schoolsuspension] … it's three swats to get out of SAC…. My freshman year, twofriends of mine-they were girls-chose to get the swats…. It meant they couldstill "exempt the exam"… that means you use your [classroom grade point]average instead of taking the final. So my friends chose to get swats so theywouldn't have SAC and they wouldn't have to take the exam. I mean, who wants totake an exam if you don't have to?[117]Some students,especially younger students, might think that the alternative punishment ismore unpleasant than the beating. These students simply do not have thematurity to make such a decision, and should not be put in this position. A motherwhose 10-year-old was paddled felt her son wasn't old enough to make thatchoice: "The principal said he asked my son whether he wanted two pops or twodays of ISS and no field trip. He always wanted to go on field trips…. So howare you going to ask this child whether he wants two pops when he is 10 yearsold?"[118]Male students maychoose paddling in part because of a desire to meet perceived societalexpectations of masculinity. One former high school teacher in Mississippi noted, "It'salways one bad thing versus another bad thing-which one are you ready for? Andwith masculinity and the pressures to be tough and unfeeling, often the youngman is going to want to take the licks. Take it like a man. It's almost a showwhen you offer the bargain."[119] This attitude affects even young children,according to one former teacher in Mississippi:"There's a certain amount of bravado that comes with it, you want to take yourlicks like a man, not crying or anything."[120] He emphasized, "with boys, it's a badge ofcourage to choose corporal punishment over ISS."[121]A parent in rural Mississippi noted someobstacles to choosing suspension above corporal punishment: "Their parents havejobs. Their moms have jobs. They say they can't sit home [with the child]."[122] A superintendent in a district that usespaddling described the complications of this dynamic: "When you tell a parentwe have to send the child home for a day, the parent will ask, 'can you notpaddle them? I'm going to be at work. They'll be home by themselves.'"[123]Sometimes schoolsdo not tell parents about beatings and so, unlike with a suspension, thestudent's parents do not find out about the underlying infraction; thismotivates students to choose corporal punishment. One Mississippi mother's son had been paddledwhen he was 17 years old; she did not find out until he was 22:The school didthis thing where they told the kids to take the paddling, don't tell anyone,and it would be over … [my son] says he got paddled almost every day…. That wasan example of how they covered it up so the parent didn't know. I had signedthe card for no paddling … I think they went so far as to tell [my son] thatwe'll just give you some licks and it will all be over and we won't have tocall your mom.[124]Many parents, likethis Mississippiparent, disagreed with this scheme: "Your kid can get a paddling and youwouldn't know it…. Let me know. That's only right."[125]Teachers andcoaches sometimes directly pressure students not to tell parents about beatings.For instance, student athletes, for whom paddling can be a routine part oftheir training, might keep the abuse from their parents. One recent high schoolgraduate noted, "for boys in the football program, they get licks withouttelling the parents. [The coach would give] them a choice-take your licks andwe won't call your parents or we'll drop your grade and your parents will findout. It's your choice, it's up to you."[126]Some studentsprefer to be paddled rather than have parents informed of the infractionbecause they feel punishment at home might be worse. A former high schoolteacher felt that her students' attitude was: "You get three smacks on thebehind, you shed a tear, and it's over. Your parents don't know and they're notgoing to beat you."[127]While studentsshould not be subjected to abuse at home, this is not a reason to give thestudent the option of "buying" the school's silence by submitting to physicalharm as a form of discipline. It is a recognized principle of human rights thatchildren should have a voice in the policies and procedures to which they aresubjected.[128] However, in this context, providingchildren a choice between physical beatings or another disciplinary option isnot a rights-protective policy. Providing students a choice in this context isfundamentally exploitative, preying on vulnerable young people withunderdeveloped decision-making capabilities.IV.Offenses Leading to Corporal PunishmentStudents are beatenin schools for a wide range of infractions. Though corporal punishment is nevera legitimate response to misbehavior, it is particularly troubling when used asa disproportionate, angry response to minor infractions that might reasonablybe expected from any child. The punishment is frequently meted out in anarbitrary manner, leaving students unsure why they were punished and angryabout the injury they have suffered. Even in cases where students committedserious infractions, corporal punishment is not an effective method ofredressing the problem.DisproportionateResponses to Minor MisbehaviorThe large majorityof instances of corporal punishment reported to Human Rights Watch was forminor infractions, such as having a shirt untucked,[129] being tardy (late to class or to school),[130] or talking in class[131] or in the hallway.[132] While no student behavior should result incorporal punishment, it is egregious when applied for minor transgressions suchas these.As Justice ByronWhite observed when dissenting from a US Supreme Court decision allowing schoolcorporal punishment, "[i]f there are some punishments that are so barbaric thatthey may not be imposed for the commission of crimes, designated by our socialsystem as the most thoroughly reprehensible acts an individual can commit, then… similar punishments may not be imposed on persons for less culpable acts,such as breaches of school discipline."[133]One teacherdescribed a policy in which teachers were required to lock classroom doors whenthe bell rang; students who were still in the hallway were then paddled by anadministrator patrolling with a paddle in hand before they could attend class.[134] A superintendent in a district that usescorporal punishment noted that the practice is particularly unpleasant if usedfor minor misbehavior: "I hate to think that a child gets three or five swatsfor being late to class, I hate to think that a child gets three or five swatsfor running in the hall-those are minor infractions."[135]Despite thissuperintendent's concern, Human Rights Watch received reports of corporalpunishment in response to a wide range of minor misbehavior. Students werepaddled for eating or drinking in class,[136] sleeping in class,[137] walking on the wrong side of the hallway,[138] running in the hallway,[139] talking back to a teacher,[140] not turning in homework,[141] not having a belt in violation of the dresscode,[142] and going to the bathroom withoutpermission.[143] While some kind of disciplinary response tothese misbehaviors may well be warranted, corporal punishment is grosslydisproportionate. Teachers and students said that minor misbehavior leads tosomewhere between three and five blows.[144] An 18-year-old noted, "You could get apaddling for almost anything. I hated it. It was used as a way to degrade,embarrass students."[145]Students in theearly grades receive corporal punishment for behavior typical among youngchildren. This is especially problematic because while young children mayimmediately comply with adults' wishes, they frequently do not remember whythey are being hit and will only refrain from future misbehavior if they facean imminent threat of violence.[146] A middle school boy in Mississippi was beaten for throwing paperballs at the teacher: "I was just trying to make the class more fun. Eventuallyafter I threw about four or five paper balls she got really mad and sent me andmy friends to the office and we got a whuppin'."[147] Two kindergarteners were paddled for playinga child's version of "footsie": "Me and my friend, we were stepping on eachother's feet. [The teacher] called us both into the hall and … gave us threelicks and sent us back into the classroom."[148]In Texas, we receivedreports that coaches would paddle student athletes for bad grades. One 16-year-oldstudent athlete said, "We had to show [coach] our grade sheets, we had to takeit around to get it signed by all the teachers and then take it back to thecoach."[149]Disproportionalityalso arises where students or parents have the option of choosing anotherpunishment such as suspension.[150] In such cases, students who refuse to bebeaten typically receive a punishment that the school usually reserves for moreserious infractions. A student who, for example, was tardy, and then chose toexercise his right not to be beaten, might then be suspended.[151] According to the hierarchy of punishmentestablished by the schools, the suspension is the more serious punishment. Ineffect, students are being further punished for asserting their right to befree from physical violence.VagueOffenses and Arbitrary Use of Corporal PunishmentStudents andteachers reported that students could be paddled for a catch-all category of"disrespect," a term which is rarely defined in school policy and is usedarbitrarily by teachers. In some cases, this is a category that can be checkedon the school's official discipline form when a student is referred to theprincipal's office for paddling.[152] One Mississippiteacher implied it can be a catch-all term used to discipline students at theteacher's whim:Disrespect canmean different things. Disrespect is doing something that you are told not todo. Not doing your work, talking out of turn, raising your voice to anotherteacher, putting your hands on another student. Breaking the rules. But itdepends on a person's definition of respect.[153]One middle schoolerdescribed punishments for "disrespect" as: "if you mess up, and don't say ma'amor sir."[154] A high school girl objected to beingwritten up for a dress code violation, stating that she was not aware of thenew rule; the teacher then wrote her up for "disrespect" instead.[155] Another similarly vague term for whichstudents are sometimes paddled is "defiance of authority," which, as a recenthigh school graduate in Mississippinoted, "could be anything; that phrase could mean anything. Teachers threw itaround all the time."[156]Corporal punishmentis sometimes administered arbitrarily, with inconsistent rules, underscoringthe inefficacy of the punishment.[157] One teacher noted that at her high schoolin the Mississippi Delta, the reasons for giving corporal punishment were"vague," and that "there was never, at my school, a list of things that a kiddid wrong that would result in corporal punishment."[158] One former teacher noted that whether ornot a child received corporal punishment "just depended on the teacher. Theonly school-wide rule was no food or drink in the classroom."[159] A former student from Texas agreed, "Whether you get in trouble,whether you get paddled, it depends on the teachers."[160] A teacher noted that she thought it was"least effective because it was a catch-all punishment."[161] In these situations, students are not givenadequate notice or clear rules that would indicate when they will be punished.Corporal Punishment forSerious Offenses, including ViolenceSome students wespoke with were subjected to corporal punishment for more serious infractions.Fighting in particular led to corporal punishment of students in both Mississippi[162] and Texas.[163] Even very young students who were caughtfighting were then beaten: Human Rights Watch spoke with a student who waspaddled after fighting in second grade,[164] and another student who was paddled afterhitting another child on the head with a chair in third grade.[165] One student we interviewed was paddled forsetting off firecrackers in school.[166] Students on a field trip were reportedlypaddled for getting drunk.[167]A superintendentwho is against corporal punishment nonetheless reflected a popular sentimentwhen he observed that corporal punishment may be "more appropriate for majorinfractions: gambling, aggression towards other students."[168] While students who commit serious offenses needeffective discipline, corporal punishment is not an acceptable answer.Under internationallaw, in "exceptional circumstances … dangerous behavior [may] justif[y] the useof reasonable restraint," but that force must be the minimum amount necessaryfor the shortest period of time, and must never be used to punish.[169] Educators are confronted with the difficulttask of maintaining order and ensuring a safe environment for their students,while avoiding the use of unnecessary force. Therefore, they must be trained torespond to dangerous behavior, "both to minimize the necessity to use restraintand to ensure that any methods used are safe and proportionate to the situationand do not involve the deliberate infliction of pain as a form of control."[170] Educators should only use force whenabsolutely necessary, and should do so in compliance with the strict limitsarticulated in international law.[171]Contrary to thisstandard, we received some reports that excessive and unnecessary force was usedto control students. For instance, a Mississippi high school girl reported thatwhen fights break out in the gym at her school, the principal and assistantprincipal "come up into the bleachers and put their hands on the girls andchoke them, and slam them … [they put their hands] on their necks, they'll grabthem all types of ways…. The principal is the biggest man at our school and hecan literally just throw down anyone."[172] Elsewhere in Mississippi, two young students, both ofwhom have mental disabilities, were physically pushed into closets aspunishment after acting out in class.[173]V.Prevalence of Corporal Punishment in US Public SchoolsData on Corporal Punishment223,190 students nationwide received corporal punishment atleast once in the 2006-2007 school year, according to data from the Office forCivil Rights (OCR) at the United States Department of Education.[174]Figure 1Click to expand Image© Human Rights Watch, 2008.While corporal punishment is legal in 21 states,[175]Table 1 shows that it is used more heavily in some states than others. In Texas alone, OCR datashow that 49,197 students were subjected to corporal punishment during the 2006-2007school year, more than in any other state.[176] InMississippi, 7.5percent of schoolchildren were paddled at least once during that same schoolyear, the highest percentage in the nation.[177]Table 1: Nationwide Prevalence of Corporal PunishmentStateNumber of StudentsPaddled During the 2006-2007 School YearStatePercentage of StudentsPaddled During the 2006-2007 School YearTexas49,197Mississippi7.5%Mississippi38,131Arkansas4.7%Alabama33,716Alabama4.5%Arkansas22,314Oklahoma2.3%Georgia18,249Louisiana1.7%Tennessee14,868Tennessee1.5%Oklahoma14,828Georgia1.1%Louisiana11,080Texas1.1%Florida7,185Missouri0.6%Missouri5,129Florida0.3%Source: United States Department of Education, Office forCivil Rights, "2006 Civil Rights Data Collection."Corporal punishment was widely accepted in US public schoolsin the latter part of the 19th century and the early 20thcentury.[178]While New Jersey banned corporal punishment bystatute in 1867,[179]many other US states,including Michigan, Connecticut,and Nevada,did not enact a ban until the late 1980s or early 1990s.[180] Inthe present decade, the number of students subjected to corporal punishment inUS public schools has been steadily dropping. OCR data indicate that 342,038children in US public schools were paddled in the 2000-2001 school year;[181]by the 2004-2005 school year, the figure had dropped to 272,028 students.[182]In 2006-2007, the most recent school year for which data are available, thenumbers fell to 223,190.[183]Any level of corporal punishment is too high; the fact that the numbers aredropping shows that districts still using paddling are becoming the exception, makingit all the more imperative that they change their discipline policies.Boys are subjected to corporal punishment more than girls:nationwide, boys make up 78.3 percent of those paddled.[184] African-Americanstudents are paddled at more than twice the rate than might be expected giventheir percentage of the student population: African Americans constitute 17.1percent of the nationwide student population, but 35.6 percent of thosepaddled.[185]Though girls as a group are paddled less than boys, African-American girls aremore than twice as likely to be subjected to paddling as their whitecounterparts.[186]Special education students[187]are also subjected to corporal punishment, even though the behavior that leadsteachers or administrators to beat them may result from their disabilities ratherthan any lack of discipline.[188]Nationwide, OCR data indicate that 41,972 special education students receivedcorporal punishment in the 2006-2007 school year.[189] Inthe two states examined in detail for this report, Mississippiand Texas,large numbers of special education students were among those receiving corporalpunishment. In Mississippi,5,831 special education students were beaten in the 2006-2007 school year.[190]In Texas,10,222 special education students were beaten, amounting to approximately one-fifthof the total number of students who were beaten statewide.[191]While these figures and rates may already appear quite high,they do not reflect the full extent of the problem. First, the data record thenumber of students hit each year, not the number of incidents.[192]In other words, the data show that 223,190 individual students were beaten inthe relevant school year, but do not show how many incidents of corporalpunishment occurred. Because many students likely were beaten more than once ina school year-a reasonable assumption given the evidence collected from ourinterviewees-the overall number of beatings administered each year undoubtedlyis far higher.The data also very likely undercount the number of studentsbeaten each year because some school districts fail to report all incidents tothe federal government. Corporal punishment is often seen as a quick form ofdiscipline: a former high school teacher recalled that "paddling was just afast way to deal with it and not write it down."[193]Records are not always kept for corporal punishment: a high school teachernoted that discipline is "completely haphazard … many teachers don't evenbother with writing referrals anymore."[194]One superintendent of a major Mississippischool district told us the reported numbers were low:[W]e probably do it twice as much as reported…. [T]here isno documentation you have to send to the central office to say that you did it….[It's] an option where you don't have to do so much documentation, It's mucheasier than signing the suspension form and giving it to the parents or any ofthat. I'm speaking realistically.[195]Incidents of corporal punishment may not be recorded whenthey do not take place in the principal's office (or the school's "main" office).A Mississippiteacher told us:I know that there are paddlings that aren't reported…. Aconcrete example: during my planning period, I spent a considerable amount oftime in this one teacher's class. I've seen the teacher ask students to get thepaddle from the corner, wait outside for him, the students are paddled, theycome in, and class resumes. No paperwork is filled out. I'm sure if you askteachers, they wouldn't be able to tell you how many students they paddled atthe end of the day.[196]Informal referrals from teachers to coaches might not berecorded. Another Mississippiteacher reported that "[w]here the coach is giving licks, the coaches don'treport to the office. It's sort of part of the coaching, [the coach's] rights,which contributes to the lack of data on corporal punishment."[197]The lack of record-keeping may be particularly evident when students arepaddled in hallways or classrooms. One former Mississippi teacher, who frequently saw herprincipal administer corporal punishment in the hallway, noted, "Oh yeah, he[the principal] never reported it. He never took names; he didn't know who allthese kids were."[198]It is unlikely such instances of informal, unregulated corporal punishment arerecorded by the administrator upon return to his or her office.Constant and High Levels of Paddling in SomeSchoolsRoutine, high levels of paddling in schools can indicate athreatening, violent environment.[199] Aformer assistant principal in charge of discipline at a middle school in Meridian, Mississippi,recalled that he received 19-23 referrals for paddling every day; one day hehad 37 students sent to his office to receive a beating.[200]Interviewees described long lines of students waiting to get paddled outsidethe principal's office.[201]One teacher noted his elementary students were punished so often it had becomeroutine: "The kids would put their hands on the back of the chair, stick theirbutts out, and the principal would start hitting."[202]Corporal punishment is so commonplace in certain publicschools in Texas and Mississippi that students reported highlevels of paddling in casual tones. A high school boy in Texas recalled, "I was paddled inelementary, yeah. Too many times to count."[203] A Mississippi high schoolgirl observed that she was paddled "at least three times a week" in the ninthand tenth grades.[204]She estimated that "at least 60" students are paddled daily at her school,noting, "A lot of kids get paddled. Every class block you will hear a list ofstudents being called [to the office for paddling] on the intercom."[205]We received reports of students of all ages receivingcorporal punishment, from pre-kindergarten to high school. A Mississippi middle school boy recalledreceiving three blows as a kindergartener for making another child eat dirt inthe playground.[206]Another Mississippikindergartener was beaten three times for stepping on another student's feet.[207]An east Texaskindergartener was paddled for pulling a chair out from underneath anotherstudent.[208]Among our interviewees, paddling was no less common in older grades. Wereceived reports of paddlings administered to a twelfth-grade girl in Mississippi,[209] aneleventh-grade girl in Texas,[210]and a 17-year-old boy in Mississippi.[211]A former teacher recalled that one of her high school students was paddleddespite being "a really big kid … [for whom] the paddle just seemed kind ofsilly."[212]VI. Impactof Corporal PunishmentCorporal punishment in schools harms children and damagestheir education. The practice almost always causes immediate pain, and canresult in lasting physical injury. It humiliates and degrades students, and mayleave them depressed or withdrawn. Corporal punishment teaches students thatviolence is acceptable: it can make students aggressive, angry, and more likelyto lash out against their peers or educators, and it can teach them thatdomestic violence is permissible. Furthermore, as a result of being physicallypunished, students can become less engaged in school, less motivated tosucceed, and may become more likely to drop out.Lasting Injuries and Immediate PainMany victims of corporal punishment in schools sustainserious injuries, as noted by the Society for Adolescent Medicine, includingsevere muscle injury, extensive bruising, and whiplash damage.[213]A girl in Mississippiwas paddled in sixth grade: "[The coach] hit me so hard I felt nauseous at mystomach. I was mad because I remember I came home to take a shower, and I waslike, I'm going to look and see if I have bruises. And I looked in the mirrorand I had bruises all over, and I said, 'Mama, come look.'"[214]Her mother took her immediately to the local hospital's emergency departmentfor medical care,[215]and also reported the incident to the sheriff's office.[216]The same girl was paddled in twelfth grade: "[The principal] reared back andpaddled me … you could see where the paddle hit and it was really red…. Thatwas first period and I had bruises by third period."[217]Once again, her mother took her to receive medical care,[218]and filed a sheriff's report.[219]A middle school student in rural Mississippi was severely bruised when hisbeatings escalated. He was sent to the office for paddling, and "[w]hen I cameback, [the teacher] said I was laughing so she sent me back and I got threemore licks…. The principal was like, 'you're in here again already?'… He said,'Do you realize that every time you come in here I'm going to hit you harderand harder?'"[220]When his mother met him after school, she noticed he was in pain. She found hisbuttocks were black from bruising.[221] Ittook more than a week for the bruises to heal, and during this period "hecouldn't sit down."[222]One very young student in Texas, a three-year-old boy attending apublic pre-kindergarten program, was beaten and bruised during paddling. Theprogram was run at the local elementary school and governed by the schooldistrict policy on discipline.[223]The boy, who has diagnosed Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), waspaddled for taking off his shoes and for playing with an air conditioner. Hebecame reluctant to go to school: his mother reported that "all he would say isthat 'she [the principal] hit him with a board.'"[224]The child sustained bruises to his hips that reached around to his bellybutton.[225]While this case may seem exceptional, it is a direct byproduct of the climatecreated in school districts by the regular use of corporal punishment.Some students sustain injuries to other body parts. An18-year-old San Antonio, Texas, girl sued her school district whenshe was hit on her buttocks and her hand. Her hand was injured when she triedto block one of the blows. She went to the emergency room with a severelyswollen hand that was put into a cast.[226] Aninjury to a hand is not unique to this case; many students use their hands orarms to protect themselves. Among our interviewees, a Mississippi high schooljunior reported that she reached back when the principal was swinging and washit on her arm,[227]and a Mississippi middle school boy reported that when the principal was aboutto paddle him, the boy put his hand back and the principal hit his thumb withthe paddle.[228]In one case the student paddled was visibly pregnant, as a Mississippi teacherdescribed:I had a pregnant girl get paddled once for being tardy. Shewas five months pregnant. She was 16. The principal paddled her … she wasshowing and it was known that she was pregnant. She was part of a group thatwas tardy to class. And she yelled something along the lines of "you shouldn'tpaddle me, I'm pregnant."[229]Nearly all students we spoke with had vivid memories of the immediatephysical pain caused by corporal punishment. A recent graduate in Texas recalled of hersixth-grade paddling: "[I]t hurt. Oh yes. It stings, and I remember it broughttears to my eyes."[230]A former teacher in Mississippireported that "[y]ou could hear it wooshing through the air and hitting anobject. Some kids would say 'No, No, NO,' and then 'Owww!'"[231] Afifth-grade girl remembered being beaten when she was in kindergarten: "theyhit me on my bottom. It feeled like it burned and burned … it hurt."[232]Students describe the paddling as "stinging" or "burning."They report that the effect can last for hours, and upon return to class, it ispainful to sit. A female recent graduate remembered, "It hurt very much. Therewere definitely red markings and then swelling. I remember it being red on mybuttocks. Almost welt-like markings. It didn't last for more than a coupledays. It was painful to sit down immediately after."[233]One 19-year-old girl described why it was difficult to sit: "You know how whenyou bite your lip it swells up a little bit? Well, that's how my butt felt."[234]The risk of serious physical injury makes corporalpunishment impossible to regulate, or administer in "appropriate" amounts. A formerteacher in Texasargued, "There's always a risk of a teacher hitting too hard. How can youcontrol how hard a kid is hit?"[235]A superintendent of a major Mississippischool district noted corporal punishment is "not worth the risk. If you paddlea child, you can't pull their pants down and make sure there's not a bruisethere. You have to wonder and worry that if I administer corporal punishment,will I leave a mark and bruise?"[236]Some students may receive more serious physical injuries from the same levels ofpaddling, perhaps because they bruise more easily, or because they have anunderlying medical condition of which the school was not aware.Aformer president of the Dallas School Board emphasized that this was one reasonfor that district's decision to prohibit corporal punishment: "It's hard toknow if someone is being too forceful, or if there's a physical condition thatthey're unaware of."[237]Some school districts have policies dictating that a childcannot be hit in anger, but these policies are virtually impossible to enforce.For instance, the PontotocCountySchool District(Mississippi)states that all corporal punishment "shall be reasonable and moderate and notadministered maliciously or for the purpose of revenge."[238]GentryHigh Schoolin the IndianolaSchoolDistrict (Mississippi)asserts that "action may not be motivated by malice or anger."[239]It is next to impossible to assess the paddler's state of mind at the time ofpaddling, since an educator can be angry or motivated by revenge, thus hittingwith extra force, without revealing these emotions to others.[240]None of the regulations related to the state of mind of the paddler or the"degree" of paddling that we have seen can be enforced in a way that wouldeliminate the risk of serious injury.Depression and AngerCorporal punishment is humiliating and degrading, may makestudents angry and ready to lash out at their peers or at educators, and maymake them less inclined to engage in learning. The AmericanAcademyof Pediatrics, in taking a position against corporal punishment, observes that"corporal punishment may adversely affect a student's self-image and schoolachievement and that it may contribute to disruptive and violent behavior."[241]Research suggests that children who are physically punished athome or at school may become less likely than other children to internalizemoral values, and may become depressed or aggressive.[242] A2005 UNESCO study notes that "[c]orporal punishment has been found to beconsistently related to poor mental health; including depression, unhappiness,anxiety, and feelings of hopelessness in children and youth."[243]There have been fewer studies on the effects of corporalpunishment in schools, as opposed to in the home. Nonetheless, studies suggestthat school corporal punishment legitimates violence.[244]According to the Society for Adolescent Medicine, victims of corporalpunishment may endure psychological harm, including: difficulty sleeping,suicidal thoughts, anxiety, increased anger, feelings of resentment, outburstsof aggression, deteriorating peer relationships, and a tendency for schoolavoidance and school drop out.[245]Students interviewed by Human Rights Watch spoke of thepsychological degradation caused by the punishment. Sean D., an 18-year-oldboy, reported that in his school district in the Mississippi Delta, "you couldget a paddling for almost anything. I hated it. It was used as a way todegrade, embarrass students." Sean received paddlings himself in middle school:"After [location withheld] Middle School, I said I'd never take anotherpaddling. It's humiliating, it's degrading. Some teachers like to paddlestudents…. Paddling causes you to lose respect for a person, stop listening tothem."[246]Dr. Ollye B. Shirley, a former member of the school board in Jackson, Mississippi,asked, "What kind of classroom can you have once you've stopped the learning tobeat somebody? I just thought kids shouldn't be treated that way. They neededto be treated with dignity."[247]A current school board member in another district agreed, "Think about themental capacity that this kind of treatment leaves our children with. We aretelling them we don't respect them. They leave that principal's office and theythink, 'they don't consider me as a human being.'"[248]Research suggests that corporal punishment is linked toincreased rates of bullying and aggression in school in the months and yearsfollowing the punishment.[249]Some studies suggest that children who are physically punished may be inclinedto engage in aggressive conduct toward their siblings, parents, teachers, andschoolmates.[250]There are no definitive studies separating the effects of corporal punishmentin the home and in schools on the aggressiveness of the child, but researchersbelieve corporal punishment in the schools has deleterious effects.[251]Dr. Shirley, the former member of the school board in Jackson, Mississippi,a district that has abolished corporal punishment, noted:One of the problems with corporal punishment is thatstudents will fight back. I remember one incident where the girl struck back atthe teacher. The child just knocked the teacher down because she just wasn'tgoing to take the whupping. That was one of the things that led me to opposeit. What do you think it does to high school students to be paddled in front oftheir peers?... It makes them angry … I think it's dangerous.[252]Both students and teachers we interviewed saw links betweencorporal punishment and bullying or peer aggression. One middle school boy said,"The other kids were watching and laughing. It made me want to fight them….When you get a paddling and you see everyone laugh at you, it makes you mad andyou want to do something about it."[253] Anine-year-old girl observed, "If they lay hands on me, I'll lay hands back."[254]"Students rarely think they did anything wrong," commented one teacher. "Couplethat with physical [punishment], that will elicit anger [from the student]. Ihave seen students acting out their aggression for receiving corporalpunishment."[255]A former high school teacher in Mississippiagreed that "as a result, they [students] are violent with each other."[256]Academic Disengagement and Drop OutCorporal punishment erodes students' trust in their teachersand their schools. In the United Nations Secretary-General's worldwide Study onViolence against Children, physical punishment in schools is noted as onefactor that contributes to absenteeism, dropping out, and lack of motivationfor academic achievement.[257]According to Dr. Daniel F. Whiteside, assistant surgeon general to PresidentRonald Reagan, "corporal punishment of children actually interferes with theprocess of learning and with their optimal development as socially responsibleadults."[258]Corporal punishment can lead to students feeling disrespectfuland angry toward their educators. A middle school boy stated that corporalpunishment made him feel violent toward the staff: "I wanted to fight [theprincipal] just for doing it to me. And the teacher who sent me to the office."[259]One teacher said, "As soon as they were paddled, they got sent back to theclassroom, and the kid would be angry and say 'Oh you just got me paddled.' Andit was like, 'Well, that certainly didn't solve anything.' [I would imaginesarcastically saying to the principal,] 'Thank you, I really want that childback right now.' So I thought it was terrible."[260]An eleventh-grade boy whose friend was paddled told us that"[h]e won't say anything else to the teacher, even a friendly conversation. He'smad at the teacher now."[261]"Corporal punishment doesn't create respect for teachers," said one recentgraduate in Texas."I wasn't going to let her put her hands on me."[262]Corporal punishment can leave students disengaged in school,less likely to succeed, and more likely to drop out. A Save the Children surveyof children in South Asia found that regularbeatings resulted in a loss of interest in studies and a drop in academicperformance.[263]A statistical study of public education in Alabama found a correlation linking corporalpunishment in schools to drop-out rates.[264]Links to Domestic ViolenceCorporal punishment teaches both boys and girls thatviolence is acceptable when used against a weaker person. Psychologists arguethere is a connection between corporal punishment and accepting or perpetratingdomestic violence later in life.[265] A Mississippi teacher andmother asked, "What are we teaching our young women when a school principal canswat a … young woman on the behind? We're saying that it's okay for a man tobeat a woman. I just don't get that at all. It's a little too close to …something that we don't want in our families-men beating on women."[266]Parents of both girls and boys were concerned about themessages their children received in school. A Texas mother explained her reasons foropting out of corporal punishment for her now 19-year-old daughter: "I tell theprincipal one of the reasons that I'm not going to let you hit my daughter isthat I don't want you conditioning her to accept abuse later. I mean domesticviolence."[267]A Mississippifather was concerned about his son, after the father went to school andobserved a 12-year-old girl being beaten by a male teacher: "I didn't want myown son to see, to know it was okay to hit little girls."[268]Nevertheless, some parents and students support corporalpunishment because they see it as an expression of concern for the child,through which the paddler is "acting like family." A Mississippi teacher said, "Some teachers mayjust hit the kids…. There is an understanding that the teachers are almost likea part of the kid's family. They know the kid's family, and they give swatsalmost as a parent would."[269]The Society for Adolescent Medicine takes the position that this isparticularly risky behavior: "Children who are spanked or subjected to othercorporal punishment means in the home may arrive at school already programmedto be aggressive; corporal punishment in the schools only perpetuates thiscycle of violence."[270]The notion that teachers are like family does not change the fact that corporalpunishment remains destructive and degrading, and that children should betaught to counteract, not perpetuate, the violence that surrounds them.VII. BestPractices in School DisciplineCorporal punishment should be abolished not only because itcauses pain, injury, humiliation, and anger, and not only because it iscontrary to international law and evolving US standards. It should be abolishedbecause it is an ineffective form of school discipline. Better, proven methodsof discipline are available.Best practices for school discipline, as discussed below,focus on creating inclusive, consistent school cultures in which misbehaviorhas clear and immediate consequences but students are valued and respected. Byusing corporal punishment, educators debase the school culture, emphasizinghumiliation of students and use of violence above positive, reinforcingdiscipline.Positive Disciplinary ApproachesThere are many alternatives to corporal punishment thatrespond better to students' educational and psychological needs.[271]With today's educators facing increasing pressure to improve studentachievement and reduce drop-out rates,[272] thecreation of nurturing school environments in which students can meet and exceedacademic targets is a critically important issue.The National Education Association opposes corporalpunishment in schools, recommending instead disciplinary procedures that"enhance high expectations and quality instruction, thereby promotingself-control and responsible behavior in students."[273] Agovernment study conducted in the United Kingdom shortly after corporalpunishment was banned found little evidence that corporal punishment was aneffective deterrent, and concluded that "[t]he best way to encourage goodstandards of behavior in a school is a clear code of conduct backed by acombination of rewards and punishments within a positive community atmosphere."[274]Even traditional methods such as detention of children (in classrooms or studyhalls, for example) or removal of privileges are preferable to corporalpunishment in respecting students' rights and responding effectively todiscipline problems.Nationwide, educators are moving toward positive disciplinepractices-those that respond to the underlying reasons for the child'smisbehavior, and are consistent with the school's mission of education[275]-asa way of creating effective school cultures.[276]Within this structured environment, children can learn to change their behaviorand return to class ready to learn.[277]In 2000, the US Department of Education and US Department ofJustice produced a joint guide on school discipline and school safety, aimed ataddressing "violence and other troubling behaviors in schools."[278]The guide, which is supported by numerous national educational organizationsincluding the American Federation of Teachers,[279]endorses Positive Behavior Support (PBS) systems as a way of providing "asocial and physical environment that fosters appropriate behavior."[280]Critical components include establishing school-wide behavioral expectations,creating incentives for appropriate behavior, and ensuring that there are consequencesfor inappropriate behavior.[281]Responses to misbehavior include: "An explanation of why the behavior is aproblem, an explanation of which rule was violated, and the provision ofopportunities to learn appropriate behaviors and to correct mistakes."[282]An administrator at a new school in a high-poverty area observed that in hispersonal experience, incorporating school discipline as an integral part of theschool's mission statement is very effective: "It's always good practice to beclear with the kids as to what the rules of the class are, and how they will berewarded or punished."[283]In 46 states around the US, there are schools currentlyusing the School-Wide Positive Behavior Support (PBS) model, implementing threelevels of positive behavior supports:[284]Universal: rules, routines, and physical arrangementsfor all students developed to prevent initial problem behavior;Secondary: small group or individual responses forstudents at risk of problem behaviors, such as mentoring programs and staffsupport teams for students; andTertiary: more intensive interventions tailored tomeet the specific needs of individual students with patterns of problembehaviors.Formal evaluations of School-Wide PBS have found significantreductions in discipline referrals to the principal's office and increasedsatisfaction among teachers because they feel more effective in their teachingand management of student behavior.[285]Furthermore, studies in Illinoishave shown that School-Wide PBS can also improve the academic performance andtest scores of students.[286]A Harvard University study in 2000 concluded that schoolscan implement a wide range of programs to bring about positive disciplinemodels, "including peer courts, conflict resolution programs, earlyinterventions, mentoring, mediations, and character education programs thatpromote a mutually respectful and collaborative school climate and teachstudents and teachers how to handle and resolve conflict in appropriate ways."[287]One high-poverty elementary school in Chicago, for example, was able to drasticallyreduce its suspension rate and increase its attendance and reading achievementsafter incorporating positive discipline.[288]The school posts a clear series of rules and consequences around the school,and a copy must be signed by parents, who are encouraged to become an integralpart of the school culture. Supervised study halls are used in place of almostall out-of-school suspension. This is just one of many examples of how positivediscipline can help students succeed. These methods can also be successful inrural schools with mentoring, school-wide commitment, and professionaldevelopment for teachers.[289]Educational experts have also turned to positive disciplinemodels as a way of redressing racial and special education disparities inschool discipline. The federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act(IDEA) encourages the use of positive behavior support systems to respondbetter to the needs of students with disabilities.[290]Likewise, positive behavior support systems can respond toracial disparities. A Justice Matters Institute report from the year 2000 onpreventing racial bias in school discipline observes that effective schools, "ratherthan striving to shape students' behavior solely through a discipline policy …create a community based on the mission or guiding principles, shaping thelarger context of relationships which, in turn, influence student behavior."[291]Again, discipline and school culture are seen as integral in effective schools:"This comprehensive approach proves far more effective than relying on adiscipline policy alone to guide student behavior."[292]Corporal punishment has no place in these positivediscipline structures. When the Jackson,Mississippi, public schoolsbanned corporal punishment in 1990, the school board's decision was "intendedto maintain a sound, productive, healthy and safe environment in the schools."[293]School districts need to follow Jackson's leadby discarding corporal punishment and embracing positive discipline methods,and Jacksonmust continue to present itself as a leader on this issue.Educators' Views on Corporal PunishmentMany educators we spoke with said that corporal punishmentis ineffective in addressing students' underlying misbehavior.[294]A middle school teacher stated, "I've seen its ineffectiveness-the immediateimpact is to get that student to stop that behavior but there is no guaranteethat it [won't] continue."[295]A superintendent in Mississippibelieves it is pointless: "You administer corporal punishment, it's over in twominutes. Children, depending on their age, have a very short memory."[296]A former principal and assistant superintendent noted that corporal punishment"is not a cure-all, it's like putting a band-aid on a broken leg."[297]Educators we spoke with believe that some students becomeimmune to paddling. A former high school teacher in a school that used corporalpunishment regularly felt the practice became like "water off the duck's backfor the kids."[298]Another teacher said that "kids who get whupped a lot, they stop respondingrelatively quickly…. It doesn't address their core issues."[299] Aneleventh-grade boy added that "[s]o many kids are so used to getting paddled thatit really don't faze them at all."[300]Some educators support corporal punishment in schools, eventhough research demonstrates that it is ineffective in addressing studentmisbehavior. One teacher pointed out that corporal punishment can be considered"cost-effective. It's free, basically. You don't have to be organized. All youneed is a paddle."[301]Some parents and teachers think corporal punishment is preferable to keepingchildren out of class and letting them fall further behind in their studies.[302]Others believe that corporal punishment "in moderation" is not harmful,especially if the educator believes the punishment will benefit the child.[303]The GreenvillePublicSchool District (Mississippi), in answering a Human RightsWatch survey, stated that corporal punishment can help the school environmentbecause it is immediate, but can also damage the environment as students becomeaccustomed to negative reinforcement.[304]Some proponents of corporal punishment argue that the OldTestament references to "spare the rod, spoil the child" give support forcorporal punishment.[305]Yet, many religious leaders disagree, including Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu whoresponds, "Violence begets violence, and [through corporal punishment] we shallreap a whirlwind. Children can be disciplined without violence that instillsfear and misery, and I look forward to church communities working in solidaritywith others … towards ending all forms of violence against children."[306]The UnitedMethodistChurch is one major US denomination that condemnscorporal punishment, arguing that "it is difficult to imagine Jesus of Nazarethcondoning any action that is intended to hurt children physically orpsychologically."[307]Corporal punishment also negates a child's capacity torespond to reason. The Society for Adolescent Medicine argues that corporalpunishment may respond more to the teacher's needs than to the child's, and islikely to be administered under conditions of emotional distress on the part ofthe teacher (triggered by the misbehavior of the child).[308]Corporal punishment may make the teacher "feel better," and that may serve as aprincipal justification for using the technique.[309]Self-control on the part of the teacher and strategies to reason with studentswould be more effective and beneficial. One recent high school graduate arguedthat reason would work better for older students: "It's not fair, gettinglicks. There are other ways to discipline children besides hitting them…. Mybrain is in my head, not in my butt."[310]In some school districts in Mississippi, logistical or financialobstacles prevented the use of after-school detention as an alternativepunishment, thereby increasing the use of corporal punishment. One 18-year-oldwho was critical of the corporal punishment regime in his rural school districtstated that "we couldn't have after-school detention. There was no busing. Kidswho got detention would have to find another way home."[311] Ateacher noted that corporal punishment was used heavily at her school, and teachershad few alternatives: "There was no ISS or anything. We had lunch duty so wecouldn't bring them in during lunch."[312]Mr. G., as a new teacher, tried to institute detention at his Mississippi middle school:I knew that I was not going to paddle, so in the first year,I asked my principal if I could hold after-school detention … it did not workat all. Parents had to come get their own kids-there was no bus so you hadparents who objected. They would say, "I'm not picking them up, I'm not takingoff work, I'm not using the gas."[313]Positive behavior support systems, as well as other moretraditional methods, can be effective alternatives to corporal punishment. Thesuperintendent of a major Mississippischool district noted that "[c]hildren will correct themselves if you engagein positive reinforcement."[314]Mr. G. believes that with the right resources, his school could find effectivealternatives to corporal punishment.[315]VIII. TheUse of Corporal Punishment against Specific GroupsCorporal punishmentis used disproportionately against certain groups of students, including boys, African-Americanstudents, and special education students. For instance, African-Americanstudents make up 17.1 percent of the nationwide student population, but 35.6percent of those paddled.[316] Even while overall corporal punishmentrates have declined during the last 30 years, disparate rates of physicalpunishment of African-American students have persisted.[317]Some might arguethat this discrepancy exists because there is a higher percentage of African-Americanstudents in states that paddle heavily, and so they are overrepresented innational statistics on corporal punishment. Yet when we examine data from onlythe 13 states that paddle more than 1,000 students per year,[318] disproportionality of paddling of African-Americanstudents persists. Among those 13 states, African-American students are 1.4times more likely to get paddled than might be expected given their proportionof the student body. Likewise, among those 13 states, Native American studentsmake up 1.2 percent of the student body, but 2.4 percent of those paddled, adisproportionality of two to one.[319]These disproportionalitiesimpinge on students' right to non-discrimination in access to education. Inaddition, they further undermine the learning environment of the school, andcreate a hostile environment in which minority groups may struggle to succeed.Boys Paddled More Than GirlsBoys are subjected tocorporal punishment at much higher rates than girls: nationwide, boys make up78.3 percent of those paddled, while girls make up 21.7 percent.[320]Boys are paddled more than girls in all states that use corporal punishment.For instance, in Mississippi, 74.2 percent ofthose paddled in schools are boys, while in Texas, 78.7 percent of those paddled areboys.[321]One high school teacher suggested one possible reason forthe gender disparity in paddling, noting that at her school it was commonpractice to "stay away from hitting the girls. I guess they're more fragile,and a lot of them could be pregnant and we wouldn't know it."[322]A father of two boys and a girl felt that it was more acceptable for boys to bepaddled than girls. He explained, "My little girl-don't you put your hands onher…. As far as my boys, I am super hard on them. For one, they are young blackmen and they are faced with different obstacles in life. I get on them everyday, and I know they say, 'Man, my dad is tough.'"[323]Many interviewees reported that boys were beaten moreharshly than girls. A middle school boy in Mississippi observed that one of histeachers "paddle the boys real hard and when he paddle the girls he don'treally hit them."[324]One student reported that there are smaller paddles for girls: "They use ashort one for girls and a long one for the boys."[325]One middle school student, however, told us that "[s]ome girls that act fastlike they're gay or something … they'll get hit real hard. When they be tryingto feel other girls."[326]Figure 2-Source: US Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights(OCR), "Civil Rights Data Collection 2006," March 26, 2008, http://ocrdata.ed.gov/ocr2006rv30/xls/2006Projected.html(accessed July 18, 2008).* "National" statistics refer to data from the states thatpermit the use of corporal punishment in schools.RaceNationwide, African-American and Native American studentsare beaten in public schools at disproportionate rates, violating their rightsto be free from physical violence and to equal protection under the law. Whilethe use of corporal punishment has declined overall in the past 30 years, thedisproportionate rate at which African-American students are corporallypunished has stayed the same or increased.[327]The most recent statistics available demonstrate that, when compared torelevant percentages of the nationwide student population, both African-Americanboys and African-American girls are significantly more likely to be punishedthan their white counterparts. African-American students make up 17.1 percentof the nationwide student population, but 35.6 percent of those paddled.[328]As mentioned above, the discrepancy in the rates of paddlingof African-American students cannot be explained merely because there is ahigher percentage of African-American students in states that paddle heavily,and so they are overrepresented in national statistics on corporal punishment. Lookingat data from only the 13 states that paddle more than 1,000 students per year,[329]in order to compare accurately the proportion of students punished to theoverall student body, disproportionality of paddling of African-Americanstudents persists. Among those 13 states, African-American students make up24.8 percent of the student population but 35.9 percent of those paddled,[330]meaning that African-American students are 1.4 times more likely to get paddledthan might be expected given their proportion of the student body. Likewise,among those 13 states, Native American students are paddled at more than twotimes the rate that would be expected given their proportion of the studentbody.[331]The disparate use of corporal punishment against African-Americanstudents was noted by some of our interviewees. One high school girl in aracially diverse school in Mississippiobserved that "every time you walk down the hall you see a black kid gettingwhupped. I would say out of the whole school year there's only about threewhite kids who have gotten paddled."[332]Because boys are beaten more often than girls, thisdisproportionality is even more stark when one separates out the data for boys.When looking at the 13 states with high rates of paddling, African-Americanboys are 2.1 times more likely to be paddled than might be expected given theirproportion of the student body; Native American boys are 3.2 times more likelyto be paddled.[333]White boys are also beaten at disproportionate rates, though the disparity isless stark: white boys are 1.6 times more likely to be paddled than might beexpected given their proportion of the student population in these 13 states.[334]The disparities for African-American boys are not uniformacross states. In Mississippi,one of the two states focused on in this report, white boys are 1.2 times aslikely to be paddled as might be expected given their proportion of the studentbody, whereas African-American boys are 1.7 times as likely to be paddled.[335]In Texas, theother state focused on here, however, white boys are 2.3 times as likely to bepaddled as might be expected, whereas African-American boys are 2.1 times aslikely to be paddled.[336]While girls are paddled less than boys as a group,[337]African-American girls are more than twice as likely to be subjected topaddling than their white counterparts. In the 13 states that paddle more than1,000 students per year, African-American girls are 2.07 times as likely aswhite girls to be corporally punished.[338]This disparity persists in the target states for this report, though to alesser degree in Texas than in Mississippi. In Texas, African-Americangirls are 1.35 times as likely as white girls to be paddled.[339]In Mississippi,African-American girls are 2.22 times as likely as white girls to be paddled, anumber that exceeds the 13-state average.[340]Figure 3Click to expand ImageSource: OCR, "Civil Rights Data Collection 2006."A former member of the Jackson(Mississippi) Public School Board of Trusteescited the disproportionate treatment of black girls as one of the reasons forabolishing corporal punishment in Jackson:"Some of the white teachers, male teachers, were spanking black girls but notwhite girls. If they could spank black girls, then why couldn't they spankwhite girls? So that was another issue. It was not being executed fairly. Wehave to have the same policy for everybody."[341]Some might argue that African-American students are punishedmore because they commit more serious disciplinary infractions, or because theycommit a higher number of minor disciplinary infractions. The US Department ofEducation, Office for Civil Rights, the main source for information on rates ofcorporal punishment, does not collect data on the underlying infraction; thequestion of whether black students commit more serious infractions that wouldexplain their disproportionate punishment cannot be answered in this report.Neither can we determine whether black students commit more (as opposed to moreserious) infractions than white students, and therefore receive corporalpunishment more frequently.[342]Existing data do establish that African-American students receive corporalpunishment at vastly disproportionate rates, and that the disproportionality haspersisted over time.[343]Discriminatory Learning EnvironmentThe disparate use of corporal punishment creates a hostileschool environment in which students of color may struggle to succeed;students, teachers, and administrators are conscious of these discriminatory patternsin their day-to-day lives. A 17-year-old girl spoke of the atmosphere producedby the disparate use of corporal punishment at the high school she used toattend in rural Mississippi:"It feels to me like we're back in slavery."[344] Aproclamation opposing school corporal punishment, signed by 20 national African-Americanleaders, including Kweisi Mfume, Marc Morial, and Reverend Jesse Jackson, Sr.,observes that "corporal punishment in schools is disproportionately used onAfrican-American children, and … all children deserve to be able to learn in asafe and supportive learning environment free from corporal punishment."[345]Some of our interviewees believe corporal punishment wasadministered with discriminatory motives. A teacher in a rural Mississippi school describedhow, even among African-American students, darker-skinned students werepunished more severely, in part because of the belief that there was less riskthat heavy bruising would be visible:I've heard this said at my school and at other schools: "Thischild should get less whips, it'll leave marks." Students that aredark-skinned, it takes more to let their skin be bruised. Even with all blackstudents, there is an imbalance: darker-skinned students get worse punishment.This really affected me, being a dark-skinned person myself.[346]One father and one guardian in separate Mississippi towns voiced their concerns thattheir African-American sons "needed" corporal punishment because of thediscriminatory environment they would face as adults. The guardian stated, "Foryoung black males, if you can't listen to authority, you're headed to jail.Discipline needs to come from people they love to prevent that."[347]This corresponds with the opinions of a high school boy in Jackson,Mississippi, a district without corporal punishment, who believes that corporalpunishment would have helped make his classes more orderly: "Corporalpunishment shows [kids] how they can make it in the world-it teaches them aboutlife after school."[348]Yet, there are other ways to teach children how to deal with the challengesthey will face later in life; a nurturing school environment structured withpositive discipline models can help deliver this self-confidence.In interviews with Human Rights Watch, students and parents repeatedlylinked the use of corporal punishment in schools to slavery, characterizinghitting young African Americans as classroom discipline as a dehumanizingreminder of techniques used to control slaves on plantations.[349]One fifth-grade African-American boy commented that "[i]t comes from the timeof slavery. They used to tie a black slave up and make another slave beat him."[350]Another student, exasperated with paddlings for not wearing the school uniform,told us she felt like asking, "Okay, are you still in slave mentality, Coach?"[351]Experienced educators also see links between corporalpunishment and submissiveness, which in turn they relate to domination bywhites over blacks. One superintendent observed that corporal punishment "hasits origins in the times of slavery when slaves were tied up and whipped as ameans of control. But because you get compliance does not mean you havecontrol."[352]A school board member in a Mississippitown reflected on this issue:I see corporal punishment as a form of slavery. Beating onthe slaves was how the headman got them to do something. Racism is not abouthatred, it's about domination … we're focused so much on making kids do what wewant. Think about the mental capacity that this kind of treatment leaves ourchildren with. We are telling them we don't respect them. They leave thatprincipal's office and they think, "They don't consider me a human being." Thatyoung person loses self-respect.[353]Particular Issues Raised by the Paddling of GirlsWhile girls are paddled less than boys, many teachers andparents we spoke with said they had particular concerns about the sexualovertones of subjecting teenage girls to corporal punishment. In addition, asalready noted, some interviewees expressed unease over the link betweencorporal punishment and domestic violence. These interviewees argued that itwas wrong to teach children in school that it is permissible for someone inauthority to strike a weaker person who cannot hit back.Case Study: Allison GuthrieAllisonGuthrie, a recent high school graduate in the Dallas area, was paddled when she was 17. Shewas sent to detention three times in one week for being late, and was given thechoice of in-school suspension or "swats":"The principal was male. Ithink he used to be the athletic director, he was maybe 300 pounds…. I had toget parental consent, my mom had to sign off on the swats. She actually came upto the school to sign off on that. She decided to leave it up to me, I guessshe figured I could decide for myself…."My mom left, and I wentinto the principal's office and there was a female there, like a secretary, afemale witness. He gave me a chair and said hold onto the chair. The paddle hadholes in it. Then he just did three swats … I was hit on my buttocks…. Therewere holes in the paddle to make it go faster. There was a bit of a pause inbetween each swat. The whole thing was a minute. The principal didn't sayanything to me…. It hurt very much. There were definitely red marks and thenswelling. I remember it being red on my buttocks. Almost welt-like markings. Itdidn't last for more than a couple days…."It was strange back thenand it was even stranger when I got older. It was like, 'Wow, you were a17-year-old girl and got hit?' But it was not out of the ordinary then becausepeople got swats. It left me feeling very humiliated. I think there wereseveral levels of emotion. Physical pain, mental humiliation. One, it felt alittle unjustified-just for being late? And being a female at that age, it waslike there was this older man hitting me on the butt. That's weird. Verystrange at that age. Even at that age I knew it was inappropriate, this being aman that I don't know. It was this instinctual knowing that it wasinappropriate…."I have talked about it sincethen, but we didn't talk about it as being inappropriate then. I think it tookme a while to realize why I was so ashamed by it and how inappropriate it was."[354]One twelfth-grade Texasgirl told us she had been paddled in eleventh grade for being tardy: "It seemednormal at the time, but now it seems weird that a man was hitting a teenagegirl…. Well that's just what I thought was supposed to happen. Weird to lookback on it, though."[355]Another twelfth-grade girl echoed that sentiment: "Can you believe it, I gotpaddled by a male teacher? It was for little stuff, like talking out loud. Itwas just a tap on my behind. But why does a man have to tap a girl? That's whyI think he's a pervert."[356]One expert felt that because corporal punishment is now more often practiced inprivate (in the principal's office, as opposed to in the classroom), it is morelikely to have sexual overtones.[357] A Mississippi teachersummarized the sense of discomfort:I know, as a 24-year-old male, I would feel veryuncomfortable paddling a 14-year-old female on the butt … I don't know, thereare sexual connotations with paddling on the butt. It's not a storyline I wantto be involved in.[358]Special Education Students and Students withDisabilitiesWhile no child should ever be beaten in school, specialeducation students[359]are exceptionally vulnerable to harm from corporal punishment. OCR data showthat nationwide, 41,972 special education students received corporal punishmentin the 2006-2007 school year.[360]In Mississippi and Texas, the states targeted in this report,special education students receive corporal punishment in large numbers. In Mississippi, 5,831 special education students wererecorded as being physically punished in the 2006-2007 school year; while in Texas, the figure was10,222.[361]Special education students are beaten in disproportionatenumbers when compared to the general student population, according to data fromOCR. Focusing on students who qualify for special education under the federalIndividuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA),[362]IDEA students in Texasmade up 18.4 percent of the total number of students who were beaten statewide.[363]However, IDEA students in Texasmade up only approximately 10.7 percent of the statewide student population,[364]meaning that they were almost twice as likely to be beaten as might beexpected.In Mississippi,IDEA students made up 15.1 percent of those beaten in the 2006-2007 schoolyear, but only 12.2 percent of the statewide student population.[365]Louise P., a former special education teacher in a Mississippi Delta highschool, argued that some special education students are paddled more than otherstudents in part because their particular needs are not being met by theschool.[366]Paddling and other forms of physical punishment can beparticularly harsh for special education students. Johnny McPhail, the fatherof a girl with autism in north Mississippi,described a combination of aggressive techniques used to control his daughter:"In kindergarten, they'd pop her, and put her in a closet. It's isolation.They'd pop her on the hand first. I didn't find out until later."[367]The R.'s, parents of a boy with Tourette Syndrome, obsessivecompulsive disorder (OCD), and bipolar disorder, described an early incident inwhich he was restrained and spanked:When he was in kindergarten, they would have meetings anddecide they would have a time-out room for him. Time out-they basically justcleaned out a closet and would put him in there … for hours…. And even thoughthey weren't supposed to touch him, they did. They carried him in there. Butthese people were not trained to do any restraint holds or anything like that….He came home several times with bruises and red marks. He was spanked on hisbehind, with an open hand, by the teacher. It happened-the times he told usabout it-at least five or six times. At least.[368]The R.'s reported that their son sustained serious injurieswhen he was punished as a fifth grader for using the wrong utensils and cursingat the assistant principal. His mother described the situation:He was eating lunch in the special ed room…. They hadmashed potatoes and pineapple that day…. He had a fork, but he was saving itfor his pineapple because he didn't want to get his fork dirty. And they toldhim not to eat his potatoes with his fingers … The teacher grabbed his hand,and that's what started it…. [The assistant principal] asked [my son] to gowith her … she grabbed him and started dragging him down the hallway by hisarm…. The assistant principal reached around and [my son] turned around, he wasall mad … and accidentally hit her in the stomach. So she pinned him to thefloor, and he bit her because he kept telling her to get off, because she washurting him.[369]The police came and handcuffed the fifth grader. Mrs. R. reported,"His wrists were so tiny that he just pulled the cuffs off."[370]Mr. R. added, "he had bruises on his upper ribs, across both his arms, and downboth of his legs, for at least a week."[371]The experience of the R. family also illustrates how, onoccasion, special education students may be punished with force for "acting out"behaviors connected with their disabilities. Mrs. R. noted that her son's TouretteSyndrome induces physical "tics." As she explained:One of his tics was balling up his fists like this, andthat was seen as aggression and he would get in trouble with it. He would beput in time out and he didn't understand why. He would try to explain that itwas a tic, and he couldn't control it, but they see that as him escalating it.So now they have in him in restraints and then they're giving him sedatives andcalling for me to come pick him up. They had a closet and he would go in thereand that's where he was hit.[372]Incidents such as these-in which force is used to punishspecial education students-may occur because teachers lack understanding of thestudent's condition. As Mr. R. concluded, "I honestly believe that most of theteachers believe that [my son] had a behavioral problem and needed to bespanked. A couple of them have told us that, that he just needs a goodspanking."[373]Mrs. R., who is also a special education teacher, said sheintervened when her school suggested applying corporal punishment to a studentwith ADHD who regularly failed to do his homework: "The approach was, 'each dayyou come in and don't bring your homework, then you'll get paddled. Maybe thatwill help you remember.'"[374]A school board member in a major Mississippitown stated, "I'm concerned that the teachers are not reading the children'sindividual learning plans…. The child with a discipline problem may not beacting out of his behavior problems but rather out of his disability."[375]Corporal punishment can be particularly harmful for specialeducation students, as it can exacerbate the student's underlying condition.Johnny McPhail, the father of a Mississippigirl with autism, felt paddling was extremely detrimental: "An autistic childnever forgets a paddling. They have total recall, programming needs to be thesame. If you hit her, she'd be hitting, it's hard to talk her out of it."[376]Beverly Shields, the mother of an autistic boy in Mississippi, fought hard to have her sonexcluded from the punishment: "Corporal punishment to an autistic person isjust not acceptable in any fashion. He wouldn't know why they were doing it."[377]Mrs. R. witnessed a student with Asperger's Syndrome and a bipolar conditionreceive corporal punishment, and noted the student's adverse reaction: "He wasjust crying and just broke down, a kind of helplessness-'I don't know what todo.'"[378]In addition to causing extensive physical and mental harm,corporal punishment can create further barriers to education for this alreadydisadvantaged group of students. Louise P. felt licks were especiallydetrimental for her special education students: "A lot of my kids haddiscipline problems. They'd universally miss first period, they'd be in theoffice, waiting for their licks. That would harm their education. Depending onthe teacher, they'd try and make up the lesson…. But the same kids would behard to get in after school … [and] it was hard to get them to graduate."[379]IX.Regulating Discipline in SchoolsRegulationsand Training on School DisciplineRegulations in states that permit corporal punishment do notadequately protect children from abusive disciplinary measures in school oroffer necessary support for alternative methods of discipline.Mississippilaw does not affirmatively call for corporal punishment in schools; rather, itstates that such treatment does not constitute negligence or child abuse.[380]Likewise, there is no Texaslaw affirmatively granting school districts authority to use corporalpunishment; policies regarding discipline and control of students are left toindividual districts. Provisions in both Mississippiand Texas lawprovide for governmental immunity from civil and criminal liability in corporalpunishment cases.[381]Both states recognize that corporal punishment isinappropriate for children in contexts other than the public schools. Texas law prohibitscorporal punishment against youth in correctional facilities,[382]in residential treatment centers,[383]and for children in the custody of the Department of Family and ProtectiveServices.[384]Mississippiprohibits corporal punishment by foster parents,[385]and by school bus drivers.[386]Mississippidoes have a provision requiring schools to adopt evidence-based practices andpositive behavioral interventions in addressing student discipline.[387]This is a positive first step by the state, and should be followed withprohibition of corporal punishment in public schools.While most states do offer extensive teacher training, notall train their teachers in appropriate, non-violent disciplinary practices.[388]One administrator felt that teachers at his middle school resorted to paddlingfar too fast, having little or no training on alternative measures ofdiscipline.[389]A superintendent in east Mississippifelt that paddling was something that people just knew how to do, and thatteachers "don't need to be trained on how to use a paddle."[390]One parent interviewed by Human Rights Watch had serious concerns about thelack of training: "What are the guidelines? Who is trained? Anybody can justgrab my child at school?"[391]Educators Who Disagree are without RecourseIn some instances, teachers and administrators who object tothe use of corporal punishment find themselves without recourse or alternativeresources. One teacher in a district that does not permit corporal punishmentdid not know what to do after he witnessed an incident of paddling on a schoolbus, and was asked to keep the incident to himself: "One of the coachesexplained to me very tersely that word of this incident should not leave thebus. This sort of cowboy justice … preempting my discomfort and my whistleblowing…. [The incident] never resurfaced. I wouldn't know who to take it to.So much, I regret it. I feel guilty."[392]Teachers who have students who seriously misbehave sometimesfind they have exhausted in-class remedies but do not want to send the child tothe office as they know the child will be beaten there.[393]One teacher noted that she had a new vice principal halfway through her firstyear: "He used corporal punishment a lot more than the other teachers. I didn'twant to send my kids to him; I wouldn't send my kids to him.[394]Another teacher said he "got the message that 'in this culture, we establishorder through corporal punishment, and until you do it, you won't getrespect.'"[395]Some teachers, reluctant to endorse corporal punishment,lacked alternative resources for dealing with particularly difficult students.One teacher described the dilemma: "I only sent kids to the office if they wereso out of hand I couldn't handle it. I didn't want to send them to get paddled.I tried to handle it within my own classroom. But I didn't have the option ofrequesting a different form of punishment."[396]Another teacher described what happened when she exhausted her options:An interesting thing happens when you're in a classroom.You have high stakes, you have a day teaching, and a history with a studentwho's a problem in the classroom, who's disruptive. You've tried everythingelse, and you get to a point-well, you're in a cultural setting where peopletell you it's okay, and you've tried everything else. I wouldn't have thought …that I'd send a kid to the office to get corporal punishment. I would havethought I'd tried everything in my power not to do it…. Once you're in theclassroom, you realize that doesn't always work.[397]CaseStudy: Ralph McLaneyRalph McLaney, a veteranteacher, became the assistant principal at CarverMiddle School in Meridian, Mississippi,in Fall 2003. Soon, Mr. McLaney was receiving 19-23 paddling referrals ofchildren to his office every day. In schools where he had worked previously,paddling was rarely used. He noted, "In Meridian, though, it was clear thatmost teachers resorted to paddling pretty fast. If the kid said anything theydidn't like, they were sent to the disciplinary office … I would end up with abacklog of students in my disciplinary office. The principal would pull themout, and whack 'em…. We were supposed to have a witness, but the principaldidn't have that."Mr. McLaney grewincreasingly uncomfortable, in part because of the racial disparity between themajority African-American student body and the largely white staff: "I realizedI did not want to be an overseer on an educational plantation." He tried tocontact parents to discuss options, but "it was hard to contact them, phonesmight be disconnected. If I did get a hold of them, the parents would oftenjust authorize the procedure, or say 'just beat that boy's butt.'… The teachersfelt if I wasn't hitting the kids, something was wrong. They felt I wasn'tbacking them up, it was that kind of mentality…. To have earned a secondmaster's degree, to have that lead to a position where the primary activity ofeach day would be hitting children, now, that's ludicrous."He sought legal advicefrom a local chapter of the National Education Association (NEA) where he waswarned of the risks of insubordination. "They told me that to refuse to hit achild at the direction of my supervisor, I'd be fired for it…. I ended upresigning, at the time, the pressure, and the whole bit.[398]… Ihave some regret, sometimes I think I should have blown the thing open insteadof resigning.[399]…In the aftermath of this whole thing, I finally contacted the NEA's nationalheadquarters-and they were shocked-but this was after the fact." He concludes,"This period has been one of the most negative experiences of my life."[400]Parental ChoiceIn many school districts, parents are given ways to opt outof the use of corporal punishment on their children,[401]but those mechanisms are hard to access and difficult to enforce. In somecases, parents' preferences are ignored and the student is beaten anyway; theparents may then be without redress. Even if the child is not beaten, he or sheis still aware of the violence meted out against his or her peers.Parents say they choose to opt out for fear that corporalpunishment will injure their children or because they do not "think anybodyshould be hitting anybody else's children. There are too many variables. Youdon't know their intent, their temperament."[402]Parents mistrusted the ability of teachers and administrators to regulate theirdecisions to resort to corporal punishment or to moderate the levels ofviolence used. One former Mississippi teacher explained, "There were a coupleof parents that didn't want their kids to get corporal punishment; it wasn'tthat they were against corporal punishment but that they were distrustful ofhow the school was using it."[403]Methods of Opting Out of Corporal PunishmentIf a school district has a policy for opting out-and not allschool districts do-the policy usually falls into one of three categories.First, in some districts, all parents must sign a "yes or no" form, specifyingwhether or not their child can receive corporal punishment. If the form is notreturned, corporal punishment is typically not administered. One superintendentin a small Mississippidistrict noted that in this situation, the principals usually would speak withthe parent before administering corporal punishment.[404]The second way of expressing preference starts from anassumption that all students will receive corporal punishment. Those who do notwant their child to be punished "opt out" by submitting a form to the school orby writing a letter. In the MidlandIndependentSchool Districtin west Texas,for instance, the policy specifies that "[c]orporal punishment shall not be usedin instances where the student's parent or guardian has filed a writtenstatement with the school principal indicating that the parent does not approveof corporal punishment. These written statements should be in the form of aletter, mailed or delivered to the school principal, and submitted annually."[405]In very limited cases, parents may express their preferences orally. A former Mississippi elementaryschool teacher explained that on the first day of school, the parents couldtell the teacher if they did not want their children to be hit: "Not a lot [ofparents] would come and articulate that, but some."[406]Third, in Texasin particular, some districts have policies under which parents are calledafter the infraction but before corporal punishment is administered. In the TylerIndependentSchool District in Texas, for instance, "a parent or legalguardian of the student must be contacted and approve of the use of corporalpunishment prior to each administration."[407]One recent graduate noted that at her high school, "parents could choose-they'dhave the principal call your house and decide on swats."[408] Wespoke with only one interviewee in Mississippiwho reported a scheme in which parents could elect to be called beforepunishment was administered.[409]Some school districts do not provide any mention of opt-outmethods or parental notification in their official policies or studenthandbooks. For example, among districts we investigated, Texasschool districts Rosebud-Lott, Quinlan, Marshall,and Pariscontain no description of opt-out policies.[410]Likewise, the policies of PearlPublicSchool Districtin Mississippido not give information on opting out.[411]Parental Struggles to Opt OutSome parents feel the opt-out methods are underpublicizedand difficult to comply with. One Texasmother told us that she "turned [an opt-out form] in this year, but not lastyear because I wasn't aware of it and it's kind of hidden."[412] Aformer teacher in rural Mississippiwas not surprised that parents lacked information on how to opt out: "Parentshad a page the student would take home. If the student didn't bring it back,then they didn't opt out. I don't know if the students ever showed theirparents or not."[413]A Texasparent whose middle school son had been beaten felt the burden on parents wasunnecessarily high: "Only if you read the handbook do you find out that theschool administers corporal punishment, and then you have to re-write a lettereach year and say that you are opposed to it."[414] Aformer administrator in Meridian, Mississippi, reported to Human Rights Watchthat parents felt coerced into signing forms authorizing paddling because, ifthey did not, their children were more likely to be threatened with expulsion shoulddisciplinary problems emerge.[415]In addition, parents of special education students have hadto fight repeatedly to opt out of corporal punishment for their children. Eachspecial education student has a yearly Individualized Education Plan (IEP) thatis devised by the parents, teachers, and administrators; this IEP includes adiscipline plan. Parents in Mississippidescribed problems having corporal punishment expressly prohibited in the IEP.Beverly Shields, a northeast Mississippimother of an autistic boy who is now 16, stated that she had to "forcibly havethis [a ban on corporal punishment] put in his IEP, because corporal punishmentto an autistic person is just not acceptable in any fashion. He wouldn't knowwhy they were doing it."[416]Her older boys had been paddled in a different Mississippi school district in violation ofher opt-out forms:I knew from my experiences that the teachers weren't goingto look at the card [indicating opt-out]. The principal was saying we won'tspank him [my autistic son]. But I needed something in a permanent fashion, thatno corporal punishment will be administered and that you will use positivereinforcement. The school tries to make you give up.[417]She noted that another advantage of fighting to get a ban oncorporal punishment placed in the IEP is that, unlike with the opt-out forms inher district, the ban does not have to be renewed every year.[418]Johnny McPhail, the father of the autistic girl in north Mississippi, also haddifficulties securing appropriate discipline for his daughter. At an IEP meetingduring his daughter's second-grade year, the school sought permission to paddleher. "They wanted to paddle her because she was having tantrums in class. Theywere from the 'old school,' [meaning] 'if you cry, they'll whip your butt.'"[419]McPhail felt strongly that the school board, the officials in charge of writingthe school discipline policy in his district, knew nothing about behavioralissues for students with disabilities.[420]Parental Preferences against CorporalPunishment IgnoredSeveral parents reported to Human Rights Watch that theirexpressed preferences were ignored, and that their children were paddled in violationof written or verbal opt outs. For instance, Janet Y., a mother in rural Mississippi, filedopt-out forms every year subsequent to the sixth grade, when her daughter waspaddled and bruised. Janet renewed the no-paddle request in twelfth grade, buther daughter was subsequently paddled, by the same perpetrator, for"disrespect."[421]The girl was once again seriously bruised, and was taken to receive medicalcare.[422]A seventh-grade boy in rural west Texas was paddled even though his mother hadfollowed school procedure by submitting a letter stating her opposition topaddling at the beginning of the school year. She commented, "I made it a pointto do this each year, and they didn't even check the files. They automaticallysmacked him without checking the files."[423] A10-year-old boy with diagnosed ADHD in rural east Texas received two blows for "horse-playing"in September 2007. His mother maintains that she had two in-personconversations with his principal in the weeks prior to her son's paddling,expressing her opposition to corporal punishment.[424]One former elementary school teacher in rural Mississippi noted thatstudents were discouraged from enforcing their parents' preferences:Even if a student is opted out, students don't have a voice… they're told their job is to listen and be obedient…. Students are powerless,unfortunately.[425]One high school girl in Mississippi tried to assert her right not tobe paddled when her principal was swinging his paddle to threaten her: "I toldhim that my mom opted out, and he said I was trying to be smart-ass. He said,'I see you standing on your soapbox this morning, bitch.'"[426]Even students whose parents' no-paddle preferences werehonored find themselves in a coercive environment. A sixth-grade boy on theopt-out list "came home crying … basically scared to death" after his principalthreatened the school with paddling during an assembly.[427] Amother of a nine-year-old and a 12-year-old noted that "I always say 'no' onthe forms … but it's always there in the school, and even in the classrooms."[428]It is a recognized principle of human rights that children,by reason of their physical and mental immaturity, are exceptionally vulnerableand therefore in need of special safeguards and legal protections.[429]Likewise, parents have a duty to facilitate their children's exercise of theirfundamental rights.[430]The parents discussed above were explicitly trying to ensure their children'srights were respected. When schools paddle a student in violation of parentalpreferences, they not only impinge on the child's fundamental rights, they directlycontradict parents' attempts to protect the best interest of their own childrento be free from humiliating and degrading treatment.X. SeekingRedress for Corporal PunishmentParents find that they have few, if any, methods of redresswhen their children are beaten. Parents we interviewed who sought redress didso primarily because their child either sustained bruising or other seriousinjury or was paddled in violation of their express wishes to the contrary. Statelaws provide considerable legal protection for educators who physically punishchildren. We spoke with eight separate sets of parents who had extremedifficulties pursuing legal action or obtaining adequate responses from schooldistrict officials after their children were paddled.[431] Inthese cases, which point to more systemic failings, parents were left withoutany recourse for defending their children's rights.SchoolDistrictResponse to Parental ComplaintsThe parents we spoke with found educational authorities tobe unresponsive to complaints that their children had been subjected to forceagainst their wishes, or that they had been seriously injured in the course ofpaddling. This was true for parents whether they raised the incident with theprincipal, superintendent, school board, or even state-wide educationalauthorities.Some parents were told not to question the schoolauthority's decision to discipline their child. Andrea N., a Texas mother of a 10-year-old with ADHD whowas paddled against her verbally expressed wishes, went to meet with theadministration: "The superintendent and the school board said they would haveto agree with any decision the principal made."[432]Leah F., the mother of a middle school boy who was paddled in violation of herwritten request in west Texas,described her interactions with the principal:When this happened to my son, I marched right over to theschool and spoke with the principal. He had the gall to yell at me and tell menot to question what he did…. The principal tried to shift the blame to [myson]. He said [my son] should have told him [that he was on the no-paddlelist]. I said, he's just a kid! You're the one with authority. The burdenshould lie with the administration to check the files.[433]Rhonda H.'s sixth-grade son was transferred by schoolauthorities from an elementary school with an opt-out policy to an alternativeschool in a larger district. There, he was paddled and severely bruised. WhenRhonda subsequently tried to opt out of paddling, she was told there was noopt-out policy in the new district, even though there had been one in her homedistrict, and her son's transfer was involuntary. She spoke to the principal inthe home district: "I confronted [her] about it, and her thing was 'well,that's an entirely different school, different system.' I said I understandthat but my point was they sent him up there; they should have known what theywere sending him to." Rhonda was unable to opt-out of paddling in thealternative school, and chose to home school her children instead.[434]School districts were also unresponsive to parents whocomplained that their children had been subjected to excessive ordisproportionate force. Chris B., a father in north Mississippi, believes his son should nothave been paddled 10 times merely for being tardy. School authorities told himhe had to take his complaint to the school board, as it is responsible formaking policy changes. Chris B. noted that he was then stonewalled, because theboard chose to go into "'executive session' [a private session in which publicaccess to the board is limited] so it wouldn't get out…. The school board saidit wasn't their concern, because they don't oversee the day-to-day issues atthe school."[435]Some parents who are met with this lack of response from school authoritiesfeel hopeless and do not know where else to turn.[436]Immunity for PerpetratorsBoth Texas and Mississippi protectperpetrators from legal responsibility for assaulting children with or withoutopt outs from parents, and fail to provide parents with appropriate redress. Inschool districts that have opt-out policies, our research has failed to revealany administrative or regulatory remedies for parents when opt-out preferencesare not followed. The parents who raised concerns that their children werepaddled in violation of opt-out forms did so either by approaching thesuperintendent or the school board, as discussed above. This is a generalremedy for any school-based complaint, as opposed to a specific procedure to befollowed when the opt-out preferences are violated.Human Rights Watch is not aware of any state-wide laws thatprovide a cause of action when parental preferences are ignored. Schooldistricts render opt-out forms meaningless when they fail to provide redressfor paddlings in violation of those forms. When serious injuries to childrenresult from corporal punishment in schools-events that occur with or withoutparents expressing their opt-out preferences-states rarely allow theperpetrators to be held responsible.States that permit school corporal punishment provide legalimmunity for paddlers.[437]In Mississippi,for example, the only way to prevail in a lawsuit against an educator forcorporal punishment is if the educator's conduct constitutes a criminaloffense, or if he or she acted with a "malicious purpose."[438]These immunity laws make it extremely difficult for parents to pursue legalaction against school officials who have acted contrary to parental wishes, orwho have injured children in their care.Texasstatutes also provide immunity for persons who administer corporal punishmentunder both criminal and civil law. The Texas Penal Code immunizes educatorsagainst criminal responsibility when they use "force, but not deadly force," aslong as the "actor reasonably believes the force is necessary" to furtherdiscipline.[439]Likewise, educators are immune from civil liability when paddling does notresult in bodily injury. The Texas Education Code specifies that "[a]professional employee of a school district is not personally liable for any actthat is incident to or within the scope of the duties of the employee'sposition of employment … except in circumstances in which a professionalemployee uses excessive force in the discipline of students or negligenceresulting in bodily injury to students."[440]Lack of Adequate Responses from Police or CourtsParents we spoke with who have sought redress in corporalpunishment cases have faced obstacles at every level of the criminal justicesystem. Parents have been unable to convince police to investigate cases wherestudents were injured, and have found district attorneys reluctant to filecriminal charges.[441]Equally, parents have faced obstacles pursuing civil lawsuits against paddlers;they have had trouble finding attorneys who will represent them, and they havehad trouble meeting the high standard of proof established in the immunitystatutes.According to parents, police have refrained from makingarrests in paddling cases. Faye L., whose story is profiled at the start ofthis report, wanted to file assault charges after her 10-year-old son Tim sustainedheavy bruising and swollen genitals after two paddlings in less than a week:"The police told me I wasn't allowed until I had 'followed school procedure.' Iwas told to go to the school board … finally, the third time I went back to thepolice, they filed charges."[442]In a similar case, Rose T. wanted an arrest made when her three-year-old sonwas paddled. The sheriff's department sent the case to the district attorney,who ultimately declined to pursue the case.[443]Reportedly, the district attorney told Rose that a grand jury would not indictfor felony assault in a corporal punishment case.[444]Rose's attorney reported there are no remaining options for legal redress,stating that "parents are told it's just a paddling, no harm done."[445]Parents interviewed by Human Rights Watch had difficultyfinding lawyers who would pursue these cases. Faye L. noted that she conductedan extensive search for a lawyer to take her son's case:I searched the world for an attorney … it was hard to findan attorney. I had an attorney in Huntsville;he took the case when he saw the pictures [of her son's injuries]. But once heknew where the case was, he dropped it. He said he felt it wouldn't goanywhere. So I searched high and low…. A guy in Dallasgave me the run-around … I saw another lawyer in Lufkin, I took my papers there. He told mehis wife was a superintendent, so he wouldn't take the case…. I couldn't findanyone in Houston; I even called as far as Galveston.[446]Even when Faye finally found a lawyer, she received norelief. Although her son sustained heavy bruising and swollen genitals, nocriminal charges were filed, because a grand jury decided not to indict theperpetrator.[447]She then pursued the case in federal court, but it was dismissed.[448]Likewise, there is evidence that some local courts in Texas may not be receptive to caseschallenging corporal punishment: in at least four instances since 2002, judgesor justices of the peace have been reprimanded for using or requiring parentsto use corporal punishment against juveniles appearing before their courts.[449]Leah F., who wanted to pursue legal action in Texas after herseventh-grade son was paddled, "called this one attorney-and she said shedidn't think it would be worth shelling out for an attorney because my kidswould be retaliated against."[450]Leah also spoke to a lawyer for Legal Aid: "She listened to me, but pretty muchsaid the same thing…. She basically said, only do something if it happensagain…. I feel discouraged; I really should try though because it feels likethey got away with it."[451]Parents ultimately find that justice is elusive. Janet Y.,whose daughter was paddled in violation of an opt-out form, was able to find alawyer, but still has faced obstacles. Her state civil case has been postponed.She commented, "I feel like it's the good ol' boys' system…. If [theprosecutor] goes too hard after this case, he's an elected official and it willhurt his career…. I asked the judge to step down because her husband works forthe school board."[452]Parents' Inability to Protect ChildrenUltimately, some parents decide that they cannot adequatelyprotect their children from corporal punishment. They believe that they areleft with the option of pulling their children out of school or subjecting themto an unsafe environment. Rose T., as already noted, pulled her three-year-oldson out of the public pre-kindergarten program to which she was entitled assoon as she found out he had been paddled, and sent him to private day care atpersonal expense.[453]And Faye L. removed her son Tim from public school after he was paddled inSeptember of his fifth-grade year. She home schooled him for the remainder ofthe school year, quitting her own job to do so, and then found him a place in aneighboring school district.[454]Parents who have sought redress for corporal punishment havefound themselves and their families ostracized within their communities. Priorto the paddling incident in which her son was badly beaten, Faye L. regularlyattended a local church. After she started speaking out, "it was best we didn'tgo there anymore-the preacher, well, his wife was a teacher, and the schoolnurse was a congregant-I felt I couldn't go anymore, I couldn't talk to my ownpreacher."[455]She noted, "We're trash now, because we talked."[456]Janet Y. reported that she and her daughter Brittany, whoare suing the school district after Brittanywas paddled in violation of an opt-out form, have been "completely ostracized….When it came out on the radio show, that was the worst … [I was told] that Ican disappear."[457]Brittany, now19 years old, hates that she is discussed on talk radio stations: "Oh, it mademe feel terrible, because, you know, they were judging me and my character …one parent called in and said I was a trouble maker." She stated that she isglad to be fighting the case, "but it's stressful. I just hate riding by theschool and people saying, 'Oh, that's her.' I went to homecoming … and everyonejust stared at me."[458]Parents who find themselves unable to protect their childrenfeel helpless. After Janet Y.'s daughter was paddled in violation of an opt-outform, she commented, "I thought I had done everything to protect her. Aftertelling them not to lay a hand on her again and signing the opt-out form, itdidn't do any good. I mean, this child is a gift from God, I've vowed toprotect her…. It hurts that I haven't protected her."[459]Rose T. noted that she was afraid of the lasting effects on her three-year-old:"What made me so angry-he's three years old, he was petrified. He didn't wantto go back to school, and he didn't want to start his new school. I was soworried that this was going to constantly be with him, equating going to schoolwith being paddled."[460]XI.Banning Corporal Punishment: International Human Rights Law and USConstitutional StandardsCorporal punishment violates internationally recognizedhuman rights to freedom from cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment orpunishment, and freedom from physical violence. In many instances, it violatesthe prohibition on discrimination and impinges on children's right toeducation. Corporal punishment is also contrary to respect for human dignity, adeep-seated guiding principle of international human rights law enshrined inthe Universal Declaration of Human Rights.Numerous international and regional human rights institutions,including the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child, the UN HumanRights Committee, and the UN Committee against Torture, have spoken out againstcorporal punishment in schools.[461]106 countries and 29 USstates have outlawed the practice.International Human Rights LawWith a handful of exceptions, children have the same humanrights as adults. For example, they should never be subjected to torture orill-treatment, and if charged with a crime, they have the right to a fair trial.Children also have certain rights not afforded to adults. Even before thedrafting of major human rights treaties, governments acknowledged these specialrights of children that reflect their unique needs and vulnerabilities, and theresponsibility of governments and governmental institutions such as schools toprotect them.In November 1959 the United Nations General Assembly adoptedthe Declaration on the Rights of the Child, which recognized that "the child,by reason of his physical and mental immaturity, needs special safeguards andcare, including appropriate legal protection, before as well as after birth."[462]The United Stateswas one of the then 78 members of the UN General Assembly, which votedunanimously to adopt the declaration.[463]Since that time, nearly all governments, including the United States, have furtherelaborated the specific rights of children, including in educational settings.Freedom from Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment orPunishmentThe UnitedStates has signed and ratified theConvention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment orPunishment (Convention against Torture) and the International Covenant on Civiland Political Rights (ICCPR). Each of these treaties prohibits the use ofcruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment.[464]International human rights bodies have repeatedly emphasized thatcorporal punishment is incompatible with these provisions.Article 7 of the ICCPR states that "[n]o one shall besubjected to … cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment."[465]The Human Rights Committee (HRC), which offers the authoritative interpretationof the ICCPR in addition to its role as the body charged with overseeinggovernmental implementation of the treaty, issued a General Comment on thescope of obligations under article 7, concluding that this "prohibition mustextend to corporal punishment, including excessive chastisement ordered … as aneducative or disciplinary measure."[466]The HRC emphasizes, "Article 7 protects, in particular, children, pupils andpatients in teaching and medical institutions."[467] Inits concluding observations (which the HRC issues after it has examined agovernment's record under the treaty), it repeatedly has stated that governmentsshould abolish corporal punishment in schools.[468]Corporal punishment may also violate US obligations underthe Convention against Torture. Article 16 of the convention obliges the USgovernment to undertake to prevent acts of cruel, inhuman or degradingtreatment or punishment.[469]The Committee against Torture, the body charged with overseeing statecompliance with the Convention against Torture, declared that the "continuingapplication" of corporal punishment "could constitute in itself a violation ofthe Convention."[470]The Right to Freedom from Physical ViolenceVarious international instruments protect the child's rightto be free from any form of physical violence. For instance, article 9 of theICCPR states that "[e]veryone has the right to liberty and security of person,"[471]while article 5(b) of the International Convention on the Elimination of AllForms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD), to which the US is also party, providesfor non-discrimination in the enjoyment of "the right to security of person andprotection by the State against violence or bodily harm."[472]The Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), the world'smost universally ratified human rights treaty, includes the fundamentalrecognition of a child's right to be free from any form of physical or mentalviolence, and the special capacity of children to learn from their mistakes andrehabilitate themselves. While the United States is one of only twocountries not to have ratified the treaty, it is a signatory and the treaty'sprovisions should be treated as authoritative guidance (as discussed below).Article 19 states:States Parties shall take all appropriate legislative,administrative, social and educational measures to protect the child from all forms of physical or mental violence,injury or abuse, neglect or negligent treatment, maltreatment orexploitation, including sexual abuse, while in the care of parent(s), legalguardian(s) or any other person who has the care of the child.[473]In 2006 the Committee on the Rights of the Child, theinternational body charged with monitoring compliance with the CRC, issuedGeneral Comment 8, discussing the right of the child to protection fromcorporal punishment. General Comments are considered authoritative interpretationsof the treaty. The committee found that article 19 "does not leave room for anylevel of legalized violence against children" and that "[c]orporal punishmentand other cruel or degrading forms of punishment are forms of violence andStates must take all appropriate legislative, administrative, social and educationalmeasures to eliminate them."[474]The Inherent Dignity of the Child and the Right to EducationProtecting the dignity of each and every individual is thefundamental guiding principle of international human rights law. Corporalpunishment violates children's right to human dignity, found in the preamble tothe Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in many other legal documents towhich the USis party, including the ICCPR.[475]Both the Committee on the Rights of the Child and theCommittee on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights have expressly stated thatcorporal punishment is inconsistent with the fundamental right to humandignity, and further asserted that the child's human dignity must be upheld inschool discipline policies. Article 28 of the CRC discusses the right toeducation, and states that "States Parties shall take all appropriate measuresto ensure that school discipline is administered in a manner consistent withthe child's human dignity[.]" In General Comment 8, the Committee on the Rightsof the Child comments on this article, noting that corporal punishment"directly conflicts with the equal and inalienable rights of children torespect for their human dignity and physical integrity."[476]Likewise, the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the bodycharged with overseeing the International Covenant on Economic, Social andCultural Rights (ICESCR), states in General Comment 13 (on the right toeducation):In the Committee's view, corporal punishment isinconsistent with the fundamental guiding principle of international humanrights law enshrined in the Preambles to the Universal Declaration and bothCovenants: the dignity of the individual.[477]In addition, "[t]he Committee welcomes initiatives taken bysome States parties which actively encourage the schools to introduce'positive,' non-violent approaches to school discipline."[478]The Committee on the Rights of the Child defines corporalpunishment broadly. Corporal punishment is "any punishment in which physicalforce is used and intended to cause some degree of pain or discomfort, howeverlight."[479]This encompasses all forms of corporal punishment currently used in the US,including but not limited to paddling.Non-discrimination and EqualityThe use of corporal punishment in US public schools can alsoviolate children's rights to non-discrimination, a fundamental principle ofhuman rights law. As a consequence of seeking public education, minoritychildren, specifically African-American children, find their rights to securityof person violated at disproportionate rates.Article 5(b) of the International Convention on theElimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination requires the US toprotect "the right of everyone, without distinction … to security of person andprotection by the State against violence or bodily harm, whether inflicted bygovernment officials or by any individual group or institution." Likewise,article 5(e)(v) of the ICERD requires non-discrimination in access to educationand training. When compared to relevant percentages of both nationwide andstatewide student populations, African-American students are significantly morelikely to be punished than their white counterparts. The racially disparate useof corporal punishment in US public schools subjects students to violations oftheir rights to be free from physical violence and to access education. Ineffect, African-American students have their rights to security of personviolated at disproportionate rates merely as a consequence of participating inpublic education.Article 24 of the ICCPR provides that "every child shallhave, without any discrimination as to race, color, sex … the right to suchmeasures of protection as are required by his status as a minor"; and article 2states that the rights in the ICCPR must be recognized "without distinction ofany kind."[480]To the extent that the ICCPR prohibits corporal punishment through articles 7and 9 (see above), that prohibition must be upheld in a non-discriminatorymanner.Corporal punishment also violates article 26 of the ICCPR,which mandates that "all persons … are entitled without any discrimination tothe equal protection of the law." Corporal punishment violates the right toequal protection by allowing children to be assaulted in the name of discipline.Criminal laws on assault should, at a minimum, protect children in the same waythat they protect adults. In fact, human rights law provides for additionalprotection for children due to their vulnerability.[481]Yet corporal punishment leaves children deprived of the very protectionsassured to adults.Parents' RightsParents have "the prior right to choose the kind ofeducation that shall be given to their children."[482]Furthermore, as guardians of their children, they must be able to uphold anddefend their children's rights. The preamble of the Convention on the Rights ofthe Child affirms that precisely because of their "physical and mentalimmaturity," children need "special safeguards and care, including appropriatelegal protection."[483]Children cannot defend their rights on their own; parents have a duty toaid them in exercising those rights.[484]Parents who try to prevent their children from being subjectedto corporal punishment, or who seek redress after their children have beenpaddled, are very much acting within their rights under international law.[485]Furthermore, the state has both an obligation to respect and ensure children'srights,[486]and an obligation to respect the responsibilities of parents who are trying toprotect their children's rights.[487]Parents should be given fair hearings and proceedings in order to uphold theirchildren's right to be free from corporal punishment.The United Statesand International Human Rights LawThe United States is obliged to followthe international norms articulated above. For instance, the United States is party to the ICCPRand the Convention against Torture. However, it attached limiting reservationsto these treaties that attempt to restrict both the scope of the treaties andtheir use in domestic court proceedings.[488]The United Statessought to limit the domestic impact of the ICCPR and the Convention againstTorture by declaring both treaties to be "non-self-executing," that is, theycannot be relied upon to enforce rights in US courts without enablinglegislation. The United Statesasserts that existing state and federal laws adequately protect citizens fromviolations of the treaties; yet in reality, both the ICCPR and the Conventionagainst Torture offer protections broader than those found under US law.The prohibition on corporal punishment is among them.USconstitutional law requires both individual states and the federal governmentto uphold human rights treaties made under the authority of the United States.The US Constitution states:[A]ll treaties made, or which shall be made, under theauthority of the United States shall be the Supreme Law of the Land; and theJudges in every State shall be bound thereby, anything in the Constitution orLaw of any State to the contrary notwithstanding.[489]Upholding this constitutional principle, the US SupremeCourt has stated, "[I]nternational law is part of our law, and must beascertained and administered by the courts of justice of the appropriate jurisdiction[.]"[490]Treaties of the UnitedStates have been held to be binding onstates independent of the will and power of state legislatures.[491]Human rights treaties, like other treaty obligations of the US government, are similarlybinding on state governments, although this fact is not commonly understood or acceptedby states or by the federal government.[492]Apart from the binding nature of treaty obligations, the Supreme Court hasoften relied upon international human rights standards as "instructive" ininterpreting US constitutional obligations.[493] Therefore,not only should state officials adhere to the prohibition on corporalpunishment, but the federal government should support those states, includingthrough federal funding, that eliminate the practice in the future.The UnitedStates also sought to circumscribe thedomestic impact of the ICCPR and the Convention against Torture by limiting thescope of the rights acknowledged. For instance, the United States considers itselfbound by the right to freedom from cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment onlyto the extent that cruel and unusual punishment is prohibited by the US Constitution.[494]Yet in 1995, the Human Rights Committee found that the US reservation to article 7 (oncruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment) was incompatible with the object andpurpose of the ICCPR, and therefore invalid.[495]US lawon corporal punishment falls short of international standards; and, at aminimum, the federal and state governments should prevent and remedy violationsof the prohibition on corporal punishment in keeping with their obligationsunder international law.As well as upholding its obligations under the ICCPR and theConvention against Torture, the UnitedStates must adhere to standards articulatedin the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The CRC is nearly universallyaccepted: as of 2005, 192 countries were party to it. Singapore is the only party thathas issued a declaration on the use of corporal punishment in the context ofits obligations under the CRC.[496]The United States and Somaliaare the only two countries in the world that have failed to ratify the CRC,although both have signed it.[497]As a signatory to the convention, the United States must not take actionsthat would defeat the CRC's object and purpose.[498]In addition to being prohibited from defeating the objectand purpose of the CRC as a signatory, the US government has proclaimed itscommitment to the CRC's principles on several occasions. The Supreme Courtexplicitly acknowledged the CRC's authority as an expression of "theoverwhelming weight of international opinion" in interpreting domestic legalstandards, observing that the "express affirmation of certain fundamentalrights by other nations and peoples simply underscores the centrality of thosesame rights within our own heritage of freedom."[499] WhenAmbassador Madeleine Albright, as the USpermanent representative to the UN, signed the CRC on behalf of the United States,she declared, "The Convention is a comprehensive statement of internationalconcern about the importance of improving the lives of the most vulnerableamong us, our children…. UnitedStates participation in the Conventionreflects the deep and long-standing commitment of the American people."[500]The United Stateshas reaffirmed this commitment on subsequent occasions. For example, in 1999 AmbassadorBettyKing, USrepresentative to the UN Economic and Social Council, stated:Although the United States has not ratified theConvention on the Rights of the Child, our actions to protect and defendchildren both at home and abroad clearly demonstrate our commitment to thewelfare of children. The international community can remain assured that we, asa nation, stand ready to assist in any way we can to enhance and protect thehuman rights of children wherever they may be.[501]In sharp contrast to its expressed desire to protect thehuman rights of children, however, certain individual states in the UShave taken no steps to reduce or eliminate the use of corporal punishment. Inaddition, while the UnitedStates is a federal system in which considerablepower over education rests with state and local officials, the federalgovernment has obligations and authority to secure compliance with human rightslaws among its constituent states.[502]US Law Permitting Corporal PunishmentDespite the federal government's obligations to securecompliance with binding human rights norms among the states, federal law failsto live up to the international standards protecting children from corporalpunishment. Corporal punishment has been permitted under US common law forcenturies.[503]In 1977 the Supreme Court ruled that routine corporal punishment is notconsidered cruel and unusual punishment, and does not per se violate proceduraldue process.[504]Since then, however, a majority of the states have enacted legislationoutlawing the use of corporal punishment in public schools.[505]The federal standards that continue to permit corporal punishment wereestablished decades ago; it is incumbent on the US government to bring its law intoline with international commitments.Cruel and Unusual PunishmentIn the 1977 decision Ingrahamv. Wright, the US Supreme Court held that the cruel and unusual punishmentsclause of the Eighth Amendment to the US Constitution does not apply todisciplinary corporal punishment in public schools.[506]The majority argued that the history of the Eighth Amendment and priordecisions of the Supreme Court indicate that the prohibition on cruel andunusual punishments was designed to protect those convicted of a crime,[507]and it declined to extend the prohibition to school disciplinary practices.[508]The majority further argued that the openness of the public school and itssupervision by the community offers safeguards against the kinds of abuses towhich convicted criminals may be subjected.[509]This argument stands in opposition to international jurisprudence, as discussedabove.The ruling in Ingrahamwas supported by only a narrow majority of the Court.[510]The dissenting opinion points out some flaws in the majority's argument, notingthat "the constitutional provision is against cruel and unusual punishments;nowhere is that prohibition limited or modified by the language of theConstitution…. No one can deny that spanking of schoolchildren is 'punishment'under any reasonable reading of the word."[511]The dissent goes on to argue that "[i]f there are some punishments that are sobarbaric that they may not be imposed for the commission of crimes … then, afortiori, similar punishments may not be imposed on persons for less culpableacts, such as breaches of school discipline."[512]The UShas attempted to argue that the domestic interpretation of the cruel andunusual punishments clause of the Eighth Amendment governs the scope of USobligations to uphold the international prohibition on cruel, inhuman, anddegrading treatment.[513]As discussed above, the Human Rights Committee rejects this argument. In thecase of corporal punishment, US standards fall far short of the protectionsoffered to children under international law.Due ProcessFederal law acknowledges thatchildren have the right to personal security which is jeopardized when corporalpunishment is administered.[514]The Supreme Court noted in Ingrahamthat the child "has a strong interest in procedural safeguards that minimizethe risk of wrongful punishment."[515]Nonetheless, the Supreme Court held that imposing additional safeguards-such asprior notice and a hearing before corporal punishment is administered-would becostly and would intrude on the decision-making of the public schoolauthorities.[516]Other federal courts have ruled that adequate common law remedies exist forexcessive corporal punishment.[517]Yet, as demonstrated above, these remedies are often illusory.In other words, federal law asserts that while children'srights exist, corporal punishment does not necessarily violate those rights andthe government is not obliged to prevent abuses before they happen. The dissentin Ingraham argues that this isproblematic: "even if the student could sue for good faith error in theinfliction of punishment, the lawsuit occurs after the punishment has beenfinally imposed. The infliction of physical pain is final and irreparable; itcannot be undone[.]"[518]Indeed, as our research demonstrates, the legal procedures available in the US forredressing instances of corporal punishment are severely inadequate.The Supreme Court has not yet ruled on whether a student hasa constitutional right to be free from excessive corporal punishment.[519]Lower federal courts appear to recognize such a right, though they are split asto the underlying reasons.[520]Some courts argue that students have the right to be free from corporalpunishment that is so brutal and disproportionate to the misconduct that it"shocks the conscience,"[521]while others argue students have a right to be free from forms of corporalpunishment that are "arbitrary, capricious, or wholly unrelated to thelegitimate state goal of maintaining an atmosphere conducive to learning."[522]Federal courts should bring this jurisprudence into line with internationalstandards and protect children from all forms of corporal punishment.Trends to Abolish Corporal PunishmentGovernments worldwide and the majority of US states have nowprohibited corporal punishment in schools, providing a clear measure ofaccelerating global adherence to the prohibition. By early 2008, 106 countrieshad prohibited corporal punishment in schools.[523]For instance, the European Court of Human Rights has considered a series ofcases on corporal punishment[524]that have resulted in the abolition of corporal punishment in all schools inthe United Kingdom and in other European states.[525]In keeping with transnational trends, school districts andstates throughout the USare upholding the rights of children by rejecting corporal punishment at anaccelerating rate. Twenty-nine states and the District of Columbia have passed bans oncorporal punishment in public schools.[526] Ofthe remaining 21 states, only eight of them paddle more than one percent ofschool children, according to the US Department of Education.[527]Ninety-five of the 100 largest school districts in the US have prohibited corporal punishment in theirpublic schools, including major school districts in Texassuch as Houston, Dallas,Fort Worth, Austin,and El Paso.[528]Jackson, the largest school district in Mississippi, has alsobanned paddling. Mississippi, Texas, and other statesthat still use paddling must join this accelerating trend.XII.Conclusion andRecommendationsGiven the international legal prohibition on corporalpunishment, and the accelerating rate of bans on the practice in public schoolsin the US and abroad,corporal punishment should be abolished immediately in the US. Children like Tim L., the 10-year-oldTexas boy whowas beaten and bruised twice in the first two weeks of the fifth grade, sufferthe consequences of this abusive practice on a daily basis. Corporal punishmentcan violate children's rights to freedom from cruel, inhuman, or degradingtreatment, to education, and to freedom from physical violence. Furthermore, itcontributes to a hostile school environment in which students struggle tolearn. Tim and his peers deserve better: they deserve a school environment inwhich they can learn, grow, and reach their full potential.Not only is corporal punishment abusive, it is ineffective.Students, teachers, and parents alike share the goal of orderly, disciplinedclassrooms in which students can learn. Yet corporal punishment fails toproduce such an environment. By responding violently to misbehavior, bydegrading and humiliating students, and by injuring them physically andpsychologically, those administering corporal punishment damage the educationalenvironment. Students may withdraw, fearful to express their ideas; they mayreact with aggression to their peers and to teachers; or they may disengagefrom school altogether and ultimately drop out.Corporal punishment disproportionately affects minoritystudents, making it harder for students of color to achieve their educationalgoals. The practice is also used disproportionately against special educationstudents, the very students who are in need of special care and guidance in thepublic school system. When parents try to defend their children's rights,whether those students are minority students, special education students, orany other students, they face serious opposition from school districts, police,the justice system, and their communities.This discriminatory, abusive, and ineffective practiceshould be abolished in US schools. It is past time for Mississippi,Texas, and other US states to ban corporalpunishment and provide adequate protection and a decent education for allstudents.To Legislatures in States with Corporal PunishmentEnact legislation explicitly banning the use ofcorporal punishment in public schools. Such legislation should clarify thefact that while teachers in many respects have the same authority asparents over students in their charge, this authority does not extend toany right to use corporal punishment. There must be no exceptions for"reasonable" force or corporal punishment "to maintain discipline."Repeal or modify existing legislation that grants educatorswho use corporal punishment immunity from civil lawsuits or criminal prosecution.Any child who is punitively struck in school by an educator should be ableto seek redress. Children must receive at least the same level ofprotection afforded by assault laws as adults.Untila complete ban is adopted, state legislatures, governors, and boards ofeducation should require school districts to respect parents' wishes notto have their children beaten by school officials, at a minimum byestablishing an "opt-in" scheme requiring parents affirmatively to agreebefore their child could be subjected to this practice.Until a full ban is adopted, provide parents with theright to seek redress against school districts and educators who usecorporal punishment in violation of their preferences. This redress couldbe facilitated by creation of an administrative ombudsman, charged withoverseeing compliance with state and local regulations on corporalpunishment. Redress should always include access to legal remedies.Enact legislation requiring school boards toincorporate positive behavior support (PBS) systems into individual schooldistrict discipline policies and codes of conduct. Require school boardsto revise their discipline policies regularly, and to base thosediscipline policies on methodologically sound studies proving the efficacyof the disciplinary methods chosen.Increase funding for additional behavior analysts andcounseling staff to ensure that special education students are treatedappropriately, particularly on discipline issues.To Governors and Departments of Education in Stateswith Corporal PunishmentPropose and support the enactment of statelegislation that ends the practice of corporal punishment in public schools.Issue clear directives to all educators that corporal punishment and allother forms of cruel or degrading punishment should not be used in public schools.Until such a ban is enacted, establish adequatecomplaint and redress procedures (accessible to parents and children) forchildren who are beaten severely or inappropriately (includingconsideration of their age or special education status), or who are beatenin violation of expressed parental preferences.Until a ban on corporal punishment is in place, enactclear standards for teachers, principals, and other professional educatorsthat provide for sanctions, dismissal, or other disciplinary action ifthose working with children violate school district procedures forcorporal punishment, or, once a ban has been passed, continue to paddlechildren.Until a ban is enacted, implement a statisticalreview system that tracks every instance of corporal punishment. Authoritiesshould be required to record each instance, taking data on the race,gender, and special education status of the students and paddlers, and thetype of infraction for which corporal punishment was administered.Ensure that state agencies charged with overseeingchild welfare investigate school-based corporal punishment complaints as thoroughlyas they investigate other child abuse complaints and take appropriateaction to prevent child abuse in schools.Conduct comprehensive and sustained awareness-raisingcampaigns among parents, teachers, and others concerned with children'seducation on the dangers of corporal punishment in schools.Conduct comprehensive and sustained awareness-raisingcampaigns among children of their rights not to be disciplined physically,including appropriate programs according to the age of the child.To Police, District Attorneys, and State CourtsTreat corporal punishment complaints as any otherassault complaint. Take statements from victims of corporal punishmentwithout requiring those individuals first to appear before the schoolboard or superintendent.Remove obstacles that prevent victims of corporalpunishment from pursuing their cases in court. Once defenses,justifications, and authorizations of corporal punishment have beenabolished by state legislation, assault laws must apply equally tochildren and to adults.To the President of the United StatesPropose and urge Congress to enact legislationabolishing the use of corporal punishment in US schools.Submit the Convention on the Rights of the Child tothe US Senate for its consent to ratification without reservation.To the United States CongressProhibit the use of corporal punishment against allstudents in US public schools.Until that point, immediately prohibit the use ofcorporal punishment against special education students in public schools(as defined by the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act and/orSection 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973).Until a full ban on corporal punishment is enacted,withhold discretionary educational funding from school districts that usecorporal punishment.Support measures to improve school discipline throughthe implementation of positive behavior and restorative justice methods,such as those discussed in the Positive Behavior for Effective Schools Act(H.R. 3407, S. 2111).Increase funding to states and to school districtsthat choose to end the use of corporal punishment and use positivebehavioral interventions instead, so that principals and teachers can betrained on effective methods of creating school discipline plans.Increase funding to states to fund additionalbehavior analysts and counseling staff to improve the delivery ofappropriate discipline to special education students.(To the Senate): ratify the Convention on the Rightsof the Child without reservation.To the US Department of Education, Office for CivilRightsPursue sanctions, mediation, or other measures to endthe discriminatory use of corporal punishment in public schools. If unsuccessful,refer the issue to the Department of Justice for litigation.Revise and expand the collection of school disciplinedata with a particular focus on corporal punishment. Data should becollected by incident as well as by pupil punished per year. Data should alsobe collected on the underlying infraction that leads to corporalpunishment.Conduct comprehensive and sustained awareness-raisingcampaigns among school districts, administrators, and others concernedwith children's education on the dangers of corporal punishment inschools.Conduct comprehensive and sustained awareness-raisingcampaigns among children on their right not to be disciplined physically,including appropriate programs according to the age of the child.To School Boards, Superintendents, Principals, andTeachersRevise discipline policies to prohibit corporalpunishment in all schools and classes under their control.Institute alternative discipline systemssuch as positive behavior support (PBS) systems to deal with discipline problemsin a non-violent, effective manner and construct a school environment inwhich students can thrive.Provide educators with extensive training oneffective classroom management techniques and positive school disciplinetechniques. Provide new teachers with adequate resources for learning tomanage classrooms, and appropriate support for helping to reachparticularly disruptive students.Better utilize professionally conducted behavioralassessments for special education students so that they receive thedisciplinary support they need before teachers resort to corporalpunishment. Ensure that those assessments include classroom observation todetermine why misbehavior is occurring, and what individualized, positiveinterventions should be incorporated into the student's plan to provideeffective incentives for appropriate conduct.Until a complete ban on corporal punishment has beeninstituted, provide adequate mechanisms for parents who do not want theirchildren to be subjected to corporal punishment. Establish an "opt-in"scheme requiring parents affirmatively to agree before their child is subjectedto this practice. Ensure that such mechanisms include practicable methodsfor parents to file complaints and seek redress should children be paddledin violation of the parents' expressed preferences.Until a complete ban on corporal punishment has beeninstituted, establish an immediate moratorium on corporal punishment forspecial education students, in light of their particular vulnerability andthe potential for serious physical or psychological injury.Until corporal punishment has been banned, institutea regular statistical review process to ensure that minorities do notreceive corporal punishment at disproportionate rates.Conduct comprehensive and sustained awareness-raisingcampaigns among parents, teachers, and others concerned with children'seducation on the dangers of corporal punishment in schools.To Teachers'Colleges and Teacher Training Programs(including Teach for America)Provide new teachers with extensivetraining on appropriate discipline techniques, including positive behaviormodels. Include a component underscoring the fact that corporal punishmentis prohibited by international law.If teachers will likely be placed in districts thatuse corporal punishment, give teachers extensive resources for managingparticularly disruptive students, so that they do not have to send thosestudents out of the classroom to receive corporal punishment.To Professional Bodies Working in Education(such as the National Education Association, the NationalAssociation for State Boards of Education, and the National Parent TeachersAssociation)Establish or strengthen policies that support theprohibition of corporal punishment, and conduct active advocacy campaignsto end the practice.Develop codes of conduct for members that refer tothe legal prohibition of corporal punishment and promote positive,non-violent school discipline.Conduct comprehensive and sustained awareness-raisingcampaigns among parents, teachers, and others concerned with children'seducation on the dangers of corporal punishment in schools.Promote positive, non-violent forms of schooldiscipline by members and their constituencies.To Private and Non-Profit Foundations that Fund USPublic Education or Advocate for Improvements in EducationMake the prohibition of corporal punishment acondition for grants, awards, and other funding and support.Provide funding for additional academic research onthe effects of school-based corporal punishment.Conduct comprehensive and sustained awareness-raisingcampaigns among parents, teachers, and others concerned with children'seducation on the dangers of corporal punishment in schools.Conduct comprehensive and sustained awareness-raisingcampaigns among children on their right not to be disciplined physically,including appropriate programs according to the age of the child.AcknowledgmentsHuman Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unionthank all of the students, parents, family members, siblings, teachers,administrators, superintendents, school board officials, and other governmentofficials who shared their views and experiences with us for this report.This report was researched and written by Alice Farmer, Aryeh Neier fellow forHuman Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union. Additional researchwas conducted by Alison Parker,deputy director of the US Program at Human Rights Watch, and a staff memberfrom the American Civil Liberties Union (who chose to remain anonymous). Theprincipal editors were: Alison Parker; David Fathi,director of the US Program at Human Rights Watch; Joseph Saunders, deputyprogram director at Human Rights Watch; and Clive Baldwin, senior legal advisorat Human Rights Watch. This report was also reviewed and edited by: Jo Becker,advocacy director of the Children's Rights Division at Human Rights Watch; Terri Burke, executive director of the AmericanCivil Liberties Union of Texas; Jamil Dakwar, director of the Human RightsProgram at the American Civil Liberties Union; Nsombi Lambright, executivedirector of the American Civil Liberties Union of Mississippi; Dennis Parker,director of the Racial Justice Program at the American Civil Liberties Union; and Meghan Rhoad and Janet Walsh of the Women'sRights Division at Human Rights Watch.Brian Root, consultant to HumanRights Watch, provided methodological and data review for this report. Ashoka Mukpo and Thomas Gilchrist, US Programassociates at Human Rights Watch, and Kennji Kizuka,Children's Rights Division associate at Human Rights Watch, provided researchand production assistance. Additional research assistance was provided by:Jennifer Norris, Giancarlo Rivero-Pelligrini, and Leanne Webster, interns withthe US Program at Human Rights Watch; and by Joy Frey and Catherine Oddy of NorthwesternUniversityLawSchool. Grace Choi,publications director, Ella Moran, multimedia specialist, Fitzroy Hepkins, printand mail manager, Xabay Spinka, communications coordinator, and Enrique Piraces,web content management specialist, provided layout and production for thisreport.We express our deep appreciation to the leaders, staff, andvolunteers of non-profit organizations, after-school programs, communitygroups, and other organizations who assisted enormously with our research.Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union are grateful to theOpen Society Institute for its support of the Aryeh Neier fellowship. We wouldalso like to thank Gara LaMarche, vice president of the Open Society Institute,for initiating the fellowship. Human Rights Watch would also like to thankPeter B. Lewis and the John Merck Fund for their generous support of the USProgram.[1]Human Rights Watch interview with FayeL., rural east Texas,February 26, 2008.[2]Ibid.[3]This report examines the use of corporal punishment in US public schools. WhileUS private schools are not the subject of this report, Human Rights Watch isaware that corporal punishment occurs in some private schools as well and believesit should be abolished in all schools.[4]Human Rights Watch interview withTiffany Bartlett (real name used with consent), Austin,Texas, February 22, 2008 (referring to events in Mississippi).[5]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with CatherineV., Washington, DC, November 7, 2007 (referring to a school in the MississippiDelta).[6]Ingrahamv. Wright, 430 U.S.651 (1977).[7] The Center for Effective Discipline, "LargeCity School Districts Banning Corporal Punishment, Discipline at School,"August 2008, http://www.stophitting.com/disatschool/100largest.php(accessed August 8, 2008) (This site lists the 100 largest school districts inthe US, and notes that 94 ofthem do not use corporal punishment, listing Aldine, Texasas one of the large districts that permits corporal punishment. However, HumanRights Watch has on file email correspondence of July 1, 2008 from Ken Knippel, assistantsuperintendent of administration in the Aldine, TexasIndependentSchool District, statingthat the Aldine ISD currently does not permit corporal punishment.).[8] Corporal punishment is prohibited in: Alaska, California, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Illinois, Iowa, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts,Michigan, Minnesota,Montana, Nebraska,Nevada, New Hampshire,New Jersey, New York,North Dakota, Oregon,Pennsylvania, RhodeIsland, South Dakota, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin,and Washington, DC. States permit or prohibit corporalpunishment in varying ways: affirmative state legislation, state-wideregulation, consensus of school districts, or silence. Consequently there issome disagreement as to whether 21 or 22 states permit the use of corporalpunishment. After analyzing these laws, we take the position that 21 statespermit the use of corporal punishment. The Center for Effective Discipline, "U.S.:Corporal Punishment and Paddling Statistics by State and Race, States BanningCorporal Punishment," 2008, http://www.stophitting.com/disatschool/statesBanning.php(accessed August 8, 2008).[9]Global Initiative to End All CorporalPunishment of Children, "Countdown to universal prohibition: Summary of legalityof corporal punishment of children worldwide," April 2008, http://www.endcorporalpunishment.org/pages/progress/countdown.html(accessed August 8, 2008).[10]This report focuses on corporal punishment in US public schools only. Corporalpunishment in private schools and in the home can also amount to seriousviolations of children's human rights, but they lie outside of the scope ofthis report.[11]Human Rights Watch interview with David F., aneighth-grade boy, rural west Texas,February 23, 2008(interviewed in the presence of his mother).[12]Human Rights Watch interview with Bryce M., a high school teacher, Leland, Mississippi,December 3, 2007.[13]South Delta School District (Sharkey-Issaquena), "South Delta School District(Sharkey-Issaquena) Student Handbook," http://www.southdelta.k12.ms.us/districtoffice/pages/files/shandbook.pdf(accessed August 8, 2008), p. 20 ("Paddle specifications: Elementary school 14"long from end to end, 2" wide and ¼" thick oak or ash wood used-middle and highschools, 15" x 2" x 3/8").[14]Human Rights Watch interview with Shannon Q., an 18-year-old girl, Midland, Texas,February 25, 2008.[15]Human Rights Watch interview with Gerardo H., whorecently left high school, Midland,Texas, February 25, 2008.[16]Human Rights Watch interview with Bre L., a 16-year-oldgirl, Midland, Texas, February 25, 2008 (interviewed in the presenceof another witness).[17]Human Rights Watch interview with Jimmy Dunne (real name used with consent),former teacher in Houston,February 19, 2008.[18]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment 8, The right of thechild to protection from corporal punishment and other cruel or degrading formsof punishment, UN Doc. CRC/C/GC/8 (2006), para. 15 (commenting on theConvention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, G.A.Res. 44/25, annex, 44 UN GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, UN Doc. A/44/49 (1989),entered into force September2, 1990, signed by the United StatesFebruary 16, 1995, arts. 19, 28(2),and 37) ("The Committee recognizes that there are exceptional circumstances inwhich teachers and others … may be confronted by dangerous behavior whichjustifies the use of reasonable restraint to control it. Here too there is aclear distinction between the use of force motivated by the need to protect achild or others and the use of force to punish. The principle of the minimumnecessary use of force for the shortest necessary period of time must alwaysapply.").[19]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment 8, para. 11 (definingcorporal punishment as "any punishment in which physical force is used andintended to cause some degree of pain or discomfort, however light…. In theview of the Committee, corporal punishment is invariably degrading.").[20]RankinCountySchool District, "RankinCounty School District Student Handbook, Grades K-12, 2006-2007," http://www.rcsd.k12.ms.us/pdfs/2006-07StudentHandbook.pdf(accessed August 8, 2008),p. 53.[21]MeridianPublicSchool District,"Student Code of Conduct, K-12, 2006-2007," http://www.mpsd.k12.ms.us/handbooks/codeofconduct0607.pdf(accessed August 8, 2008).[22]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Ralph McLaney (real name used withconsent), a former middle school administrator, Alabama, October 26, 2007.[23]Human Rights Watch interview with Bre L., a 16-year-old girl, Midland, Texas,February 25, 2008.[24]Human Rights Watch interview with Gerardo H., who recently left high school, Midland, Texas,February 25, 2008.[25]Human Rights Watch interview with Lisa P., a former teacher in the MississippiDelta, Austin, Texas, February 22, 2008 ("It had tape around it … Ithink they put tape on it because it split or whatever.").[26]Human Rights Watch interview with Matthew S., a middle school student in theMississippi Delta, December12, 2007.[27]On May 22, 2008,Human Rights Watch called five school supply stores in Mississippiand seven school supply stores in Texasthat sold school supplies state-wide. None sold paddles. Earlier calls also didnot yield any school supply stores that sold paddles. These stores gave variousreasons for not carrying paddles, saying, for example, "nobody asks for them," or"there's no real demand," and that they did not "know of any company that makesthem," that they had "never seen them in any catalog from suppliers," and thatthey are "not something our vendors offer."[28]GreenvillePublicSchool District,"Corporal Punishment Survey," May22, 2008, unpublished document on file with Human Rights Watch.[29]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with a superintendent of a smalldistrict in east Mississippi,April 14, 2008.[30]Human Rights Watch interview with Tiffany Bartlett (real name used withconsent), Austin, Texas,February 22, 2008(referring to events in Mississippi).[31]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with John Booth (real name used withconsent), Levelland, Texas, April 23, 2008.[32]Human Rights Watch interview with Lisa P., a former teacher in the MississippiDelta, Austin, Texas,February 22, 2008(referring to events in Mississippi).[33]Human Rights Watch interview with Kiashia T., a fifth-grade girl in rural Mississippi, December 10, 2007 ("[theteacher] said, 'I'm going to get my Dr. Pepper out'").[34]Human Rights Watch interview with Mathew S., middle school student in theMississippi Delta, December12, 2007.[35]Human Rights Watch interview with Elizabeth Savage (real name used withconsent), New Orleans, Louisiana, December 9, 2007.[36]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Chris Myers Asch (real name usedwith consent), a former elementary school teacher in the Mississippi Delta, Washington,DC, December 19, 2007.[37]Human Rights Watch interview with Nakia D., a twelfth-grade girl in ruralMississippi, December 4, 2007 (noting that students are asked to put their"hands on the top of the desk"); and Human Rights Watch interview with KeshawnE., eleventh grader in urban Mississippi, December 7, 2007 ("[The principal]told each of us to come into the office separately and told us to put our handson the desk and gave us a paddling.").[38]Human Rights Watch interview with Gerardo H., who recently left high school, Midland, Texas,February 25, 2008.[39]Human Rights Watch interview with Mei N., teacher at a high school inMississippi, December 4, 2007 ("my principal has walked around with a paddle inhallways, you know, to get kids to class … he will give them licks in thehallway.")[40]Human Rights Watch interview with Matthew S., a middle school student in theMississippi Delta, December12, 2007.[41]Human Rights Watch interview with Brittany Y., who recently left high school,rural Mississippi,December 11, 2007.[42]Human Rights Watch interview with Kiashia T., a fifth-grade girl in rural Mississippi, December 10, 2007.[43]Human Rights Watch interview with Sean D., recent high school graduate, Oxford, Mississippi,December 14, 2007.[44]Human Rights Watch interview with Chantal K., Leland, Mississippi,December 3, 2007.[45]Human Rights Watch interview with LaShell M., Mississippi Delta, December 4, 2007.[46]Human Rights Watch interview with Brittany Y., who recently left high school,rural Mississippi,December 11, 2007.[47]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment 8, para. 11.[48]Human Rights Watch interview with LaShell M., Mississippi Delta, December 4, 2007.[49]Human Rights Watch interview with Rochelle T., who recently left high school, Midland, Texas,February 25, 2008.[50]Human Rights Watch interview with Jake G., a middle school boy in north Mississippi, December 14, 2007.[51] MarshallIndependent School District, "Student Code of Conduct, 2006-2007," on file withHuman Rights Watch, pp. 14, 15, and 17.[52]Grand PrairieIndependentSchool District,"Student Code of Conduct,"http://www.gpisd.org/forparents/documents/StudentCodeofConduct2007-2008.pdf(accessed July 18, 2008),p. 61.[53]DrewSchoolDistrict, "Drew School District Handbook,2005-2006," http://www2.mde.k12.ms.us/6720/Files/2005shb.pdf (accessed August 8, 2008), p. 36.[54]SouthDeltaSchool District (Sharkey-Issaquena), "SouthDeltaSchool District(Sharkey-Issaquena) Student Handbook," http://www.southdelta.k12.ms.us/districtoffice/pages/files/shandbook.pdf(accessed August 8, 2008),p. 20.[55]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Louise P., Chicago, Illinois,November 19, 2007(interviewed with family member).[56]Human Rights Watch interview with Nakia D., a twelfth grader in rural Mississippi, December 4, 2007.[57]Human Rights Watch interview with LaShell M., Mississippi Delta, December 4, 2007.[58] "CorporalPunishment in Schools: Position Paper of the Society for Adolescent Medicine," Journal of Adolescent Health, vol. 32,no. 5 (2003), p. 389, http://www.adolescenthealth.org/PositionPaper_Corporal_Punishment_in_Schools.pdf(accessed August 8, 2008) ("Medical complications [of corporal punishment] mayprevent students from returning to school for days, weeks, or even longer.Reported medical findings include abrasions, severe muscle injury, extensivehematomas, whiplash damage, life-threatening fat hemorrhage, and others"). Seealso Chapter VI: Impact of Corporal Punishment for a more in-depth discussionof the physical impact of paddling.[59]Human Rights Watch interview with Ryan A., a seventh-grade boy in rural Mississippi, December 12, 2007.[60]Human Rights Watch interview with Chelsea S., recent high school graduate, in Houston, Texas,February 18, 2008.[61]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Catherine V., Washington, DC,November 7, 2007.[62]Human Rights Watch interview with David F., an eighth-grade boy, rural west Texas, February 23, 2008(interviewed in the presence of his mother).[63]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment 8, para. 11.[64]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharrie L., teacher, Mississippi Delta,December 4, 2007; Human Rights Watch interview with Doreen W., school boardmember in a Mississippi Delta town, December 4, 2007; Human Rights Watchinterview with Mei N., teacher at a high school in the Mississippi Delta,December 4, 2007; Human Rights Watch interview with Nakia D., twelfth-gradegirl, Mississippi Delta, December 4, 2007; Human Rights Watch interview withCerise F., recent high school graduate, Beaumont, Texas, February 20, 2008;Human Rights Watch interview with Tammy K., high school student, Beaumont,Texas, February 19, 2008.[65]Human Rights Watch interview with Mei N., teacher at a high school in theMississippi Delta, December 4, 2007; Human Rights Watch interview with Dr.Ollye B. Shirley (real name used with consent), Jackson, Mississippi, December5, 2007; Human Rights Watch interview with Joseph O., former teacher, Jackson,Mississippi, December 5, 2007; Human Rights Watch interview with Dean D.,recent high school graduate, Oxford, Mississippi, December 14, 2007; HumanRights Watch interview with George R., who recently left high school, Beaumont,Texas, February 19, 2008; Human Rights Watch interview with Kathy J.,16-year-old girl, Beaumont, Texas, February 19, 2008.[66]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Catherine V., Washington, DC,former teacher in the Mississippi Delta, November 7, 2007; Human Rights Watchinterview with Doreen W., school board member in a Mississippi Delta town,December 4, 2007; Human Rights Watch interview with Mei N., teacher in theMississippi Delta, December 4, 2007; Human Rights Watch interview with BlakeC., 17-year-old boy, Beaumont, Texas, February 19, 2008; Human Rights Watchinterview with Tammy K., high school student, Beaumont, Texas, February 19,2008.[67]Human Rights Watch interview with Roxie G., high school junior, Jackson,Mississippi, December 5, 2007 (describing paddling by first-grade teacher);Human Rights Watch interview with Corinne J., fourth-grade girl, ruralMississippi, December 10, 2007 (describing paddling by third-grade teacher).[68]Human Rights Watch interview with Nick E., recent high school graduate, Nacogdoches, Texas,February 27, 2008("In high school, it's also the sports coaches who paddle. Athletes, they'lllisten to the coach before they listen to anyone else.").[69]Human Rights Watch interview with Brittany Y., who recently left high school,rural Mississippi,December 11, 2007.[70]Human Rights Watch interview with Jordan Y., Longview, Texas,February 27, 2008.[71]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharrie L., Indianola, Mississippi,December 4, 2007.[72]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Paula H., Illinois, January 17, 2008.[73]Human Rights Watch interview with Mei N., a teacher at a high school in theMississippi Delta, December4, 2007.[74]Human Rights Watch interview with Zack T., fifth-grade boy, rural Mississippi, December 10, 2007; Human Rights Watchinterview with Ralphine L., Indianola, Mississippi, December 12, 2007 (in thepresence of another interviewee) (A mother of four children in the MississippiDelta reported coming to school to discipline her fifth-grade niece: "She'ssmart but she acts out too, she's just a class clown … I spanked her myself.She's my sister's child. She got sent to the office for disrespecting theteacher … I was already at the school to pick up my son and the principal askedme to scare her up. I went into the office and … I tapped her on the behind.").[75]Human Rights Watch interview with Andrea N., rural east Texas, February 28, 2008.[76]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharrie L., Indianola, Mississippi,December 4, 2007.[77]Human Rights Watch interview with Bryce M., Leland, Mississippi,December 3, 2007.[78]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharrie L., Indianola, Mississippi,December 4, 2007.[79]Human Rights Watch interview with Ryan A., Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[80]Human Rights Watch interview with Kiashia T., rural Mississippi, December 10, 2007.[81]Human Rights Watch interview with Brittany Y., who recently left high school,rural Mississippi,December 11, 2007.[82]Human Rights Watch interview with Ronette P., recent high school graduate, Aldine, Texas,February 18, 2008("She'd claim she was going to use it, she'd make verbal threats.").[83]Human Rights Watch interview with Zack T., rural Mississippi, December 10, 2007.[84] Miss.Code Ann. § 37-11-57 (establishing that corporal punishment does not constitutenegligence or child abuse); Tex. Educ. Code § 37.102 (allowing school boards toadopt discipline rules); Tex. Penal Code § 9.62 (allowing use of non-lethalforce in an educator-student relationship); Tex. Educ. Code § 22.0511, 22.0512(providing immunity for school officials who paddle).[85]Sample Policy from the Mississippi School Board Association, "Student Conduct-DisciplinePlan," on file with Human Rights Watch.[86]Sample School District Handbook from the Texas Association of School Boards,"Student Discipline," April14, 2008, on file with Human Rights Watch.[87]Human Rights Watch interview with Mei N., teacher at a high school in theMississippi Delta, December4, 2007.[88]Sample School District Handbook from the Texas Association of School Boards, onfile with Human Rights Watch.[89] Forexample, Midland Independent School District, "Student Discipline," March 20,2006, p. 2; Tyler Independent School District, "Student Discipline," November21, 2005, p. 2; Beaumont Independent School District, "Student Discipline," October6, 1998, p. 2; Crockett Independent School District-Houston County, "StudentDiscipline," October 31, 2005, p. 2. (all on file with Human Rights Watch).[90]PearlPublicSchool District, "PearlHigh School, Student Handbook, Grades 9-12, 2007-2008, " http://www.pearl.k12.ms.us/news/downloads/StudentHandbook2007.pdf(accessed August 8, 2008).[91] Forexample, Harrison County School District, "Handbook 2007-2008," http://www.harrison.k12.ms.us/LinkClick.aspx?fileticket=gOZqMTWqvBg%3d&tabid=165&mid=1404(accessed April 18, 2008) ("corporal punishment will not be administered in thepresence of other students"); Rankin County School District, "Rankin CountySchool District Student Handbook, Grades K-12, 2006-2007," http://www.rcsd.k12.ms.us/pdfs/2006-07StudentHandbook.pdf(accessed August 8, 2008), p. 53.[92]Human Rights Watch interview with Kiashia T., rural Mississippi, December 10, 2007.[93]Human Rights Watch interview with Matthew S., Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[94]Human Rights Watch interview with Sean D., recent high school graduate, Oxford, Mississippi,December 14, 2007(referring to events in a small school district in the Mississippi Delta).[95]Human Rights Watch interview with Elizabeth Savage (real name used withconsent), New Orleans, Louisiana, December 9, 2007 (referring to events in aMississippi Delta high school).[96]Human Rights Watch interview with Robert H., seventh grader, rural Mississippi, December 11, 2007(interviewed in the presence of family).[97]Human Rights Watch interview with Ben H., eighth grader, rural Mississippi, December 11, 2007(interviewed in the presence of family).[98]Human Rights Watch interview with Bre L., 16-year-old girl, Midland, Texas,February 25, 2008.[99]Human Rights Watch interview with Lisa P., a former teacher in the MississippiDelta, Austin, Texas, February 22, 2008 (referring to events in theMississippi Delta).[100]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharrie L., Indianola, Mississippi,December 4, 2007.[101]Human Rights Watch interview with Keith D., recent high school graduate,Houston, Texas, February 19, 2008 (noting that students at his junior highschool could choose between corporal punishment and detentions or in-school-suspension;Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Louise P., Chicago, Illinois,former high school teacher in the Mississippi Delta, November 19, 2007(interviewed in the presence of a family member) (describing a scheme in whichstudents could choose between five licks or a 15-minute lunch detention).[102]Human Rights Watch interview with Mei N., teacher at a Mississippi school,December 4, 2007 (noting students can take licks and get out of in-schoolsuspension earlier); Human Rights Watch interview with Sean D., 18-year-oldboy, Oxford, Mississippi, December 14, 2007 (noting that if students refusedpaddling, they received in-school suspension or a "zero day"); Human RightsWatch interview with Allison Guthrie (real name used with consent), recent highschool graduate, Houston, Texas, February 18, 2008 (noting that she was offereda choice of corporal punishment instead of in-school suspension for being tardyin her Dallas-area district).[103]Human Rights Watch interview with Nakia D., twelfth-grade girl in theMississippi Delta, December 4, 2007 (high school students given choice ofpaddling or suspension); Human Rights Watch interview with Peter E., recenthigh school graduate, Beaumont, Texas, February 19, 2008 ("I was given a choiceof getting licks or getting written up and then getting suspension.").[104]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Chris Myers Asch (real name usedwith consent), a former elementary school teacher in the Mississippi Delta,Washington, DC, December 19, 2007.[105]Human Rights Watch interview with Cassie L., recent highschool graduate, College Station,Texas, February 21, 2008.[106]Human Rights Watch interview with Kathy J., 16-year-oldgirl, Beaumont, Texas, February 19, 2008; Human Rights Watch telephoneinterview with John Booth (real name used with consent), superintendent of theLevelland School District, Texas, April 23, 2008 (noting that high schoolstudents can choose between two swats or after-school suspension); Human RightsWatch telephone interview with Gail Krohn (real name used with consent), superintendentof the Nederland School District, Texas, April 22, 2008 (noting a choicebetween two licks or one day of in-school suspension).[107]Human Rights Watch interview with Bryce M., teacher, Mississippi Delta, December 3, 2007.[108]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Louise P., Chicago, Illinois,former teacher in the Mississippi Delta, November 19, 2007 (interviewed in the presenceof a family member).[109]Human Rights Watch interview with Sean D., Oxford, Mississippi,December 14, 2007(referring to a school district in the Mississippi Delta).[110] Human Rights Watch interview with a superintendent of a mid-sizedurban district in the Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[111]See Chapter VII: Best Practices in School Discipline for further discussion ofpositive discipline.[112]Human Rights Watch interview with Rochelle T., who recently left high school, Midland, Texas,February 25, 2008.[113]Human Rights Watch interview with Ryan A., middle school boy, MississippiDelta, December 12, 2007.[114]Human Rights Watch interview with Shannon Q., Midland, Texas,February 25, 2008.[115]Human Rights Watch interview with Peter E., who recently left high school, Beaumont, Texas,February 19, 2008.[116]Human Rights Watch interview with Steven R., high school student, Jackson, Mississippi,December 7, 2007.[117]Human Rights Watch interview with Kathy J., Beaumont, Texas,February 19, 2008.[118]Human Rights Watch interview with Andrea N., rural east Texas, February 28, 2008.[119]Human Rights Watch interview with Joseph O., former teacher in an urban Mississippi district, Jackson, Mississippi,December 5, 2007.[120] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Chris MyersAsch (real name used with consent), a former elementary school teacher in theMississippi Delta, Washington, DC, December 19, 2007.[121] Ibid.[122]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Angie T., Mississippi, November 6, 2007.[123]Human Rights Watch interview with a superintendent of a mid-sized urbandistrict in the Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[124]Human Rights Watch interview with Beverly Shields (real name used with consent),Cumberland, Mississippi,December 11, 2007(referring to events in a suburban Mississippischool district).[125]Human Rights Watch interview with Bobby Daniel (real name used with consent), Indianola, Mississippi,December 12, 2007.[126]Human Rights Watch interview with Cassie L., College Station, Texas,February 21, 2008.[127]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Paula H., former teacher in Mississippi, currently based in Illinois, January 17, 2008.[128]Convention on the Rights of the Child,art. 12 ("States Parties shall assure to the child who is capable offorming his or her own views the right to express those views freely in allmatters affecting the child, the views of the child being given due weight inaccordance with the age and maturity of the child.").[129]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharrie L., a teacher in the MississippiDelta, December 4, 2007; Human Rights Watch interview with LaShell M., an eleventh-gradegirl in the Mississippi Delta, December 4, 2007; Human Rights Watch interviewwith Kiashia T., a fifth-grade girl in rural Mississippi, December 10, 2007;Human Rights Watch interview with Robert H., a seventh-grade boy in ruralMississippi, December 11, 2007; Human Rights Watch interview with Blake C., a17-year-old boy in Beaumont, Texas, December 19, 2007.[130]Human Rights Watch interview with Brittany Y., who recently left high schooland was disciplined in the sixth grade, rural Mississippi, December 11, 2007;Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Chris B., a parent whose son waspaddled 10 times for being tardy, north Mississippi, January 14, 2008; HumanRights Watch interview with Kristin S., recent high school graduate, Midland,Texas, February 25, 2008; Human Rights Watch interview with Bre L., 16-year-oldgirl, Midland, Texas, February 25, 2008; Human Rights Watch interview with ShannonQ., an 18-year-old high school student, west Texas, February 25, 2008.[131]Human Rights Watch interview with Roxie G., an eleventh-grade girl in urban Mississippi, December 5, 2007; Human Rights Watch interview with RyanA., a seventh-grade boy in the Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007; Human Rights Watchinterview with Blake C., a 17-year-old boy in Beaumont, Texas,February 19, 2008.[132]Human Rights Watch interview with LaShell M., an eleventh-grade girl in theMississippi Delta, December4, 2007.[133]Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S. 651, 684(1977); see also Jerry R. Parkinson, "Federal Court Treatment of Corporal Punishment in Public Schools:Jurisprudence that is Literally Shocking to the Conscience," South Dakota Law Review, vol. 36 (1994),pp. 284-286 (criticizing the implications, if the decision weretaken to its logical conclusion, of the majority decision in Ingraham).[134]Human Rights Watch interview with Tiffany Bartlett (real name used withconsent), Austin, Texas, February 22, 2008 (referring to events at a ruraljunior high school in the Mississippi Delta) ("I know sometimes I locked kidsout for being tardy, and he would knock on my door so I could let them in. AndI said no, they don't have tardy passes. So he said, 'Alright, bend over,' andhe would paddle them.").[135]Human Rights Watch interview with a superintendent of a mid-sized urban districtin the Mississippi Delta, December12, 2007.[136]Human Rights Watch interview with Nakia D., a twelfth-grade girl in theMississippi Delta, December4, 2007.[137]Human Rights Watch interview with Fred K., recent graduate, Nacogdoches, Texas,February 27, 2008(16-year-old paddled for being asleep in class and for arguing with the teacherwhen woken up).[138]Human Rights Watch interview with LaShell M., an eleventh-grade girl in theMississippi Delta, December4, 2007.[139]Ibid.[140]Human Rights Watch interview with Keshawn E., an eleventh-grade boy, Jackson,Mississippi, December 7, 2007 (referring to events in a suburban district);Human Rights Watch interview with Ken A., a 17-year-old high school student,Midland, Texas, February 25, 2008 ("Kids get paddled for cussing at teachers,that happens a lot.").[141]Human Rights Watch interview with Elizabeth Savage (real name used withconsent), a former teacher in the Mississippi Delta, New Orleans, Louisiana, December9, 2007.[142]Human Rights Watch interview with Kiashia T., a fifth-grade girl in rural Mississippi, December 10, 2007.[143]Human Rights Watch interview with Scott I., a recent high school graduate, inrural Mississippi,December 10, 2007.[144]Human Rights Watch interview with Bryce M., a high school teacher in theMississippi Delta, December3, 2007 ("If I send a kid out of class for a minor incident, theyusually get three-five licks and then they get sent back to my class.").[145]Human Rights Watch interview with Sean D., a recent high school graduate, Oxford, Mississippi,December 14, 2007.[146]Paulo Pinheiro (Independent Expert), United Nations Secretary-General's Studyon Violence against Children, WorldReport on Violence against Children (Geneva:UN, 2006), p.53 (discussing a Save the Children Alliance survey of the impactof corporal punishment on younger children).[147]Human Rights Watch interview with Keshawn E., Jackson, Mississippi,December 7, 2007(referring to events in a suburban district).[148]Human Rights Watch interview with Tamika C., an 11-year-old girl, in rural Mississippi, December 10, 2007.[149]Human Rights Watch interview with Stuart J., Beaumont, Texas,February 19, 2008.[150]See Chapter III: Corporal Punishment in US Public Schools ("The Devil'sBargain": Choosing to be Beaten").[151]For example, Human Rights Watch interview with Sean D., a recent graduate, Oxford, Mississippi,December 14, 2007(describing the scheme at his high school).[152]Gentry High School, Indianola, Mississippi, "Discipline Referral," on file withHuman Rights Watch (indicating under "Issue(s) of Concern": "Defiance/DisrespectInsubordination"); [Name withheld] High School, Mississippi, "Office ReferralForm," on file with Human Rights Watch (indicating under "Misconduct Reported":"Defiance of staff/Disrespect").[153]Human Rights Watch interview with Brad G., Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[154]Human Rights Watch interview with Ben H., an eighth-grade boy in rural Mississippi, December 11, 2007.[155]Human Rights Watch interview with Brittany Y., who recently left high school, ruralMississippi, December 11, 2007.[156]Human Rights Watch interview with Sean D., recent highschool graduate, Oxford, Mississippi, December 14, 2007 (describing the scheme athis high school).[157]Compare, for example, Lord Elton, Committee of Enquiry into Discipline inSchools, UK Secretary of State for Education and Science, Enquiry into Discipline in Schools (London: 1989), pp. 64-65 (discussingthe efficacy of consistent discipline codes used to replace corporal punishmentin the United Kingdom after a nationwide ban).[158]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Catherine V., Washington, DC,November 7, 2007.[159]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Paula H., former high schoolteacher in the Mississippi Delta, currently based in Illinois, January 17, 2008.[160]Human Rights Watch interview with Shequita F., 19-year-old girl, Beaumont, Texas,February 19, 2008.[161]Human Rights Watch interview with Tiffany Bartlett (real name used withconsent), Austin, Texas, February 22, 2008 (referring to events at arural junior high school in the Mississippi Delta).[162]Human Rights Watch interview with Nakia D., twelfth-grade girl in the MississippiDelta, December 4, 2007; American Civil Liberties Union interview with HectorZ., twelfth-grade boy, Jackson, Mississippi, December 5, 2007; Human RightsWatch interview with Scott I., recent high school graduate, rural Mississippi,December 10, 2007.[163]Human Rights Watch interview with Haley K., recent high school graduate,Beaumont, Texas, February 20, 2008; Human Rights Watch interview with LaShellM., recent high school graduate, Beaumont, Texas, February 20, 2008 (LaShell'syounger brother was repeatedly paddled for fighting and for talking back to theteacher); Human Rights Watch interview with Mario T., recent high schoolgraduate, Odessa, Texas, February 25, 2008.[164]Human Rights Watch interview with Scott I., recent high school graduate, rural Mississippi, December 10, 2007.[165]American Civil Liberties Union interview with Hector Z., twelfth-grade boy, Jackson, Mississippi,December 5, 2007.[166]Human Rights Watch interview with Jake G., middle school student in north Mississippi, December 14, 2007.[167]Human Rights Watch interview with former high school teacher in major Mississippi school district, Jackson, Mississippi,December 5, 2007.[168]Human Rights Watch interview with a superintendent of a mid-sized urbandistrict in the Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[169]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment 8, para. 15(commenting on the Convention on the Rights of the Child, arts. 19, 28(2), and 37).[170]Ibid.[171]Ibid.[172]Human Rights Watch interview with Nakia D., high school senior, MississippiDelta, December 4, 2007.[173]Human Rights Watch group interview with Tom R. and Michelle R. (spouses), Hinds County, Mississippi,December 8, 2007;Human Rights Watch interview with Johnny McPhail (real name used with consent),Oxford, Mississippi,December 14, 2007.[174]US Department of Education, Office forCivil Rights (OCR), "Civil Rights Data Collection 2006," March 26, 2008,http://ocrdata.ed.gov/ocr2006rv30/xls/2006Projected.html (accessed August 8, 2008). The USDepartment of Education, Office for Civil Rights, has been conducting a biennialsurvey of the nation's public elementary and secondary schools since 1968. TheCivil Rights Data Collection is conducted pursuant to 34 C.F.R. Section100.6(b) of the Department of Education regulation implementing Title VI of theCivil Rights Act of 1964. Information is collected on enrollment anddiscipline, among other topics, by race and by gender. The data collection is arolling stratified sample of approximately 6,000 districts and 60,000 schoolswithin those districts, which facilitates state and national projections ofdata. The 2006 Civil Rights Data Collection contains information on 5,929public school districts and 62,484 schools in those school districts, andprovides information reflecting the 2006-2007 school year. OCR, "About the Data,"http://ocrdata.ed.gov/ocr2006rv30/aboutdat.html(accessed August 8, 2008); OCR, "Data Collection," http://ocrdata.ed.gov/ocr2006rv30/wdscoll.html(accessed August 8, 2008); Human Rights Watch telephone interview with anofficial at the US Department of Education who chose to remain anonymous,Washington, DC, April 15, 2008.[175]Corporal punishment is permitted in some form in Alabama (Ala. Code §16-28A-1), Arizona (Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 15-843B(2)), Arkansas (Ark. CodeAnn. § 6-18-503b.1), Colorado (Colo. Rev. Stat. § 22-32-109.1), Florida (Fla.Stat. § 1003.32), Georgia (Ga. Code Ann. § 20-2-730, 20-2-731), Idaho (IdahoCode Ann. § 33-1224), Indiana (Ind.Code § 31-34-1-15), Kansas (Kan. Stat. Ann. § 21-3609), Kentucky (Ky. Rev.Stat. Ann. § 503.110), Louisiana (La. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 17:223),Mississippi (Miss. Code Ann. § 37-11-57), Missouri(Mo. Rev. Stat. § 160-261), New Mexico (N.M.Stat. § 22-5-4-3), North Carolina (N.C. Gen.Stat. § 115C-391), Ohio (Ohio Rev. Code §3319.41), Oklahoma (Okla. Stat. tit. 21, § 844), South Carolina (S.C. Code Ann. § 59-63-260), Tennessee (Tenn. CodeAnn. § 49-6-4103), Texas (Tex.Penal Code Ann. § 9.62), and Wyoming (Wyo. Stat. Ann. §21-4-308). Global Initiative to End All Corporal Punishment of Children, "North America: summary of legal status of corporalpunishment of children," June 2007, http://www.endcorporalpunishment.org/pages/pdfs/charts/Chart-NorthAmerica.pdf(accessed July 18, 2008).There is debate among scholars and advocates as to whether 21 or 22 states inthe US currently permit corporal punishment, in part because there is somecontroversy as to whether certain states have bans on corporal punishment, orwhether it has merely fallen out of use. For instance, both RhodeIsland state law and the policy manuals of each RhodeIsland school district are silent on the issue; however, Rhode Island schooldistricts can only act pursuant to positive legal authorization. Thus, corporalpunishment is essentially outlawed in RhodeIsland. Parkinson, "Federal Court Treatment of Corporal Punishment in Public Schools:Jurisprudence that is Literally Shocking to the Conscience," South Dakota Law Review, p. 279, footnote30. In another example, South Dakota Codified Law 13-32-2 is ambiguous, statingthat "superintendents, principals, supervisors, and teachers and their aids andassistants, have the authority, to use the physical force that is reasonableand necessary for supervisory control over students." However, legislativehistory for this provision shows that the intent was "to repeal theauthorization to administer physical punishment or use of violence incorrecting a child." South Dakota HB-1142, 1990, on file with Human RightsWatch; Human Rights Watch telephone interview with an assistant attorney generalfor South Dakota (responsible for overseeingeducation in the state of SouthDakota), July 14, 2008.[176]OCR, "Civil Rights Data Collection 2006."[177]Ibid.[178]Andre R. Imbrogno, "Corporal Punishment in America's Public Schools and the UNConvention on the Rights of the Child: A Case for Nonratification," Journal of Law and Education, vol. 29,no. 2 (April 2000), p. 128 (giving an historical overview of the use ofcorporal punishment in the United States); Carl F. Kaestle, "Social Change,Discipline, and the Common School in Early Nineteenth-Century America," Journal of Interdisciplinary History,vol. 1, no. 1 (1978), pp. 3-5 (discussing the evolving attitudes to schooldiscipline in the 19th century); Barbara Finkelstein, "A Crucible ofContradictions: Historical Roots of Violence against Children in the UnitedStates," History of Education Quarterly,vol. 40, no. 1 (2000), pp. 1-4 (discussing the prevalence of violence againstchildren in the United States generally in the 19th century).[179]NJ Permanent Statutes, Education 18A:6-1.[180]The Center for Effective Discipline, "U.S.:Corporal Punishment and Paddling Statistics by State and Race, States BanningCorporal Punishment," 2008, http://www.stophitting.com/disatschool/statesBanning.php(accessed August 8, 2008).[181]OCR, "Elementary and Secondary School Survey 2000," http://ocrdata.ed.gov/ocr2000rv30/wdsdata.html(accessed August 8, 2008).[182]OCR,"Civil Rights DataCollection 2004," http://ocrdata.ed.gov/ocr2004rv30/wdsdata.html(accessed August 8, 2008).[183]OCR,"CivilRights Data Collection 2006."[184]Ibid.[185]Ibid.[186]Ibid. (In the 13 states that paddle more than 1,000 students per year, 0.384times as many white girls were paddled as might be expected given theirpercentage of the student population, whereas 0.795 times as many African-Americangirls were paddled, a disproportionality of 2.06.).[187]Defined here (and by the OCR) as students who qualify for federal servicesunder the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, sec. 504 (29 USCA Section 701 et seq.)("The term 'disability' means (A) except as otherwise provided in subparagraph(B), a physical or mental impairment that constitutes or results in asubstantial impediment to employment; or (B) for the purposes of sections 701,711, and 712 of this title and subchapters II, IV, V, and VII of this chapter,a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more majorlife activities") or under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act(IDEA) of 2004, sec. 602 (PL 108-446) (20 U.S.C. 1400) ("(A) In general. Theterm 'child with a disability' means a child (i) with mental retardation,hearing impairments (including deafness), speech or language impairments,visual impairments (including blindness), serious emotional disturbance(referred to in this title as 'emotional disturbance'), orthopedic impairments,autism, traumatic brain injury, other health impairments, or specific learningdisabilities; and (ii) who, by reason thereof, needs special education andrelated services. (B) Child aged 3–9 - The term 'child with a disability' for achild aged 3 through 9 (or any subset of that age range, including ages 3through 5), may, at the discretion of the State and the local educationalagency, include a child - (i) experiencing developmental delays, as defined bythe State and as measured by appropriate diagnostic instruments and procedures,in 1 or more of the following areas: physical development; cognitivedevelopment; communication development; social or emotional development; oradaptive development; and (ii) who, by reason thereof, needs special educationand related services.").[188]See Chapter VIII: The Use of Corporal Punishment against Specific Groups forfurther discussion of the use of corporal punishment against these students.[189]OCR, "Civil Rights Data Collection 2006." (39,093 of these students qualify forIDEA, and 2,879 qualify for section 504).[190]Ibid.[191]Ibid.[192]OCR, "Civil Rights Data Collection Individual School Report: ED102, ReportingRequirement," March 31, 2005,www.ed.gov/about/inits/ed/pbdmi/surveytool/crdcollection/ed102_inst.pdf(accessed August 8, 2008),p. 4 ("Enter the number of students who … received corporal punishment. Counteach student only once regardless of the number of times punished."); HumanRights Watch telephone interview with an official at the US Department ofEducation who chose to remain anonymous, Washington, DC, April 15, 2008(reporting that the OCR does not have the resources to perform external auditsof the school districts' reports, but noting that they do check that a districtdoes not report more corporal punishment than enrollment, which would indicatethat a school district reported number of instances, as opposed to number ofstudents).[193]Human Rights Watch interview with Tiffany Bartlett (real name used withconsent), Austin, Texas, February 22, 2008 (referring to a schooldistrict in the Mississippi Delta). Students report similar information. See,for example, Human Rights Watch interview with Peter E., recent high schoolgraduate, Beaumont, Texas, February 19, 2008 (noting that at his high school, "Typicallywe weren't written up for licks. It doesn't end up in the office, no one knowswhat you did.").[194]Human Rights Watch interview with Chantal K., Mississippi Delta, December 3, 2007.[195]Human Rights Watch interview with a superintendent of a mid-sized urbandistrict in the Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[196]Human Rights Watch interview with Brad G., Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[197]Human Rights Watch interview with Mei N., Mississippi Delta, December 4, 2007.[198]Human Rights Watch interview with Tiffany Bartlett (real name used withconsent), Austin, Texas, February 22, 2008 (referring to a schooldistrict in the Mississippi Delta).[199]Pinheiro, World Report on Violence againstChildren, p.129 (discussing the educational environment produced byphysical punishment, and arguing that, in terms of systemic violence, "thebehaviour of the school heads, teachers, and other school staff is alsocritical. If they engage in abusive behavior and show disrespect for therights, comfort and safety of others, then children will follow their example.").[200]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Ralph McLaney (real name used withconsent), Alabama, October 26, 2007; follow-up telephone interview, Alabama,November 6, 2007.[201]Human Rights Watch interview with Brad G., teacher, Mississippi Delta, December12, 2007; Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Johnny McPhail (real nameused with consent), parent, Oxford, Mississippi, November 14, 2007.[202]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Chris Myers Asch (real name usedwith consent), a former elementary school teacher in the Mississippi Delta,Washington, DC, December 19, 2007.[203]Human Rights Watch interview with Blake C., Beaumont, Texas,February 19, 2008.[204]Human Rights Watch interview with Kimberly P., Mississippi Delta, December 4, 2007.[205]Ibid.[206]Human Rights Watch interview with Ben H., rural east Mississippi, December 11, 2007 (interviewed in the presenceof family).[207]Human Rights Watch interview with Tamika C., then in fifth grade, rural Mississippi, December 10, 2007.[208]Human Rights Watch interview with Ruth W., parent, Austin,Texas, February 22, 2008 (referring to events in Beaumont, Texas).[209]Human Rights Watch interview with Brittany Y., who recently left high school, ruralMississippi, December 11, 2007.[210]Human Rights Watch interview with Shannon Q., Midland, Texas,February 25, 2008(interviewed in the presence of another witness).[211]Human Rights Watch interview with Beverly Shields (real name used with consent),parent, Cumberland, Mississippi,December 11, 2007(referring to events in a suburban Mississippidistrict).[212]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Lanesra P., Rochester, NY,November 9, 2007.[213]"Corporal Punishment in Schools: Position Paper of the Society for AdolescentMedicine," Journal of Adolescent Health,p. 389 ("Medical complications may prevent students from returning to schoolfor days, weeks, or even longer. Reported medical findings include abrasions,severe muscle injury, extensive hematomas, whiplash damage, life-threateningfat hemorrhage, and others.").[214]Human Rights Watch interview with Brittany Y., who recently left high school, ruralMississippi, December 11, 2007.[215]Human Rights Watch interview with Janet Y., rural Mississippi, December 11,2007; "Emergency Department Physician Report," February 12, 2001, on file withHuman Rights Watch (noting symmetrical bruises and welts on the buttocks, each2 inches wide and 2 ¼ inches long).[216]Human Rights Watch interview with Janet Y., rural Mississippi, December 11, 2007 (the mother did not keep arecord of the sheriff's report at the time).[217]Human Rights Watch interview with Brittany Y., who recently left high school, ruralMississippi, December 11, 2007.[218]"Chart Document," The Women's Group of [name of location withheld], March 22, 2007, on filewith Human Rights Watch (noting, "Large area of bruising on both hipsconsistent with paddle trauma. Tender to touch.").[219][Name of location withheld] County Sheriff Department, Statements from Motherand Daughter, March 20, 2007,on file with Human Rights Watch.[220]Human Rights Watch interview with Robert H., seventh-grade boy, rural east Mississippi, December 11, 2007.[221]Human Rights Watch interview with Rhonda H., rural east Mississippi, December 11, 2007.[222]Ibid.[223]Early ChildhoodCenter, "Student-Parent Handbook,2007-2008" [name of location withheld], on file with Human Rights Watch (referringto the [name withheld] School District Student Code of Conduct, on file withHuman Rights Watch).[224]Human Rights Watch interview with an attorney in private practice representingRose T. (mother of the three-year-old boy), rural Texas, February 26, 2008.[225]Ibid.[226]"18-year-old student sues over paddling," Associated Press, January 31, 2005.[227]Human Rights Watch interview with LaShell M., Mississippi Delta, December 4, 2007.[228]Human Rights Watch interview with Jake G., north Mississippi, December 14, 2007 (interviewed in the presenceof his guardian).[229]Human Rights Watch interview with Tiffany Bartlett (real name used withconsent), Austin, Texas, February 22, 2008.[230]Human Rights Watch interview with Chelsea S., recent high school graduate, Houston, Texas, February 18, 2008(referring to events in the MidlandIndependentSchoolDistrict).[231]Human Rights Watch interview with Lisa P., a former teacher in the MississippiDelta, Austin, Texas, February 22, 2008.[232]Human Rights Watch interview with Tamika C., rural Mississippi, December 10, 2007.[233]Human Rights Watch interview with Allison Guthrie (real name used with consent),Houston, Texas,February 18, 2008(referring to events in a Dallassuburb).[234]Human Rights Watch interview with Brittany Y., who recently left high school, ruralMississippi, December 11, 2007.[235]Human Rights Watch interview with Jimmy Dunne (real name used with consent), Houston, Texas,February 19, 2008.[236]Human Rights Watch interview with a superintendent of a mid-sized urbandistrict in the Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[237]Human Rights Watch interview with Ken Zornes, former Dallasschool board president, Austin,Texas, February 22, 2008.[238]PontotocCountySchool District,"Teacher Handbook," http://www.pcsd.k12.ms.us/Resources/Teacherhb.pdf (accessedJuly 18, 2008).[239]GentryHighSchool, IndianolaSchool District, "Procedures,"on file with Human Rights Watch, p. 43.[240]Irwin A. Hyman and Donna C. Perone, "The Other Side of School Violence:Educator Policies and Practices that May Contribute to Student Misbehavior," Journal of School Psychology, vol. 36,no. 1 (1998), p. 18 (discussing how aggression and victimization of students byteachers can lead to student misbehavior, aggression, and alienation).[241]AmericanAcademy of Pediatrics, Committee onSchool Health, "Corporal Punishment in Schools," Pediatrics, vol. 106, no. 2 (August 2000), http://aappolicy.aappublications.org/cgi/content/full/pediatrics%3b106/2/343(accessed August 8, 2008),p. 343.[242]Pinheiro, World Report on Violence againstChildren, p.129-130 (discussing studies from many different countries onthe social impact of corporal punishment and other forms of violence againstchildren in schools).[243]United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization, Eliminating Corporal Punishment – The WayForward to Constructive Child Discipline (UNESCO, 2005), Executive Summary,p. 2 (discussing corporal punishment both at home and in schools).[244]Stephen S. Owen, "The Relationship Between Social Capital and CorporalPunishment in Schools: A Theoretical Inquiry," Youth and Society, vol. 37, no. 1 (2005), p. 88; Hyman and Perone,"The Other Side of School Violence," Journalof School Psychology, p. 18 (arguing that while there is not yet adefinitive body of work proving a connection between school paddling and schoolviolence, based on social learning and modeling theory one would expectincreasing aggression as a function of the frequency, intensity, and durationof the paddlings).[245]"Corporal Punishment in Schools: Position Paper of the Society for AdolescentMedicine," Journal of Adolescent Health,p. 388.[246]Human Rights Watch interview with Sean D., Oxford, Mississippi,December 14, 2007.[247]Human Rights Watch interview with Ollye B. Shirley (real name used withconsent), Jackson, Mississippi, December 5, 2007.[248]Human Rights Watch interview with Doreen W., Mississippi Delta, December 4, 2007.[249]"Corporal Punishment in Schools: Position Paper of the Society for AdolescentMedicine," Journal of Adolescent Health,p. 388 ("punished children become more rebellious and are more likely todemonstrate vindictive behavior"); Pinheiro, World Report on Violence against Children, p.132 (reviewing NorthAmerican studies that have found a direct correlation between abusive behaviorfrom educators and the prevalence of violence or bullying among children).[250]Pinheiro, World Report on Violence againstChildren, p. 130 (noting that children who are physically punished may beless inclined to resist temptation, to empathize with others, or to exercisemoral judgment, and more inclined to engage in disorderly conduct against theirpeers).[251]Hyman and Perone, "The Other Side of School Violence," Journal of School Psychology, p. 19 (stating that "almost allviolent delinquents have a history of corporal punishment, often at home, inschool, and not infrequently, in correctional institutions[,]" and noting thatmany school psychologists "will attest to the anger, rage, and desire forrevenge that corporal punishment of any type instills in recipients, especiallythose who have a history of abuse at home.").[252]Human Rights Watch interview with Ollye B. Shirley (real name used withconsent), Jackson, Mississippi, December 5, 2007.[253]Human Rights Watch interview with Matthew S., middle school student in theMississippi Delta, December12, 2007.[254]Human Rights Watch interview with Corinne J., rural Mississippi, December 10, 2007.[255]Human Rights Watch interview with Brad G., middle school teacher in Marks, Mississippi, December 12, 2007.[256]Human Rights Watch interview with Elizabeth Savage (real name used withconsent), former teacher in the Mississippi Delta, New Orleans, Louisiana,December 9, 2007.[257]Pinheiro, World Report on Violence againstChildren, p. 130 ("In the Regional Consultations for this study, physicaland psychological punishment … were repeatedly reported as reasons forabsenteeism, dropping-out, and lack of motivation for academic achievement.").[258]End Physical Punishment of Children (EPOCH), "Newsletter," vol. 1, issue 11(Fall 2007), http://www.stophitting.com/disathome/newsletter/EPOCH_Newsletter_2007v1Iss11.pdf(accessed August 8, 2008).Whiteside continues, "We feel it is important for public health workers,teachers, and others concerned for the emotional and physical health ofchildren and youth to support the adoption of alternative methods for theachievement of self-control and responsible behavior in children and adolescents."[259]Human Rights Watch interview with Matthew S., Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[260]Human Rights Watch interview with Tiffany Bartlett (real name used withconsent), Austin, Texas, February 22, 2008 (referring to events at arural junior high school in the Mississippi Delta).[261]Human Rights Watch interview with Wade M., high school student, MississippiDelta, December 12, 2007.[262]Human Rights Watch interview with Haley K., recent high school graduate, Beaumont, Texas,February 20, 2008.[263]International Save the Children Alliance, "Ending Physical and HumiliatingPunishment of Children – Making it Happen," Submission to the United NationsSecretary-General's Study on Violence against Children, Stockholm, Sweden,2005.[264]Sandra de Hotman, "Dissertation: A Comparison of School Systems in AlabamaUsing Corporal Punishment and Not Using Corporal Punishment on SelectedDemographic Variables," unpublished document on file with Human Rights Watch(1997) (finding a statistically significant correlation between districts thatuse corporal punishment and districts with higher drop-out rates).[265]Elizabeth Thompson Gershoff, "Corporal Punishment by Parents and AssociatedChild Behaviors and Experiences: A Meta-Analytic and Theoretical Review," Psychological Bulletin, vol. 128, no.4(2002), p. 541 (summarizing academic studies suggesting a link between corporalpunishment and domestic violence, and finding that "if corporal punishment isassociated with a general aggressive tendency in adulthood, this aggressionalso may manifest in relationships with family members, particularly with achild or spouse."). For additional commentary, including arguments on the otherside of this point, see: Diana Baumrind, Robert E. Lazerlere, and Philip A.Cowan, "Ordinary Physical Punishment: Is it Harmful? Comment on Gershoff," Psychological Bulletin, vol. 128, no. 4(2002), http://www.apa.org/journals/releases/bul1284580.pdf (accessed August 8,2008) (stressing that Gershoff's review may be skewed by overreliance on severeviolence, and that it does not prove a causal relationship between corporalpunishment and domestic violence, only a correlation between the two); "CorporalPunishment in Schools: Position Paper of the Society for Adolescent Medicine," Journal of Adolescent Health, p. 389(reviewing Gershoff's analysis and stating that "the best evidence indicatesthat children and adolescents subjected to corporal punishment are also morelikely to utilize violence in their own families in the future").[266]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharrie L., Indianola, Mississippi,December 4, 2007(referring to events in a nearby school district).[267]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Libby Dunagan (real name used withconsent), Paris, Texas, March 5, 2008.[268]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Johnny McPhail (real name used withconsent), parent, Oxford, Mississippi, November 14, 2007.[269]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharrie L., Mississippi, December 4, 2007.[270]"CorporalPunishment in Schools: Position Paper of the Society for Adolescent Medicine," Journal of Adolescent Health, p. 388.[271]"Corporal Punishment in Schools: Position Paper of the Society for AdolescentMedicine," Journal of Adolescent Health,p. 390 (discussing alternatives to corporal punishment).[272]See, for example, Sam Dillon, "States' InflatedDataObscureHowFewFinishHighSchool," The New YorkTimes, March 20, 2008(asserting that Mississippi,like other states, uses an inflated graduation rate for federal reportingrequirements and is under pressure to establish better goals for improvinggraduation rates).[273]National Education Association, "2006-2007 NEA Resolutions," Resolution B-59:Discipline, http://www.nea.org/handbook/images/resolutions.pdf (accessed August 8, 2008), p. 30 (adoptedat the 2007 NEA Rep. Assembly).[274]Lord Elton, Committee of Enquiry into Discipline in Schools, UK Secretary ofState for Education and Science, Enquiry into Discipline in Schools(London: 1989), p. 63, para. 50. For additional discussion, see Lord Elton, Enquiry into Discipline in Schools, p.41 (giving specific examples of good classroom management, including knowingpupils as individuals, planning and organizing the classroom, emphasizingpositive behavior as well as good work, and making sparing and consistent useof reprimands and punishments).[275]US Department of Education, Office of Special Education Programs (OSEP),Technical Assistance Center on Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports,"School-Wide PBS," http://www.pbis.org/schoolwide.htm(accessed August 8, 2008) (giving definitions and details of positive behaviorsupport (PBS)).[276]Major school districts have initiated such changes. For examples, see LosAngeles Unified School District (LAUSD), "Discipline Foundation Policy:School-Wide Positive Behavior Support," March 27, 2007, http://notebook.lausd.net/pls/ptl/docs/PAGE/CA_LAUSD/FLDR_ORGANIZATIONS/STUDENT_HEALTH_HUMAN_SERVICES/SHHS/DISCIPLINE_POLICY/BUL-3638.0.PDF(accessed August 8, 2008) (requiring every school in the district to adopt andimplement a school-wide positive behavior support discipline plan); KentuckyGeneral Assembly, "Legislative Declaration on Goals for Commonwealth's Schools-ModelCurriculum Framework," July 14, 2000, http://www.lrc.ky.gov/krs/158-00/6451.PDF(accessed August 8, 2008) (providing a framework for schools to incorporatecharacter education into curriculum to eliminate barriers to achievement); "ChicagoPublic Schools Policy Manual: Student Code of Conduct for the Chicago PublicSchools for the 2007-2008 School Year," June 27, 2007, Section 705.5, http://policy.cps.k12.il.us/documents/705.5.pdf(accessed August 8, 2008) (revising the "Student Code of Conduct" to reflect acomprehensive approach to student discipline and including components ofrestorative justice, alternatives to out-of-school suspension, and othermeasures aimed at creating a safe and positive environment for students andschool personnel).[277]US Department of Education, Office of Special Education and RehabilitativeServices, "Safeguarding our Children: An Action Guide," April 21, 2000, http://www.ed.gov/admins/lead/safety/actguide/action_guide.pdf(accessed August 8, 2008), p. 12 (noting that positive discipline is based onthree important characteristics: "[a]n explanation of why the behavior is aproblem, an explanation of which rule was violated, and the provision ofopportunities to learn appropriate behaviors and to correct mistakes").[278]Ibid., p. 1.[279]This guide is supported by the American Association of School Administrators,the American Federation of Teachers, the American Psychiatric Association, theAmerican School Counselor Association, the National Association of ElementarySchool Principals, the Council of Administrators of Special Education, theNational Association of Secondary School Principals, the National EducationAssociation, the National PTA, and the National School Boards Association,among others. US Department of Education, "Safeguarding our Children: An ActionGuide," inside front cover.[280]Ibid., p. 11.[281]Ibid.[282]Ibid., p. 12.[283]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Morgan Barth (real name used withconsent), former teacher in an Arkansas district that uses corporal punishment,and current academic dean at Elm City College Prep, New Haven, Connecticut,November 7, 2007 ("We have very high expectations for student behavior, wespend a great deal of time thinking about school culture … this encompasses afeeling that everyone will work hard to climb the mountain to college.").[284]OSEP, "School-Wide PBS."[285]US Department of Education, "Safeguarding our Children: An Action Guide," p.13.[286]Illinois Positive Behavior Interventions & Supports Network, "2005-06Progress Report," February 2007, http://www.pbisillinois.org/Downloads/Annual%20Reports/FY06_AnnualRpt_FINAL.pdf(accessedJune 24, 2008), p. 33.[287]Harvard University Civil Rights Project, "Opportunities Suspended: TheDevastating Consequences of Zero Tolerance and School Discipline," June 2000,http://eric.ed.gov/ERICDocs/data/ericdocs2sql/content_storage_01/0000019b/80/17/21/dd.pdf(accessed July 19, 2008),p. 32.[288]Ibid., pp. 33-34.[289]Nedra Skaggs Wheeler and Alice Glover Anderson, "Creating Classrooms in RuralSettings that Prevent Discipline Problems," Annual National ConferenceProceedings of the American Council on Rural Special Education, March 2002, http://eric.ed.gov/ERICDocs/data/ericdocs2sql/content_storage_01/0000019b/80/19/ea/8f.pdf(accessed August 8, 2008).[290]Southern Poverty Law Center, MississippiYouth Justice Project, "Effective Discipline for Student Success: Reducing Studentand Teacher Dropout Rates in Mississippi,"2008, http://www.splcenter.org/images/dynamic/main/effective_discipline.pdf (accessedAugust 8, 2008), p.7.[291]Justice Matters Institute, "Turning To Each Other, Not On Each Other: HowSchoolCommunities Prevent Racial Bias in School Discipline," 2000, p. 38.[292]Ibid.[293]Jackson Public School Board Meeting Minutes, July 16, 1990, on file with Human Rights Watch.[294]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Paula H., former high schoolteacher in the Mississippi Delta, currently based in Illinois, January 17, 2008("I just knew it wasn't an effective form of discipline; it didn't help me atall in the classroom as a teacher, and I don't like children being hit."); "CorporalPunishment in Schools: Position Paper of the Society for Adolescent Medicine," Journal of Adolescent Health, p. 388 ("Noclear evidence exists that such punishment leads to better control in theclassroom…. Physically punishing children has never been shown to enhance moralcharacter development, increase the students' respect for teachers or otherauthority figures in general, intensify the teacher's control in class, or evenprotect the teacher.").[295]Human Rights Watch interview with Brad G., middle school teacher, MississippiDelta, December 12, 2007.[296]Human Rights Watch interview with a superintendent of a mid-sized urbandistrict in the Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[297]Human Rights Watch interview with Tasha R., Jackson, Mississippi,December 7, 2007.[298]Human Rights Watch interview with Elizabeth Savage (real name used withconsent), former teacher in the Mississippi Delta, New Orleans, Louisiana,December 9, 2007.[299]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Chris Myers Asch (real name usedwith consent), a former elementary school teacher in the Mississippi Delta,Washington, DC, December 19, 2007.[300]Human Rights Watch interview with Wade M., Jackson, Mississippi,December 7, 2007.[301]Human Rights Watch interview with Elizabeth Savage (real name used withconsent), former teacher in the Mississippi Delta, New Orleans, Louisiana,December 9, 2007.[302]Human Rights Watch interview with superintendent of a mid-sized urban districtin the Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007 ("The parent would say 'I prefer mychild to be in class rather than in [in-school suspension] so why don't youpaddle him.'"); For further discussion, see Michael Dobbs, "US Students StillGetting the Paddle: Corporal Punishment Laws Often Reflect Regional Chasms," Washington Post, February 21, 2004.[303]Murray Straus, University of New Hampshire, "Demystifying the Defenses ofCorporal Punishment," 2001, http://pubpages.unh.edu/~mas2/CP64E.htm (accessed July19, 2008) (giving an overview of common arguments in support of corporalpunishment, in the context of a discussion of corporal punishment by parents);Gershoff, "Corporal Punishment by Parents and Associated Child Behaviors andExperiences," Psychological Bulletin,p. 541 (reviewing psychological studies on corporal punishment in the home andits effects on immediate compliance and moral internalization).[304]Greenville Public School District, "Corporal Punishment Survey," May 22, 2008,on file with Human Rights Watch.[305]Dobbs, "US Students Still Getting the Paddle," Washington Post.[306]The Most Reverend Desmond M. Tutu, Archbishop Emeritus, cited in GlobalInitiative to End All Corporal Punishment of Children, Ending Legalized Violence against Children (Global Report 2007):Following up the UN Secretary-General's Study on Violence against Children(Global Initiative: London, 2007), p. 3.[307]The UnitedMethodistChurch,"Policies Adopted by the United Methodist Church General Conference 5/04:Corporal Punishment by Parents and Caretakers," 2004,http://www.stophitting.com/religion/unitedmethodist.php (accessed August 8, 2008).[308]"Corporal Punishment in Schools: Position Paper of the Society for AdolescentMedicine," Journal of Adolescent Health,p. 389.[309]Ibid.[310]Human Rights Watch interview with Peter E., Beaumont, Texas,February 19, 2008.[311]Human Rights Watch interview with Sean D., Oxford, Mississippi,December 14, 2007(referring to a school district in the Mississippi Delta).[312]Human Rights Watch interview with Lisa P., a former teacher in the MississippiDelta, Austin, Texas, February 22, 2008.[313]Human Rights Watch interview with Brad G., Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[314]Human Rights Watch interview with a superintendent of a mid-sized urbandistrict in the Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[315]Human Rights Watch interview with Brad G., Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[316]OCR, "Civil Rights Data Collection 2006."[317]Elizabeth Thompson Gershoff, "Race and Gender Disparities in School Corporal Punishmentin the U.S.," paperpresented at the annual conference of the Society for the Psychological Studyof Social Issues, Chicago, Illinois, June 2008.[318]The 13 states that paddle more than 1,000 students per year are: Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia,Kentucky, Louisiana,Mississippi, Missouri,North Carolina, Oklahoma,South Carolina, Tennessee,and Texas.OCR, "Civil Rights Data Collection 2006."[319]Ibid. (OCR cautions that some of the data for Native American students in thissample should be used with caution due to large statistical uncertainty in theestimate, based on a standard error for each projected item.).[320]OCR, "Civil Rights Data Collection 2006."[321]Ibid.[322]Human Rights Watch interview with Mei N., a teacher at a high school,Mississippi Delta, December4, 2007.[323]Human Rights Watch interview with Myron Evans, II (real name used with consent),Jackson, Mississippi,December 7, 2007.[324]Human Rights Watch interview with Matthew S., Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[325]Human Rights Watch interview with Bre L., 16-year-old girl, Midland, Texas,February 25, 2008.[326]Human Rights Watch interview with Matthew S., Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[327]Elizabeth Thompson Gershoff, "Race and Gender Disparities in School Corporal Punishmentin the U.S."[328]OCR, "Civil Rights Data Collection 2006."[329]Ibid. The 13 states that paddle more than 1,000 students per year are: Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia,Kentucky, Louisiana,Mississippi, Missouri,North Carolina, Oklahoma,South Carolina, Tennessee,and Texas.[330]Ibid.[331]Ibid. (OCR cautions that some of the data for Native American students in thissample should be used with caution due to large statistical uncertainty in theestimate, based on a standard error for each projected item.).[332]Human Rights Watch interview with Abrea T., rural Mississippi, December 10, 2007.[333]OCR, "Civil Rights Data Collection 2006" (African-American boysmake up 12.6 percent of the student body in the 13 states with high rates ofpaddling, but 26.1 percent of those paddled; Native American boys make up o.6percent of the student body, but 1.9 percent of those paddled. OCR cautions that some of the data for Native Americanstudents in this sample should be used with caution due to large statisticaluncertainty in the estimate, based on a standard error for each projected item.).[334]Ibid. (White boys make up 26.6 percent of the student population in the 13states with high rates of paddling, but 43.7 percent of those paddled.).[335]Ibid. (Native American boys are two times as likely to be paddled as might beexpected, though there were only 515 Native American boys in the Mississippipublic school system in the 2006-2007 school year.).[336]Ibid.[337]Ibid. (78.3 percent of those paddled nationwide are boys, whereas only 21.7percent of those paddled are girls.).[338]Ibid. (In the 13 states that paddle heavily, there were 2,042,779 African-Americangirls in the student population, and 21,527 African-American girls who werepaddled in the 2006-2007 school year, meaning that African-American girls havea 0.0105 probability of receiving corporal punishment. White girls have a0.00509 probability of receiving corporal punishment, meaning that the relativerisk for African-American girls is 2.07.).[339]Ibid.[340]Ibid.[341]Human Rights Watch interview with Ollye B. Shirley (real name used withconsent), Jackson, Mississippi, December 5, 2007.[342]OCR, "Civil Rights Data Collection 2006."[343]Gershoff, "Race and Gender Disparities in School Corporal Punishment in the U.S."[344]Human Rights Watch interview with Abrea T., rural Mississippi, December 10, 2007.[345]"Proclamation Signed by African American Leaders Opposing School CorporalPunishment," compiled by Dr. Alvin Poussaint and End Physical Punishment ofChildren (EPOCH-USA), December 2004, http://www.thehittingstopshere.com/hsh-a2.htm(accessed August 8, 2008).[346]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Catherine V., former elementaryschool teacher at a school district in Mississippi,Washington, DC, November 7, 2007.[347]Human Rights Watch interview with Suzanne G., Oxford, Mississippi,December 14, 2007.[348]Human Rights Watch interview with Ron C., Jackson,Mississippi, December 5, 2007.[349]Human Rights Watch interviews withparents in Indianola, Mississippi on December 4, 2007 and Eupora, Mississippion December 11, 2007, and with high school students in Sunflower, Mississippion December 4, 2007 and Jackson, Mississippi on December 5, 2007.[350]Human Rights Watch interview with Zack T., rural Mississippi, December 10, 2007.[351]Human Rights Watch interview with LaShell M., Mississippi Delta, December 4, 2007.[352]Human Rights Watch interview with a superintendent of a mid-sized urbandistrict in the Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[353]Human Rights Watch interview with Doreen W., December 4, 2007.[354]Human Rights Watch interview with Allison Guthrie (real name used withconsent), Houston, Texas, February 18, 2008.[355]Human Rights Watch interview with Shannon Q., Midland, Texas,February 25, 2008.[356]Human Rights Watch interview with Tammy K., Beaumont, Texas,February 19, 2008.[357]Human Rights Watch interview with Jordan Riak, executive director of Parentsand Teachers Against Violence in Education, California, October 1, 2007. Perhaps as a way to negatethese overtones, some schools in districts investigated by Human Rights Watchuse female paddlers or witnesses when teenage girls are hit.[358]Human Rights Watch interview with Brad G., teacher, Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[359]For the purposes of this statistical discussion, "specialeducation students" refers to students who are qualified for federal assistanceunder IDEA or section 504.[360]OCR, "Civil Rights Data Collection 2006" (39,093 of these students qualify forIDEA, and 2,879 qualify for Section 504).[361]Ibid. (In Mississippi,5,763 of these students qualify for assistance under IDEA, and 68 qualify for assistanceunder section 504. In Texas,9,055 of these students fall under IDEA and 1,167 fall under section 504.).[362]As discussed above, students may qualify for assistance either through IDEA orunder section 504. This discussion of disproportionality specifically examinesstudents who fall under IDEA as information on the IDEA student body is morereadily available.[363]OCR, "Civil Rights Data Collection 2006" (49,197 students received corporalpunishment in Texas in the 2006-2007 school year, and 9,055 of them, or 18.4percent, qualified for assistance under IDEA.).[364]Ibid. (There were 4,557,140 students in Texas in the 2006-2007 school year, ofwhom 489,850, or 10.7 percent, qualified for assistance under IDEA.).[365]Ibid. (There were 38,131 students who received corporal punishment inMississippi in the 2006-2007 school year, of whom 5,763, or 15.1 percent,qualified for assistance under IDEA. Of the 506,397 students in Mississippi publicschools in the 2006-2007 school year, 62,461, or 12.2 percent, qualified forassistance under IDEA.).[366]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Louise P., Illinois, November 19,2007 (interviewed in the presence of a family member) ("The Special Ed kids hada greater chance of misbehaving in class-some of them had identified behaviorproblems in class. Their needs weren't being met by the school.").[367]Human Rights Watch interview with Johnny McPhail (real name used with consent),Oxford, Mississippi,December 14, 2007.[368]Human Rights Watch interview with Tom R., HindsCounty, Mississippi, December 8, 2007(interviewed with Michelle R., spouse).[369]Human Rights Watch interview with Michelle R., Hinds County, Mississippi,December 8, 2007(interviewed with Tom R., spouse).[370]Human Rights Watch interview with Michelle R., Hinds County, Mississippi,December 8, 2007(interviewed with Tom R., spouse).[371]Human Rights Watch interview with Tom R., HindsCounty, Mississippi, December 8, 2007(interviewed with Michelle R., spouse).[372]Human Rights Watch interview with Michelle R., Hinds County, Mississippi,December 8, 2007(interviewed with Tom R., spouse).[373]Human Rights Watch interview with Tom R., HindsCounty, Mississippi, December 8, 2007(interviewed with Michelle R., spouse).[374]Human Rights Watch interview with Michelle R., Hinds County, Mississippi,December 8, 2007(interviewed with Tom R., spouse).[375]Human Rights Watch interview with Doreen W., Mississippi Delta, December 4, 2007.[376]Human Rights Watch interview with Johnny McPhail (real name used with consent),Oxford, Mississippi,December 14, 2007.[377]Human Rights Watch interview with Beverly Shields (real name used with consent),Cumberland, Mississippi, December 11, 2007.[378]Human Rights Watch interview with Michelle R., Hinds County, Mississippi,December 8, 2007(interviewed with Tom R., spouse).[379]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Louise P., Chicago, Illinois,November 19, 2007(interviewed with family member).[380]Miss. CodeAnn. Section 37-11-57. Compare with Arkansaslaw, which specifically permits the use of corporal punishment, Ark. Code Ann6-18.[381]Tex. Educ. Code Section 37.102, Tex. Penal Code Section9.62; Mississippi Torts Claims Act, Miss. Code Ann. Section 11-46-7 and Miss. Code Ann. Section 11-46-9(1)(x).[382]37 Tex.Admin. Code Section 95.1.[383]40 Tex.Admin. Code Section 748.2303.[384]40 Tex.Admin. Code Section 749.1003.[385]2007 MS Reg Text 112699.[386]Mississippi State Department of Education, "Instructor's Guide for TrainingSchool Bus Drivers," http://www.healthyschoolsms.org/healthy_school_environment/documents/instructorguide.pdf(accessedAugust 8, 2008),p. 10.[387]Miss. CodeAnn. Section 37-11-54.[388]While corporal punishment is prohibited under international law, the Committeeon the Rights of the Child permits the use of restraint in exceptionalcircumstances, noting that "detailed guidance and training is also required,both to minimize the necessity to use restraint and to ensure that any methodsused are safe and proportionate to the situation and do not involve thedeliberate infliction of pain as a form of control." UN Committee on the Rightsof the Child, General Comment 8, para 15.[389]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with Ralph McLaney (real name used withconsent), Alabama,October 26, 2007and November 6, 2007.[390]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with a superintendent of a smalldistrict in east Mississippi,April 14, 2008.[391]Human Rights Watch interview with Michelle R., Hinds County, Mississippi,December 8, 2007.[392]Human Rights Watch interview with Joseph O., Mississippi, December 5, 2007.[393]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Catherine V., former teacher in theMississippi Delta, Washington, DC, November 7, 2007; Human Rights Watchtelephone interview with Charlotte M., former teacher in the Mississippi Delta,New Haven, Connecticut, November 16, 2007.[394]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Catherine V., former teacher in theMississippi Delta, Washington,DC, November 7, 2007.[395]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Chris Myers Asch (real name usedwith consent), a former elementary school teacher in the Mississippi Delta,Washington, DC, December 19, 2007.[396]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Paula H., former high schoolteacher in the Mississippi Delta, currently based in Illinois, January 17, 2008.[397]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Charlotte M., former teacher in theMississippi Delta, New Haven,Connecticut, November 16, 2007.[398]Georgia E. Frye, "Carver's former assistant principal condemns paddling," Meridian Star, March 25, 2004 (describing Mr.McLaney's resignation).[399]Dobbs, "US Students Still Getting the Paddle," Washington Post (discussing how McLaney resigned "when it becameclear to him that the alternative was to be fired for insubordination").[400]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with Ralph McLaney (real name used withconsent), Alabama,October 26, 2007and November 6, 2007.[401]Human Rights Watch was unable to obtain reliable statistics on the number ofparents who chose to opt out of corporal punishment. One district, the GreenvillePublicSchool District in Mississippi, estimated that 30 percent ofparents chose to opt out. Greenville Public School District, "Corporal PunishmentSurvey," May 22, 2008, on file with Human Rights Watch.[402]Human Rights Watch interview with Janet Y., Mississippi, December 11, 2007.[403]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Louise P., Chicago, Illinois,November 19, 2007(interviewed in the presence of a family member).[404]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with a superintendent of a smalldistrict in east Mississippi,April 14, 2008.[405]Midland Independent School District, "Student-Parent Handbook, 2007-2008," onfile with Human Rights Watch, p. 36.[406]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Catherine V., Washington, DC,November 7, 2007.[407]Tyler Independent School District, "Student Discipline," November 21, 2005, onfile with Human Rights Watch, p. 2.[408]Human Rights Watch interview with Kristin S., Midland,Texas, February 25, 2008 (referring to events in MidlandIndependentSchool District).[409]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Charlotte M., New Haven, Connecticut,November 16, 2007.[410]Rosebud-Lott Independent School District, "Rosebud-Lott Student Handbook,2006-2007"; Rosebud-Lott Independent School District, "Rosebud-Lott StudentCode of Conduct," August 16, 2005; Quinlan Independent School District,"Student Handbook, 2007-2008"; Quinlan Independent School District, "StudentCode of Conduct, 2007-2008"; Marshall Independent School District, "StudentCode of Conduct," July 18, 2006; Paris Independent School District, "DisciplineManagement Plan and Student Code of Conduct," August 2007, all on file withHuman Rights Watch.[411]PearlPublicSchool District,"Pearl High School, Student Handbook, Grades 9-12, 2007-2008, " http://www.pearl.k12.ms.us/news/downloads/StudentHandbook2007.pdf(accessed August 8, 2008).[412]Human Rights Watch interview with Mary Schwartz (real name used with consent),Alpine, Texas,February 24, 2008.[413]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Paula H., Illinois, January 17, 2008.[414]Human Rights Watch interview with Leah F., rural west Texas, February 23, 2008.[415]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Ralph McLaney (real name used withconsent), Alabama,October 26, 2007.[416]Human Rights Watch interview with Beverly Shields (real name used with consent),Cumberland, Mississippi, December 11, 2007.[417]Ibid.[418]Ibid.[419]Human Rights Watch interview with Johnny McPhail (real name used with consent),Oxford, Mississippi,December 14, 2007.[420]Ibid.[421]Human Rights Watch interview with Janet Y., Mississippi, December 11, 2007.[422]"Chart Document," The Women's Group of [name of location withheld], March 22, 2007, on filewith Human Rights Watch (noting "large area of bruising on both hips consistentwith paddle trauma. Tender to touch.").[423]Human Rights Watch interview with Leah F., rural west Texas, February 23, 2008.[424]Human Rights Watch interview with AndreaN., rural east Texas,February 28, 2008.[425]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Chris Myers Asch (real name usedwith consent), a former elementary school teacher in the Mississippi Delta,Washington, DC, December 19, 2007.[426]Human Rights Watch interview with Abrea T., who recently left high school,rural Mississippi,December 10, 2007.[427]Human Rights Watch group interview with two parents, Hinds County, Mississippi,December 8, 2007.[428]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharrie L., Indianola, Mississippi,December 4, 2007.[429]Convention on the Rights of the Child,preamble ("Bearing in mind that, as indicated in the Declaration of the Rightsof the Child, 'the child, by reason of his physical and mental immaturity,needs special safeguards and care, including appropriate legalprotection[.]'").[430]Ibid., art. 5 ("States Partiesshall respect the responsibilities, rights, and duties of parents or, whereapplicable, the members of the extended family or community as provided for bythe local custom, legal guardians or other persons legally responsible for thechild, to provide, in a manner consistent with the evolving capacities of thechild, appropriate direction and guidance in the exercise by the child of therights recognized in the present Convention.").[431]Human Rights Watch group interview with Michelle and Tom R., Hinds County,Mississippi, December 8, 2007; Human Rights Watch interview with Janet Y.,Mississippi, December 11, 2007; Human Rights Watch group interview with RhondaH., Ben H., and Robert H., Mississippi, December 11, 2007; Human Rights Watchtelephone interview with Chris B., north Mississippi, January 14, 2008; HumanRights Watch interview with Leah F., rural west Texas, February 23, 2008; HumanRights Watch interview with Faye L., rural east Texas, February 26, 2008; Human Rights Watch interview with Andrea N.,rural east Texas, February 28, 2008; Human Rights Watch telephone interviewwith Rose T., east Texas, March 4, 2008.[432]Human Rights Watch interview with AndreaN., rural east Texas,February 28, 2008.[433]Human Rights Watch interview with Leah F., rural west Texas, February 23, 2008.[434]Human Rights Watch group interview with Rhonda H., Ben H., and Robert H., Mississippi, December 11, 2007.[435]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Chris B., north Mississippi, January 14, 2008.[436]Human Rights Watch interview with Leah F., rural west Texas, February 23, 2008.[437]State employees are typically shielded from liability in certain ways forofficial actions taken within the scope of their employment duties, under theirindividual states' "Sovereign Immunity" statutes. In states that use corporalpunishment, this means that the administration of physical punishment, as longas it is "reasonable" and in conformity with the school district's policies,may be considered an official act of maintaining order and discipline, andtherefore protected. Such is the case in Kentucky,Arizona, Ohio,Oklahoma, and Louisiana. See, for example, in Kentucky, Carr v. Wright, 423 S.W.2d 521 (Ct. App.Ky., 1968), Wood v. Bd. of Educ. ofDanville, 412 S.W.2d 877 (Ct. App. Ky., 1967); in Arizona, A.R.S. §15-341(E), LaFrentz v. Gallagher, 462P.2d 804 (Ariz. 1969); in Ohio, Ohio Code Ann. § 3319.41(A)(1), State v. Albert, 456 N.E.2d 594 (OhioCt. App. 1998); in Oklahoma, 21 O.S. 1981 § 844, Holman v. Wheeler, 677 P.2d 645 (Okla. 1983) (overturned onunrelated grounds); in Louisiana, Roy v.Continental Ins. Co., 313 So.2d 349 (La. Ct. App. 1975), Setliff v. Rapides Parish School Bd.,888 So. 2d 1156 (La. Ct. App. 2004). Some states that use corporal punishmentprovide an extra layer of protection for school employees by addressingdisciplinary acts explicitly within the state's law, rather than relying ongeneral Sovereign Immunity. These states include Missouri,North Carolina, Indiana,Wyoming, Florida,Georgia, Arkansas,Alabama, Colorado,Tennessee, and New Mexico. See, for example, in Missouri,V.A.M.S. § 160.261, see also Streeter v.Hundley, 580 S.W.2d 284 (Mo. 1979); in North Carolina, N.C.G.S.A. §115C-391(h); in Indiana, Ind. Code Ann. § 13-3-3(20); in Wyoming, W.S. 1977 §21-4-308; in Florida, F.S.A. § 1006.11; in Georgia, Ga. Code Ann. § 20-2-732;in Arkansas, A.C.A. § 6-17-112; in Alabama, Ala. Code Ann. 1975 § 16-28A-1; in Colorado, C.R.S.A. § 22-32-109.1; in Tennessee,T.C.A. § 49-6-4105; in New Mexico,N.M.S.A. 1978 § 22-5-4.3.[438]Mississippi Torts Claims Act, Miss. Code Ann. Section 11-46-7 and Miss. Code Ann. Section 11-46-9(1)(x).[439]Texas PenalCode, Section 9.62.[440]TexasEducation Code, Section 22.051(a).[441]Human Rights Watch spoke with district attorneys' offices in both Mississippiand Texas to ask what policies and procedures the district attorneys wouldfollow on receiving corporal punishment cases. Seven of the 11 county offices wecalled did not respond to our messages. Human Rights Watch calls to districtattorneys in Hinds County, Mississippi; Sunflower and Washington Counties, Mississippi;Meridian City, Mississippi; Webster County, Mississippi; Smith County, Texas;Jefferson County, Texas; and Potter County, Texas, June 25, 2008. The remainingfour offices stated that they do not have clear policies or procedures that werefollowed for these cases. Human Rights Watch calls to district attorneys in Lauderdale County, Mississippi;Midland County, Texas;Nacogdoches County, Texas;and Lubbock County, Texas, June 25, 2008.[442]Human Rights Watch interview with Faye L., rural east Texas, February 26, 2008.[443]Human Rights Watch interview with an attorney in private practice representingRose T., rural Texas,February 26, 2008.[444]Ibid.[445]Ibid.[446]Human Rights Watch interview with Faye L., rural east Texas, February 26, 2008.[447]Ibid.[448]Ibid.[449]Christopher Sherman, "South Texas Justice of Peace Must Cease Paddling inCourt," El Paso Times, June 11, 2008(Cameron County Justice of the Peace ordered stepfather to paddle 14-year-oldstepdaughter for truancy); Texas State Commission on Judicial Conduct, "PrivateSanction Summaries, FY 2000 to Present," June 4, 2008, http://www.scjc.state.tx.us/pdf/actions/FY00-Present-PVsum.pdf(accessed July 19, 2008), p. 17 ("judge's actions and suggestions regarding theadministration of corporal punishment by parents to their children constitutedwillful or persistent conduct that cast public discredit on the judiciary"); ReviewTribunal, Appointed by the [Texas] Supreme Court (reviewing recommendation fromthe State Commission on Judicial Conduct), Inre Thurman Bill Bartie, Order No. 90 (April 16, 2004) (Justice of the Peacein Jefferson County removed and barred from judicial office in part forengaging in corporal punishment of juveniles who appeared before him on truancycharges); Texas State Commission on Judicial Conduct, "Summaries of PublicSanctions, September 1, 1999 through August 31, 2003," http://www.scjc.state.tx.us/pdf/actions/FY2000-2003PUB-SANC-SUMM.pdf(accessed June 17, 2008) (during a truancy hearing the judge ordered a fosterparent to paddle his foster child in the courtroom with a paddle obtained fromthe judge's chambers).[450]Human Rights Watch interview with Leah F., rural west Texas, February 23, 2008.[451]Ibid.[452]Human Rights Watch interview with Janet Y., Mississippi, December 11, 2007.[453]Human Rights Watch telephone interviewwith Rose T., east Texas,March 4, 2008.[454]Human Rights Watch interview with Faye L., rural east Texas, February 26, 2008.[455]Ibid.[456]Ibid.[457]Human Rights Watch interview with Janet Y., Mississippi, December 11, 2007.[458]Human Rights Watch interview with Brittany Y., who recently left high school, ruralMississippi, December 11, 2007.[459]Human Rights Watch interview with Janet Y., Mississippi, December 11, 2007.[460]Human Rights Watch telephone interviewwith Rose T., east Texas,March 4, 2008.[461]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment 8, The Right of theChild to Protection from Corporal Punishment and Other Cruel or Degrading Formsof Punishment, UN Doc. CRC/C/GC/8 (2006), para. 18; UN Human Rights Committee,General Comment 20, Article 7, Replaces General Comment 7 Concerning Prohibitionof Torture and Cruel Treatment of Punishment, UN Doc. CCPR/C/GC/20* (1992),para. 5; Report of the Committee against Torture, UN GAOR, UN Doc. A/50/44 (1995),para. 169.[462] UN General Assembly, Resolution 1386 (XIV), November 20, 1959. Similarly,article 19 of the American Convention on Human Rights states that "[e]veryminor child has the right to the measures of protection required by hiscondition as a minor on the part of his family, society, and the state." AmericanConvention on Human Rights ("Pact of San José, Costa Rica"), adopted November22, 1969, O.A.S. Treaty Series No. 36, 1144 U.N.T.S. 123, entered into forceJuly 18, 1978, reprinted in Basic Documents Pertaining to Human Rights in theInter-American System, OEA/Ser.L.V/II.82 doc.6 rev.1 at 25 (1992), art. 19.[463] While United Nations General Assemblyresolutions do not in and of themselves constitute binding international law,passage of resolutions by unanimous consent is strong authority for assertingtheir status as customary international law. Schwebel, "The Effect ofResolutions of the U.N. General Assembly on Customary International Law," American Society of International LawProceedings, vol. 73 (1979), p. 301.[464]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December 16, 1966, G.A.Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 UN GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, UN Doc. A/6316 (1966), 999U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23, 1976, ratified by the United StatesJune 8, 1992, art. 7; Conventionagainst Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment(Convention against Torture), adopted December 10, 1984, G.A. res. 39/46,annex, 39 UN GAOR Supp. (No. 51) at 197, UN Doc. A/39/51 (1984), entered intoforce June 26, 1987,ratified by the UnitedStatesOctober 21, 1994, art. 16.[465]ICCPR, art. 7.[466]UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment 20, para. 5.[467]Ibid.[468]UN Human Rights Committee, "Consideration of Reports Submitted by StatesParties Under Article 40 of the Covenant: Concluding Observations by the HumanRights Committee: United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland," UNDoc. CCPR/C/79/Add.55 (1995), paras. 4 and 5; UN Human Rights Committee,"Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Parties Under Article 40 of theCovenant: Concluding Observations by the Human Rights Committee: Tanzania,"UN Doc. CCPR/C/79/Add.79 (1998), para. 16; UN Human Rights Committee,"Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Parties Under Article 40 of theCovenant: Concluding Observations by the Human Rights Committee: Greece,"UN Doc. CCPR/CO/83/GRC (2005), para. 16.[469]Convention against Torture, art. 16.[470]Report of the Committee against Torture, UN GAOR, UN Doc. A/50/44 (50th Sess.,1995), para. 169.[471]ICCPR, art. 9.[472]International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of RacialDiscrimination (ICERD), adopted December 21, 1965, G.A. Res. 2106 (XX), annex,20 UN GAOR Supp. (No. 14) at 47, UN Doc. A/6014 (1966), 660 U.N.T.S. 195,entered into force January 4,1969, ratified by the United StatesOctober 21, 1994, art. 5(b).[473]Convention on the Rights of the Child(CRC), adopted November 20,1989, G.A. Res. 44/25, annex, 44 UN GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, UNDoc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into force September 2, 1990, signed by the United StatesFebruary 16, 1995, art. 19 (emphasisadded).[474]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment 8, para. 18.[475]Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), adopted December 10, 1948, G.A. Res.217A(III), UN Doc. A/810 at 71 (1948), preamble ("Whereas recognition of theinherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of thehuman family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world.").[476]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment 8, para. 21.[477]UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment 13, Article13, The Right to Education, UN Doc. E/C.12/1999/10 (1999), para. 41.[478]Ibid.[479]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment 8, para. 11.[480]ICCPR, arts. 2 and 24.[481]CRC, preamble ("as indicated in the Declaration of the Rights of the Child,'the child, by reason of his physical and mental immaturity, needs specialsafeguards and care, including appropriate legal protection.'").[482]UDHR, art. 26(3).[483]CRC, preamble.[484]CRC, art. 5 ("States Parties shall respect the responsibilities, rights, andduties of parents … to provide, in a manner consistent with the evolvingcapacities of the child, appropriate direction and guidance in the exercise bythe child of the rights recognized in the present Convention.").[485]The Committee on the Rights of the Child notes that "interpretation of achild's best interests must be consistent with the whole Convention, includingthe obligation to protect children from all forms of violence and therequirement to give due weight to the child's views; it cannot be used tojustify practices, including corporal punishment and other forms of cruel ordegrading punishment, which conflict with the child's human dignity and rightto physical integrity." UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, GeneralComment 8, para. 26.[486]CRC, art. 2.[487]CRC, art. 5 .[488]The US government attached threereservations, five understandings, and two declarations to its ratification ofthe Convention against Torture. Five reservations, five understandings, andfour declarations accompanied the ICCPR. The United States has not ratified theFirst Optional Protocol to the ICCPR and did not declare itself bound by article22 of the Convention against Torture. The First Optional Protocol and article22 allow the committees responsible for monitoring compliance with the treatiesto receive complaints from individuals and organizations, in addition tocomplaints from other governments. The effect of the US positions, combinedwith inadequate enforcement at the state level of prohibitions on torture andcruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment, is to deny US citizens and others whoallege violations of such treaties any forum in which their grievances can beheard or resolved.[489]USConstitution, art. VI, clause 2.[490]The Paquete-Habana, 175 U.S.677, 700 (1900). See also Murray v. The Charming Betsy, 6 U.S. (2 Cranch)64, 118 (1804) (statutes "can never be construed to violate … rights … furtherthan is warranted by the law of nations"); Harold Hongju Koh, "Is InternationalLaw Really State Law?," Harvard LawReview, vol. 111 (1998), p. 1824 (noting that customary international lawis federal common law and preempts inconsistent state practices).[491]Asakura v. City of Seattle, 265 U.S.332 (1924) (holding that a treaty made under the authority of the United Statesstands on the same footing of supremacy as do the provisions of theConstitution and laws of the United States and "operate[s] of itself withoutthe aid of any legislation, state or national; and it will be applied and givenauthoritative effect by the courts"). See also Maiorano v. Baltimore & Ohio R. R. Co., 213 U.S. 268, 272 (1888); Baldwin v. Franks, 120 U.S. 678 (1887); Head Money Cases, 112 U.S.580, 598 (1884); Chew Heong v. UnitedStates, 112 U.S.536, 540 (1884); Foster v. Neilson, 2Pet. 253, 314 (1829).[492]Jordan J. Paust, "Self-Executing Treaties," AmericanJournal of International Law, vol. 82 (1988), p. 760 (explaining that whenJohn Jay was secretary of foreign affairs of the Confederation in 1787, hereported to Congress that a treaty "made, ratified and published by Congress, …immediately [became] binding on the whole nation, and superadded to the laws ofthe land"). See also Asakura v. City ofSeattle 265 U.S. 332, 341 (1924) ("The rule of equality established by [thetreaty] cannot be rendered nugatory in any part of the United States by municipalordinances or state laws. It stands on the same footing of supremacy as do theprovisions of the Constitution and laws of the United States. It operates ofitself without the aid of any legislation, state or national; and it will beapplied and given authoritative effect by the courts."); ICCPR, art. 50, (providingthat the provisions of the covenant "shall exten[d] to all parts of federalStates without any limitations or exceptions."). The UN Human Rights Committeestates in its General Comment 31, "The obligations of the Covenant in generaland article 2 in particular are binding on every State Party as a whole. Allbranches of government (executive, legislative and judicial), and other publicor governmental authorities, at whatever level-national, regional or local-arein a position to engage the responsibility of the State Party. The executivebranch that usually represents the State Party internationally, includingbefore the Committee, may not point to the fact that an action incompatiblewith the provisions of the Covenant was carried out by another branch ofgovernment as a means of seeking to relieve the State Party from responsibilityfor the action and consequent incompatibility. This understanding flowsdirectly from the principle contained in article 27 of the Vienna Convention onthe Law of Treaties, according to which a State Party 'may not invoke theprovisions of its internal law as justification for its failure to perform atreaty.'… In this respect, the Committee reminds States Parties with a federalstructure of the terms of article 50, according to which the Covenant'sprovisions 'shall extend to all parts of federal states without any limitationsor exceptions.'" UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment 31, Nature of theGeneral Legal Obligation on States Parties to the Covenant, UN Doc. CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.13(2004), para. 4.[493]Roper v. Simmons, 543 U.S. 551, 574(2005) ("Yet at least from the time of the Court's decision in Trop [1958], the Court has referred tothe laws of other countries and to international authorities as instructive forits interpretation of the Eighth Amendment … [of the US Constitution].").[494]United Nations Treaty Collection, ICCPR, "United States of America:Reservations," para. 5; Committee against Torture, "Status of the Conventionagainst Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,and Reservations, Declarations and Objections under the Convention," http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/ratification/9.htm(accessed August 8, 2008).[495]UN Human Rights Committee, "ConcludingObservations of the Human Rights Committee: United States of America," UN Doc.CCPR/C/79/Add 50 (1995), http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/hrcommittee/US-ADD1.htm(accessed August 8, 2008); UN Human Rights Committee, "Concluding Observationsof the Human Rights Committee on the Second and Third US Reports to theCommittee (2006)," UN Doc. CCPR/C/SR.2395 (2006), http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/usdocs/hruscomments2.html(accessed August 8, 2008) (discussing in detail US failure to comply witharticle 7 of the Covenant).[496] Office of the United Nations HighCommissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), "Convention on the Rights of the Child,"http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/ratification/11.htm (accessed August 8,2008) Singapore's declaration reads: "The Republic of Singapore considers thatarticles 19 and 37 of the Convention do not prohibit-(a) the application of anyprevailing measures prescribed by law for maintaining law and order in theRepublic of Singapore; (b) measures and restrictions which are prescribed bylaw and which are necessary in the interests of national security, publicsafety, public order, the protection of public health or the protection of therights and freedom of others; or (c) the judicious application of corporalpunishment in the best interest of the child." A number of states haveinterpreted Singapore'sdeclaration as a reservation and objected to it as contrary to the object andpurpose of the Convention. "UN Treaty Collection Database," (Germany: September 4, 1996; Belgium: September 26, 1996; Italy: October 4, 1996; The Netherlands: November 6, 1996; Norway: November 29, 1996; Finland: November 25, 1996; Portugal:December 3, 1996).[497] The UnitedStates signed the CRC on February 16, 1995 and Somalia signed on May 2, 2002.[498]See ViennaConvention on the Law of Treaties, concluded May 23, 1969, 1155 U.N.T.S. 331, entered intoforce January 27, 1980,art. 18. Although the UnitedStates has signed but not ratified theVienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, it regards this convention as "theauthoritative guide to current treaty law and practice." S. Exec. Doc. L., 92dCong., 1st sess. (1971), p. 1; Theodor Meron, "The Meaning and Reach of theInternational Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,"American Journal of International Law,vol. 79 (1985), p. 283. The USgovernment has also accepted that it is bound by customary international lawnot to defeat a treaty's object and purpose. "Albright Says U.S. Bound by NukePact; Sends Letters to Nations Despite Senate Vote," Washington Times, November2, 1999 (describing the Clintonadministration's acceptance of obligations under the Comprehensive Test BanTreaty despite the Senate's failure to ratify).[499]Roper v. Simmons, 543 U.S.551, 578 (2005).[500] "Remarks by Ambassador Madeleine K. Albright,United States Permanent Representative to the United Nations on the Occasion ofthe Signing of the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child," White HousePress Release, February 16, 1995.[501] "Statement by Ambassador Betty King, UnitedStates Representative on the Economic and Social Council, to the Plenary of the54th Session of the General Assembly on the Tenth Anniversary of the Conventionon the Rights of the Child," November 11, 1999.[502]ICCPR, art. 50.[503]Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S.651, 660 (1977) (stating that corporal punishment "has survived thetransformation of primary and secondary education from the colonials' relianceon optional private arrangements to our present system of compulsory educationand dependence on public schools").[504]Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S.651 (1977). At the circuit court level, corporal punishment has also beenconsidered under the US Constitution's substantive due process clause (Hall v. Tawney, 621 F.2d 607, 611 (4th Cir.1980), Garcia v. Miera, 817 F.2d 650,656 (10th Cir. 1987), Saylor v. Board ofEducation of Harlan County, 118 F.3d 507, 514-515 (6th Cir. 1997)), as wellas the equal protection clause (Cunninghamv. Beavers, 858 F.2d 269, 273 (5th Cir. 1988) (holding that intermediatescrutiny under equal protection jurisprudence does not apply to corporalpunishment cases because children are not viewed as a "suspect class.")).[505]Global Initiative to End All Corporal Punishment of Children, "North America: Summary of legal status of corporalpunishment of children," June 2007, http://www.endcorporalpunishment.org/pages/pdfs/charts/Chart-NorthAmerica.pdf(accessed August 8, 2008).Compare to Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S.651, 660-661 (1977) (the majority, writing in 1977, observed that corporalpunishment "continues to play a role in the public education of school childrenin most parts of the country…. We can discern no trend toward itselimination.").[506]Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S.651, 664-670 (1977).[507]Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S.651, 664 (1977).[508]Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S.651, 669 (1977).[509]Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S.651, 670 (1977).[510]The nine-member court divided, with five members in the majority and fourdissenting.[511]Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S.651, 685 (1977) (White, J., dissenting).[512]Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S.651, 684 (1977) (White, J., dissenting).[513]OHCHR, "International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights: Declarations andReservations made upon ratification, accession or succession," United States ofAmerica, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/ratification/docs/DeclarationsReservationsICCPR.pdf(accessed August 8, 2008), reservation 3 ("That the United States considersitself bound by article 7 to the extent that 'cruel, inhuman or degradingtreatment of punishment' means the cruel and unusual treatment or punishmentprohibited by the Fifth, Eighth, and/or Fourteenth Amendments to theConstitution of the United States.").[514]Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S. 651,673-674 (1977) (noting that the liberty interest in personal security isimplicated where public school authorities, acting under color of state law,deliberately punish a child for misconduct by restraint and infliction ofappreciable pain).[515]Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S.651, 676 (1977).[516]Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S.651, 682 (1977).[517]Cunningham v. Beavers, 858 F.2d 269,272 (5th Cir. 1988) (citing to Tex. Penal Code Ann. § 9.62 (Vernon 1986), Texas Educ.Code Ann. § 21.912 (Vernon 1986), among others, to support thecontention that common law remedies exist); Woodwardv. Los Fresnos, 732 F.2d 1243, 1245 (5th Cir. 1984) (citing to oldercases).[518]Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S.651, 693 (1977) (White, J., dissenting).[519]Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S. 651, 676(1977) (noting that routine corporal punishment does not violate substantive dueprocess: "There can be no deprivation of substantive rights as long asdisciplinary corporal punishment is within the limits of the common-lawprivilege"). But see Garcia v. Miera,817 F.2d 650, 653 (10th Cir. 1987) ("[W]e believe that Ingraham requires us tohold that, at some point, excessive [corporal punishment] violates the pupil'ssubstantive due process rights.").[520]Saylor v. Board of Education of HarlanCounty, 118 F.3d 507, 513 (6th Cir. 1997) ("The courts of appeals are notof one mind on the substantive due process question.").[521]Garcia v. Miera, 817 F.2d 650, 653(10th Cir. 1987); Hall v. Tawney, 621F.2d 607 (4th Cir. 1980).[522]Woodward v. Los Fresnos, 732 F.2d1243, 1245 (5th Cir. 1984).[523]Global Initiative to End All CorporalPunishment of Children, "Countdown to universal prohibition: Summary oflegality of corporal punishment of children worldwide," April 2008, http://www.endcorporalpunishment.org/pages/progress/countdown.html(accessed August 8, 2008).[524]Campbell and Cosans v. UK, EuropeanCourt of Human Rights (ECHR), (Application No. 7511/76; 7743/76), February 25,1982 (holding that by failing to respect the parents' philosophical objectionsagainst corporal punishment, United Kingdom schools had violated the children'srights to education); Costello-Roberts v.UK, ECHR, (Application No. 13134/87),March 25,1993 (findingthat corporal punishment in schools can reach the level of severity as toviolate Article 3 of the European Convention ("No one shall be subjected totorture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment."); A v. UK, ECHR, (Application No.25599/94),September 23,1998 (holding that parental corporalpunishment can violate article 3 of the European Convention); Tyrer v. UK, ECHR, (Application No.5856/72),April 25,1978 (barring corporal punishment of juveniles incustody).[525]Section 548 of the Education Act (1996) (United Kingdom) as amended by section131 of the School Standards and Framework Act (1998) (clarifying that there isno right for a member of an educational staff to administer corporal punishmentto a child in any location).[526]The Center for Effective Discipline, "U.S.:Corporal Punishment and Paddling Statistics by State and Race, States BanningCorporal Punishment," 2008, http://www.stophitting.com/disatschool/statesBanning.php(accessed August 8, 2008).[527]OCR, "Civil Rights Data Collection 2006."[528]The Center for Effective Discipline, "Discipline at School," http://www.stophitting.com/disatschool/100largest.php(accessed August 8, 2008).Related ContentApril 15, 2010Statement“Corporal Punishment in Schools and Its Effect on Academic Success” Joint HRW/ACLU StatementFor the Hearing Before the House Education and Labor Subcommittee on Healthy Families and CommunitiesApril 15, 2010Statement“Corporal Punishment in Schools and Its Effect on Academic Success” Joint HRW/ACLU StatementRegion / CountryUnited States Racial DiscriminationProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch