No Way Out: Child Marriage and Human Rights Abuses in Tanzania | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload the summary and recommendations: photo featureDownload the summary and recommendations in Swahili: photo featureDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload the summary and recommendations: photo featureDownload the summary and recommendations in Swahili: photo featureOctober 29, 2014No Way OutChild Marriage and Human Rights Abuses in TanzaniaAvailable InEnglishKiswahiliDefinition of TermsIn this report, the following terms have these meanings:“Child” is used to refer to anyoneunder the age of 18, consistent with usage under international law.“Girl” refers to female children underage 18.“Child marriage” refers to a unionwhere either spouse is below 18 years of age.“Early marriage” refers to marriagesinvolving a person aged below 18 in countries where the age of majority isattained earlier or upon marriage.“Forced marriage” refers to any marriagewhich occurs without the full and free consent of one or both of the partiesor where one or both of the parties are unable to end or leave the marriage,including as a result of duress or intense social or family pressure. Itencompasses related harmful practices such as wife inheritance, bridekidnapping, girl-child compensation, and marriage as dispute settlement ordebt payment, which are practiced in Tanzania.“Female genital mutilation” or FGM refersto the partial or total removal of the external female genitalia fornon-medical purposes.SummaryWhen Matilda H. was 14, her father told her he wanted her tomarry a 34-year-old man who already had one wife. He told her that he hadalready received a dowry payment of 4 cows and 700,000 Tanzanian Shillings(TSh) (US$435).Although Matilda had passed her exams and had been admittedto secondary school, her father told her: “You cannot continue with youreducation. You have to get married because this man has already paid dowry foryou.” She pleaded with him to allow her to continue her education, but herefused.Matilda told us, “I felt very sad. I couldn’t goto school, dowry was paid, and I could not disobey my father. I did not know myhusband before.” Matilda said her mother tried to seek help from thevillage elders to stop the marriage but “the village elders supported myfather’s decision for me to get married. I had nothing to do. I had noway out but to allow to get married.”Matilda’s husband physically and sexually abused herand could not afford to support her. She told us, “My husband was verypoor. When I would get sick, he would not even have money to take me to thehospital.”In Tanzania, 4 out of 10 girls are married before their 18thbirthday. A study by the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) estimated that 37percent of Tanzanian women aged 20-24years were first married or in union before the age of 18, between 2000-2011. Human Rights Watch documented caseswhere girls as young as seven were married.Child marriage is deeply embedded in Tanzaniansociety. In many cultures in Tanzania, girls are generally consideredready for marriage when they reach puberty and marriage is viewed as a way toprotect them from pre-marital sex and pregnancy that undermine family honor andmay decrease the amount of dowry a family may receive. Cultural practices suchas female genital mutilation (FGM) also contribute to child marriage in somecommunities. Among the Maasai and Gogo ethnic groups, where Human Rights Watchconducted some of its research for this report, FGM is closely related to childmarriage and is done primarily as a rite of passage to prepare girls, aged 10-15 years, for marriage.Many Tanzanians regard child marriage as way of securingfinancial security for themselves and their daughters. The practice of dowrypayment by the groom to the bride’s family is a key incentive for manyfamilies to marry off their daughters. Some girls see marriage as a way out ofpoverty, violence, or neglect. Child labor in Tanzania may also be associatedwith a significant increase in marriage at an earlier age, as girls who faceabuse and exploitation in their workplaces see marriage as a way to escapetheir suffering.Human Rights Watch conducted extensive interviews with girlsand women in 10 districts in the Mwanza, Shinyanga, Kilimanjaro, Arusha,Dodoma, and Lindi regions of the Tanzania mainland, and with governmentofficials, community development officers, police officers working at Police Genderand Children’s Desks, teachers, ward and village executive officers,health workers, and experts.Human Rights Watch investigated the factorscontributing to child marriage, the severe harms and rights abuses associatedwith it, and the risks girls face when they resist marriage. We also examinedthe gaps in the child protection system, the lack of protection for victims ofchild marriage, and the many obstacles they face in attempting to obtainredress, as well as shortcomings in existing laws and plans to combat childmarriage.By permitting child marriage, the government becomesresponsible for the serious harms suffered by girls and women, thus violatingmany human rights recognized under international law. Girls married as childrenare usually unable to continue with their schooling and consequently havelimited wage-earning prospects due to their lack of education. Girls mayexperience domestic violence and marital rape, and receive little or no supportduring their marriages or when they leave. They are forced into adulthoodbefore they are physically and emotionally mature and they struggle with thephysical and emotional health effects of becoming pregnant too young. Theseharmful effects take the heaviest toll on the youngest brides.This report documents the particularly severe impact ofchild marriage on girls’ education. Child marriage undermines access to education- limiting girls’ lifeopportunities and their ability and confidence to make informed decisions abouttheir lives. Girls told Human Rights Watch that their parents or guardianswithdrew them from school to marry, and they found it difficult to return toschool after marriage. Girls who became pregnant or married were frequentlyexpelled. Tanzanian government policy allows schools to expel or exclude studentswho enter marriage or commit an offense “against morality,” whichis often understood to mean pre-marital sex or pregnancy. Tanzanian schoolsroutinely conduct mandatory pregnancy tests of girls, a serious infringement oftheir rights to privacy, equality, and autonomy.Girls Human Rights Watch interviewed who rejected or triedto resist marriage were assaulted, verbally abused, or evicted from their homesby their families. Others, who were unable to escape marriage, described howtheir husbands beat and raped them and did not allow them to make any decisionsin their homes. A large number also said their husbands abandoned them and leftthem to care for children without any financial support. Many said they alsoexperienced violence and abuse at the hands of their in-laws.Many girls also told Human Rights Watch how they felt lonelyand isolated, confined to their homes by domestic and child-rearing duties orbecause their husbands and in-laws restricted their movements. The isolationand abrupt end to childhood that is typically associated with child marriagecombined with the physical, verbal, and sexual abuse that married girls suffer,the lack of support when girls seek help from authorities and their families,as well as economic and cultural pressures that prevent some girls from leavingabusive marriages have profound effects on a girl’s psychologicalhealth.Many girls interviewed by Human Rights Watch said they wereunhappy in their marriages and regretted having married early. Some said theyhad contemplated suicide.Health workers described the negative reproductiveconsequences for girls and their children when girls give birth, includingmaternal death, obstetric fistula, premature delivery, malnutrition, andanemia. Prenatal and postnatal health care services, especially inTanzania’s rural areas, are scarce, thus increasing these risks.To its credit, the Tanzanian government has made importantlegal and policy reforms in the area of girls’ and women’s humanrights. The Sexual Offences Special Provisions Act, adopted in 1998,criminalizes rape, sexual exploitation of children, and FGM, and sets the ageof sexual consent at 18 years. In addition, in June 2014 the cabinet passed theEducation and Training Policy that explicitly allows the admission of girls toschool after they have given birth. The policy does not address the position ofmarried girls, although it states that girls who drop out due to “otherreasons” should also be readmitted. The government has developed nationalplans to combat violence against women and children. In October 2014, theTanzanian Constituent Assembly adopted the final draft of the proposed new constitutionthat includes a provision defining a child as every person below the age of18.The final draft, however, fails to explicitly set a uniform minimummarriage age of 18 for both boys and girls.Tanzania’s laws, however, permit child marriage forgirls and do not provide adequate protection from domestic violence. TheMarriage Act of 1971 sets the marriage age at 18 years for boys, but at 15 forgirls with parental consent. Existing laws are contradictory and sometimesvague, failing to consistently define who is a child. The government has yet toreview the Marriage Act to provide protections against child marriage, despiteindicating it would do so. In addition, government national plans of action toaddress violence against women and children do not lay out comprehensivestrategies to curb child marriage.In Tanzania there is almost no accountability for victims ofviolence related to child marriage, including domestic violence. Tanzania lacksa comprehensive law on domestic violence and marital rape is not criminalized.The government has made scant efforts to investigate or prosecute perpetrators.Several significant factors underpin this impunity. Many girls and women do notknow what their rights are, or do not know where to seek assistance, other thanfrom their families or traditional institutions.Some victims will notreport forced marriage and marital abuse because they lack confidence in the justicesystem and fear reprisal and stigma should they report their families orhusbands. The absence of clear family legislation means that most mattersrelating to marriage, divorce, maintenance payments, and domestic violence arehandled through customary procedures, which are discriminatory and often failto provide justice for victims.These problems are compounded and perpetuated by the lack ofcapacity and inaccessibility of the court system, limited legal aid that doesnot include survivors of gender-based violence, and negligent and dismissivepolice responses to reports of violence against women. In addition, the lack ofresources and well-trained personnel, corruption in the justice system, andwidespread and deep-seated discriminatory attitudes towards women undermineaccountability for gender-based violence. Tanzania also does not havesufficient safe spaces where victims of child marriage and other gender-relatedabuses can find shelter and protection.The Tanzanian government has not made sufficient efforts toprotect girls at risk of child and forced marriage and to assist survivors withmuch needed psychological, social, or economic support.Survivors oftenstruggle alone with the severe mental health consequences of the abuses they endured.Additionally, they get little support to make up for their lost education or tohelp them develop economic opportunities to provide for themselves and theirchildren. While some local groups and international aid agencies operateprograms, their efforts cannot compensate for the state authorities’failure to adopt national strategies to address survivors’ various needs.As a result of these failures and inadequacies, many womenand girls continue to struggle with the often devastating and long-lastingconsequences of child marriage. Child marriage harms not only individual girlsand women, but also their families and communities. Failure to combat thisproblem is likely to have negative implications for Tanzania’s futuresocial and economic development.Human Rights Watch calls on the government of Tanzania totake immediate and long-term measures to protect girls and women from child,early, and forced marriage and ensure the fulfillment of their human rights, inaccordance with its international human rights obligations. Any upcoming examinationsof national plans on violence against women and children provide an opportunityfor the government to strengthen protections against child and forced marriage.Key RecommendationsTo the President of TanzaniaPublicly support setting a uniform,internationally recognized minimum marriage age of 18 for both boys and girlsin Tanzania.Publicly call on education authorities toend the exclusion of married and/or pregnant girls from school.To the Ministry of Education and VocationalTrainingRevise the Education and Training Policy toinclude a provision that allows both married and pregnant students to continuewith their education.Increase access to post-primary education bytaking all possible measures to ensure that children can access secondaryeducation irrespective of their Primary School Leaving Examination results. Inparticular, take measures to allow children who fail to retake the exam, and toseek admission in public schools.To the Ministry of Constitutional and Legal AffairsTake the necessary steps to enact a comprehensive domesticviolence law. The law should criminalize sexual violence in marriage.To the Ministry of Community Development, Gender,and ChildrenCreate a national action plan to combat child marriage, inaccordance with international good practices, with input fromwomen’s and children’s rights groups, health professionals,and other service providers; coordinate efforts among all relevantministries; seek sufficient resources to implement the plan.To United Nations Agencies and International DonorsUrge the government of Tanzania to end theexclusion from school of married and pregnant pupils and adolescent mothers,and to provide re-entry opportunities for married girls and young mothers ofschool-going age.MethodologyThis report is based on field research Human Rights Watchconducted between March and August 2014 in 12 districts of Mwanza, Shinyanga,Kilimanjaro, Arusha, Manyara, Dodoma, and Lindi regions of Tanzania mainland.[1]Human Rights Watch selected the regions and districts in which to conduct theresearch in consultation with local organizations working on women’srights and on child marriage. Regions and districts were selected in order toreflect cultural and religious diversity in Tanzania.Human Rights Watch researchers interviewed 135 girls andwomen in total, between the ages of 12 and 34. Human Rights Watch interviewed75 girls and women individually and 60 in small groups.Most groupinterviews involved 5 to 10 girls and women. Individual girls and women wereidentified with the assistance of local nongovernmental organizations (NGOs)that provided services to girls and women; however, no services were dependenton participation in interviews. Interviews were conducted ininterviewees’ homes or at offices of NGOs with as much privacy aspossible. All participants were informed of the purpose of the interview, itsvoluntary nature, and the ways the information would be used. Each participant orallyconsented to be interviewed. Participants were advised they could decline toanswer questions or end the interview at any time.Interviews lasted between thirty minutes and one hour. Allthe interviews were conducted in Kiswahili with the assistance of a femaleinterpreter. Care was taken to minimize re-traumatization of women and girlswho were recounting difficult experiences. Where appropriate, Human RightsWatch provided contact information for organizations offering legal, social, orcounseling services. Interviewees did not receive any compensation forparticipating in interviews, but were reimbursed for any transportation coststo and from the interview.Some girls and women were unsure about their exact ages ordates of birth; in Tanzania, many children do not have birth certificates. Thisreport uses the estimates provided by the girls — many said that theirparents had told them their age. Most of the girls and women Human Rights Watchinterviewed were married as children.Pseudonyms were selected randomly, and they may not reflectthe interviewee’s ethnicity or religion.Human Rights Watch also interviewed government officials inthe Ministries of Constitutional and Legal Affairs; Home Affairs; Education andVocational Training; Community Development, Gender and Children; and Health andSocial Welfare; the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP); officials from theCommission for Human Rights and Good Governance and the Law Reform Commission;social welfare officers; community development officers; police officersworking at Police Gender and Children’s Desks; ward and village executiveofficers; and traditional leaders and religious leaders. Human Rights Watch alsoobserved three Police Gender and Children’s Desks, and interviewedrepresentatives of NGOs working on women’s and children’s rights inboth Tanzania mainland and Zanzibar, as well as officials from the UnitedNations and international donor organizations.Human Rights Watch reviewed laws, policies, officialgovernment strategies, and reports by academics, national and internationalorganizations, and UN agencies. We conducted an extensive review of literatureon child marriage in Tanzania and other countries.I. Background: Child Marriage and Violence against Women and Girlsin TanzaniaPrevalence of Child Marriage in TanzaniaAlthough rates of child marriage in Tanzania have decreasedby 10 percent since 2004, the number of girls marrying remains high.[2]Four out of ten girls are married before their eighteenth birthday.[3]The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) estimates that 37 percent of womenaged 20-24 years were married or in union by age of 18 in Tanzania between 2000-2011.[4] Tanzania is among the41 countries with 30 percent or more of women 20-24years old who married or entered into union by age 18 between 2000-2011.[5]According to one study, 7 percent of women between the ages of 20 and 24 in2010 were married or in union before the age of 15.[6] Thenational average masks wide regional differences: prevalence is estimated at 59percent in Shinyanga, 58 percent in Tabora, 51 percent in Dodoma, while inIringa, it is only 8 percent.[7] Girlswho are less educated, from poor families, or from rural areas are most likelyto marry as children.[8]The National Action Plan for the Prevention and Eradicationof Violence against Women and Children (“National Action Plan”),2001-2015, recognizes the need to amendlaws that affect women’s and children’s rights, including theMarriage Act of 1971. The National Action Plan calls for a minimum marriage ageof 18, the need to create awareness about the impact of early marriage, and totrain men and women leaders on the elimination of early marriage and FGM.[9]The National Roadmap Strategic Plan to Accelerate Reduction of Maternal,Newborn and Child Deaths in Tanzania, 2008-2015,commits various government ministries to advocate for review of legislation,including the Marriage Act of 1971, that influence maternal and newborn deathsand child health.[10]Neither of the national plans comprehensively sets out strategies to addresschild marriage.Violence against Women and GirlsThe 2010 TanzaniaDemographic and Health Survey (TDHS) found that almost half (45 percent) ofwomen aged 15-49 had experienced either physical or sexualviolence.[11]According to the study, 1 in 2 ever-married womenaged 15-49 reported having experienced either one or acombination of emotional, physical, and sexual violence at the hands of theircurrent or former husbands.[12]Four in ten men agreed that wife beating isjustified.[13]Older women experience witchcraft-related abuse andviolence.[14]Research by government departments and NGOs working on human rights suggestthat witchcraft-related killings targeting older women are on the increase.[15]In 2013, 765 witchcraft killings were reported: 505 women and 260 men werekilled, according to analysis of police data by the Legal and Human RightsCenter.[16]Cultural practices and attitudes that condone violenceagainst women are major challenges in preventing abuse.[17] Girlsand women in some areas of Tanzania are subject to FGM despite the prohibitionof the practice by the Sexual Offences Special Provisions Act (SOSPA) of 1998,which prohibits FGM for girls under the age of 18.[18]This harmful practice is inter-linked with other violations of women’shuman rights, including child and forced marriage (discussed below).The government has taken steps to address gender-basedviolence, developing action plans on violence against women and children and onFGM. [19] Since2008, the government has established specialist Police Gender and Children’sDesks and developed comprehensive health sector guidelines on the management ofsurvivors of abuse.[20] There are plans by thepolice to construct one-stop centers and victim support units.[21]However, effective implementation of these policies and programs is hindered byinadequate resources and the lack of a comprehensive legal aid systemaccessible to women.[22]In addition, existing Tanzanian laws do not adequatelyprotect women and girls against violence, including marital rape, and are alsopoorly implemented.[23]The government has frequently announced its intention to amend existingdiscriminatory laws that perpetuate gender-based violence but no reforms havebeen announced or introduced.[24]II. How Girls Become Brides:Factors Contributing to Child MarriageChild marriage in Tanzania is driven by poverty and thepayment of dowry, child labor, adolescent pregnancy, child abuse and neglect,and limited access to education and employment opportunities for women andgirls.Payment of DowryIt is common for a father whose daughter has passedStandard 7 (equivalent to grade 9), [to say] he has no money to educate herbecause he wants her to marry so he can receive dowry.— Japheat Daud, program coordinator, Agape AIDSControl Program, Shinyanga, April 2014Dowry payment is a major factor driving child marriage inTanzania. Dowry is negotiated by a man and his family and is paid to awoman’s family in the form of money, cattle or other livestock, or acombination of both.[25]Although common in many Tanzanian communities, dowry payments vary depending onethnic group, family wealth, and other cultural and social considerations, suchas the lightness of a girl’s complexion or whether she has undergone FGM.[26]Twenty-six girls told Human Rights Watch that their families forced them tomarry because they wanted to receive dowry. Some of the girls said they wereforced to leave school to marry because dowry had already been paid, oftenwithout their knowledge.Anita G., 19, told Human Rights Watch that her father forcedher to leave school to get married when she was 16 and in her second year ofsecondary school:My father said he did not have money to support myschooling. I then discovered that he had already received 20 cows as dowry forme. My mother tried to reason with my father to allow me continue with school,but my father said I had to marry. He said, “Once dowry has been taken,it cannot be returned.”[27]Child Labor and Related AbusesI was a housemaid and living a very difficult life. I wasabused a lot and humiliated in the home where I worked. I saw marriage as myonly way out of the suffering. I found a man who agreed to marry me.— Nancy J., married at 17, Mwanza, March 2014The International Labour Organization (ILO) defines childlabor as “work that deprives children of their childhood, their potentialand their dignity, and that is harmful to their physical and mentaldevelopment.”[28]Poverty drives many children into premature employment.[29]Children who lack financial and other support from their parents, guardians, orextended families, and who are abused at home, are more likely to engage inchild labor.[30]According to a 2006 government survey, about 21 percent of children between theages of 5 and 17 are engaged in some form of child labor in Tanzania.[31]Children work in various economic sectors, including agriculture, domesticwork, fishing, and mining.Among girls, child labor is associated with a significantincrease in the probability of marriage at an earlier age. A 2008 World Bankstudy looking at the consequences of child labor in rural Tanzania noted a linkbetween child labor and child marriage, stating that “the more childrenwork, the more likely they are to marry at an earlier age.”[32]Girls who face abuses in their workplaces may see marriage as a way to escapetheir suffering.Girls in work are also frequently exposed to sexualexploitation and abuse, and sometimes enter relationships with boys or men inreturn for food or other support, or because they are pregnant.Human Rights Watch interviewed 20 girls who said theymarried early to escape child labor. In Tanzania, child domestic work is commonand widely accepted as a way to contribute to the family’s income.[33]It may also be viewed as part of a girl’s preparation or apprenticeshipfor future married life.[34] Due toweak government regulation of child work, girls face many abuses, includingphysical and sexual abuse, and often receive little or no pay.[35]Additionally, “girls fleeing abusive households may be vulnerable tocommercial sexual exploitation.”[36]Judith K., 25, married at 14, told Human Rights Watch:A houseboy in the house I was working in asked me to marryhim. I agreed — because I saw marriage as my only option to escapemistreatment from my boss. My boss used to give me a lot of work without payingme. Many times I slept on a hungry stomach because my boss used to deny mefood.[37]Girls working in small-scale gold mining areas arefrequently approached for sex, and some girls form relationships with or marryadult miners.[38] YasminD., a 15-year-old girl working at a small-scale gold mine in Mbeya region, toldHuman Rights Watch:A lot of men approach me … always showing memoney…Sex work is very common… Most of those are working inthe bar. Sometimes they stay here… they sacrifice themselves in theforest. They create a hut and stay.[39]Witness J., 19, told HumanRights Watch she was 14 and in her final year of primary school when herstepfather chased her away from home because she was “mature”enough to look after herself. She told us that she found a job as a waitress,but she was overworked by her boss. She married shortly after: “He was aregular customer. One day he told me he was looking for a wife and asked me tomarry him. I thought getting married would stop my suffering and my husbandwould take care of me. But I experienced a lot of suffering in themarriage.”[40]Adolescent PregnancyTanzania has high rates of teenage pregnancy. According tothe 2010 Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey, “44 percent of women areeither mothers or are pregnant with their first child by age 19.”[41]Among young women aged 15-19, 23percent have already begun childbearing; 17 percent are mothers, and anadditional 6 percent are pregnant with their first child.[42]Women and girls inTanzania have limited access to family planning services. The contraceptiveprevalence rate is 34 percent among all currently married women and girls inTanzania and 51 percent among sexually active unmarried women and girls age 15-49.[43]According to official statistics, “Only 12%of married girls aged 15-19 in Tanzania are usingmodern methods of contraception compared to 24% of married women aged 20-24 years.”[44]Girls who are not in school are particularly vulnerable tomarriage as parents fear that they will get pregnant and bring shame to thefamily. Ali K., 19, married when she was 16. She told us: “My parents andfriends pressured me. They told me that since I had failed the Primary SchoolLeaving Examinations and was not at school, I should get married to avoidgetting pregnant.”[45]When unmarried girls get pregnant, or a girl is suspected ofbeing sexually active, parents and other caregivers may force her to marry hersexual partner. Sima P., 19, became pregnant when she was 16 and in her thirdyear of secondary school. Her parents chased her away from her home, and shewas forced to live with the man responsible for the pregnancy. They told her:“You do not come here with a pregnancy. Go to the man who is responsiblefor the pregnancy.”[46]Sima married her sexual partner.Girls lack access to sex education and accurate informationabout contraception. They also have limited access to reproductive healthservices and lack the power to negotiate safe sex with men who usually enticethem with money, gifts, and promises to educate or marry them. Several girlstold Human Rights Watch that peer pressure is another contributing factor.Afafa Y., 17, did learn about contraception at school, but she did not use anywhen she started having sex due to false information and pressure from herboyfriend. She said, “My friends told me that if I use an injection itwill kill my eggs, and that if I take tablets they will become a big lump in mystomach. My boyfriend also told me he could not use a condom because they haveside effects.”[47] Afafalater became pregnant and her boyfriend paid dowry of 40,000 TSh ($US25) to herfamily so they could get married.The Tanzanian government has failed to ensure the provisionof comprehensive sexuality education in primary and secondary schools, despitea “life skills” program­–incorporated into existingsubjects, such as biology, civics, languages, and work skills–thatincludes information on sexuality and family planning. Tanzania mainland lacksa national sexuality education curriculum, meaning there is no clear guidancefor schools or teachers on what the subject covers and how it should be taught.[48]Instead, the sexuality education provided in Tanzanian schools is implementedin an ad hocand limited manner.[49]In addition, the material covered in schools is not comprehensive, and thereare concerns that schools promote an abstinence-only approach to sex education,while some teaching material contains information that is misleading andscientifically incorrect.[50]Furthermore, teachers are not well trained in the delivery of sex education andthere is little monitoring to determine if it is being taught.Child Abuse and NeglectMy step-mother was mistreating me a lot. She made me to domost of the work while her children were not working. She often denied me foodand would beat and verbally abuse me. I felt it was better I get married andget away from my step mother.— Tina J., married at 15, Lindi Rural, April 2014Violence against children is a significant problem in Tanzania.[51]Many children are “vulnerable to violence, exploitation, neglect andabuse.”[52]According to the 2011 National Survey on Violence Against Children, more than 8in 10 girls and boys “aged 13 to 24 years who experienced sexual violenceprior to age 18, also experienced physical violence.”[53]Sixty percent of children name adult relatives as the most common perpetratorsof physical violence.[54]Natalie F., 19, married when she was 14 after her fatherabandoned her mother:My life turned for the worst after my mother remarried.When I reached Standard 5 [equivalent of grade 7], my step-dad warned me that Ihave to leave home after I finish Standard 7 since I would be grown up. AfterStandard 7 [equivalent of grade 9], he told me, “I cannot raise you whenmy own children are not staying with me, and I am not your biological father.”I went to the market and started vending food. Life on the streets was hard. Imet a man who was a driver. He asked me to marry him and I agreed. He paid adowry of 300,000 TSh ($188).[55]Children who are abused at home, or who lack financial andother material support from their parents or extended families, are more likelyto get married early in the hope of finding a better life.Limited Access to EducationI passed my primary school exams and was selected to joinsecondary school. But my uncle told me, “I have no money to support agirl to go to school. I can never support a girl’s education.” So Igot married.— Kate M., married at 14, Kahama district, April 2014Tanzania has achieved very high rates of primary schoolenrollment. Since the abolition of school fees for primary education and the requirementto send children to school, enrollment has increased: in 2000 only 59 percentof school aged children (7-13 yearsold) were enrolled in primary school; in 2011 it was 94 percent.[56]However, girls with limited access to education may be morelikely to get married. According to the UNFPA, of those women aged 20-24 who were married or in union at age 18,61 percent had no education, and 39 percent had primary education, compared toonly 5 percent of the women who had achieved secondary education or higher.[57]Most of the girls and women interviewed by Human Rights Watch were either notat school when they were married, or were forced by their families to drop outof school to get married.[58]Somemarried girls interviewed by Human Rights Watch had never been to school.Tanzania’s constitution guarantees the right toeducation for all children.[59]The National Education Act, adopted in 1978, provides for compulsory primaryeducation and also makes it an offense for any person to impregnate or marry apupil.[60] In 2002, thegovernment abolished school fees for primary education, although challenges remainin implementing this policy.[61]Abolition of school fees for primary education has led to an increase inprimary school enrollment: in 2005, 7,541,208 children were enrolled and in2012, this number increased to 8,247,172 children.[62]These challenges include overstretched infrastructure, shortage ofequipment and materials, and inequitable distribution of teachers in schools.[63]Despite government efforts to improve access to educationthere are still clear gender gaps in education and literacy. The literacy ratefor men is higher at 82 percent, than for women at 72 percent.[64]Girls face several important obstacles to education, notablygender stereotypes about the value of educating girls, school fees forsecondary schooling and school-related costs, and the entry exam for secondaryschool. In addition, girls are usually expelled from school if they getpregnant.In Tanzania, girls are more likely to be withdrawn fromschool when families face financial constraints because of their low socialstatus and the costs of educating them.[65] Primary education isfree of charge, according to the law, but parents must pay related school costssuch as uniform, text books, and testing fees, which many cannot afford.[66]Secondary school education is not free, with fees ranging from $400 to $800 peryear for government schools. School fees represent a major obstacle for parentswishing to keep their children in school and increase girl’s risk ofdropping out.[67]According to Japheat Daud, program director of Agape AIDS Control Program inShinyanga, an NGO working on child marriage: “Some parents do not value agirls’ education because they think her value is in marriage.”[68]Amber T., 18, married when she was 15 after completingStandard 7 (equivalent to grade 9). She said, “I passed [the exam] to goto secondary school. My mother did not have money to send me to secondaryschool. She then forced me to get married saying it was improper for me to stayat home.”[69]The completion of primary school in Tanzania is marked by takingthe Primary School Leaving Examination (PSLE).[70] The PSLE is not usedas an assessment tool, but as a selection tool to determine which pupilsproceed to secondary school. [71] Pupilswho fail their exam cannot retake it or be admitted to a government secondaryschool.[72] Thispolicy undermines children’s transition tosecondary school and exposes girls to child marriage.[73]The new Education and Training Policy fails toaddress this critical issue and is silent on whether pupils who fail the examcan retake it at a later time. Parents and guardians of children who havefailed the PSLE may send their children to private secondary schools, but manycannot afford to pay private school fees.Salia J., 19, was forced tomarry at 15 after failing the primary school exam:“My only option was to join a private secondaryschool, but my parents are poor. My father decided to get me a man to marry mebecause I was staying at home doing nothing.”[74] Human RightsWatch interviewed several girls who said they married under similarcircumstances.III. Impacts of Child Marriage in TanzaniaChild marriage violates arange of human rights recognized under international law. These include theright to bodily integrity and to be free from violence, the right to education,the right to decide when and who to marry, and the right to the highest attainablestandard of health.Barring Girls from EducationI married when I was 14. Marrying early affected my life ina big way. My dream was to study to be a journalist. Until today, when I watchnews or listen to the radio and someone is reading news, it causes me a lot ofpain because I wish it were me presenting.— Sharon J., married at 14, Kishapu district,April 2014Many of the girls interviewed by Human Rights Watch linkedthe difficulties they faced in their marriages, including violence and poverty,to their limited educational opportunities. Almost all of them regretted notbeing able to complete their education and asked that the government takemeasures to ensure girls who get pregnant or marry while in school are notdenied an education.Studies have shown that girls who continue their education,especially to secondary school, are more likely to invest in their ownchildren’s education, enabling them to become economically independent.[75]At the same time, children of young and illiterate mothers tend to face thesame cycle of childhood deprivation and abuse.[76]Few of the currently married or formerly married girlsinterviewed by Human Rights Watch were enrolled in school after marriage.Although married girls may attend vocational schools or centers - and Human Rights Watch did interview somegirls who were attending these schools -they face many barriers to enrolling and remaining in them.[77]Several girls interviewed were assisted by local NGOs to leave forced marriagesbefore they had started living with their husbands and are now enrolled inschool.Pregnancy and MarriageIn Tanzania, marriage usually ends girls’ education.Married or pregnant pupils are routinely expelled or excluded from school.[78]Although not an official policy, Tanzanian schools also routinely conductmandatory pregnancy tests and expel pregnant girls.[79]The 2013 Ministry of Education and Vocational Training Tool Kit recommendsconducting periodic pregnancy tests as a way of curbing teenage pregnancies inschools.[80] The newEducation and Training Policy is regrettably silent on whether married studentscan continue with school, although it does make provisions for the readmissionof girls after they have given birth and “for other reasons.”[81]According to available government data, 4,705 girls insecondary school and 2,433 girls in primary school dropped out of school due topregnancy in 2012.[82]The government does not appear to collect data on the numbers of girls who areexpelled because they are pregnant or married.[83] HumanRights Watch interviewed several girls who were expelled from school becausethey were pregnant. Others said they stopped attending school after finding outthey were pregnant because they feared expulsion.[84]Sharon J., 19, was expelled when she was in her final yearof primary school: “When the head teacher found out that I was pregnant,he called me to his office and told me, ‘You have to leave our schoolimmediately because you are pregnant.’”[85] Ahead teacher at Farkwa Secondary School said, “When we find a pregnantpupil in school, we call a school board meeting where we agree to expel thepupil.”[86]The practice of expelling pregnant girls is not explicitlymandated by law or policy, but the government has done little to stop it andthe consequent denial of girls’ right to education.[87]School and government officials frame the practice of expelling pregnant girlsas part of an effort to prevent adolescent pregnancy, and as a disciplinarymeasure. There is also a notion among many members of the community thatmotherhood is incompatible with education.[88] Theprovisions in the Education (Expulsion and Exclusion of Pupils from Schools)Regulations, 2002, are vague and fail to provide clear guidance on pregnancy.The regulations allow for schools to expel or exclude pupils who commit anoffense “against morality,” which is often interpreted to mean thatwhen a girl is pregnant, she has had sex out of wedlock.[89]To the government’s credit, the 2014 Education andTraining Policy enables girls to return to school following pregnancy, and alsomakes secondary education compulsory for all students up to Form 4(equivalentto grade 12).[90]The new education policy calls on the government to remove barriers toeducation and training for all students, including ensuring that students whodrop out of school due to pregnancy, or other reasons, have the opportunity tocontinue their studies. However, the policy is silent on allowing girls tocontinue with school during pregnancy and does not lay out clear procedures fortheir re-entry. In an interview a few months before the adoption of the law,the Minister of Education and Vocational Training acknowledged thegovernment’s shortcomings in addressing this issue:We are struggling to enable all children to accesseducation. I would be happy to have pregnant girls in school. We may need towork harder to provide facilities for pregnant girls in schools as we do withchildren with special needs. [91]The Minister of Education and Vocational Training echoed theviews of various persons interviewed for this report, that girls who getpregnant need to know “there are consequences,” including missingout on education.Access to Vocational SchoolsAlthough married girls may access vocational schools, manyare unable to do so and face barriers in seeking to further their education.There are few vocational schools and they are inaccessibleto the majority of girls living in rural areas.[92]Girls who are able to enroll in vocational schools, find it difficult tocontinue their training due to the lack of child care and provision of earlychildhood development centers, distance, the need to do household chores, and controllinghusbands.Physical and Verbal Abuse, Sexual ViolenceMy parents forced me to marry when I was 16 because theywanted to get dowry.I said no and they threatened to chase me from home.I agreed to the marriage because I did not want to disrespect them. My husbandbeats me. When he beats me, he calls me names like “malaya” [prostitute]and “maskini” [pauper]. I am not allowed to visit my family. Evenwhen there are visitors, I am not allowed to see them. Many times my husbandforces me to have sex with him, which makes me feel so bad.— Bantu H., married at 16, Dodoma Urban, April 2014Violence against Girls Who Resist MarriageGirls interviewed by Human Rights Watch who have tried toresist marriage have been physically assaulted and verbally abused by theirfamilies. In some cases, families threatened to disown girls, or chased themaway from home. Anita G., 19, told Human Rights Watch that her father forcedher to marry a man when she was 16 whom she did not know, after the man made adowry payment of 20 cows.Anita told her father she did not want to marrybut preferred to continue her schooling–she was in her second year ofsecondary school. She asked her mother to speak to him:My father became veryangry and started beating me and my mother. He chased us away, and we soughtrefuge at my father’s sister’s home. My mother went back home but Iremained. But I had no way out and eventually got married because my father hadalready accepted dowry for me.[93]Her father forced Anita G. to leave school to get married.Adelina O., 21, told Human Rights Watch that she was 17 whenher mother forced her to marry. When she tried to resist the marriage, hermother threatened her saying: “If you do not want to marry this man, youshould leave my house and never come back because you will have disrespectedme.”Some families coerce or force girls into marriage bythreatening them. Pion H. was 10 when her father tried to force her to undergoFGM and marry a much older man. Pion, now 12, refused and said she wanted to goto school. Her grandmother reprimanded her saying, “Your father willcurse you and you will die because you disobey him.” Pion said, “Igot very afraid and used to cry every day.”[94]Pion was later assisted by a local NGO, which prevented her from undergoing FGMand getting married, and enrolled her in school.A health worker told Human Rights Watch about a 14-year-oldgirl forced to marry a 70-year-old man who had paid her father a dowry of 10cows. The health worker tried to assist the girl: “I took her to school.While at school, someone gave her some herbs and she got a skin rash. Shebecame very terrified about the skin rash, and said that her father had put a curseon her. She decided to leave school and marry the old man.”[95]Physical, Verbal, and Emotional Violence inMarriageMost of the girls and women interviewed by Human RightsWatch said that they experienced violence during their marriage.Patricia J., 17, married an 18-year-old man when she was 15,hoping to escape poverty at home. Her husband paid a dowry of 70,000 TSh ($44).She eventually left the marriage and is staying with a friend:My husband used to beat me almost every day. One day hecame home and started making noises and threatening me saying he will burn me.I asked him why and he said, “Your father took my money because he ispoor.” He told me to spread my legs open. I refused. He went outside thehouse and came with burning charcoal. He forced my legs open and pushed theburning charcoal into my vagina. I was helpless. All I could do was cry.[96]Aida K., 22, married at the age of 17 after finishingprimary school. She was married to her 21-year-old husband for three years buthe eventually chased her away because she was not pregnant and married anotherwoman. She told Human Rights Watch: “My husband would despise me saying, ‘Youare barren and useless. Even if you go away there is no problem. Your friendhas a baby and you do not. You can leave my house if you want.’ I feltvery bad and decided to leave the marriage.”[97]Many girls interviewed by Human Rights Watch said theirlives were controlled by their husbands through violence and threats. Some saidthey were lonely and isolated because they were confined to their homes toperform domestic and child-rearing duties, or because their movements wererestricted by their husbands or in-laws. Several girls told Human Rights Watchthat their husbands prevented them from contacting family or friends, going tothe market, or looking for a job.Rose M., a mother of 2, was married when she was 16. Shetold us: “I experienced a lot of problems in my marriage. We had no foodor clothes. We washed our clothes with leaves. My husband beat me at leasttwice a week and he used to force me to have sex with him. Also, I was not allowedto go out of the home.”[98]Natalie F., 19, married a 27-year-old man when she was 14.Natalie said about her marriage, “I had no power over anything. I couldnot make any decisions at home.”[99]Some girls also told Human Rights Watch that they were abusedby their husbands’ relatives, while some in polygamous unions said theirco-wives abused them. Amani J., 18, married at the age of 16. She said that herfather forced her to marry a 30-year-old-man who already had a wife. She toldus that she faced abuse from her in-laws:My husband’s first wife and his relatives hated me somuch. The first wife would verbally abuse and threaten me saying, “I hateyou. One day I will poison you because this is my husband and not yours.”My husband’s family also isolated me. They used to overwork me and denyme food.[100]Girls sometimes attemptto leave abusive husbands and return to their own families, hoping to receivehelp, but girls interviewed by Human Rights Watch who tried to return to theirfamilies said that they are often told that all married women must tolerateabuse, and are then forced to return to their husbands.[101]Linda W., 18, married at the age of 14. She fledto her parent’s home after her husband beat her, but her father tried toforce her to return to him:My husband was beating me every day. I went back home. Myfather tried to force me to go back to my husband. My husband came to get mebut I said no. My father told him to beat me so that I agree to go back withhim. My husband beat me severely but I still said no. He gave up beating me andwent away. The next morning I escaped from my parents’ home and went toseek help from a local organization.[102]Catherine P. was 16 when her parents forced her to getmarried. She told Human Rights Watch her husband physically, verbally, andsexually abused her. She reported the abuse to her parents but they advisedher: “Violence in a marriage is a normal thing and the wife has to betolerant.” When asked whether she had reported her husband to the policeshe said, “I can’t report him to the police because my parents toldme to tolerate him and I do not want to disrespect them.”[103]Sexual Violence in MarriageMany of the married and formerly married girls and womenwhom Human Rights Watch interviewed said their husbands forced them to havesex. Aisha S., 20, was 17 and in her third year of secondary school when herfather forced her to marry a 45-year-old-man. He paid her father a dowry of300,000 TSh ($200).She told Human Rights Watch: “My husband usedto beat me brutally.... He used to force me to have sex. I tolerated his abusetill I gave birth and then I ran away. I now live with my grandmother.”[104]Penina K. was 14 when her parents forced her to marry a32-year-old man. She told us she suffered sexual, physical, and verbal abusefrom her former husband: “He forced me to have sex. I did not refusebecause my parents had advised me to always do what my husband tells me, andnot to deny him sex. I did not report him because my parents told me not totalk about my domestic problems with anyone.”[105]Jana K. told Human Rights Watch that her husband physicallyand sexually abused her when she was pregnant.“My husband used tobeat me at least two times a week. When I got pregnant, I was not interested inhaving sex with him. If I told him I did not want to have sex, he would startbeating me and force me to have sex with him.”[106]As is the case in many African countries, marital rape isnot recognized as a crime under Tanzanian law.[107]This gapfacilitates the sexual abuse of girls and women and leaves them with no remedy.[108]Coerced or non-consensual sex can have particularly long-lasting physical andmental health consequences for young girls because they are still at aformative stage of social and psychological development, shaping theiridentities and perspectives. Mental health implications may include a sense ofworthlessness, depression, and suicidal thoughts.[109]Female Genital MutilationIn Tanzania, FGM ispracticed for various socio-cultural reasons depending on ethnic group,including as part of a ritual initiation into womanhood.[110]Among the ethnic groups of the Maasai and Gogo,where Human Rights Watch conducted its research, FGM is closely related tochild marriage and is done primarily as a rite of passage to prepare girls formarriage.[111]A Maasai traditional leader told Human Rights Watch,“In our land [community], you have to cut a girl before she gets married.Girls are cut between 10-15 years andthey get married 2-3 months after beingcut. There is a lot of pain when you combine FGM, and the forced marriage of agirl.”[112] Apolice officer at the Police Gender and Children’s Desk also told us:“Among the Maasai, FGM is linked to child marriage. When you hear thereis a [FGM] ceremony taking place, know that a husband is also chosen.”[113]The prevalence of FGM in Tanzania was estimated at 15percent in 2010–a slight decline from 18 percent in 1996.[114]This decline may be attributable to an actual decline in the practice as aresult of the legal prohibition or underreporting of the practice.[115]The prevalence of FGM is higher among women in rural areas than in urban areasand higher among those with low levels of education.[116]There are wide regional variations in the prevalence of FGM.[117] InTanzania, FGM is carried out on girls throughout childhood.[118] The TDHS2010 reports that the cutting of young girls is increasingly carried out at anearlier age, with the percentage of girls cut before their first birthday increasingfrom 28 percent in 2004-2005, to 37percent in 2010.[119]Pion H., 12, was 10-years-old and in her second year ofprimary school when her grandmother told her she was to undergo FGM and getmarried:My grandmother told me, “You must stop schoolimmediately. Get prepared to become a ‘real’ Maasai woman.” Istarted crying. I was afraid. I knew it [FGM and forced marriage] was going tohappen because they told my sister the same thing. She was also 1o-years-oldwhen they cut her and forced her to marry a month later.[120]A girl who has notundergone FGM may be socially ostracized and referred to as “rubbish”or “useless.”[121]If married, her in-laws may force her to undergoFGM.[122]Among the Maasai and Gogo ethnic groups, a girlwho has undergone FGM fetches more dowry.[123]Human Rights Watch interviewed several girls whosaid they underwent FGM as preparation for marriage.Impact of Dowry PaymentDowry payment is believedby some communities to give a husband and his family “propertyrights” over the wife.[124]Dowry payment may increase the likelihood ofviolence against women and girls, who may be unable to leave abusiverelationships because they cannot afford to repay the dowry.[125]Dora P. told Human Rights Watch that her husbandwas physically and verbally abusive, and that whenever she complained, he wouldreply, “I bought you. Your father has taken my wealth so I own you. Doyou think you can go anywhere?”[126]Some girls told Human Rights Watch that they were beaten orthreatened if they resisted marrying because their families did not want tolose the dowry. Annet R. told us her father forced her to get married, saying: “Ihave already taken dowry from your husband. You will have to marry him. If youdo not marry him, I will disown you as my daughter.”[127]Dowry also makes divorce and separation more difficult.Under some Tanzanian customary law systems, divorce is not widely accepted andin some cases, may only be possible when the dowry is repaid, a requirementthat can put pressure on a woman to stay in a violent marriage because herfamily may be unable or unwilling to repay the dowry.[128]Sofia V., 18, said her mother forced her to marry when shewas 14 because she wanted to get dowry. Sofia agreed to the marriage because,“She is my mother and I had to listen to her.” Her husband beat herand often failed to provide financially for her and her children. She left himand sought help from her aunt. She told Human Rights Watch:My mother called me asking why I had left with the babybecause my husband was asking for his dowry. When my aunt heard this, she saidto me, “This is your bus fare, take it and go to your husband.” Ileft my aunt’s home and went to live with my nephew for five months, buteventually went home to my mother.My mother was very angry with me andwanted me to take my baby to the father. I refused. I stayed with her but shewas telling me harsh words all the time. She would say, “You are notgiving me a good reason why you left your husband. You have put me in debtbecause I have to repay the dowry. If you want to stay here, return the baby tothe father.” I decided to become a waitress to help my mother to repaythe dowry. She returned some of the dowry but they are still demanding therest.[129]Impact on HealthPhysical Health ConsequencesI had complications during delivery. I bled a lot andalmost died. I even fell unconscious during delivery because I had lost so muchblood.— Jamila G., married at 14, Kishapu district, March2014Young mothers and their children face serious health risksassociated with early pregnancy and childbirth. These increased risks are notonly related to age, but also to girls’ low levels of education, lowsocial status, and lack of access to health-related information and healthservices.Research in developing countries shows that complicationsfrom pregnancy and childbirth are the main cause of death among adolescentgirls aged 15-19 in those countries.[130]Teenagers aged 15 to 19 years are twice as likely to die during pregnancy orchildbirth compared to women over 20 years old.[131]Girls between the ages of 10 and 14 are 5 times more likely to die duringdelivery than mothers who are between 20 and 24.[132]The children of young mothers also face higher mortality rates.[133]Studies also show that Tanzania’s widespread child marriage exacerbatesthe high maternal mortality rates. According to the United Nations, Tanzaniawas one of the 10 countries that together accounted for 58 percent of globalmaternal deaths in 2013.[134]A midwife working at the maternity ward of ShinyangaRegional Hospital for more than 20 years said:From my experience, I have seen that complications duringdelivery are higher in girls between 15-20years and especially those younger than 15. Mortality is also higher amongthese girls. Sometimes they do not have breast milk to feed the baby. InJanuary, February, and March 2014, 30 girls between the ages of 14 and 16 gavebirth through caesarian section because their bodies were not physically maturefor normal delivery. In the same three months, 438 girls aged below 20delivered here.[135]The district medical officer of Shinyanga district said:In January to December 2013, we had 1,508 pregnant girlsbelow the age of 20 who suffered from risk factors of hypertension, anemia, andhemorrhage. Only 680 pregnant women above the age of 20 suffered the same riskfactors. The big difference clearly shows that age is a big factor in pregnancyrelated complications among young girls.[136]Aisha S. married at 17 and became pregnant shortly afterwards.She said:I got complications during delivery. I was unable to pushand I was weak with no energy. The nurses said I was getting complicationsbecause my body was not fully developed. To pull out the baby, the nursesforced their hands inside my body and pulled the baby out. I felt so much painthat I was not able to walk for a whole month after delivery.[137]Due to physical immaturity, young girls are more susceptibleto obstructed labor, which is a leading cause of maternal mortality globally.[138]Obstructed labor also causes obstetric fistula, a childbirth injury that leavesits victims with urine or fecal incontinence.[139]Studies show that, although factors such as lack of access to timely andadequate maternity care are predisposing factors, physical immaturity is thekey risk for developing obstetric fistula for girls under 15.[140]Tanzania has high rates of obstetric fistula.[141] Itis estimated that 3,700 new fistula cases occur annually in Tanzania.[142]Psychological Consequences of Child MarriageAs illustrated by theaccounts of women and girls who were married as children, child marriage canhave profound psychological health consequences for girls, particularly youngergirls, and these consequences mayimpact women throughout their lives. Many of the girls and women said they wereunhappy in their marriages and regretted having been married early.Some girls with whomHuman Rights Watch spoke said they contemplated suicide to avoid gettingmarried. Rose M., 20, was 16 and in Standard 6 (equivalent to grade 8) when herfather forced her to leave school to get married because she was“big” enough. She said, “I felt very sad when my fatherforced me to leave school and get married. I wanted to commit suicide.… Isaw it as my only solution to avoid getting married to a man I did notknow.”[143]Hadija C., 19, wasmarried at 14 and has 2children. She has since left the marriage. She toldHuman Rights Watch: “I felt lonely and I was always crying. My husbandused to force me to have sex. I kept thinking to myself that if I was notmarried I would have finished my studies.”[144]Agnes J., married at 17, told us: “I feltvery sad. I regretted marrying. What kept me going was the hope that one day hewould travel on a long journey and I would run away.”[145]Agatha K., 11, was 7 when her father tried to force her intomarriage. She told Human Rights Watch: “My husband came in the morning totake me away to his home. As we were walking to my husband’s home, Istarted crying. I was crying because I did not want to get married. I was youngto get married. A policeman saw me and asked me why I was crying. I told him Iwas being forced to get married. The policeman threatened to arrest my husbandand he took me to an NGO.” Agatha is now at school with the help of alocal organization.IV. Government Failure to Protect Girls from ChildMarriage and Ensure Justice for VictimsLast year, there was a 14-year-old girl in a village calledElelai.She had passed Standard 7 to go to secondary school, but herfather wanted her to marry an old man who had two wives. The case was reportedto us. We arrested the parents and the husband to be, and they were taken tocourt. The court kept postponing the case and eventually the girl disappeared.That was the end of the case.—Happiness Eliufoo, police officer, Police Gender andChildren’s Desk, Hai district, April 2014Discriminatory, Contradictory, and Vague Laws onthe Age of Marriage and Sexual ViolenceTanzania’s Marriage Act of1971 permits child marriage for girls. It sets the minimum marriage age forgirls at 15 with parental consent, and at 18 for boys.[146]It also permitsthe marriage of 14-year-old children when a court is satisfied that specialcircumstances exist, but fails to define what constitutes specialcircumstances.[147] The2009 Child Act does not expressly prohibit child and forced marriage, butprohibits cultural practices that are dehumanizing or are injurious to thephysical and mental well-being of a child, which could include child marriage.[148]The Penal Code of 1945 similarly does not expressly prohibit child marriage butprohibits the abduction of a woman with intent to marry, an offense that ispunishable by seven years in prison.[149]The Sexual Offences SpecialProvisions Act criminalizes rape, attempted rape, sexual exploitation ofchildren, and defilement.[150]This law makes it an offense to have sex with a girl under the age of 18.[151]It also prohibits sexual intercourse where consent is not “freely andvoluntarily given by each of the parties” and where consent is obtainedthrough coercion.[152]However, the Penal Code and the Sexual Offences Special Provisions Act do notcriminalize marital rape and the Sexual Offences Special Provisions Actprovides that a man who has sex with a girl below 18 years does not commit rapeif “the woman is his wife who is fifteen or more of age, and is notseparated from the man.”[153]A magistrate explained that oneof the challenges she faces in protecting girls from child marriage and maritalviolence:The Marriage Act and SOSPA undermine our ability to protectgirls and women from child marriage and marital rape. The Law of the MarriageAct allows a girl below 18 years to enter into a marriage. At the same time,SOSPA prohibits sexual relations with a girl below 18 years but says that a mandoes not commit the offense of rape if the woman is his wife, is 15 years andthey are not separated.[154]A police officer told Human Rights Watch:We use the definition that a child is below 18. We do getthese cases [child marriage] from teachers, NGOs, ward executive officers, andward council leaders. After a case is reported we open an investigation. Thechallenge we face is that the law of marriage is contradictory with the Child Act[Law of the Child] that allows girls who have not reached 18 [years] andchildren to marry. So we prefer to talk to the parents to stop the marriage andtake the girl back to school instead of prosecuting.[155]Weak Enforcement of Existing Laws and Access toJusticeWomen and girls are often reluctant to report cases offorced marriage and violence to the police. They lack confidence that thejustice system will protect them, often because of its bribery and corruption.Theyalso often do not know their rights and they are subject to threats ofretaliation from the perpetrator and family, and to community pressure to solveconflicts internally.Poverty also plays a role. Those who do seekjustice face many hurdles, including barriers to access the formal justicesystem and pressure to have matters adjudicated through problematic customaryprocesses.Madina H. was forced to marry when she was 16. She toldHuman Rights Watch she could not report her husband’s physical abusebecause he threatened her saying, “If you report me to the police, I willbeat you even more and chase you away from my house.”[156]Various sources said that bribery of judicial and othergovernment officials was a major barrier to successful prosecution of crimesagainst women and girls.A police officer at the Police Gender and Children’sDesk told Human Rights Watch:Some of the cases we take to court for prosecution aredelayed or are not completed because perpetrators pay money to the magistrates.When magistrates are paid, all they do is keep postponing and adjourning casesduring hearing sessions. When cases are delayed, the victims and witnesses giveup on the case and stop coming to court.[157]Janet G., now 19, marriedat 17. Her husband refuses to pay maintenance for their child: “I want toreport my husband’s abuse to the police but I do not have money to paythem to help me.”[158]A representative of an NGO working on child marriage and FGMtold Human Rights Watch that they privately prosecuted a case in which 3 sisters,one 13 and two 14, were forced to undergo FGM and marriage. The NGO alleged thefather of the girls bribed the magistrate to end the case:“Afterthe magistrate was bribed, he ruled that there was no case for the girls’father to answer, and that the case could not proceed to trial.”[159]Almost all of the social welfare officers and NGO staffersworking with women and children who spoke to Human Rights Watch mentioned alack of awareness about rights as a key barrier to girls and women reportingchild marriages and domestic violence. Most of the girls Human Rights Watchinterviewed did not know about the laws on child marriage and violence, or thatthey could report their families for forcing them to marry. Many girls who hadbeen abandoned by their husbands or whose boyfriends had refused to supporttheir children did not know that they had a right to seek legal help to enforcethe payment of child maintenance.Kanoni K. was physically and verbally abused by her husbandafter being married at 14. She said, “I was very young. I thoughtviolence was a normal thing in a marriage. I did not know I could go to thepolice.”[160]Few Tanzanians have access to the formal legal system.Barriers include the high cost of legal fees, inability to access legal aid,long distances to courts that are located mainly in urban areas, lack ofawareness about court procedures, and lack of juvenile courts.[161]Broader systemic weaknesses in the criminal justice system such as thelack of infrastructure, like fully equipped Police Gender and Children’s Desks,lack of government resources, and lack of trained personnel make it difficultfor Tanzanians to seek and obtain justice. A small number of girls weinterviewed told us they tried to file charges against perpetrators but noaction was taken against the perpetrators.Many serious marital problems are instead handled bytraditional leaders, who apply the customary laws of Tanzania’s variousethnic groups. As child marriage is accepted in many Tanzanian traditions andcultures, customary processes offer limited hope for redress and protection.Government officials, such as ward or council executives, are closest tocommunities and women and girls are more likely to seek help from them forforced marriage or marital violence.[162]However, these officials may also apply customary laws that allow them to usemediation and reconciliation to solve issues of violence, and their decisionsfrequently reflect deeply ingrained patriarchal views.[163]Human Rights Watch documented several instances whereperpetrators of violence against women and girls were permitted to paycompensation to the parents of the victim, or were allowed to marry their victimsin cases of rape and defilement, in order to avoid criminal penalties. Asalready noted, when girls get pregnant out of wedlock, parents and guardiansoften force the girl to marry her sexual partner, regardless of whether thegirl is not of legal age to consent to sex or the pregnancy is the result ofrape.[164]A ward executive officer confirmed the general lack ofwillingness among communities to report child and forced marriage cases:I have handled very fewcases of forced marriage. I receive only about two to three cases on average ayear. The problem is many of these cases are not reported because they aresolved at the local level in the village. At the village level, cases aresolved by a perpetrator paying compensation in the form of money or livestocklike cows, goats and sheep to the injured family.[165]Customary adjudication processes generally favor restorativeand consensual solutions over punitive ones.[166]While these are accepted ways of settling disputes within communities, thefailure of customary procedures to address the criminal elements ofgender-based crimes leaves victims without adequate remedy. In addition, theycreate opportunities for families and husbands to intimidate women, and coercethem into marriages or to continue in marriages that they did not want or withabusive husbands.Weakness in Child ProtectionThe government of Tanzania has adopted child protectionlegislation, policies, and action plans.[167] TheLaw of the Child Act, 2009, establishes a legal framework for child protection.[168]In addition, following the outcomes of a national study on various forms of violenceagainst children, the government developed the National Plan of Action (NAP) toguide the provision of high quality services dedicated to preventing andresponding to violence as part of the national child protection system throughmulti-sectoral collaboration.[169] TheChild Act puts obligations on local government authorities, including socialwelfare officers, to safeguard and promote the welfare of children within itsarea of jurisdiction.[170]UNICEF is supporting the government to establish child protection teams inTanzania to protect children from abuse and expedite cases of abuse againstchildren.[171]However, despite thislegal framework, the government is failing to implement child protection laws,policies, and action plans effectively throughout the country. The lack ofsupport, including adequate resources and training, provided to relevantauthorities in child protection has undermined the effectiveness of therelevant laws, policies, and the NAP.The acting regional social welfare officer of Kilimanjaro,Agnes Humphrey Urassa, said:We do not have adequate training on issues around childprotection.We lack adequate resources to facilitate our work. Thisundermines our ability to make timely interventions on cases of child abuse andchild marriage. We are also unable to sometimes follow up on whether girls arelater married off, effective follow up in cases of abuse of children.[172]Customary Laws and Practices that Undermine RightsCustomary laws andpractices tend to discriminate against women in matters related to marriage.[173]Customary and Islamic laws and practicesconsider puberty as the age of majority and use it to determine when a girl isready for marriage.[174]They also promote practices such as polygamy andwife inheritance.[175]Customary laws also do not recognize maritalrape.[176]The Judicature and Application of Laws Act and the LocalCustomary Law (Declaration) (No.4), Order of 1963 allow for the application ofcustomary and Islamic laws in matters of marriage, divorce, guardianship,inheritance, and similar matters in Tanzania.[177] TheMarriage Act also allows courts to give regard to the customs of the communityto which the parties belong when deciding matters of division of matrimonialproperty.[178]Most marriages in Tanzania at the village level are enteredinto under customary law.[179]The Law of the Marriage Act of 1971 was enacted to unify and harmonize themultiple existing regimes of marriages in Tanzania and to give equalrecognition to all marriages however celebrated, including under Christianity,Islam, civil, or customary.[180] Someof the girls Human Rights Watch interviewed said their marriages were presidedover by traditional leaders or ward and village executive officers. JosephineK. was forced to marry when she was 14. She thought the ward and villageexecutive officers would protect her and stop the marriage: “I had awedding ceremony that was prepared by my husband’s parents. The elders inmy village and village executive officers presided over my marriage. They didnot do anything to stop my father from marrying me off.”[181]Lack of SheltersTanzania has few shelters for survivors of gender-basedviolence. Lack of shelters or safe spaces where girls can seek help andprotection when at risk of forced marriage—or when they run away fromthem—is a key barrier to effectively responding to child marriage anddomestic violence generally. Girls who resist marriage face physical, verbal,and psychological violence from their families and husbands and are not safe athome. As accounts in this report show, girls and women who face abuse fromtheir husbands often do not get help from their parents and therefore theirparents’ homes are often not a place they can seek refuge.Maureen K., 19, told us why she was still living with herabusive husband: “I have thought of leaving my husband but I have no placeto go.”[182] Herparents forced her to marry him after she became pregnant.The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, theinternational expert body that interprets and monitors compliance with the CRC,has urged governments to provide shelters to girls who escape from childmarriages and to develop and provide adequate resources to implement“physical and psychological recovery programmes for child victims ofharmful traditional practices,” including child marriage.[183]The few shelter facilities in Tanzania are not run or fundedby the government, but by individuals and NGOs.[184]Police officers and NGOs working on women’s and children’s rightssaid they have to accommodate women and girl survivors of domestic violence andchild marriage at homes for street children, orphanages, or though informalshelter arrangements. The deputy minister in the Ministry of CommunityDevelopment, Gender, and Children told Human Rights Watch: “We askdistrict officials, relatives, friends, or religious leaders to help us accommodatethe victim. Our challenge is that we lack resources to establish shelterfacilities in all regions.”[185]The director of an NGO that works with women said:“One of the biggest challenges we face is lack of shelters. There is aprivately owned shelter in Dar es Salaam. However, this facility is not enoughto accommodate all the women we receive, so many end up going back home to theabusers.”[186]A police officer told us, “We are always stuck withvictims of violence who have nowhere to go. We have no place to keep them safe.Sometimes we take them to a center for abandoned babies run by a Roman CatholicChurch.”[187]Lack of Birth and Marriage RegistrationsI had a marriage ceremony but I do not have a marriagecertificate. I do not know where to get one.— Annet G., married at 16, Mpwapwa district, April2014Birth and marriageregistration are important tools for ensuring equity over a broad scope ofservices and interventions for children and women. They are essentialcomponents of combating child marriage as they assist in proving the age ofspouses at the time of marriage.Tanzanian laws, including the Births and Deaths RegistrationAct cap 108 (2002), the Marriage Act, 1971, and the Law of the Child Act,require birth, marriage, and death registration.[188]However, these laws are poorly implemented in Tanzania. Only 16 percent ofchildren in Tanzania under age 5 have been registered with civil authorities,and only about half of these children received a birth certificate.[189]Most marriages in Tanzaniaare entered into under customary laws or by cohabitation and research showscustomary marriages remain unregistered for varied reasons, such as inadequateaccess to registration officials.[190]This is despite domestic laws, such as theMarriage Act, providing for compulsory marriage registration.[191]Many of the girls interviewed married undercustomary law. Some of them had marriage certificates, but others said they didnot know it was important to register their marriages or where to register.V. Tanzania’s International Legal ObligationsThe government of Tanzania has obligations underinternational and regional human rights law to protect the rights of girls andwomen. These include the rights to equality and non-discrimination, to thehighest attainable standard of health, to education, to information, to freeand full consent to marriage, to choose one’s spouse, and to be free fromphysical, mental, and sexual violence. Those whose rights are violated areentitled to an effective remedy. The inadequate fulfillment and protection ofthese rights is both a cause and consequence of child marriage in Tanzania.Tanzania is a party to the core international treaties thatprotect women’s and girls’ human rights. Tanzania has ratified theInternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the InternationalCovenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), the Convention onthe Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), and theConvention on the Rights of the Child (CRC).[192] Among the regionaltreaties to which Tanzania is a party are the African Charter on Human andPeoples’ Rights (the “African Charter”), the African Charteron the Rights and Welfare of the Child (ACRWC), and the Protocol to the AfricanCharter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa (the“Maputo Protocol”).[193]International human rightslaw recognizes state accountability for abuses by private actors and requiresgovernments to show due diligence in preventing and responding to human rightsviolations. According to the CEDAW Committee, which monitors governmentcompliance with CEDAW, “States may also be responsible for private actsif they fail to act with due diligence to prevent violations of rights or toinvestigate and punish acts of violence.”[194]Under international law,governments are obligated to work towards eliminating harmful traditionalbeliefs, values, stereotypes, or practices that contravene human rights. Theymust not invoke “traditional values” to justify violations of humanrights, particularly for people who are members of groups that havehistorically suffered discrimination such as women.[195]CEDAW explicitly acknowledges social and cultural norms asthe sources of many women’s rights abuses, and requires governments totake appropriate measures to address such abuses. Governments need to“modify the social and cultural patterns of conduct of men and women, witha view to achieving the elimination of prejudices and customary and all otherpractices which are based on the idea of the inferiority or the superiority ofeither of the sexes or on stereotyped roles for men and women.”[196]Theargument that some practices are cultural norms and thus impervious toalteration cannot justify a government’s failure to addressdiscriminatory practices. The Human Rights Committee, which monitors compliancewith the ICCPR, affirms that governments “should ensure that traditional,historical, religious or cultural attitudes are not used to justify violationsof women’s right to equality before the law and to equal enjoyment of allCovenant rights.”[197]Right to Equality and Non-DiscriminationTanzania has obligations under international law to ensurewomen’s rights to equality and non-discrimination. The ICCPR calls for“the equal right of men and women to the enjoyment of all civil andpolitical rights,” including the right to birth registration, to free andfull consent to marriage, to equality of rights and responsibilities of spousesduring marriage and at its dissolution, to life, to liberty and security of theperson, and to freedom of expression.[198] TheICESCR includes similar provisions.[199]The CRC recognizes the right of children to be free fromdiscrimination, including on the grounds of sex.[200]The CEDAW Committee hasexplained that “[i]nherent to the principle of equality between men andwomen, or gender equality, is the concept that all human beings, regardless ofsex, are free to develop their personal abilities, pursue their professionalcareers and make choices without the limitations set by stereotypes, rigidgender roles and prejudices.”[201]Child marriage is considered a form of gender-baseddiscrimination because the practice disproportionately affects girls, andnegatively impacts the realization of many of girls’ and women’sother human rights. The impact of these violations is felt by women throughouttheir lives, and extends to their families and societies.A number of child bridesare forced into polygamous marriages thereby undermining their right toequality and non-discrimination. CEDAW, in its General Recommendation No. 21 onEquality in Marriage and Family Relations, explains that “polygamousmarriage contravenes a woman's right to equality with men and can have suchserious emotional and financial consequences for her and her dependents”and ought to be discouraged and prohibited.[202]Right to Marriage, Choose a Spouse, and Minimum Ageof MarriageThe right to marriage based on “full and freeconsent” of the spouses is recognized in several internationalinstruments.[203]CEDAW upholds the equal right of men and women to enter into marriage, and theConvention on the Consent to Marriage further specifies that each spouse mustgive his or her consent “in person...as prescribed by law.”[204]The Maputo Protocol specifies that “no marriage shall take place withoutthe free and full consent of both parties.”[205]The ACRWC states that, “Child marriage and thebetrothal of girls and boys shall be prohibited.” Prohibitions on childmarriage and non-discrimination are also included in the Maputo Protocol andthe African Charter.[206]The CRC Committee has repeatedly addressed the need forcountries to establish a definition of a child in all domestic legislation thatis consistent with the provisions of the CRC. It has also taken a clearposition on 18 as the minimum age for marriage, regardless of parental consent.[207]At the African regional level, the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare ofthe Child explicitly requires governments to take effective action, includinglegislation, to specify the minimum age of marriage as 18 years.[208]The Maputo Protocol also specifies that governments are to “enactappropriate national legislative measures to guarantee that; the minimum age ofmarriage for women shall be 18 years.”[209]The UN Human Rights Committee clarified in General CommentNo. 19 that the marriageable age for both men and women shall be based on theability of both spouses to give their full and free consent.[210]In its General Comment No. 28, the committee affirms the obligation ofgovernments to treat men and women equally with regard to marriage.[211]CEDAW General Comment No. 21 on the right to marriage reiterates men’sand women’s equal right to enter into marriage, conditioned on their freeand full consent.[212]Consent cannot be “free and full” when one ofthe parties involved is not sufficiently mature to make an informed decisionabout a life partner, or the meaning and responsibility of marriage.[213] Theaccounts in this report indicate that many girls, including older girls who areof the legal marriage age, were unaware of the implications of marriage and theresponsibilities that come with it. These forms of marriage generally disregardthe free and full consent and wishes of the girls involved, thus placing themat high risk of violence and other forms of abuse and exploitation.Right to EducationInternational law provides that everyone has the right toeducation and the right to equal opportunity in education.[214] TheMaputo Protocol specifically places obligations on governments to eliminate allforms of discrimination against women and guarantee them equal opportunity andaccess to education and training.[215]While the right to education under the ICESCR is subject toprogressive realization, governments also have core obligations that have to befulfilled immediately. In particular, governments need to “provideprimary education for all, on a non-discriminatory basis” and ensure thatprimary education is free of charge and compulsory.[216]The 2005 CRC Committee’s General Comment No. 7 on implementing childrights in early childhood interprets the right to education during earlychildhood as beginning at birth and closely linked to young children’sright to maximum development.[217]With regards to secondary education, the ESCR Committee,which monitors state compliance with the ICESCR, in its General Comment No. 13on the Right to Education, has stated that governments also have an obligationto take concrete steps towards achieving free secondary and higher education.Secondary education must not be dependent on a student's apparent capacity orability, and should be distributed throughout the country in such a way that itis available on the same basis to all.[218] HumanRights Watch considers the use of the Primary School Leaving Examination as aselection mechanism to secondary education to be contrary to the right toeducation as provided under international law. This is because it hinderschildren’s transition into secondary school.The ESCR Committee has highlighted the need for the Tanzaniangovernment to take steps to ensure free primary education and urgently addressthe high dropout rate of girls from both primary and secondary education,including “by abolishing mandatory pregnancy testing and prohibitingexpulsions due to pregnancy.”[219] The committeealso addressed the need for Tanzania to take steps to raise the overall qualityof education through increasing the number of teachers, improving theavailability of textbooks, and improving the physical environment of schools,including “ensuring appropriate water and sanitation facilities, inparticular in rural areas.”[220]Tanzania is failing in its obligation to ensure access toeducation for boys and girls on an equal basis. Child and forced marriages aremajor contributors to Tanzania’s low rates of school enrollment amonggirls, particularly at the secondary and tertiary levels. They also contributeto low rates of literacy among women. Tanzania is also not meeting itsobligations with regard to the right to education by failing to: curb child andforced marriages; take steps to stop harmful and discriminatory practices inschools such as the forced pregnancy testing of girls and their expulsion fromschool; and take measures to enable married girls to continue with formalschooling.Right to be Free from Physical, Mental, and SexualViolenceUnder international and regional law, the government ofTanzania has an obligation to prevent, investigate, prosecute, and punishviolence against girls and women.[221]The responsibility is grounded in the rights of non-discrimination andequality, security of person, health, and freedom from torture and otherill-treatment provided in treaties thatTanzania has ratified.The CRC obligates governments to protect children fromphysical, mental, and sexual abuse or exploitation through legislation andother social and educational measures. The obligation to protect children fromviolence includes protection from parents or other caregivers.[222] TheCRC also sets out the obligation of governments to protect children from sexualexploitation and abuse.[223]The Maputo Protocol calls on governments to adopt legislative,administrative, social, and economic measures as may be necessary to identifythe causes and consequences of all forms of violence against women includingsexual violence whether it occurs in private or public, and to ensure their prevention,punishment, and eradication,.[224]It specifically obliges governments to take measures to protect women who areat risk of harmful practices and all other forms of violence, abuse, andintolerance, and to “establish mechanisms and accessible services foreffective information, rehabilitation, and reparation for victims of violenceagainst women.”[225]The African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rightsand the CRC Committee have specifically addressed the need for Tanzania toeliminate the discriminatory practice of violence against women by enactinglaws to penalize domestic violence and marital rape.[226] The ESCRCommittee addressed the need for Tanzania to ensure effective enforcement ofthe provisions criminalizing FGM, expand programs against FGM to those regionswith a high prevalence, and organize media campaigns and other outreachactivities on FGM.[227]The CEDAW Committee hasidentified key steps necessary to combat violence against women, among them:effective legal measures, including penal sanctions, civil remedies, andcompensatory provisions; preventive measures, including public information andeducation programs to change attitudes about the roles and status of men andwomen; and protective measures, including shelters, counseling, rehabilitation,and support services.[228]Violence targeting womenprevents them from enjoying a host of other rights. These rights include theright not to be subject to cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment orpunishment,[229]security of person,[230]and at times, the right to life.[231]The CEDAW Committee has also noted that“gender-based violence is a form of discrimination that seriouslyinhibits women’s ability to enjoy rights and freedoms on the basis ofequality with men,” including “the right to the highest attainablestandard of physical and mental health.”[232]As this report shows, girls in Tanzania who are subjected tochild marriage may experience violence from their spouses, in-laws, and otherfamily members. This includes physical, verbal, sexual, and psychological abuse.Girls and women often do not report violence to the authorities due to a numberof cultural and legal barriers as noted. Nonetheless, some women do reportabuse, including forced marriages, but they rarely get redress.Tanzania’s obligations to prevent, investigate,prosecute, and punish violence against girls and women includes ensuring thatstate actors, such as the police, the justice system, and customary processestake all reasonable steps to provide everyone within its territory witheffective protection against violence by private parties. Governments shouldalso address the barriers that deter women and girls from reporting abuse andaccessing protection–to better prevent abuse in the first place–andto change discriminatory attitudes. This includes effectively investigatingsuch violence in a manner capable of leading to the identification,prosecution, and punishment of those responsible.[233]The inaction of government authorities, police, prosecutors,and customary bodies in the face of violence against women creates anatmosphere of impunity facilitating further abuse, and dissuades women fromseeking help. Their failure to act exposes girls and women to further violence.Right to HealthThe right to health is enshrined in numerous internationaltreaties. The ICESCR specifies that everyone has a right “to theenjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mentalhealth,” and obligates governments to implement the right withoutdiscrimination on the basis of sex, age, or other prohibited grounds.[234]The CRC recognizes children’s rights to health and to access healthservices, and notably the right to be protected from traditional practicesprejudicial to the health of the child.[235] CEDAW obligatesgovernments to take all appropriate measures to eliminate discriminationagainst women in the field of health.[236]Severaltreaties and authoritative interpretations specifically note that reducingmaternal mortality rates and improving maternal health services are not subjectto progressive realization, but are core obligations that must be metimmediately.[237]The CRC Committee has called on governments to reduce childmortality and to raise the age of sexual consent to prevent forced marriage andensure the health of children.[238]The ESCR Committee has called on Tanzania to improvewomen’s access to obstetric and reproductive health services.[239]The committee has also specifically addressed the need for Tanzania to takemeasures to address the high rate of teenage pregnancies, including providingfamily planning information and services to all adolescents regardless ofmarital status or age, and promoting sexual and reproductive health as part ofthe education curriculum.[240] Italso called on Tanzania to conduct awareness-raising campaigns to combat anderadicate traditional practices harmful to the health, survival, anddevelopment of children, especially girls, such as FGM and child marriage. Itcalled on Tanzania to introduce sensitization programs for practitioners andthe general public to encourage change in traditional attitudes, engaging withthe extended family and the traditional and religious leaders.[241]The risk of child marriage–and subsequent reproductivehealth problems–often begins when young girls get pregnant early and arepressured by family members to marry or girls themselves feel marriage is thebest option for them. One of the factors leading to early pregnancy andchildbearing is the lack of accurate reproductive health knowledge.Although there is a life skills program in Tanzanian schoolscovering reproductive health, it is not well implemented or comprehensive. As theaccounts in this report show, child and forced marriage also exposes girls tomental and emotional suffering.Right of Children to ExpressTheir Views FreelyThe right of children to express their views is set out inthe CRC, which provides that they have this right in all matters affectingthem, according to their age and maturity.[242] The CRCCommittee’s General Comment No. 12 on the right of the child to be heardaffirms this right in any judicial or administrative proceeding affecting theirwell-being.[243]In its comment, the committee goes on to set out the obligations of governmentsto establish reporting mechanisms such as telephone help lines and supportmechanisms to assist children in expressing their views. This includes accessto physicians and to teachers who can offer a safe space for children toexpress their views freely or to seek help in any matter related to theirwell-being.[244]RecommendationsTo the President of TanzaniaPublicly condemn violence against girls andwomen who resist child, early, and forced marriages.Publicly support setting a uniform,internationally recognized minimum marriage age of 18 for both boys and girls.Publicly call on education authorities toend the discriminatory practice of mandatory pregnancy testing of girls, theexpulsion of pregnant girls from school, and the exclusion of married studentsfrom school.To the Ministry of Education and VocationalTrainingRevise the Education and Training Policy toinclude a provision that allows both married and pregnant students to continuewith their education.Revise the existing legal and policyframework governing expulsion and exclusion:Revise Regulation No. 4 of the Education Regulations (Expulsionand Exclusion of Pupils from Schools) of 2002 by removing “wedlock”as a grounds for expulsion, and adding a regulation that states explicitly thatneither pregnancy nor marriage are grounds for expulsion or exclusion.Ensurethat teachers and school administration officials are aware that expulsion andexclusion on the basis of pregnancy and marriage is prohibited.Ensure that pregnant and married pupils who wish to continuetheir education are able to do so in an environment free from stigma anddiscrimination, and monitor schools’ compliance.End pregnancy testing in schools and ensurethat teachers and school administration officials are aware that the practiceis prohibited.Increase access to post-primary education byensuring that children can access secondary education irrespective of theirPrimary School Leaving Examination results. In particular, allow children whofail to retake the exam and to seek admission in public schools.Preparethe education sector for the introduction of compulsory secondary education, inlight of the recently passed Education and Training Policy. In particular,schools should be equipped to enroll and teach significantly larger numbers ofstudents.Begin a process to introduce a comprehensivesex education curriculum in primary and secondary schools that complies withinternational human rights standards. In cooperation with the Ministry ofHealth and Social Welfare, teach the curriculum as an examinable, independentsubject by teachers with adequate training and resources, and monitor itsimplementation.Improve girls’ access to education by:Developingretention strategies to ensure girls who enroll in school remain and completeschool, such as incentives for families to keep girls in school, offeringbursaries and scholarships, expanding boarding facilities and school feedingprograms, ensuring schools have adequate sanitation facilities, and subsidizingor eliminating costs of uniforms, textbooks, and other operational costs. Dothis together with the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare.Expanding options for child care and early childhood developmentcenters for children of teenage mothers so that they can attend school whileguaranteeing their children also develop in a safe environment. Do thistogether with the Ministry of Community Development, Gender, and Children, andMinistry of Health and Social Welfare.Improve data collection on the number ofgirls who drop out of school due to pregnancy and child marriage in order tobetter evaluate the impact of new laws and policies.Create mechanisms through the schools to monitorand follow up on female students who drop out of school, to discourage childmarriages, and monitor girls who have dropped out because of pregnancy.Expand access to vocational trainingopportunities for married women and girls in all districts, and inform thepublic about the existence of these programs.Impose penalties on education authorities whofail to initiate legal action against offenders who marry or impregnate pupils.To the Ministry of Constitutional and Legal AffairsWorktowards a comprehensive review and reform of Tanzania’s laws on marriage,separation, divorce, and related matters. Seek to harmonize laws to establishclarity and uniformity in application by enacting comprehensive family andmarriage legislation that:Clearly sets the minimum marriage age for both boys and girls at18.Recognizes equality of all marriages, guarantees equal rights tomarriage, during marriage, and at its dissolution to both spouses; andrecognizes equality of these rights in all marriages. These rights shouldinclude equal rights to own and inherit property, and to custody of children.Clearlyestablishes the requirement for full and free consent of both partners to amarriage, and removes the requirement for parental consent to marriage.Makes proof of age compulsory for marriage.Makes marriage registration compulsory.Sets clear penalties and punishments for adults involved in thearrangement, contracting, or solemnization and registration of a child marriageor forced marriage.Ensures that girls married prior to the enactment of the newlegislation have the option of terminating their marriage, and protects theirrights to property, child custody, and maintenance.Sets clear penalties and punishment for acts of violence againstgirls and women carried out as intimidation or retribution for refusal tomarry; and provides for adequate legal, medical, and psychosocial services tovictims of these attacks.Providesthat those forcibly married or married as children shall have the right topress criminal charges, seek a divorce, and obtain maintenance for children.Prohibits polygamy and protects the rights and status of womenwho were in polygamous marriages before the enactment of this law.Once the new family law is in place, conduct public educationcampaigns about the provisions of the law, aiming to raise awareness in bothurban and rural areas together with the Ministry of Community,Gender, and Children Development.Seek to repeal all laws that arediscriminatory against girls and women, including those allowing theapplication of customary law on matters of marriage, divorce, and inheritance.Take the necessary steps to enact acomprehensive domestic violence law. The law should criminalize sexual violencein marriage.Revise the 1998 Sexual Offences SpecialProvisions Act to recognize sexual violence in marriage as a criminal offense,stating specifically that marriage or other relationships shall not constitutea defense to a charge of sexual assault.Increase access to legal aid services inboth rural and urban areas, and ensure legal aid services cover cases ofviolence against women, including child, early, and forced marriage.Provideregular trainings for police and prosecutors on their responsibilities toinvestigate and prosecute violence against women, including child and forcedmarriage, under the applicable law, in coordination with the Ministry ofCommunity Development, Gender, and Children and the Ministry of Constitutionaland Legal Affairs.Investigate allegations of corruption inrelation to child marriage cases and, if evidence is found, punish the lawenforcement officers responsible.Establish a central database on violenceagainst women to record the number and different forms of cases reportedincluding their outcomes, such as referral to traditional mechanisms, andfollow-up such as successful prosecution or acquittal.Ensure such datais publicly available.Expand juvenile courts, as provided for inthe Child Act, in both rural and urban areas to enhance access to justice forchildren.Inform girls and women about their rights toseek child maintenance from fathers of their children under applicable law, incoordination with the Ministry of Community Development, Gender, and Children.Strengthen Tanzania’s human rightsframework to protect women by taking the necessary steps to ensure the promptratification, without reservations, of the Convention Against Torture and OtherCruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and the Convention onConsent to Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage, and Registration of Marriages. Seeksupport for this with relevant government ministries and the Tanzania NationalAssembly.To the Ministry of Community Development, Gender,and ChildrenCreate a national action plan to combatchild marriage, in accordance with international good practices, with inputfrom women’s and children’s rights groups, health professionals,and other service providers; coordinate efforts among all relevant ministries; seeksufficient resources to implement the plan.Renew and expand the National Plan of Actionto Prevent and Respond to Violence Against Children to include comprehensivestrategies to prevent and address child and forced marriage, in accordance withinternational good practices. Ensure there is input from women’s andchildren’s rights groups, health professionals, and other serviceproviders; coordinate efforts among all relevant ministries; seek sufficientresources to implement the plan.Develop help lines, posters, or similarcommunication tools to ensure awareness of, and access, to advice, protection,and rehabilitation for all children at risk or trapped in forced marriages.Ensure that programs addressing thepsychosocial needs of survivors of gender-based violence include victims ofchild and forced marriage.Expandprograms to support married girls and women with income-generating activities,especially girls and women who have been abandoned by their husbands andfamilies, in coordination with relevant government ministries.Develop and implement national communityawareness-raising campaigns on child, early, and forced marriage. Do this inconsultation with relevant government ministries, communities, traditional andreligious leaders, women and girls, and nongovernmental organizations. Includeinformation on:The harm child marriage causes and the benefits of delayedmarriage and childbearing.Responsibilities of law enforcement, protection measures, legalremedies, and medical and psychosocial care available to girls and women aswell as the need for girls and the public to report child marriages.Consequences for perpetrators.The importance of education for girls.The many factors contributing to teenage pregnancies and theneed to end the stigma surrounding teenage pregnancy.Establish more safe spaces, such asshelters, for girls and women threatened by child, early, and forced marriageor other forms of gender-based violence. Ensure girls and women are aware oftheir existence, and how to access them.Support the development of gender-sensitiveeducation policies and practices including efforts to introduce comprehensivesexuality education in schools, policies to end the mandatory pregnancy testingof school girls and their expulsion from school, as well as exclusion ofmarried students from education.Ensurecommunity development officers, in coordination with relevant ministries,identify and protect children from child abuse and neglect, withdraw andrehabilitate neglected children, and take legal action against thoseresponsible. Do this together with the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare.To the Ministry of Health and Social WelfareBegin aprocess to introduce a comprehensive sexuality education curriculum in primaryand secondary schools that complies with international human rights standards,together with the Ministry of Education and Vocational Training.Teach thecurriculum as an examinable, independent subject by teachers with adequatetraining and resources, and monitor its implementation.Improveaccess to sexual and reproductive health services and information for all girlsand women, including access to emergency obstetric care and family planning. Inparticular, expand access to and ensure quality, adolescent-friendlyreproductive health information and services in all districts.Providehealthcare providers with appropriate training on the reproductive and sexualrights of adolescents. The training should have a strong focus on the right toaccess health information and services, including contraception, and anunderstanding of the many interlinked factors that contribute to teenagepregnancies.Ensure that healthcare providers areinformed about the illegality of mandatory pregnancy testing of girls, and thehuman rights violations at issue.Support efforts to end the mandatorypregnancy testing of school girls and their expulsion from school.Strengthen the capacity of communities andlocal government actors to protect the most vulnerable children, includingchildren at risk of child marriage and child labor, and ensure their access tochild protection services.To the Ministry of Labor and EmploymentTakeaction to end child labor that undermines children’s access to educationas part of the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Child Labor. Inparticular, increase child labor inspections including in informal worksettings, and conduct programs to withdraw children from child labor and enrollin school or vocational training. Furthermore, activities should include theprovision of appropriate health services, and, if necessary, socialreintegration measures.Conduct a new national survey on child laborin Tanzania.To the Ministry of Home AffairsExpand Police Gender and Children’sDesks in both rural and urban areas in Tanzania. Increase the number of femaleofficers at these desks, ensure adequate training on gender-based violence forpolice working at these desks, and seek adequate resources to do their work.Provideregular trainings for police and prosecutors on their responsibilities toinvestigate and prosecute violence against women, including child and forcedmarriage, under the applicable law, in coordination with the Ministry ofCommunity Development, Gender, and Children and Ministry of Constitutional andLegal Affairs.Appropriately discipline or prosecute corruptlaw enforcement officers.To the Commission for Human Rights and GoodGovernanceIncrease monitoring of child, early, andforced marriage cases. Investigate and publish reports on the issue of child,early, and forced marriage, gaps in protection, and access to justice forvictims.To the African UnionUrge Tanzania to launch the African Unioncampaign to end child marriage, and to develop concrete indicators formonitoring and measuring progress.To United Nations Agencies and International DonorsUrge the government of Tanzania to end theexclusion from school of married or pregnant students, and to provide re-entryopportunities for married girls and young mothers of school-going age.Urge and support the Tanzanian government totake measures to increase access to post-primary education by taking allnecessary measures to ensure that children can access secondary educationirrespective of their Primary School Leaving Examination results, and by takingmeasures to allow children who fail to retake the exam and to attend publicschools.Urge and support the Tanzanian government tointroduce a comprehensive sexuality education curriculum in primary andsecondary schools that complies with international human rights standards;implement this curriculum as an examinable, independent subject.Support justice sector reforms that payparticular attention to addressing discrimination against women in law andpractice.In programs they fund, donors should supportthe mainstreaming of strategies to prevent child, early, and forced marriageand to support married girls.These could include incorporatingstrategies to improve girls’ access to education, including thosesupporting pregnant and married girls to return to school; enhancing access tosexual and reproductive health information and services for adolescent girls;implementing incoming-generating activities for girls and their families,including married girls; building community awareness about the harms of childmarriage and the importance of delaying marriage; and helping girls at risk of,and in forced marriages, to access protection, justice, and redress.Support the establishment and maintenance ofPolice Gender and Children’s Desks in Tanzania, ensuring that they areavailable in urban and rural areas across the country.Support nongovernmental organizations toimplement programs to better understand the root causes of child and forcedmarriage in Tanzania, and to monitor and evaluate programs addressing child andforced marriage and to use this information to improve programing.Support the establishment and maintenance ofshelters for survivors of gender-based violence.Urge and support the government of Tanzaniato launch and carry out the African Union campaign to end child marriage, andto develop concrete indicators for monitoring and measuring progress.Support the expansion of legal aid servicesin both rural and urban areas, including its expansion to cover gender-basedviolence.AcknowledgementsThis report was researched and written by Brenda Akia, aresearch fellow in the Women’s Rights Division of Human Rights Watch.Agnes Odhiambo and Meghan Rhoad, senior researcher and researcher of theWomen’s Rights Division participated in the field research.The report was reviewed and edited by Liesl Gerntholtz,director of the Women’s Rights Division, and Agnes Odhiambo. Specialistreview was provided by Juliane Kippenberg, senior researcher, Elin Martinez,researcher, Jane Cohen, senior researcher; and Leslie Lefkow, deputy directorof the African Division. James Ross, legal and policy director, and TomPorteous, program director, provided legal and program reviews.Report production and editorial assistance was provided byAnnerieke Smaak, and Alexandra Kotowski, associates in the Women’s RightsDivision; Kathy Mills, publications specialist; and Fitzroy Hepkins,administrative manager. This report was translated into Kiswahili by MaryKishimba. Multimedia conception and coordination was provided by VeronicaMatushaj, director of documentary video & photography, Elena Tetsi, senior producer,documentary video & photography/senior manager, Human Rights DefendersProgram, and Ivy Shen, multimedia & creative services officer.We would also like to thank many individuals andorganizations who played a critical role in guiding the research. Theseinclude: The United Nations Children's Fund(UNICEF) - Tanzania; Elizabeth Lesitey from World Vision– Tanzania; Koshuma Mtegeti from Children’s Dignity Forum; ValerieMsoka from Tanzania Media Women Association; Dr. Helen Kijo Bisimba from Legaland Human Rights Center; Gerald Samuel Ng’ong’a and Daniel Ntimbafrom Rafiki Social Development Organization; John Myolo, Japhet Daud, andDeozawadi Marandu from Agape AIDS Control Program; Gervas Evodius from HakizetuYoung Women and Girls’ Rights Organization; Francis Roman and andHonorata Raymond Naswa from Network Against Female Genital Mutilation; JenniferStanley Chiwute from Inter-African Committee Tanzania – Dodoma Chapter(DIAC); Daniel Msangya, from African Rural Press in Action; and Cosma Bulu,fromLindi Women’s Paralegal Association.Most of all we would like to thank the individuals whobravely shared their experiences with us for this report.[1]The United Republic of Tanzania is a unitary republic comprising Tanzaniamainland and Zanzibar. There are two central governments-the Union Government and the Zanzibar Revolutionary Government-each with their own executive, judiciary,and legislature. Consequently, Tanzania mainland and Zanzibar have distinctlaws and policies. This report focuses on the laws, regulations, policies, andpractices specific to Tanzania mainland. The name Tanzania as used in thereport refers to Tanzania mainland.[2]United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), “Marrying Too Young: End ChildMarriage,” 2012,http://www.unfpa.org/webdav/site/global/shared/documents/publications/2012/MarryingTooYoung.pdf(accessed May 8, 2014), pp. 24 and 35. Tanzania’s rate of child marriagehas significantly decreased by 10 percent. Decreases in child marriage ratesare associated with higher levels of development, such as urban residence,secondary or higher education, and wealth. See also, UNFPA, “ChildMarriage Profiles: United Republic of Tanzania,”http://www.devinfo.info/mdg5b/profiles/files/profiles/4/Child_Marriage_Country_Profile_AFRTZA_United%20Republic%20of%20Tanzania.pdf(accessed May 9, 2014). Child marriage is often referred to as“early” or “forced” marriage since children, given theirage, are not able to give free, prior, and informed consent to their marriagepartners or to the timing of their marriage.In this report, child,early, and forced marriage will be used interchangeably to mean child marriage.[3]Tanzania National Bureau of Statistics and ICF Macro, “TanzaniaDemographic and Health Survey Key Findings 2010,” 2010, http://www.measuredhs.com/pubs/pdf/SR183/SR183.pdf(accessed January 9, 2014), p.4.[4]UNFPA, “Marrying Too Young: End Child Marriage,” 2012, http://www.unfpa.org/webdav/site/global/shared/documents/publications/2012/MarryingTooYoung.pdf(accessed May 8, 2014), p. 23.[5]Ibid.[6]United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF),“United Republic of Tanzania: Statistical Profile on Female Genital Mutilation,”2013, http://data.unicef.org/corecode/uploads/document6/uploaded_country_profiles/corecode/30/Countries/FGMC_TZA.pdf,(accessed May 29, 2014).[7]UNFPA, “Child Marriage Profiles: United Republic of Tanzania,http://www.devinfo.info/mdg5b/profiles/files/profiles/4/Child_Marriage_Country_Profile_AFRTZA_United%20Republic%20of%20Tanzania.pdf(accessed May 8, 2014).[8]UNFPA, “Marrying Too Young: End Child Marriage in Tanzania,” 2013,http://countryoffice.unfpa.org/tanzania/drive/UNFPACHILDMARRIAGE_BROCHURERL.pdf,(accessed May 9, 2014).[9]Ministry of Community Development, Gender, and Children, “The NationalAction Plan for the Prevention and Eradication of Violence against Women andChildren 2001-2015,” pp. 10, 11, and 17.[10]Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, “The National RoadmapStrategicPlan to Accelerate Reduction of Maternal, Newborn and ChildDeaths in Tanzania, 2008-2015,”http://www.who.int/pmnch/countries/tanzaniamapstrategic.pdf (accessed January8, 2014), p. 26.[11]United Republic of Tanzania National Bureau of Statistics and ICF Macro,“Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey 2010,”http://www.nbs.go.tz/takwimu/references/2010TDHS.pdf (accessed May 7, 2014), p.275.[12]Ibid., p. 279.[13]United Republic of Tanzania National Bureau of Statistics and ICF Macro,“Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey 2010,”http://www.nbs.go.tz/takwimu/references/2010TDHS.pdf (accessed May 7, 2014), p.253.[14]Convention to Eliminate All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, (CEDAW),“Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Parties under Article 18 ofthe Convention, Combined Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Periodic Reports, Tanzania,http://www.refworld.org/publisher,CEDAW,STATEPARTIESREP,TZA,47440a962,0.html(accessed May 7, 2014), para. 76.[15]Human Rights and Legal Center, “Tanzania Human Rights Report,”2013,http://www.humanrights.or.tz/downloads/tanzania-human-rights-report-2013.pdf(accessed May 28, 2014), p. 35. See also, Human Rights Watch interview withMary Massay, executive director, Commission for Human Rights and GoodGovernance (CHRAGG), Dar es Salaam, April 15, 2014. Also see, Help AgeInternational, “Violence against Older Women: Tackling WitchcraftAccusations in Tanzania,”http://social.un.org/ageing-working-group/documents/HelpAge%20briefing%20violence%20against%20older%20women%20Aug%2011.pdf,(accessed June 4, 2014). There is no reliable data on this topic, butgovernment reports show older women are disproportionately affected.[16]Human Rights and Legal Center, “Tanzania Human Rights Report,”2013, p. 36.[17]Office of the Sector Director Poverty Reduction and Economic Management NetworkAfrica Region World Bank, “Tanzania: Strategic Country GenderAssessment,” http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTAFRREGTOPGENDER/Resources/TanzaniaSCGA.pdf(May 8, 2014), p. v.[18]CEDAW, “Considerations of Reports Submitted by States Parties underArticle 18 of the Convention: United Republic of Tanzania,” April 16,2007, http://www.bayefsky.com//reports/tanzania_cedaw_c_tza_6_2006.pdf(accessed May 7, 2014), paras 50 and 51.Common types of FGM in Tanzaniainclude: Type II that accounts for 80 percent of FGM procedures performed ongirls and women, and infibulation that accounts for only 1 percent of FGMprocedures performed on girls and women. Type II is a more invasive procedurethat includes the partial or total removal of the clitoris and the labiaminora. This form can be performed with or without excision of the labiamajora and is known as excision. See also, Legal and Human Rights Center,“Tanzania Human Rights Report,” 2013, p. 174. FGM is mostlypracticed in the regions of Arusha, Dodoma, Kilimanjaro, Kigoma, Manyara, Mara,and Morogoro. United Republic of Tanzania and IFC Macro, “TanzaniaDemographic and Health Survey,” 2010, p. 295. Type II accounts for 91percent of FGM procedures performed on girls and women. Penal Code Act, 1945,art. 169, amended by the Sexual Offences Special Provisions Act (SOSPA),http://ilo.org/dyn/natlex/docs/ELECTRONIC/67094/63635/F532037758/TZA67094.pdf(accessedJune 14, 2014), art. 21.[19]Ministry of Community Development, Gender and Children, “The NationalAction Plan for the Prevention and Eradication of Violence against Women andChildren 2001-2015”; Ministry of Community Development, Gender, andChildren, “Multi Sector National Plan of Action to Prevent and Respond toViolence against Children” 2013-2016; Ministry of Health and SocialWelfare National Management “Guidelines for the Health Sector Response toEnd Prevention of Gender Based Violence (GBV)” 2011; The United Republicof Tanzania National Development Vision 2025: and The National Plan of Actionto Combat Female Genital Mutilation, 2001-2015.[20]Ministry of Home Affairs, Tanzania Police Force, “Guidelines for theEstablishment of Police Gender and Children Desk,” paras. 2.2 and 3. The PoliceGender and Children’s Desk (PG&CD) is a facility specificallydesigned to address cases of gender-based violence and child abuse in a genderand child-responsive manner. It is managed and staffed by trained personnel, designatedby the officer commanding the police station. It is situated within thepremises of the police station offices. The layout and size of the desk,includes, four rooms; a reception and record room; an interview room withsufficient privacy for interviewing adults; a child friendly interview room forhandling child survivors and a resting room for survivors who are traumatized.The United Nations Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF) in Tanzania issupporting the police force in improving infrastructure of the PG&CDthrough constructing child-friendly interview rooms and providing training topolice officers on handling cases of child abuse.[21]Human Rights Watch interview with Assistant Superintendent Pili Simon Misungwi,police officer in charge of Police Gender and Children’s Desk officecommanding station, Shinyanga, April 1, 2014. Human Rights Watch interview withGrace R. Lyimo, ASP, Kilimanjaro police station, Kilimanjaro, April 4, 2014.The regional police station in Shinyanga and Moshi are constructing a victimsupport unit and one-stop centers respectively using donated funds.[22]National Action Plan for the Prevention and Eradication of Violence againstWomen and Children 2007-20015, p.6.; The Legal Aid Secretariat (LAS),“Tanzania Paralegal Baseline Survey: Tanzania Mainland,” 2010,http://las.or.tz/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/Paralegal-Baseline-Report.pdf(accessed July 22, 2014), p.1. The government, through the Ministry ofConstitutional and Legal Affairs, is improving access to legal aid for womensurvivors of gender-based violence through introducing legal aid centers,commonly known as “paralegals centers” in some communities, inresponse to the need for legal support.Paralegals, working on avoluntary basis, assist people access to justice at the community level,especially for women and children who are more vulnerable to violence and abuseby men, family and clan members, and women who lack legal support.[23]The Sexual Offences Special Provisions Act (SOSPA), 1998, arts. 5(3), 21 and 14.SOSPA criminalizes sexual assault and harassment, FGM, and sex trafficking, butnot marital rape. See also Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Helen KijoBisimba, executive director, Legal and Human Rights Center (LHRC), Dar esSalaam, April 16, 2014.[24]CEDAW, “Tanzania Non-Governmental Organization’s Shadow Report toCEDAW: The Implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms ofDiscrimination against Women,” http://www.iwraw-ap.org/resources/pdf/41_shadow_reports/Tanzania%20_SR.pdf(accessed June 13, 2014) p. 16.[25]Tanzania Women Judges Association, “Millennium Development Goal 3 Program(MDG),” 2009-2011, http://www.iawj.org/Tanzania_Country_Report.pdf(accessed May 9, 2014), p. 26. Among the Sukuma in Shinyanga, dowry payment islargely paid in cattle, or a combination of cattle or other livestock andmoney. Among the Sukuma, dowry of up to 40 cows is paid depending on agirl’s complexion and virginity. See also, Human Rights Watch interviewwith Japheat Daud, program coordinator, Agape AIDS Control Program, Shinyanga,March 31, 2014.[26]Tanzania Women Judges Association, “Millennium Development Goal 3 Program(MDG),” 2009-2011,http://www.iawj.org/Tanzania_Country_Report.pdf(accessed May 9, 2014), p. 26. See also, Human Rights Watch interview withValerie Msoka., executive director, Tanzania Media Women’s Association,Dodoma, April 8, 2014.[27]Human Rights Watch interview with Anita G., Kahama district, April 2, 2014.[28]ILO, “Defining Child Labor,”http://www.ilo.org/ipec/facts/lang--en/index.htm (accessed July 22, 2014).[29]United Republic of Tanzania, “National Action Plan for the Elimination ofChild Labor,” 2009, p. 5. See also, ILO, “What is Child Labor:Defining Child Labor,” http://www.ilo.org/ipec/facts/lang--en/index.htm(accessed July 22, 2014).[30]Ibid. pp. 11 and 12.[31]National Bureau of Statistics, “Child Labour in Tanzania: An Analysis ofFindings of the Integrated Labour Force Survey,”2006, http://www.ilo.org/ipecinfo/product/viewProduct.do?productId=16320,(accessed July 22, 2014), p. xvi. These are the most recent government figuresavailable. In its 2013 report, “Toxic Toil: Child Labor and MercuryExposure in Tanzania’s Small-Scale Gold Mines,” p. 87, Human RightsWatch recommended conducting a new national survey on child labor.[32]The World Bank, “The Consequences of Child Labor,”2008, http://siteresources.worldbank.org/DEC/Resources/84797-1154354760266/2807421-1222979971506/5435009-1222980070537/Consequences_of_Child_Labor.pdf(accessed July 22, 2014), p. 1.[33]International Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour, Country Report,“2000/2001 Integrated Labour Force and Child Labour Survey,” p.xii. ILO, Child Domestic Work: Global Estimates 2012,http://www.ilo.org/ipec/Informationresources/WCMS_IPEC_PUB_23235/lang--en/index.htm,(accessed July 22, 2014). Child domestic work refers to the “situationwhere children aged 5 to 17 years perform domestic tasks in the home of a thirdparty or employer (with or without remuneration).” p.1.[34]ILO, “Child Labor and Domestic Work,”http://www.ilo.org/ipec/areas/Childdomesticlabour/lang--en/index.htm (accessedAugust 8, 2014).[35]Ibid. See also, The United Republic of Tanzania, “National Action Planfor the Elimination of Child Labor,” 2006, para 3.3. Also see, the Law ofthe Child Act, 2009, art. 78, which criminalizes the employment or engagementof a child in any kind of exploitative labor that deprives the child of hishealth or development, exceeds six hours a day, is inappropriate for his age,and does not provide adequate remuneration.The Employment and LaborRelations Act, No. 6 of 2004, in art. 5, prohibits employment of children underthe age of 14 years. It also prohibits, in art. 5(3), the employment ofchildren below 18 years in conditions considered hazardous by the ministers,including mines and factories. The Employment Act, however, in art. 5(2) allowsfora child of 14 yearsto do light work, which is not likely to beharmful to the child’s health and development; and does not prejudice thechild’s attendance at school. Tanzania is also party to ILO ConventionNo. 138 concerning the Minimum Age for Admission and Employment (Minimum AgeConvention), adopted June 26, 1973, 1015 U.N.T.S. 297, entered into force June19, 1976, ratified by Tanzania on December 16, 1998, and the ILO Convention No.182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of theWorst Forms of Child Labor (Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention), adoptedJune 17, 1999, 38 I.L.M. 1207, entered into force November 19, 2000, ratifiedby Tanzania on September 12, 2001.[36]United States Department of Labor, “Findings on the Worst Forms of ChildLabor: Tanzania,” 2012, p. 2.[37]Human Rights Watch interview with Judith K., Mwanza, March 31, 2014.[38]Human Rights Watch, Toxic Toil: Child Labor and Mercury Exposure inTanzania’s Small-Scale Gold Mines, August 2013, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/tanzania0813_ForUpload_0.pdf,pp. 40-42. “Some girls on and around mining sites, including thoseworking in small restaurants preparing food for the miners (a common job forgirls at mines), reported sexual harassment, being pressured into having sex,and commercial sexual exploitation. Girls who are sexually exploited are atrisk of getting infected with HIV and other sexually transmittedinfections.”[39]Human Rights Watch interview with Yasmin D., 15, Chokaa Ward, Chunya District,December 11, 2012.[40]Human Rights Watch interview with Witness J., Kishapu district, March 31, 2014.[41]Tanzania National Bureau of Statistics and IFC Macro, “TanzaniaDemographic and Health Survey,” 2010, p.64.[42]Tanzania National Bureau of Statistics and IFC Macro, “TanzaniaDemographic and Health Survey,” 2010, pp. xix and 64.[43]Tanzania National Bureau of Statistics and ICF Macro, “TanzaniaDemographic and Health Survey 2010,” p. 68.The contraceptionprevalence rate has increased from 26 percent of married women in 2004-2005 to 34 percent in 2010.[44]UNFPA, “Marrying Too Young, End Child Marriage in Tanzania 2012,”2012, http://countryoffice.unfpa.org/tanzania/drive/UNFPACHILDMARRIAGE_BROCHURERL.pdf(accessed May 8, 2014).[45]Human Rights Watch interview with Ali K., Lindi Rural, April 12, 2014.[46]Human Rights Watch interview with Sima P., Mwanza, March 29, 2014.[47]Human Rights Watch interview with Afafa Y., Lindi Rural, April 12, 2014.[48]United Republic of Tanzania, Ministry of Education and Vocational Training,“National Life Skills Education Framework,” http://hivhealthclearinghouse.unesco.org/sites/default/files/resources/Tanzania_National_Life_Skills_Education_Framework_Final_Draft.pdf(accessed June 9, 2014), 2010, p. v. Life skills is currently part of theschool curriculum and includes topics on knowing oneself (self-awareness),relationship skills, cognitive skills, and sexual and reproductive healtheducation. Also see, The Ministry of Education Circular No. 3 of 2000.[49]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Kwezi Edith, district medical officer, Shinyanga,April 2, 2014.[50]Center for Reproductive Rights, “Forced Out: Mandatory Pregnancy Testingand The Expulsion of Pregnant Students in Tanzanian Schools,”2013,http://reproductiverights.org/sites/crr.civicactions.net/files/documents/crr_Tanzania_Report_Part1.pdf(accessed July 22, 2014), pp. 26 and 28.[51]United Republic of Tanzania, UNICEF, and CDC, “Violence Against Childrenin Tanzania, 2011, http://www.unicef.org/media/files/VIOLENCE_AGAINST_CHILDREN_IN_TANZANIA_REPORT.pdf(accessed May 7, 2014), p. 1.[52]UNICEF, “Child Protection,”2011, http://www.unicef.org/tanzania/ChildProtection_factsheet.pdf (accessedAugust 11, 2014).[53]United Republic of Tanzania and UNICEF,“Violence against Children in Tanzania: Findings From A National Survey2009,” 2011,http://www.unicef.org/media/files/VIOLENCE_AGAINST_CHILDREN_IN_TANZANIA_REPORT.pdf(accessed May 8, 2014), p. 2.[54]Ibid.[55]Human Rights Watch interview with Natalie F., Kishapu district, April 1, 2014.[56]UNICEF, “Education Equity andQuality: Tanzania,” http://www.unicef.org/tanzania/6911_10874.html,(accessed May 28, 2014).[57]UNFPA, “Marrying Too Young: End Child Marriage in Tanzania,” 2013,http://countryoffice.unfpa.org/tanzania/drive/UNFPACHILDMARRIAGE_BROCHURERL.pdf,(accessed May 9, 2014).[58]See Children’s Dignity Forum, “Report on Child Marriage SurveyConducted in Dar es Salaam, Coastal, Mwanza and Mara Regions,”http://cdftz.org/files/Child%20Marriage%20Baseline%20Survey%20-%20Dar%20es%20Salaam,%20Coastal,%20Mwanza%20and%20Mara%20region.pdf(accessed May 28, 2014) 2008, p. 51. According to the report, respondentsstated that children who have completed Standard 7 would be mature enough toenter into marriage, and would be better off getting married than staying idle.[59]Constitution of the United Republic of Tanzania, art. 11.[60]Education Act, No. 25 of 1978, art. 35. “It shall be compulsory for everychild who has attained the age of seven years but has not attained the age ofthirteen to be enrolled for primary education.” Also see, art. 60, EducationAct, amended by art. 170 of the Law of the Child Act, 2009. Also see, art. 2,Education Act, a pupil refers to a person who is enrolled at any school for thepurposes of receiving education.[61]“Harmonization of Laws on Children in Tanzania Country Brief,”http://acerwc.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/English-ACERWC-Tanzania-Harmonisation-of-Laws-on-Children.pdf(accessed May 8, 2014), p. 7.[62]The Ministry of Education and Vocational Training Policy, 2012, art. 1.1.Primary school enrollment increased from 3,855,712 boys and 3,685,496 girls in2005, to 4,086,280 boys and 4,160,892 girls in 2012. See also, United Republicof Tanzania, “National Strategy for Growth and Poverty Reduction II,2010,” https://extranet.who.int/nutrition/gina/sites/default/files/TZA%202010%20NSGRP%20II.pdf(accessed May 28, 2014), p. 10.[63]United Republic of Tanzania, “National Strategy for Growth and PovertyReduction II, 2010,” p. 11. Also see, The Ministry of Education andVocational Training Policy, 2012, art. 1.1.[64]United Republic of Tanzania National Bureauof Statistics and IFC Macro, “Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey2010,” p. 36.[65]According to UNESCO, “Global Partnership for Girls and Women’sEducation: One Year On,” http://www.unesco.org/eri/cp/factsheets_ed/TZ_EDFactSheet.pdf(accessed May 17, 2014), povertyremains the main challenge to theimprovement of girls’ secondary education and increases girls’ riskof dropping out of school.[66]United Nations Economic and Social Council, “Concluding Observations onthe Initial to Third Reports of the United Republic of Tanzania,”December 13, 2012, http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=E/C.12/TZA/CO/1-3&Lang=En,(accessed May 15, 2014), p. 6.[67]According to Elimu Africa-Education Africa, http://www.elimuafrica.org/page20/page9/page9.html(accessed August 31, 2014), “If the student is placed in a secondaryschool in another village or city, there is a cost for boarding and travel,which can bring the total up to $900 or more.”[68]Human Rights Watch interview with Japheat Daud, program coordinator, Agape AIDSControl Program, Shinyanga, March 31, 2014.[69]HumanRights Watch interview with Amber T., Kahama district, April 2, 2014.[70]UNESCO, “World Data on Education,” seventh edition, 2010/2011,http://www.ibe.unesco.org/fileadmin/user_upload/Publications/WDE/2010/pdfversions/United_Republic_of_Tanzania.pdf(accessed May 28, 2014).[71]The Republic of Tanzania Education Sector Development Programme,“Education Sector Performance Report 201/2012,” September 2012,http://www.ed-dpg.or.tz/pdf/ESPR%20and%20AM/JESR%20201112_Education%20Sector%20Performance%20Report.pdf(accessed August 28, 2014), p. 46.[72]Ibid.[73]Letter by Human Rights Watch and Tanzania Child Rights Forum, “Access toSecondary Education in Tanzania,” March 26, 2014, (accessed August 28,2014).[74]Human Rights Watch interview with Salia J., Lindi Rural, April 12, 2014.[75]UNICEF “State of the World’s Children,” 2014, http://www.unicef.org/sowc2014/numbers/documents/english/SOWC2014_In%20Numbers_28%20Jan.pdf,p. 18. See also, UNICEF Innocenti Digest, “Early Marriage: ChildSpouses,” No. 7, March 2001,http://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/digest7e.pdf (accessed May 28,2014), p. 16. See also, UNESCO, “Education for All Global MonitoringReport: Education Enhances Job Opportunities,”http://www.education-transforms.org/en/?portfolio=test-education-enhances-job-opportunities#.U_-WhsVdWSo(accessed August 28, 2014). “In Tanzania, 82 percent of workers who haveless than primary education, live below the poverty line. By contrast, workingadults with primary education are 20 percent less likely to be poor, whilesecondary education reduces the chances of being poor by almost 60 percent.”[76]UNICEF Innocenti Digest, “Early Marriage: Child Spouses,” No. 7,March 2001, p. 11.[77]Vocational Education and Trainings Act, Cap 82, R.E 2006, art. 2. Vocationaltraining center means any place or institution where vocational education ortraining is provided.[78]Education (Expulsion and Exclusion of Pupils from Schools) Regulations, 2002,art. 4.A student may be excluded or expelled from school for reasonsthat include: persistent and deliberate misbehavior of the pupil (such asendangering the general discipline or the good name of the school), committinga criminal offense such as theft, malicious injury to property, prostitution,drug abuse or an offense against morality, or if a pupil has entered into wedlock.These regulations apply to all primary and post-primary schools. Exclusionrefers to the refusal of admission or readmission of pupils as defined inMainland Tanzanian school regulations, while expulsion refers to the permanentremoval of a pupil from school as defined in Mainland Tanzanian schoolregulations.[79]United Nations Economic and Social Council, “Concluding Observations onthe Third Reports of the United Republic of Tanzania,” December 13, 2012,para 27.[80]Ministry of Education and Vocational Training, “School Improvement Took Kit:Practical Guide for Head Teachers and Head of Schools,” July 2013,http://www.moe.go.tz/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_view&gid=220&Itemid=622(accessed August 28, 2014), p. 12.[81]The Ministry of Education and Vocational Training, “Education andTraining Policy,” art. 3.3.[82]Ministry of Education, “BestEducation Statistics for Tanzania (BEST),” 2013, T4.10 Drop & Chart4.8 and T2.13 DropOChrt 2.7.[83]According to the Ministry of Education, “Best Education Statistics forTanzania (BEST),” 2012 and 2013, available to Human Rights Watch, thereis no data on the number of girls expelled because they are pregnant ormarried. The data of students dropping outof school because of marriage is included in the category of“other” reasons students drop out of school.[84]Center for Reproductive Rights, “Forced Out: Mandatory Pregnancy Testingand The Expulsion of Pregnant Students in Tanzanian Schools,” 2013, p. 9.“A pregnant student drops out of school because she (or her family)recognizes, or a school official makes clear, that expulsion from school on thebasis of pregnancy is inevitable. In Tanzania Mainland, schools carry outpregnancy testing in a custodial context, in which the student is under theschool’s control and supervision, the student’s consent is neitherobtained nor sought, and the student has no meaningful opportunity to decline.In this regard, adolescent girls are effectively powerless to contest thepractice. Pregnancy testing occurs in a context in which consent is notvoluntarily or freely given because it is required as a precondition foradmission to school.”[85]Human Rights Watch interview with Jamida K., Kahama, April 1, 2014.[86]Human Rights Watch interview with Bakari Abdallah Bakari, headmaster, FarkwaSecondary School, Chemba district, April 6, 2014.[87]Human Rights Watch interview with Neema Kitundu, national coordinator, Forumfor African Women Educationalists Tanzania (FAWETZ), Dar es Salaam, April 17,2014. The Education (Expulsion and Exclusion of Pupils from Schools) Regulations,2002, art. 4, allow for exclusion or expulsion of a student for reasons,including committing a criminal offense such as theft, malicious injury toproperty, prostitution, drug abuse or an offense against morality. The offenseagainst morality is used as grounds for expelling pregnant girls, as it hasbeen interpreted to mean that when a girl is pregnant, she has had sex out ofwedlock. This means she has committed an offense against morality and should beexpelled from school.[88]Human Rights Watch interview with Zebadayo Kyomo, education adviser, Departmentfor International Development (DFID), Dar es Salaam, April 15, 2014. Also,Human Rights Watch interview with Neema Kitundu, national coordinator, Forumfor African Women Educationalists Tanzania (FAWETZ), Dar es Salaam, April 17,2014.[89]Human Rights Watch interview with Neema Kitundu, national coordinator, Forumfor African Women Educationalists Tanzania (FAWETZ), Dar es Salaam, April 17,2014.[90]Ministry of Education and Vocational Training, “Education and TrainingPolicy,” arts. 3.1.2, 3.1.3, and 3.3. The Cabinet passed the newEducation and Training Policy in June 2014 with some recommendations to theMinistry of Education and Vocational Training. Human Rights Watch has not seenthe new version with incorporated edits. At this writing, officials from theMinistry of Education and Vocational Training had not released the policy withincorporated recommendations.[91]Human Rights Watch interview with ShukuruKawambwa, minister of education and vocational training, Dodoma, April 8, 2014.[92]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Evance Tegete, managing director,Watoto Wetu Tanzania, May 7, 2014.[93]Human Rights Watch interview with Anita G., Kahama district, April 2, 2014.[94]Human Rights Watch interview with Pion H., Kishapu district, March 31, 2014.[95]Human Rights Watch interview with Elithak Kifaluka, public nurse, Hail DistrictHospital, Kilimanjaro, April 3, 2014.[96]Human Rights Watch interview with Patricia J., Chemba district, April 6, 2014.[97]Human Rights Watch interview with Aida K., Mwanza district, March 29, 2014.[98]HumanRights Watch interview with Rose M., Kahama district, April 2, 2014.[99]Human Rights Watch interview with Natalie F., Kishapu district, March 31, 2014.[100]Human Rights Watch interview with Amani J., Mpwapwa district, April 7, 2014.[101]Human Rights Watch interview with Maria F., traditional leader, Chemba, Dodoma,April 5, 2014. See also, World Health Organization, “Understanding andAddressing Violence Against Women: Intimate Partner Violence,” 2012,http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/77432/1/WHO_RHR_12.36_eng.pdf(accessed June 9, 2014).[102]Human Rights Watch interview with Linda W., Mpwapwa district, April 7, 2014.[103]Human Rights Watch interview with Catherine P., Dodoma Urban, April 5, 2014.[104]Human Rights Watch interview with Aisha S., Kahama district, April 2, 2014.[105]Human Rights Watch interview with Penina K., Kahama district, April 2, 2014.[106]Human Rights Watch interview with Jana K., Kahama district, April 2, 2014.[107]CEDAW, “Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Parties underArticle 18 of the Convention, Concluding Observations of the Committee on theElimination of Discrimination against Women: United Republic ofTanzania,” July 16, 2008,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cedaw/docs/co/CEDAW-C-TZA-CO-6.pdf (accessedMay 27, 2014),para 119.[108]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Helen Kijo Bisimba, executive director,Legal and Human Rights Center (LHRC), Dar es Salaam, April 16, 2014.[109]United Republic of Tanzania, UNICEF and CDC, “Violence Against Childrenin Tanzania, 2011, http://www.unicef.org/media/files/VIOLENCE_AGAINST_CHILDREN_IN_TANZANIA_REPORT.pdf(accessed May 7, 2014), pp. 61-62.[110]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Helen Kijo Bisimba, executive director,Legal and Human Rights Center (LHRC), Dar es Salaam, April 16, 2014.[111]Tanzania Women Judges Association, “Millennium Development Goal 3 Program(MDG 3), Tanzania: Stopping, Shaming and Naming the Abuse of Power for SexualExploitation: A Tool Kit by Tanzania Women Judges Association (TAWJA),”p. 25. Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Helen Kijo Bisimba, executivedirector, Legal and Human Rights Center (LHRC), Dar es Salaam, April 16, 2014; HumanRights Watch interview with Francis Roman, program director, NAFGEM, Moshi,Kilimanjaro, April 4, 2014 ; Human Rights Watch interviewwith JenniferStanley Chiwute, program director, Inter-African Committee Tanzania–DodomaChapter (DIAC), Dodoma, April 7, 2014. FGM is performed by a traditionalexcisor called “ngariba.” Also see, Forward UK and Children’sDignity Forum, “Voices of Child Brides and Child Mothers in Tanzania: APeer Report on Child Marriage,” p. 6.[112]Human Rights Watch interview with Laizer Daudi, traditional leader for theMaasai people, Moshi, April 3, 2014.[113]Human Rights Watch interview with Happiness Eliufoo, police officer, Police Genderand Children’s Desk, Hai Police Station, Moshi, April 3, 2014.[114]United Republic of Tanzania and IFC Macro, “Tanzania Demographic andHealth Survey,” 2010, p. 295. Also see, UNICEF, “Female GenitalMutilation/Cutting: A Statistical Overview and Exploration of the Dynamics ofChange,” 2009, http://www.unicef.org/esaro/FGCM_Lo_res.pdf (accessed July22, 2014). It is estimated that 7.9 million girls and women in Tanzania have undergoneFGM.[115]United Republic of Tanzania and IFC Macro, “Tanzania Demographic andHealth Survey,” 2010, p. 295.[116]Ibid.[117]CEDAW, “Considerations of Reports Submittedby States Parties under Article 18 of the Convention: United Republic ofTanzania,” April 16, 2007, paras 50-51.Also see, Legal and HumanRights Center, “Tanzania Human Rights Report,” 2013, p. 174. Alsosee, “28 Too Many, FGM in Tanzania,” 2013, pp. 35 and 38. FGM ispracticed in eight regions of Tanzania: Arusha, Kilimanjaro, Dodoma, Singida,Iringa, Mtwara, Morogoro (Kilosa), and Mara region. Human Rights Watchconducted research among the Maasai and the Gogo ethnic groups.Among theMaasai communities, the FGM prevalence rate is estimated at 95 to 100 percent.In Dodoma, where the Gogo ethnic group resides, the FGM prevalence rate isestimated at 64 percent. Both the Maasai and the Gogo practice Type II FGM.Among the Maasai, FGM is performed on young girls aged between 7 and16years. Among the Gogo, FGM was originally performed on adolescent girls but isnow reportedly secretly performed on infant girls.[118]Ibid., p. 297. Almost one in three women (thirty two percent) were circumcisedby age one. The number of girls circumcised at age 13 or older is estimated at27 percent.[119]United Republic of Tanzania and IFC Macro, “Tanzania Demographic andHealth Survey,” 2010, p. 297.[120]Human Rights Watch interview with Pion H., Kilimajaro region, April 5, 2014.[121]28 Too Many, FGM, Lets End it, “Country Profile: FGM in Tanzania,” http://www.28toomany.org/media/uploads/tanzania_final_final_final.pdf(accessed May 28, 2014), 2013, p. 39.[122]Human Rights Watch interview with Francis Roman, program director, NAFGEM,Moshi, Kilimanjaro, April 4, 2014.[123]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Helen Kijo Bisimba, executive director,Legal and Human Rights Center (LHRC), Dar es Salaam, April 13, 2014.[124]CEDAW, “Tanzania Non-Governmental Organization‘s ShadowReport to CEDAW: The Implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of allForms of Discrimination Against women,”http://www.iwraw-ap.org/resources/pdf/41_shadow_reports/Tanzania%20_SR.pdf(accessed June 13, 2014) p. 10.[125]CEDAW “Tanzania Non-Governmental Organization‘s Shadow Report toCEDAW: The Implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms ofDiscrimination Against women,” p. 10. See also, Center for ReproductiveRights, “Supplementary information on the United Republic of TanzaniaSubmitted to the Pre-Sessional Working Group of the Committee on Economic,Social, and Cultural Rights during its 47th Session, December 5-9, 2011,”2011,http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/Treaties/CESCR/Shared%20Documents/TZA/INT_CESCR_NGO_TZA_14221_E.pdf(accessed May 9, 2014), p. 14.[126]Human Rights Watch interview with Dora P., Kahama district, April 2, 2014.[127]Human Rights Watch interview with Annet R., Kahama district, April 2, 2014.[128]CEDAW, “Tanzania Non-Governmental Organization’s Shadow Report toCEDAW: The Implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms ofDiscrimination Against women,” p. 10.[129]Human Rights Watch interview with Sophia V., Kishapu district, April 1, 2014.[130]Save the Children, “State of the World’s Mothers: Children HavingChildren,” 2004, http://www.ungei.org/resources/files/SaveTheChildren_SOWM_2004_final.pdf(accessed May 13, 2014), p. 4.[131]World Health Organization (WHO), “WHO Guidelines on Preventing EarlyPregnancy and Poor Reproductive Outcomes Among Adolescents in DevelopingCountries,” 2011,http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2011/9789241502214_eng.pdf (accessedJanuary 8, 2014), p. 2.[132]Ibid. Studies on other countries show that women who marry early have thehighest proportion of unfavorable pregnancy outcomes at all stages throughouttheir childbearing years. S. Shawky and W. Millat, “Early TeenageMarriage and Pregnancy Outcome,” Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal,2000, vol. 6, issue 1, http://www.emro.who.int/publications/emhj/0601/06.htm(accessed July 22, 2014), pp. 46-54.[133]Young mothers are less likely to get prenatal care and often do not have enoughinformation about proper nutrition while pregnant. Babies born to young mothersrun a 30 percent increased risk of dying during their first year of life.Babies may have a low birth weight as a consequence of their mother’spoor nutritional status while pregnant, and babies with low birth weight are 5to 30 times more likely to die than babies of normal weight. See Population ActionInternational, “How Family Planning Protects the Health of Women andChildren,” May 1, 2006, http://www.populationaction.org/Publications/Fact_Sheets/FS2/How_Family_Planning_Protects_the_Health_of_Women_and_Children.pdf (accessed March 12, 2012), pp. 1-2;Nawal M. Nour, “Health Consequences of Child Marriage in Africa,”November 2006,http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/12/11/06-0510_article.htm (accessed July 22,2014).[134]WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank, “Trends in Maternal Mortality:1990-2013,” http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/112682/2/9789241507226_eng.pdf?ua=1(accessed January 9, 2014), p. 21.[135]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatuma Bwanga, nursing officer in thematernity ward and Selina Mpemba, assistant nursing officer in the maternityward, Shinyanga Regional Government Hospital, Shinyanga, April 1, 2014.[136]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Edith Kwezi, district medical officer,Shinyanga Region, April 1, 2014. These statistics are from the report forreproductive and child health, January to December 2013, provided to us by Dr.Edith Kwezi during the interview. These statistics are of girls who deliveredat Shinyanga Regional Hospital. The given statistics were not available inpercentages.[137]Human Rights Watch interview with Aisha S., Kahama, April 2, 2014.[138]Nawal Nour, “An Introduction to Maternal Mortality,” Journal ofObstetrics and Gynecology, Vol. 1, No. 2 (2008), p. 77-81.[139]See Amy Tsui et al., “The Role of Delayed Childbearing in the Preventionof Obstetric Fistulas,” International Journal ofGynecology and Obstetrics, vol. 99 (2007), p.98; WHO, “Obstetric Fistula: Guiding Principles for Clinical ManagementandProgramme Development,” p.3; and UNFPA,“Marrying too Young: End Child Marriage,” p. 22.[140]Nawal Nour, “An Introduction to Maternal Mortality,” Journal ofObstetrics and Gynecology, Vol. 1, No. 2 (2008), p. 12.[141]UNFPA, “Using Mobile Phones to Tackle Fistula in Tanzania,” May,2011, http://www.unfpa.org/public/home/news/pid/7697 (accessed January 21,2014).[142]Ibid. Also see, Population Council,“Healing Wounds, Instilling Hope: The Tanzania Partnership AgainstFistula,” http://www.popcouncil.org/uploads/pdfs/qcq/QCQ16.pdf (accessedJuly 22, 2014), p. 6. Data on fistula are difficult to collect because of thestigma associated with the condition, the effort involved in reaching remoteareas where many of those with fistula live.[143]Human Rights Watch interview with Rose M., Kahama district, April 2, 2014.[144]Human Rights Watch interview with Hadija C., Kahama district, April 2, 2014.[145]Human Rights Watch interview with Agnes J., Kahama district, April 2, 2014.[146]Law of the Marriage Act, 1971, arts. 13(1) and. 17.[147]Law of the Marriage Act, 1971, arts. 13(1). See also, art.148, A person who isparty to, or participates in, a marriage where either party is below theminimum marriage age commits an offense liable to 2to 3 years in prison.[148]Law of the Child Act, 2009, arts. 4, 5, 9 and 13.[149]Penal Code Act, arts. 133 and 134.[150]Penal Code Act, No. 21 of 1945, amended by the Sexual Offences SpecialProvisions Act (SOSPA), 1998, arts. 5 (e), 6, 7 and 12. The offense of rapeincludes when: “(1) a male person rapes a girl or a woman; (2) a maleperson commits the offense of rape if he has sexual intercourse with a girl ora woman under circumstances falling under any of the following descriptions: (a)not being his wife, or being his wife who is separated from him without herconsenting to it at the time of the sexual intercourse; (b) with her consentwhere the consent has been obtained by the use of force, threats orintimidation by putting her in fear of death or of hurt or while she is inunlawful detention; (c) with her consent when her consent has been obtained ata time when she was of unsound mind or was in a state of intoxication inducedby any drugs, matter or thing, administered to her by the man or by some otherperson unless proved that there was prior consent between the two; (d) with herconsent when the man knows that he is not her husband, and that her consent isgiven because she has been made to believe that he is another man to whom, sheis, or believes herself to be, lawfully married; (e) with or without herconsent when she is under eighteen years of age, unless the woman is his wifewho is fifteen or more years of age and is not separated from the man.”A person convicted of rape is liable to imprisonment of no less than 30 years,with corporal punishment, and a fine determined by the court.[151]Sexual Offences Special Provisions Act, 1998, arts. 3 and 5.[152]The Penal Code Act, 1945, art. 130, amended by the Sexual Offences SpecialProvisions Act, 1998, art. 5.[153]The Penal Code Act, 1945, arts. 130, amended by the Sexual Offences SpecialProvisions Act, 1998, art. 5(e).[154]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Neema Gasabilie, residentmagistrate, Shinyanga region, June 13, 2014.[155]Human Rights Watch interview with Assistant Superintendent of Police, PiliSimon Misungwi; police officer in charge of Police Gender and Children’s Deskin Shinyanga region, Shinyanga, April 1, 2014. Most of the law enforcementofficers, including police officers at Police Gender and Children’s Desksand social welfare officers, as well as NGOs who spoke to Human Rights Watchsaid they use the Law of the Child Act, 2009, to define a child as a personbelow 18. However, the challenge they face in protecting children from childmarriage is the contradiction of the Law of the Child Act with the Law of theMarriage Act, 1971, which allows girls who have not yet reached 18 to marry.[156]Human Rights Watch interview with Madina H., Mwanza, March 31, 2014.[157]Human Rights Watch interview with Happiness Eliufoo, police officer at the PoliceGender and Children’s Desk, Hai police station, Moshi, April 2014.[158]Human Rights Watch interview with Janet G., Mwanza, March 31, 2014.[159]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Helen Kijo Bisimba, executive director,Legal and Human Rights Center, Dar es Salaam, April 16, 2014.[160]Human Rights Watch interview with Kanoni K., Mwanza, March 30, 2014.[161]Ministry of Community Development, Gender, and Children, “The NationalAction Plan for the Prevention and Eradication of Violence against Women andChildren 2007-20015,” p.6. The 2009 Child Act provides a legal frameworkfor a child protection system, including establishment of juvenile courts withpowers to hear and determine all applications relating to child care,maintenance and child protection, including cases of child marriage and FGM.However, Tanzania has just one juvenile court, located in the capital city inDar es Salaam and cases relating to children are heard in regular courts. Thiscauses delays in determining matters relating to children, and thereby undermineschildren’s access to justice.[162]The Local Government Laws (Miscellaneous Amendments), Act No. 13 of 2006, arts.4 (p) and 94 (1). Also see, UNICEF, “Violence Against Children,”http://www.tzdpg.or.tz/fileadmin/documents/dpg_internal/dpg_working_groups_clusters/cluster_2/health/DPGH_Meeting_Documents_2011/Violence_Against_Children_in_Tanzania.pdf(accessed July 22, 2014). Ward and village executive officers are employed bythe Ministry of Local Government and are responsible for the day to daymanagement of wards and villages. They have the duty to safeguard and promotethe welfare of children within their jurisdiction. Their other duties includeresolving conflicts and disputes that arise among residents, includinggender-based violence.[163]Human Rights Watch interview with Valerie Msoka, executive director, TanzaniaMedia Women’sAssociation (TAMWA), Dodoma, April 8, 2014.[164]Penal Code Act, 1945, art. 130, amended by the Sexual Offences SpecialProvisions Act (SOSPA), 1998, art. 5. The age of sexual consent is 18. Seealso, Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Eliezer Felishi, director ofpublic prosecutions, Tanzania, May 9, 2014.[165]Human Rights interview with Emmanuel K. Kalolo; ward executive officer, Kahamadistrict, April 2, 2014.[166]Championand International Center for Research on Women, “Help-Seeking Pathwaysand Barriers for Survivors of Gender-based Violence in Tanzania,” 2013,http://www.engenderhealth.org/files/pubs/localized/tanzania/CHAMPION-GBV-Pathways-and-Barriers-report.pdf,(accessed May 6, 2014), p. 26. Ward council officers, including ward executiveofficers and village executive officers are mandated to provide advice,counseling, mediation, and reconciliation for cases of gender-based violence.The Local Government Laws (Miscellaneous Amendments), Act No. 13 of 2006, arts.4 (p), establishes ward executive officers.Also see, Champion andInternational Center for Research on Women, “Help-Seeking Pathways andBarriers for Survivors of Gender-based Violence in Tanzania,” 2013,http://www.engenderhealth.org/files/pubs/localized/tanzania/CHAMPION-GBV-Pathways-and-Barriers-report.pdf,(accessed May 6, 2014), p. 26. Ward executive officers and village executiveofficers are leaders in the local government district overseeing developmentalactivities in the wards.[167]United Republic of Tanzania, “Multi-Sector National Plan of Action toPrevent and Respond to Violence against Children June 2013-June 2016.”http://www.tanzania.go.tz/egov_uploads/documents/National_Response_to_Violence_Against_Children_sw.pdf(accessed May 28, 2014). See also Ministry of Health and Social Welfare,“National Costed Plan of Action for Most Vulnerable Children for 2013 to2017.” This action plan targets children living with severe deprivations,such as orphans and children engaged in the worst forms of child labor, and isled by the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, in conjunction with otherministries, development partners, and stakeholders.[168]Child Act 2009, arts. 97 and 98, provides for the establishment of juvenilecourts with powers to hear and determine all applications relating to childcare, maintenance, and protection. See also, Human Rights Watch telephoneinterview with Eliezer Felishi, director of public prosecutions, May 9, 2014.Tanzania has just one juvenile court, located in the capital, Dar es Salaam,and cases relating to children are heard in regular courts. This causes delaysin determining matters relating to children, and thereby undermines children’saccess to justice.[169]United Republic of Tanzania, “Multi-Sector National Plan of Action toPrevent and Respond to Violence against Children June 2013-June 2016”.Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, “National Costed Plan of Actionfor Most Vulnerable Children for 2013 to 2017.”[170]The Law of the Child Act, 2009, arts. 16, 17, 18, and 94.[171]Human Rights Watch interview with Birgithe Lund-Henrisken, chief, Child Protection,UNICEF, April 14, 2014.[172]Human Rights Watch interview with AgnesHumphrey Urassa, acting regional social welfare officer, Kilimanjaro, April 4,2014.[173]CEDAW, “Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Parties underArticle 18 of the Convention, Combined Fourth, Fifth and Sixth PeriodicReports, Tanzania,” April 16, 2007,http://www.bayefsky.com//reports/tanzania_cedaw_c_tza_6_2006.pdf (accessed May7, 2014), paras 11, 17, and 25.[174]Tamar Ezer et al, “Child Marriage and Guardianship in Tanzania: RobbingGirls of Their Childhood and Infantilizing Women,” http://winafrica.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/08/Child-Marriage-Guardianship-in-Tanzania.pdf(accessed May 28, 2014), p. 361.[175]The Marriage Act, 1971, arts. 9 and 10; Judicature and Application of Laws Act,Chapter 358, arts. 11(1) and 11(2); Local Customary Law (Declaration) (No.4)Order, Government Notice No. 436 of 1963. See also, CEDAW “TanzaniaNon-Governmental Organization‘s Shadow Report to CEDAW: TheImplementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms ofDiscrimination against Women,” p. 1o.[176]See, Tanzania Women Judges Association, “Millennium Development Goal 3Program (MDG 3)—Tanzania, 2009 to 2011,” http://www.iawj.org/Tanzania_Country_Report.pdf(accessed May 8, 2014), p. 13. The overall culture of women’ssubmissiveness to men makes it difficult for many women to believe there ismarital rape.[177]Judicature and Application of Laws Act,http://tanzania.go.tz/egov_uploads/documents/JUDICATURE%20AND%20APPLICATION%20OF%20LAWS%20ACT.pdf(accessed May 29, 2014) Chapter 358, arts. 11(1) and 11 (2), provides,“Customary law shall be applicable to, and courts shall exercisejurisdiction in accordance therewith in, matters of a civil nature betweenmembers of a community in which rules of customary law relevant to the matterare established and accepted….nothing… shall preclude any courtfrom applying the rules of Islamic law in matters of marriage, divorce,guardianship, inheritance….”[178]Law of the Marriage Act, 1971, art. 114.[179]United Republic of Tanzania Law Reform Commission, Report of the Commission onLaw of Marriage Act, 1971 (No. 5 of 1971) presented to the Minister of Justiceand Constitutional Affairs, Dar es Salaam, 1994, http://www.commonlii.org/tz/other/TZLRC/report/R2/2.pdf,p. 17.[180]Law Reform Commission of Tanzania, “Report on the Law of the Marriage Act,” 1971, p. 3.The Law of the Marriage Act, 1971, was enacted to unify andharmonize the multiple existing regimes of marriages in Tanzania and to giveequal recognition to all marriages however celebrated, including underChristianity, Islam, civil, or customary.[181]Human Rights Watch interview with Josephine K., Mpwapwa district, April 6,2014.[182]Human Rights Watch interview with Maureen K., Mwanza, March 30, 2014.[183]CRC Committee, “Concluding Observations: Burkina Faso,” para.59(e), U.N. Doc. CRC/C/BFA/CO/3-4 (2010); Cameroon,para. 60(d), U.N. Doc. CRC/C/CMR/CO/2(2010).[184]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Judy Odunga, director, Women in Lawand Development (WiLDAF), May 15, 2014. There is no data on the number ofshelters in Tanzania.[185]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Dr. Pindi Chana, deputy minister,Ministry of Community Development, Gender and Children, May 14, 2014.[186]Human Rights Watch interview with Judy Odunga, director, Women in Law andDevelopment (WiLDAF), May 15, 2014.[187]Human Rights Watch interview with assistant inspector, George Nelson, communitypolice officer, G.7168, Police Gender and Children’s Desk, Dodoma PoliceStation, April 9, 2014.[188]The Births and Deaths Registration Act, cap 108 of the Revised Laws 2002, art.11. The Marriage Act 1971, art. 157 and the Child Care Act , 2009,art. 6(3).[189]United Republic of Tanzania and IFC Macro, “Tanzania Demographic andHealth Survey,” 2010, p. 27.[190]United Republic of Tanzania Law Reform Commission, Report of the Commission onLaw of Marriage Act, 1971 (No. 5 of 1971) presented to the Minister of Justiceand Constitutional Affairs, Dar es Salaam, 1994, http://www.commonlii.org/tz/other/TZLRC/report/R2/2.pdf,p. 17.[191]The United Republic of Tanzania Law Reform Commission, Report of the Commissionon Law of Marriage Act, 1971 (No. 5 of 1971) presented to the Minister ofJustice and Constitutional Affairs, Dar es Salaam, 1994, http://www.commonlii.org/tz/other/TZLRC/report/R2/2.pdf,p. 17.The Marriage Act 1971, art. 157[192]International Covenant on Civil andPolitical Rights (ICCPR), adopted December 16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S.171,entered into force March 23, 1976, ratified by Tanzania on June 11, 1976;International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR),adopted December 16, 1966, G.A. Res.2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No.16) at49, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966) 993 U.N.T.S. 3, entered into force January 3, 1976,ratified by Tanzania on June 11, 1976.; International Convention on theElimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), adoptedDecember 18, 1979, G.A. Res. 34/180, entered into force September 3, 1981,ratified by Tanzania on August 20, 1985; Convention on the Rights of the Child(CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, G.A. Res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp.(No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into force September 2,1990, ratified by Tanzania on June 10, 1991.[193]African (Banjul) Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR), OAU Doc.CAB/LEG/67/3 rev. 5, 21 (1982), entered into forced October 21, 1986, ratifiedby Tanzania on February 18, 1984;African Charter on the Rights andWelfare of the Child (ACRWC), OAY Doc. CAB/LEG/24.9/49 (1990), entered intoforce November 29, 1999, ratified by Tanzania on March 16, 2003; and Protocolto the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on The Rights ofWomen in Africa (the Maputo Protocol), adopted July 11, 2003, entered into forceNovember 2005 and ratified by Tanzania March 3, 2007.[194] Committee on theElimination of Violence Against Women (CEDAW Committee), General RecommendationNo. 19,Violence against women, (Eleventh session, 1992),Compilation of General Comments and General RecommendationsAdopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, U.N. Doc.HRI\GEN\1\Rev.1 at 84 (1994), (contained in document A/47/38), para. 9. Seealso, UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment 31, Nature of the generallegal obligation on states parties to the Covenant, para.8, U.N. Doc.CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.13 (2004); UN Committee Against Torture, General CommentNo. 2: Implementation of Article 2 by States Parties, 24 January2008.CAT/C/GC/2. Regarding the responsibility of states extending to all withintheir jurisdiction.[195] Human RightsCouncil Resolution 16/3, “Promoting human rights and fundamental freedomsthrough a better understanding of traditional values of humankind,”A/HRC/RES/16/3, April 8, 2011,http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/RESOLUTION/GEN/G11/124/92/PDF/G1112492.pdf?OpenElement(accessed September 23, 2014), p.2. See also, Sexual Rights Initiative,“Submission Regarding Best Practices In The Application of TraditionalValues While Promoting And Protecting Human Rights And Upholding HumanDignity,” http://www.ohchr.org/documents/issues/hrvalues/sri%20.pdf(accessed September 23 2014), p. 1.[196] CEDAW, art. 5.[197] Human RightsCommittee, General Comment No. 28, para. 5. See also UN General Assembly,Report of the Special Rapporteur in the field of cultural rights. A/67/287. NewYork, UN General Assembly, August 10, 2012,http://www.unesco.lacult.org/docc/2012_Cultural_Rights_A_67_287_eng.pdf(accessed July 22, 2014), p. 4. The UN Special Rapporteur on cultural rightsreiterated in 2012 that: “Many practices and norms that discriminateagainst women are justified by reference to culture, religion andtradition,” and recommended that states ensure: “The freedom ofwomen to refuse to participate in traditions, customs and practices thatinfringe upon human dignity and rights, to critique existing cultural norms andtraditional practices and to create new cultural meanings and norms ofbehavior.”[198] ICCPR, arts. 3,6, 9, 19, 23 and 24.[199] ICESCR, art. 2.[200] CRC, art. 2.[201] CEDAW Committee,General Recommendation No. 28: the core obligations of states parties underarticle 2 of theConvention on the Elimination of All Forms ofDiscrimination against Women, 47th Sess., U.N. Doc. CEDAW/C/ GC/28, 2010,http://www.iwraw-ap.org/convention/details28.htm (accessed September 21,2014),para. 9 and 22.[202] CEDAW Committee,General Recommendation No. 21, Equality in Marriage and Family Relations, UNCEDAWOR, 13th Sess., UN Doc. A/47/38, (1994), para. 14.[203]See Universal Declaration on Human Rights, adopted December 10, 1948, G.A. Res.217A(III), U.N. Doc. A/810 at 71 (1948), art. 16, ICCPR, art. 23, and ICESCR,art. 10 (1).[204]CEDAW, art. 16. See also Convention on the Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age forMarriage, and Registration of Marriages, art. 1 not ratified by Tanzania.[205]Maputo Protocol, art. 6.[206]The Maputo Protocol in article 6 calls ongovernments to develop laws that establish 18 as the minimum age of marriage.The African Charter in article 18 obligates governments to “ensure theelimination of every discrimination against women and also ensure theprotection of the rights of the woman and the child as stipulated ininternational declarations and conventions.”[207]See, for example, CRC Committee, General Comment No. 4, Adolescent Health andDevelopment in the Context of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,(Thirty-third session, 2003), para. 20. There is an evolving consensus ininternational law that 18 should be the minimum age for marriage.[208]ACRWC, art.21 (2).[209]Maputo Protocol, art.6 (a).[210]UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 19 (The Family), Protection ofthe Family, the Right to Marriage andEquality of the Spouses, (Article23), (Thirty-ninth session, 1990), Compilation of General Comments and GeneralRecommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty bodies, UN Doc.HRI/Gen/1/Rev.7(2004),para. 4.[211]General Comment No. 16 of the Committee on Economic, Social and CulturalRights, which oversees implementation of the ICESCR, para 27, sets outobligations of governments to “ensure that men and women have an equalright to choose if, whom, and when to marry.”[212]CEDAW Committee, General Recommendation No. 21, Equality in Marriage and FamilyRelations, (Thirteenth Session,1994), Compilation of General Commentsand General Recommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, UN Doc.HRI/GEN/1/Rev.1(2004), paras. 16, 1 (a) and (b).[213]General Comment No. 16 of the Committee on Economic, Social and CulturalRights, which oversees implementation of the ICESCR, para 27, sets outgovernments’ obligations to “ensure that men and women have anequal right to choose if, whom, and when to marry.”[214]ICESCR, art. 13, CRC, art.28, African Charter, art. 17, Maputo Protocol,art. 12, ACRWC, art. 11. ESCR Committee, General Comment No. 13, The Right toEducation (article 13 of the Covenant), E/C.12/1999/10 (1999), para. 57.Providing primary education is a core obligation for governments.[215]Maputo Protocol, art. 12,[216]ESCR Committee, General Comment No.13, The Right to Education, UN Doc.E/C.12/1999/10 (1999), paras. 10 and 57.[217]CRC Committee, General Comment No. 7 (2005), , U.N. Doc. CRC/C/GC/7/Rev.1, 20September 2006CRC/C/GC/7/Rev 1 (2006), para. 28.[218]ESCR Committee, General Comment No. 13, The Right to Education (article 13 ofthe Covenant), E/C.12/1999/10 (1999), para. 13.[219]UN Economic and Social Council, “Concluding Observations on the Initialto Third Reports of the United Republic of Tanzania,” December 13, 2013,http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=E/C.12/TZA/CO/1-3&Lang=En,(accessed May 15, 2014), para. 27.[220]Ibid. para. 26.[221]Human Rights Committee, General Comment 31, Nature of the general legalobligation on states parties to the Covenant (hereinafter "General Comment31"), para. 8, U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.13 (2004); UN CommitteeAgainst Torture (CAT), General Comment No. 2: Implementation of Article 2 byStates Parties, 24 January 2008.CAT/C/GC/2.[222]CRC, art. 19.[223]Ibid., art. 34.[224]Maputo Protocol, arts. 4(2b) and 3 (4).[225]Ibid., arts. 5(d) and 4(2f).[226]African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, “Consideration ofReports Submitted by States Parties under the Terms of Article 62 of theAfrican Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights: United Republic ofTanzania,” http://www.achpr.org/files/sessions/43rd/conc-obs/2to10-1992-2008/achpr43_conc_staterep2to10_tanzania_2008_eng.pdf(accessed May 15, 2014), para 36.CRC Committee, “Consideration ofReports Submitted by States Parties under Article 44 of the Convention,Concluding Observations: United Republic of Tanzania,” http://www.refworld.org/publisher,CRC,,TZA,45377ee80,0.html(accessdate)June 21, 2006, para 51.[227]UN Economic and Social Council, “Concluding Observations on the Initialto Third Reports of the United Republic of Tanzania,” December 13, 2012.Para. 18.[228]CEDAW Committee, General Recommendation No. 19, Violence against Women,(Eleventh session, 1992), Compilation of General Comments and GeneralRecommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, UN Doc. HRI\GEN\1\Rev.1(1994), paras. 9 and 24.[229]ICCPR, art. 7.[230]Ibid., art. 9.[231]Ibid., art. 6.[232]CEDAW Committee, General Recommendation No, 19, paras. 1 and 7 (g).[233]See generally, European Court of Human Right, Kaya v. Turkey, judgmentof February 19, 1998, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1998-I, p. 324; Jordanv. the United Kingdom, No. 24746/94, judgment of May 4, 2001; Finucanev. the United Kingdom, No. 29178/95, judgment of July 1 2003; Isayeva v.Russia, 57950/00, judgment of July 27, 2004; Adali v. Turkey,38187/97, judgment March 31, 2005.[234]ICESCR, art. 12.[235]CRC, art. 24; See also ESCR Committee, General Comment No. 14, para. 22.[236]CEDAW, art. 12(1).[237]ESCR Committee, “Substantive Issues Arising in the Implementation of theInternational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,” No. 14,The Right to the Highest Attainable Standard of Health, E/C.12/2000/4 (2000), http://www.refworld.org/docid/4538838d0.html(accessed September 19, 2014) paras. 14 and 21.[238]CRC Committee, Concluding Observations: Costa Rica, U.N. Doc CRC/C/CRI/CO/4(2011), paras.27, 28.[239]ESCR Committee, “The Concluding observations on the initial to thirdreport of the United Republic of Tanzania, adopted by the Committee at itsforty - ninth session (2012),”http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cescr/docs/E.C.12.TZA.CO.1-3_en.pdf(accessed may 28, 2014), para s 18 and 24.[240]Ibid.[241]See also Republic of Tanzania, “Reports on The Implementation of theConvention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), 3rd, 4th,and 5th” 2005-2011, http://www.africanchildforum.org/clr/Report%20and%20Concluding%20Observation/CRC/report/tanzania-%20thirdtofifth-uncrc-en.pdf(accessed May 21, 2014), para 193.[242]CRC, art. 12.[243]CRC Committee, General Comment No. 12, The Right of the Child to Be Heard, U.N. Doc.CRC/C/GC/12(2009), p.3[244]Ibid., para 49.Related ContentOctober 29, 2014News ReleaseTanzania: Child Marriage Harms GirlsSet 18 as Minimum Age to MarryOctober 29, 2014News ReleaseTanzania: Child Marriage Harms GirlsRegion / CountryAfrica Tanzania and ZanzibarProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch