Fields of Peril: Child Labor in US Agriculture | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload this reportPara leer el resumen y las recomendaciones en español, favor de apretar aquíDownload summary and recommendations in English: photo featureDonate NowDownloadsDownload this reportPara leer el resumen y las recomendaciones en español, favor de apretar aquíDownload summary and recommendations in English: photo featureMay 5, 2010Fields of PerilChild Labor in US AgricultureFields of PerilChild Labor in US AgricultureMaria M.Marcos S.I. Summaryand Key RecommendationsKeyRecommendationsII.MethodologyIII. ChildFarmworkers in the United StatesIV. TheYoungest WorkersWhy ChildrenWorkV.Exploitation: Wages and HoursExcessiveWorking HoursEarning Lessthan the Minimum WageVI.Education and FarmworkVII. Healthand SafetyWork withDangerous Machinery, Equipment, and ToolsRepetitiveMotion InjuriesPressure toWork Fast, Sick, and InjuredPesticideExposureExtremeTemperatures: Heat and ColdSanitationGreenTobacco SicknessAccess toHealth CareSexualHarassment and ViolenceVIII.Vulnerability of Child Workers Due to Immigration StatusIX. TheUnited States Government’s Failure to Protect Farmworker ChildrenFair LaborStandards ActChildren’sAct for Responsible Employment (CARE): Closing the Legal LoopholeFailure toEnsure Adequate Minimum Age, Maximum Hour, and Minimum Wage Protections: the USDepartment of LaborFailure toProtect Children’s Health and SafetyX.International Legal ObligationsILOConvention on Worst Forms of Child LaborConventionon the Rights of the ChildConventionon the Elimination of Racial DiscriminationXI. DetailedRecommendationsTo theUnited States CongressTo theUnited States Department of LaborToOccupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)To theEnvironmental Protection Agency (EPA)To theUnited States Department of EducationTo AllStatesAcknowledgmentsMaria M.“Every teenager should do at least a day and see howit is to work a real job. You sweat. You walk until your feet hurt, you haveblisters, and until you have cuts all over your hands,” said Maria M.,reflecting on her childhood working in the fields.[1]Growing up in a farmworker family in rural Idaho, Maria saidshe was “always surrounded” by work in the fields. She startedworking at age 11 in order to help her parents. “I worked picking onionsafter school in about 6th grade,” she told Human Rights Watch.“I didn’t mind working in the fields. I just saw it as something wedid, something my family had always done.”According to Maria, her young age was nothing unusual:“I worked with a lot of older people and younger. The ages were alwaysvaried, 11 and 12 year olds, even 10 year olds. They didn’t get paid oncheck [on the books], they’d just go and help their parents on the side.The growers know that. They see that—they would pass by when they dropoff water. No one was going to say anything.”Maria said she worked 10 and sometimes 13 hours a day,earning less than the minimum wage. “The pay was terrible.”As she got older, Maria said, she mostly “was hoeingonions in the back country . . . sugar beets, zucchini, espiga [detasselingcorn]. . . . When I worked in espiga, the growers would water . . . . We wouldwalk down the rows getting really wet. The mud goes in your tennis shoes andyou get blisters. You’re in them all day.”Maria said everyone felt pressure to work fast. “Thecrew leader would egg the workers on and intimidate the workers who were slow.It almost became a tradition in the field, the person who was the fastest wasthe best worker. . . . [It’s] something that has been instilled in us towork hard. Prove yourself, be a good worker.”One summer vacation in high school she harvested zucchini,bending down all day to pick the vegetables. “You had to go reallyfast,” she explained. “You had to bend down for hours until yournext break. . . . A lot of people who did zucchini before have back problems. Iwas young and I know how much my back hurt after one season. . . . Idon’t know if I blame the field, but ever since I worked in zucchini, Ihave had a lot of back problems. I don’t know if it was zucchini or if itwas just working for years in the field.”Maria was the only member of her family picking zucchini andone of only three girls in the field. “The first time we gotthere,” she said, “the guys were just joking around and said thiswas a guy’s job, it was no place for girls, that we should just gohome.” She added, “it wasn’t an easy job. . . . Sometimes itwas very frustrating because guys would tell you stuff.” Because Maria’sfather was known in the community, she said, she was spared more seriousharassment, but the men were verbally abusive to one of her co-workers.At the time, Maria said, she did not know anything aboutpesticides but has since learned. “Now that I know about pesticides,”she told us, “I’m pretty sure we entered many fields” withrecently applied pesticides.There was always white residue in the fields, especiallyzucchini always had residue on them. . . . [T]here were people who got sick butprobably thought it was the heat. They never told us they were spraying, theywould just say “watering.”One summer . . . me and my older sister were working . . .. We were told when we saw the plane we had to get out. But they didn’tsay when, just “look for the plane.” They were spraying things wedidn’t know what they were. We heard it was chemicals so [the plants]could grow, but we didn’t know what they were. So we didn’t thinkabout that when we saw a plane. We were in the next field and you see it all thetime in the country. It’s always the next field but it drifts.Maria is one of the rare farmworker children who has made itto college, where she says her experiences in the field continue to motivateher. “I’m not like some people who came to college because theirparents made them or to party,” she explained. “With me, my parentsdidn’t force me to come to school. They didn’t want me to putpressure on myself. In the long run when I finish school, I will help myparents. When there is an exam coming or I just want to go home because myparents need help financially, I think how much I’m going to help themwhen I get out. Some days I just want to go home and help them, but I think inthe long run this won’t help, so I think working in the fields had a bigimpact on me.”Marcos S.“I really didn’t have a childhood and Idon’t want [my own children] to go through what I did,” 17-year-oldMarcos S. told Human Rights Watch. “You’re a kid only once. Onceyou get old you have to work.”[2]Marcos, who lives in North Carolina, said he started workingin agriculture full time when he was 12 years old. Among other things, fromlate November to late December, he cuts Christmas trees. Marcos explained whathis work was like when he was 12 years old. He said:I did two things. One, I used a machine. It didn’tcut the trees but it dug them out with the roots so we could take themsomewhere else. These were heavy because of the trees and the soil. I had tohold the tree when they were digging. Then you carry it on your shoulder to thetruck. It was so heavy you couldn’t carry it by yourself so you had to doit in pairs.Second, I cut the tree three to four inches from theground. I put it in the machine to tie it. I put it on my shoulder and carriedit to the trucks. . . .When I was 12, the first day it was so heavy. The next dayI didn’t even want to get up because my body hurt so bad but I knew I hadto because I needed the money. I said “never again” but I had tobecause that was the only job.Marcos told us that the first year he “used a chainsawa couple of times but that was it. If someone was doing something else,they’d say, ‘Cut there.’” But when he returned to thesame farm the next year at age 13, he used a chainsaw like everyone else. Whenasked if he was taught how to use it, he replied: “You just have to startit, that was the most important thing.” Marcos admitted that hedidn’t always feel safe. “My uncle cut his leg using a chainsaw.Sometimes if you don’t do it right, it can bounce back—it canhappen in a flash. My uncle, it was bad.”While working, he said, he wore “just regular clothes,no gloves, masks, no protection. Regular shoes. . . . I never had anyprotective gear. . . . And it’s cold, it rains. We still have towork.”Marcos said that pesticides were sprayed around him.“They spray to kill the insects that damage the trees. They do that forthe trees that are still growing. . . . You don’t cut all the trees,they’re mixed in. They’re marked with a red ribbon, the ones theywant you to cut. So the ones they don’t, they spray. You’re rightthere. . . . A big tank on their back and they go around. They did it when Iwas working. It smells so bad.”He had never received any training on pesticides, he said.“They don’t say anything. They just want you to get it done. The guysthat spray, they don’t even wear masks.”Marcos said no one ever asked him how old he was, “Youjust come if you can work.” Still, he assumed his employers knew his age:“You can tell when someone is a kid, I mean, 12.” And, he noted,“There’s a lot of young kids working out there. . . . Last year[when I was 16] there were kids younger than me. When I was 13 . . . there wereother kids. My cousin is the same age as me. He worked Christmas trees forother people.”Marcos said he normally works weekends and school vacations,on different crops throughout the year. But the Christmas tree harvest isduring the school year, and “sometimes they say, ‘We need you tocome Monday.’ So I say, ‘I have school,’ but they’regoing to pay me. . . . You pretty much have to choose work or school.They’re not part-time jobs. . . . So sometimes I have to choose work. . .. But in school there’s a limited number of times you can be absent. . .. Then I have homework to catch up on. I go to work, I come home. I stay uplate to get it done.”Marcos said that no one in his family had made it past thetenth grade, and his two older sisters had already dropped out to work.“My mom tells me, ‘You might want to get out of school and helpme.’ I listen to her and respect her but I want to choose my future. Iwant to go as far as I can go.”I. Summary and KeyRecommendationsHundreds of thousands of children under age 18are working in agriculture in the United States. But under a double standard inUS federal law, children can toil in the fields at far younger ages, for farlonger hours, and under far more hazardous conditions than all other workingchildren. For too many of these children, farmwork means an early end tochildhood, long hours at exploitative wages, and risk to their health andsometimes their lives. Although their families’ financial need helps pushchildren into the fields—poverty among farmworkers is more thandouble that of all wage and salary employees—the long hoursand demands of farmwork result in high drop-out rates from school. Without adiploma, child workers are left with few options besides a lifetime of farmworkand the poverty that accompanies it.In 2000, Human Rights Watch published thereport “Fingers to the Bone: United States Failure to Protect ChildFarmworkers.” This study documented the exploitative, dangerousconditions under which children worked in agriculture and the damage inflictedupon their health and education. Highlighting weak protections in US law, it found that even these provisions were rarely enforced. Nearly 10 yearslater, Human Rights Watch returned to the fields to assessconditions for working children. We conducted research in the states of Florida, Michigan, North Carolina and Texas, interviewing dozens of child farmworkers whohad altogether worked in 14 states across the country. Shockingly, we foundthat conditions for child farmworkers in the United States remain virtually asthey were a decade ago. This report details those conditions and the failure ofthe US government to take effective steps needed to remedy them.Most notably, the government has failed to address the unequaltreatment of working children in the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), whichprovides fewer protections to children working in agriculturecompared with all other working children.In agriculture, children typicallystart working adult hours during the summers, weekends, or after school at age 11or 12. Many children work part time much earlier, and Human Rights Watchinterviewed child farmworkers as young as seven. Seventeen-year-old Jose M.,who described the shock he felt going to work at age 11, said that when helooks around the field and sees 12-year-olds, “I know how they feel. Iused to feel like that. They have a face that says they don’t want to behere.” He added, “Teachers at school know when kids turn 12. Theysee the cuts on their hands. They know a child at 12 goes to work. No if’s,and’s, or but’s.”Parents told us they took their children towork because they did not have childcare and because they needed the money tomeet basic expenses and buy school supplies. The fact that the work is legalalso presents it as a legitimate choice for parents, children, and employers.But several mothers later expressed regret over the choices they had made. Onemother in Texas said she believed she had already stolen her 11-year-olddaughter’s childhood. Another said when she saw what work did to her twooldest children, she decided not to take her two youngest children to work.Current US law provides no minimum age for children workingon small farms so long as they have their parent’s permission. Childrenages 12 and up may work for hire on any farm with their parent’s consent,or if they work with their parents on the same farm. Once children reach age 14,they can work on any farm even without their parents’ permission. Outsideof agriculture, children must be at least 16 years old to work, with a fewexceptions: 14- and 15-year-olds can work in specified jobs such as cashiers,grocery baggers, and car washers, subject to very restricted conditions.Children often work 10 or more hours a day: at the peak ofthe harvest they may work daylight to dusk, with few breaks. Children describedworking five to seven days a week, weather permitting. For example, 14-year-oldOlivia A. said she worked from 6 a.m. to 6 or 7 p.m. picking blueberries in Michigan, seven days a week. Felix D., age 15, said he worked the same hours defloweringtobacco in North Carolina, six days a week.For school children, work is often confined to weekends andsummers, and before and after school. Children who have dropped out of school,including “unaccompanied children” who have come without theirfamilies from Mexico and Central America, work these hours whenever work isavailable. Under US law, there are no limits on the hours children can work inagriculture outside of school hours. In non-agricultural settings, 14- and15-year-olds cannot work more than three hours on a school day and eight hourson a non-school day.Children working in agriculture typically make less than theminimum wage. Their pay is often further cut because employers underreporthours, and they are forced to spend their own money on tools, gloves, anddrinking water that their employers should provide by law. For example, in the Texas panhandle region, children told us they made $45 to $50 a day for 10 or more hours ofhoeing cotton, or at best $4.50 to $5.00 an hour, compared with the federalhourly minimum wage of $7.25. Where the pay is based on a piece rate, meaningworkers are paid by the quantity they pick, it is usually much worse. AntonioM., age 12, said that picking blueberries on piece rate in North Carolina, hemade at most $3.60 an hour.With some notable exceptions, farmworkers are legallyentitled to minimum wage but not overtime, and rarely receive job-relatedbenefits that much of the rest of America’s workforce takes for granted.They receive no paid sick days, no health insurance, no paid vacation leave,and have no job security. They only get paid for the hours they work. Laws thatdeny farmworkers overtime, and in some instances minimum wage, combined withpoor enforcement of existing wage laws, contribute to farmworkers’poverty and financial desperation that compel children to work and make farmworkerseven more vulnerable to exploitation.Farmworker youth drop out from school at four times thenational drop-out rate, according to government estimates. Human Rights Watchinterviewed many children who had been forced to repeat a grade one or moretimes and who had never had anyone in their families graduate from high school.Several factors explain this. Around 40 percent of hired crop workers migrateeach year to or within the United States for work. Children whose familiesmigrate within the United States often leave school early—in April orMay—and return weeks or even months after school has already started.Fifteen-year-old Ana Z. in Texas said: “I don’t remember the lasttime I got to school registered on time. . . . I’m afraid it’sgoing to hold me back on my education. . . . I got out of math because I was adisaster. I would tell the teacher, ‘I don’t even know how todivide and I’m going to be a sophomore.’ I’m going from placeto place. It scrambles things in my head and I can’t keep up.”Children who try to combine working and goingto school often find that school pays the price, in part because there are nolimits on how many hours children can work in agriculture outside of schoolhours. Jaime D., who told us he dropped out of school at age 16 after hestarted picking tomatoes, explained, “I wanted to work and still go toschool, but I couldn’t concentrate on both. I didn’t know how to doboth.”Agriculture is the most dangerous industry for young workers,according to the Centers for Disease Control’s National Institute forOccupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). Working with sharp tools and heavymachinery, exposed to chemicals, climbing up tall ladders, lugging heavybuckets and sacks, children get hurt and sometimes they die. From 2005 to 2008,at least 43 children under age 18 died from work-related injuries in cropproduction—27 percent of all children who were fatally injured at work.The risk of fatal injuries for agricultural workers ages 15 to 17 is more than4 times that of other young workers.Under current US law, children can do agricultural work thatthe US Department of Labor deems “particularly hazardous” forchildren at age 16 (and at any age on farms owned or operated by theirparents). In non-agricultural sectors, no one under age 18 can do such jobs.Incongruously, some of the same jobs that are considered too dangerous forteenagers in non-agricultural settings are perfectly legal in agriculture: a16-year-old who is barred from driving a forklift in a store warehouse, forexample, may do so without restriction on a farm.Children routinely described small injuries, and some moreserious in interviews with Human Rights Watch. Rarely did they say they soughtmedical care.Jose M. said he was 12 when “they gave me my firstknife. Week after week I was cutting myself. Every week I had a new scar. Myhands have a lot of stories. There are scars all over.” Another boy describedbeing hurt when the truck carrying him out to the field rear-ended another.Nevertheless, he said, he and his family returned to work the next day: workingsick, injured, and without taking breaks was a common theme among ourinterviewees who needed the money and were afraid of getting fired if theymissed a day.Human Rights Watch saw children working without gloves andeven barefoot. Most said no one required them to wear protective gear; ifanyone, it was their parents who urged them to wear it, not their employers.Children often work performing the same motions—kneeling,stooping, or raising their arms for hours a day. Youth described pain in theirbacks, knees, hands, and feet, even at very young ages. Children whose bodiesare still developing are especially vulnerable to repetitive-motion injury.Children work in extreme temperatures, heat and cold, fromover 110 degrees in the Texas summer to snow in Michigan. In some climates theday starts cold and wet, then turns unbearably hot. Elias N., age 16, said thebad days for him were the “real hot ones, the field is full of weeds, youcan’t even take a step. When you’re surrounded by corn,there’s no air.” Working long hours in high temperatures placeschildren at risk of heat stroke and dehydration, particularly if there is notenough drinking water. Heat illnesses can lead to brain damage and death, andchildren are significantly more susceptible to heat stress than adults. A17-year-old girl in California died in May 2008 after working nine hourspruning grape vines. Her supervisor delayed her seeking medical care, and whenshe finally reached the hospital she had a core body temperature of 108degrees.Many children said that their employers did not providedrinking water, handwashing facilities, or toilets. Children described bringingtheir own water and sometimes running out. In some places workers said they hadto buy water with their meager wages because the quality of the water inmigrant housing was too poor to drink.The federal Occupational Safetyand Health Administration (OSHA) requires agricultural employers to providedrinking water, water for hand washing, and toilet facilities. Congress,however, exempts farms with fewer than 11 employees from these regulations,essentially exempting them from having to protect their workers' dignity andmost basic health requirements.Children are exposed to pesticides. Some children told HumanRights Watch they were sprayed directly; many more said that the fields next tothem were sprayed while they were working, and they smelled and had reactionsto the drift. “Here there are a lot of chemicals in the field,” said18-year-old Hector H., who worked alongside children. “You can smellthem. [Recently] the plane sprayed, sprayed the cotton. . . . I felt dizzy. Icovered my face and kept working. No one told us to get out of thefield.”Many children described seeing residue on the plants oreven going back into fields wet with spray. Almost none of the children wespoke with had received training on pesticide safety.Exposure to pesticides is a hazard for all farmworkers butmay be especially dangerous for children whose bodies are still developing. Childrenare uniquely vulnerable to chemicals and may absorb pesticides more easily thanadults. Children working in agriculture have far greater incidence rates ofacute occupational pesticide-related illnesses than children working in otherjobs. Exposures to pesticides can produce rash, dizziness, nausea and vomiting,headaches, and burning eyes, as well as brain damage and death. Long-termpesticide exposure in adults is associated with chronic health problems such ascancer, neurologic problems, and reproductive problems.US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulationsprohibit the spraying of pesticides when any unprotected worker is in the fieldor may be exposed through drift. The agency sets restricted-entry intervals(REIs) specifying the amount of time after pesticide application workers shouldnot be in treated areas and requires basic pesticide safety training for allworkers. However, EPA regulations make no special consideration for children.They do not prohibit children mixing, handling, or applying pesticides(although regulations on hazardous work prohibit children under age 16 fromusing the most dangerous categories of pesticides). Pesticide risk assessmentsdo not take children’s special vulnerabilities into account. REIs are setusing a 154-pound adult male as a model—they are not adapted forchildren, pregnant women, or others who differ from this model.Farmworker women and girls are exceptionally vulnerable tosexual abuse, ranging from inappropriate or threatening comments to groping,sexual assault, and rape. Geographic isolation, language barriers, fear ofdeportation, and the desperate need for work make it very difficult forfarmworkers to report abuse, much less get help. Girls may be especiallytargeted because they are young and because of a greater power imbalance thatmakes it even less likely they will complain.Despite these risks to children’s healthand safety, even the weak protections in US law are rarely enforced. Indeed, inthe 10 years following the publication of our first report, enforcement ofchild labor laws overall by the Department of Labor’s Wage and Hourdivision declined dramatically. In 2009 the division found only 36 casesof child labor violations in agriculture, constituting only 4 percent of allchild labor violations, compared with 104 cases in 1998. In 2008Congress raised the maximum civil money penalties for violations ofchild labor provisions resulting in death or serious injury, and in 2009 theDepartment of Labor added several hundred new labor inspectors and promisedmore robust enforcement of labor laws. It remained to be seen at the time ofwriting whether these efforts would result in better protection for childfarmworkers.Although each has recently undertaken positivesteps in this direction, neither the US Department of Labor nor the EPA has maderegulatory changes to better protect child farmworkers from dangerous work andpesticides. Many of the regulations specifying “particularlyhazardous” jobs are out of date and fail to address the serious safetyand health hazards that children face in the workplace. In 2002 NIOSHrecommended in a lengthy report that the Department of Labor update many of theso-called “hazardous order” regulations. By early 2010, thedepartment had taken steps towards updating some of the regulations fornon-agricultural jobs but had not placed amending the list for agriculture onits published regulatory agenda, despite the particularly dangerous nature ofagricultural labor and younger age at which children are permitted to dohazardous jobs. Nor has the Wage and Hour Division enforced existingprohibitions on hazardous work: in 2009 it cited only two violations ofagricultural hazardous orders in two cases, or 0.14 percent of the 1,432hazardous order violations it found that year.In December 2009, the EPA announced plans to strengthen itsassessment of pesticide health risks for children, farmworkers and others, witha strong emphasis on risks for children in the fields. A process to amend theWorker Protection Standard, which regulates practices related to workers’exposure to pesticides, has been ongoing for more than a decade.Lax enforcement of labor laws and health and safetystandards is exacerbated by workers’ fears of reporting violations toauthorities because they fear deportation for themselves or for their familymembers. While many child farmworkers are US citizens, the entire family mayfear deportation if the parents are undocumented or hold short-termagricultural visas. Labor standards and their enforcement apply to all workers,irrespective of their immigration status. However, enforcement of workplaceprotection laws often relies upon workers to self-report abuse. They are veryunlikely to do so when their employers can threaten to call the US Immigrationand Customs Enforcement agency (ICE).  Workers are also unlikely to reportabuses to local police or law enforcement, since these agencies are increasinglyinvolved in enforcing immigration laws.The United States spent over $26 million in 2009 toeliminate child labor around the world—more than all other countriescombined—yet the country’s law and practice concerning childfarmworkers are in violation of or are inconsistent with international conventionson the rights of children. International Labor OrganizationConvention No. 182 on the Worst Forms of Child Labor, ratified by theUnited States in 1999, prohibits children from engaging in dangerous or harmfulwork. The Convention on the Rights of the Child, to which the United States is a signatory but not a party, seeks to protect children from economic exploitation,and also from work that is hazardous or otherwise harmful. Additionally,because farmworker children are overwhelmingly ethnicly Hispanic, the disparityin legal protections provided to agricultural workers compared to other workersin the United States has a disparate impact that is discriminatory underinternational law. The failure of the United States to enforce existinglaws and regulations that purport to protect children working in agriculturefurther violate the United States’ international legal obligations.For the last decade, members of Congress haverepeatedly introduced draft legislation into both the Senate and House ofRepresentatives that would eliminate the double-standard in US child laborlaws, and apply the same age and hour restrictions to children working inagriculture that already apply to other industries. However, none of the billshave ever reached a vote. As this report goes to press, a House bill,co-sponsored by over 80 members of Congress, is pending.Key RecommendationsThe US Congress should:Amend the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) to apply the same ageand hour requirements to children working for hire in agriculture as alreadyapply to all other working children. Congress should also raise the minimum agefor particularly hazardous work in agriculture to 18, in line with existingstandards in all other industries.Halt its yearly approval of a rider exempting almost all farmswith 10 or fewer employees from the jurisdiction of the Occupational Safety andHealth Administration (OSHA).Provide sufficient support to programs, such as those administeredby the Department of Education’s Office of Migrant Education, to removebarriers to the school enrollment, attendance, and achievement of childfarmworkers and ensure that child farmworkers have access to and benefit fromthe same appropriate public education, including public preschool education,provided to other children.The US Department of Labor should:Dramatically increase agricultural workplace inspectionstargeting child labor and minimum wage violations through its Wage and HourDivision. Significantly increase civil money and criminal penalties within thelimits allowed by law to improve compliance with the law.Propose and press for much-needed amendments to the list of jobsin  agriculture that deemed to be “particularly hazardous” forchildren, as recommended by the Centers for Disease Control’s NationalInstitute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) in 2002.The Environmental Protection Agency should:Amend the Worker Protection Standard to impose a minimum age of18 for all pesticide handlers.Revise the restricted-entry intervals (REIs), which prohibitentry into an area treated by pesticides for a specified period of timefollowing the application of the chemicals, to distinguish between adultsand children and impose more stringent REIs for children. Incorporate anadditional safety margin on top of what is determined necessary to ensure shortand long-term safety, and take into account the combined effect of bothoccupational and non-occupational exposures.Monitor states' enforcement of the Worker Protection Standard andrelated pesticide regulations to ensure that such enforcement is vigorous andmeaningful.All states should:Set or raise the minimum age for agricultural work to at least 14,with the exception of children working on farms owned and operated by theirparents. Detailed recommendations may be found at the end of thisreport.II. MethodologyThis report is based on Human Rights Watch’s fieldresearch in 2009 and early 2010 and a review of secondary sources. Weinterviewed 59 children under age 18 who had altogether worked as farmworkers in14 states in different regions of the United States: California, Florida,Georgia, Idaho, Michigan, New Jersey, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, SouthCarolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and Washington State. We also interviewed11 young people ages 18-20 who had worked on farms as children. We spoke withparents, legal services providers, nurses, doctors, social workers, educationofficials, farmers, and farm operators. We also spoke to officials of the USDepartment of Labor’s Wage and Hour Division and Occupational Safety andHealth Administration, the Centers for Disease Control’s NationalInstitute for Occupational Safety and Health, the Environmental Protection Agency(EPA), and the US Department of Agriculture. Some interviews were conducted bytelephone. In total we interviewed more than 140 people.For this report Human Rights Watch visited Florida, Michigan, North Carolina, and Texas. We chose these states because they allowed us tointerview both seasonal and migrant farmworkers, including migrants who were athome and on the road, as well as children working in diverse crops. Their laborincluded detasseling corn and sorghum; hoeing sugar beets, cotton, and pumpkins;and harvesting asparagus, cucumbers, Christmas trees, tomatoes, oranges,apples, blueberries, peaches, tobacco, and cherries. Florida and Texas are base states for migrant workers; North Carolina, Michigan, and northern Texas are destinations. Although agriculture includes both crop and livestock workers, ourinterviews focused on crop workers only.Interviewees were identified largely with the assistance ofa variety of organizations providing legal, health, and social services tofarmworkers. These workers may have been less vulnerable than those withoutcontact with any such organizations. Some farmworkers approached declined to beinterviewed.Human Rights Watch interviewed several agricultural guest workers,who are lawfully present in the United States on a short-term basis under theH-2A guest worker program but highly vulnerable to abuse.[3]However, children under age 18 are not eligible for the program and even thoseinterviewed who appeared underage maintained that they were not. Accordingly,their accounts are not used in this report.Interviews were conducted in English or Spanish or acombination of the two, at the interviewee’s preference. Some personsinterviewed in Spanish were native speakers of other languages indigenous to Mexico. Most interviews were conducted privately and individually, away from the worksite;where interviewees preferred to have another person present, this is indicatedin the notes. All participants were informed of the purpose of the interview,its voluntary nature, and the ways in which the information would be collectedand used, and orally consented to be interviewed. Most interviews ranged from10 to 90 minutes in length. No one was provided with any compensation inexchange for an interview.The statistics cited about the farmworker population are themost recent available at the time of writing. It is notable that there isrelatively little recent nationwide data on farmworkers.In this report “child” and“children” are used to refer to anyone under the age of 18,consistent with usage under international law. Except where otherwiseindicated, the names of all children have been replaced with pseudonyms toprotect their privacy and to preclude any potential retaliation. In addition,some service providers requested anonymity out of concerns about jeopardizingtheir access to farmworkers living on farms.The term “migrant worker” can have variousmeanings and, as noted below, many farmworkers were, at least at some point intheir lives, international migrants. In this report the term“migrant” is used for workers who travel for seasonal agriculturalwork, as distinguished from settled workers based on one place.This report draws on survey data that use the terms“Hispanic” and “Latino” to refer to ethnicity. Whereused in this report, these terms reflect those used in the survey referenced.III. Child Farmworkersin the United StatesNo one knows exactly how many children under the age of 18are working in US agriculture.[4]Counting farmworkers is difficult: the work changes with the growing season,children and adults move in and out of the workforce, and migrants work outsidetheir hometowns and countries. Many lack telephones and mailing addresses thatare essential for most surveys conducted by the government. Roughly half offarmworkers lack work authorization and growers employ others off the books,giving incentives to both parties for workers not to be counted. Data aboutchild agricultural workers are at best several years old and not comprehensive.Even where adults are working legally, children may not be officially employedbut their work counted towards their parents’ pay instead. Despitegrueling hours and difficult and dangerous tasks, even their parents mayconsider them “helpers,” not workers. And teenagers under age 18 maynot be visibly distinguishable from young adults.Despite the scarcity of data, conservative estimates makeclear that hundreds of thousands of children are working as hired laborers inagriculture, making up a significant proportion of the country’sestimated 2.3 million employed workers who are below age 18.Farm operators reported hiring 2,636,509 farmworkers in 2007,directly hiring 211,588 children under age 18 in 2006.[5]Adjusting for differences in dates and other factors, researchers from theNational Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) estimate thatabout 9 percent of directly hired farmworkers were under age 18 in 2006.[6]These data exclude children working on their own families’ farms, for laborcontractors, or off the books and thus not reported by farm operators.[7]Given that farmers rely on labor contractors to hire 15 percent or more oftheir crop workers,[8]and that about 497,000 children under age 18 worked on the farms on which theyresided in 2006,[9]these figures represent significantly fewer than all children working in USagriculture.Farmworkers under age 18 can be found workingall across the country. Particularly large populations of farmworkers liveand work in California, Florida, North Carolina, Texas, Oregon, and Washington State.[10]Virtually no state is without child labor in agriculture, andcertainly no state fails to benefit from children’s farmwork, as theproduce that is harvested and packed by youngsters' hands may travel thousandsof miles to grocery store shelves.A sizeable minority—somewhat less than 40percent—of hired farmworkers are mobile, meaning that they move for work.Most of these travel between their homes and a single location; only about 10percent “follow the crops,” traveling to multiple locations as theseason progresses.[11]Migrants travel north each year through three rough“streams” in the eastern, mid-western, and western regions of thecountry.Farmworkers are overwhelmingly poor: poverty among farmworkersis more than double that of all wage and salary employees in the United States.[12]The average individual annual income of crop workers was between $12,500 and $14,999in 2005-2006, the most recent year for which data are available. Total familyincome averaged between $15,000 and $17,499 annually.[13]Non-supervisory crop workers are the poorest of all agricultural workers: in 2006their median weekly earnings were less than that of livestock farmworkers,janitors, and maids.[14]“In migrant camps as soon as you are old enough you have to go to work toearn for your family,” the director of a program providing socialservices for migrants explained. “Typical families we work with [in Florida] earn $7,000 to $10,000 a year. Per family.”[15]The national impact of the recent US financial crisis onfarmworkers has not been documented. Human Rights Watch received reports insome places of persons returning to farmwork after having lost preferable jobs,and reports elsewhere that such a shift had not occurred as anticipated sincemany people are simply unwilling to do such hard and low paying work. We heardreports in Florida, where some workers had been able to stop migrating to otherstates by finding construction and other work during the off season, of workersreturning to Mexico and remaining there rather than resuming migration. Elsewhereservice providers said that workers they had expected to return to Mexicoinstead remained in the United States, in part because crossing the border(in  either direction) had become even more expensive and dangerous.[16]IV. The YoungestWorkersI’ve been working since 11. The age to startworking at this ranch is usually 12 but I started at 11. My parents said weneeded to earn as much as possible because we had a lot of debt. Everything [Iearn] goes to my parents because they know what to do with it.My sister said all day, “Hurry up!” I was alittle kid. It was hard at first to carry boxes, count 24, and pack boxes. Iused to do stuff I couldn’t even imagine. “Pick up this,” canI do it? . . . I was a kid. I was used to playing with toys. They took me totheir fields and I was like, “Where am I?” They gave me basicinstructions, pick greens, cut them, package them, weed the fields. . . . Youcan’t imagine how hard it can be to start a year younger thanyou’re legally qualified to work. I had to learn things fast and learnthe ways of the field. . . .Growing up has been hard. . . . When I’m in thefields working and I wait for people to fill the boxes, I look around and I see12 year olds working around. I know how they feel. I used to feel like that.They have a face that says they don’t want to be here. They start gettingused to the fact that they have to work. Putting in more effort. Experiencingmore. They learn if they work faster they earn more and there will be lessdebt.—Jose M., age 17, Saline, Michigan, August 24, 2009I don’t know about it [child labor]. I don’tlook for it but I don’t see it.—Farm operator, Michigan, August 28, 2009Children typically described going to work full-time outsideof school at age 11 or 12. Even very young workers, ages 7, 8, 9, are notdifficult to find working in the fields, however. Human Rights Watchinterviewed children who said they picked strawberries at ages seven and eightin Florida, picked blueberries at age seven in Michigan, picked and shuckedgreen peas in Virginia at age eight, and hoed cotton at ages seven, eight, andnine in Texas. “When I was seven I worked in the field next to our housebecause they needed help with strawberries,” 14-year-old Olivia A. told HumanRights Watch. “We would turn in some card things and they would give usmoney and we would give it to my mom. I gave it to her to buy food.”[17]Her older brother James A. also said he started working that year, at ageeight.[18]Children this young typically work only part of the day and attend school, atleast when their families are at home and are not migrating to work elsewhere.The concept of “underage” labor in US law is notas clear in agriculture as it is in all other labor sectors. Under the law, onsmall farms with parental permission, outside of school hours, there is nominimum age for workers. Children ages 12 and 13 can work for any size farmwith their parent’s consent outside of school hours; children 14 and 15can work on any size farm without parental consent outside of school hours;there are no restrictions on employing children ages 16 and older, including inhazardous agricultural occupations. By comparison, in nonagricultural settings,employment of children under age 14 is prohibited, and children ages 14 and 15may work only in certain jobs designated by the Secretary of Labor and for onlylimited hours outside of school. Children ages 16 to 18 can work innonagricultural occupations but cannot do hazardous work.[19]Despite these weak laws for agriculture, some growers andfarm labor contractors still violate the standards in their hiring practices,including:hiring children under age 16 to work during school hoursor in hazardous work;hiring children under 14 to work without theirparent’s consent; andhiring children under 12 to work on farms that are not“small,” meaning farms that have about 7 or more employees.[20]In interviews with Human Rights Watch, most children saidthat no one asked them their age or for proof of it. “Age doesn’tmatter,” said Marta V., age 13, who had hoed cotton since age seven in Texas.[21]A young woman who worked in California starting at age 12 said that no oneasked her age or for any papers.[22]At one farm in Michigan and one in Texas, children alternately told us they hadto be 11 or 12 to work: “Only the little ones they ask their age but 11and up is ok.”[23]Most children said they started working full time at age 11or 12. Human Rights Watch interviewed boys and girls who at those ages wereworking adult shifts picking oranges and cucumbers, pulling asparagus, cuttinggreens and Christmas trees, hoeing cotton and cucumbers, and weeding by hand.Children described how they felt when they first worked. A girlwho started cutting greens and pulling green onions and radishes full time atage 12 said, “At first I thought it was cool but then when I workedactually it was miserable. I cried every day.”[24]Other children emphasized the physical hardships. A 12-year-oldboy said on his first day hoeing at age 11 he got very tired: “I feltweak. My back hurt. I got blisters on my hands and on my feet when I took offmy shoes.”[25]Another boy described his first day of hoeing cucumbers at age 12: “Thefirst day I was exhausted. It was my first job.”[26]Older teens and young adults often described how theirinitial enthusiasm to contribute to the family later evolved to despair in theface of such tedious, grueling, and poorly paid work. The account of Hector H.from Idaho was typical of those who started working at young ages: “Atfirst I liked it, but then I realized it wasn’t that good. It was toohard with the sun. It was boring. It’s a long day to be working. At [age]eight or nine I was hoeing cotton. There were big weeds, three or four feettall. . . . It gets harder by the year, doing the same thing every year. Youget tired of it. I’ve pretty much done the same thing since I was eightyears old.”[27]Mauricio V. told us: “I thought it would be heroic and honorable. I couldn’twait until when I turned 12 and they let me work in the summer. . . . Idefinitely feel different about it now. . . . I was trying to find something tobe proud of, an honorable thing to be. Like ‘yes, I do support my familyby working.’”[28]Why Children WorkWe can hire as many adult workers as we need. Wedon’t need to hire children.—Tony Marr, general manager for Adkin Blue RibbonPacking Company, assessed child labor penalties in 2009 after a US Departmentof Labor investigation found children as young as six years old picking in itsfields[29]Children told Human Rights Watch that they worked to helptheir families buy food, to repair the family’s truck, to pay the phonebill, and to buy school clothes and supplies. For example, Luz A., who said shestarted working at age nine, told Human Rights Watch: “I reallydidn’t decide to work. I had to because my mom was having difficultyraising us and providing us with everything we needed. It was ok with me eventhough it was hard work because I was helping out. It paid for food for ourfamily to eat and school, the things [for school] they were always asking forus to bring.”[30]Andrea C. said: “I feel pressure to work sometimes. When we get allfilled up with bills, we need the money. The car bill, the phone bill, theinsurance. I have two older brothers but they got married so I’m the onlyone who helps my parents. And they’re getting kind of old.”[31]Financial need and a sense of family responsibility can pushchildren to prioritize work above their own education and health. Ana Z., whowas hoeing cotton with a fever, told us: “I have to, I have to help mymom. . . . So at least me, I do my 10 hours. We don’t miss out. We goevery day, even sick. We’re just trying to make a living.”[32]When asked, parents gave a variety of reasons for sendingtheir children to work. Some described a financial crisis or the need to meetbasic expenses. Some said that they had to bring their children to the fieldsanyway, that they could not afford childcare, and wanted to keep their familiestogether, especially when migrating. In the fields even young children who arenot working are exposed to pesticides, heavy machinery, and other hazards.“I bring the kids here because I can’t pay a babysitter,”said a woman caring for her four-, six-, and seven-year-old grandchildren.“It’s dangerous. They could get bitten by an animal. Run over by amachine.” Childcare would cost her $15 per child per day, she said, butshe earns only $45 to $50 a day hoeing cotton.[33] Human Rights Watchalso visited labor camps where teenage girls and women rotated to provide childcare in the camps during the workday because farm operators had prohibited veryyoung children from being in the fields.Some children described waiting to work until they turned12, suggesting that the law influenced their families’ decisions to sendtheir children to work. “Teachers at school know when kids turn12,” Jose M. told us. “They see the cuts on their hands. They knowa child at 12 goes to work. No if’s, and’s, or but’s.”[34]Others described a family and community tradition that made it normal to workand employers who were willing to hire them.Several parents expressed regret over having sent theirchildren to work and over the long-term effects it had.[35]One woman, who said her perspective changed after enrolling in a high schoolequivalency (GED) program, told Human Rights Watch: “When you hear thechildren talk, you feel bad because you’ve taken a whole childhood awayand you don’t realize it because you’re thinking about trying tomake payments. . . .  For my kids summer was not summer. They had to work.It makes me feel guilty.”[36]One mother whose 11-year-old daughter worked hoeing cotton and caring for heryounger brothers said, “I tell my daughter, ‘I’m so sorry Istole your childhood from you.’”[37]V. Exploitation: Wagesand HoursChildren typically work for long hours and poor pay. Manydescribed workdays as long as fourteen hours, seven days a week at the peak ofthe harvest. Most children Human Rights Watch interviewed said they earned lessthan the federal minimum wage.Excessive Working Hours“You’re put to work every day, you hardlyget a break unless it’s raining. Kids get so happy [when it starts torain] that they’re screaming.”—James A., age 15, Plant City, Florida, March 21,2009My son, he needs his play time. He can’t work 30hours a week. He can work three to four hours a few times a week. . . . As anemployer you can’t say “I’ll hire 13-, 14- year olds.”No! I don’t support that.—Farm operator whose 12-year-old son works on hisfarm, Michigan, August 28, 2009.Children described the long hours they worked, over whichthey typically had no control:James A., age 15, who worked in a blueberry packing plantin Michigan the previous summer, said that sometimes he worked as long asfrom 7 a.m. to 2:30 a.m. the following morning: “When I got home Ididn’t even have time to take a shower. During the breaks I’dneed to get a little bit of sleep. Lunch was only 30 minutes. Idon’t know if painkillers would have helped out. Sometimes I tookcoffee. I worked seven days a week and we would go beyond 40 hours. TwiceI got to 80 hours.”[38]Olivia A., age 14, described picking blueberries in Michigan: “I would wake up at 5 and start working at 6 [a.m.]. We’d come out at6 or 7 [p.m.], depending on if it rained and how quick we worked. Weworked seven days, all day, except the days it rained. That was the onlytime we got a break. I felt happy we could go home. We didn’t haveto be in the sun no more.”[39]Sam B., age 17, who said he sometimes hoed cotton in Texas for up to 14 hours a day, told us: “We have to work 10 hours for sure but ifthey want us to work more, we work 12-13 hours. It depends on whateverthey what. You have to put in at least 10 hours, you can’t just gohome.”[40]Felipe D., age 15, said he worked from 6 a.m. to 6 or 7p.m. deflowering tobacco in North Carolina. “At 12 [noon] we get anhour break,” he said. “The rest is just hot sun andworking.”[41]Luz A., age 18 and from Florida, explained that the previoussummer: “In the morning we’d start around 7 [a.m.] and end atabout 8 [p.m.]. We’d work a long time. There really ain’t nohours. It depends on how fast everyone finishes the section. No one canleave. They block the exits and say everyone has to help out. In a day youdo two sections, sometime they put their cars there so we couldn’tdrive out. . . . If you left early they’d end up kicking youout.”[42]By the end of the day, children said, they were exhausted.“You change out of your clothes if you can make it and pass out,”said Elisabeth S, about working when she was in high school. “Taking ashower, it doesn’t happen. If you had the energy you would eat, but youwould usually sleep, wake up, then shower and eat. . . . “I hated tosleep because sometimes all you dreamed of what working, thinking, ‘Ineed to be working.’ It’s so tiresome. And then you get up and think,‘I have to go to work?’”[43] Thirteen-year-oldMarta V. told us: “Really, I don’t have a good day when I work. It’sjust so tiring. After 12 [noon] you just want the time to go by quick, to comehome and rest.[44]Even older teens described the toll of having no days off. “Every day itgets harder with no rest,” 15-year-old James A. explained.[45]US federal law permits children to work in agriculture forunlimited hours, outside of school hours. In non-agricultural jobs 14- and15-year-olds cannot work before 7 a.m. or after 7 p.m., except during thesummer when they can work until 9 p.m. They may not work more than 3 hours on aschool day, 18 hours in a school week, 8 hours on a non-school day, and 40hours in non-school week.[46]Workers’ powerlessness to control their hours combinedwith the unpredictability of agricultural work leave them in a constant bind:some days they may work past the point of endurance; other days the weather,slow demand for a crop, or a poor harvest leave them without enough work to meettheir most basic needs.Earning Less than the MinimumWageThey don’t pay us enough for the hours we work. Iwould like them to pay us enough and give us some benefits. We’re outthere, a whole bunch of young people. . . . It’s hard but since you needthe money you don’t have a choice. It doesn’t matter if they pay usa little because you need the money. That’s why I’m working. . . .I make $300/week. $200/week if it rains.—Sam B., age 17, who said he typically works at least55 hours, 5 and a half days a week when not in school[47]Like adults, many children in farmwork earn less than federalminimum wage, which was $7.25 an hour as of July 24, 2009, up from $6.55 the 12months prior to that. Most children Human Rights Watch interviewed said theywere paid less than the minimum wage—many earned far less. For example:Antonio M., age 12, in North Carolina said he pickedblueberries from 6 a.m. to 11 a.m. or 12 noon. He could fill five or sixboxes in a day, at $3.00 a box.[48]At best, therefore, he made $18 for five to six hours’ work, or$3.00 to $3.60 an hour. For five hours of work at the federal minimum wage,Antonio should have earned $36.25, more than twice what he was paid.In Texas, children and adults consistently reported making$45 to $50 a day for 10 hours or more of hoeing cotton, or at best $4.50to $5.00 an hour. At federal minimum wage at the time Human Rights Watchvisited, they should have earned $65.50 for 10 hours’ work.Olivia A., age 14, said she made $300 to $350 a week theprevious summer picking blueberries in Michigan from 6 a.m. to 6 or 7p.m., seven days a week except when it rained.[49]Her brother said he made about $200 a week.[50]At best they were earning $4.16 and $2.38 an hour, respectively. Atfederal minimum wage at the time, for 84 hours of work a week, they shouldhave earned $550.20 a week.In one part of North Carolina, we heard reports of someemployers paying children a lower hourly wage than adults. A migrant healthoutreach worker whose own child worked told us: “Sometimes they just paypart for children, $2-3. Or they don’t pay. Patrones [bosses] talkwith parents and say, ‘I’ll let your kid enter but I’ll payhalf of what you earn.’ But they have to work the same as an adult orthey don’t let them enter.”[51]With some exceptions, agricultural workers are entitled tominimum wage. These exceptions include workers on small farms and some piecerate workers, including certain local hand harvest laborers and non-localchildren ages 16 and under who are working alongside their parents.[52]Where workers are entitled to minimum wage, agriculturalemployers may pay either an hourly rate or a piece-rate, but those whopay on piece-rate must by law ensure that the earnings for all hours worked ina week are sufficient to bring the average hourly wage up to minimum wage,unless they fall under one of the previously mentioned exceptions. “Theyhave to make at least minimum wage,” a cucumber farm operator in Michigan explained. His workers do, he said “if pickles are going well. If not, Ihave to kick in.”[53]All agricultural workers are deprived of overtime payprotections as a result of a special provision in the Fair Labor Standards Act(FLSA). Most other workers, by contrast, are required to be paid one and a halftimes their regular rate of pay for each hour worked in excess of 40 hours perweek.[54] Agriculturalworkers are also excluded from the protections of the National Labor RelationsAct and do not have the right to organize and collectively bargain with theiremployers, except in the handful of states such as California in which statelaws protect their right to organize.[55]Laws that deny farmworkers protections enjoyed by otherworkers, combined with poor enforcement of existing laws, contribute tofarmworkers’ poverty and financial desperation that compels children towork and makes farmworkers even more vulnerable to exploitation.[56]Although government data suggest that crop workers onaverage make slightly above minimum wage, these figures are likely inflated.[57]There are several reasons for this, discussed in more detail below. First, insituations where workers are paid a piece rate, children often work with aparent in the fields, but only the parent is listed on the payroll.  Theparent is shown as earning more than the minimum wage, because the childrenmake the parent’s productivity look higher. Second, employers oftenfalsify payroll records to show fewer hours than the employee actually worked.[58]Third, many employers make illegal deductions from their employees’ wageswhich reduce their gross below the minimum wage, forcing the workers to pay forgoods and services that benefit their employer. “Most farmworkers inFlorida are not making minimum wage,” explained Gregory Schell, ofFlorida Legal Services Migrant Farmworker Justice Project. “Kidsaren’t different and in fact, there probably is a higher percentage ofthe underage workers earning below the minimum wage than among the generalfarmworker population.”[59]Several factors make children easier to exploit than adults: children may bemore credulous, less experienced, and less likely to question authority. Theyalso may have even fewer options to change jobs, since their employment inother labor sectors may be illegal.Even when farmworkers are paid minimum wage, theunpredictability of the work and no guarantee of minimum hours drive down theirincome. Farmworkers only get paid for the hours they work. They typicallyreceive no paid sick days, no health insurance, no paid vacation leave, andhave no job security. Among other things, average minimum wage data do not takeinto account unpaid hours, days, and weeks waiting out weather or traveling toremote fields.[60]Families may use their last dollars to migrate only to find there is no workwhen they arrive. Those who do find work may find themselves without incomewhen it rains and between harvests.[61]Some workers in Florida said their employers required, as a condition ofproviding housing, that they remain permanently available and not seek workwith others, even when the employer did not have work for them.Unscrupulous practices and wage fraudSome children described unscrupulous practices and outright fraudby labor contractors and growers that further reduced their pay. For example,Walter R. and his parents said that their employer had required them to sign adocument promising to return $30 a week so that their wages would appear higherthan they actually were. The teenager told us that a “governmentinspector,” whom they could not identify, had recently come to theirworksite and questioned him and his family—“we said we work for$7.25.”[62]His mother explained, “My husband was afraid to denounce because he saidwe would get fired.”[63]Marcos S., whose account is given above, said that he was not paid for cuttingChristmas trees after 5 p.m.: “If they need you, they hold you late. Butwhen it comes to [pay]check time they say 8 to 5. They say they don’t rememberholding you later. But if you get off earlier, they remember.”[64]A paralegal in Florida described cases he had worked on in which employers orcontractors required workers to under-report their hours or clock in onlyafter, for example, picking the first flat of strawberries.[65]The practice of withholding but not reporting social security money fromworkers’ paychecks is particularly widespread when the labor contractoris responsible for paying taxes.[66]In a survey by the Southern Poverty Law Center of some 500 Latino immigrants infive states, 41 percent said they had experienced wage theft in which they hadnot been paid for work performed.[67]Deductions for transport were commonly described by childrenworking in tobacco in North Carolina, who said that their employers chargedthem $10 to $30 a week to take them to the fields.[68]Children told us they were required to purchase their own basic safetyequipment and tools such as gloves, hoes, and knives.[69]For example, Elisabeth S. said that when she first started working inWashington State: “I couldn’t afford a new hoe so I was using ahalf hoe for two days. My sister would switch with me for 15 minutes. It wasold and would give you splinters if you didn’t have gloves. Then my bossgave me one but took it out of my check. They don’t give younothin’.”[70]US law prohibits crediting against minimum wage obligations items furnishedprimarily for the employer’s benefit—these include tools of thetrade.[71] Dailytransport to and from work may generally be credited but typically nottransport from the point of hire to a distant jobsite.[72]Employers or contractors may also cut wages by deductingrent or running a “company store.” “By the time they getdone, there’s no paycheck left,” explained Josie Ellis, the directorof Vecinos Inc. Farmworker Health Program.[73]Piece rate and child laborWorkers who harvest fresh fruits and vegetables are oftenpaid on a piece-rate basis (such as a flat rate for each box of fruit or bag ofapples they pick) rather than an hourly rate. Diana G., age 16, explained howthe piece rate system worked for blueberries in North Carolina. “You fillliter buckets to the top,” she said. “If you don’t go to thetop, you have to go back. You don’t make much. Two buckets is $5.It’s really hard because blueberries are really tiring. It takes 30 to 45minutes to fill one bucket. Later on when the blueberries get bigger it getsfaster. You get a token when you turn in the bucket. If you have leaves orsticks in it, you get a yellow ticket—$1 taken off.”[74]At this rate, Diana was earning $3.33 to $5.00 an hour.A paralegal working with farmworkers in Florida, himself aformer farmworker, explained that it is very difficult for workers toconsistently pick enough on piece rate to earn minimum wage. “I rarelyfind a worker who can constantly pick a certain number of tubs in oneyear,” he told us. “You can’t do it.”[75]From an employer’s perspective, piece rateincentivizes productivity. But for workers, piece rate adds additional pressureto work as quickly as possible and avoid taking breaks, sometimes even at theexpense of drinking water or cooling down when overheated.[76]Luz A., who had worked since age nine, said that when picking blueberries onpiece rate she does not stop and rest: “We keep on going because if wewere to sit down and take a break we’d make even less.”[77]None of the children Human Rights Watch interviewed reportedthat their employers had made up the difference between the piece rate theyreceived and minimum wage. Moreover, when children work off the books and whatthey harvest is counted towards their parent’s check, this creates theappearance on paper that the adult has earned a higher wage. For example,although a farm operator in Michigan said that his employee tracked the hours thefarmworkers worked, when Human Rights Watch reviewed records of the amountpicked and payment, these were recorded as if only one person, rather than afamily group, had picked the cucumbers. When Human Rights Watch noted thatfamilies with children 12 and younger were working together to pick thevegetables, an office employee said: “It should be one person but Idon’t know—they can pick it any way they want. They can get othersor do it themselves.”[78]Others described similar arrangements. A man who had threechildren and his wife working with him harvesting onions in Texas told us thatwith five people working on piece rate, “We made $80 on the first day.There are days where we can do $200. But sometimes we don’t work allweek.”[79]At these rates, each family member earned, on average, $16 to $40 a day.Child labor in these instances, regardless of whether thechildren themselves are exploited, facilitates wage exploitation of adults bypotentially preventing the adult from receiving the legal minimum wage.Attorney Gregory Schell explained: “Most farmworkers are unaware that thefederal minimum wage applies to piece-work tasks. Therefore, so long as workersare paid the promised piece-rate for the buckets/tubs/units they pick, they(mistakenly) believe they have been properly paid.”[80]Where employers fail to ensure that piece rate workers makeat least minimum wage, a piece rate system creates incentives for employers toallow young children to work and for families to send their children to work,even if they earn very little.[81]For example, a young woman from California said she started working at age 14after her mother could only find work in the fields: “We realized themore she [my mother] picked the more she earned. We all would help on weekends .. . . My mom was the only one registered so the check went to her. . . . On theweekends we were five people—parents plus three kids.”[82]VI. Education andFarmworkWe miss about 2-3 weeks of school. It starts, then we goback. To me it’s normal because I don’t remember starting on thefirst day of school.—Elias N., who subsequently dropped out of school,age 16, Plainview, Texas, July 21, 2009Schools are turning a blind eye. We know that farmworkerkids are not getting enrolled or not getting enrolled in the right places.—Casey Trupin, staff attorney, Columbia LegalServices, Seattle Washington, August 18, 2010Children who try to work and go to school atthe same time, or who migrate and miss school, find that their education oftensuffers. A third of child crop workers drop out before graduating from highschool, and without a diploma are left with few options besides a lifetime offarmwork and the poverty that accompanies it.Thirty-three percent of US-born farmworkers had dropped outof school in 2005-2006, the most recent year for which data are available;among all farmworkers the median highest grade completed was 8th.[83]By comparison, the national dropout rate was 8 percent in 2008 (18.3 percentfor Hispanics).[84] Therate for migrant children may be considerably higher. In California, the statewith the largest migrant student population in the country, a 2007 studyestimated that drop-out rates among migrant children were well over 50 percent.[85]Human Rights Watch interviewed farmworker children who had been held back inschool one or more times, children who had never had anyone in their familiesgraduate from high school, and youths who had dropped out.Several factors explain this. Migrant children often endtheir school year early—in April or May—and return weeks or evenmonths after school has already started. Fifteen-year-old Ana Z. said: “Idon’t remember the last time I got to school registered on time. . . . Igot out of math because I was a disaster. I would tell the teacher, ‘Idon’t even know how to divide and I’m going to be asophomore.’ I’m going from place to place. It scrambles things inmy head and I can’t keep up.”[86] Fourteen-year-oldOlivia A. said that she returns from Michigan to school in Florida late everyyear. On her first day at school:I felt kind of scared because I didn’t know what toexpect because people look at you as kind of dumb. You have to catch up withwhat other people already know. Every class starts out knowing this stuff. Atthe end you have exams but you weren’t there. . . . Hopefully itwon’t get worse once I’m going into high school. My sister andbrother dropped out. They migrated and went to school. My brother dropped outthe month we came back. The first time we [migrated]. No one in my family hasgraduated. My sister barely did grade 8.[87]Jose M., who said he starts school when his family goes backto Texas in November and leaves school early in May to migrate to Michigan,said: “I miss about three months and that’s a lot. . . . I’lldo senior year but don’t know if will graduate because I will miss a lotof class.”[88]And Luz A. told us that it was only through the help of her school’smigrant advocate that she was able to recover from missing the first month ofschool each year: “We get graded on things we weren’t there tolearn. . . . I’m finally back on track [at the end of March].”[89]Migrant farmworker children, on average, change schoolsthree times a year, according to earlier studies,[90] afigure that is consistent with Human Rights Watch’s interviews. Some studiesreport children moving through as many as 10 different school districts in asingle year.[91]Beyond the sheer challenge of transferring schools, thedifferences between states in start dates, curriculum, and credits also make itharder for migrant children keep up. For example, when Human Rights Watchinterviewed working children in Michigan, school had already started in Florida andTexas but not in Michigan. Emily D. explained: “We don’t go in Michigan because school starts late there. I would only go for a day. I’d rather goand help my dad find pickles there. . . . You get behind a lot. Your grades godown. You don’t really learn much.” She said that when she startedthe 10th grade late, “I thought, ‘Oh my God I’m sobehind.’”[92]A migrant education professional at Immokalee High School in Florida, explained that schools in different states have different criteria forgraduation and not all classes transfer. “This frustrates a lot of kidsthat not every state is on the same channel. This contributes to some kidssaying, ‘Screw it, I’m out of here.’” He added, “Someparents put them in school up north or don’t because they don’tknow how long they’re staying. Those kids when they come in October,November don’t get credit because they’re not in school so whenthey finish the semester they have a big fat F. That messes up their GPA [gradepoint average].”[93]“When they start teaching here [in Michigan], then we go down there [to Texas], they have already moved on,” said Andrea C. “It sucks. I wish I werethere.”[94]Children who try to combine long work hours and school, suchas Marcos S., whose experience cutting Christmas trees is described above,often find that their schoolwork suffers. Jaime D. explained how he ended updropping out of school after he started picking tomatoes at age 16 in central Florida: “I wanted to work and still go to school but I couldn’t concentrate onboth. I didn’t know how to do both.”[95]His younger brother also dropped out of high school to pick tomatoes, he said.A study of migrant farmworker students in south Texas found that migrantstudents were more likely than non-migrants to miss and arrive late to school,sleep in class, and study fewer hours weekly. Migrant students also reportedfewer hours of nightly sleep, fewer hours spent with their friends, and moreminor illnesses than non-migrant youth.[96]Migration and afterschool work also prevent children fromengaging in the extra-curricular activities that help keep teens in school. Youthdescribed not being able to play soccer or football or join the dance team, andmissing prom and homecoming. A 14-year-old girl in Texas explained: “The8th graders went to Washington this year but I didn’t get togo because it cost $800. Then it got cancelled because of the ‘flu sothey went in the summer but I was here.”[97]Many children described an environment in which they fallbehind at young ages and graduating from high school is rare. We spoke with anine-year-old girl going into the 3rd grade who said she had flunkedthe 2nd grade and been held back a year. She said she works in thefields when not attending summer school.[98] “Idon’t know if I will finish school because it’s very difficult buthopefully I will,” said 15-year-old Elena R. who works periodically inthe fields after school. “None of my brothers and sisters finishedschool.”[99]“Most people I know don’t want to go through being behind so theydrop out of high school,” said 18-year-old Luz A. “Most of myfriends have dropped out. Little by little they’ve been droppingout.”[100]And a 14-year-old girl who said that no one in her family had graduated toldus: “If I finish school, I’m going to shine like a peacock.”[101]Children who have recently entered the United States from other countries may not know how to access the US education system or may beunable to afford the lost wages. A boy who came to the United States alone at age 15 after his parents died said: “I want to go to school but I haveto work. I don’t have time. If I had the chance to work and study I wouldstudy.”[102]The US Department of Education’s Office of MigrantEducation runs several programs to support migrant children’s access toeducation. These include the Migrant Education Program, which identifiesmigrant children and provides education and support services, such as remedialinstruction, school record exchanges, and counseling and assessment services;the High School Equivalency Program (HEP), which helps farmworkers and theirchildren who are 16 or older to achieve a General Education Development (GED) certificateand gain subsequent employment; and the Migrant Education Even Start (MEES),which focused on improving literacy among farmworker families. The Office of MigrantEducation also provides $3 million per year in grants to individual states thatcooperate with other states to provide direct education and support services tomigrant children whose education has been interrupted.[103]During the 2003-2004 school year, the Office of MigrantEducation served more than 488,000 children, but these represented only 54percent of children eligible for its programs.[104]VII. Health and SafetyIt’s not the same as someone who works inMcDonald’s for minimum wage because this kind of work wears your systemout. You’re exposed to harsh nature, pesticides, all other kinds ofchemicals, herbicides, fungicides. Farmworkers are the first line of contact.—Josie Ellis, registered nurse and director ofVecinos Inc. Farmworker Health Program, Sylva, North Carolina, August 4, 2009Working with sharp tools and heavy machinery, exposed tochemicals and extreme temperatures, climbing tall ladders, lugging heavybuckets and sacks, children get hurt and sometimes they die. Agriculture is themost dangerous industry open to young workers, according to the Centers forDisease Control’s National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health(NIOSH),[105]and the rate of occupational fatality for all workers in crop production was almostnine times the national average in 2008.[106] From 2005 to2008, 43 children under age 18 died from occupational injuries in cropproduction—27 percent of all children who were fatally injured at workduring this period.[107]In 2000, the most recent year for which data are available, the risk of fatalinjuries for all agricultural workers ages 15 to 17 was 4.4 times that of youngworkers in other workplaces.[108]Other common health hazards of agricultural work includefungal infections, contact dermatitis from plants and chemicals applied tothem, hearing loss from proximity to loud agricultural machinery, eye injuriesand irritations, and transportation injuries while traveling to and from workand between fields.[109]In interviews with Human Rights Watch, children routinelydescribed small accidents, and some more serious. Rarely did they say theysought medical care. Underreporting of injuries is, in fact, substantial, andit is argued that traditional sources of data are not reliable.[110]“I see a lot of them get hurt,” a community health worker in Florida told us.”[111]According to NIOSH, young workers’ “biologic, social,and economic characteristics” cause them “unique and substantialrisks for work-related injuries and illnesses.”[112]These characteristics include rapidly growing “organ and musculoskeletalsystems, which may make them more likely to be harmed by exposure to hazardoussubstances or to develop cumulative trauma disorders”; and lessexperience, training, and knowledge about how to work safely, what their rightsare, and what they are not legally allowed to do.”[113]In addition to injuries actually suffered on the job,farmworker children’s health is also affected by substandard farmworkerhousing, low incomes that result in poor diet, pregnant farmworkers’exposure to pesticides and lack of access to adequate prenatal health care, andmental health problems related to poverty, migration, and drug and alcoholabuse in farmworker camps.[114]Work with DangerousMachinery, Equipment, and ToolsChildren described working with heavy machinery, usingknives and chainsaws, and climbing tall ladders to pick fruit. As notedthroughout this report, US law allows children to do hazardous work inagriculture at age 16, compared with an age limit of 18 for all other hazardousjobs.Tractors, trucks, and other heavy machineryChildren may legally drive tractors of over 20 horsepowertake-off at age 16, and at age 14 if trained and certified.[115]Tractor overturns were the leading cause of death for all farmers andfarmworkers who died from work-related injuries between 1992 and 2007.[116]As discussed below, roll-over protective structures greatly improve tractorsafety but were missing from 41 percent of tractors in 2006.Human Rights Watch interviewed several boys ages 16 andolder who said they drove tractors.[117]Jose M. described his work, which also involved hitching a wagon to thetrailer, an activity that is recognized as carrying additional risks: “Ihook up the trailer wagon and go to the field,” he explained. “Iorganize the boxes in the wagon so they don’t fall off on the way to thebarn. I do the hitching. You could easily break your arm hitching. You have toknow how close you’re getting to the wagon so you don’t hitit.”[118]Children are also at risk of getting struck by, run over, orentangled in other machinery. Jose M. described being in an accident when thetrucks transporting the workers to an onion field collided: “The backwindow of the truck broke on our heads. I fell off the truck. My mom hurt herknee. My aunt and uncle got hurt. . . . I had lots of cuts on my head from thebroken glass. I got stitches.”[119]Other reports of children’s work-related deathsinclude:In December 2007, 17-year-old Edilberto Cardenas died onhis first day on the job picking oranges in Florida. According to thesheriff’s department, he climbed off a ladder to empty a bag oforanges in a loading basket and a truck backed into him.[120]In December 2006, a 10-year-old boy accidentally ran overhis 2-year-old brother while driving a pickup truck pulling a trailer thathis parents were filling with oranges in a Florida grove.[121]In early summer 2004, a 12-year-old boy working for hirein Iowa was crushed between a hay wagon and a truck bed as he was hitchingthe wagon to the truck.[122]On August 15, 2002, a 14-year-old farmworker in Ohio diedafter falling into a cattle feed grinder/mixer. The boy was using ahandheld hay hook to drop hay bales into the operating grinder from thetop of a stack of hay bales. He apparently lost his footing, slipped, andfell into the grinder.[123]Children under the age of 16 may not legally operate or help operate afeed grinder.[124]Knives, chainsaws, and other sharp tools[When I was 12] they gave me my first knife. Week afterweek I was cutting myself. Every week I had a new scar. My hands have a lot ofstories. There are scars all over.—Jose M., age 17, Saline, Michigan, August 24, 2009Children regularly work with sharp tools, from hoes andkitchen knives to chainsaws. Sometimes they cut themselves. Children under theage of 16 may not legally operate a power-driven circular, band, or chain saw.[125]Children cutting kale and collard greens in southeastern Michigan showed us fresh cuts they got through their gloves. Robert L., whose hands werelaced with scars, said he had been cut “so many times” cuttinggreens. He worked with a 6-inch knife. “You’re bound to getsliced,” he said.[126]Andrea C. showed us two fresh punctures and said, “I poke myself. A bunchof blood comes out. . . . My brothers when they were still here, one got cutbad. A lot of people get cut. Sometimes you get so close to chopping yourfinger off! Sometimes you’re going really fast and you don’t noticeand ah!”[127]Hector H. in Texas showed us an inch-long scar on hisknuckle that he said he got working in Ohio the year before while making boxesto pack corn: “There was a thin string, I put my hand under a box. . . .I went to the hospital the same day and then came back and worked. I got fourstitches. It happened about 9 or 10 a.m. I finished at the hospital about 11. Iwas making boxes but I couldn’t move my thumb . . . but the guy told meto go to work.”[128]Lucas F. said he cut his finger in a Michigan packing house:“When the beans come out on the shaker, they shoot into the machine thatcuts the beans. Sometimes the machine gets stuck and you have to pull it back.A bunch of people cut themselves.”[129] Maria M. from Idaho described using a small knife while weeding sugar beets. “If you wanted to workfast you would use a knife. . . . It’s not always safe because ifyou’re kneeling down you have to be careful not to cut yourself. Iwrapped it with a sock.”[130]In North Carolina, Marcos S., quoted above, said he firstcut Christmas trees with a chainsaw at age 12, and used one regularly from age13.[131]LaddersChildren described climbing tall ladders carrying heavycontainers to pick fruit. In the mornings, trees and ground are often wet withdew. Workers often place one foot on a branch or use the top two steps of theladder to extend their reach, and pick with one or both arms over their headreaching for fruit.[132]A young man who picked cherries, pears, and apples around Yakima, Washington, as a teenager said: “You carry 20-30 pounds in your bag. . . . In themorning it’s pretty wet and the ladder gets wet. If you take a wrongstep, you’re down from the ladder. They’re 13-foot ladders sothey’re pretty high.[133]A boy who had picked oranges in Florida told us: “It’s really high.When we didn’t have ladders, I had to climb the trees. Twice I fell fromthe top of a ladder. I grabbed a branch and broke my fall.”[134]Children under the age of 16 may not legally work from a ladder at a height ofmore than 20 feet.[135]Failure to use protective gearHuman Rights Watch researchers saw many children workingwithout gloves and some, including a 10- and a 12-year-old, working barefoot.Most said no one required them to wear protective gear; if anyone, it was theirparents, not their employers.Some children told us that gloves were uncomfortable,cumbersome, or bruised the fruit. Raul L. explained why he did not wear gloveswhile picking mint as a teenager in Idaho: “Sometimes it hurts yourhands, but gloves are really uncomfortable and the plant is very slippery.Especially early in the morning, it’s hard to get the plant out. But atthe end of the day my hands really hurt from pulling those weeds out all daylong.”[136]Julia N., who worked as a teenager in California, said: “I used glovesbut cut the fingers off because otherwise you bruise the fruit and theydon’t pay you. There are kinds without spines and others with strong onesand they stick you. Your fingerprints have a lot of little cuts from thespines. And if you forget your gloves then your arms get reallyscratched.”[137]Even with gloves, children cutting greens in Michigan said they still cutthemselves, as recounted above.Many children said their parents made them wear long pantsand long sleeves but some did not. Pedro E. described working in Georgia in 2008: “The first day I was burned. I was in short sleeves and shorts. Ithought, ‘Thank God I got through it.’”[138]Repetitive MotionInjuriesWhen I did strawberry roots, you have to bend down allday. It would kill your back.— Marcos S., age 17, Sylva, North Carolina, August 4,2009.Children described working bent over at the waist, on theirknees, with their arms up in the air, or otherwise holding awkward positions,all day long, five to seven days a week. They often perform prolongedrepetitive motions and lift heavy weights. They told us about pain in theirbacks, knees, hands, and feet, even at very young ages. Children whose bodiesare still developing are especially vulnerable to repetitive motion injuries.[139]Luz A. said that when she picked strawberries in Florida at age nine: “It was hard—you have to be bent over and afterwards yourback hurts. You don’t feel the pain at work but afterwards your backhurts.[140]Lucas F., who first worked pulling asparagus at age 12, described the work as“backbreaking,” sitting on a “rider” with his feet ontwo bars, leaning over to pick asparagus between his legs.[141]Raul L. remembered weeding in Idaho: “You kneel down.It was really painful sometimes. It’s hard on your back, but Ididn’t feel I needed to go to the doctor because of the pain—itwould go away someday. Sometimes I had a lot of pain in my hands, back, feet.Sometimes you would get all wet from your waist to your feet. It was reallytough on my feet because I didn’t change socks, and at night sometimes itwas hard to sleep because of the pain in my feet.”[142]Musculoskeletal disorders are usually caused by “anaccumulation of microtrauma” without sufficient time to recover.[143]These disorders constitute nearly half of all agricultural occupational illnessand injuries in the United States.[144]A study of farmworkers in the eastern United States found that farmworkers weremost affected in the neck, shoulders, and upper extremities.[145] Adoctor who cares for farmworkers told us that he was treating 29- and30-year-olds for knee pain that he attributed to their starting farmwork atyoung ages.[146]Although treating repetitive motion injuries typically requires rest, as wellas anti-inflammatories, splinting, physical therapy, and rehabilitation,farmworkers are under pressure to keep working at the same rate and, as notedbelow, often lack access to medical care.[147]Pressure to Work Fast,Sick, and InjuredI can’t afford to miss any day. Half of my familydepends on the money I earn. My money counts.—Jose M., age 17, Saline, Michigan, August 24, 2009It’s hard to say what hurts theworst,” “My legs hurt, my head hurts from the sun. [Today] I’vehad 3 bloody noses. I feel dizzy and then my nose is bleeding.—Walter R., age 17, who had spent the day working intobacco, Goldsboro, North Carolina, August 6, 2009Children routinely told us they felt pressure to work asfast as possible, with few breaks, and to keep working even when injured or whensickened by pesticides, heat, tobacco, colds, flu, or other illnesses. “Wecan’t get sick because then we can’t work,” said 15-year-oldMary J.[148]When paid on piece rate, the faster they work, the more workersget paid.[149]When paid by the hour, children said they were afraid of falling behind andgetting fired. The pressure children feel to work quickly combined with simplyless work experience can increase the risk of accidents.“I have to be fast,” explained a 17-year-oldtractor driver. “Bring [the load] all the way to the barn and then get[more]. There is pressure there that makes you go faster. If I don’thurry, I’m losing boxes.”[150] And Elisabeth S. saidof working during her high school years: “The main thing is not beingleft behind because the boss pays attention to you. You help your friends sothey don’t get fired. The whole time you’re living in fear thatyou’re going to get fired. . . . It was like a race all the time.”[151]A 15-year-old girl told us: “I get sick and throw up alot in Michigan. My stomach and my head hurt. It’s because of the sun.When I’m picking I feel sick. . . . If my dad sees I’m really sickhe makes me come home and rest. But then he gets really behind becausewe’re a lot of help to him. So if I leave it’s a lot of work. I feeldown because I know my dad is going to have to work even harder.”[152]Jose M., whose accident while being transported to thefields is described above, told us that he and his injured family membersnevertheless returned to work the following day: “The next day we wereout in the field. It’s an unexplainable feeling. You have to try not tomiss any day.”[153]Pesticide ExposureHere there are a lot of chemicals in the field. . . .You can smell them. [Recently] the plane sprayed, sprayed the cotton. . . . I feltdizzy. I covered my face and kept working. No one told us to get out of thefield.—18-year-old Hector H., who worked from age 8 or 9and works alongside children, Plainview, Texas, July 20, 2009Pesticides are poisons. If you’re sprayed,it’s always bad.—Dr. Thomas A. Arcury, Director, Center forWorker Health, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, October 19, 2009Exposure to pesticides is a serious risk for all farmworkersand even more so for children. Most children we interviewed said they had hadcontact with pesticides, many through pesticides being sprayed in fields nextto them and blown by the wind, and through contact with residue, sometimesstill wet. Some children reported being sprayed directly. Almost none of thechildren said they had received training on pesticide safety.As discussed in more detail below, children under age 16 arenot legally allowed to handle or apply pesticides classified as category I orII of toxicity but may handle less toxic pesticides. Regulations prohibit thespraying of pesticides when any unprotected worker is in the field or may beexposed through drift, and require workers to be trained in pesticide safetybut make no special consideration for children.Children’s exposure to pesticidesPesticides widely used in agriculture include insecticides,herbicides, fungicides, fumigants, nematicides, rodenticides, and plant growthindicators.[154]The most widely used insecticides are neurotoxins.[155]Pesticides vary in toxicity and enter the body primarily through absorptionthrough the skin, although they can also be ingested or inhaled.[156]Although everyone who works on a nonorganic farm is exposedto pesticides, the degree of exposure depends on the farm’s safety andhygiene practices: exposure includes both the amount of pesticides with whichfarmworkers come into contact as well as the dose that actually enters theirbodies, which is affected by the use of protective equipment and clothing,washing, and other factors.[157]Relatively little research on farmworkers’ pesticide exposure has beenconducted anywhere in the United States and even less so on working children.[158]Andrea C. in Michigan said that on the farm where she works,pesticides are sprayed from a tractor: “Sometimes we’re passing byand they’ll spray anyways.”[159] Sam B. in Texas told us he was sprayed from an airplane the previous year.[160]A former child farmworker in North Carolina who now educates workers aboutpesticides told us that she had personally seen tobacco workers being sprayedwith pesticides: “People don’t leave. . . . People say, ‘Wecan leave but we don’t want to because we’re afraid the patron[boss] will fire us.’ They stay there because they’re afraid oftheir patron.”[161]More common than direct spraying was exposure when the windor run-off spread pesticides to nearby areas, known as “drift.”“They sprayed the field next to us yesterday,” said AndrésF. in North Carolina. “My head hurt. I could smell it, it blew. We keptworking. Many people say this can, can hurt you. I’m a little, a littleworried about it. Sometimes I put on gloves. When I don’t use gloves, itfeels irritated.”[162]Noemi J. in North Carolina told us she did not like workingtobacco because of pesticides: “Sometimes you’re in one field andyou see people in the next field spraying. It gives me headaches. I’mallergic. I think, ‘You could have at least waited until weleft!’”[163]And Elias N. in Texas said: “A few days ago they sprayed the fields inthe front. [The plane] passed by and we were starting to get out, but it justpassed one time so we kept on. I got a headache. I could hardly hit the weedsbut I kept on. It was about a quarter mile away. The wind was going to us and Icould smell it and got a headache. It was in the wind.”[164]Most children described seeing residue on plants whileworking in the field. Some children described being kept out of the fieldsafter pesticide application; others said they worked while the fields werestill wet with chemicals. The account of a boy in Michigan is typical:“Countless times we’ve been in the fields when they’re stillwet [with pesticides]. Also, the boss says take the day off because it’stoo wet.”[165]Even if workers are kept out of the area for the legally required time period,known as the restricted-entry interval (REI), pesticides are still present inthe fields at lower levels.[166]Children of farmworkers, in addition to any occupationalexposure, are also exposed to pesticides brought home on parents’ bodies,that drift during and after nearby applications, in farmworker housing,prenatally, and through breastfeeding.[167] For example,Human Rights Watch interviewed a 17-year-old girl five months pregnant who wasalternating daily between working in tomato fields and taking care of children.[168]The impact of pesticide exposure on childrenChildren are uniquely vulnerable to chemicals and may absorbpesticides more easily than adults because they have a higher skin surface areato weight ratio, faster metabolisms, and ongoing development.[169] Directspraying is not necessary to poison a child; contact with treated surfaces canprovide enough exposure.[170]Exposure to pesticides has both immediate and long-termeffects. Small doses can produce rash, dizziness, nausea and vomiting,headaches, muscle aches, and burning eyes.[171] Large doses cancause loss of consciousness, coma, and death; exposure can also causespontaneous abortion and birth deformities.[172] The EnvironmentalProtection Agency estimates that 10,000-20,000 physician-diagnosedpesticide poisonings occur each year among US agricultural workers.[173]This number represents only a small fraction of actual pesticide poisonings asmany cases are never reported.[174]Although exact numbers of poisoned children are not available, researchindicates that children working in agriculture have far greater incidence ratesof acute occupational pesticide-related illnesses than children working inother jobs.[175]The long-term effect of pesticide exposure is not welldocumented, particularly at low levels. However, it is associated with chronichealth problems such as cancer, neurologic problems, hormonal and reproductivehealth problems, and infertility.[176]According to Dr. Thomas Arcury, director of the Center for Worker Health atWake Forest University School of Medicine, “The accumulated knowledgefrom animal studies and ecological studies all indicate that long-term lowlevel exposure is a problem and that we need to do a better job of protectingpeople from pesticides.”[177]Subclinical long-term health effects that may not be readily diagnosedinclude memory loss and, in children, retarded neurobehavioral development.[178]Many children we spoke with described symptoms consistentwith pesticide poisoning, although some did not realize it at the time. RaulL., who worked as a child in Idaho, told us: “They have the canal withwater at the end of the field and they put the chemicals in the water and theyget these pipes and pipe water into the fields for corn, sugar beets. . . . Ourfeet would get all big with mud. So when we would go to eat, we’d go andwash our feet with our hands [in the canals] and then in the afternoonI’d get the rash. . . . I would get a lot of itchiness. My feet would getred, rashy. At that time I didn’t know about types of chemicals—noone told us.”[179]Julia N., who later trained farmworkers on pesticide safety,described her experience working as a child in California: “One time Itook off my bandana and gloves and experienced the symptoms of pesticides. . .I had an itchy face, blurry eyes, I got very dizzy.” Julia said that shedid not associate her symptoms with pesticide exposure until she was trainedfor her current job. “I feel so bad that I didn’t know and that somany people don’t know that if they take off a glove that could exposethem to pesticides and they’ll have so many problems, like cancer,”she told us. “I think about this, that I [got exposed and my mom did] andI’m so afraid that one day she’s going to get sick or somethingwill happen to her from pesticides.”[180]Luz A. told us that when she picked blueberries every yearin Michigan: “I got sick because when I was in the fields, I took in thechemicals they put on the plants. . . . My stomach was always heaving. Everysingle day. I was really sick. . . . I think [what made me sick] was thepesticides they put on the plants. The smell of it, and on the blueberries youcould see that they have something on them. You could see it all around, andyou were breathing it. I’d still be out there all sick because I had tohelp my mom because we didn’t have that much money.”[181]Pesticidetraining and protective gear[Pesticides] are there but I don’t know aboutthem.— Nelson I., age 17, Plainview, Texas, July 20, 2009They don’t tell us anything.— Noemi J., age 16, responding to a question aboutpesticide training, Goldsboro, North Carolina, August 6, 2009Most children Human Rights Watch interviewed said they hadnever received training on pesticide safety and took few precautions.[182]Some children who said they had not received formal training still describedgood practices such as washing their work clothes daily, showering right afterwork, and wearing long pants and sleeves.For example, 14-year-old Alejandro P. said he worked in“short sleeves, jeans, sneakers and gloves so my hands don’t getdirty.”[183]As noted above, Human Rights Watch saw children working barefoot and withoutgloves, and a health outreach worker said, “We talk with people who go towork barefoot or with no shirt.”[184] According toexperts on farmworkers and pesticides: “In most fieldwork situations, theappropriate pesticide PPE [personal protective equipment] for farmworkers iswork clothing that covers the head, body, arms, legs, and feet; that is a hat,a long-sleeve shirt that is closed around the neck, long pants, socks, andclosed shoes.”[185]A 2003 study found that of the studied cases of pesticide-related illness inwhich relevant information was available, only 19 percent of children who wereemployed in agriculture had used protective equipment (9 of 48) and only 25percent of children who had directly handled pesticides had used personalprotective equipment.[186]Research in several states, including North Carolina and Texas, has found that from about one-quarter to one-half of workers surveyed have receivedno pesticide safety training.[187]Sam B., who said he trained other workers, was unaware that regulationsprohibit any unprotected worker from being in a field when pesticides areapplied: “Sometimes the airplane will be spraying pesticides around. Wehave to ask the crew leader if they are poisonous or not. One time last year anairplane passed over and sprayed us, and we didn’t know if it waspoisonous or not.”[188]Alejandro P. told us, “I don’t know if there are pesticides ornot.”[189]In contrast, children in several areas of Michigan saidtheir employers had shown them a pesticide training video, and a farm operatorpointed out the video in Spanish and in English on pesticide training that hesaid he shows to his workers. Mauricio V. said that the second year he workedin Idaho his crew leader showed a pesticide video after nearby workers werepoisoned:An onion field was sprayed with a certain pesticide. It wasstill visible and smelled and the workers were told to go back to work, andthey didn’t want to because they could see the plants were white. Somedidn’t, others did because they needed to work. Within an hour some werecoughing up blood. . . .After that the crew leader showed us a pesticide video butbefore that none of us had ever seen one. It was basic safety: don’t getthe pesticides on you, don’t get water from irrigation canals. . . . Itwas actually pretty good. It’s just a kind of evil that the reason wewere watching it was because that already happened.[190]Pesticide training for child workers is especially importantbecause, as one study stated, “Young people are generally lessexperienced and assertivethan adults, and thus they may notquestion assignments thatplace them at risk for pesticideexposure.”[191]Several agencies are working to improve pesticide safetytraining for farmworkers. For example, the US Environmental Protection Agency(EPA) has developed extensive training for state pesticide safety inspectorsand for workers, including in multiple languages and in pictorial guides. But“[w]hether or not it’s being used as it should be is a differentquestion,” staff acknowledged.[192] The Associationof Farmworker Opportunities Programs (AFOP) also conducts pesticide safetyprograms for farmworkers under grants from the EPA and AmeriCorps in 24 states.[193]Training alone, however, will not address the many factorsoutside of workers’ control, such as growers who force workers intofields with fresh residue or who fail to provide sanitation equipment that candecrease the dose absorbed. “What does it matter if they wear longsleeves, bandanas if they have to go back into the field right after it’sbeen sprayed?” noted a North Carolina health outreach worker.[194]Similarly, Carol Dansereau, of the Seattle-based Farm Worker Pesticide Project,stated: “a lot of attention has gone into ‘educating’ farmworker families about ‘hygiene’ to reduce exposures. While itcertainly is important to let people know about things one can do to try toreduce exposures, it is appalling that this is the emphasis, to the exclusionof ending the source of the problem . . . nearby applications of highly toxicchemicals.”[195]Seventeen-year-old Andrea C. also pointed out that while she “learned alot of things” from the video, “It’s dumb, they make us seeit but they don’t enforce it. Like restrooms. We have portables but notthe water it takes to wash, soap, towels. The first day they did the soap andfilled the towels. Now we want soap and towels. You tell them and they say,‘So?’ They don’t care.”[196] Asnoted above, Andrea also told us that she had been sprayed with pesticides froma passing tractor. Mauricio V., a former child worker, commented on the powerimbalance that resulted in some workers returning to the Idaho field whenordered to do so: “It was so terrible to hear about it because when itcomes down to it you really need to work. You’ll work, you’llwork.”[197]Extreme Temperatures:Heat and ColdChildren work in extreme heat and extreme cold. In someclimates the day starts cold and wet, then turns unbearably hot. “Whenyou wake up it’s really cold,” said James A., who works in Michigan in the summer. “The plants hurt your hands because it’s so cold. Yourhands get numb.[198]One mother with working children described picking apples in Michigan inwaist-high snow.[199]In contrast, temperatures in the Texas panhandle can reachwell over 100 degrees Fahrenheit in the summer, and children spoke of longingfor jobs in air conditioning. Elias N. said that when he’s working:“I think of the sun, why it’s so hot. How I want to go home fromthis field.… [I]t’s the hot air and the sun is beating you up. . .. [Bad days are the] real hot ones, the field is full of weeds, you can’teven take a step. When you’re surrounded by corn, there’s noair.”[200]Elisabeth S., who worked in Washington as a teenager, told us: “It was sohot that I didn’t want to touch my clothes.”[201]Working long hours in high temperatures places children atrisk of heat stroke and dehydration, particularly if there is not enoughdrinking water and they are wearing extra clothes to protect them from sunburnand pesticide exposure. “It’s just really hot and the water getshot. You get really, really thirsty,” Marta V., age 13, said.[202]Sam B. told us: “The first year I worked, the second week, I gotdehydrated. My dad had to bring me water. Sometimes you feel dizzy butyou’ll come back. . . . You get all dehydrated and you want to faint butyou need the money. Sometimes I think, why am I here? I can get a better job.But it’s not true. . . . I’ve seen women, guys get dehydratedquick. Faint. They’ll just give up like that.”[203]Heat illnesses can lead to brain damage and death. From 1992to 2006, 68 crop workers were formally recorded as having died from exposure toenvironmental heat, a rate 20 times that of all US civilian workers.[204]Children are significantly more susceptible to heat stress than adults.[205]The deadliness of heat illness and the difficulty intreating a worker once the illness has progressed to a critical stage is welldemonstrated by the death of Maria Isabel Jiménez. On May 13, 2008, 17-year-oldJiménez collapsed after working for nine hours straight in the heat. Bythe time she reached the hospital, her core body temperature exceeded 108degrees and she died two days later.[206] The autopsyreport gave “Heat Stroke/Sun Stroke due to Occupational EnvironmentalExposure” as the cause of death. The state of California fined the laborcontractor more than $250,000 and revoked her license; in 2009, the contractorand Jiménez’s supervisor were charged with involuntarymanslaughter for failing to provide Jiménez with reasonable access topotable water, shade, heat illness training, and prompt medical attention.[207]SanitationMany children said that their employers did not providedrinking water, handwashing facilities, or toilets.[208]As noted below, the Occupational Safety and Health Act requires thatagricultural employers with more than 10 employees provide drinking water andtoilet and handwashing facilities for farmworkers while they are working.Access to drinking water is critical to preventing heatinjury: workers may need one half to one quart of water per hour as thetemperature increases from 80 to 90⁰F.[209]Girls and women may also be at risk of urinary tract infections.[210]Strikingly, the mother of two teenage children hoeing cotton with no toilets orprovided drinking water told us, “We don’t go to the bathroombecause we sweat.”[211]Frequent handwashing, especially before eating and using the toilet, iscritical for reducing the dose of pesticides entering the body followingexposure. The absence of field toilets may also increase the risk of gastrointestinaldisorders.[212]Drinking waterI have never worked where we had water. In my timewe’ve always had to carry our own.—Mother of 10- and 11-year-old working children, Plainview, Texas, July 20, 2009Many children said they had to bring their own drinkingwater, buy it in the fields, or do without. A 15-year-old girl told us that in Michigan: “You take your own water. If you run out they allow you to go home and getsome.” In Florida, she said, they “sell it to you. Water is$1.”[213]Elisabeth S., who worked with a team of teenagers in Washington State, explained: “If we ran out [of water] we ran out. They [employers] didn’tfill it up. Occasionally if people complained they would fill it, but becausewe were all kids we would just stay quiet. In Spanish culture we’retaught that whatever the authority says, goes. If there’s no water, well,they know, so we’re not going to say anything.”[214]Some children in Texas and Michigan said that they not onlyhad to bring their own water, the tap water in the camps or their communitieswas so poor they had to buy the water they brought. For example, a 14-year-oldgirl living in migrant housing in Texas told us: “We bring our own water.We buy our own water and fill it [the cooler] up.”[215]A 10-year-old boy said that early each morning before work, his chore is to buywater “from the machine at Lowe’s beside the house.”[216]Toilets and handwashing facilitiesYou don’t wash your hands to eat. You just takeoff your gloves. They had a weird smell. . . . I don’t know anyone whowashed their hands. There was no place to.— Elisabeth S., age 19, who worked in Washington Statewhile in high school, August 3, 2009Many workers we spoke with said there were no toilets orhandwashing facilities in the fields, although this varied by location andcrop. For example, children hoeing cotton in the Texas panhandle said theyalmost never had these facilities provided. “There’s no place towash hands,” a 14-year-old hoeing cotton in Texas said. “We bringtap water and wash our hands.” When asked if there were portable toilets,she responded, “No, only during pumpkin season in October.”[217]A mother who took her children to hoe cotton said she wished for portabletoilets. Her 10-year-old son, she said, “had diarrhea one day behind thewheel [of the car] and we forgot toilet paper. He was trying to hide behind thewheel of the car.”[218]In contrast some children in Michigan said they had toilets,and Human Rights Watch saw some in the fields, although not necessarily at thedistances or conditions required by regulation.[219] Insome studies farmers have reported it “difficult to move toilet andwashing facilities to all of the fields where they employ workers,” that“when they do provide sanitation facilities, such as field toilets andwashing stations, workers do not use them,” and that they “considerthis requirement to be burdensome.”[220]Green Tobacco SicknessAcute tobacco poisoning, known as “green tobaccosickness,” is an additional risk to working in tobacco, and children areespecially vulnerable. The poisoning occurs when workers absorb tobacco throughthe skin as they come into contact with the leaves; wet leaves increase therisk of poisoning as nicotine dissolves in the water on the leaf’ssurface. Physical exercise and high ambient temperatures can increaseabsorption of nicotine as blood is shunted to the skin to help lower bodytemperature.[221]Symptoms include nausea, vomiting, headaches, muscle weakness, dizziness,abdominal pain, and diarrhea, as well as shortness of breath, and occasionalfluctuations in blood pressure or heart rate.[222]According to a recent study, “on a humid day, especially after a recentrain, the average field worker may be exposed to as much as 600 mL ofdew,” which would contain roughly the nicotine of 36 average cigarettes.[223]“Topping” and harvesting, two types of tobaccowork the children Human Rights Watch interviewed conducted, place workers inconstant contact with tobacco leaves and at particular risk of green tobaccosickness.[224]Human Rights Watch interviewed 12 children working in tobacco in eastern North Carolina.Children are especially vulnerable to green tobacco sicknesscompared with adults. Their bodies are smaller in size relative to the dose ofnicotine they absorb, they typically lack tolerance to nicotine, and may beless well-informed about the risks, especially from rain or dew, because thedanger is from the plant itself, not an obvious external substance.[225]Protective clothing such as rain gear and water-tight glovescan protect workers from exposure but also increase the risk of heat exhaustionand dehydration;[226]none of the children Human Rights Watch interviewed mentioned wearingprotective clothing.Access to Health CareFarmworkers generally have poor access to health care, andonly 20 percent of migrant and seasonal farmworkers reported in 2000 using any healthcareservices in the preceding two years.[227] A study ofmigrant families in eastern North Carolina, published in 2004, found that forover half of the children sampled, the child’s caretaker reported a timein the past year when the caretaker felt the child needed medical care but thechild did not receive it.[228]Cost is a significant problem. Farmworkers’ incomesplace them near or below poverty, many are not eligible for Medicaid, and fewhave health insurance: 85 percent of migrant and seasonal farmworkers, and nineout of ten children in farmworker families, were uninsured in 2000.[229]Some simply cannot afford the lost wages of hours spent waiting for care or toapply for benefits; some may lose their jobs if they miss a day of work.Farmworkers are also not covered by workers’ compensation laws in manystates.[230]There are approximately 160 federally funded migrant healthclinics as well as community clinics that receive federal funding to care foruninsured and under-insured migrant farmworkers and their families.[231]While many of these provide excellent care, they are not sufficient to coverall farmworkers’ needs. Language and distance from medical facilities arealso significant barriers.[232]Where workers do receive care, health providers may have limited training indiagnosing occupational health problems, including pesticide exposure, and mayface cultural barriers in providing treatment.[233]The Migrant Clinicians Network has programs to promote the integration ofoccupational and environmental medicine into primary care.[234]Some children told us their employers had paid for theiremergency care for a minor workplace injury but strictly on an ad hoc basis.More common were descriptions of problems persisting for years without formalmedical treatment. “When they’re really sick, unless they’rein pain,” they are not going to go to the doctor, a health worker toldus.[235]The new health care reform law recently enacted by the USCongress excludes undocumented workers from coverage. As noted earlier, it isestimated that about half of all farmworkers are undocumented.Sexual Harassment andViolenceFrom California, where the fields werecalled “field de calzon” (or “field of panties”) because so many supervisors rapedwomen there, to Florida, where female farm workers call them “The GreenMotel,” and throughout the country, we have found women working inagriculture are often particularly vulnerable to sexual harassment.—William R. Tamayo, EEOC regional attorney, San Francisco district office, June 18, 2009[236]All forms of workplace exploitation take their toll onvictims, whether it is economic or sexual. One major difference that I haveseen is that when you are raped at work it is not the same as not being paid;you are not just going to get another job and move on with your life like whenyou’re not paid. When you’re raped, it impacts the rest of yourlife. . . .Farmworker victims are getting pregnant, they aregetting STIs [sexually transmitted infections] from perpetrators, and they aresuffering trauma from rape. It affects them and their families. Some victimsI’ve represented have said they could no longer interact with theirfamily in the same way afterward because they felt ashamed and embarrassed. Theharm caused by sexual violence goes to the core of the person’s being.It’s a health issue, a safety issue, a civil rights issue.—Mónica Ramírez, Esperanza: TheImmigrant Women’s Legal Initiative of the Southern Poverty Law Center,December 30, 2009[237]Farmworker women and girls are exceptionally vulnerable tosexual exploitation and violence by co-workers, crew leaders, laborcontractors, and growers. This violence ranges from inappropriate orthreatening comments to groping, sexual assault, and rape. In a recent surveyof Latino immigrants in five states, 77 percent of women said that sexualharassment was a major workplace problem.[238] Similarly,farmworkers and advocates in Fresno, California, told EEOC staff “thathundreds, if not thousands, of women had to have sex with supervisors to get orkeep jobs and/or put up with a constant barrage of grabbing and touching andpropositions for sex by supervisors.”[239]Maria M. from Idaho, whose story is recounted above,described her experience of being almost the only girl harvesting zucchini whenshe was in high school:It was difficult . . .  when I was placed next to men.I wore really loose clothing. I never wore tight clothing because that would bea big mistake. There were times when you were working down the row andthere’s a guy next to you asking your name. They never ask how old youare because they don’t want to know that. . . . You had to be rude to aguy even though they’re just asking your name because it could turn intosomething worse. . . . You had to strategize how you were going to answerquestions to prevent them from talking to you.I remember one crew leader, he would stand behind girls andlook at them. It wasn’t ok for him to do that, but other guys laughedbecause he was a crew leader. He was the worst crew leader ever. . . .Women know you don’t wear a t-shirt to work. . . .When you’re working in the fields you can’t avoid being harassed byguys because of what you’re wearing.[240]Another young woman said that when she worked when she was15 and 16 years old in Washington State, girls tried to stay together in groupsto avoid harassment, especially after the lunch break when men would get highon drugs.[241]In 2005, Olivia Tamayo became the first female farmworker tosuccessfully challenge her employer in federal court for sexual harassment.[242]Tamayo testified that her supervisor, who carried a gun and a knife, raped herand threatened to kill her and her husband if she told anyone.[243]She reported the assault and threats to her employer in 1999, and a deputysheriff interviewed her but did not find her allegations credible.[244]The EEOC sued on Tamayo’s behalf and charged that Harris Farms allowed her to work isolated in the fieldsand to endure co-worker harassment until, in March 2001, she felt compelled toquit her job, her primary employment for more than 15 years. The jury foundHarris Farms liable for sexual harassment, retaliation, and the constructivetermination of Tamayo.[245]In January 2005, a jury awarded Tamayo a nearly $1 million verdictagainst Harris Farms, one of California’s largest agriculturalbusinesses.[246]The prevalence of sexual violence is always difficult tomeasure accurately; the isolation and other vulnerabilities of farmworker girlsand women make it more so in this context. According to William Tamayo, an EEOCregional attorney whose office has brought numerous sexual harassment cases(and no relation to Olivia Tamayo): “This happens behind closed doors.There are probably scores of women and girls who are being raped in the fieldsevery day but don’t come forward. They’re scared. . . . My view isthat we’re just scratching the surface here.”[247]Geographic, linguistic, and cultural isolation combined withpoverty and a desperate need for work, poor housing, vulnerability todeportation if undocumented, and the inability to seek protection create aperfect climate for sexual harassment and violence to flourish on farms.Farmworkers typically work in less populated, more isolated rural areas; themajority of workers, supervisors, and employers are male. Victims may not speakEnglish or know the abuse is illegal; they simply endure sexual harassment aspart of the job. “People don’t know their rights. Predators arerarely punished,” said EEOC attorney Tamayo.[248]The power differential between growers, contractors,supervisors, and workers is enormous. Workers may fear that they and theirfamily members will be fired or face violence if they do report abuse. Maria M.told us: “it’s something that girls have to live with. I’msure a lot of people wonder why a girl would go into the field in thatsituation, but you have to accept it’s going to happen and work iswork.”[249]If the employer provides housing, being fired may mean becoming homeless. Inaddition, being fired could cause the victim or her family members to beblacklisted from agricultural employment in the area where the incidentoccurred or elsewhere because the worker is coined a trouble maker. As aresult, the victim and even her family members can be denied future employmentopportunities.[250]Girls may be especially targeted and may be less likely tochallenge their abusers than adults. “I never saw [sexual harassment] asan issue because I was used to it,” the young woman from Idaho explained. “Sometimes I would get frustrated, but it was something I knew wasgoing to happen so I didn’t think it was a big deal until I learned itshouldn’t happen.”[251]Mónica Ramírez, founder and director of Esperanza: The ImmigrantWomen’s Legal Initiative of the Southern Poverty Law Center, whorepresents farmworker women and girls in cases involving sexual violence, said:“Children are always more vulnerable because they don’t know theyhave protections or how to protect themselves. Perpetrators take advantage oftheir youth, inexperience as employees, and lack of knowledge about theirrights. Sometimes they make threats against the victims’ parents or otherfamily members. Unaccompanied minors are also especially vulnerable.”[252]According to EEOC attorney Tamayo: “The imbalance of power is sogreat—kids don’t know their rights and they’re really scared.It’s usually 30- to 40-something’s who are propositioning orgrabbing them—16-year-old girls.”[253]Employers may ignore harassment or may themselves engage inabuse. “In cases I’ve handled,” Ramírez said,“it’s been supervisors and company owners who have committed theharassment. I am aware that some growers and supervisors say that they areaware of the problem but that it is not happening on their farm. Theycan’t say it’s not happening on their watch. It’s people inpower who are perpetrating this violence.”[254]In other instances, the employer turns a blind eye or never receives thecomplaint. William Tamayo explained: “English-speaking owners are verydependent on labor contractors or foremen who speak Spanish. . . . Predatorshave so much power. They are the link to the employer. They are the lifeline.They are insulated. The employers are so dependent on these guys and so whenproblems are raised they don’t want to hear about it. They may think thatthe chances are rare that they will ever be prosecuted.”[255]Women and girls have limited or no recourse for abuse. Locallaw enforcement may be unavailable or unreceptive to farmworker women’sand girls’ complaints. Where local and state police have signed so-called287(g) agreements with Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) allowing themto enforce federal immigration law, undocumented victims may, in effect, haveno legal protection from crime because they fear complaining to the police willlead to their deportation (see below).Aside from lacking information about their rights,farmworker victims often do not know about the community resources available tohelp them in the face of sexual harassment or violence. Social serviceproviders may be far away from where the farmworker community members live orwork. Such services may also only be available in English. Victims may fearthat their partners and families will blame them for provoking abuse or forbeing perceived as causing problems. Thus, these victims may not tell eventhose closest to them. A paralegal who works with farmworkers said: “Thewomen don’t want to talk about it. They don’t even tell theirhusbands. Because their husbands are going to blame them. So the woman says,‘I don’t want anyone to know.’”[256]One government agency that has specifically targeted thisissue is the US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), which since1996 has filed more than 20 cases of sexual harassment, retaliation, andsex-based discrimination on behalf of women agricultural workers, mostly out ofits San Francisco office.[257]At the time of writing, only the Harris Farms case, described above, hadresulted in a jury verdict, but at least 18 have resulted in settlements orconsent decrees.As an example of a recent case involving a teenager, in alawsuit filed in January 2010 against Giumarra Vineyards,the EEOCalleged that a male co-worker subjected a teenage farmworker to “sexualadvances, sexually inappropriate touching, and abusive and offensive sexualcomments about the male sex organ,” that farmworkers who witnessed theharassment complained to Giumarra Vineyards, and that one day after thecomplaint, Giumarra Vineyards summarily discharged the girl and the farmworkerswho complained in retaliation.[258]This case and others were still pending at the time of writing.Several non-governmental organizations have also taken upthe issue of sexual harassment and violence against farmworkers. These includeEsperanza: The Immigrant Women’s Legal Initiative of the Southern PovertyLaw Center (SPLC), the Agricultural Worker Health Project in conjunction withCalifornia Rural Legal Assistance Foundation and California Rural LegalAssistance, Inc., and the non-profit organization Lideres Campesinas. Inaddition, many organizations throughout the United States and abroad havepartnered with SPLC on its Bandana Project Campaign.[259]VIII. Vulnerability ofChild Workers Due to Immigration StatusLabor and workplace violations—including wageexploitation, pressure to do dangerous work, and sexual abuse—are risksfor all child farmworkers. However, for undocumented immigrant childfarmworkers (who lack permission to work) and lawfully present or US citizen childrenwith undocumented parents, the threat of deportation by US Immigration andCustoms and Enforcement (ICE) exacerbates an already exploitative and degradingworkplace.Over half—53 percent—of all (adult and child)crop workers lacked work authorization in 2005-2006, according to the NationalAgricultural Workers Survey (NAWS).[260]By comparison, 2006 data from the US Census Bureau indicate that only about 40percent of all farmworkers (crops and livestock) were foreign born and lack UScitizenship, and do not indicate how many farmworkers without citizenship werestill working lawfully.[261]Based on these numbers, Human Rights Watch estimates that it is likely that themajority of child farmworkers are documented, given that many farmworkerparents without US citizenship would have had children born in the US, makingthem US citizens.[262]In some states visited by Human Rights Watch, serviceproviders perceived a trend towards employing undocumented youth—someeven as young as 12—who were not accompanied by family members. GregorySchell, a public interest lawyer, said that in Florida, “Most of theunderage workers we see are unaccompanied, and tend to be older—15 ormore.”[263]Advocates working directly with farmworkers also described the growing presenceof indigenous children from Mexico and Central America for whom Spanish was nota native language. “We’ve seen more and more youngerfarmworkers,” said Carol Brooke, migrant worker attorney with the North Carolina Justice Center. “Sixteen, seventeen years old. Typically in malecrews, maybe with a relative. Mostly undocumented, often speaking indigenouslanguages, although they also speak Spanish.”[264] Forthis report, Human Rights Watch interviewed child farmworkers who were UScitizens, who were green card holders with permission to work in the US, andwho were undocumented.While this report’s main focus is on improving childlabor protections and health and safety protections for all child farmworkers,the ways in which immigration law—most tangibly felt as the threat ofdeportation—exacerbate problems for children in agriculture cannot beignored. The vulnerability of immigrant workers to exploitation createsdangerous and unfair work conditions for all workers. Some employers’willingness to take advantage of immigrants who are too afraid to complainhurts all workers in the fields, including the hundreds of thousands of UScitizens who work alongside immigrant workers.Undocumented child farmworkers, or children who are workingtogether with undocumented parents, live in fear of at least two scenarios. Oneis that their employers will turn them or their parents over to immigrationauthorities, and that they or their parents will be deported. This means thatchildren are terrified of complaining about abusive conditions in the fields,and any steps they might take towards vindicating their rights can be thwartedby an employer who threatens to call ICE. The second scenario that childrenfear is that their employers will be subject to a raid by immigrationauthorities.[265]Recognizing that employers have an almost unfettered abilityto exploit undocumented workers, ICE (and its predecessor agency, INS) and theUS Department of Labor (DOL) have entered into a Memorandum of Understanding(MOU) to try to de-link immigration and labor law enforcement.[266]First established in 1998, this DOL MOU states that the two agencies must avoidsituations where their co-involvement in a particular labor setting will havethe purpose or effect of placing raids on undocumented workers above labor lawenforcement, because the Department of Labor has recognized that immigrantworkers will be reluctant to bring complaints if employers are able to call inICE under any circumstance.[267]Since 1996, the INS (now ICE) has had in place internal guidance to its staffon how to avoid immigration enforcement involvement in labor disputes.[268]Despite the existence of these tools, perhaps partly because they are notconsistently followed by ICE, undocumented workers continue to live in fear ofexercising their rights as workers. As one service provider said,“Undocumented victims or victims whose family members or other people intheir social network are undocumented won’t report because they areafraid that they or someone they love will be deported.”[269]Undocumented farmworkers live in fear not only of ICE, butincreasingly of their local police officers as well. This is due to so-called“287(g) agreements” under which local or state police enter into anagreement with ICE to enforce federal immigration law.[270]As of April 2010, ICE reported having enrolled 71 agencies in 26 states andtrained 1,120 officers under the program.[271]In the course of our research for this report, Human Rights Watch heard fromservice providers about local police in North Carolina setting up roadblocks tocheck people’s immigration status, including near a Spanish-language daycare.The involvement of local police in enforcing federal immigrationlaws, which often is accompanied by intense racial profiling, has a chillingeffect on all immigrant farmworkers’ willingness to report workplaceabuses.[272]“The 287(g) agreements definitely affect people’s willingness toreport sexual violence,” one service provider told Human Rights Watch. “Insome cases when people do file a report, law enforcement officials question thecredibility of victims because of their immigration status, language, andnationality.”[273]According to the Southern Poverty Law Center, there are several cases in whichpolice have turned female victims of crimes over to ICE and they have beendeported.[274]Even though undocumented workers have violated USimmigration law, the fact of their employment in the United States means thatthey are protected by, and their employers must follow, minimum wage, childlabor, and health and safety rules.[275]In addition, human rights law is clear that both undocumented and documentedworkers must benefit from protection of their basic rights as workers.[276]Despite these protections in US and human rights law, thereality of immigration law enforcement in the United States and workers’unwillingness to draw attention to themselves mean that the fear of deportationoften trumps all else. “You can seize on child labor or alleged slaverybut these things only exist as extreme examples of th[e] type of extremelawlessness [that all farmworkers live under] . . . . In a world where everyoneis in a precarious employment situation and the system relies on employeetestimony, there’s not good enforcement,” explained Gregory Schellof Florida Legal Services Migrant Farmworker Justice Project.[277]A migrant health project director in Michigan told Human Rights Watch: “Evenpeople who are documented have family members who are undocumented so they areafraid to speak up.”[278]Similarly, a nurse at a rural health clinic said: “We hear over and overagain from our patients that they are willing to put up with a lot because theyare undocumented and afraid. One really can’t talk about health ifyou’re worried about getting paid. If you can’t afford to buyfood.”[279]IX. The UnitedStates Government’s Failure to Protect Farmworker ChildrenProtecting child farmworkers from dangerous and exploitativework is the responsibility of lawmakers as well as the agencies that implementthe law, including the US Department of Labor and the Environmental ProtectionAgency (EPA). By providing children working in agriculture less protection thanall other working children, and by poorly enforcing what protections they dohave, the government is failing in its responsibility to safeguard the health,education and safety of farmworker children.Fair Labor StandardsActChild labor is first and foremost regulated by the FairLabor Standards Act (FLSA), the federal law that sets minimum ages for work,maximum work-hours per day and week, and minimum hourly wages. The FLSA datesback to 1938 and reflects a radically different era in the United States, atime when “agriculture” was synonymous with “familyfarm,” and a quarter of all Americans still lived and worked onfarms. Initially, farmworkers were excluded entirely from the law'sprotection, and the minimal restrictions on child labor in agriculture were notadded until 1974.The most glaring deficiency of the FLSA is its disparatetreatment of farmworker and non-farmworker children. Children workingin agricultural occupations receive much less protection than childrenworking in all other jobs. As put by the General Accounting Office, “childrencan legally work in agriculture under conditions that would be illegal in otherwork settings.”[280]For example:Outside of agriculture, the employment of children youngerthan 14 is prohibited.[281]In agriculture, there is no minimum age at which employers may hirechildren to work unlimited hours outside of school, day or night, providedthe work takes place on a small farm with written parental consent.[282]Outside of agriculture, employment of children ages 12 and13 is forbidden. In agriculture, any employer, regardless of size, mayhire children ages 12 and 13 to work unlimited hours outside of school,provided they have written parental consent or work on a farm where aparent is employed.[283]Outside of agriculture, the standard minimum age for workis 16. Children ages 14 and 15 can work in certain limited jobs, such ascashiers, stocking shelves, or washing cars, in retail or food servicestores, and in gas stations but only for limited hours: up to 40 hours ina nonschool week; up to 18 hours in a school week; up to 8 hours on anonschool day; and up to 3 hours on a school day. In addition, outside ofagriculture, 14- and 15-year olds may not work before 7:00 a.m. or after7:00 p.m. (9 p.m. in the summer). There are no similar restrictionsprotecting children working in agriculture. In agriculture, employers mayhire children ages 14 and 15 to work unlimited hours outside ofschool.  There is no parental consent requirement.[284]In nonagricultural occupations, the minimum age for particularlyhazardous work is 18, including for children working in a parent’sbusiness. In agriculture, employers may require or allow 16 and 17-yearolds to work in particularly hazardous occupations.[285] Childrenwho work on a farm owned or operated by their parents can do particularlyhazardous work at any age, no matter how young. For example, using apower-driven circular saw or band saw is allowed for children starting atage 16 in agriculture, whereas in other industries the minimum age forusing such saws is 18 years.[286]This disparate treatment is particularly troublesome given agriculture'sposition as the most dangerous occupation for working children in the United States.States have the power to provide stronger protections forfarmworker children than federal law, but most state child labor laws are nomore protective than federal law. Seventeen states do not cover agriculturalemployment in their child labor laws at all.[287]Children’s Act for Responsible Employment (CARE):Closing the Legal LoopholeFor the last decade, members of the USCongress have repeatedly introduced draft legislation into both the Senate andHouse of Representatives that would eliminate the double-standard in US childlabor laws and apply the same age and hour restrictions to children working inagriculture that already apply to other industries. However, to date, none ofthe bills have ever reached a vote.As this report goes to press, legislation isstill pending. In September 2009, Representative Lucille Roybal-Allardof California introduced legislation that would amend the Fair Labor StandardsAct and apply the same age and hour requirements to children working inagriculture as for children working in other occupations (exceptfor the existing family-farm provision that excuses from all child laborrequirements parents whose children work on a farm that the parents own oroperate). The Roybal-Allard bill, the Children's Act for ResponsibleEmployment (CARE) (HR 3564), has three key provisions. First, it would prohibitthe employment of children ages 13 and younger in agriculture, except for thoseworking on farms owned and operated by their parents. It would allow 14- and15-year-olds to work only for limited hours, outside of school hours. Second,it would raise the minimum age for particularly hazardous jobs in agriculturefrom 16 to 18. Third, it would increase the maximum amount of civil moneypenalties from $11,000 to $15,000, and would for the first time require aminimum penalty of $500 for each violation. In the case of a violation thatcauses serious injury, serious illness, or death, there would be a minimumpenalty of $15,000 and a maximum penalty of $50,000, which maximum could bedoubled where the violation is repeated or willful.[288]As of April 2010, the bill had more than 80 Congressionalco-sponsors, but no formal action had been taken.Failure to EnsureAdequate Minimum Age, Maximum Hour, and Minimum Wage Protections: the USDepartment of LaborI’m a bittired of seeing all my pediatric patients out there working against the law.—JosieEllis, registered nurse and director of Vecinos Inc. Farmworker Health Program,Sylva, North Carolina, July 28, 2009The US Department of Labor is responsible for enforcing theFLSA, which it does through its Wage and Hour Division. The secretary of laborcan seek redress for child labor violations through injunctive relief, civilmoney penalties, and criminal sanction. (Only the secretary of labor—notindividual employees or their parents—can sue an employer for violationsof the FLSA’s child labor provisions.) Many of the employers of childrenprofiled in this report would not be subject to sanction for child laborbecause the children are working legally under US federal law as it applies toagricultural employment. However, far too many agricultural employers violatethe law without penalty.The Wage and Hour Division’s enforcement of childlabor laws in agriculture has been extremely weak. In 2009 it found only 36cases of child labor violations involving 109 children in agriculture, constitutingonly 4 percent of all child labor cases that year.[289]This number is not only astonishingly low, but also reflects a dramatic declinein overall enforcement of child labor laws from 2001.[290]By comparison, in 1998, the Department of Labor found 104 cases of child laborviolations in agriculture.[291]The Wage and Hour Division suffers from too fewinvestigators, too little attention devoted to child labor, and, of thoseresources devoted to child labor, too little focus on agriculture. As a result,growers have no reason to fear using children illegally.The division does not dedicate staff to inspect for childlabor exclusively, but instead maintains that all fullinvestigations—even those made under laws other than theFLSA—include a child labor component.[292] Thus, accordingto Arthur M. Kershner, Jr., youth employment branch chief, inspectorsconducting an investigation of an agricultural employer will always look forchild labor violations, even if the investigation has been triggered bycomplaints of other violations.[293]Yet the low numbers of child labor cases that result from these investigationscall this into question: in 2009, the Wage and Hour Diviaion made 1,379 fullinvestigations in agriculture but found only child labor violations in lessthan 3 percent of those investigations (36 cases, as noted above).[294]One possible reason the Wage and Hour Division finds so few child laborviolations is that it conducts very few investigations in agriculture that startout as child labor investigations. In 2007 over 98 percent of investigations ofagricultural employers were started for reasons unrelated to child labor.[295]Until recently the Wage and Hour Division has not tailoredits investigative techniques to fit the particular work environment andcharacteristics of children working in the fields. Many agricultural workersmove from farm to farm and do not stay long in one place; they often workirregular hours, including very early in the morning and on weekends; they arefrequently unfamiliar with their rights; they often do not speak English (oreven Spanish in the case of indigenous language speakers from Mexico andCentral America); and those who are undocumented tend to be wary of anygovernment investigators.These factors highlight how critical it is that theDepartment of Labor develop better methods for determining where child laborviolations are likely to occur and investigate child labor proactively without waitingfor workers to make complaints. Unlike issues such as non-payment of wages,working children or their parents are not going to report child labor.The Wage and Hour Division’s failure to adequatelyenforce child labor laws in agriculture is compounded by its overall failure toaddress wage violations against adult workers that contribute to farmworkerpoverty and push children to work to contribute to family income. For example,the US Government Accountability Office (GAO) found in 2009 that the Wage andHour Division responds inadequately to complaints of wage fraud and non-paymentof wages, leaving low wage workers vulnerable to wage theft.[296]The GAO concluded that the division’s system actively discouragedcomplaints, for example by directing most calls to voicemail but requiring aninvestigator speak with the employee before an investigation can be initiated, bynot returning phone calls, by providing conflicting or misleading informationabout how to file a complaint, and by accepting only written complaints at someoffices.[297]Activists and service providers whom Human Rights Watch interviewed in NorthCarolina, for example, told us that both state and federal department of laboroffices are difficult for workers to access, even more so for children. In asurvey by the Southern Poverty Law Center of some 500 Latino immigrants in fivestates, published in 2009, about 80 percent said they had no idea how tocontact government enforcement agencies such as the Department of Labor.[298]Even when violations are found, sanctionsgenerally are weak and ineffective.[299] TheWage and Hour Division can assess civil money penalties for child laborviolations. The maximum civil money penalty available for a nonwillfulchild labor violation is $11,000 for each employee who experiences a violation,and $50,000 for each violation that causes death or serious injury of a child,which may be doubled for repeated or willful violations.[300] Theamount of the penalty must be based on the size of the business and the gravityof the violation.[301] The amount of civil money penalties ordered for child labor violationsis far too low. For example, in 2008, the average penalty was only $890 perchild illegally employed, which is only 8 percent of the maximum penalty of$11,000 then in effect.[302] Asanother example, according to news reports, in 2009 the division assessed twoblueberry growers only $2,584 for child labor violations after it foundchildren as young as six years old picking in the growers’ fields.[303]Moreover, these penalty amounts do not represent penaltiesactually paid because assessed penalties may be negotiated downwards inorder to resolve cases and avoid litigation.[304]The “hot goods” provision is anotherenforcement tool. The provision prohibits the shipment in interstate commerceof any goods produced in violation of minimum wage, overtime, or child laborrequirements.[305] Itcan be extremely effective, particularly in agriculture, in that it allows theWage and Hour Division to seek temporary restraining orders preventing themovement of tainted goods. This creates great incentives for companies,growers, and other affected businesses to cooperate with thedivision. Such cooperation has included future compliance agreements andarrangements for ongoing monitoring. Use of the “hot goods”provision is still an exceptional law enforcement tool: the division invokedthe provision only once in 2008 and once in 2009.[306]The Wage and Hour Division has recently taken steps toaddress some of its basic shortcomings and improve the quality of theinformation it collects to litigate cases.[307] In 2009 thedivision hired several hundred new inspectors, who were still being trained atthe time of writing, bringing the total number of inspectors to 894 in April2010.[308]The division is also providing inspectors with basic technology such as cellphones, jump drives, and digital video and audio equipment; paying overtime sothat inspectors can work weekends and early mornings; and adding bilingualstaff.[309]The division says it has begun tracking harvests and plans to strengthenrelations with community organizations so that its inspectors will haveinformation about where farmworkers are likely to be.[310]It remained to be seen at the time of writing whether these efforts wouldresult in overall more vigorous enforcement of protections for childfarmworkers.Failure to ProtectChildren’s Health and SafetySeveral sets of laws address hazards for children inagricultural work. First are the Department of Labor’s hazardous orders,which apply specifically to children. Second is the federal Insecticide,Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA), enforced by the US EnvironmentalProtection Agency. Third is the Occupational Safety and Health Act, enforced bythe Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) in the Department ofLabor. These latter two laws (and their implementing regulations) affectworkers of all ages.The Department of Labor’s hazardous ordersUnder the FLSA, the Department of Labor is responsible fordetermining what jobs are hazardous and therefore prohibited for children underage 16 working on farms that are not owned or operated by their parents (or forsome tasks, children ages 14 and older who have received special training). TheDepartment of Labor also determines what jobs are hazardous and thus prohibitedfor children under age 18 in all non-agricultural industries. For agriculture, occupationsdeemed particularly hazardous for children include operating equipment such astractors of over 20 horsepower take-off, corn and cotton pickers, graincombines, and hay mowers; working in yards, pens, or stalls occupied by a bull,boar, or stud horse; working from a ladder at a height of over 20 feet; workinginside fruit, forage, or grain storage containers; and handling or applyingagricultural chemicals classified as Category I or II of toxicity.[311]Children under age 16 may still handle pesticides of lower toxicity, andchildren ages 16 and older may work in agriculture without any age-relatedrestrictions. Notably, a 2003 study of children under age 18 with acuteoccupational pesticide-related illnesses found that only a few appeared toworking in violation of these regulations.[312]In 2002 NIOSH, in a report to the Department of Labor,recommended amending the hazardous orders for both agricultural andnon-agricultural jobs.[313]In agriculture, NIOSH recommended, among other things, revising the tractorexemption for certified 14- and 15-year olds to require rollover protectivestructures and seatbelts; lowering the height restrictions on ladders from 20to 6 feet; and expanding the prohibition on handling certain agriculturalchemicals to “[p]erforming any tasks that would fall under the EPAdefinition of ‘pesticide handler.’”[314]To date, none of the recommendations have been implemented. Although theDepartment of Labor has taken steps to implement some of NIOSH’srecommendations for nonagricultural hazardous orders, initiating changesto agricultural hazardous orders was not on the department’s regulatoryagenda at the time of writing,[315]despite the younger ages for hazardous work in agriculture and high rates ofinjuries and fatalities compared with other sectors.Even existing hazardous orders are almost never enforced foragriculture. In 2009 the Wage and Hour Division cited only two violations ofagricultural hazardous orders in two cases, or 0.14 percent of the 1,432hazardous occupation violations it found that year.[316]The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)The US Environmental Protection Agency overseesthe registration, distribution, sale, and use of pesticides. TheEPA’s Worker Protection Standard is a federal regulation intended to“reduce the risks of illness or injury resulting from . . . occupationalexposures to pesticides.”[317]The Worker Protection Standard forbids employers from requiring or allowingworkers, other than trained pesticide handlers, to enter or remain in areasbeing treated with pesticides. It requires employers to notify workers whenareas have been treated by pesticides, either orally, by means of prominently posted“Danger” signs, or both, depending on the pesticide's labelingstatement. The Worker Protection Standard further requires that workers betrained in a language they understand on 13 specific items regarding pesticidesafety, pesticide-related illnesses, and emergency responses to pesticide exposure.The Worker Protection Standard sets no minimum age for mixing or applyingpesticides (although, as noted above, regulations set by the Department ofLabor under the FLSA prohibit children under 16 from handling category I and IIpesticides).The same regulations that establish the Worker ProtectionStandard also set restricted-entry intervals (REIs), the period of time after apesticide's application during which workers should not be in the treated areaswithout protective equipment.[318] TheREI is listed on the label for each pesticide and, generally ranges from about12 to 72 hours.[319]Dry conditions may necessitate a longer REI, particularly among toxicitycategory I pesticides, which are the most toxic.[320]The regulations also restrict the application of pesticides under certainconditions, such as strong winds.Despite the greater vulnerability of children to pesticides,there is no special consideration for them in EPA regulations at all. TheWorker Protection Standard and the REI regulations are formulated withadults—and only adults—in mind. In the Worker Protection Standardthere is no prohibition on children mixing, handling, or applyingpesticides. Restricted-entry intervals are set using a 154-pound adultmale as a model—they are not adapted for children, pregnant women, orothers who differ from this model. A 2003 study of children with acuteoccupational pesticide-related poisoning found that 26 percent of ill childrenin agriculture were exposed despite compliance with restricted-entry intervalrequirements, suggesting, according to the authors, “that longerintervals may be requiredto protect youths.”[321]A process to revise the Worker Protection Standard has been going on for morethan a decade. Although it is possible that revisions may include, for example,age limits on applying the most toxic pesticides, they will be reopened forpublic comment and are, at best, several years from being put into place.Notably, in December 2009, the EPA announced plans tostrengthen its assessment of pesticide health risks for children—farmworkersand others—with a strong emphasis on risks for children in the fields.[322]The proposed risk assessment techniques would include “usingan additional safety/uncertainty factor to protect children, consideringaggregate exposures to pesticides from multiple sources, considering cumulativeeffects that may occur from exposure to multiple pesticides with a commonmechanism of toxicity, and reporting potential risks for individuals who hadnot been explicitly considered, specifically workers age 12-17 and childrentaken into agricultural fields while their parents work.”[323]The period for public comments on the policy paper outlining theEPA’s plans closed in April 2010 and at the time of writing the EPA wasreviewing the comments received. The worker advocates who submitted comments,such as the California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation, the FarmworkerPesticide Project, and the Pesticide Action Network, urged the EPA to set forthan explicit timeline for the development and application of these moreprotective policies, including reliance upon a scientific advisory panel reviewand public input. The outcome of the proposed changes remains to be seen.The Worker Protection Standard and REI regulations areenforced by the individual states, which often do so poorly.[324] Asnoted above, children described to Human Rights Watch being exposed topesticides through spraying and drift in violation of the regulations,re-entering fields before the pesticides had even dried on the plants, and notbeing trained on pesticide safety. In western Michigan a farm operator told usthat he posted information about spraying at the farm headquarters.[325]However, the headquarters were located in a completely different location fromthe fields, and workers did not go there on a daily basis. In eastern Michigan a girl told us: “The signs [in the fields] say pesticides only when theinspector comes. When he’s not here we don’t know. I’ve onlyseen these signs once. The inspector rarely comes.”[326]The EPA’s Office of Pesticide Programs has a grantrelationship with states to implement pesticide programs and could use theprogram to push for better enforcement by states. EPA officials in the Officeof Pesticides Programs also told us that they have now clearly defined what aninspection should include to be meaningful.[327] Some states, suchas California and Washington, have more extensive pesticide safety programsapplicable to farmworkers.The Occupational Safety and Health Administration(OSHA)The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) withinthe US Department of Labor is the federal agency with primary responsibilityfor setting and enforcing standards to promote safe and healthy workingconditions for all workers. OSHA has the power to issue safety and healthregulations, impose civil monetary penalties, and pursue criminal penaltiesagainst employers who have violated the Occupational Safety and Health (OSH)Act or its regulations. Potentially protective to children working inagriculture are the agency’s Field Sanitation Standard, which requiresagricultural employers to provide drinking water, handwashing facilities, andtoilets;[328]its regulations on tractors; and its power to inspect and penalize employersfor workplace hazards. However, each of these measures is limited in itsapplication to farmworkers.[329]Aside from enforcement problems, several legal restrictionsprevent OSHA from protecting many farmworkers. Congress annually limits theapplication of the OSH Act by exempting from all enforcement activity any farmthat employs 10 or fewer employees and has not had an active temporary laborcamp within the last 12 months.[330]Not only are these small farms not required to provide drinking water andsanitation facilities, the limit of OSHA jurisdiction to farms with 11 or moreworkers applies even to cases where workers face imminent danger or where anaccident or death has occurred. Whatever happens on a farm with 10 or feweremployees that has no active temporary labor camp, OSHA may not investigate.Even on farms with more than 10 employees, many of OSHA’s“general industry standards” that could protect farmworkers,including children, do not apply to agriculture.[331] Amongthose that do not are those regulating work at heights (such as work onladders), the use of personal protective requirement (including reinforcedshoes and gloves), and the availability of medical services and first aid.[332]And OSHA has no standard at all relating to musculo-skeletal injuries, whichare among the most common injuries for children (as well as adults) working inagriculture.OSHA officials state that OSHA can rely on its so-calledgeneral duty clause where standards for agriculture are insufficient.[333]This is a requirement in the OSH Act itself that each employer must provideeach employee a job and a place to work “free from recognized hazardsthat are causing or are likely to cause death or serious physical harm to hisemployees.” But because this language is much more general thatrequirements in OSHA regulations, it is more difficult to prove a violation ofthis general duty clause. Moreover, it is not clear that OSHA has invoked thisclause to any significant degree to protect farmworkers.OSHA officials also told Human Rights Watch that OSHA doesnot conduct targeted investigations on farms but instead only responds towritten complaints, including of worker deaths or situations of imminent danger.[334]Even OSHA regulations that do apply in agriculture are oftennot protective enough. One example relates to tractors, where the standard doesnot cover many older tractors. As noted above, tractor roll-overs are a leadingcause of death for farmworkers, including children. Serious injuries fromtractors can be prevented by roll-over bars or similar devices.[335]Yet OSHA standards requiring roll-over protective structures cover only about 8percent of all US farms due to a variety of exemptions,[336] andin 2006, only 59 percent of tractors used on farms in the US were equipped withthem.[337]Finally, individual states may develop and operate their ownoccupational safety and health programs. These programs, called StatePlans, must be approved and monitored by federal OSHA. Once in place, theysupplant (with limited exceptions) direct federal OSHA enforcement in that state.Twenty-five states and two territories at the time of writing had approvedState Plans.[338] OSHA previouslydid little monitoring of state plans, but officials told Human Rights Watchthat they were initiating a review of every state plan following seriousdeficiencies in enforcement discovered in a review of Nevada’s state plan.[339]X. International LegalObligationsUnited States law and practice concerning farmworkerchildren are in violation of or are inconsistent with international conventionson the rights of children. International Labor Organization Covention No.182 on the Worst Forms of Child Labor, ratified by the United States in 1999, prohibits children from engaging in dangerous or harmful work. The Conventionon the Rights of the Child, to which the United States is a signatory but not aparty, seeks to protect children from economic exploitation, and also from workthat is hazardous or otherwise harmful. The failure of the United States to enforce existing laws and regulations that purport to protect children working inagriculture further violate the international legal obligations of the United States.ILO Convention on Worst Forms of Child LaborIn 1999, the International Labor Organization (ILO) adopted ConventionNo. 182 Concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Elimination of the Worst Formsof Child Labor (Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention). It obliges allratifying states “to secure the prohibition and elimination of the worstforms of child labour as a matter of urgency.”[340] TheUnited States on December 2, 1999, became one of the first states to ratifythis convention. Since then, it has become one of the most widely ratifiedlabor conventions, with 171 states parties.Prior to adoption of the convention, the US government spoke strongly in its favor, urging ILO member states to “join together and tosay there are some things we cannot and will not tolerate.”[341]In November 2009 the Obama administration affirmed that “The USGovernment remains committed to ensuring full US compliance with ILO ConventionNo. 182.”[342]Under the convention, “the worst forms of childlabour” include “work which, by its nature or the circumstances inwhich it is carried out, is likely to harm the health, safety or morals ofchildren.”[343]Exactly what constitutes such types of work is left to be determined by statesparties, in consultation with employer and worker organizations and inconsideration of international standards, particularly the ILO Worst Forms ofChild Labor Recommendation.[344]This Recommendation, adopted in 1999 in conjunction with the convention of thesame name, states that in defining the “worst forms of childlabour” and in identifying where they exist, consideration should begiven, as a minimum, to:(a) work which exposes childrento physical, emotional or sexual abuse;(b) work underground, underwater, at dangerous heights or in confinedspaces;(c) work with dangerousmachinery, equipment and tools, or which involves the manual handling ortransport of heavy loads;(d) work in an unhealthyenvironment which may, for example, expose children to hazardous substances,agents or processes, or to temperatures, noise levels, or vibrations damagingto their health;(e) work under particularly difficult conditions such aswork for long hours or during the night or work which does not allow for thepossibility of returning home each day.[345]The findings of this report show that children working inagriculture in the United States—who number in the hundreds ofthousands—face the risks outlined in subparagraphs (c) through (e). Theywork with dangerous machinery, equipment, and tools; work in an unhealthyenvironment, including exposure to hazardous substances, notably pesticides;and work for long hours, during the night, or without the possibility ofreturning home each day. In addition, the nature of farmwork places femalefarmworkers at an added risk of the dangers set out in subparagraph (a),exposure to sexual abuse.Accordingly, farmwork in the United States can run a highrisk of harming the health and safety of children, and appears in many cases tomeet the definitional requirements of the “worst forms of childlabor.” As a state party to  the Worst Forms of Child LaborConvention, the United States is obligated to take immediate and effectivesteps to ascertain what forms and conditions of child labor in agricultureviolate the convention and then eliminate them.[346]The convention further calls on member states to:prevent children from engaging in the worst forms of child labor; provide directassistance for the removal of children already engaged in the worst forms ofchild labor; identify and reach out to children at risk; and take account ofthe special situation of girls.[347]Far from acknowledging the danger of farmwork to childrenand taking these appropriate steps, the United States by law permits childrento engage in agricultural labor with fewer restrictions than children workingin other areas. This includes permitting children to engage in hazardousagricultural work.The US government, in response to the ILO Committee ofExperts 2008 observations on the Application of Conventions andRecommendations, acknowledged in 2009 that the FLSA allows children ages 16 and17 “to perform all work,” and that it excludes certain farmworkerchildren from minimum age provisions and hours of work limitations.[348]The government noted that “[t]here are currently no separate health andsafety standards under federal law for child farm workers ages 16 or 17engaging in hazardous work,” and that it “has no special trainingor instructional requirements at the federal level specifically for 16- and17-year-old agricultural workers engaged in hazardous labor.”The ILO’s Committee of Experts in 2010 strongly criticizedchildren’s involvement in hazardous agricultural work. It urged the US government “to take immediate and effective measures to comply” with theconvention “to prohibit children under 18 years of age from engaging inhazardous and dangerous work in agriculture.”[349]The Committee of Experts requested the government to follow-up on NIOSH’srecommendations for changing the existing hazardous orders and adopt thoseamendments. Commenting on exemptions for farms with 10 or fewer employees, iturged the government “to ensure that the necessary monitoring mechanismsare in place so that all farms are inspected and monitored, regardless of thenumber of persons they employ.”[350]Convention on theRights of the ChildThe United States has signed but not ratified the Conventionon the Rights of the Child (CRC).[351] As asignatory to the CRC, the United States is obliged to refrain from acts that woulddefeat the treaty’s object and purpose.[352]The CRC sets out the minimum protections to which children—defined as personsunder age 18—are entitled.In additional to CRC protections relating to health and education, article 32of the CRC is of particularly relevance to farmworker children. It providesspecifically that children have a right “to be protected from economicexploitation and from performing any work that is likely to be hazardous or tointerfere with the child's education, or to be harmful to the child's health orphysical, mental, spiritual, moral or social development.” The article requiresgovernments to take appropriate legislative, administrative, social andeducational measures in this regard, and especially to provide for a minimumage of employment, appropriate regulation of work hours and conditions ofemployment, and appropriate sanctions to ensure enforcement of the article.[353]Convention on theElimination of Racial DiscriminationThe burden of weakerlabor law protections for agricultural workers compared to non-agriculturalworkers in the United States falls overwhelming on Hispanic American citizensand immigrants, and amounts to discrimination under international law.Most hired cropworkers in the United States are Hispanic: 83 percent of hired crop workers identified themselves as members of aHispanic group in 2001-2002, the most recent year for which data are available.[354]When all employed “miscellaneous agricultural workers,” includinglivestock workers, are considered, 45 percent identify as Hispanic.[355]Bycomparison, 14 percent of all US civilian workers described themselves asHispanic in 2008.[356]The term“Hispanic” generally refers to ethnicity; persons who identify asHispanic may also identify themselves as “white,”“black,” “indigenous,” or another race. No data is available on the ethnicity of childworkers compared with adults; indeed, the data exclude younger workers: NAWSdoes not count child workers under age 14; the Bureau of Labor Statistics doesnot count child workers under 16.International law binding on the UnitedStates, notably the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights(ICCPR) and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms ofRacial Discrimination (ICERD), affirms the equality of all persons before thelaw and prohibits governments from discriminating in policy or practice onethnic grounds.[357] Not all distinctions made by governments, however, constituteimpermissible discrimination. The Human Rights Committee, which monitorscompliance with the ICCPR, has observed that differentiation in treatment willnot constitute discrimination if the criteria for such differentiation“are reasonable and objective and if the aim is to achieve apurpose” that is legitimate under the ICCPR.[358]While US constitutional prohibitions focus ondiscriminatory intent,[359] the ICERD defines prohibited discrimination as any race-based distinction,exclusion, restriction or preference that has “the purpose or effect”of curtailing human rights and fundamental freedoms.[360] The specificreference to “purpose or effect” makes clear that discriminationcan exist in the absence of an intent to harm members of a particular race orethnicity.The Committee on the Elimination of RacialDiscrimination (the “Committee”), which monitors state compliancewith the ICERD, has interpreted the convention to prohibitlaws or policies that have “an unjustifiable disparate impact” onracial and ethnic minorities.[361] It has called onstates to eliminate laws or practices that may be race-neutral on their face,but that unjustifiably have significant racial disparities in their impact evenin the absence of racial animus.[362] Labor laws and policiesthat have a racially disparate impact and are not reasonably designed toachieve a legitimate state purpose violate the international human right to befree from discrimination.The Committee has twice informed the United States that ICERD prohibits discrimination in all its forms, including practices withunintentional discriminatory effect. In 2001, the Committee recommended thatthe United States take appropriate measures to review legislation and policiesto “ensure effective protections against any form of racialdiscrimination and any unjustifiably disparate impact.”[363]In 2008, the Committee again concluded that the United States should ensurethat racial discrimination is prohibited in all its forms, including laws andpractices “that may not be discriminatory in purpose, but in effect.”It stated that “indirect—or de facto—discrimination occurswhere an apparently neutral provision, criterion or practice would put personsof a particular racial, ethnic or national origin at a disadvantage comparedwith other persons, unless that provision, criterion or practice is objectivelyjustified by a legitimate aim and the means of achieving that aim areappropriate and necessary.” The committee called on the government“to take all appropriate measures” to review existing laws policiesto “ensure the effective protection against any form of racialdiscrimination and any unjustifiable disparate impact.”[364]XI. DetailedRecommendationsTo the United States CongressAmend the Fair Labor StandardsAct (FLSA) to:apply the same age and hour requirements to children working forhire in agriculture as already apply to all other working children: prohibitthe employment of children age 13 and younger; limit the number of hours thatchildren ages 14 and 15 can legally work to 3 hours a day on a school day and 18hours a week during a school week; 8 hours a day on a nonschool day and 40hours a week when school is not in session; and prohibit before-school work by childrenage 15 and younger;raise the minimum age for particularly hazardous work inagriculture to 18, in line with existing standards in all other industries;increase civil money and criminal penalties to improve compliancewith the child labor provisions;incorporate the Environmental Protection Agency’s WorkerProtection Standard, 40 C.F.R. Part 170, into the child labor regulations,thereby protecting children working in agriculture not only from pesticideswith acute effects (such as nausea, skin rashes, and dizziness), but also fromthose with chronic or long-term effects (such as cancer and interference withsexual reproduction);require agricultural employers to report work-related deaths,serious injuries, and serious illnesses to the US Department of Labor in orderto collect and publish better statistics than are currently available aboutsuch incidents; andrequire the USDepartment of Labor to submit to Congress an annual report on work-relateddeaths, injuries, and illnesses of children working in agriculture, includingan evaluation of the data that highlights, among other things, safety andhealth hazards and the extent and nature of child labor violations.Halt the yearly approval of a specialprovision in the Department of Labor appropriations act that exempts almostall farms with 10 or fewer employees from the jurisdiction of theOccupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA).Provide sufficient support toprograms, such as those administered by the Department ofEducation’s Office of Migrant Education, to remove barriers to theschool enrollment, attendance, and achievement of child farmworkers andensure that child farmworkers have access to and benefit from the sameappropriate public education, including public preschool education,provided to other children.Require the Department ofEducation’s Office of Migrant Education to collect and analyze statedata on school completion rates for all child farmworkers and to reportnational and state results annually.Repeal programs that require local police to enforceimmigration laws so that undocumented children are able to report abusewithout fear of deportation for themselves or their family members.To the United StatesDepartment of LaborDramatically increase, throughthe Wage and Hour Division, the number of child labor and minimum wageinvestigations in agriculture, the most dangerous industry in whichchildren are allowed to work.Improve compliance with existinglabor law by seeking higher civil money and criminal penalties inaccordance with the law. In particular, amend the civil penaltyregulations to reflect amendments made by a rider to the GeneticInformation Non-discrimination Act (“GINA”) in 2008 that raisethe $11,000 maximum penalty to $50,000 where the violation of a childlabor provision results in death or serious injury, and where the higherpenalty is doubled to $100,000 in the case of a repeat or willfulviolation. Make the department’s civil money penalty regulations (29C.F.R. Part 579) more precise in order to assure that it imposes higherpenalties, and that these higher penalties are upheld in litigation.Appropriatelyuse the Fair Labor Standards Act's “hot goods” provision,which prohibits the interstate movement of goods produced in violation ofchild labor or minimum wage laws, where the traditional course ofcitations and relatively insignificant civil money penalties would havelittle deterrent effect.Propose and press formuch-needed amendments to the list of jobs in  agriculture thatdeemed to be “particularly hazardous” for children, asrecommended by the Centers for Disease Control’s National Institutefor Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) in 2002.Vigorously enforce OSHA FieldSanitation Standard, which require employers to provide workers withdrinking water, toilets, and handwashing facilitiesRequest the National Agricultural Workers Survey (NAWS) toexpand its surveys to collect information about child workers under, aswell as over, age 14. Explore methods of counting working children that donot rely on reports from growers and adult farmworkers who may underreportthe numbers of working children.To Occupational Safetyand Health Administration (OSHA)Conduct targetedinvestigations in agriculture rather than responding only to writtencomplaints.Continue and accelerate monitoring of “stateplans” and require that all states enforcing OSHA-approved plans doso effectively, including frequent unannounced inspections.To the EnvironmentalProtection Agency (EPA)Amend the Worker ProtectionStandard to impose a minimum age of 18 for all pesticide handlers.Revise the restricted-entryintervals (REIs), which prohibit entry into an area treated by pesticidesfor a specified period of time following the application of thechemicals.  Distinguish between adults and children, and impose more stringentREIs for children. Incorporate an additional safety margin on top ofwhat is determined necessary to ensure short and long-term safety, andtake into account the combined effect of both occupational andnon-occupational exposures.Closely monitor states'enforcement of the Worker Protection Standard and related pesticideregulations to ensure that such enforcement is vigorous and meaningful.Further expand the program toeducate workers regarding the Worker Protection Standard, and ensure thatmaterials used are culturally, age, and language appropriate.Ensure that state agencies responsible for enforcement ofEPA regulations are staffed by a sufficient number of trained, bilingual(Spanish and English) compliance officers.To the United StatesDepartment of EducationConduct a study, with leadership from the Office onMigrant Education, to establish accurate data on school drop-out rates forall child farmworkers. To All StatesEnsure that state child laborlaws are at least as protective as federal standards.Set or raise the minimum agefor agricultural work to at least 14, with theexception of children working on farms owned and operated by theirparents.Amend workers’ compensationlaws to ensure coverage for farmworkers equal to that of other workers.Provide training and a strong mandate to law enforcementto better respond to cases of sexual violence against farmworker girls andwomen.AcknowledgmentsThis report was researched and written by Zama Coursen-Neff,deputy director of the Children’s Rights Division of Human Rights Watch.The report was edited by Jo Becker, advocacy director of the Children’sRights Division. Lance Compa, Andrew Mawson, Alison Parker, James Ross, RebeccaSchleifer, Janet Walsh, and Lois Whitman also reviewed and commented on thereport. Alison Parker contributed to the material relating to immigration. ZoeHutchison, Kyle Knight, Heather Renwick, and Andrew Strong provided researchassistance.Kyle Knight, associate in the Children's Rights Divisionprovided editing and production assistance. Anna Lopriore, creative manager; GraceChoi, publications director; and Fitzroy Hepkins, mail manager, providedproduction assistance.Thomas A. Arcury, Center for Worker Health, Wake ForestUniversity School of Medicine; Mónica Ramírez, Southern PovertyLaw Center; Gregory Schell, Migrant Farmworker Justice Project, Florida LegalServices; David Strauss, Association of Farmworker Opportunity Programs; andWilliam R. Tamayo, US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, also providedexpertise and helpful comments. Human Rights Watch especially thanks JamesLeonard for his extensive expertise and advice. Human Rights Watch is solelyresponsible for the contents of this report, and any errors or omissions areours.Human Rights Watch is particularly grateful to the followingindividuals and organizations for their generous assistance: the Association ofFarmworker Opportunity Programs (AFOP), Irene Favila, Esperanza Gamboa andstaff of the WIA Youth Program at Manatee Technical Institute, Alice Larson, thestaff of Migrant Health Promotion, Melinda Wiggens and staff of Student Actionwith Farmworkers (SAF), and Josie Ellis and staff of Vecinos Inc. FarmworkerHealth Program. We also thank Paul Strauss, Acorn; Reid Maki, Child LaborCoalition; Casey Trupin and Dan Ford, Columbia Legal Services; Thomas Thornburgand staff of Farmworker Legal Services of Michigan; Carol Dansereau, FarmWorker Pesticide Project; Martha Gonzalez-Cortes, Hispanic Center of WesternMichigan; Lester Claravall, Interstate Labor Standards Association; Anna Jensen;Ingrid Lobet; Deliana Garcia and Amy Liebman, Migrant Clinicians Network; RogerRosenthal, Migrant Legal Action Program; Julia Perez; Bobbi Ryder, NationalCenter for Farmworker Health; Sally Greenberg, National Consumers League; CarolBrooke, North Carolina Justice Center; Rodolfo Sanchez, Texas Rural Legal Aid;and others who did not wish to be named. Human Rights Watch thanks officials atthe US Department of Labor, US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and theNational Institute for Occupational Safety and Health who provided informationand agreed to be interviewed for this report.Human Rights Watch also thanks Robin Romano, filmmaker, and LeeTucker, the author of the organization’s 2000 report on childfarmworkers, Fingers to the Bone: United States Failure to Protect ChildFarmworkers.Most of all, we thank the many children and young people whospoke with us, recounting their experiences in the fields of the United States.With them this report would not have been possible.[1]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Maria M. (not a pseudonym), age 19,Idaho, September 13, 2009.[2]Human Rights Watch interview Marcos S. (not his realname), age 17, Jackson County, North Carolina, August 4, 2009.[3]For more information about abuses suffered by guest workers,see Southern Poverty Law Center, “Close to Slavery: Guestworker Programsin the United States,” March 2007,http://www.splcenter.org/sites/default/files/downloads/Close_to_Slavery.pdf(accessed April 7, 2010); and Patricia Medige, “Perspectives on the BushAdministration’s New Immigrant Guestworker Proposal: Immigrant LaborIssues,” Denver Journal of International Law and Policy, vol. 32 (2004),p. 739. Less than 5 percent of all hired farmworkers are hired through theprogram. William Kandel, US Department of Agriculture (USDA) Economic ResearchService, “Profile of Hired Farmworkers, A 2008 Update,” July 2008, http://www.ers.usda.gov/Publications/ERR60/ERR60.pdf(accessed April 8, 2010), p. 14.[4]The government estimates that approximately 2.3 millionadolescents ages 15 to 17 worked in all kinds of jobs (including agriculture)in the U.S. in 2008, but this estimate excludes children under age 14 who canwork only in agriculture. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health(NIOSH), Centers for Disease Control, “Young Worker Safety andHealth,” January 13, 2010, http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/youth/(accessed April 3, 2010).[5]Emails from John Myers, Health Statistician, NIOSH, toHuman Rights Watch, April 5 and 7, 2010 (citing 2007 Census of Agriculture fortotal agricultural workers and NIOSH 2006 research on children directly hiredby farm operators). These numbers, which are based on telephone reports fromthe farmers themselves, include adults and children working in both crops andlivestock. See US Department of Agriculture, “2007 Census of Agriculture,”2009, table 7, p. 336, and appendix B, p. B-13.By comparison, the US Department of Labor’sNational Agricultural Workers Survey (NAWS), which does not count workingchildren under age 14, found that 3 percent of hired crop workers were ages 14-17in 2005-2006. US Department of Labor, “The National Agricultural WorkersSurvey: Public Access Data,” http://www.doleta.gov/agworker/naws.cfm(accessed April 27, 2010).[6]Emails from Myers, April 5 and 7, 2010.[7]Ibid.[8]US Department of Labor, “The NationalAgricultural Workers Survey: Public Access Data,” http://www.doleta.gov/agworker/naws.cfm(accessed April 27, 2010) (data from 2005-2006). Farmlabor contractors are central to the structure of agricultural production inthe United States. Farm labor contractors range in size from singleindividuals to large corporations. Under contract to a grower or farmer, a farmlabor contractor typically is responsible for hiring and overseeing the workersand ensuring that the work—planting, pruning, weeding,harvesting—is completed satisfactorily. Farm labor contractorsusually are paid a lump sum by the growers, which they then use to secure laboras needed and in turn charge hired farmworkers in exchange for arrangingemployment, further reducing their pay. Kandel, “Profile of HiredFarmworkers, A 2008 Update,” p. 22 (see also p. 25). Wherea farm labor contractor is used, the grower may have no direct contact with theworkers. Either the employer or the farm labor contractor might set the rate atwhich wages will be paid, but it is the farm labor contractor who recruits andcontracts with the workers, pays the wages, makes payroll deductions, and oftentransports the workers to the work site each day (often for a fee).[9]Email from Kitty J. Hendricks, Division of Safety Research, NIOSH, to HumanRights Watch, April 12, 2010.[10]According to data from the US Census Bureau Current Population Survey, almosthalf of all hired farmworkers live in just five states: California, Texas, North Carolina, Washington, and Oregon. USDA Economic Research Service, “RuralLabor and Education: Farm Labor,” March 31, 2008, http://www.ers.usda.gov/Briefing/LaborAndEducation/FarmLabor.htm(accessed April 3, 2010).[11]Ibid. (citing data from NAWS through 2006). “Migrating hired farmworkersexhibit different demographic and employment profiles from settled farmworkers:they are younger, more likely to be male, and more often Hispanic.” Ibid.[12]Kandel, “Profile of Hired Farmworkers, A 2008Update,” p. iv.[13]US Department of Labor, “The NationalAgricultural Workers Survey: Public Access Data,” http://www.doleta.gov/agworker/naws.cfm(accessed April 27, 2010). Twenty-eight percent said that they orsomeone in their household had used at least one type of public assistanceprogram in the previous two years (most commonly Medicaid (23 percent), WomenInfants and Children (13 percent) and food stamps (6 percent)) but less than 1percent reported that they or someone in their family had received generalassistance welfare or temporary assistance to needy families (TANF). Ibid.[14]Kandel, “Profile of Hired Farmworkers, A 2008 Update,” pp. 20-21.Median weekly earnings for crop farmworkers in 2006 were $350/week, comparedwith $425/week for livestock farmworkers, $420/week for janitors, and $360/weekfor maids. Ibid.[15]Human Rights Watch interview with program director, Bradenton, Florida, March 20, 2009.[16]The numbers of new arrivals to the US from Mexico dropped from 653,000 betweenMarch 2004 and March 2005 to just 175,000 between March 2008 and March 2009,the lowest total in the decade. Migration Policy Institute, “Migrationand the Global Recession:A Report Commissioned by the BBC WorldService,” September 2009, http://www.migrationpolicy.org/pubs/MPI-BBCreport-Sept09.pdf(accessed April 14, 2010) p. 19 (citing US population survey data). However,according to the Migration Policy Institute, “the recent steep slowdownin the flows from Mexico is largely driven by unauthorized Mexican migrantsstaying home, primarily in response to limited economic prospects in the United States . . . [and] the flow of legal immigrants from Mexico has not changed.” Ibid.(emphasis in original).[17]Human Rights Watch interview with Olivia A. (not her real name), age 14, Plant City,Florida, March 21, 2009.[18]Human Rights Watch interview with James A. (not his real name), age 15, Plant City,Florida, March 21, 2009.[19]29 U.S.C. sec. 213.[20]A "small farm" is one which did not employ more than 500 man-days ofagricultural labor during any calendar quarter of the preceding year. 29 U.S.C.sec. 213(a). Five hundred man-days would typically be reached by sevenemployees working six days a week during a calendar quarter. Human RightsWatch, Fingers to the Bone (New York: Human Rights Watch, June 2000), http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2000/06/02/fingers-bone-0,p. 38 note 113.[21]Human Rights Watch interview with Marta V. (not her real name), age 13, Plainview, Texas, July 21, 2009.[22]Human Rights Watch interview with Julia N. (not herreal name), age 18, Benson, North Carolina, August 5, 2009. Unlike federal law,California state law sets 12 as the minimum age to work and requiresemployers to obtain work permits before employing minors under age 18.[23]Human Rights Watch interview with Martin P. (not his real name), age 12, Plainview, Texas, July 21, 2009.[24]Human Rights Watch interview with Andrea C. (not her real name), age 17,Saline, Michigan, August 24, 2009.[25]Human Rights Watch interview with Martin P., age 12, Plainview, Texas, July 21, 2009.[26]Human Rights Watch interview with Lucas F. (not his real name), age 17, Walkerville, Michigan, August 26, 2009.[27]Human Rights Watch interview with Hector H. (not his real name), age 18, Plainview, Texas, July 20, 2009.[28]Human Rights Watch interview with Mauricio V. (not his real name), age 19, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, August 6, 2009.[29]Bob Luder, “Department of Labor Levies Fines for Child LaborViolations,” The Packer, October 30, 2009, http://thepacker.com/Department-of-Labor-levies-fines-for-child-labor-violations/Article.aspx?oid=930942&aid=342&fid=PACKER-TOP-STORIES (accessed April 22, 2010).[30]Human Rights Watch interview with Luz A. (not her real name), age 18, Plant City,Florida, March 21, 2009.[31]Human Rights Watch interview with Andrea C., age 17, Saline, Michigan, August24, 2009.[32]Human Rights Watch interview with Ana Z. (not her real name), age 15, Plainview, Texas, July 21, 2009.[33]Human Rights Watch interview with Rosa M. (not her real name), Plainview, Texas,July 21, 2009.[34]Human Rights Watch interview with Jose M., age 17, Saline, Michigan, August 24,2009.[35]For example, Human Rights Watch interview with mother and health outreachworker, Jackson County, North Carolina, August 4, 2009.[36]Human Rights Watch interview with mother and former child farmworker, Bradenton, Florida, March 20, 2009.[37]Human Rights Watch group interview with mother, 10-year-old son, and11-year-old daughter, Plainview, Texas, July 20, 2009.[38]Human Rights Watch interview with James A., age 15, Plant City, Florida, March 21, 2009.[39]Human Rights Watch interview with Olivia A., age 14, Plant City, Florida, March 21, 2009.[40]Human Rights Watch interview with Sam B. (not his real name), age 17, Plainview, Texas, July 21, 2009.[41]Human Rights Watch interview with Felipe D. (not his real name), age 15, Goldsboro, North Carolina, August 6, 2009.[42]Human Rights Watch interview with Luz A., age 18, Plant City, Florida, March21, 2009.[43]Human Rights Watch interview with Elisabeth S. (not her real name), age 19, Durham, North Carolina, August 3, 2009.[44]Human Rights Watch interview with Marta V., age 13, Plainview, Texas, July 21, 2009.[45]Human Rights Watch interview with James A., age 15, Plant City, Florida, March 21, 2009.[46] 29 C.F.R. sec. 570.35.[47]Human Rights Watch interview with Sam B., age 17, Plainview, Texas, July 21,2009. A wage of $300 for 55 hours a week would constitute $5.45 an hour; $200for 55 hours would be $3.64 an hour. Compared with the federal minimum wage atthe time of $6.55 an hour, Sa, earned $60.50 to $160.05 a week less than heshould have for those hours of work.[48]Human Rights Watch interview with Antonio M. (not his real name), age 12, andhis mother, Goldsboro, North Carolina, August 6, 2009.[49]Human Rights Watch interview with Olivia A., age 14, Plant City, Florida, March 21, 2009.[50]Human Rights Watch interview with James A., age 15, Plant City, Florida, March 21, 2009.[51]Human Rights Watch interview with mother and health outreach worker, JacksonCounty, North Carolina, August 4, 2009.[52]Employers are exempt from minimum wage requirements if they did not utilizemore than 500 “man days” of agricultural labor in any calendarquarter of the preceding calendar year, with a “man day” defined asany day during which an employee performs agricultural work for at least onehour. Employees are not entitled to minimum wage if:·they are immediate family members of their employer;·they are principally engaged in the production of livestock;·they are local hand harvest laborers who commute daily from theirpermanent residence, are paid on a piece rate basis in traditionallypiece-rated occupations, and worked in agriculture less than 13 weeks duringthe preceding calendar year; or·they are non-local children 16 years or younger who are handharvesters, paid on a piece rate in traditionally piece-rated occupations,employed on the same farm as their parent, and are paid the same piece rate asthose over 16.29 C.F.R. sec. 780.300.In addition, employers may pay youth under age 20 alower minimum wage during the first 90 consecutive calendar days after theirinitial employment.[53]Human Rights Watch interview with farm operator, Michigan, August 28, 2009.[54]29 U.S.C. sec. 213(b)(12).[55]29 U.S.C. sec. 152. As a result, agricultural workers can be fired for joininga labor union or engaging in collective action against an employer, and have noway of joining together to compel an employer to negotiate wages paid, hoursworked, and other conditions of employment.[56]The connection between the failure to enforce minimum wage laws for adults andchild labor was highlighted by attorneys who advocate on behalf of farmworkers.See, for example, Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Thomas Thornburg,managing attorney, and staff of Farmworker Legal Services of Michigan, Bangor,Michigan, July 20, 2009.[57]According to NAWS, cropworkers were paid an average of $8.09 an hour in 2005-2006. US Department ofLabor, “The National Agricultural Workers Survey: Public Access Data,”http://www.doleta.gov/agworker/naws.cfm (accessed April 27, 2010). The USDepartment of Agriculture reported that the median wage for nonsupervisoryhired farm labor in 2006 was $6.75 per hour, “among the lowest wages paidfor a typical unskilled occupation.”USDA Economic ResearchService, “Rural Labor and Education: Farm Labor” (using informationfrom the USDA, the National Agricultural Statistics Service, and the Farm LaborSurvey).[58]For example, if a harvester is shown as having worked only 40 hours with agross wage of $290 in the week, that indicates an hourly wage of $7.25, thecurrent minimum wage. But if the harvester actually worked 60 hours a week, hewas paid only $4.83 an hour, far below the minimum wage.[59]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Gregory Schell, managing attorney,Florida Legal Services Migrant Farmworker Justice Project, Florida, February 2,2009.[60]Farmworkers in the fields many have to interrupt their work because of rain ora cold snap, but if they are required to wait in the fields until the weatherimproves, this time is ordinarily considered to be compensable, because theemployer, as courts have ruled, has “usurped” the workers’time. Adding this forced downtime to other hours of productive work can resultin minimum wage violations if the employer fails to pay for it. A similarunpaid time situation can occur when workers are required to be in the fieldsat a specific time, only to be told that the temperature, humidity, and otherfactors are not yet right for harvesting crops. For example, 16-year-old DianaG. described a recent experience of getting up at 3 a.m., traveling an hour anda half to the fields, and upon arrival being told to wait 30 minutes to startworking. In fact, she was not allowed to start working until much later, at 10a.m., and at 3 p.m., she said “they said we had to go because it’stoo hot and will make the blueberries soggy.” She was not paid for thetime she spent waiting to work although she was obligated to be there. Human RightsWatch interview with Diana G. (not her real name), age 16, Goldsboro, North Carolina, August 6, 2009.[61]Crop workers were employed on US farms in 2005-2006 anaverage of 34.5 weeks (65 percent of the year) and in non-farm activities for alittle more than 3 weeks (6 percent of the year); 12 percent of hired cropworkers also held a non-farm job at some point during the year. US Departmentof Labor, “The National Agricultural Workers Survey: Public Access Data,”http://www.doleta.gov/agworker/naws.cfm (accessed April 27, 2010).[62]Human Rights Watch interview with Walter R. (not his real name), age 17, andhis parents, Goldsboro, North Carolina, August 6, 2009.[63]Ibid.[64]Human Rights Watch interview Marcos S., age 17, JacksonCounty, North Carolina, August 4, 2009.[65]Human Rights Watch interview with paralegal, Immokalee, Florida, March 24,2009.[66]Email from Schell, Florida Legal Services Migrant Farmworker Justice Project,April 7, 2010.[67]Southern Poverty Law Center, “Under Siege: Life for Low-Income Latinos inthe South,”April 2009, www.splcenter.org/undersiege (accessedMarch 20, 2010), p. 6. The workers surveyed were employed in agriculture andother sectors. As noted above, in this report, the terms “Hispanic”and “Latino” are used according to the term employed in the surveyreferenced.[68]See, for example, Human Rights Watch interviews with Felipe D., age 15, withWalter R. and his parents, and with Diana G., age 16, Goldsboro, North Carolina, August 6, 2009.[69]In contrast with Human Rights Watch’s interviews, NAWS reported that mostemployers covered the cost of using tools or equipment in 2005-2006. US Department of Labor, “The National AgriculturalWorkers Survey: Public Access Documentation,” http://www.doleta.gov/agworker/naws.cfm(accessed April 27, 2010).[70]Human Rights Watch interview with Elisabeth S., age 19, Durham, North Carolina, August 3, 2009.[71]See 29 C.F.R. sec. 531.3 (d)(1), (2).[72]See Arriaga v.Florida-Pacific Farms, 305 F.3d 1228 (11th Cir. 2002); and  Riverav. Brickman Group, 2008 WL 81570 (E.D. Pa. 2008).[73]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Josie Ellis, registered nurse anddirector of Vecinos Inc. Farmworker Health Program, Sylva, North Carolina, July27, 2009.[74]Human Rights Watch interview with Diana G., age 16, Goldsboro, North Carolina, August 6, 2009.[75]Human Rights Watch interview with paralegal, Immokalee, Florida, March 24,2009.[76]See, for example, John J. May, “Occupational Injury and Illness inFarmworkers in the Eastern United States,” Latino Farmworkers in theEastern United States: Health, Safety, and Justice, Thomas A. Arcury andSara A. Quandt, eds. (New York: Springer, 2009), p. 72.[77]Human Rights Watch interview with Luz A., age 18, Plant City, Florida, March21, 2009.[78]Human Rights Watch interview with farm office manager, Michigan, August 27,2009.[79]Human Rights Watch interview with father of working children, Plainview, Texas, July 20, 2009.[80]Email from Schell, Florida Legal Services Migrant Farmworker Justice Project,April 7, 2010.[81]In 2005-2006, 84 percent of crop workers reported being paid by the hour, 9percent by the piece, 2 percent by a combination of hourly and piece rate pay,and 2 percent by salary. US Department of Labor,“The National Agricultural Workers Survey: Public Access Documentation,”http://www.doleta.gov/agworker/naws.cfm (accessed April 27, 2010).[82]Human Rights Watch interview with Julia N., age 18, Benson, North Carolina, August 5, 2009.[83]US Department of Labor, “The NationalAgricultural Workers Survey: Public Access Documentation,” http://www.doleta.gov/agworker/naws.cfm(accessed April 27, 2010).[84]Thomas D. Snyder, National Center for Education Statistics, Institute ofEducation Sciences, US Department of Education, “Mini-Digest of EducationStatistics 2009,” April 2010, http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2010/2010014.pdf(accessed April 27, 2010), p. 35.[85]California Department of Education, “California Migrant EducationProgram: Comprehensive Needs Assessment, Initial Report of Findings,”2007, http://www.cde.ca.gov/sp/me/mt/documents/cnareport.pdf(accessed April 8, 2010), p. 2. Anecdotally, a migrant education staff memberat Immokalee High School, where many students are from farmworker families,told us that 400 to 450 students enter the eighth grade every year and“by the time they graduate it’s 200 to 250. So about half drop outor move out of the area.” Human Rights Watch interview with migranteducation staff member, Immokalee, Florida, March 25, 2009.[86]Human Rights Watch interview with Ana Z., age 15, Plainview, Texas, July 21,2009.[87]Human Rights Watch interview with Olivia A., age 14, Plant City, Florida, March 21, 2009.[88]Human Rights Watch interview with Jose M., age 17, Saline, Michigan, August 24,2009.[89]Human Rights Watch interview with Luz A., age 18, Plant City, Florida, March21, 2009.[90]David Bell, “The National’s Invisible Families: Living in theStream,” Rural Educator, vol. 15, no. 3 (Spring 1994), pp.27-30.[91]Michael Romanowski, “Meeting the Unique Needs of the Children of MigrantWorkers,” The Clearing House: A Journal of Educational Strategies,Issues and Ideas, v. 77, no. 1 (October 2003), pp. 27-22.[92]Human Rights Watch interview with Emily D. (not her real name), age 16, centralFlorida, March 22, 2009.[93]Human Rights Watch interview with migrant education staff member, Immokalee, Florida, March 25, 2009.[94]Human Rights Watch interview with Andrea C., age 17, Saline, Michigan, August24, 2009.[95]Human Rights Watch interview with Jaime D. (not his real name), age 20, Bradenton, Florida, March 20, 2009.[96]Cooper et al, “Comparative Description of MigrantFarmworkers Versus Other Students Attending Rural South Texas Schools:Demographic, Academic, and Health Characteristics,” Texas Medicine,vol. 101 (2005), pp. 58-62; Cooper et al, “Comparative Description ofMigrant Farmworkers Versus Other Students Attending Rural South Texas Schools:Substance Use, Work, and Injuries,” Journal of Rural Health, vol.21 (2005), pp. 361-366.[97]Human Rights Watch group interview with 12- and 14-year-old girls, Plainview, Texas, July 20, 2009.[98]Human Rights Watch group interview with 15-year-old girl, 10-year old boy, and9-year-old girl, central Florida, March 22, 2009.[99]Human Rights Watch interview with Elena R., age 15, central Florida, March 22,2009.[100]Human Rights Watch interview with Luz A., age 18, Plant City, Florida, March21, 2009.[101]Human Rights Watch group interview with Blanca S. (not her real name), age 14,and her two friends, Immokalee, Florida, March 25, 2009.[102]Human Rights Watch interview with Walter R., age 17, Goldsboro, North Carolina, August 6, 2009.[103]Department of Education Office of Migrant Education website, undated, http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/oese/ome/programs.html(accessed April 7, 2010).[104]Association of Farmworker Opportunity Programs, “Children in the Fields:An American Problem,” May 2007, http://www.afop.org/CIF%20Report.pdf (accessedApril 14, 2010) (citing information provided to AFOP by the US Department ofEducation, Office of Migrant Education, February 2007), p. 19, note 76.[105]NIOSH bases this statement on the fatality rate of workers between 1992 and2000. NIOSH, “NIOSH Alert: Preventing Deaths, Injuries and Illnesses ofYoung Workers,” no. 2003-128, July 2003, p. 4.[106]Bureau of Labor Statistics, US Department ofLabor, “Fatal occupational injuries, total hours worked, and rates offatal occupational injuries by selected worker characteristics, occupations,and industries, civilian workers, 2008,”http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/cfoi/cfoi_rates_2008hb.pdf(accessed April 4, 2010). The fatality rate for all civilian workers in 2008was 3.7; for “crop production” it was 32.5.[107]Email from Sean Smith, Bureau of Labor Statistics, US Department of Labor, toHuman Rights Watch, March 31, 2010 (citing preliminary data); Bureau of LaborStatistics, US Department of Labor, “2008 National Census of FatalOccupational Injuries Preliminary Data,” http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/cfoi/cftb0239.pdf(accessed April 21, 2010); Bureau of Labor Statistics, US Department of Labor,“2007 National Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries PreliminaryData,” http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/cfoi/cftb0230.pdf (accessed April 21,2010); Bureau of Labor Statistics, US Department of Labor, “2006 NationalCensus of Fatal Occupational Injuries Preliminary Data,”http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/cfoi/cftb0221.pdf (accessed April 21, 2010);Bureau of Labor Statistics, US Department of Labor, “2005 National Censusof Fatal Occupational Injuries Preliminary Data,”http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/cfoi/cftb0212.pdf  (accessed April 21, 2010).In total, 304 children and adults died from work-related injuries in cropproduction, and 34 children under age 18 died from injuries related to work inall sectors in 2008. Email from Sean Smith, Bureau of Labor Statistics, USDepartment of Labor, to Human Rights Watch, March 31, 2010 (citing preliminarydata). Although Human Rights Watch could not obtain information about how manyof the children who died in crop production during this time period were underage 14, by comparison, from 1998 to 2002, 9 of the 65 children under 18 diedwhile working in crop production were under age 14. Notably, agriculture is theonly sector in which work-related deaths were recorded for children under age14 during this time period. Janice Windau and Samuel Meyer, Bureau of LaborStatistics, US Department of Labor, “Occupational injuries among youngworkers,” Monthly Labor Review, October 2005, p. 17, http://www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/2005/10/art2full.pdf(accessed April 4, 2010).[108]US Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics,“Report on the youth labor force,” November 2000, p. 58, http://www.bls.gov/opub/rylf/pdf/rylf2000.pdf(accessed April 4, 2010).[109]May, “Occupational Injury and Illness in Farmworkers in the EasternUnited States,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern United States, Arcuryand Quandt, eds., pp. 80-87.[110]Ibid., pp. 71-72.[111]Human Rights Watch interview with a community health worker, central Florida, March 23, 2009.[112]NIOSH, “Young Worker Safety and Health.”[113]NIOSH, “NIOSH Alert: Preventing Deaths, Injuries and Illnesses of YoungWorkers,” pp. 1-2.[114]See, for example, Sara A. Quandt, “Health of Children and Women in theFarmworker Community in the Eastern United States,” Latino Farmworkersin the Eastern United States, Arcury and Quandt, eds., pp. 173-200.[115]29 C.F.R. sec. 570.72.[116]NIOSH, “Agricultural Safety,” January 5, 2010, http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/aginjury/(accessed January 27, 2010).[117]Human Rights Watch interview with Mike V. (not his real name), age 16, Plainview, Texas, July 20, 2009.[118]Human Rights Watch interview with Jose M., age 17, Saline, Michigan, August 24,2009.[119]Ibid.[120]“Teen grove worker hit by truck dies,” OrlandoSentinel, December 30, 2007, p. B3.[121]Rick Rousos, “Citrus Grove Accident Torments Family,” TheLedger, January 12, 2007, p. A1.[122]“12-Year-Old Farm Boy Dies While Hitching Up HayWagon,” NIOSH Fatality Assessment and Control Evaluation (FACE) Program,Iowa FACE, no. 04IA017, June 19, 2005, http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/face/stateface/ia/04ia017.html(accessed March 28, 2010). The investigative report noted that a “lessexperienced 12-year-old boy” might not have known techniques that“[e]xperienced farmers in this situation” might have employed toprevent the accident. Ibid.[123]“Youth Farm Worker Dies After Falling IntoOperating Feed Grinder/Mixer – Ohio,” NIOSH Fatality Assessment andControl Evaluation (FACE) Program, NIOSH In-house FACE Report 2002-10, November20, 2003, http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/face/In-house/full200210.html(accessed March 28, 2010).[124]29 C.F.R. sec. 570.71(a)(3).[125]29 C.F.R. sec. 570.71(a)(3).[126]Human Rights Watch interview with Robert L. (not his real name), age 16,Saline, Michigan, August 24, 2009.[127]Human Rights Watch interview with Andrea C., age 17, Saline, Michigan, August24, 2009.[128]Human Rights Watch interview with Hector H., age 18, Plainview, Texas, July 20, 2009.[129]Human Rights Watch interview with Lucas F., age 17, Walkerville, Michigan, August 26, 2009.[130]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Maria M., age 19, Idaho, September13, 2009.[131]Human Rights Watch interview Marcos S., age 17, JacksonCounty, North Carolina, August 4, 2009.[132]May, “Occupational Injury and Illness in Farmworkers in the EasternUnited States,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern United States,Arcury and Quandt, eds., pp. 88-89.[133]Human Rights Watch interview with Tony P. (not his real name), age 19, Durham, North Carolina, August 6, 2009.[134]Human Rights Watch interview with Andrés F. (nothis real name), age 17, Benson, North Carolina, August 5, 2009.[135]29 C.F.R. sec. 570.71(a)(3).[136]Human Rights Watch interview with Raul L. (not his real name), age 21, Durham, North Carolina, August 6, 2009.[137]Human Rights Watch interview with Julia N., age 18,Benson, North Carolina, August 5, 2009.[138]Human Rights Watch interview with Pedro E. (not his real name), age 15, Immokalee, Florida, March 25, 2009.[139]NIOSH, “NIOSH Alert: Preventing Deaths, Injuries and Illnesses of YoungWorkers,”pp. 1-2.[140]Human Rights Watch interview with Luz A., age 18, Plant City, Florida, March21, 2009.[141]Human Rights Watch interview with Lucas F., age 17, Walkerville, Michigan, August 26, 2009.[142]Human Rights Watch interview with Raul L., age 21, Durham, North Carolina,August 6, 2009.[143]May, “Occupational Injury and Illness in Farmworkers in the Eastern UnitedStates,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern United States, Arcuryand Quandt, eds., p. 78.[144]Bureau of Labor Statistics, US Department of Labor, “TABLE R1. Number of nonfatal occupational injuries and illnesses involving days away from work(1) by industry and selected natures of injury or illness, 2006,” November 8, 2007, http://stats.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/osh/case/ostb1793.txt (accessed April 15, 2010).[145]May, “Occupational Injury and Illness in Farmworkers in the EasternUnited States,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern United States, Arcuryand Quandt, eds., pp. 78.[146]Human Rights Watch interview with Matthew T. Standridge,family medicine physician and medical director of Vecinos Inc. FarmworkerHealth Program, Sylva, North Carolina, August 4, 2009.[147]May, “Occupational Injury and Illness in Farmworkers in the EasternUnited States,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern United States, Arcuryand Quandt, eds., p. 78.[148]Human Rights Watch interviewwith Mary J., age 15, Goldsboro, North Carolina, August 6, 2009.[149]“The use of piece-rate pay strategies encourages inappropriate haste andshortcuts and may well heighten injury risk.” Ibid., p. 90.[150]Human Rights Watch interview with Jose M., age 17, Saline, Michigan, August 24,2009.[151]Human Rights Watch interview with Elisabeth S., age 19, Durham, North Carolina, August 3, 2009.[152]Human Rights Watch group interview with 15-year-old girl, 10-year old boy, and9-year-old girl, central Florida, March 22, 2009.[153]Human Rights Watch interview with Jose M., age 17, Saline, Michigan, August 24,2009.[154]Thomas A. Arcury and Sara A. Quandt, “Pesticide Exposure AmongFarmworkers and Their Families,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern United States, Arcury and Quandt, eds., p. 104.[155]These include organophosphorus and organochlorine pesticides. Most workers noware exposed to nonpersistent pesticides, which are metabolized in the bodywithin a few days, compared with older pesticides which remain in the body andenvironment for a long time. Ibid., pp. 104, 122.[156]Ibid., p. 104.[157]Ibid., pp. 104-106. Farmworkers and their family members, including children,are also exposed in their homes, which may be contaminated through years ofdrift, accumulated pesticides brought in through contaminated clothing andcontainers, and application in the homes, particularly in dilapidated,pest-infested housing. Ibid., and see, for example, Quirina M. Vallejos, SaraA. Quandt, and Thomas A. Arcury, “The Condition of Farmworker Housing inthe Eastern United States,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern UnitedStates, Arcury and Quandt, eds.[158]Arcury and Quandt, “Pesticide Exposure Among Farmworkers and TheirFamilies,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern United States, Arcuryand Quandt, eds., p. 120. For more information about existing research, seeibid., pp. 121-122; Thomas A. Arcury et al , “Seasonal Variation in theMeasurement of Urinary Pesticide Metabolites among Latino Farmworkers inEastern North Carolina,” International Journal of Occupational andEnvironmental Health, vol. 15 (2009), pp. 339-350; and Thomas A. Arcury etal, “Variation Across the Agricultural Season in OrganophosphorusPesticide Urinary Metabolite Levels for Latino Farmworkers in Eastern NorthCarolina: Project Design and Descriptive Results,” America Journal ofIndustrial Medicine, vol. 52 (2009), pp. 539-550.[159]Human Rights Watch interview with Andrea C., age 17, Saline, Michigan, August24, 2009.[160]Human Rights Watch interview with Sam B., age 17, Plainview, Texas, July 21,2009.[161]Human Rights Watch interview with Julia N., age 18, Benson, North Carolina, August 5, 2009.[162]Human Rights Watch interview with Andrés F., age17, Benson, North Carolina, August 5, 2009.[163]Human Rights Watch interview with Noemi J. (not her real name), age 16, Goldsboro, North Carolina, August 6, 2009.[164]Human Rights Watch interview with Elias N. (not his real name), age 16, Plainview, Texas, July 21, 2009.[165]Human Rights Watch interview with Jose M., age 17, Saline, Michigan, August 24,2009.[166]Arcury and Quandt, “Pesticide Exposure Among Farmworkers and TheirFamilies,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern United States, Arcuryand Quandt, eds., p. 108.[167]Email from Carol Dansereau, Farm Worker Pesticide Project, to Human Rights Watch,July 17, 2009.[168]Human Rights Watch interview with Marisol G. (not her real name), age 17,Jackson County, North Carolina, August 4, 2009.[169]Geoffrey M. Calvert et al, “Acute Pesticide-Related IllnessesAmong Working Youths, 1988–1999,” AmericanJournal of Public Health, vol. 93, no. 4 (April 2003), p. 609 (citing W.R.Snodgrass, “Physiological and biochemical differences between childrenand adults as determinants of toxic response to environmentalpollutants,” P.S. Guzelian, C.J. Henry, S.S. Olin, eds. Similaritiesand Differences Between Children and Adults: Implications for Risk Assessment,(Washington, DC: International Life Sciences Institute Press, 1992), pp.35-42); and International Labor Organization, Tackling Hazardous ChildLabour in Agriculture: Guidance on Policy and Practice, User Guide, 2006,box 5, p. 10.[170]A study of children under age 18 with acute occupational pesticide-relatedpoisoning from a one-year period found that 47 percent (33 of 70) of illchildren in agriculture were exposed through “contact with treatedsurfaces, most commonly by entering farm fields recently sprayed bypesticides.” Calvert et al, “Acute Pesticide-Related IllnessesAmong Working Youths, 1988–1999,” AmericanJournal of Public Health, p. 608.[171]Walter A. Alarcon et al, “Acute IllnessesAssociated with Pesticide Exposures at Schools,” Journal of theAmerican Medical Association, vol. 294, no. 4 (July 27, 2005), pp. 455-465;Center for Worker Health, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,“Policy Brief: Biomarkers of Farmworker Pesticide Exposure in North Carolina,” undated (reporting research results from 2007).[172]Arcury and Quandt, “Pesticide Exposure Among Farmworkers and TheirFamilies,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern United States, Arcuryand Quandt, eds., p. 106.[173]NIOSH, “Pesticide Illness & InjurySurveillance,” April 24, 2009, http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/pesticides/(accessed January 27, 2010).[174]Officials in the EPA’s Office of Pesticide Programs told Human RightsWatch that they were unable to estimate farmworkers’ overall pesticideexposure. Human Rights Watch interview with Kevin Keaney and staff of theOffice of Pesticide Programs, Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC,February 23, 2010. In addition to the barriers farmworkers face in accessingany kind of medical care, poisoned workers who do find care may not becorrectly diagnosed, and diagnosed cases may not be reported to surveillancesystems. Calvert et al, “Acute Pesticide-Related Illnesses Among WorkingYouths, 1988–1999,” American Journal of Public Health, p.609.[175]Calvert et al, “Acute Pesticide-Related Illnesses Among WorkingYouths, 1988–1999,” American Journal of Public Health, p.609.[176]Michael C.R. Alavanja, Jane A. Hoppin, and Freya Kamel,“Health Effects of Chronic Pesticide Exposure: Cancer and Neurotoxicity,”Annual Review of Public Health, vol. 25 (2004), pp. 155-197;Ana M. Garcia, “Pesticide exposure and women's health,” AmericanJournal of Industrial Medicine, vol. 44 (2003), pp. 584-594; Arcury andQuandt, “Pesticide Exposure Among Farmworkers and Their Families,” LatinoFarmworkers in the Eastern United States, Arcury and Quandt, eds., p. 106;and Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Dr. Thomas A. Arcury, Director,Center for Worker Health, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, October19, 2009.[177]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Arcury, Center for Worker Health,Wake Forest University School of Medicine, October 19, 2009.[178]Alavanja, Hoppin, and Kamel, “Health Effects of ChronicPesticide Exposure: Cancer and Neurotoxicity,” Annual Review of PublicHealth, pp. 155-197; Garcia, “Pesticide exposure and women's health, AmericanJournal of Industrial Medicine, pp. 584-594.[179]Human Rights Watch interview with Raul L., age 21, Durham, North Carolina,August 6, 2009.[180]Human Rights Watch interview with Julia N., age 18, Benson, North Carolina, August 5, 2009.[181]Human Rights Watch interview with Luz A., age 18, Plant City, Florida, March21, 2009.[182]Human Rights Watch’s interviews are consistent with research in North Carolina finding that “farmworkers generally lack knowledge of the pesticidesapplied where they work: what is applied, where it is applied, and when it isapplied.” Arcury and Quandt, “Pesticide Exposure Among Farmworkersand Their Families,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern United States, Arcuryand Quandt, eds., p. 116.[183]Human Rights Watch interview with Alejandro P. (not hisreal name), age 14, accompanied by his uncle, Benson, North Carolina, August 5,2009.[184]Human Rights Watch interview with Julia N., age 18, Benson, North Carolina, August 5, 2009.[185]Arcury and Quandt, “Pesticide Exposure Among Farmworkers and TheirFamilies,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern United States, Arcuryand Quandt, eds., p. 119. Gloves made of cloth and leather hold the pesticidesto the skin and are also a safety problem. Email from Dr. Thomas A. Arcury,Director, Center for Worker Health, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,to Human Rights Watch, April 8, 2010.[186]Calvert et al, “Acute Pesticide-Related Illnesses Among WorkingYouths, 1988–1999,” American Journal of PublicHealth, p. 608.[187]For a discussion of this research, see Arcury and Quandt, “PesticideExposure Among Farmworkers and Their Families,” Latino Farmworkers inthe Eastern United States, Arcury and Quandt, eds., p. 113.[188]Human Rights Watch interview with Sam B., age 17, Plainview, Texas, July 21,2009.[189]Human Rights Watch interview with Alejandro P., age 14,accompanied by his uncle, Benson, North Carolina, August 5, 2009.[190]Human Rights Watch interview with Mauricio V., age 19, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, August 6, 2009.[191]Calvert et al, “Acute Pesticide-Related Illnesses Among WorkingYouths, 1988–1999,” American Journal of Public Health, p.608.[192]Officials in the EPA’s Office of Pesticide Programs could not estimatehow many workers were untrained because current regulations do not requirerecordkeeping, but acknowledged “many gaps.” Officials also told usthat some workers who had been trained would not necessarily report that they had.Human Rights Watch interview with Keaney and staff of the Office of PesticidePrograms, Environmental Protection Agency, February 23, 2010.[193]Email from David Strauss, director, Association of Farmworker OpportunityPrograms (AFOP), to Human Rights Watch, April 2, 2010.[194]Human Rights Watch interview with health outreachworker, Benson, North Carolina, August 5, 2009.[195]Email from Dansereau, Farm Worker Pesticide Project, July 17, 2009.[196]Human Rights Watch interview with Andrea C., age 17, Saline, Michigan, August24, 2009.[197]Human Rights Watch interview with Mauricio V., age 19, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, August 6, 2009.[198]Human Rights Watch interview with James A., age 15, Plant City, Florida, March 21, 2009.[199]Human Rights Watch interview with mother, Bear Lake, Michigan, August 27, 2009.[200]Human Rights Watch interview with Elias N., age 16, Plainview, Texas, July 21, 2009.[201]Human Rights Watch interview with Elisabeth S., age 19, Durham, North Carolina, August 3, 2009.[202]Human Rights Watch interview with Marta V., age 13, Plainview, Texas, July 21, 2009.[203]Human Rights Watch interview with Sam B., age 17, Plainview, Texas, July 21,2009.[204]Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Heat-Related Deaths AmongCrop Workers—United States, 1992-2006,” Morbidity and MortalityWeekly Report, no. 57(24), June 20, 2008, pp. 649-653,http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5724a1.htm (accessed January 25,2010). The editors note that heat-related deaths were likely underreported.[205]Valentina Forastieri, Children at Work: Health and Safety Risks (Geneva: ILO, 2002), p. 74; Jeffrey R.  Bytomski and Deborah L. Squire, “HeatIllness in Children,” Current Sports Medicine Reports, vol. 2(6)(2007), p. 320 (noting that children are more susceptible than adults to heatillness because of “greater surface area to body mass ratio, lower rateof sweating, and slower rate of acclimatization”).[206]United Farm Workers Union, Deadly Harvest: Heat related deaths ofCalifornian farm workers, (Kreen: United Farm Workers Union, 2009), p. 8.[207]Jennie Rodríguez, “Seeking Protection,” Vida En Valle, August5, 2009; Jennie Rodríguez, “Teen Farmworker's Death BringsInvoluntary Manslaughter Charges,” Vida En Valle, May 12, 2009;“Statement from Action Labor and Workforce Development Agency Secretaryon Criminal, Civil Charges Filed in Case of Deceased Farm Worker from SanJoaquin County,” US Fed News, April 25, 2009.[208]In contrast, according to the National Agricultural Workers Survey, in 2005-2005,crop workers reported that their employer did not provide, on a daily basis, bothdrinking water and cups (14 percent), water for washing (3 percent), and atoilet (4 percent). US Department of Labor,“The National Agricultural Workers Survey: Public Access Documentation,”http://www.doleta.gov/agworker/naws.cfm (accessed April 27, 2010).[209]May, “Occupational Injury and Illness in Farmworkers in the EasternUnited States,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern United States, Arcuryand Quandt, eds., p. 77.[210]See, for example, Maria L. Ontiveros, “Lessons From the Fields: FemaleFarmworkers and the Law,” Maine Law Review, vol. 55 (2003),p. 170.[211]Human Rights Watch interview with Rosa M., mother of two teenage childrenworking in the fields, Plainview, Texas, July 21, 2009.[212]Arcury and Quandt, “Pesticide Exposure Among Farmworkers and TheirFamilies,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern United States, Arcuryand Quandt, eds., p. 115.[213]Human Rights Watch group interview with 15-year-old girl, 10-year old boy, and9-year-old girl, central Florida, March 22, 2009.[214]Human Rights Watch interview with Elisabeth S., age 19, Durham, North Carolina, August 3, 2009.[215]Human Rights Watch group interview with12- and 14-year-old girls, Plainview, Texas, July 20, 2009.[216]Human Rights Watch group interview with mother, 10 year-old son, and11-year-old daughter, Plainview, Texas, July 20, 2009.[217]Human Rights Watch group interview with 12- and 14-year-old girls, Plainview, Texas, July 20, 2009.[218]Human Rights Watch group interview with mother, 10 year-old son, and11-year-old daughter, Plainview, Texas, July 20, 2009.[219]Toilets and handwashing facilities must be “provided for each (20)employees or fraction thereof,” “adequately ventilated,appropriately screened, have self-closing doors that can be closed and latchedfrom the inside and shall be constructed to insure privacy,” “belocated within a one-quarter-mile walk of each hand laborer's place of work inthe field.” 29 C.F.R. sec. 1928.110(c)(v).[220]Arcury and Quandt, “Pesticide Exposure Among Farmworkers and TheirFamilies,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern United States, Arcuryand Quandt, eds., p. 115 (citing 2001 study).[221]Robert H. McKnight and Henry A. Spiller, “Green Tobacco Sickness inChildren and Adolescents,” Public Health Reports, vol. 120 (November-December2005), http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1497768/?tool=pubmedwww.pubmedcentral.nih.gov (accessed January 25, 2010), p. 603.[222]Ibid.; and Jeffrey S. McBride et al, “Green Tobacco Sickness,” TobaccoControl, vol. 7, (1998), p. 295.[223]McKnight and Spiller, “Green Tobacco Sickness in Children andAdolescents,” Public Health Reports, p. 603.[224]Ibid. When “topping,” workers walk throughthe rows, snapping off the flower from the plant. Harvesting occurs in one oftwo ways. For flue-cured tobacco, workers snap off individual leaves as theyripen, typically grasping the picked leaves between their arm and chest untilthey cannot hold anymore. To harvest burley tobacco, workers grasp the stalk ofthe plant, cut the base, and impale them on a spear to dry in the field, movingthem inside only if rains. Ibid.[225]Ibid. See also Sara A. Quandt et al, “Environmental and BehavioralPredictors of Salivary Cotinine in Latino Tobacco Workers,” Journal ofOccupational and Environmental Medicine, vol. 43, no. 10 (2001), pp.844-52.[226]Ibid. See also Natalie M. Schmitt et al, “Health Risks in Tobacco FarmWorkers—A Review of the Literature,” Journal of Public Health, vol.15 (2007), p. 263.[227]Sara Rosenbaum and Peter Shin, Center For Health Services Research and Policy,George Washington University, “Migrant and Seasonal Farmworkers: HealthInsurance Coverage and Access to Care,” Kaiser Commission on Medicaid andthe Uninsured, April 2005, p. 3; and US Department of Labor, “NationalAgriculture Workers Survey (Release 3.0),” 2000.[228]Quandt, “Health of Children and Women in the Farmworker Community in the Eastern United States,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern United States, Arcuryand Quandt, eds., p. 177 (citing Weathers et al. 2004).[229]Thomas A. Arcury and Sara A. Quandt, “The Health and Safety ofFarmworkers in the Eastern United States: A Need to Focus on SocialJustice,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern United States, Arcuryand Quandt, eds., p. 2; and Rosenbaum and Shin, “Migrant and SeasonalFarmworkers: Health Insurance Coverage and Access to Care,” pp. 1, 3-4;US Department of Labor, “National Agriculture Workers Survey (Release3.0).” See also National Center for Farmworker Health, Inc. “AboutAmerica’s Farmworkers: Farmworker Health,” undated, http://www.ncfh.org/?pid=4&page=7(accessed January 25, 2010).[230]See Farmworker Justice, “State Workers’ Compensation forAgricultural Workers,” 2009, http://www.fwjustice.org/HealthResources/State%20Workers'%20Comp%20Information%20for%20Health%20Centers.pdf(accessed April 15, 2010).[231]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Amy Lieberman, Migrant CliniciansNetwork, March 6, 2009; National Center for Farmworker Health, Inc.,“About Community and Migrant Health Centers,” undated, http://www.ncfh.org/?pid=6(accessed April 27, 2010).[232]Rosenbaum and Shin, “Migrant and Seasonal Farmworkers: Health InsuranceCoverage and Access to Care.”[233]May, “Occupational Injury and Illness in Farmworkers in the EasternUnited States,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern United States, Arcuryand Quandt, eds., p. 75.[234]Migrant Clinicians Network, A Migrant Farmworker Occupational Health ReferenceManual, 2006, www.migrantclinician.org/service.dl.php?fid=2121(accessedApril 8, 2010)[235]Human Rights Watch interview with health worker, central Florida, March 23,2009.[236]“Willamette Tree Wholesale Sued by EEOC for Severe Sexual Harassment, Retaliation,”US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission press release, June 18, 2009, http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/newsroom/release/6-18-09a.cfm(accessed March 19, 2010).[237]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Mónica Ramírez,Southern Poverty Law Center, Atlanta, Georgia, December 30, 2009.[238]Southern Poverty Law Center, “Under Siege: Life for Low-Income Latinos inthe South,” p. 28.[239]William R. Tamayo, “The Role of the EEOC in Protecting the Civil Rightsof Farm Workers,” UC Davis Law Review, vol. 22 (Summer, 2000), p.1080.[240]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Maria M., age 19, Idaho, September13, 2009.[241]Human Rights Watch interview with Elisabeth S., age 19, Durham, North Carolina, August 3, 2009.[242]EEOC v. Harris Farms, January 2005, (E.D. Cal.)Civil Action, No. F-02-6199 AWI[243]Miriam Jordan, “Farmworker Gets Rare Win Against Grower,” TheWall Street Journal, January 24, 2005; and Rebecca Clarren, “TheGreen Motel,” Ms. Magazine, Summer 2005.[244]Jordan, “Farmworker Gets Rare Win Against Grower,” The WallStreet Journal; Juliana Barbassa, “Sexually harassed farmworkersoften unaware of rights,” Associated Press, October 26, 2005.[245]Ibid., and “Jury Orders Harris Farms to Pay $994,000 inSexual Harassment Suit by EEOC,” EEOC press release, January 21, 2005, http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/newsroom/release/1-21-05.cfm (accessed March 22, 2010).[246]Jordan, “Farmworker Gets Rare Win Against Grower,” The WallStreet Journal. Harris Farms appealed, and the Ninth Circuit affirmed theverdict in 2008. “Sexual Harassment Verdict Upheld in Favor of EEOCAgainst AG Industry Giant Harris Farms,” EEOC press release, April 25,2008, http://www.eeoc.gov/press/4-25-08.html .[247]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with William R. Tamayo, EEOC regionalattorney, San Francisco, California, July 31, 2009.[248]Ibid.[249]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Maria. M., age 19, Idaho, September 13, 2009.[250]Email from Mónica Ramírez, Southern Poverty Law Center, to Human Rights Watch April 2, 2010.[251]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Maria M., age 19, Idaho, September13, 2009.[252]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Ramírez, Southern PovertyLaw Center, December 30, 2009.[253]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Tamayo, EEOC, July 31, 2009.[254]Human Rights Watch telephone interview withRamírez, Southern Poverty Law Center, December 30, 2009.[255]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Tamayo, EEOC, San Francisco, California, July 31, 2009.[256]Human Rights Watch interview with paralegal and former farmworker, Immokalee, Florida, March 24, 2009.[257]Sexual harassment and retaliation for complaining about it violate Title VII ofCivil Rights Act of 1964. 29 C.F.R. sec. 1604.11.[258]“Giumarra Vineyards Sued by EEOC for Sexual Harassment and RetaliationAgainst Farm Workers,” EEOC press release, January 13, 2010, http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/newsroom/release/1-13-10.cfm(accessed March 19, 2010) (citing EEOC v. Giumarra Vineyards Corporationet al, January 13, 2010, Civ. No. 5:09-CV-04646-PVT.[259]The Bandana Project was launched in June 2007 to raise awareness aboutworkplace sexual violence against farmworker women.  More than 2,000 whitebandanas have been decorated and displayed as a show of solidarity to end thisviolence.[260]US Department of Labor, “The NationalAgricultural Workers Survey: Public Access Documentation,” http://www.doleta.gov/agworker/naws.cfm(accessed April 27, 2010).[261]USDA Economic Research Service, “Rural Labor andEducation: Farm Labor.”[262]See US Constitution, amendment 14 (1) (“All persons born… in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State whereinthey reside.”)[263]Email from Schell, Florida Legal Services Migrant Farmworker Justice Project,April7, 2010.[264]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Carol Brooke, North CarolinaJustice Center, Raleigh, North Carolina, February 3, 2009.[265]From 2006 to 2008,workplace immigration raids were on the rise. The Obama administration hasdistanced itself from such raids, suggesting that the focus should be onemployers who hire undocumented workers, and not solely on deporting workers.Lornet Turnbull, “Napolitano demands review of ICE raid at Bellinghamplant,” Seattle Times, February 26, 2009. Nevertheless, ICE made 6,287arrests for immigration offenses at workplaces in 2008; only 135 were owners,managers, supervisors, or human resources employees charged with harboring orknowingly hiring undocumented workers—the remainder were the workersthemselves. US Immigration and Customs Enforcement, “WorksiteEnforcement,” April 30 2009, http://www.ice.gov/pi/news/factsheets/worksite.htm(accessed April 22, 2010). Such raids chill workers’ willingness to comeforward about wage or conditions violations in the workplace. That chillingeffect is only heightened by the fact that some such enforcement actions havecome even in the midst of actions by workers to exercise their labor rights.[266]“Memorandum of Understanding Between the Immigration and NaturalizationService Department of Justice and the Employment Standards Administration Departmentof Labor,” November 23, 1998, http://www.dol.gov/esa/whd/whatsnew/mou/nov98mou.htm(accessed April 22, 2010).[267]Government Accountability Office, “Better Use of Available Resources andConsistent Reporting Could Improve Compliance,” no. GAO-08-962T, July 15,2008.[268]This guidance, which appears as an ICE “Operating Instruction” onlabor disputes, provides that ICE agents should consider whether tips aboutalleged employment of undocumented workers are being provided to the agency inorder to interfere with labor rights. ICE Operating Instruction 287.3(a), http://www.uscis.gov/ilink/docView/SLB/HTML/SLB/0-0-0-1/0-0-0-53663/0-0-0-61045/0-0-0-61070.html#0-0-0-31745(accessed April 22, 2010).[269]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Ramírez, Southern PovertyLaw Center, December 30, 2009.[270]Section 287(g) of the Immigration and Nationality Act “authorizesthe secretary of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to enter intoagreements with state and local law enforcement agencies, permitting designatedofficers to perform immigration law enforcement functions, pursuant to aMemorandum of Agreement (MOA), provided that the local law enforcement officersreceive appropriate training and function under the supervision of sworn U.S.Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) officers.” Delegation ofImmigration Authority Section 287(g): Immigration and Nationality Act, Immigrationand Customs Enforcement, 1996,http://www.ice.gov/partners/287g/Section287_g.htm, 287(g).[271]US Immigration and Customs Enforcement, “Updated Facts on ICE's 287(g)Program,” April 12, 2010, http://www.ice.gov/pi/news/factsheets/section287_g-reform.htm(accessed April 22, 2010).[272]Southern Poverty Law Center, “Racial Profiling by LawEnforcement is Constant Threat,” April 2009,http://www.splcenter.org/publications/under-siege-life-low-income-latinos-south/2-racial-profiling(accessed April 7, 2010); see also Southern Poverty Law Center, “Close toSlavery: Guestworker Programs in the United States,” pp. 1-2.[273]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Ramírez, Southern PovertyLaw Center, December 30, 2009. In areas with 287(g) agreements, “bothdocumented and undocumented immigrants as well as Latino US citizens toldsurveyors that the program made them fearful of the police and reluctant tocall the police if victimized.” Southern Poverty Law Center, “UnderSiege: Life for Low-Income Latinos in the South,” p. 27.[274]Southern Poverty Law Center, “Under Siege: Life for Low-Income Latinos inthe South,” p. 31. For example, the organization describes contacting alocal prosecutor about the sexual assault of a 13-year-old Latino girl and theprosecutor saying that if the girl came forward and he discovered she wasundocumented, he would contact ICE. The family decided not to report the caseand the rapist went unpunished. Ibid., p. 27.[275] For US lawindicating that core labor standards apply to all workers, regardless ofimmigration status, see Sure-Tan, Inc. v. NLRB, 467 U.S. 883, 892 (1984)(undocumented immigrants are “employees” under the National LaborRelations Act); Patel v. Quality Inn South, 846 F.2d 700 (1988), certdenied, 489 U.S. 1011 (1989) (declining to review lower court’s decisionthat the Fair Labor Standards Act’s coverage of undocumented aliens isfully consistent with US immigration law); and EEOC v. Hacienda Hotel,881 F.2d 1504 (9th Cir. 1989) (nondiscrimination laws apply to undocumentedworkers).[276]Regarding international law that protects the rights of all workers,irrespective of immigration status, see International Convention on theProtection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families(Migrant Workers Convention), adopted December 18, 1990, G.A. Res. 45/158, annex,45 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49A) at 262, U.N. Doc. A/45/49 (1990), entered intoforce July 1, 2003, art. 25; ILO Convention No. 97 concerning Migration forEmployment Convention (Revised), adopted July 1, 1949, entered into forceJanuary 22, 1952, art. 6. The Inter-American Court of Human Rights (IACHR) saidthat despite their irregular status, “If undocumented workers arecontracted to work, they immediately are entitled to the same rights as allworkers . . . . This is of maximum importance, since one of the major problemsthat comes from lack of immigration status is that workers without work permitsare hired in unfavorable conditions, compared to other workers.” SeeInter-American Court of Human Rights, “Legal Condition and Rights ofUndocumented Migrant Workers,” Consultative Opinion OC-18/03 (September17, 2003). The IACHR specifically mentioned several workplace rights that itheld must be guaranteed to migrant workers, regardless of their immigrationstatus:In the case of migrant workers, there are certainrights that assume a fundamental importance and that nevertheless arefrequently violated, including: the prohibition against forced labor, theprohibition and abolition of child labor, special attentions for women whowork, rights that correspond to association and union freedom, collectivebargaining, a just salary for work performed, social security, administrativeand judicial guarantees, a reasonable workday length and in adequate laborconditions (safety and hygiene), rest, and back pay.[277]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Schell, managing attorney, FloridaLegal Services Migrant Farmworker Justice Project, February 2, 2009.[278]Human Rights Watch interview with Phillis Engelbert, Migrant Health Promotion,Saline, Michigan, August 24, 2009.[279]Human Rights Watch interview with Josie Ellis, registered nurse and director ofVecinos Inc. Farmworker Health Program, Sylva, North Carolina, August 4, 2009.[280]US General Accounting Office, “Child Labor in Agriculture:Characteristics and Legality of Work,” no. GAO/HEHS-98-112R, 1998, p. 2.[281]The FLSA allows for very limited exceptions to this, including work deliveringnewspapers, acting, and making evergreen wreaths.[282]29 U.S.C. sec. 213(c)(1)(A).  A "small farm" is one which didnot employ more than 500 man-days of agricultural labor (or about 7 workers) duringany calendar quarter of the preceding year.[283]29 U.S.C. sec. 213(c)(1)(B).[284]29 U.S.C. sec. 213(c)(1)(C).[285]29 U.S.C. sec. 213(c)(2).[286]Compare 29 C.F.R. 570.71(a)(3)(iv) (power saws inagriculture) with 570.65(a)(i) (power saws in all other industries).[287]The 17 states not listing agricultural employment among sectors covered bytheir child labor laws are: Alabama, Delaware (non-hazardous employment),Georgia, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland (non-hazardous employment),Mississippi, Montana, Nebraska (covers only work in detasseling and beetfields), North Carolina, Oklahoma, Rhode Island, Tennessee, Texas, WestVirginia (non-hazardous employment), and Wyoming. Wage and Hour Division,“State Child Labor Laws Applicable to Agricultural Employment January 1,2010,” http://www.dol.gov/whd/state/agriemp2.htm(accessed January 29, 2010).[288]The child labor amendments in the 2008 Genetic Information Non-discriminationAct (“GINA”) do not impose any minimum penalty and apply only tomajor injuries and death, not to major illnesses.[289]Email from Michael Kravitz, deputy director, Division of Performance, Budget,and Departmental Liaison, Wage and Hour Division, US Department of Labor, toHuman Rights Watch, April 9, 2010. Regarding all child labor cases, the Wageand Hour Division found 887 cases involving 3,448 children in 2009.[290]US Department of Labor, “2008 Statistics Fact Sheet,” http://www.dol.gov/whd/statistics/2008FiscalYear.htm(accessed April 22, 2010). The annual number of child labor cases inagriculture in the three-year period from 2007 to 2009 remained stable—35cases in 2007, 34 in 2008, and 36 in 2009—indicating that 2009 was not anaberration in recent enforcement numbers. US Department of Labor, “Reportfor the period of September 1, 2007 to August 30, 2009, made by the Governmentof the United States of America, in accordance with Article 22 of theConstitution of the International Labor Organization, on the measures taken togive effect to the provisions of the Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention, 1999(No. 182),” undated, p. 9.[291]US Department of Labor, "Compliance Highlights: 1998Agricultural Activity Report, Wage and Hour Division," March 1999, p. 2.[292]Human Rights Watch interview with Nancy Leppink, deputy administrator; ArthurM. Kerschner, Jr., youth employment branch chief, Division of EnforcementPolicy; and Michael Kravitz, deputy director, Division of Performance, Budget,and Departmental Liaison, Wage and Hour Division, US Department of Labor,Washington, DC, February 17, 2010.[293]Ibid.[294]Email from Kravitz, Wage and Hour Division, US Department of Labor, April 9,2010.[295]US Department of Labor data on file with Human Rights Watch.[296]US Government Accountability Office, “Department of Labor Wage and HourDivision’s Complaint Intake and Investigative Processes Leave Low WageWorkers Vulnerable to Wage Theft,” Testimony Before the Committee onEducation and Labor, House of Representatives, March 25, 2009.[297]Ibid., p. 18.[298]Southern Poverty Law Center, “Under Siege: Life for Low-Income Latinos inthe South,” p. 6.[299]The Government Accountability Office also found that where the Wage and HourDivision made phone calls to the employer (known as“conciliations”) “where the employer refuses to pay, theiroffices lack the resources to investigate further or compel payment. . .[I]n some conciliations, the employer is able to avoid paying back wages simplyby refusing.” US Government Accountability Office, “Department ofLabor Wage and Hour Division’s Complaint Intake and InvestigativeProcesses Leave Low Wage Workers Vulnerable to Wage Theft,” TestimonyBefore the Committee on Education and Labor, House of Representatives, p. 119.[300]Genetic Information Non-discrimination Act (GINA), sec. 302 (amending sec.16(3) of the Fair Labor Standards Act).[301]Fair Labor Standards Act, sec. 16(e).[302]According to data from the Department of Labor, it concluded 1,129 cases ofchild labor violations in 2008 involving 4,737 children, and assessed$4,218,088 in child labor civil monetary penalties. US Department of Labor,“Report for the period of September 1, 2007 to August 30, 2009, made bythe Government of the United States of America, in accordance with Article 22of the Constitution of the International Labor Organization, on the measurestaken to give effect to the provisions of the Worst Forms of Child LaborConvention, 1999 (No. 182),” sec. II. The Wage and Hour Division was notable to make information on penalties assessed in 2009 available at the time ofwriting.[303]Luder, “Department of Labor Levies Fines for Child LaborViolations,” The Packer.[304]Human Rights Watch interview with Leppink, Kerschner, and Kravitz, Wage andHour Division, US Department of Labor, February 17, 2010.[305]The hot good provision came into use by the Wage and HourDivision in 1998, although it has been part of the FLSA since its originationin 1938. The provision as it pertains to child labor reads in part:  "Noproducer, manufacturer, or dealer shall ship or deliver for shipment incommerce any goods produced in an establishment situated in the United States in or about which within thirty days prior to the removal of such goods therefrom any oppressive child labor has been employed." 29 U.S.C. sec. 212(a).[306]Email from Kravitz, Wage and Hour Division, US Department of Labor, April 9,2010.[307]Human Rights Watch interview with Leppink, Kerschner, and Kravitz, Wage andHour Division, US Department of Labor, February 17, 2010.[308]Email from Kravitz, Wage and Hour Division, US Department of Labor, April 9,2010.[309]Human Rights Watch interview with Leppink, Kerschner, and Kravitz, Wage andHour Division, US Department of Labor, February 17, 2010.[310]Ibid.[311]29 C.F.R. sec. 570.71.[312]Three of the ninety-nine children for whom such information was available. Calvertet al, “Acute Pesticide-Related Illnesses Among Working Youths,1988–1999,” American Journal of Public Health,p. 609. However, working in violation of the law may discourage reporting.[313]NIOSH, “NationalInstitute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) Recommendations to theU.S. Department of Labor for Changes to Hazardous Orders,” May 3, 2002, http://youthrules.dol.gov/niosh_recs_to_dol_050302.pdf(accessed April 5, 2010).[314]Ibid., pp. 67-98.[315]Email from Nancy Leppink, deputy administrator, Wage and Hour Division, USDepartment of Labor, to Human Rights Watch, April 17, 2010.[316]Email from Kravitz, Wage and Hour Division, US Department of Labor, April 9,2010.[317]40 C.F.R. sec. 170.1. See 40 C.F.R. sec. 170 and following sections forthe entire Worker Protection Standard.[318]See "Restricted-entry statements," 40 C.F.R. sec. 156.208.[319]40 C.F.R. sec.156.208(c)(2)(i)-(iii).[320]Ibid., sec. 156.208(c)(2)(i).[321]Calvert et al, “Acute Pesticide-Related Illnesses Among WorkingYouths, 1988–1999,” American Journal of PublicHealth, p. 609.[322]EPA, “EPA to Strengthen Oversight of Pesticide’s Impact on Childrenand Farmworkers,” EPA news release, December 8, 2009. The Office ofPesticide Programs December 2009 policy paper “Revised Risk AssessmentMethods for Workers, Children of Workers in Agricultural Fields, and PesticideswithNo Food Uses” can be found on the followingwebpage: http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/health/worker-rsk-assmnt.html(accessed April 5, 2010).[323]EPA, “Worker Risk Assessment,” February 2010, http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/health/worker-rsk-assmnt.html(accessed April 5, 2010).[324]“Other regulations for pesticide safety and field sanitation, such ascentral posting of pesticide application information in a language that workerscan understand and posting the restricted entry intervals for fields on whichpesticides have been applied, are often not enforced in farmworkersettings.” Arcury and Quandt, “Pesticide Exposure Among Farmworkersand Their Families,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern United States, Arcuryand Quandt, eds., p. 107.[325]Human Rights Watch interview with farm operator, Michigan, August 28, 2009.[326]Human Rights Watch interview with Andrea C., age 17, Saline, Michigan, August24, 2009. Research in North Carolina found that: “Fewer than half offarmworkers interviewed indicated that they are told about pesticides that havebeen applied where they are working, that information on pesticides that havebeen applied is posted in an accessible location, or that warning signs areposted around fields to which pesticides have been applied.” Arcury andQuandt, “Pesticide Exposure Among Farmworkers and Their Families,” LatinoFarmworkers in the Eastern United States, Arcury and Quandt, eds., p. 113.[327]Human Rights Watch interview with Kevin Keaney and staff of the Office ofPesticide Programs, US Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC,February 23, 2010.[328]OSHA’s 1987 Field Sanitation Standard, which is enforced by DOL’s Wageand Hour Division, requires agricultural employers to provide workerswith:(1)  Cool and potabledrinking water in sufficient amounts, dispensed by single-use drinking cups orby fountains and readily accessible to all; and(2)  One toilet and a handwashingfacility for each twenty employees, located within a quarter-mile walk.OSHA Field Sanitation Standard (1987), 52 Fed. Reg.16050 (May 1, 1987), 29 C.F.R. sec. 1928.110. For many years, OSHA refused toissue any regulation on this subject, but it was finally forced to do so byorder of a federal court, which excoriated OSHA’s 14 years of“intractable . . .resistance”as a “disgraceful chapter of legal neglect.” Farmworker JusticeFund, Inc. v. Brock, 811 F.2d 613, 614 (D.C.Cir 1987). After issuing thestandard, OSHA predicted that its implementation would reduce by hundreds ofthousands the annual incidence of farmworker illnesses, injuries, and deaths,including heat-related deaths and injuries, parasitic intestinal illnesses,pesticide-related illnesses, and urinary tract infections.US Department of Labor, Occupational Safetyand Health Administration, "OSHA's Field Sanitation Standard," FactSheet No. OSHA 92-25, p. 2.[329]The analysis of OSHA’s limitations draws in part on: Shelly Davis and JamesB. Leonard, “The Ones the Law Forgot: Children Working inAgriculture,” 2000, available at: http://www.fwjustice.org/Health&Safety/CHILD%20LABOR%20REPORT%20-%20FINAL.pdf(accessed April 8, 2010).[330]Congress exempts small farms from enforcement of OSHA standards by attachingriders to annual appropriation bills.[331]The seven OSHA safety and health regulations that do apply to agriculturegovern temporary labor camps, story and handling of anhydrous ammonia, loggingoperations, slow-moving vehicles, hazard communication, cadmium, and theretention of US Department of Transportation markings, placards, and labels. 29C.F.R. sec. 1928.21(a).[332]As noted in the previous footnote, only those OSHA safety and healthregulations listed there apply in agriculture.[333]Human Rights Watch interview with Deborah Berkowitz, chief of staff; Richard E.Fairfax, director, Enforcement Programs; and Thomas M. Galassi, deputydirector, enforcement programs, OSHA, US Department of Labor, Washington, DC,February 17, 2010. “General duty clause” refers to section 5(a)(1)of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, which requires employers to“furnish to each of his employees employment and a place of employmentwhich are free from recognized hazards that are causing or are likely to causedeath or serious physical harm to his employees.”[334]Human Rights Watch interview with Berkowitz, Fairfax, and Galassi, OSHA, US Department of Labor, February 17, 2010.[335]NIOSH estimates that fatality rates due to tractoroverturns could be reduced by a minimum of 71 percent if all tractors in the US were equipped with roll-over protective structures. John Meyers, NIOSH Division ofSafety Research, “Preventing Death and Injury in Tractor Overturns withRoll-Over Protective Structures,” NIOSH Science Blog, January 5, 2009, http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/blog/nsb010509_rops.html(accessed April 4, 2010). For additionalinformation,see Davis and Leonard, “The Ones the LawForgot:Children Working inAgriculture.”[336]In 1976, OSHA required all agricultural employers to equip allemployee-operated tractors manufactured after October 25, 1976, with roll-over protectivestructures and safety belts, but family members are exempted and the standardis not enforced on farms with fewer than 11 full-time employees in 47 states. Since1986, nearly all new agricultural tractors sold in the United States have beenequipped with roll-over protective structures and seatbelts as standardequipment, but tractors manufactured before this date remain in use, despitethe modest expense of updating the equipment compared with that of injuries anddeaths from rollovers. Meyers, NIOSH Division of Safety Research,“Preventing Death and Injury in Tractor Overturns with Roll-OverProtective Structures,” NIOSH Science Blog. See 29 C.F.R. sec. 1928.52.[337]NIOSH, “Agricultural Safety.”[338]OSHA, US Department of Labor, “Agricultural Operations: Standards,”undated http://www.osha.gov/SLTC/agriculturaloperations/standards.html(accessed March 17, 2010). Three states—California, Oregon, and Washington—have so-called OSHA state plans, under which a state agency administersthe OSH Act. These three states have state regulations that apply to farms withfewer than 11 employees, but these states must use state funds to enforce thispart of their state regulations.[339]Human Rights Watch interview with Berkowitz, Fairfax, and Galassi, OSHA, US Department of Labor, February 17, 2010. See OSHA, “Review of the NevadaOccupational Safety and Health Program,” October 20, 2009, http://www.osha.gov/dcsp/final-nevada-report.html(accessed April 5, 2010).[340]International Labor Organization Convention Concerning the Prohibition andImmediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor (WorstForms of Child Labor Convention), adopted June 17, 1999, 38 ILM 1207 (enteredinto force November 19, 2000), art. 1.[341]Office of the Press Secretary, The White House, "Remarks by the Presidentto the International Labor Organization Conference," June 16, 1999.[342]US Department of Labor, “Report for the period of September 1, 2007 toAugust 30, 2009, made by the Government of the United States of America, inaccordance with Article 22 of the Constitution of the International LaborOrganization, on the measures taken to give effect to the provisions of theWorst Forms of Child Labor Convention, 1999 (No. 182) ratification of which wasregistered on December 2, 1999,” sec. III.[343]Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention, art. 3(d).[344]Ibid., art. 4.[345]International Labor Organization Recommendation Concerning the Prohibition andImmediate Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor, para. 3.[346]Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention, arts. 1, 4, 6, and 7.[347]Ibid., art. 7.[348]US Department of Labor, “Report for the period of September 1, 2007 toAugust 30, 2009, made by the Government of the United States of America, inaccordance with Article 22 of the Constitution of the International LaborOrganization, on the measures taken to give effect to the provisions of theWorst Forms of Child Labor Convention, 1999 (No. 182) ratification of which wasregistered on December 2, 1999,” sec. III.[349]International Labor Office, “Report of the Committee of Experts on theApplication of Conventions and Recommendations,” International Labour Conference,99th Sess., no. III (1A), 2010, p. 386, http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_norm/---relconf/documents/meetingdocument/wcms_123424.pdf(accessed April 15, 2010).[350]Ibid., p. 387.[351]Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), G.A. res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N.GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into force Sept.2, 1990.[352]See Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, concluded May 23, 1969, 1155U.N.T.S. 331, entered into force January 27, 1980, art. 18.[353]CRC, art. 32.[354]US Department of Labor, “Findings from the National Agricultural WorkersSurvey (NAWS) 2001-2002,” Research Reportno. 9, March 2005, http://www.doleta.gov/agworker/report9/chapter1.cfm#ethnicity(accessed November 20, 2009). NAWS, which is performed under contract with theUS Department of Labor, is the only national level source of information on theemployment, demographic, and health characteristics of hired crop farm workers,but does not count working children under age 14. The information is collectedin face-to-face interviews with farmworkers in three cycles throughout the yearto reflect the seasonality of agricultural work and employment.[355]Bureau of Labor Statistics, US Department of Labor, “Labor ForceStatistics from the Current Population Survey, Labor Force Characteristics ByRace and Ethnicity 2008, Table 6. Employed persons by detailed occupation,race, and Hispanic or Latino ethnicity, 2008 annual averages,” http://www.bls.gov/cps/race_ethnicity_2008_6.htm(accessed April 22, 2010)..[356]Ibid.[357]InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political Rights, G.A. res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAORSupp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into forceMarch 23, 1976, art. 26 (prohibiting discrimination on “any ground suchas race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, nationalor social origin, property, birth or other status"); International Convention on the Elimination of All Formsof Racial Discrimination (ICERD), 660 U.N.T.S. 195, entered intoforce Jan. 4, 1969 (prohibiting unlawful discrimination “based on race,colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin”), art. 1.  The US ratified the ICCPR in June 1992 and ICERD in October 1994.[358]HumanRights Committee, General Comment No. 18,"Nondiscrimination," 37thSess., 1989, para. 13.[359]See, for example, Amelia Parker, RacialDisparities in U.S. Public Education and International Human Rights Standards:Holding the U.S. Accountable to CERD, Human Rights Brief, vol. 14, p. 27(2007).[360]ICERD, art. 1(1).[361]Committee on theElimination of Racial Discrimination, General Comment No. 14, para. 2. In itsconcluding observations on the implementation of the ICERD in the US in 2001, the Committee stated:Whilenoting the numerous laws, institutions and measures designed to eradicateracial discrimination affecting the equal enjoyment of economic, social andcultural rights, the Committee is concerned about persistent [racial andethnic] disparities in the enjoyment of, in particular, the right to adequatehousing, equal opportunities for education and employment, and access to publicand private health care.A/56/18/380-407,August 14, 2001, 398.[362]SeeCommittee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, General RecommendationXIV(42), on art. 1, para. 1 of the Convention, U.N. GAOR, 48th Sess., Supp. No.18, at 176, U.N. Doc. A/48/18 (1993). See also, Theodor Meron, "TheMeaning and Reach of the International Convention on the Elimination of AllForms of Racial Discrimination," American Journal of International Law,vol. 79, 1985, pp. 287-88.[363]Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, “ConcludingObservation of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination: United States of America,” CERD/C/Misc. /56/18, paras. 380-407, August 2001, para.14. The Committee made the observations after considering the initial, secondand third periodic reports of the US, which were combined into one report.[364]Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, Consideration of ReportsSubmitted by State Parties under Article 9 of the Convention: ConcludingObservations, United States of America, CERD/C/USA/CO/6, 2 para. 10.Related ContentMay 5, 2010News ReleaseUS: Child Farmworkers’ Dangerous LivesEnd Legal Double-Standard That Fails to Protect Children Working in AgricultureMay 5, 2010News ReleaseUS: Child Farmworkers’ Dangerous LivesRegion / CountryUnited States Immigration US Poverty and Economic Inequality Racial DiscriminationProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch