Two Years With No Moon : Immigration Detention of Children in Thailand | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload the summary and recommendations in ThaiDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload the summary and recommendations in ThaiSeptember 1, 2014Two Years With No MoonImmigration Detention of Children in ThailandRohingya women and children who arrived by boat from Burma pass the time at a closed shelter in Phang Nga, Thailand, in October 2013© 2013 Reuters/Athit PerawongmethaTwo Years With No MoonImmigration Detention of Children in ThailandPrologue: Bhavani and Her SistersSummaryKeyRecommendations to the Thai GovernmentMethodologyTerminologyI.Paths to Immigration DetentionArrestsof Migrant Workers and their ChildrenArrestsof RefugeesArrestsof Burmese RefugeesArrestsof Urban Refugees and Asylum SeekersII.Immigration Detention of ChildrenArbitraryand Indefinite Detention of ChildrenInternationalLaw Prohibiting Detention of Migrant ChildrenII.Impact of Immigration Detention on ChildrenRiskof Psychological HarmRiskof Harm to Physical HealthLackof Adequate ExerciseLackof Adequate NutritionPoorHealth and Insufficient Medical CareSocialand Developmental HarmDenialof Family ContactDenialof Adequate EducationIII.Abusive Conditions for Children in  Immigration DetentionAbusiveConditions for Children in the Bangkok IDCFailureto Separate Children from Non-Relative AdultsDegradingTreatment in Initial Holding CellsChildrenin Overcrowded, Squalid CellsChildrenExposed to ViolenceAbusiveConditions in Other Immigration Detention CentersAbusiveConditions in Police Lock-upsIV.Alternatives to DetentionThailand’sLimited Recognition of Children’s Right to LibertySuccessful Use of Alternatives to Detention ElsewhereAFive-Step Process to Avoid Detention of ChildrenV.RecommendationsTothe Thai GovernmentTothe ParliamentTothe Police Immigration DivisionTothe Ministry of Social Development and Human SecurityTothe Ministry of InteriorTothe National Human Rights Commission of Thailand (NHRCT)Tothe UN Resident Coordination and UN Country TeamToUNHCRTothe International Organization for Migration (IOM)ToUNICEFTothe Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)ToDonor and Resettlement GovernmentsAcknowledgmentsAppendicesPrologue: Bhavani and Her SistersFrom age 8 to 10, Bhavanispent two years locked up in Bangkok’s squalid, overcrowded ImmigrationDetention Center (IDC). She and her family, refugees from Sri Lanka, weredetained because Thailand’s immigration laws precluded them from gaininglegal status and protection in the country.Bhavani is the youngest of sixchildren. She was living in hiding in Bangkok with her mother, father, threesisters, and the younger of her two brothers. Early one morning when her motherand brother were out, the police raided the apartment, apprehended Bhavani, herfather, and her sisters, and sent them to the Bangkok IDC. Her older brotherhad already been detained there for over a year, and even though they had notbeen able to see him—they lacked any paperwork that would let them visit—thefamily had some idea of the harsh conditions inside.When Bhavani’s mother,Mathy, learned that her husband and daughters had been arrested, she wasshocked.  “I just thought I should surrender,” she told HumanRights Watch. “I wasn’t able to leave four of my girls in the IDCalone.” Mathy voluntarily reported to a court, where the judge orderedher to pay a 6,000 baht (about US$200) fine for being in the country without avisa, then let her surrender and join her daughters in the IDC. In the two daysthey were apart, Mathy said, “I felt like I was dreaming. I wasn’table to sleep, I’d hear them talking like they were calling me, knockingat the door.”When the sisters and theirfather reached the IDC—two days before Mathy arrived—the policeseparated the girls from their father and sent them to different holding cells.The girls were initially held in a large hall with many adults. “Whenthey took our dad away from us, we started to cry. That’s when I realizedwe couldn’t get out of there,” said Amanthi, Bhavani’ssister, who was 12 at the time. “When I saw them there,” saidMathy, “I was so scared.”After a few days, Mathy andher four daughters were moved to the cell where they would spend the next twoyears. The cell was overcrowded, sometimes with over 100 occupants. People were“sleeping all on top of each other, so crowded even right up to the toilet,”said Amanthi. “At some point we couldn’t sit.” Mathy said shecoped as best she could, but “One of my sons was never arrested. It wasreally difficult. I wanted to be in the IDC with my girls, but I missed mysecond son.” He could not visit without risking arrest himself.Because of the detentioncenter’s policy of holding males in one cell and females in another,without chances to visit, the family was separated, despite being in the samefacility. They were only brought together when a charity group visited once ortwice per month and asked to see the whole family. “When Bhavani wantedto meet my dad or brother,” said Amanthi, “she’d really cry.”Crammed in their cigarette smoke-filled,fetid permanent cell, the girls saw their health and education suffer. Bhavanideveloped a rash all over her body, but Mathy said the medication theIDC’s clinic gave her did not help. The toilets—just three for thehundred or so migrants held there—were filthy, and Bhavani’steenage sister avoided using them because there were no doors. Though theInternational Organization for Migration ran a small daycare center that thegirls could attend once or twice a week, there was no school. “I worried thatmy girls’ education stopped,” said Mathy.Fights often broke out betweenwomen in the overcrowded cell, frustrated by their indefinite detention. “Whensomeone behaved badly to other people, I didn’t like that,” saidBhavani. “They would shout at night.” The guards would not do verymuch when fighting started, and the girls would hide, explained Amanthi. “The[other migrants] are really, really strong. My mom didn’t know how tofight, she tried to take us to a corner and protect us. It was scary.”Detained without release insight, the family members slowly found ways to cope. “The first three tofour months was really hard,” said Mathy. “It was difficult tomanage and take care of my girls. I got used to it. We met people who had moreproblems than us.” Bhavani became friends with a Sri Lankan boy and girldetained with her. Their mothers would carve out a small space for them toplay, defending the area against encroachment from others in the overcrowdedcell.Bhavani and her family werefinally released on bail in the process of being resettled as refugees to theUnited States. Yet Bhavani, who had spent one fifth of her life in detention,had become accustomed to life in the IDC. When the family finally left, “Iwas so sad I had to leave my friends,” she said. “I knew theywouldn’t be coming out too.”Now, living safely in the US,Bhavani has not seen her father in over a year. He was not cleared forresettlement alongside his wife and children, and, despite the risk ofpersecution, chose to return to Sri Lanka rather than remain in the IDC. Thefamily decided that splitting up was the only way to get their children out ofdetention and back to regular education. Mathy still worries about the 20 or soother children left behind in her cell in the IDC: “Their education,their health, their future is spoiled.”SummaryEvery year, Thailandarbitrarily detains thousands of children, from infants and toddlers and older,in squalid immigration facilities and police lock-ups. Around 100children—primarily from countries that do not border Thailand—maybe held for months or years. Thousands more children—fromThailand’s neighboring countries—spend less time in this abusivesystem because Thailand summarily deports them and their families to their homecountries relatively quickly. For them, detention tends to last only days orweeks.But no matter how long theperiod of detention, these facilities are no place for children.Drawing on more than 100interviews, including with 41 migrant children, documenting conditions forrefugees and other migrants in Thailand, this report focuses on how the Thaigovernment fails to uphold migrants’ rights, describing the needlesssuffering and permanent harm that children experience in immigration detention.It examines the abusive conditions children endure in detention centers,particularly in the Bangkok Immigration Detention Center (IDC), one of the mostheavily used facilities in Thailand.This report shows thatThailand indefinitely detains children due to their own immigration status orthat of their parents. Thailand’s use of immigration detention violateschildren’s rights, immediately risks their health and wellbeing, andimperils their development. Wretched conditions place children in filthy,overcrowded cells without adequate nutrition, education, or exercise space.Prolonged detention deprives children of the capacity to mentally andphysically grow and thrive.In 2013, the Committee on theRights of the Child, the body of independent experts charged with interpretingthe Convention on the Rights of the Child, to which Thailand is party, directedgovernments to “expeditiously and completely cease the detention ofchildren on the basis of their immigration status,” asserting that suchdetention is never in the child’s best interest.***Immigration detention inThailand violates the rights of both adults and children. Migrants are oftendetained indefinitely; they lack reliable mechanisms to appeal theirdeprivation of liberty; and information about the duration of their detention isoften not released to members of their family. Such indefinite detentionwithout recourse to judicial review amounts to arbitrary detention prohibitedunder international law.Thailand requires many ofthose detained to pay their own costs of repatriation and leaves them to languishindefinitely in what are effectively debtors’ prisons until thosepayments can be made. Refugee families face the unimaginable choice ofremaining locked up indefinitely with their children, waiting for the slimchance of resettlement in a third country, or paying for their own return to acountry where they fear persecution. Many refugees spend years in detention.Immigration detention,particularly when arbitrary or indefinite, can be brutal for even resilientadults. But the potential mental and physical damage to children, who are stillgrowing, is particularly great.Immigration detentionnegatively impacts children’s mental health by exacerbating previoustraumas (such as those experienced by children fleeing repression in their homecountry) and contributing to lasting depression and anxiety. Without adequateeducation or stimulation, children’s social and intellectual developmentis stymied. None of the children Human Rights Watch interviewed in Thailandreceived a formal education in detention. Cindy Y., for example, was threeyears older than her classmates in school when she was finally released. Shesaid, “I feel ashamed that I’m the oldest and studying with theyounger ones.”Detention also imperilschildren’s physical health. Children held in Thailand’s immigrationdetention facilities rarely get the nutrition or physical exercise they need.Children are crammed into packed cells, with limited or no access to space forrecreation. Doug Y. wanted to play football, his favorite sport, but said, “Ifyou kick a ball, you’d hit someone, or a little kid.” Parentsdescribed having to pay exorbitant prices for supplemental food smuggled fromoutside sources to try to provide for their children’s nutritional needs.Labaan T., a Somali refugee detained with his 3-year-old son, said, “Thediet for the boy consists of the same rice that everybody else eats. He needsfruits which are neither provided nor available for purchase.”The bare and brutal existencefor children in detention is exacerbated by the squalid conditions. Leander P.,an adult American who was detained in the Bangkok IDC, said that one of the twoavailable toilets in his cell, occupied by around 80 people, was permanentlyclogged, so “someone had drilled a hole in the side – what wouldhave gone down just drained onto the floor.” Multiple children weinterviewed described cells so crowded they had to sleep sitting up.Even where children have roomto lie down and sleep, they routinely reported sleeping on tile or wood floors,without mattresses or blankets. “The floor was made from wood, the woodwas broken and the water came in,” said one refugee woman detained formonths in the Chiang Mai IDC with a friend and the friend’s 6 and 8 year-olds.“While I was sleeping, a rat bit my face.”Severe overcrowding appears tobe a chronic problem in many of Thailand’s immigration detention centers.The Thai government detained hundreds of ethnic Rohingya refugees, includingunaccompanied children, in the Phang Nga IDC in 2013. Television footage showednearly 300 men and boys detained in two cells resembling large cages, eachdesigned to hold only 15 men, with barely enough room to sit. Eight Rohingyamen died from illness while detained in extreme heat with lack of medical carein the immigration detention centers that year.Children are routinely heldwith unrelated adults in violation of international law, where they are exposedto violence between those detained and from guards. A Sri Lankan refugee,Arpana B., was pregnant and detained in an overcrowded cell in the Bangkok IDCwith her small daughter in 2011. “One of the detainees beat my daughter,”she said. “He was crazy. There was no guard, no police to help us.”Thailand faces numerousmigration challenges posed by its geographical location and relative wealth,and is entitled to control its borders. But it should do so in a way thatupholds basic human rights, including the right to freedom from arbitrary detention,the right to family unity, and international minimum standards for conditionsof detention. Instead, Thailand’s current policies violate itsinternational legal obligations, put children at unnecessary risk, and ignorewidely held medical opinion about the detrimental effect that detention canhave on the still-developing bodies and minds of children.Alternatives to detentionexist and are used effectively in other countries, such as open receptioncenters and conditional release programs. Such programs are a cheaper option, respectchildren’s rights, and protect their future. The Philippines, forinstance, operates a conditional release system through which refugees andother vulnerable migrants are issued with documentation and required to registerperiodically.Children should not be forcedto lose parts of their childhood in immigration detention. Given the seriousrisks of permanent harm from depriving children of liberty, Thailand shouldimmediately cease detention of children for reasons of their immigrationstatus.Key Recommendations to the Thai GovernmentEnact legislation and policiesto expeditiously end immigration detention of children consistent with therecommendations of the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child.Adopt alternatives todetention, including supervised release and open centers that fulfill the bestinterests of the child and allow children to remain with their family membersor guardians in non-custodial, community-based settings while their immigrationstatus is being resolved.Until children are no longerdetained, ensure that their detention is neither arbitrary nor indefinite, andthat they and their families are able to challenge their detention in a timelymanner.Drastically improve conditionsin Immigration Detention Centers and any other facilities that hold migrantchildren in line with international standards, including by providing access toadequate education and health care and maintaining family unity.Sign and ratify the 1951Refugee Convention and its 1967 Protocol.MethodologyThis report builds on twoprevious Human Rights Watch reports that examined Thailand’s treatment ofmigrants: Ad Hoc and Inadequate: Thailand’s Treatment of Refugees andAsylum Seekers (2012), and From the Tiger to the Crocodile: Abuse of MigrantWorkers in Thailand (2010).The report is based on 105interviews conducted between June and October 2013, of people detained,arrested, or otherwise affected by interactions with police and immigrationofficials in Thailand. This report also uses an additional nine interviews,collected between September 2008 and October 2011 in the course of researchingprevious reports that refer to issues still relevant today.  Intervieweesranged in age from 6 to 48, plus a grandmother who did not know her age.Fifty-five of the migrants interviewed were female. The majority of migrantsinterviewed were Burmese (including Rohingya); the next largest source countrywas Cambodia; and the remainder were from China, Nepal, Pakistan, Somalia, SriLanka, and the United States.Forty-one of the intervieweeswere migrant children under the age of 18. Five others were adults under theage of 23 at the time of their interview who related experiences that occurredwhen they were children. We interviewed 10 adults who were parents of, relatedto, or had spent significant time detained with children below the age of 5.We conducted some interviewsin English and in Urdu, and others through the use of interpreters in alanguage in which the interviewee was comfortable, such as Rohingya, Burmese,Thai, or Khmer. We explained to all interviewees the nature of our research andour intentions concerning the information gathered, and we obtained oralconsent from each interviewee.Most interviews took place in Thailand,including in Bangkok, Chiang Mai, Mae Sot, Phang Nga, Ranong, and Samut Sakhon.We also interviewed, in their home country or in a third country, nine migrantsand refugees who had been detained in Thailand. Most of these interviews tookplace in person; one took place by videoconference.Most interviews were conductedindividually and privately; this included extensive, detailed conversationswith released detainees. In addition, Human Rights Watch researchers visitedseveral immigration detention facilities and conducted group interviews withtwo or three of those detained at a time. In order to safeguard intervieweeswho were detained, our conversations took place outside the hearing ofimmigration staff.Human Rights Watch researchersmet eight government officials concerned with migration who worked for thepolice, immigration department, and the Ministry of Social Development andHuman Security.  We also sent letters requesting data and otherinformation concerning immigration and detention in Thailand, on January 18,2014, to the Office of the Prime Minister, the Immigration Division, theMinister of Social Development and Human Security, and the Thai ambassadors tothe United States and to the United Nations in Geneva and in New York. Althoughwe received a letter from the office of the ambassador to the UN in Genevaacknowledging receipt of our letter, the office did not provide any answers tothe questions we raised. We also sent a summary of our findings, and requestedcomment on July 15, 2014, to the ministries of foreign affairs and interior,and the Thailand mission to the United Nations in New York. The missionresponded on August 14, 2014, and both our letter and their response areincluded as an annex to this report.In addition, we met withrepresentatives of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) andthe International Organization for Migration (IOM), officials ofnongovernmental organizations (NGOs), migrant community leaders, journalists, humanrights lawyers, and activists.All names of migrantsinterviewed, including those of all children, have been replaced by pseudonymsto protect their identity. Pseudonyms used may not match the country of origin.In cases where the interviewee was concerned about the possibility of reprisal,we have concealed the location of the interview or withheld precise details ofthe migrant’s case. Many staff members of government agencies,intergovernmental organizations, and NGOs in Thailand are not identified attheir request.Human Rights Watch did notassess whether the migrants we spoke to qualified for refugee status. Some,perhaps many, do. This report instead focuses on how the Thai government failsto uphold migrants’ human rights, regardless of whether or not thosemigrants have legitimate asylum claims or other protection needs.On May 22, 2014, the Thai militarytook control of the government. Although theresearch for this report was completed prior to the coup, its findings remainrelevant. The military government,known as the National Council for Peace and Order (NCPO), has instituted no major policy changes regardingdetention of migrant children. Thailand’s policy of detaining migrants has remained consistentacross previous governments, including military governments.TerminologyThis report focuses onmigrants, refugees, and asylum seekers in urban centers in Thailand. Mostnon-Burmese asylum seekers lodge refugee claims directly with UNHCR becauseThailand is not party to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees(the 1951 Refugee Convention) and its 1967 Protocol, has no procedure fordetermining refugee status for urban asylum seekers, and has made no commitmentto provide permanent asylum. UNHCR recognizes some as refugees but has noauthority to grant asylum. The Thai authorities do not allow UNHCR to conductrefugee status determinations for members of certain nationalities, including Burmese,Lao Hmong, and North Koreans.An “asylum seeker”is a person who is trying to be recognized as a refugee or to establish a claimfor protection on other grounds. Where we are confident that a person isseeking protection we will refer to that person as an asylum seeker. A “refugee,”as defined in the Refugee Convention, is a person with a “well-foundedfear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membershipof a particular social group or political opinion” who is outside theircountry of nationality and is unable or unwilling, because of that fear, toreturn. In this report, we use the term “refugee” when that personhas been recognized as a refugee by UNHCR in Thailand, though it should benoted that UNHCR recognition of refugee status is declaratory, which means thatpeople are, in fact, refugees before they have been officially recognized assuch.In this report, “migrant”is a broad term used to describe foreign nationals in Thailand, includingpeople traveling in and through Thailand and passengers on boats movingirregularly. The use of the term “migrant” does not exclude thepossibility that a person may be an asylum seeker or refugee.In line with internationallaw, the term “child” as used in this report refers to a personunder the age of 18,[1] includingchildren traveling with their families and unaccompanied migrant children. Thisreport discusses these groups separately and together, and uses the term “migrantchildren” to refer to them together. This term includes children who areseeking asylum or have been granted refugee certificates from UNHCR.For the purposes of thisreport, we use the definition of “unaccompanied migrant child” fromthe term “unaccompanied child” employed by the Committee on theRights of the Child: “Unaccompanied children” are children, asdefined in the Convention on the Rights of the Child, “who have beenseparated from both parents and other relatives and are not being cared for byan adult who, by law or custom, is responsible for doing so.”[2]I. Paths to Immigration DetentionThere are approximately375,000 migrant children in Thailand, including children who work, children ofmigrant workers, and refugee and asylum-seeking children.[3]Children constitute around 11 percent of Thailand’s total migrantpopulation of 3.4 million people.[4]Under Thai law, all migrantswith irregular immigration status, even children, can be arrested and detained.[5]Immigration authorities and police arrest migrants while they are working, atmarkets, or as they travel within the country or seek to cross borders.[6]Migrants of all nationalitieswho are arrested—and as a practical matter unable to pay bribes—arelikely to be taken to police lock-ups or Immigration Detention Centers (IDCs).[7]Those from countries borderingThailand tend to spend a few days or weeks in detention before they are takento the border to be deported or otherwise released. Nationals from countriesthat do not border Thailand, however, can spend years in indefinite detention,being essentially held until they can pay for their own removal.[8]Refugees can be held until they are resettled to a third country, an unlikelyoutcome for many refugees; and the relatively few who are resettled often spendmany months, sometimes years, in detention prior to their resettlement.Arrests of Migrant Workersand their ChildrenThousands of migrant workerscross into Thailand each year from the neighboring countries of Burma,Cambodia, and Laos. Particularly those who remain unregistered with the Thaigovernment face constant risk of arrest. These migrant workers make up asignificant proportion of the workforce in Thailand.[9]Some bring children with them, and some give birth to children inThailand. Infants stay in the migrant workers’ camps or in other homeswith relatives, and young children attend informal schools in migrantcommunities. Many migrant children start working around 13, 14, or 15 yearsold.Prior to the military coup of 2014, Thailand had made someprogress toward regularizing migrant workers, but the process of applying forand gaining migrant worker status remained prohibitively expensive for manyworkers.After the military coup, largenumbers of Cambodian migrant workers left Thailand inresponse to rumors of migrants being arrested and harassed.[10]In just 18 days between June 8 and 25, at least 246,000 Cambodians fledthe country, according to the International Organization for Migration (IOM).[11]Cambodians in particular fear reprisals because of political tension betweenthe two countries.[12]However, it is possible that Burmese and other migrants are also beingtargeted, but are less likely to flee due to conditions in their homecountries.[13]The NCPO government denied that a crackdown on migrants is taking place andcategorically denied all allegations of attacks and human rights violationsagainst migrants.[14]On June 25, 2014, the National Council for Peace and Order (NCPO)announced the creation of service centers to issue temporary entry permits to migrantworkers and temporary work permits to their employers, both of which arerequired to obtain legal migrant worker status. After60 days workers will have to verify their nationality before receiving a longerwork permit. The announcement states that “relevant law enforcement entities shall strictly enforce the law” against migrants whose permits expire.[15]Thailand routinely arrestsmigrant workers and their accompanying family members.  Migrants,including children, report being arrested repeatedly. Nhean P., a 12-year-oldCambodian boy, said he had been arrested, detained, and deported three times inthe past five years. He described his most recent arrest, in early 2012:I was on the bus [with mymother and brother]. Police came and asked for ID – we didn’t haveit. So they told us to get down and they took us to jail and sent us back toCambodia. They sent us back in a pickup truck, without covering, open to therain. We came right back to Thailand. [If we stayed] in Cambodia, wewouldn’t have any money.[16]The lack of a legal framework inThailand that recognizes and provides government-issued documents for refugees,and some obstacles to regularization for migrant workers, means that hundredsof thousands of Burmese adults and children are vulnerable to arrest on thestreet, workplace, or home. In most cases this can lead to detention anddeportation.[17]Police or immigrationauthorities raid migrant worker camps, other accommodation, or places ofemployment; they also stop migrants on the street or in markets. Aung M. was 13years old in March 2013 when she went to a market in the town of Samut Sakhonwith her two sisters. The police stopped them, arrested Aung, and took her tothe police station as she had no papers. “I wanted to cry because I wasafraid,” she said.[18] Hersisters, who had work permits, ran home and told her mother.  Aung’smother told Human Rights Watch, “The moment I knew, I was terrified. Ihad to find my daughter; I worried [that she would be deported to Burma]”.[19]Parents reported fear ofletting children leave their sight, in case they should be arrested.  PhoeZaw, a Burmese man in Mae Sot with a 12-year-old daughter, said, “I worryabout my daughter. I’m afraid of the police. If she goes out anddoesn’t come in on time, I go after her.”[20]Police and immigrationauthorities frequently demand money or valuables from detained migrants ortheir relatives in exchange for their release, either from detention or at thetime of arrest. Migrants reported paying bribes ranging from 200 to 8000 baht (US$6 to 250) or more, dependingon the region, the circumstances of the arrest, and the attitudes of theofficers involved. In some cases the migrant could be forced to pay theequivalent of one to several months’ pay in one incident.[21]The police sometimes tell apprehended migrants that they can pay asmaller amount directly to the police to avoid the higher fines they would berequired to pay if taken to court.[22]Sometimes children with aschool ID card or in a school uniform are not arrested. (Thailand revised itseducation policies in 2005 in line with the “Education for All”movement principles to permit migrant children to attend Thai government schools.)[23]Koy Mala, a 13-year-old Burmese girl who attended government school, said, “Myparents say that if the police come, wear your school uniform so theywon’t arrest you.” She saw her 14-year-old classmate arrested bythe police in 2013 when she was not wearing her uniform.[24]Police arrest criteria seem arbitraryand vary considerably. Saw Lei, a Burmese man with migrant worker status whowas living in Samut Sakhon, told us that in 2012 the police tried to arrest histhen 10-year-old son, but when they discovered his son was a student at anunofficial migrant school, they let him go without requiring uniform or ID.[25] Yet SawLei’s daughter, who was 13 years old at the time, was arrested in aseparate incident in 2012, even though she also went to the migrant school. Shewas released when her teacher came to the police station and vouched that shewas a student.[26]While Thailand has madeprogress in enrolling migrant children in school, there are still significantgaps, leaving some children vulnerable to arrest. “Many families live farinto the fields,” said Saw Kweh, a veteran community activist in Mae Sot,“and schools can’t come pick them up. There are costs for going toschool and some families can’t afford it.”[27]Arrests of RefugeesThe largest group of refugeesliving in Thailand is from Burma, both from the civil wars and more recentlyfrom the violence against Muslims in Burma’s western Arakan State.[28]Thousands still live in camps along the Burmese border. There are also around2,000 refugees from more distant places, including Pakistan, Sri Lanka,Somalia, and Syria.[29]Thailand’s refugeepolicies are fragmented, unpredictable, and ad hoc, leaving refugees and asylumseekers unnecessarily vulnerable to arbitrary and abusive treatment.[30] Thailand hasnot signed the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees nor its 1967Protocol (the Refugee Convention) and does not have an asylum law. It thereforeconsiders refugees and asylum seekers and their families to be irregularmigrants subject to detention. The lack of a legal framework makes the statusof refugees and asylum seekers unclear and renders them vulnerable to arrestand detention.Arrests of Burmese RefugeesAs of2013, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) statistics said that there were 77,913 Burmese refugees inrefugee camps in Thailand, 34,289 of whom were children.[31] These figures may be low; The Border Consortium, a nongovernmentalorganization providing assistance in the border camps, estimates that there are117,000 Burmese refugees in the 10 camps in which they work as of May 2014.[32] Most fled decades of fighting in Burma, and many children were bornin Thailand to refugee parents.[33] Some portion of the tens of thousands of Burmese migrantworkers in Thailand are, in fact, refugees, but have not been officiallyrecognized as such, in large part because they are precluded from lodgingclaims with the government or with the UNHCR.[34]Some 92,000 Burmese refugees were resettledfrom Thailand to third countries between 2005 and January 2014.[35]Political changes in Burma since 2011,including the signing of preliminary ceasefire agreements between the Burmesegovernment and most of the ethnic armed groups, have opened the possibility forfuture voluntary repatriation. However, up to now, few ethnic minority groupmembers have opted to return.[36]Registered Burmese refugees inThailand face stark decisions: they can remain in one of the refugee campsalong the Burmese border, where they are relatively protected from arrest, butlack freedom to move or work, and are dependent on aid agencies, which havereduced funding since the ceasefires in Burma. Alternatively, they can live andwork outside the camps (in areas such as in Mae Sot, Chiang Mai, Kanchanaburi,and Bangkok), but typically without legal status of any kind, which makes themsubject to exploitation, extortion, arrest, and deportation.[37]For decades, tens of thousandsof ethnic Rohingya, a Muslim minority that is effectively denied citizenship inBurma, have fled persecution by the Burmese government. In 2012, the situationsignificantly worsened as a result of sectarian violence, including “ethniccleansing,” in Arakan State, causing massive flights of even more peoplefleeing Burma by boat.[38]In 2013, Thailand permitted 2,055 Rohingya to enter the country, stating itwould offer them “temporary protection,” but then treated them asundocumented migrants and detained them in IDCs and closed government shelters.Starting in October 2013,significant numbers of the Rohingya escaped detention and traveled souththrough Thailand to Malaysia, with the involvement of people smugglers whodetained them in jungle camps and then demanded payments to facilitate travelto Malaysia.[39]  OtherRohingya were deported by Thai immigration officials in Ranong but were notsent to Burma, but rather into the hands of people smugglers who confined themin remote camps and inflicted physical torture on those who could not arrangepayment for travel on to Malaysia.Arrests of Urban Refugees and Asylum SeekersUNHCR-registered refugees andasylum seekers (often from countries not neighboring Thailand) tend to live atthe margins of society in Thailand’s cities, in particular in Bangkok.Without any way to regularize their status with the Thai government, they riskarrest and detention. When the Thai government detains a refugee or an asylumseeker, it argues that it is simply detaining an irregular migrant in order todeport him or her. Therefore, many remain in detention indefinitely, awaitingthe limited places available for resettlement to a third country.[40]Saleem and Shandana P., aPakistani couple seeking asylum, were arrested early in the morning in February2011. “The police came and did rounds,” Saleem said. “Theycame in three or four cars. They knocked on our door [of the apartment they sharedwith other asylum seekers]. They took us to the police station.” Saleemand Shandana were taken to the Bangkok IDC and detained indefinitely.[41]Refugees and asylum seekersoutside detention live in fear of arrest and extended detention. Suvik P., a SriLankan asylum seeker living in hiding in Bangkok with his wife and 3-year-oldson, said he rarely travels outside his apartment: “If I was alone,I’d be ready to take the risk, but I can’t now because I’mwith my son… If we don’t want to go back [to Sri Lanka] we’dhave to stay in the IDC for the rest of our lives.”[42]Nimal P., another Sri Lankanasylum seeker living in Bangkok, echoed this sentiment: “If I’marrested, my son [who is 6 years old] will go to the IDC [with me]. I fear thateven just when I go to the market and come back.”[43]Thai authorities have limited therole of UNHCR in Thailand, severely restricting the organization’s abilityto protect refugees, including children, from arrest or detention. UNHCR is notallowed to conduct refugee status determinations for Burmese, Lao Hmong, orNorth Koreans.[44] Forindividuals from other countries, UNHCR attempts to process refugee statusdetermination requests and resettle to third countries refugees who qualify andfor whom there are available places. UNHCR also issues “Asylum Seeker Certificates”for asylum seekers from other countries that say the bearer is a “Personof Concern” to UNHCR. However, Thai authorities often refuse to recognizethese certificates, meaning they provide scant protection when police arrestpeople.[45]Many refugees and asylumseekers in Bangkok complain about the lengthy waiting periods for UNHCR refugeestatus determination interviews, for UNHCR to report back on the results of theinterviews, and for the appeals process to run its course. Even once UNHCR recognizesa person as a refugee, it can take years to be resettled, and only a fractionof refugees will qualify for the limited numbers of resettlement places. Thesedelays can leave refugees and asylum seekers more vulnerable to arrest anddetention.[46] While UNHCR isable to move the procedures slightly faster for people in indefinite detention,a number of refugees and asylum seekers still languish for months or years inIDCs before their cases are fully processed.People in Thailand who havefled conditions of conflict or persecution are refugees in fact (so-called defacto refugees) even if Thai officials have not recognized them as refugeesunder the law or allowed UNHCR to do so.[47]The absence of a legal framework for refugee status recognition does not meanthat these people should be denied protections owed to refugees, includingprotection from detention.II. Immigration Detention ofChildren“My [five-year-old] nephew asked, ‘Howlong will I stay?’ He asked, ‘Will I live the rest of my lifehere?’ I didn’t know what to say.”[48]-Yanaal N., indefinitely detained with family in the Bangkok IDC forapproximately six months in 2011Migrant children—bothchildren in families and unaccompanied children—are arbitrarily detainedin squalid detention facilities in Thailand. Authorities routinely detainchildren from neighboring countries (Burma, Cambodia, and Laos) for relatively shortperiods that can range from a few days to a few weeks, while children fromcountries that do not border Thailand can be held for much longer periods.[49] Children ofrefugees and asylum seekers can be held for years. Migrants, includingchildren, are typically detained without judicial review or bail, access tolawyers, or any way to challenge their detention. Such indefinite detentionwithout recourse to judicial review amounts to arbitrary detention prohibitedunder international law.Some IDCs, such as in Bangkokor those in towns nearer the country’s borders, are more heavily usedthan others. The Bangkok Immigration Detention Center (IDC) is the location formost of the long-term detainees. However, some interviewees described detaineesheld for months in IDCs in other parts of the country, including in Chiang Mai,Ranong, and Phang Nga.2014Human Rights WatchArbitrary and IndefiniteDetention of ChildrenThailand routinely detains migrantchildren and their families without providing information on length ofdetention. Human Rights Watch asked, among others, the Office of the PrimeMinister and the Immigration Division for details on the numbers of migrantsdetained, the length of detention, and the demographic details of the detainees,but the government did not provide this information. However, according toinformation collected from an international organization, approximately 100children per year are detained on a long-term basis (that is, for a period oflonger than one month).[50]Meanwhile, at least 4,000 children are thought to move through the immigrationdetention system each year for shorter periods (days or weeks).[51]The average length of stay forrefugees and asylum seekers was 298 days between 2008 and 2012.[52]This figure does not include migrants who do not make asylum claims. Staff withJesuit Refugee Service (JRS), which provides assistance to some detainees,informed Human Rights Watch in 2011 that there were Sri Lankan refugees in theBangkok IDC who had been detained for four to five years.[53]Not only does the Thaigovernment fail to inform detainees of the length of detention, their policiesmean some groups are held without any prospect of release. Refugees—whoby definition fear returning home—and migrants from distant countries whocannot afford to pay their way home have no way to get out of detention.Ali A. was an Ahmadi asylum seeker who fled Pakistan in a group with severalchildren.[54] “Weleft Pakistan because we were afraid of prison,” he said. “But inthe IDC in Thailand, we stayed two years… We didn’t see the moonfor two years.”[55]Amjad P., an Ahmadi refugeedetained with his wife and three sons in the Bangkok IDC from December 2010until June 2011, said that the indefinite nature of their detention was particularlytroubling: “There was no timeframe in detention. We could be thereforever until someone would take us for third country resettlement.”Amjad and his family were ultimately released through a trial bail program(discussed in Chapter IV, below).Parents worried about theimpact of indefinite detention on their children. Cindy Y. and Doug Y.’smother said, “I worried about the long time we were in the IDC… Ididn’t know what their future would be. Inside they had nothing, we werelosing all hope.[56]Though the majority of ourinterviewees who were held indefinitely for long periods were detained in theBangkok IDC, Human Rights Watch also received reports of indefinite detentionfor months or longer in the IDCs in Chiang Mai, Phang Nga, and Ranong. Most ofthe interviewees held for long periods were refugees or asylum seekers whofeared persecution if they were to leave the IDCs and go back to their countryof origin.Some detainees are held formonths or years in the IDCs because the Thai authorities rarely deport peopleat the government’s expense to countries that do not border Thailand.Instead, they hold them indefinitely until their family members can provideplane tickets for them to deport themselves. Migrants without financialresources are faced with very long periods of detention.[57]“People couldn’t afford to pay their way out,” said LeanderP., an American who overstayed his tourist visa, who was held in a cell in theBangkok IDC with around 80 long-term detainees. “It was a modern-daydebtor’s prison. I think that’s just wrong.”[58]Arrest and detention ofnon-citizens, including children, is regulated by the 2009 Immigration Act, the2008 Alien Employment Act, and official orders.[59]Sections 19 and 20 of the Immigration Act provide broad discretionary powersfor detention, under which “competent officials” have the authorityto detain non-citizens. There is no legal limit to the length of detention.[60]Under the Alien Employment Act, a migrant’s case may be processedformally through the court system, in which case the migrant could be subjectto a period of imprisonment of up to five years and a fine ranging from 2,000to 100,000 baht (approximately US$66 to US$3,300).[61]In 2010, the office of theprime minister issued an order “regarding the suppression, prosecutionand arrest of migrants working underground.”[62] This order provides for “specialcooperation” on immigration enforcement between the Ministries of Laborand the Interior, as well as the Royal Thai Police Force, the Army, and theNavy. The Mekong Migration Network asserted in a 2013 study that cooperationbetween the police and armed forces in immigration enforcement “lacksoperational transparency and has led to concerns about the treatment ofmigrants in detention,” noting that after the order was issued, there wasan increase in harsh crackdowns on irregular migrants.[63]Non-national children aresubject to the same arrest and detention laws as adults. In 2013, the National Subcommittee on Statelessness, Migration and DisplacedPersons issued a report on the rights of children in immigration detention.They found that Thai law unnecessarily criminalizes children by failing todifferentiate between children and adults when arresting and detainingirregular migrants.[64]Under the 2008Anti-Trafficking in Persons Act, if the arresting officials identify an adultor a child as a victim of trafficking, they may refer that person to agovernment shelter instead of sending them to detention.[65]There are no such exemptions for migrant children who are not victims oftrafficking.In 2013, the Thai governmentused a new form of indefinite detention: keeping women and children in closedshelters from which they were not permitted to leave. And in a break fromprevious practice, Thailand permitted 2,055 Rohingya migrants to stay in thecountry in 2013 under “temporary protection” status. Despite thefact that Rohingya are an oppressed Muslim minority in Burma and have beensubject to considerable targeted violence in recent years, Thailand treated thegroup as “illegal migrants” and did not offer them the chance toclaim protection as refugees or consider treating them as stateless personsunder international law. The government separated families, holding adultmen and some male children, including unaccompanied boys, indefinitely inimmigration detention centers,[66]and detaining others, primarily women and younger children, in closed sheltersrun by the Ministry of Social Development and Human Security (MSDHS).[67]All Rohingya at governmentshelters interviewed by Human Rights Watch said they were not permitted toleave the facilities. Service providers, including Thai government officials,confirmed this. The Thai government made no plans to regularizedetainees’ immigration status. This left the Rohyinga forcibly confinedin shelters they were not permitted to leave .[68]While hundreds of children suchas Rohingya are indefinitely detained for months or more, much larger numbersof children are held typically days or weeks, again without a predeterminedtime of detention and without recourse to judicial review. An internationalorganization estimates that at least 2,500 children from Cambodia, Burma, andLaos pass through the Bangkok IDC each year before being summarily deported.[69]Many other IDCs around the country also detain children from neighboringcountries for short periods, including IDCs in Samut Sakhon, Ranong, ChiangRai, Mae Sot, and Ubon Ratchathani.Adults and children are alsoarbitrarily detained in police lock-ups. Mai M., an ethnic Mon girl from Burma withoutpaperwork in Thailand, was arrested in the outskirts of Bangkok around December2011, when she was 15 years old. She said she was taken to a police stationwith her mother, uncle, and cousin, and held for 15 days, without seeing ajudge or going to court, before police took her and 30 other migrants to theBurmese border by truck to be deported.[70]Human Rights Watch documentedcases of unaccompanied migrant children who were detained,[71]despite international prohibitions on detention of such children.[72]Htee Yaw, a Burmese migrant living and working in Chiang Mai, reported thatpolice arrested and detained his 17-year-old brother for several weeks, withoutany family members, in December 2010. He went to the police station and pleadedfor his release: “They knew he was 17, my brother told them, I told them….He was arrested by the police with handcuffs, even though he was young and hadcommitted no crime.”[73]Htee Yaw said he had to pay a bribe of 5,000 baht ($167) to secure hisbrother’s release.[74]Very young children andinfants, who are exceptionally vulnerable and in need of nurture and care, arenonetheless detained.  Labaan T., a Somali refugee and father who had beendetained for two years and eight months at the time of the interview in theBangkok IDC in 2011, emphasized just how hard it was for his young son todevelop behind bars. “It is absolutely difficult for a boy of 3 years togrow up amid 50-plus grown-up men in a locked room and only allowed to go outfor a short period of less than two hours in the sunshine after three days.”[75]Under Thailand’simmigration law, any migrant who enters the country without properdocumentation will be regarded as an illegal immigrant and may be subject todetention awaiting deportation. Detention is permissible until the authoritiesexecute the deportation, and where they cannot deport, indefinitely.Thailand’s laws do not give migrants or asylum seekers opportunities tochallenge their detention, nor do they provide any way for them to know whenthey will be released.International LawProhibiting Detention of Migrant ChildrenThailand deprives children oftheir liberty as a routine response to irregular entry, rather than as ameasure of last resort. Yet international law places strict limits on theexceptional use of detention of children. The Convention on the Rights of theChild (CRC), to which Thailand is party, states that detention of any typeshould only be used against children as “a measure of last resort and forthe shortest appropriate period of time.”[76]International law indicatesthat children should not be detained for reasons related to their migrationstatus. In February 2013, the Committee on the Rights of the Child, the body ofindependent experts that interprets the CRC, urged states to “expeditiouslyand completely cease the detention of children on the basis of theirimmigration status,” concluding that such detention is never in thechild’s best interest.[77]In the interim, the committee stated, while immigration detention of childrenremains, governments should impose strict time limits to the child’sdetention in order to minimize the loss of education and impact on mentalhealth.[78]Deprivation of liberty has anegative effect on children’s capacity to realize various fundamentalrights enumerated in the CRC, including the rights to education, health, andfamily unity.[79]International law delineates additionalprotection from detention for refugee and asylum-seeking children.Refugees—who are lawfully present in a country—should not bedetained.[80]UNHCR’s Guidelines on Applicable Criteria and Standards Relating to theDetention state that “[a]s a general rule, asylum seekers should not bedetained.”[81]In the exceptional cases where asylum-seeking children are detained, UNHCRemphasizes that this detention must conform to the restrictive parametersexpressed in the CRC.[82]The CRC (as well as UNHCR’s specific guidelines for asylum-seekingchildren) emphasizes that immigration detention of children must have at itscore an “ethic of care,” prioritizing the best interest of thechild above immigration enforcement.[83]Thailand’s indefinitedetention regime, without the possibility of judicial review or remedy, amountsto arbitrary detention prohibited by international treaties to which Thailandis party. The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)provides: “No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest or detention.”[84]The CRC mandates that all children deprived of their liberty (includingchildren in immigration detention) have the right to “prompt access tolegal and other appropriate assistance” and to challenge the legality ofthe deprivation of their liberty before a court.[85]The United Nations WorkingGroup on Arbitrary Detention holds that a migrant or asylum seeker placed indetention “must be brought promptly before a judge or other authority.”[86]The Working Group’s mandate to investigate arbitrary deprivation ofliberty includes “[w]hen asylum seekers, immigrants or refugees aresubjected to prolonged administrative custody without the possibility ofadministrative or judicial review or remedy.”[87]UNHCR emphasizes that asylum seekers and refugees have the rights to libertyand freedom of movement and that detention must only be in accordance with andauthorized by law.[88]II. Impact of Immigration Detention on ChildrenIt is unfortunate that innocent children should bedenied a reasonable upbringing to which they are entitled. They neithercomprehend the circumstances nor had any choice to make.- Labaan T., a Somali refugeeindefinitely detained with his two children, Bangkok IDC, June 2014.Thailand’s use ofimmigration detention has deeply harmed children’s development. Detentionis not in the child’s best interest as it causes lasting harm, in part byimpeding children’s capacity to attain the highest attainable standard ofhealth. Exceptionally vulnerable and at key developmental points in theirlives, children in immigration detention risk psychological trauma, poorphysical health, and setbacks in their educational and social development.Risk of Psychological HarmIndefinite detention can havea devastating effect on migrants’ mental health. Children, due to theirongoing development, can suffer severe mental health problems. Young peoplehave fewer psychological resources than adults to help them manage the stress,anxiety, and poor conditions they experience in immigration detention. For manychildren in immigration detention, developmental immaturity is compounded byhistories of trauma at home and during flight.There is a considerable bodyof scientific literature describing psychological harm linked to immigration detention.In 2009, the British Journal of Psychiatrypublished a systematic review of 10 studies investigating the impact ofimmigration detention on the mental health of children, adolescents, andadults. The review found that all studies reported “high levels of mentalhealth problems in detainees,” including anxiety, depression, self-harm,and suicidal ideation, and that “time in detention was positivelyassociated with severity of distress.”[89]In 2003, the medical journal The Lancet published research, based on agroup of 70 asylum seekers aged 15 to 52 years old detained in the US, findingthat “nearly all” the detainees in the study had “clinicallysignificant symptoms of anxiety, depression, or post-traumatic stress disorder,which worsened with time in detention and improved on release.”[90]The authors concluded that their findings “suggest detention of asylumseekers exacerbates psychological symptoms.”[91]Studies in the United Kingdomand Australia demonstrated deterioration in mental health linked to immigrationdetention. A 2009 study of immigration detention in the UK suggested similarlyhigh rates of mental illness: after a median of 30 days of detention, 76percent of detained adult asylum seekers in this study were clinically depressedcompared with 26 percent of a non-detained comparison sample.[92]In Australia, a 2006 study of refugees who had been detained found thatimmigration detention was linked to risk of ongoing Post Traumatic StressDisorder (PTSD), depression, and mental-health related disability, even afterrelease, and that “longer detention was associated with more severemental disturbance.”[93]The 2009 British Journal of Psychiatry systematicreview emphasized that children demonstrated additional problems compared toadults, while also noting that the sample sizes made the reliability of dataproblematic. Problems observed include separation anxiety, sleep disturbances(including nightmares, night terror, and sleep walking), impaired cognitivedevelopment, and, less often, mutism and refusal to eat or drink.[94]A 2004 Australian study citedin the systematic review found that children regularly reported anxietyregarding educational delays and a sense of shame. Eighty percent of theyounger children (below 6 years old) had developmental delays or emotionaldisturbances. All 10 of the older children in the study (aged between 6 and 17years) met the clinical criteria for PTSD, all 10 had major depression, and allexpressed suicidal ideation. Eight of the older children had engaged inself-harm.[95]According to a 2009 study inthe UK that conducted a psychological assessment of 11 children held inimmigration detention, all 11 reported symptoms of depression and anxiety;sleep problems, poor appetite, and behavioral difficulties were common.[96]A 2011 paper examining the impact of detention of asylum-seeking and refugeechildren in Canada found that “the preliminary results of nearly 20 in-depthinterviews with children and families are in keeping with international medicalliterature: detention is highly distressing for children and may have long-termconsequences.”[97]During research for thisreport, children and their parents described to Human Rights Watch a variety ofmental health problems associated with detention, including depression, sleepproblems, isolation, and detachment.  Doug Y. was an active 6-year-old boywhen he entered detention, but he became despondent, according to his sister: “Hewas just sitting and lying down.”[98]Doug’s mother said he “wasn’t talking [when they werein the IDC]. It’s hard on the children, we were losing all hope.”[99]Cindy Y. was 9 when sheentered immigration detention, and stayed for three years. “The worstpart was that you were trapped and stuck,” she said. “Youcouldn’t go anywhere. You look to the left, it was always the same. Tothe right, always the same. And in front of you, just lots and lots of people,so many people. I would look outside and see people walking around theneighborhood, and I would hope that would be me.”[100]Adults who spoke to HumanRights Watch who had been held for longer periods noted a negative impact onmental well-being. Abid A., an adult held for two years in the Bangkok IDC,said that by the end, his “mind was not working properly. If you stay inone room without going outside, without contact, your mind gets confused.”[101]Leander P., theAmerican held in the IDC in 2012, was detained alongside a Swedish detainee whoLeander said had been there for several years. “He went into the bathroomand kept banging his head on the metal pipe. He looked totally beat, exhausted,like he’d given up. People had to pull him away from the pipe. I think hewas trying to commit suicide.”[102]Interviewees said that therewere very few resources available for people with mental health problems.Leander described an elderly British man in his cell who was suffering fromwhat Leander believed was dementia. “He never went down to the doctorwhile I was there... There’s no way he should have been there. He thoughtI was a woman, he had real dementia problems. He absolutely should not havebeen there. He was completely confused.”[103]Some children rememberedvividly the trauma of detention. Veata S. was 10 when we spoke with her. Shedescribed in detail her detention in the Bangkok IDC two years earlier: “They[the immigration police] had bats, they would slap people in the face…I’m scared now, I’m scared they’re going to beat me, with thebats they have.”[104]Adults who spoke to HumanRights Watch worried that children in immigration detention started to seedetention as a normal condition. Ali A., who was detained in the Bangkok IDCfor two years, said:Some babies, if they’reborn there or stay there for one or two years, they think this is life. Theythink this is normal… One man in our room had a child… who came inas an infant. That girl stayed four years. She will think “This is mylife, this is everything.” If your children go live in the IDC theiremotions will die.[105]Risk of Harm to Physical HealthDetention of children cancause serious physical harm and exposes them to a range of potential healthrisks. Immigration detention facilities are rarely equipped to provideappropriate care for children’s physical health. Thailand’s IDCsare not designed to hold families or young children, or for that matter,anyone, for a lengthy period. Lack of exercise and adequate nutritionparticularly affect children’s growing bodies. Our interviewees indicatedinstances of children falling sick in detention.Lack of Adequate ExerciseOne of the definingexperiences for children held in immigration detention is lack of adequaterecreation space, exercise, and fresh air.Many of our child intervieweesheld in the Bangkok IDC, for instance, were either unable to go to therecreation area, or only allowed to go there approximately once a week for oneor two hours. Cindy Y., who was 9 when she entered the IDC, spent the vastmajority of the time confined to an overcrowded cell, barely walking. “WhenI first got out, it was hard to run,” she said. “I got…cramps. But I kept at it, and now I can run.”[106]The recreation space itselfwas crowded and inappropriate for children. Doug Y. was 6 when he entered theBangkok IDC. “Football is my favorite thing,” he told us. “Butwe couldn’t play football in the IDC. Even in the recreation area, therewasn’t space. If you kick a ball, you’d hit someone, or a littlekid. And we only had a little ball.”[107]Leander P., the American adult held in 2012, said, “People in theexercise area could be very aggressive.”[108]Often children held forshorter periods are not allowed outside at all. Nhean P. said he had beenarrested, detained in the Bangkok IDC, and deported back to Cambodia threetimes between the ages of 7 and 12. Each time, he was detained for a few nightsor a week without being allowed out of his cell. He said, “We don’thave a place to play outside [there]. We just eat and sleep, eat and sleep.”[109]Mai M. was 15 when she washeld in a police station on the outskirts of Bangkok for 15 days in December2011; she said the cell was “always very packed” and “weweren’t allowed to go outside, we were always in the same room.”[110]Many international andnational public health organizations recommend that children engage in at leastone hour or more of physical activity each day.[111]Children should engage in a combination of activities, such as vigorous aerobicactivity like running or football; muscle-strengthening activity, such asgymnastics; and bone-strengthening activity, such as jumping rope.[112]Lack of Adequate NutritionChildren, who are physicallygrowing and changing, need age-appropriate nutrition and care. Human RightsWatch found that authorities routinely failed to provide children inimmigration detention with adequate nutrition appropriate for their physicaldevelopment. Parents reported that they had to supplement theirchildren’s diet with food purchased on the black market, using precious,dwindling resources.Interviewees told Human RightsWatch about the poor quality and insufficient quantity of food provided to them.Cindy Y. turned 9 when she was held in the Chiang Mai IDC for three months. “Wewere just lying down all day, without enough to eat or drink.”[113]In the Bangkok IDC, detainees were generally given food three times per day,but several detainees reported they were provided insufficient amounts of foodand that they were often hungry. Arunny P. had been detained in the Bangkok IDCat least three times by the time we interviewed her at 10 years old, deportedeach time to Cambodia. “The food wasn’t good,” she said.“Just a little rice, I was not full.”[114]“The food was only rice and soup,” said Saleem P., a Pakistaniasylum seeker held in the Bangkok IDC with several boys in 2011.“Sometimes chicken [in the soup], but mostly bones.”[115]Labaan T., a Somali refugee,was detained in 2011 in the Bangkok IDC in a cell with his 3-year-old son,while his wife and year-old child stayed in another cell. He worried aboutnutrition: “The diet for the boy [in my cell] consists of the same ricethat everybody else eats. He needs fruits which are neither provided noravailable for purchase.”[116]Some detainees reportedinsufficient potable water. Abid A., an adult held for two years in the BangkokIDC alongside refugee boys, said, “We didn’t have filtered water,we’d have to drink water from [the same sink as they used for] washingclothes. Sometimes they’d turn off the water for 15 to 18 hours.”[117]Some interviewees reportedconcerns that the unsanitary conditions tainted the food. For instance, oneinterviewee said that in the Bangkok IDC, detainees washed their own food traysin the toilet areas, using the same water source as was used for the toiletsthemselves; the detainees used the same trays for the next meal without otheropportunities to wash them.[118]Some detainees reportedsupplementing their diet or that of their children by buying food and waterfrom the outside. Peter X., a Chinese refugee who was detained in the BangkokIDC with his parents, said people had to drink water from the wash area, “unlessthey buy bottles” at “five times the price” of shops inBangkok.[119]Leander P. reported that it was possible to buy food, such as fresh chicken ornoodles, from other detainees who were friendly with the guards, for a mark-upof about 50 percent on street prices.[120]Parents struggled to ensureadequate and nutritious food for their children. For example, Mathy S., a SriLankan asylum seeker who was held in the IDC for two years with her fourdaughters, the youngest of whom was 8 when they were arrested, said, “Iworried my girls would develop real health problems... I’d spend 500-600baht (about US$17-20) [each week] to buy food for the girls. It was hard to sayno to what they needed.” Mathy had to scramble to find money: “We’dsell land in Sri Lanka and send the money to Thailand [so a family member]could buy things for us.”Major governmental andintergovernmental authorities such as the Food and Agriculture Organization,the World Health Organization, the US Department of Agriculture, and the USNational Institutes of Health, recommend a balanced diet for children ofnutrient-dense foods, including vegetables, fruits, and cereals.[121]Healthy food is essential for child development;[122]physical development, including bone development, requires particular nutrientsto ensure healthy growth.[123]The UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners mandate thatprison officials ensure detainees regularly have food of “nutritional valueadequate for health and strength, of wholesome quality and well prepared andserved[,]” as well as adequate drinking water.[124]Poor Health and Insufficient Medical CareChildren’s right to thehighest attainable standard of health is compromised by detention. Intervieweesreported persistent medical problems due to detention and lack of access tocare. Children and families in detention are entirely dependent on Thaiauthorities for medical care, yet interviewees reported insufficient access tomedical services and inadequate treatment. Care for pregnant women and newbornswas also lacking.A number of studies indicateendemic health problems and lack of access to appropriate healthcare servicesin Thailand’s immigration detention facilities. The Thai National Subcommittee on Statelessness, Migration and DisplacedPersons found in a 2013 study that children in immigration detention sufferfrom skin diseases, respiratory diseases, and malnutrition.[125]A World Health Organization-sponsored meeting noted low rates oftuberculosis screening in 2012 in the Bangkok IDC.[126]A 2012 paper in the Oxford Monitor of Forced Migration found thatamong 96 interviewees (one third of whom were children) who had been detainedin the Bangkok IDC for at least several months in 2011, “everyone,especially the children, suffered physically” from detention conditions.Interviewees reported skin allergies, itching, asthma, and fever.[127]Interviewees for this reportdescribed poor general conditions that could lead to disease. Peter X., aChinese refugee who was detained in the Bangkok IDC with his parents, said, “Thebiggest problem was the air quality. There was no ventilation. A quarter of thepeople in the room were smoking. The whole place, it was suffocating. I wore amask but I still got sick after two to four days.”[128] LabaanT., a Somali refugee held with his 3-year-old son, said, “The room has 50occupants, most of whom are smokers. The conditions are not hygienic for theboy. The room is hot and dirty which has caused the boy to be sick frequently.”[129]Interviewees also reportedchronic health problems that were not resolved by medical care. Bhavani S., whowas 8 years old when she entered the Bangkok IDC for two years and was held ina fetid cell, developed a persistent rash, according to her mother, Mathy.[130] Mathy addedthat several of the other young children, including toddlers, developed asimilar rash.[131]Mathy consulted the nurse at the clinic in the Bangkok facility, but said thatthe rash persisted for years despite the prescribed medication.[132]Abid A., an adult who was heldin the Bangkok IDC for two years, acquired sores on his legs. “It hurt somuch I couldn’t walk or pray … The nurse told me to keep clean. Buthow could I keep clean?”[133]Peter X. described an incidentin which medical care was slow, despite serious illness:[A 30-year old man in my cell]started having fits, like epilepsy … He’d been in the cell, havingfits, lying in his own puke, for hours. [Eventually, detainees and guards] puthim outside the cell on a low bench and used a water hose…. Then he layon that table. It was probably 10 hours before they took him outside the centerfor some treatment. The doctor never came, it was the nurse from the clinic whocame, but no one else, no one with medical equipment. He was half naked, justin his boxers. He was unconscious, [both] in the cell and outside on the table.[134]Medical care for pregnantwomen and young infants was lacking. Saleem and Shandana P., Pakistaniasylum-seekers, were expecting a baby when they were detained in the IDC forseveral months in 2011. Saleem said, “My wife… had no check-ups. Iasked the guards four or five times for check-ups, but nothing.”[135] Shandana wasenormously relieved when she and Saleem were released prior to her due date: “Isaw one woman who was pregnant, in her last month, at the IDC. They took her[to a local hospital handcuffed] to deliver the baby…. I was scared itwould be the same for me.”[136]Women were brought back to theIDC with their newborn infants a few days after giving birth. However, severalinterviewees complained that authorities made inadequate provisions for themost basic needs of young infants. Sithara P., a Sri Lankan asylum seeker, washeld in the Bangkok IDC with her husband and three children for at least threeyears. Her youngest child was 10 months when they entered the facility. “Wedidn’t have diapers for the baby [in the IDC],” she said.  “Thebaby would wake up soaked in urine.”[137]Social and DevelopmentalHarmChildren in immigrationdetention are denied the chance to realize rights central to their social,emotional, and educational development. They are frequently deprived of contactwith their families, whether by separation into different cells in the samedetention facility, or by family outside not being able to visit. Many childrenin immigration detention do not have sufficient access to education, or toservices that would enrich their growth and allow them to fulfill theirpotential. Some refugee children who are resettled to third countries mayencounter further difficulties integrating into a new life after years indetention.Denial of Family ContactChildren held inThailand’s immigration detention facilities were routinely separated fromfamily members and denied opportunities to see them. Mui, who runs a shelterfor street children in Bangkok, commented on her years of experience workingwith Cambodian children who are deported through the Bangkok IDC: “If thechildren are big enough to play, they might be separated [from their parents].”[138] If childrenare housed in a different cell from one parent, they are not necessarily givenany visitation opportunities.A number of interviewees toldHuman Rights Watch that one of the most painful aspects of being detained forlong periods was being separated from family members. Amjad P., an Ahmadirefugee who was detained in the Bangkok IDC from December 2010 until June 2011,said he was in one cell with his two older boys; his wife and youngest childwere in another cell. “It was painful for us to be separated from ourwives and children,” he said of his own family and other Ahmadi asylumseekers in the same situation. “Our family life was destroyed.”[139]Kah, a 17-year-old Burmese boywithout paperwork, was detained for one month in Chiang Mai, northern Thailand,without his parents or another guardian, before being deported to Burma. He waskept in a filthy cell with about 50 men and one 5-year-old boy. The 5-year-old’smother, who was in a different cell and could only see her son for one hourevery day, spent much of the rest of the time sitting by the cell door andcalling his name. Meanwhile, Kah said of the distraught little boy, “Wetried to make him laugh.”[140]Our interviewees reported thatchildren were visibly affected by these enforced separations. Yanaal N. wasdetained with his 5-year-old nephew, who he said struggled, wanting to see bothhis parents. “[My nephew] was with his mother for the first 10 or 12days. Then he said he wanted to be with his father and me, so they moved him toour cell [where he couldn’t see his mother].” Yanaal’s nephewwas periodically allowed to attend the IOM-run daycare center in the IDC. “After,[my nephew] would sneak up to his mother’s cell with his sister to wave‘bye’ to his mother. If the guards saw this and caught him he wouldbe in trouble.”[141]Without visitationopportunities arranged by immigration officers, many detainees were dependenton interventions from outside groups for visits to take place. When outsidersvisit the Bangkok IDC, they can request to see a particular detainee(identified by their detention center registration number) and that detainee isbrought to the visitors’ room. Volunteers from church or communityservice groups are able to coordinate their visits so family members can bebrought to the room at the same time, and have the opportunity to see eachother.Dwight Turner, an Americanliving in Bangkok who has volunteered at the IDC, described the loud, chaoticatmosphere during these visiting periods, which last for less than an hour. “There’sa fence that separates visitors and those visited, but at least families couldmeet and touch,” he said.[142]Without these coordinated visits from volunteer groups, families have few otherchances to meet.Denial of Adequate EducationChildren in immigrationdetention typically have no meaningful access to education or to otherenriching experiences. Yet these children are often held for weeks, months, oreven years at a time when their education is crucial to their development. Noneof the children interviewed for this report described adequate schooling duringtheir time in detention, and parents repeatedly cited the lack of education asa key concern.Mathy S. was detained for twoyears in the Bangkok IDC in the same cell as her four daughters. “When wewere in Sri Lanka, the girls were healthy and had a good education,” shesaid. “The biggest problem [in the IDC]: I worried that my girls’education stopped.”[143]Cindy Y. was held in variousIDCs for three years, starting at age nine. When she was finally released, shewas behind in school: “I missed some years, and now… I’m inyounger classes. I feel ashamed that I’m the oldest and studying with theyounger ones.”[144]Unlike most other immigrationdetention facilities, the Bangkok IDC does have a daycare center (run by IOM),which some children (typically longer-staying children) can attend. While thedaycare center is a welcome break for children, it does not fulfill the Thaigovernment’s obligation to provide education. The center has limitedcapacity, so children can only attend a few times per week, and less if the IDCis crowded and there are more children in detention.[145]Children from Laos, Cambodia, and Burma (who are typically detained for shorterperiods) rarely, if ever, are allowed to go to the daycare center.The National Subcommittee on Statelessness, Migration and DisplacedPersons found in a 2013 study that children in immigration detention inThailand are routinely denied education, and this puts Thailand in violation ofits obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the Child.[146]III. Abusive Conditions for Children inImmigration DetentionThe Bible talks about hell. This is one part of hell.-Sunil K., a Nepalese man detained in the Bangkok IDC, June2011Children, for whom thepotential harm of immigration detention is great, have that harm magnified bythe appalling conditions in Thailand’s immigration detention facilities.Children and parents alike consistently reported horrendous conditions ofdetention—including severe overcrowding, putrid sanitation, and anatmosphere of violence—that fall far short of international standards.[147] The poorconditions of the facilities make it even less likely that detained childrencan grow and thrive.Human Rights Watch was notallowed sufficient access to the Bangkok IDC—the facility that holds themajority of long-term detainees, as well as significant numbers of thosedetained for short periods—or to other facilities to make a first-handassessment of conditions of detention. Nonetheless, detainees and formerdetainees gave consistent accounts of overcrowded, unhygienic, and sometimesviolent conditions inappropriate and damaging for children.The poor conditions stem inpart from the fact that the IDCs were not built to house large numbers ofdetainees for long periods of time. The government has acknowledged this issuebut has failed to address it. In 2011, Vijavat Isarabhakdi, director general ofthe Department of International Organizations in the Thai Ministry of ForeignAffairs, told Human Rights Watch: “We acknowledge that the IDCs were notbuilt to house such large numbers.”[148]A second key reason forThailand’s abysmal detention conditions is that Thailand considers it thedetainees’ responsibility, rather than the government’s, to providefor basic needs in detention. Thailand’s immigration law requires that “theexpense of detention shall be charged to the alien’s account,”[149] in clearviolation of international standards.[150]International law binding onThailand prescribes appropriate treatment of detained children, as well asadults. The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)provides that “[a]ll persons deprived of their liberty shall be treatedwith humanity and with respect for the inherent dignity of the human person,”[151]while the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) specifies that “everychild deprived of liberty shall be treated with humanity and respect for theinherent dignity of the human person and in a manner which takes into accountthe needs of persons of his or her age.”[152]Thailand’s immigrationdetention facilities fail to meet minimum international standards. The UNStandard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners set the internationalstandard for minimally acceptable conditions for detention, which include basicstandards of hygiene, provision of food, the separation of men and women, andchildren and adults, access to natural light and fresh air, and recreation.[153]UNHCR’s guidelines on detention of asylum seekers notes that states mustadhere to UN standards on conditions of confinement, including by segregatingchildren from unrelated adults where it is in their best interest, and byalways providing education. Where children in families are subject toimmigration detention, states should ensure that the child should not beseparated from his or her parents against his or her will.[154]Abusive Conditions for Children in the Bangkok IDCThe first day I thought, wow, this is really where Ihave to stay? … People have been here months and years…. If I hadbeen standing at that door taking a picture, just looking at everyone lyingdown, body after body – it was an awful sight.-Leander P., an American detained in the Bangkok IDC in 2012The Bangkok IDC deals withthousands of children every year, including some 2,500 who are processed fordeportation to neighboring countries. Generally thefacility with the most detainees nationwide, the Bangkok IDC also hosts thevast majority of the long-term detainees, including around a hundred childrenas of October 2013. The government does grant some domestic and internationalnongovernmental organizations access to provide basic assistance, but this doesnot cover all needs.The Bangkok IDC has largecells that are designed to hold around 80 people, but which, according tonearly all of our interviewees, are often overcrowded. Detention officialsdivide detainees by gender and by nationality, though there can be manynationalities grouped in one room. Long-term detainees described being held inthe same cell as other long-term detainees, though they also describeshort-term detainees joining them at particularly crowded times.Failure to Separate Children from Non-Relative AdultsChildren are typically held inthe same room as one of their parents, with other unrelated adults, whileunaccompanied children are held in cells with adults of their gender, inviolation of international standards on detention.[155]The National Subcommittee on Statelessness, Migration andDisplaced Persons found in 2013 that this practice puts Thailand in violationof its obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the Child.[156]According to the interviewees,younger children, including infants and nursing toddlers, tend to be in thesame cell as their mother. Boys can be sent to live in the same room as theirfathers at varying ages. One long-term detainee reported that boys were sent tothe male room around 12 years of age.[157]Yet we also received reports of boys being separated from their mothers andsent to the male room as young as 2 years.[158]Whether unaccompanied or witha family member in their cell, children held with unrelated adults, who themselvesare under the stress of detention, are exceptionally vulnerable to abuse andneglect. For instance, Amanthi S., a Sri Lankan refugee detained in a cell withher mother and three sisters, reported being afraid of a Russian detainee who,she said, “hit me – it was really scary.”[159]Degrading Treatment in Initial Holding CellsSome detainees reported thatwhen they initially entered the IDC, they were held in transit, or processing,cells for several days before being allocated more permanent space. These cellswere hectic and inappropriate for children. Amanthi, who was 12 years old whenshe entered the IDC, described the initial large cell as “a big hall,with people with diseases.”[160]Diederik O., a Ugandan refugeeheld in the IDC in 2010, described the initial holding cell. He slept in asmall place on the tiled floor, with a “bright light that is never turnedoff just above my eyes.” The first day, “through the night,detainees were brought in and out, causing a few stirs as they lined them up,men, boys, women and girls, with guards shouting out sit down, line-up ordersin Thai.”[161]Diederik, who was awaiting resettlement to the United States, described groupsof “women, girls and their children lined up and made to squat in linesand then stayed for about an hour before [the initial registration] process wasover.” He added, “I did not really enjoy the sight of all this,people [were] treated like animals.”[162]Diederik described thedeterioration in his cell’s conditions. With more than 100 people in hiscell, including a boy he estimates was seven years old, he wrote in his diary, “Wewere full to the max … packed in like sardines[.]  I could …just sleep in one position all night long….  Before dawn, then thedetention cell … was a sauna in itself, dripping with sweat, as I movedto and from the dirty stinky washroom to wet my body, shirt and face. [With]inmates packed over each other in an attempt to sleep … it looked like a… body dumping corner.”[163]Children in Overcrowded, Squalid CellsChildren barely had room tosleep or walk, let alone room to run or play, in cells they were held in formonths or years. Cindy Y. was held in a women’s cell for three yearsstarting at the age of nine. “There were so many people in the room, weslept sitting and leaning on each other,”[164]she said, while demonstrating thatsleeping position with her younger brother. Nimal P., a Sri Lankan asylumseeker, was held in a cell for several months in 2013 with his seven-year-oldson, with a varying population between 55 and 120 people. “At 120[people] the boy can’t lie down,” he said. “There’s noroom for him to play.”[165]According to the MekongMigration Network (MMN), a regional coalition of NGOs that engaged in anextensive study of Thailand’s arrest and deportation practices in 2013,the Bangkok IDC has cells of different sizes, the smallest being approximately12 meters by 8 meters, and the largest around 50 meters by 50 meters.[166]MMN estimates that at times there are 400 detainees held in a single cell.[167]Similarly, a 2012 study interviewing those held and released from the BangkokIDC, cited interviews with women and girls asserting “300to 400 persons had to stay in a room built for 40 to 50 persons.”[168]The World Health Organization,in the course of a study on tuberculosis in 2013, found there to beapproximately 880 to 1,000 people detained in the Bangkok IDC, withapproximately 3 square meters per person.[169]The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) recommends at least 3.4square meters per detainee (and 5.4 meters per detainee in newly constructedprisons).[170]Ali A., a Pakistani asylumseeker who was detained for two years in the Bangkok IDC, said that “we’dhave to hang our bags on strings because the room was full, there wasn’tspace to keep them on the floor.”[171]Abid A., who was detained alongside Ali, added, “The guards would cut ourstrings so the things would fall down about two times per month” tosearch for contraband or smuggled property.[172]Leander P. also described suchconditions persisting in 2012: “When I got in there were 83 people listedin the room [I was assigned to]. That was really tight. There’s almost noway to walk around… If I rolled to the right, I’d lie on someone.If I rolled to the left I’d roll on someone else. I’d get elbowedall the time. I had to hang my bag by a string or use it as apillow—there was no room anywhere else.”[173]Not only did children reportthat they had no room to sleep, they also reported that they frequently did nothave mattresses or blankets. Arunny P., from Cambodia, had been detained at theBangkok IDC three times by the time she was 10 years old. When describing themost recent time, she said, “We slept on tiles and had to sleep in rowsall next to each other because there were lots of people.”[174]Veata S., a Cambodian girl, was eight years old when she was detained at theBangkok IDC in 2011. She was held with her mother and younger sister in a cellwhere “we had nothing, we just slept on the floor, on the hard floor.”[175]Rosa H. stayed in the BangkokIDC for almost two years with her friend Linda Y. and Linda’s twochildren. “We never had any mattresses,” she said. “Theynever gave us clothes.”[176]Linda added, “One winter, [a humanitarian NGO] gave blankets foreveryone.”[177]Interviewees describedappalling sanitation conditions, with limited water, filthy wash areas, taintedfood, and insufficient numbers of toilets.Labaan T., a Somali refugeeindefinitely detained with his three-year-old son in 2011, reported that theappalling conditions took their toll on his son’s health. “Hebathes in the same water as the rest of us in the room and sometimes there isno water at all.”[178]Saleem P., a Pakistani Ahmadiasylum seeker held in a cell with children in 2011, reported that “thewater would only run for four hours, during which so many people, 60 people,had to shower, do anything.”[179]Sunil K., a Nepalese refugee, had been detained for three years and nine monthswhen Human Rights Watch interviewed him in 2011. He said, “We alsocan’t get hot water. We use a naked [electrical] wire to heat the water.”[180]Cindy Y., the girl held forthree years starting at the age of nine, told us that her cell, shared with atleast 40 other people, “smelled like a rubbish bin, like near a toilet.People smoked and I didn’t like that… I’d put mint under mynose to block the smell.”[181]Veata, the Cambodian girl who was eight when she was last detained said, “Thetoilet was really bad, the smell was really bad.”[182]Leander P. described theshower area in his cell as “awful”. He said that of the threetoilets—for approximately 80 people—one was “just a storagearea, for cleaning stuff.” One of the other two toilets was permanentlyclogged:As a solution, someone haddrilled a hole in the side, so what would have gone down just drained onto the floor….After every meal you’d have to go into the bathroom to use the water andsponges there to clean your tray. If someone was in that toilet, there’dbe shit in the water you’d wash your tray in…. The sponges were onthe floor, in the shit. That was the only way the trays were washed.[183]Peter X., who fled China aged17 and was detained in the Bangkok IDC before being resettled to the US, saidthat “the whole cell’s covered in this cage, with an opening at thebottom. They’d slide food through the opening. I felt like they werefeeding animals.”[184]Abid A., said, “There weremany times some creatures…. Lots of cockroaches.”[185]Ali A. added that “there were some insects like lice that sucked blood.Anywhere we have hairs, they’d come and suck, and if the blankets weren’tclean, they’d live there…. It was itchy, itchy from the dirtyblankets.”[186]The toll on children’smental and physical health from being held in such appalling conditions ishigh. Detention is inherently problematic for the realization ofchildren’s right to health.Children Exposed to ViolenceThe Bangkok IDC appears tooperate with an atmosphere of violence that renders the environment even moreunsuitable for children. Interviewees repeatedly reported fights breaking outin the overcrowded cells; sometimes excessive force used by guards to break upthose fights, including with batons; and occasionally young children physicallyhurt in the violence.Children of all ages said thatthey were witness to episodes of violence, underscoring the unsafe andunhealthy environment of detention. The psychological harm of immigration detentionis exacerbated by the stress of violence and fear of attack.International law binding onThailand prohibits corporal punishment and cruel, inhuman, and degradingtreatment in detention facilities, whether criminal or civil.[187]Similar standards prohibit the use of force against children in detentionexcept in exceptional circumstances to prevent self-injury, injury to others,and destruction of property.[188]Many interviewees describedthe Bangkok IDC as a loud and violent place. Even though Leander P. was anadult—25 years old—when he was detained, he still found theenvironment difficult: “I was really scared, when I first walked in.People were pounding on the walls, yelling at us.”[189]Interviewees such as YanaalN., a Pakistani asylum seeker detained in the Bangkok IDC, described “fightsevery five or six days, with other prisoners.”[190]Leander explained how guards would respond: “They’d hit people withsticks, the people in the fight… they’d punish people in the fighteven if the fight was over.”[191]Ali A. said, “The guards would hit with their hands, slap, and punch”[192] in addition tousing batons.This environment left childrenterrified. Cindy Y. was ten when she was taken to the Bangkok IDC and heldthere for almost two years. She said, “I saw people fighting and I wasscared, I was scared of the guards. You know, they have sticks. What if theyhit me? I’m really scared of fighting.”[193]One adult detainee describedone particular incident witnessed by a ten-year-old girl detained with her: “SomeCambodian women were fighting…. [Six or seven] guards came in… theywere beating the women with their sticks…. The guards hit [one woman] onthe face. Her eye swelled up, all over that side of her face.”[194]Veata S., from Cambodia, wasdetained in the Bangkok IDC when she was eight years old. Two years later, whenHuman Rights Watch interviewed her, she vividly remembered a particularincident: “They [the guards] hit a woman who was pregnant. She wasplaying cards. I was with my mom, about to go to sleep. I heard a scream.”[195]Some children ceased to beafraid and started to see the guards’ violence as normal. Nhean P. saidhe had been detained in the Bangkok IDC, and deported back to Cambodia threetimes between the ages of seven and twelve. He told us that “when someonedoes something wrong, the guards hit people. Like if those people fight... Ithink that’s normal.”[196]Human Rights Watch receivedsome reports of children themselves receiving blows, including in one case froma guard. Veata said that a guard at the Bangkok IDC slapped her in the facewhen she was eight.[197]Arpana B., a 31-year-old Sri Lankan woman who was pregnant at the time of herdetention in the Bangkok IDC in 2011 and who had a small daughter with her,told Human Rights Watch: “One of the detainees beat my daughter. He wascrazy. There was no guard, no police to help us.”[198]The immigration detentionsystem has no comprehensive regulations governing staff behavior, nordisciplinary or punitive measures for immigration staff who violatemigrants’ rights.[199]We requested, on multiple occasions, information from the Office of the PrimeMinister, the Police Immigration Division, and the ambassadors to the US and tothe UN in Geneva and in New York regarding procedures regulating staff behavioror providing accountability for abuse or other violations of migrants’rights. Although we received a letter from the office of the ambassador to theUN in Geneva, acknowledging receipt of our letter, the office did not provideany answers to the questions we raised.Abusive Conditions inOther Immigration Detention CentersWhile this report does notoffer a comprehensive survey of all facilities used to detain migrant children,Human Rights Watch received reports of problematic conditions in a number ofother IDCs around the country in addition to the Bangkok IDC, including inPhang Nga, Chiang Mai, Chiang Rai, Nong Khai, and Mae Sot.Gross overcrowding led toappalling conditions at the Phang Nga IDC in 2013, when the Thai governmentdetained hundreds of ethnic Rohingya refugees, including unaccompaniedchildren. Television footage from ITN showed some 280 men and boys detained inthe Phang Nga facility in two cells resembling large cages, each designed tohold only 15 men, with barely enough room to sit. Some suffered swollen feetand withered leg muscles. In July 2013, men reported they had not been let outof the cells in five months.[200]In response to internationalpressure to protect a large influx of Rohingya migrants in 2013, the Thaigovernment made some efforts to separate Rohingya migrant children and placethem in closed shelters instead of IDCs. However, Human Rights Watch found thatthe government failed to adequately screento identify children.[201]Children, including unaccompanied migrant children, were among the Rohingyamigrants from Burma held in the immigration detention centers. Not only shouldchildren not be kept in such conditions, but detaining them alongside unrelatedadults violates international law.Hakim A., a 12-year-old unaccompanied Rohingya boy, told Human Rights Watchthat he was detained at the Phang Nga Immigration Detention Center in June2013: “I was put in the same room with other Rohingya. But I just went bymyself in the corner of the room. I didn’t know anybody there…It’s not a good place: the toilet’s right here, you live righthere, you eat right here. It’s all very close.”[202]Human Rights Watch’svisits to the Ranong IDC and the Samut Sakhon IDC in July 2013 raised furtherconcerns about the conditions of the facilities. Our visual observation of thewomen’s cell in the Ranong IDC showed that the areas around the toiletswere filthy, with the tiles covered in black dirt. The 10 or so women heldthere had only thin rubber mats to sleep on.An immigration officer on dutyat the Samut Sakhon IDC told Human Rights Watch that he had concerns about theconditions for children in the facility, which included temporary cells lesswell constructed than those in other IDCs he had worked in. For instance, hesaid, “The toilet needs to be improved, the cleaning. I see thatit’s not really comfortable when they need to clean themselves... I’mconcerned for the girls, no privacy to wash.” The officer said thatchildren who passed through the facility—typically for a few days or aweek—had no sleeping mats and slept on the floor.[203]Human Rights Watch hasdocumented problems in IDCs going back for more than five years.[204]For instance, 158 Lao Hmong recognized as “persons of concern” toUNHCR were held for three years in the Nong Khai IDC before being deported toLaos in December 2009; six babies were born in detention.[205]Several detainees at Nong Khai IDC in 2009 passed information to Human RightsWatch that their rooms had no windows, no light, and no beds.[206]Rice rations were meager and of poor quality, supplemented by local residentswho brought or sold them food.[207]One of the Lao Hmong detaineestold Human Rights Watch in September 2008:There is not enough place tosleep … it is very hot. Some of us have to take off our clothes….If the water is working, we drink from the water pipe in the toilet. If it isbroken, the officials bring us water from the outside. This water is not veryclean and people get sick…. So we have no choice, we have to stay in thedarkness and we cannot use the toilet for many hours because of the very badsmell and the heat inside.[208]Rosa H., a refugee from asoutheast Asian country, was held in the Chiang Mai IDC for three months in2010 with a friend and her friend’s two children, aged six and eight atthe time. She said:It was very, very dirty. Thefloor was made from wood….There was no air coming in at all. The wood wasbroken and water came in. There were lots of insects, and cockroaches, and rats– the rats were as wide around as this [indicating the circumference ofher upper arm.] It was very dirty, smelly, stinky, with… no air. Wedidn’t have mattresses, we didn’t have anything…. Wedidn’t have water, no shower. When I was sleeping, a big rat bit my face,I had a sore. And we had sores, I had sores all over my body from not washing.The children slept with us. They got sick.[209]Linda Y. was held in theChiang Rai IDC with her two children for two weeks in 2010 before they were alltransferred to another facility. She said, “We couldn’t sleepbecause water came in from the hole in the roof, the floor was wet.”[210]Human Rights Watch interviewsin 2011 with migrants who had been held at the Mae Sot IDC raised similarconcerns about the quality of facilities there. For example, Moe Moe, a28-year-old woman from Arakan State in Burma, spent seven days in the Mae SotIDC: “We had to share a few blankets and mattresses, not enough for allthe people.... The IDC had a very bad smell from the toilet… the Thaipolice [immigration officials] provided no food… for seven days.”[211]Abusive Conditions inPolice Lock-upsChildren held in policestations also reported worrisome conditions. Mai M., a Burmese girl, was 15when she was detained for a little over two weeks in a police station outsideBangkok in December 2011. She said, “There was nothing. No pillows, nomattresses. We just slept on the floor, a [tiled] floor... There was no soap.We just wore the same clothes the whole time… it was always very packedand we had to sleep lined up side-by-side. The toilet was inside this room,with nothing separating.”[212]Saw Bway, from Burma, was 17when he was arrested during a raid on the prawn factory where he worked. Hesaid he was initially taken to a shelter for boys, and then sent to anovercrowded police station in Samut Sakhon for several nights in preparationfor deportation to Burma. “There was no space to lie down or stretch out,”he said. “You couldn’t bend your knees.”[213]Kah S. was 17 when he was heldin a police lock-up in Chiang Mai for 25 days. Despite being in a room withapproximately 70 migrants, he said there was “only one small bowl forwashing… nobody cleaned it, nobody gave us cleaning products.”[214]They had no mattresses, said Kah. “We would sleep on the floor, we wouldlie very close, we had to because it became very crowded.”[215]Htee Yaw, a Burmese man livingin Chiang Mai, told us his brother was arrested when he was 17 years old, in2012. Htee Yaw went to visit him at the police lock-up: “About 50 menwere there, some men, some my brother’s age…. From the visitingroom I could see inside. It was smelly, crowded, without good facilities andwithout enough blankets.”[216]IV. Alternatives to DetentionDetentionis Thailand’s default option for irregular migrants, including children.Every year thousands of children are detained in conditions that put them atgreat risk of physical, psychological, and developmental harm. Yet immigrationdetention is not only abusive, it is also unnecessary. Thailand’s ownNational Subcommittee on Human Rights, Statelessness, Migration and DisplacedPersons (under the National Human Rights Commission) has detailed the harmimmigration detention has on children and suggested alternative receptionarrangements for undocumented families.[217]Alternativesto immigration detention are used successfully in a number of other countries. Suchalternative measures focus on facilitating the resolution of immigration andasylum claims within community settings, thus preserving children’s rightto liberty. There are a number of alternatives to detention available toThailand, which, if implemented, would not only prevent the abusive andunnecessary immigration detention of children, but could also makeThailand’s immigration system less costly, more humane, and moreefficient.Thailand’s LimitedRecognition of Children’s Right to LibertyIn recentyears, Thailand has undertaken two small pilot programs that may indicate somewillingness to shift from the default position of detention. However, theprograms affect at most a few hundred of the thousands of children detained andapply only to very narrow categories.Beginningin 2011, a limited bail program allowed for the release from the Bangkok ImmigrationDetention Center (IDC) of slightly more than 100 refugees (children and theirfamilies), the majority of whom had been cleared for resettlement to a thirdcountry.  Secondly, in 2013, after permitting 2,055 Rohingyamigrants to enter the country, the government separated families, sending womenand younger children to shelters run by the Ministry of Social Development andHuman Security (MSDHS), while adult men and some male children, includingunaccompanied boys, were sent to IDCs. Much can be doneto improve on these models and to expand efforts to move children out ofdetention.Thegovernment defends its extensive and costly detention network by claiming thatirregular migrants pose a risk to national security,[218]that detention acts as a deterrent to those who seek to migrate irregularly,[219]and that detention of irregular migrant children is somehow protective of the children’sinterests.[220]Thailandallowed a small number of recognized refugees, most cleared for resettlement,and very occasionally, asylum seekers, to leave the Bangkok IDC. The fee setwas very high for people in their position: 50,000 baht ($1,700) per person.[221]Families would need to raise that amount for each individual member. Mostdetained families could not do that and instead relied on external donors. Inaddition, each “bailee” needed a guarantor, typically provided byan NGO. (In the limited instances where bail has been used, different NGOs inThailand served as guarantors for separate groups of bailees). With complicatedand unclear bureaucratic rules and no clear pattern for releasing children andtheir families, Thailand’s bail program, according to UNHCR, offers only “avery limited remedy to immigration detention.”[222]Invoking the use of sheltersfor migrant children can be seen as a positive step, because open shelters canprovide appropriate conditions for children. Yet in relation to the Rohingyacases in Thailand in 2013, there were serious flaws in the use of shelters asan alternative to detention. First, families were separated, and some children,including unaccompanied children, were left in detention. Unaccompaniedchildren should never be detained.[223]All immigration decisions should be taken in the child’s best interest,and children have the right to family unity. Effective alternatives todetention should prioritize the maintenance of family unity. In this example,moving intact families, including parents of both genders, to shelters wouldhave been a better option.A second problem with the useof MSDHS shelters for Rohingya in 2013 was that those shelters were closed;they effectively became places of detention, albeit with better conditions thanthe IDCs. All Rohingya at government shelters interviewed by Human Rights Watchsaid they were not permitted to leave the facilities. Service providers,including Thai government officials, confirmed this. The Thai government, whichrefuses to consider Rohingya asylum claims, made no plans to regularizedetainees’ immigration status. This left the Rohyinga essentiallyforcibly confined in shelters they were not allowed to leave (though many didescape), and thus constituted a form of indefinite detention. Migrant familiesheld in shelters should be able to move freely.Thailand should placeasylum-seeking children and their families, like this group of Rohingya, inopen shelters with guaranteed freedom of movement, and provide children accessto education.SuccessfulUse ofAlternatives to Detention ElsewhereAnxietyover irregular migration is not unique to Thailand. Many countries are nowcoming to realize, however, that they are able to manage migration concernswithout the high financial and human costs that detention incurs.[224]Forexample, the Philippine government operates a recognizance release system(albeit in a context where refugees are recognized by the government).Refugees, asylum seekers, and vulnerable migrants are issued with appropriatedocumentation and released on the condition that they comply with the refugeestatus determination process,[225]or periodically renew their registration with the Department of Justice.[226]Children in immigration detention are “released as a matter of coursefollowing referral to the Department of Social Welfare and Development, who…provide social work, shelter and healthcare services” and can act asresponsible guardians for unaccompanied or separated children.[227]According to UNHCR, “the Philippines’ system is an example of onethat does not regard detention as the norm, but has managed to function wellfor many years on the basis of open reception arrangements.”[228]Since2008, Belgium has operated a network of “Family Identification and ReturnUnits,” also known as “Return Houses,” whichhavebeen identified as best practice by alternatives to detention experts.[229]These return houses, typically used during deportation, consist of basictemporary accommodation units for undocumented families. Upon entering a returnhouse, families are allocated a case-worker, known as a coach, who works withthem and the authorities to resolve their immigration cases, provide foodvouchers, and ensure that families abide by the conditions of the program.[230]Between October 2008 and November 2011, 249 families with a total of 452children have been accommodated for an average of 24 days in return houses.[231]Compliance rates (people completing the program) fluctuate between 75 and 80percent,[232]and although comparative figures for detention are not published, the directorof Belgium’s agency for the reception of asylum seekers has confirmedthat return houses are cheaper than the detention of families.[233]Thesuccess of the return houses has been explained by the early access to freelegal advice, transparent communication, and trust between families and “coaches”,which characterizes the program.[234]Other shared elements of successful alternatives to detention such as thisinclude the provision of adequate material support and a case management systemthat keeps migrants informed at every stage of the process of statusresolution.[235]InToronto, Canada, a government-funded charitable organization called the TorontoBail Program was established to assist migrants to meet the financial andsocial conditions of the bail program. While in the program, individuals abideby strict requirements including reporting to Toronto Bail Program officestwice weekly, social counselling, and frequent unannounced visits.[236] Inreturn, the program provides housing and financial support, and assistance tonavigate Canada’s asylum and social welfare systems.[237]The Toronto Bail Program has achieved impressive compliance rates. In 2009-2010,of the 250 to 275 individuals released to the Toronto Bail Program, less than 4percent absconded, and since then compliance rates have improved further.[238]The program has also made significant savings for the Canadian government.Whereas detention costs US$163 per person per day, the cost to the state of theToronto Bail Program is $9 to 11 per person per day—a saving of around $152per person per day.[239]Forbail programs to play an efficient role in preventing unnecessary immigrationdetention, bail must be set at levels appropriate to the individual’sfinancial situation (and refugees and asylum seekers should be released withoutbail).[240]Funds, such as the Toronto Bail Program, should be created and made availableto detainees who cannot otherwise access bail programs. As the Toronto BailProgram example shows, government support for such release funds can prove tobe very cost-effective.Successfulalternatives to detention, such as the recognizance release program in thePhilippines, are founded on the dignity of the individual migrant, refugee orasylum seeker. Recognisance release is a particularly effective and sustainablealternative to detention due to the self-reliance it engenders. Thailand shouldlook to the example set by the Philippines, a fellow ASEAN state, whenreforming its immigration and asylum procedures.A Five-Step Process toAvoid Detention of ChildrenThe InternationalDetention Coalition, an association of over 250 NGOs and individuals in morethan 50 countries working to protect the rights of migrants in immigrationdetention, proposes a five-step process for countries to avoid the detentionof children. First, they advocate for governments to adopt a presumptionagainst the detention of children, prior to any migrants’ arrivals.Next, when a migrant child arrives, with or without their family, theauthorities should screen the individual to determine their age, allocate acase worker, and place the child (and family) into a community setting.Third, the case manager works with the child or family to resolve theindividual migration case (an incentive to comply with the program). Fourth,the child or family’s placement in an alternative to detention isreviewed periodically, and an assessment is made of the risk of the child orfamily absconding prior to departure. Finally, the child or family is grantedthe right to stay, or deported.[241]V. RecommendationsTo the Thai GovernmentEnact legislation and implementpolicies to expeditiously end the immigration detention of children consistentwith the recommendations of the United Nations Committee on the Rights of theChild.Adopt alternatives todetention, including supervised release and open centers, that fulfill the bestinterests of the child and allow children to remain with their family membersor guardians in non-custodial, community-based settings while their immigrationstatus is being resolved.Until children are no longerdetained, ensure that their detention is neither arbitrary nor indefinite, andthat they and their families are able to challenge their detention in a timelymanner.Drastically improve conditionsin immigration detention centers and any other facilities that hold migrantchildren to meet international standards, including by providing access toadequate education and health care, and maintaining family unity.Ensure that guardianship forunaccompanied and separated children is vested in the Ministry of SocialDevelopment and Human Security.Immediately release from IDCdetention all refugees recognized by the United Nations High Commission forRefugees.Immediately discontinuepolicies requiring migrants to meet the cost of their detention or deportation;never detain irregular migrants indefinitely for the purpose of compelling themor their families to pay for their own deportation.Sign and ratify the 1951Refugee Convention and its 1967 Protocol, and the Convention on the Protectionof the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families.Remove Thailand’sreservation to article 22 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,concerning child refugees.To the ParliamentAmend the 2009 Immigration Actto ensure that children are not detained simply for reasons of theirimmigration status.Enact a law that establishescriteria and procedures for recognizing refugee status and providing asylum andother forms of protection, in line with international legal standards.Until a refugee law isenacted, amend the 2009 Immigration Act to authorize persons that UNHCRdesignates as a “person of concern” to stay legally in Thailandwithout being threatened with arrest and detention while they await a statusdetermination or a durable solution for those found to be in need ofinternational protection.To the Police Immigration DivisionImplement, in conjunction withthe Ministry of Social Development and Human Security and relevant civilsociety organizations, (alternatives to detention such as open shelters andconditional release programs that prioritize the child’s best interestsand family unity, and ensure that children are referred to the Ministry ofSocial Development and Human Security for appropriate care.Immediately bring detentionconditions in line with international standards, including standards relatingto overcrowding, water and sanitation, nutrition, and access to recreation,among others.Before reforms are enacted toensure migrant children are no longer detained, ensure that families are kepttogether as long as it is in the child’s best interest. In the rareinstances when children are separated from family members, ensure that theyhave routine opportunities to visit with those family members.Immediately cease detainingchildren with unrelated adults.Provide appropriate, age-specificeducation to all children of compulsory primary education age being held indetention facilities, and make secondary education available and accessible toevery child.Take appropriate measures toensure that children are not subjected to violence or placed in situationswhere they witness violence in detention facilities.Ensure that migrants indetention have the means to communicate with family members, UNHCR, and legalrepresentatives.To the Ministry of Social Development and Human SecurityImplement, in conjunction withthe Immigration Division, alternatives to detention such as open shelters andconditional release programs that prioritize the child’s best interestsand family unity. Adopt practices that allow children to remain with familymembers and/or guardians if they are present in the country.Ensure that guardianship forunaccompanied and separated children is vested in the Ministry of SocialDevelopment and Human Security.To the Ministry ofInteriorAdopt and publicize a policythat ends detention of children for reasons of their immigration status, andorder immigration police to faithfully implement that policy.Direct police and immigrationofficers not to arrest on immigration enforcement grounds asylum seekers who havebeen issued “person of concern” certificates issued by UNHCR.Provide budgetary resources toupgrade immigration detention facilities in order to bring conditions into linewith international standards.To the National Human RightsCommission of Thailand (NHRCT)Closely monitor immigration detentionfacilities, including by making regular visits to IDC facilities around thecountry to ensure adequate conditions for children being held in immigrationdetention.Respond to this report byconducting public hearings on the detention of children in IDC facilities anddemand government authorities articulate how they will address the issuesraised by this report, and the NHRCT’s own investigations and findings.Urge the Royal Thai governmentto revise the 2009 Immigration Act to ensure that children are not detained forreasons of their immigration status.To the UN Resident Coordination and UN Country TeamPrioritize advocacy action toend arbitrary detention, including in immigration detention facilities, andpublicly communicate concerns about arbitrary detention, and the failure ofcurrent laws and regulations to meet international standards, to the Thaiauthorities on a continuous basis.Publicly call upon the Thaigovernment to end detention of all children for reasons of their immigrationstatus.Support UN agency efforts tocomprehensively address the issue of children in detention in Thailand throughappropriate advocacy and services.To UNHCRContinue to urge the Thai governmentto cease detaining children solely for reasons of their immigration status.Speed up refugee statusdetermination in Thailand, especially for detainees.Ensure that UNHCR officialsintervene promptly to seek the immediate release of refugees and asylum seekerswhen they are arrested.Educate Thai governmentauthorities on their obligations to respect the status of asylum seekers andnot detain asylum seekers or refugees recognized by UNHCR.To the InternationalOrganization for Migration (IOM)Monitor conditions ofconfinement for all asylum seekers and children in immigration detentionfacilities, and report issues and concerns to all appropriate Thai governmentofficials including, but not limited to, Thailand’s Immigration Division.Urge the Immigration Divisionto improve conditions of detention and bring them into compliance withinternational human rights standards.To UNICEFUrge the Thai government toend the detention of migrant children, and work closely with other UN agenciesto make this a priority issue for the UN Country Team.Urge the Thai government tomake issues affecting migrant children, including refugee and asylum-seekingchildren, a priority in Thailand’s child protection programs andactivities, and use UNICEF’s programming in Thailand to assist theseefforts.To the Association ofSoutheast Asian Nations (ASEAN)Uphold refugee rights in allregional immigration enforcement policies and practices.Make children’s rights apriority in immigration enforcement, including by providing specializedprotection for unaccompanied migrant children, and by urging states to ceasethe detention of migrant children.Request that the ASEANCommission for the Protection and Promotion of the Rights of Women and Children(ACWC) conduct immediate research on detention of children in immigrationfacilities, and develop recommendations on best practices to end such detentionpractices.Prioritize ending immigrationdetention of children in formal discussions at the Bali Process on PeopleSmuggling, Trafficking in Persons, and Related Transnational Crime.To Donor and ResettlementGovernmentsUrge the Thai government tocease the detention of children solely for reasons of immigration status.Facilitate and provide supportfor the development of alternatives to detention, including open receptioncenters and conditional release programs for migrant children and theirfamilies.Encourage the development ofrefugee law in Thailand according to international standards.Call on the Thai government tocease detaining migrants who are UNHCR “persons of concern.”AcknowledgmentsResearch for this report was primarilyconducted between June and October 2013, by Alice Farmer, children rights researcherat Human Rights Watch, who wrote the report.  Additional research wasconducted by Shaivalini Parmar, senior associate in the Asia Division; ZamaCoursen-Neff, director of the Children’s Rights Division; Bill Frelick,director of the Refugee Rights Program; and Phil Robertson, deputy director ofthe Asia Division.The report was edited by BedeSheppard, deputy director of the Children’s Rights Division; PhilRobertson; Bill Frelick; Sunai Phasuk, senior researcher in the Asia Division;Richard Pearshouse, senior researcher in the Health and Human Rights Division;Joseph Amon, director of the Health and Human Rights Division; James Ross,legal and policy director; Danielle Haas, senior editor; and Babatunde Olugboji,deputy program director.Significant researchassistance was provided by Laura Schulke, senior associate in theChildren’s Rights Division, and Patrick Phongsathorn, intern in theChildren’s Rights Division. Anne Stotler, intern in the Children’sRights Division, and Beneva Davies, associate in the Children’s RightsDivision, provided research and production assistance. Kathy Mills and FitzroyHepkins provided production assistance.Human Rights Watch is gratefulto the individuals who shared their personal stories, as well as all theofficials, service providers, and experts who agreed to be interviewed. Wethank all the organizations and individuals who supported this work,facilitated interviews, reviewed sections, and provided invaluable insight.AppendicesDownload the Appendices[1]Convention on the Rightsof the Child (CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, GA Res. 44/25, annex, 44 UN GAORSupp. (No. 49) at 167, UN Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into force September 2,1990, art. 1. Thailand ratified the CRCin 1992.[2]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 6,“Treatment of Unaccompanied and Separated Children Outside their Countryof Origin,” U.N. Doc. CRC/GC/2005/6 (2005), paras. 7-8.[3]International Organization for Migration, “Thailand Migration Report2011,” Bangkok, 2011, p. 96.[4]Ibid.[5]Immigration Act BE 2522, (1979),http://www.immigration.go.th/nov2004/en/doc/Immigration_Act.pdf (accessedDecember 18, 2013) section 29.[6]Human Rights Watch, Ad Hoc and Inadequate:Thailand’s Treatment of Refugees and Asylum Seekers, September2012, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/thailand0912.pdf.[7]Human Rights Watch, Ad Hoc and Inadequate.[8]Human Rights Watch, Ad Hoc and Inadequate,p. 6.[9]A 2010 Human Rights Watch report, From theTiger to the Crocodile: Abuse of Migrant Workers in Thailand,details the broad range of rights abuses faced by migrant workers from Burma,Laos, and Cambodia. They may be effectively bonded to their employers; police,military, and immigration officers threaten, physically harm, and extortmigrant workers with impunity; migrants are frequently arrested and detainedwithout fair process and subject to abuse in detention; and when migrantworkers face abusive employers or common crime, Thai authorities are veryreluctant to investigate and are sometimes complicit. Human Rights Watch, From the Tiger to the Crocodile: Abuse of MigrantWorkers in Thailand, February 2010,http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/thailand0912.pdf.[10]Madison Park, “180,000 Cambodian migrant workers estimated to have fledThailand,” CNN, June 19,2014, , (accessed July 7,2014),http://www.cnn.com/2014/06/18/world/asia/cambodia-thailand-migrants-border/.[11]Steve Finch, “Is the Thai Junta Targeting CambodianMigrants?” The Diplomat (Japan),June 26, 2014, , (accessed July 7, 2014),http://thediplomat.com/2014/06/is-the-thai-junta-targeting-cambodian-migrants/.[12]“The exodus: Rumors drive hundreds of thousands of Cambodians backhome,” The Economist, June21, 2014,  (accessed July 7, 2014),http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21604585-rumours-drive-hundreds-thousands-cambodians-back-home-exodus?frsc=dg|c.[13]Finch, “Is the Thai Junta Targeting CambodianMigrants?” The Diplomat (Japan).[14]RoyalThai Government, Announcement of the National Council for Peace and Order No.67/2557, Temporary measures in addressing migrant workers, June 16, 2014,http://www.thaigov.go.th/en/announcement-2/item/84074-id84074.html, (accessedJuly 7, 2014).[15]Royal Thai Government, Announcement of the National Councilfor Peace and Order No. 70/2557, Interim Measures in solving the problem ofmigrant workers and human trafficking,  June 25, 2014, http://www.thaigov.go.th/en/announcement-2/item/84207-84207.html, (accessed July 7, 2014).[16]Human Rights Watch interview with Nhean P., Bangkok, July 10, 2013.[17]Human Rights Watch, Ad Hoc and Inadequate,p. 5.[18]Human Rights Watch interview with Aung M., Samut Sakhon, July 28, 2013.[19]Human Rights Watch interview with Chit M., Samut Sakhon, July 28, 2103.[20]Human Rights Watch interview with Phoe Zaw, Mae Sot, July 26, 2013.[21]Human Rights Watch, From the Tiger to theCrocodile, section V; and Human Rights Watch, Ad Hoc and Inadequate, p. 6.[22]Human Rights Watch, Ad Hoc and Inadequate,p. 6.[23]The 2005 Cabinet Resolution on Education for Unregistered Persons guaranteesthe right to education of children without legal immigration status inThailand, and allows these children to enroll in government schools. Educationis compulsory for both Thai and migrant children until age 15. In 2012, the Ministry of Education’sMinisterial Regulation on Migrant Learning Centers legalized theprovision of basic education through migrant learning centers run by nongovernmental organizations orindividuals. For more information, see: “Right to Education for migrants, refugees and asylumseekers,” Social Division,Department of International Organizations, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Kingdomof Thailand, http://www.mfa.go.th/humanrights/implementation-of-un-resolutions/72-right-to-education-for-migrants-refugees-and-asylum-seekers; “Thailand:2012 Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor,” United StatesDepartment of Labor.[24]Human Rights Watch interview with Koy Mala, Mae Sot, July 25, 2013.[25]Human Rights Watch group interview with Saw Lei, Samut Sakhon, July 27, 2013.[26]Human Rights Watch group interview with Ma Myo, Samut Sakhon, July 27, 2013.[27]Human Rights Watch interview with Saw Kweh, Mae Sot, July 26, 2013.[28]Human Rights Watch, "All You Can Do is Pray”: Crimes AgainstHumanity and Ethnic Cleansing of Rohingya Muslims in Burma’s ArakanState, April 2013, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2013/04/22/all-you-can-do-pray-0.[29]UNHCR, “2014 Country Operations Profile:Thailand,” http://www.unhcr.org/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/page?page=49e489646&submit=GO#(accessed April 11, 2014).[30]Human Rights Watch, Ad Hoc and Inadequate.[31]UNHCR 2013 Annual Statistical Report.[32]The Border Consortium, Refugee and IDP Camp Populations: May 2014, May 2014,http://theborderconsortium.org/camps/2014-05-may-map-tbc-unhcr.pdf (accessedJuly 18, 2014).[33]According to Thailand’s Nationality Act, children born in Thailand afterFebruary 26, 1992 do not acquire Thai nationality at birth if either or both oftheir parents has entered Thailand “without permission under the law on immigration”or has only temporary permission to stay in Thailand (such as a migrant workerpermit). Any child born in Thailand who does not acquire Thai citizenship atbirth is considered an irregular migrant. For more information, see: Nattha Keenapan, “Thestateless classroom,” UNICEF, http://www.unicef.org/thailand/reallives_10445.html;Nationality Act, B.E. 2508, amended by Acts B.E. 2535No. 2 and 3, (1992) Ch. 1 § 7(2).[34]Human Rights Watch, Ad Hoc and Inadequate.Starting in January 2004, the Thai government stopped allowing UNHCR to conductrefugee status determination interviews for Burmese refugees and directed thatall Burmese refugees should live in the Thai-Burma border camps. The governmentrefused to screen or register all but a small fraction of the new arrivalsbetween 2004 and 2011, leaving tens of thousands of people unregistered andthus regarded as illegal. Ibid.,pp. 1-2. Since 2011, the government has slightly reopened the admissionprocedure for certain categories of persons, such as unregistered members ofregistered families who are in the resettlement pipeline.[35]“USwraps up group resettlement for Myanmarrefugees in Thailand,” UNHCR news release, January 29, 2014,http://www.unhcr.org/52e9 (accessed June 12, 2014).[36]Human Rights Watch, Ad Hoc and Inadequate,p. 2.[37]Human Rights Watch, Ad Hoc and Inadequate.[38]“Ethnic cleansing,” though not a formal legal term,has been defined as a purposeful policy by an ethnic or religious group toremove by violent and terror-inspiring means the civilian population of anotherethnic or religious group from certain geographic areas. In October2012, Buddhist Arakanese political and religious leaders andordinary citizens organized attacks against Rohingya and Kaman Muslimcommunities in Arakan State. The evidence indicates that they intended to driveMuslims from the state or at least relocate them from areas in which they hadbeen residing – particularly from areas shared with the majority Buddhistpopulation. Rohingya men, women, and children were killed, some were buried inmass graves, and their villages and neighborhoods were razed. In many cases thestate security forces stood aside during attacks or directly supported theassailants. The Burmese government has taken no serious action since thisviolence. For more information, see: Thailand: Protect Rohingya BoatChildren, Human Rights Watch news release, January 6, 2014,http://www.hrw.org/news/2014/01/06/thailand-protect-rohingya-boat-children;Human Rights Watch, All You Can Do is Pray:Crimes Against Humanity and Ethnic Cleansing of Rohingya Muslims inBurma’s Arakan State, April 2013.[39]“Thailand: Protect Rohingya Boat Children,” Human Rights Watch newsrelease, January 6, 2014,http://www.hrw.org/news/2014/01/06/thailand-protect-rohingya-boat-children.[40]UNHCR helps resettle recognized refugees from Thailand and otherrefugee-receiving countries to third countries when it is the only safe and viable durable solution available. Only a small number ofthird countries welcome refugees. Any refugee interested in resettlement can apply to UNHCR. UNHCR, rather than therefugees, decides the country to which each case is submitted, and that countrydecides whether to accept the refugee for resettlement. For more information,see: “Resettlement,” UNHCR, http://www.unhcr.org/pages/4a16b1676.html; “Third Country Refugee Resettlement Information,” UNHCR, http://reliefweb.int/report/nepal/third-country-refugee-resettlement-information-refugees-bhutan-living-nepal.[41]Human Rights Watch interview with Saleem P., Bangkok, July 15, 2013.[42]Human Rights Watch interview with Suvik P., Bangkok, July 14, 2013.[43]Human Rights Watch interview with Nimal P., Bangkok, July 18, 2013.[44]Human Rights Watch, Ad Hoc and Inadequate,p. 87.[45]Human Rights Watch, Ad Hoc and Inadequate,p. 7.[46]Human Rights Watch, Ad Hoc and Inadequate, p.7.[47]Human Rights Watch, Ad Hoc and Inadequate.[48]Human Rights Watch interview with Yanaal N., Bangkok, July 15, 2013.[49]Human Rights Watch, Ad Hoc and Inadequate,p. 6.[50]Data was provided to Human Rights Watch by an international organization on thecondition that we do not cite its name.[51]Data was provided to Human Rights Watch by an international organization on thecondition that we do not cite its name.[52]Email from UNHCR to Human Rights Watch, June 14, 2012.[53]Human Rights Watch interview, JRS staff, Bangkok, June 23, 2011.[54]Ahmadis are members of the Ahmadiyya community, a religiousminority in Pakistan with an estimated two million members in Pakistan. Atleast 87 Ahmadis, including children, were charged under various provisions ofthe country’s Blasphemy Law in 2009. Many face violence and persecutionin Pakistan. As a result, thousands of Ahmadis have fled Pakistan to seekasylum. For more information, see: Pakistan: Massacre ofMinority Ahmadis, Human Rights Watch news release, June 1, 2010,http://www.hrw.org/news/2010/06/01/pakistan-massacre-minority-ahmadis.[55]Human Rights Watch interview with Ali A., [Location withheld], July 15, 2013.[56]Human Rights Watch interview with Linda Y., [location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July 3, 2013.[57]Human Rights Watch, Ad Hoc and Inadequate,p. 6.[58]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Leander P., September 25, 2013.Leander was held in the IDC for overstaying a tourist visa.[59]Mekong Migration Network, No Choice in the Matter: Migrants’ Experiencesof Arrest, Detention and Deportation, July 2013, p. 26.[60]Ibid.[61]Ibid.[62]Royal Thai Government, Order of the Prime Minister’s Office No. 125/2553,Re: Establishment of a Special Centre to Suppress, Arrest and Prosecute AlienWorkers Who Are Working Underground, June 2, 2010.[63]Mekong Migration Network, No Choice in the Matter: Migrants’ Experiencesof Arrest, Detention and Deportation, July 2013, p. 27.[64]"Hidden Migrant Children – Is the Government prepared to look afterthem?" Thai Rath (Bangkok),September 28, 2013, https://www.thairath.co.th/content/eco/372506 (accessedJanuary 15, 2014).[65]Anti-Trafficking in Persons Act B.E. 2551 (2008),section 29.[66]Thailand: End Inhumane Detention of Rohingya, Human Rights Watch news release,June 4, 2013, http://www.hrw.org/news/2013/06/03/thailand-end-inhumane-detention-rohingya.[67]“Thailand: Protect Rohingya Boat Children,” Human Rights Watch newsrelease, January 6, 2014,http://www.hrw.org/news/2014/01/06/thailand-protect-rohingya-boat-children.[68]Ibid.[69]Data was provided to Human Rights Watch by an international organization on thecondition that we do not cite its name.[70]Human Rights Watch interview with Mai M., Samut Sakhon, July 28, 2013.[71]See, e.g., Human Rights Watch interview with Ma Swe, Chiang Mai, July 12, 2013(Ma Swe was arrested in 2005; she reports that she was 25 and was held atChiang Mai Women’s Prison for several nights with her 17-year-old femalefriend); Human Rights Watch group interview with Kah S., Chiang Mai, July 13,2013.[72]Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 6, para. 61.[73]Human Rights Watch interview with Htee Yaw, Chiang Mai, July 11, 2013.[74]Ibid.[75]Handwritten note and Human Rights Watch interview with Labaan T., Bangkok IDCJune 24, 2011 (note on file with Human Rights Watch). Interviewed in thepresence of a local NGO service provider.[76]CRC, art. 37.[77]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, Report of the 2012 Day of GeneralDiscussion on the Rights of All Children in the Context of InternationalMigration, February 2013, www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/crc/docs/discussion2012/2012CRC_DGD-Childrens_Rights_InternationalMigration.pdf(accessed July 15, 2013) para 78.[78]Ibid.[79]See CRC, arts. 10, 24, and 28.[80]Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, 189 U.N.T.S. 150, entered intoforce April 22, 1954, art. 26. Although Thailand is not a party to the 1951Refugee Convention or its 1967 Protocol, it is a member of UNHCR’sExecutive Committee, which is open to states “with a demonstratedinterest in, and devotion to, the solution of the refugee problem.”(United Nations Economic and Social Council, Establishment of the ExecutiveCommittee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner forRefugees, E/RES/672 (XXV) (1958), http://www.unhcr.org/3ae69eecc.html (accessedJanuary 31, 2014)).  As such, it should demonstrate respect for theConvention and UNHCR guidelines.[81]UNHCR, Guidelines on the Applicable Criteria and Standards relating to theDetention of Asylum-Seekers and Alternatives to Detention, 2012,www.unhcr.org/505b10ee9.html (accessed January 31, 2014).[82]Ibid.[83]Ibid.[84]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), G.A. res. 2200A(XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S.171, entered into force Mar. 23, 1976, art. 9(1). Thailand ratified the ICCPRin 1996.[85]CRC, article 37.[86]In 1999, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention developed criteria fordetermining whether the deprivation of liberty of migrants and asylum seekersis arbitrary. The principles mandate that a migrant or asylum seeker placed incustody “must be brought promptly before a judge or otherauthority,” and that decisions regarding detention must be founded oncriteria established by law. Moreover, migrants and asylum seekers in detentionmust be notified in writing—in a language they understand—of thegrounds for detention and that remedy may be sought from a judicial authorityempowered to decide promptly on the lawfulness of detention and to orderrelease if appropriate. UN Commission on Human Rights, Report of the WorkingGroup on Arbitrary Detention, E/CN.4/2000/4, December 28, 1999, Annex II,Deliberation No. 5, Situation Regarding Immigrants and Asylum Seekers.[87]UN Commission on Human Rights, Report of the Working Group on ArbitraryDetention, A/HRC/16/47, January 17, 2011,  Annex III,,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/16session/A-HRC-16-47.pdf(accessed January 31, 2014).[88]UNHCR, Guidelines on the Applicable Criteria and Standards relating to theDetention of Asylum-Seekers and Alternatives to Detention 2012,http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/503489533b8.html (accessedJanuary 31, 2014), Guidelines 2 and 3.[89]Katy Robjant et al, “Mental health implications of detaining asylumseekers: systematic review,” BritishJournal of Psychiatry, vol. 194 (2009), pp. 306-312.[90]Dr. Allan S. Keller et al, “Mental health of detained asylumseekers,” The Lancet, vol.362, issue 9397 (November 22,2003), pp. 1721-1723.[91]Ibid.[92]K. Robjant et al, “Psychological distress amongst immigration detainees:a cross-sectional questionnaire study, ”BritishJournal of Clinical Psychology, vol. 48 issue3 (September 2009), pp.275-86.[93]Zachary Steel et al, “Impact of immigration detention and temporaryprotection on the mental health of refugees, “BritishJournal of Psychiatry, vol. 188 (2006), pp. 58-64.[94]Katy Robjant et al, ”Mental health implications of detaining asylumseekers: systematic review”, BritishJournal of Psychiatry, vol. 194 (2009), pp. 306-312.[95]Sarah Mares and Jon Jureidini, “Psychiatric assessment of children andfamilies in immigration detention: clinical, administrative and ethical issues,” Austraila and New Zealand Journal of PublicHealth, vol. 28 issue 6 (December 2004), pp. 520-526.[96]Ann Lorek et al, “The mental and physical health difficulties of childrenheld within a British immigration detention center: a pilot study,” Child Abuse and Neglect, vol. 33 issue 9(September 2009), pp. 573-585.[97]Rachel Kronik et al., “Mandatory Detention of Refugee Children: A PublicHealth Issue?”, Paediatric ChildHealth, vol. 16 issue8 (October 2011), pp. 65-67.[98]Human Rights Watch interview with Cindy Y., [location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July 3, 2013.[99]Human Rights Watch interview with Linda Y., [location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July 3, 2013.[100]Human Rights Watch interview with Cindy Y., [location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July  3, 2013.[101]Human Rights Watch interview with Abid A., [Location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July 15, 2013.[102]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Leander P., September 25, 2013.[103]Ibid.[104]Human Rights Watch interview with Veata S., Bangkok, July 10, 2013.[105]Human Rights Watch interview with Ali A., [Location withheld XX], July 15,2013.[106]Human Rights Watch interview with Cindy Y. [location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July  3, 2013.[107]Human Rights Watch interview with Doug Y. [location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July  3, 2013.[108]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Leander P., September 25, 2013.[109]Human Rights Watch interview with Nhean P., Bangkok, July 10, 2013.[110]Human Rights Watch interview with Mai M., Samut Sakhon, July 28, 2013.[111]See, e.g., World Health Organization, “Globalrecommendations on physical activity for health,” http://www.who.int/dietphysicalactivity/factsheet_recommendations/en/ (accessed January 20, 2014), p. 20; US Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention, “How much physical activity do childrenneed?”http://www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity/everyone/guidelines/children.html (accessedJanuary 20, 2014); US Department of Health and Human Services, “PhysicalActivity Guidelines for Americans,”http://www.health.gov/paguidelines/factsheetprof.aspx (accessed January 20,2014).[112]See, e.g., World Health Organization, “Globalrecommendations on physical activity for health,” http://www.who.int/dietphysicalactivity/factsheet_recommendations/en/ (accessed January 20, 2014), p. 20; US Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention, “How much physical activity do childrenneed?”,http://www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity/everyone/guidelines/children.html (accessedJanuary 20, 2014).[113]Human Rights Watch interview with Cindy Y. [location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July  3, 2013.[114]Human Rights Watch interview with Arunny P., Bangkok, July 10, 2013.[115]Human Rights Watch interview with Saleem P., Bangkok, July 15, 2013.[116]Handwritten note and Human Rights Watch interview with Labaan T., Bangkok IDC,June 24, 2011 (note on file with Human Rights Watch). Interviewed in thepresence of a local NGO service provider.[117]Human Rights Watch interview with Abid A., [Location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July 15, 2013.[118]“Life in IDC: Written by an African refugee who was being resettled tothe USA about his experiences in the Bangkok Immigration DetentionCentre,” diary of Diederik O. (pseudonym), on file with Human RightsWatch.[119]Human Rights Watch interview with Peter X., California, United States,September 25, 2013.[120]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Leander P., August 30 , 2013.[121]See, e.g., Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion, United States Departmentof Agriculture, “Dietary Guidelines for Americans,” 2012,http://www.cnpp.usda.gov/dietaryguidelines.htm (accessed January 20, 2014); Food and Agricultural Organization and World Health Organization,“Living well with HIV/AIDS: A manual on nutritional care and support forpeople living with HIV/AIDS,” 2002, http://www.fao.org/docrep/005/y4168e/y4168e00.HTM , pp. 13-18.[122]World Health Organization, “Global strategy for infantand young child feeding,” 2003, http://www.who.int/nutrition/topics/global_strategy/en/ (accessed January 20, 2014), p. 5.[123]Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion, United States Department ofAgriculture, “Dietary Guidelines for Americans,” 2012, http://www.cnpp.usda.gov/dietaryguidelines.htm(accessed January 20, 2014).[124]United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (StandardMinimum Rules), adopted by the First United Nations Congress on the Preventionof Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held at Geneva in 1955, and approvedby the Economic and Social Council by its resolution 663 C (XXIV) of July 31,1957, and 2076 (LXII) of May 13, 1977, para. 20.[125]"Hidden Migrant Children – Is the Government prepared to look afterthem?" Thai Rath (Bangkok),September 28, 2013, https://www.thairath.co.th/content/eco/372506 (accessedJanuary 15, 2014).[126]WHO, “Forum on international migration and health in Thailand: status andchallenges to controlling TB,” Bangkok June 4-6, 2013.[127]Collewet, Louise, “Inhuman Detention Conditions in Bangkok?” OxfordMonitor of Forced Migration, vol. 2issue 1 (June 2012), pp. 28-33.[128]Human Rights Watch interview with Peter X., California, US, September 25, 2013.[129]Handwritten note and Human Rights Watch interview with Labaan T., Bangkok IDC,June 24, 2011 (note on file with Human Rights Watch). Interviewed in thepresence of a local NGO service provider.[130]Human Rights Watch group interview with Mathy S., Sunnyvale, California,September 26, 2013.[131]Ibid.[132]Ibid.[133]Human Rights Watch interview with Abid A., [Location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July 15, 2013.[134]Human Rights Watch interview with Peter X., California, United States,September 25, 2013.[135]Human Rights Watch interview with Saleem P., Bangkok, July 15, 2013.[136]Human Rights Watch interview with Shandana P., Bangkok, July 15, 2013.[137]Human Rights Watch interview with Sithara P., [location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July 30, 2013.[138]Human Rights Watch interview with Mui, Bangkok, July 10, 2013.[139]Human Rights Watch interview Amjad P., Bangkok, June 21, 2011.[140]Human Rights Watch group interview with Kah S., Chiang Mai, July 13, 2013.[141]Human Rights Watch interview with Yanaal N., Bangkok, July 15, 2013.[142]Human Rights Watch interview with Dwight Turner [real name], July 10, 2013.[143]Human Rights Watch group interview with Mathy S., Sunnyvale, California,September 26, 2013.[144]Human Rights Watch interview with Cindy Y., [location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July 3, 2013.[145]Human Rights Watch interview with Linda Y., [location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July 3, 2013.[146]"Hidden Migrant Children – Is the Government prepared to look afterthem?" Thai Rath (Bangkok),September 28, 2013, https://www.thairath.co.th/content/eco/372506 (accessedJanuary 15, 2014).[147]See generally, Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under AnyForm of Detention or Imprisonment, G.A. res. 43/173, annex, 43 U.N. GAOR Supp.(No. 49) at 298, U.N. Doc. A/43/49 (1988).[148]Human Rights Watch interview with Vijavat Isarabhakdi, director general,Department of International Organizations, Ministry of Foreign Affairs,Bangkok, June 20, 2011.[149]Immigration Act, B.E. 2522 (1979).http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/46b2f9f42.html (accessed January 30,2014), section 54.[150]As no other detainees in Thailand, including ordinary criminals, are requiredto bear the costs of their detention, forcing immigration detainees, who bydefinition are non-Thai citizens, to do so is tantamount to discriminatorytreatment. The committee that oversees the Convention for the Elimination ofAll Forms of Racial Discrimination, a treaty to which Thailand is party, notesthat “any differential treatment based on citizenship or immigrationstatus will constitute discrimination if the criteria for such differentiation,judged in the light of the objectives and purposes of the Convention, are notapplied pursuant to a legitimate aim, and are not proportional to theachievement of this aim.” (Committee on the Elimination of RacialDiscrimination, General Recommendation No. 30: Discrimination againstNon-Citizens, January 10, 2004; International Convention on the Elimination ofAll Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD), adopted December 21, 1965, GA Res.2106, annex 20 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 14) at 47, U.N. Doc. A/6014 (1966), 660U.N.T.S. 195,, entered into force January 4, 1969, acceded to by Thailand onJanuary 28, 2003.) Under this test, singling out immigration detainees as thesole detainees who have to bear the costs of incarceration constitutes unlawfuldiscrimination. (The 1990 International Convention on the Protection of theRights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families, reflects theconsensus that differential treatment for migrants in detention is notacceptable. The Migrant Workers Convention provides that: “Migrantworkers and members of their families who are subjected to any form ofdetention or imprisonment in accordance with the law in force in the State ofemployment or in the State of transit shall enjoy the same rights as nationalsof those States who are in the same situation”; and “if a migrantworker or a member of his or her family is detained for the purpose ofverifying any infraction of provisions related to migration, he or she shallnot bear any costs arising therefrom.” (International Convention on theProtection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families(Migrant Workers Convention), adopted December 18, 1990, G.A. Res. 45/158,annex, 45 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49A) at 262, U.N. Doc. A/45/49 (1990), enteredinto force July 1, 2003 arts. 17(7) and (8)).[151]ICCPR, art. 10(1).[152]CRC, art. 37(c).[153]See generally, Standard Minimum Rules.[154]UNHCR, Guidelines on the Applicable Criteria and Standards relating to theDetention of Asylum-Seekers and Alternatives to Detention, 2012,www.unhcr.org/505b10ee9.html (accessed January 31, 2014) para 52.[155]CRC, art. 37(c); ICCPR, art. 10(b); Committee on the Rights of the Child,General Comment No. 6, para. 63.[156]"Hidden Migrant Children – Is the Government prepared to look afterthem?" Thai Rath (Bangkok),September 28, 2013, https://www.thairath.co.th/content/eco/372506 (accessedJanuary 15, 2014).[157]Human Rights Watch interview with Linda Y., [location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July 3, 2013.[158]Human Rights Watch interview with Abid A., [Location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July 15, 2013.[159]Human Rights Watch interview with Amanthi S., Sunnyvale, California, September26, 2013.[160]Ibid.[161]“Life in IDC: Written by an African refugee who was being resettled tothe USA about his experiences in the Bangkok Immigration DetentionCentre,” diary of Diederik O. (pseudonym), on file with Human RightsWatch.[162]“Life in IDC: Written by an African refugee who was being resettled tothe USA about his experiences in the Bangkok Immigration DetentionCentre,” diary of Diederik O. (pseudonym), on file with Human RightsWatch.[163]Ibid.[164]Human Rights Watch interview with Cindy Y., [location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July  3, 2013.[165]Human Rights Watch interview with Nimal P., Bangkok, July 30, 2013.[166]Mekong Migration Network, “NoChoice in the Matter: Migrants’ Experiences of Arrest, Detention andDeportation”, July 2013, p. 53.[167]Ibid.[168]Collewet, Louise, “Inhuman Detention Conditions inBangkok?”, Oxford Monitor of ForcedMigration, vol. 2 issue1 (2012), p. 29.[169]WHO, “Forum on international migration and health in Thailand: status andchallenges to controlling TB”, Bangkok (June 4-6, 2013), p. 36.[170]International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), Water, sanitation, hygiene and habitat in prisons: Supplementaryguidance, (Geneva: ICRC, 2012), p. 35.[171]Human Rights Watch interview with Ali A., [Location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July 15, 2013.[172]Human Rights Watch interview with Abid A., [Location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July 15, 2013.[173]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Leander P., August 30 , 2013.[174]Human Rights Watch interview with Arunny P., Bangkok, July 10, 2013.[175]Human Rights Watch interview with Veata S., Bangkok, July 10, 2013.[176]Human Rights Watch interview with Rosa H., [location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July 3, 2013.[177]Human Rights Watch interview with Linda Y., [location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July 3, 2013.[178]Handwritten note and Human Rights Watch interview with Labaan T., Bangkok IDC,June 24, 2011 (note on file with Human Rights Watch). Interviewed in thepresence of a local NGO service provider.[179]Human Rights Watch interview with Saleem P., Bangkok, July 15, 2013.[180]Human Rights Watch interview with Sunil K., Phlu Suan IDC, Bangkok, June 24,2011. Interviewed in the presence of a local NGO service provider.[181]Human Rights Watch interview with Cindy Y., [location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July  3, 2013.[182]Human Rights Watch interview with Veata S., Bangkok, July 10, 2013.[183]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Leander P., August 30 , 2013.[184]Human Rights Watch interview with Peter X., California, US, September 25, 2013.[185]Human Rights Watch interview with Abid A., [Location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July 15, 2013.[186]Human Rights Watch interview with Ali A., [Location withheld], July 15, 2013.[187]ICCPR art. 3; Standard Minimum Rules, art. 31.[188]United Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty(Rules for the Protection of Juveniles), adopted December 14, 1990, G.A. Res.45/113, annex, 45 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49A) at 205, U.N. Doc. A/45/49 (1990),art. 63.[189]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Leander P., August 30 , 2013.[190]Human Rights Watch interview with Yanaal N., Bangkok, July 15, 2013.[191]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Leander P., August 30 , 2013.[192]Human Rights Watch interview with Ali A., [Location withheld], July 15, 2013.[193]Human Rights Watch interview with Cindy Y., [location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July 3, 2013.[194]Human Rights Watch interview [name, location, and precise date withheld toprotect confidentiality], July, 2013.[195]Human Rights Watch interview with Veata S., Bangkok, July 10, 2013.[196]Human Rights Watch interview with Nhean P., Bangkok, July 10, 2013.[197]Human Rights Watch interview with Veata S., Bangkok, July 10, 2013.[198]Human Rights Watch interview with Arpana B., Bangkok, June 23, 2011.[199]Immigration Order 148 B.E. 2553 (2009), Guidelines on Standards in ImmigrationDetention Centers.[200]”Thailand:End Inhumane Detention of Rohingya,”Human Rights Watch news release, June4, 2013, http://www.hrw.org/news/2013/06/03/thailand-end-inhumane-detention-rohingya.[201]“Thailand: Protect Rohingya Boat Children,” Human Rights Watch newsrelease, January 6, 2014,http://www.hrw.org/news/2014/01/06/thailand-protect-rohingya-boat-children.[202]Human Rights Watch interview with Hakim A., Phang Nga, July 17, 2013.[203]Human Rights Watch interview with immigration official, Samut Sakhon, [datewithheld to protect confidentiality].[204]See, e.g., Human Rights Watch, Ad Hoc andInadequate, Section VI, pp. 108-120.[205]Human Rights Watch, Ad Hoc and Inadequate,pp. 115-116.[206]Email to Human Rights Watch (source and date omitted for reasons ofconfidentiality).[207]Ibid.[208]Human Rights Watch telephone interview, Nong Khai IDC, September 4, 2008.[209]Human Rights Watch interview with Rosa H., [location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July 3, 2013.[210]Human Rights Watch interview with Linda Y., [location withheld to protectconfidentiality], July 3, 2013.[211]Human Rights Watch interview with Moe Moe, Mae Sot, June 14, 2011.[212]Human Rights Watch interview with Mai M., Samut Sakhon, July 28, 2013.[213]Ibid.[214]Human Rights Watch group interview with Kah S., Chiang Mai, July 13, 2013.[215]Ibid.[216]Human Rights Watch interview with Htee Yaw, Chiang Mai, July 11, 2013.[217]"Hidden Migrant Children – Is the Government prepared to look afterthem?" Thai Rath (Bangkok),September 28, 2013 https://www.thairath.co.th/content/eco/372506 (accessedJanuary 15, 2014).[218]International Organization for Migration, “Thailand Migration Report2011,” 2011, p. 31.[219]UNHCR, “Back to Basics: The Right to Liberty and Security of Person and‘Alternatives to Detention’ of Refugees, Asylum Seekers, StatelessPersons and Other Migrants,” 2011, p. 202.[220]See, for example, Anti-Trafficking in Persons Act B.E 2551 (2008), section 29.[221]Thai Committee for Refugees, “Refugee Freedom Fund,”http://www.thaiforrefugees.org/refugee-freedom-fund/ (accessed December 12,2013).[222]UNHCR,“Alternatives to Detention of Asylum Seekers and Refugees,” 2006,accessed June 10, 2014, http://www.refworld.org/docid/4472e8b84.html, p. 198.[223]Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 6, para. 61.[224]International Detention Coalition,“Thereare Alternatives: A Handbook for Preventing Unnecessary Immigration Detention,”2011, p. 6.[225]Ibid. p. 25.[226]UNHCR, Alternatives to Detention of Asylum Seekers and Refugees, 2006, http://www.refworld.org/docid/4472e8b84.html,(accessed June 10, 2014), p. 167.[227]The International Detention Coalition, “There are Alternatives: AHandbook for Preventing Unnecessary Immigration Detention” 2011, p. 43.[228]UNHCR, Alternatives to Detention of Asylum Seekers and Refugees, 2006, accessedJune 10, 2014, http://www.refworld.org/docid/4472e8b84.html, p. 167.[229]“Alternatives to immigration detention prove cheaper, more humane,”IRIN, August 30, 2013,http://www.irinnews.org/report/98666/alternatives-to-immigration-detention-prove-cheaper-more-humane(accessed January 15, 2014).[230]These conditions include certain restrictions on freedom of movement and arequirement that they stay overnight at the return houses. Jesuit RefugeeService, “From Deprivation to Liberty: Alternatives to Detention inBelgium, Germany and the United Kingdom”, 2012, pp. 20-21.[231]Ibid, p. 21.[232]Ibid.,p. 21.[233]UNHCR, “Alternatives to Detention of Asylum Seekers and Refugees,2006,” accessed June 10, 2014, http://www.refworld.org/docid/4472e8b84.htmlp. 48.[234]Liesbeth Schockaert, “Alternatives to Detention: Open Family Units inBelgium”, Forced Migration Review,vol. 44, (September 2013), p. 54.[235]“Alternatives to immigration detention prove cheaper, more humane,”IRIN, August 30, 2013,http://www.irinnews.org/report/98666/alternatives-to-immigration-detention-prove-cheaper-more-humane(accessed January 15, 2014).[236]Global Detention Project, “Canada Detention Profile,”http://www.globaldetentionproject.org/countries/americas/canada/introduction.html(accessed December 19, 2013).[237]UNHCR , “UNHCR urges states to avoid detaining asylum-seekers,”UNHCR news release,http://www.unhcr.org.uk/resources/monthly-updates/june-update/alternatives-to-detention.html,(accessed December 19, 2013).[238]UNHCR, “Back to Basics: The Right to Liberty and Security of Person and‘Alternatives to Detention’ of Refugees, Asylum-Seekers, StatelessPersons and Other Migrants,” April 2011,http://www.unhcr.org/4dc949c49.pdf, p. 57.[239]Ibid., p. 85.[240]International Detention Coalition,“Thereare Alternatives: A Handbook for Preventing Unnecessary ImmigrationDetention,”  p. 43.[241]International Detention Coalition, “Captured Childhood,” 2012.Related ContentSeptember 1, 2014News ReleaseThailand: Migrant Children Locked UpThousands Held in Immigration DetentionSeptember 1, 2014News ReleaseThailand: Migrant Children Locked UpRegion / CountryAfrica Kenya Asia ThailandProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch