No Easy Answers: Sex Offender Laws in the US | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload this reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload this reportSeptember 11, 2007No Easy AnswersSex Offender Laws in the USAcknowledgementsHuman Rights Watch would like to thank allof the survivors of sexual violence, former offenders and their families,social workers, advocates, law enforcement officials, and attorneys who sharedtheir experiences and perspective with us for this report.We areespecially grateful to those who trusted us with very painful and personalstories.Corinne Carey, former researcher for the USProgram, undertook the original research for this report. The report waswritten by Sarah Tofte with the assistanceof Jamie Fellner, director of the USProgram, who also edited the report. Dr. Patrick Vinck, director of theBerkeley-Tulane Initiative on Vulnerable Populations at the Human RightsCenter, University of California-Berkeley, tabulated the data for Human RightsWatch's study of North Carolina'sonline sex offender registry.Ashoka Mukpo, US Program Associate, and USProgram interns Anjali Balasingham, Andrea Barrow, Madeline Gressel, and KariWhite provided important research assistance. Zama Coursen-Neff, acting deputydirector of the Children's Rights Division and Janet Walsh, acting director ofthe Women's Rights Division, reviewed the report. IanGorvin, deputy director of the Program Office, and Aisling Reidy, senior legal counsel, edited the report.Ashoka Mukpo, Grace Choi, and Andrea Holley provided invaluable productionassistance.We want to acknowledge our special gratitudeto Patty Wetterling, Alisa Klein, Jim Rensel, Nancy Daley, Dr. Robert Prentky,and Dr. Levenson for providing guidance and insights in helping us to shape theresearch and writing of this report. Dr. Richard Tewksbury, Dr. Levenson, andMs. Wetterling also reviewed the report.Human Rights Watch would also like to thankPeter B. Lewis, the Open Society Institute, and the John Merck Foundation, allof whom generously support the work of the US Program.I.SummaryThe reality isthat sex offenders are a great political target, but that doesn't mean any lawunder the sun is appropriate.-Illinois State Representative John Fritchey[1]People want asilver bullet that will protect their children, [but] there is no silver bullet.There is no simple cure to the very complex problem of sexual violence.-Patty Wetterling,child safety advocate whose son was abducted in 1989 and remains missing[2]What happened tonine-year-old Jessica Lunsford is every parent's worst nightmare.In February 2005 she was abducted from herhome in Florida,raped, and buried alive by a stranger, a next-door neighbor who had been twiceconvicted of molesting children. Over the past decade, several horrific crimeslike Jessica's murder have captured massive media attention and fueledwidespread fears that children are at high risk of assault by repeat sexoffenders. Politicians have responded with a series of laws, including the sexoffender registration, community notification, and residency restriction lawsthat are the subject of this report.Federal law and thelaws of all 50 states now require adults and some juveniles convicted ofspecified crimes that involve sexual conduct to register with law enforcement-regardlessof whether the crimes involved children. So-called "Megan's Laws" establish publicaccess to registry information, primarily by mandating the creation of onlineregistries that provide a former offender's criminal history, currentphotograph, current address, and other information such as place of employment.In many states everyone who is required to register is included on the onlineregistry. A growing number of states and municipalities have also prohibitedregistered offenders from living within a designated distance (typically 500 to2,500 feet) of places where children gather-for example, schools, playgrounds,and daycare centers.Human Rights Watch appreciatesthe sense of concern and urgency that has prompted these laws. They reflect adeep public yearning for safety in a world that seems increasingly threatening.Every child has the right to live free from violence and sexual abuse. Promotingpublic safety by holding offenders accountable and by instituting effectivecrime prevention measures is a core governmental obligation.Unfortunately, ourresearch reveals that sex offender registration, community notification, andresidency restriction laws are ill-considered, poorly crafted, and may causemore harm than good:The registration laws are overbroad inscope and overlong in duration, requiring people to register who pose nosafety risk;Under community notification laws,anyone anywhere can access online sex offender registries for purposesthat may have nothing to do with public safety. Harassment of and violenceagainst registrants have been the predictable result;In many cases, residency restrictionshave the effect of banishing registrants from entire urban areas andforcing them to live far from their homes and families.The evidence isoverwhelming, as detailed in this report, that these laws cause great harm tothe people subject to them. On the other hand, proponents of these laws are notable to point to convincing evidence of public safety gains from them. Evenassuming some public safety benefit, however, the laws can be reformed toreduce their adverse effects without compromising that benefit. Registrationlaws should be narrowed in scope and duration. Publicly accessible onlineregistries should be eliminated, and community notification should beaccomplished solely by law enforcement officials. Blanket residencyrestrictions should be abolished.Public Safety andMistaken PremisesProponents of sexoffender registration and community notification believe they protect childrenin two ways: police have a list of likely suspects should a sex crime occur inthe neighborhood in which a registered offender lives, and parents haveinformation that will enable them to heighten their vigilance and to warn theirchildren to stay away from particular people. Advocates for residencyrestrictions believe they will limit offenders' access to children and theirtemptation or ability to commit new crimes. While these beliefs may seemintuitively correct, they are predicated on several widely shared butnonetheless mistaken premises. Given these faulty underpinnings, it is notsurprising that there is little evidence that the laws have in fact reduced thethreat of sexual abuse to children or others.Sex offender lawsare based on preventing the horrific crimes that inspired them-but theabduction, rape, and murder of a child by a stranger who is a previouslyconvicted sex offender is a rare event. The laws offer scant protection forchildren from the serious risk of sexual abuse that they face from familymembers or acquaintances. Indeed, people children know and trust areresponsible for over 90 percent of sex crimes against them.In addition, sexoffender laws are predicated on the widespread assumption that most peopleconvicted of sex offenses will continue to commit such crimes if given theopportunity. Some politicians cite recidivism rates for sex offenders that are ashigh as 80-90 percent. In fact, most (three out of four) former sex offendersdo not reoffend and most sex crimes are not committed by former offenders. PattyWetterling, a prominent child safety advocate who founded the Jacob WetterlingFoundation after her son was abducted in 1989, recently told Human Rights Watch,Ibased my support of broad-based community notification laws on my assumptionthat sex offenders have the highest recidivism rates of any criminal. But thehigh recidivism rates I assumed to be true do not exist. It has made me rethinkthe value of broad-based community notification laws, which operate on theassumption that most sex offenders are high-risk dangers to the community theyare released into.Over-breadth ofthe Registration RequirementThe justificationsoffered for sex offender laws focus on sexually violent offenders. Yet peoplewho have not committed violent or coercive offenses may nonetheless be requiredto register as sex offenders and be subject to community notification andresidency restrictions. For example, in many states, people who urinate inpublic, teenagers who have consensual sex with each other, adults who sell sexto other adults, and kids who expose themselves as a prank are required toregister as sex offenders.Brandon M.'s caseis an example. Brandonwas a senior in high school when he met a 14-year-old girl on a church youthtrip. With her parents' blessing, they began to date, and openly saw each otherromantically for almost a year. When it was disclosed that consensual sexualcontact had occurred, her parents pressed charges against Brandon and he was convicted of sexualassault and placed on the sex offender registry in his state. As a result, Brandon was fired from hisjob. He will be on the registry and publicly branded as a sex offender for therest of his life. In his mother's words, "I break down in tears several times aweek. I know there are violent sexual predators that need to be punished, butthis seems like punishment far beyond reasonable for what my son did."[3]The over-breadth inscope is matched by over-breadth in duration: the length of time during which aformer offender must register and be included in online registries is setarbitrarily, based on the nature of the crime of conviction and not on anyassessment of the likelihood that the former offender continues to pose asafety threat. Indeed, legislators are steadily increasing the duration ofregistration requirements: in 17 states, registration is now for life. Yetformer sex offenders are less and less likely to reoffend the longer they liveoffense-free.Unfortunately, onlya few states require or permit periodic individualized assessments of the riskto the community a former offender may pose before requiring initial orcontinued registration and community notification.UnrestrictedAccess to Registry InformationIfformer offenders simply had to register their whereabouts with the police, theadverse consequences for them would be minimal. But online sex offenderregistries brand everyone listed on them with a very public "scarlet letter"that signifies not just that they committed a sex offense in the past, but thatby virtue of that fact they remain dangerous. With only a few exceptions, statesdo not impose any "need to know" limitations on who has access to theregistrant's information.With anational registry including every state registrant's online profile due to becomplete by 2009, information about previously convicted sex offenders will beavailable to anyone anywhere in the country, without restriction.Most registriessimply indicate the statutory name of the crime of which a person wasconvicted, for example, "indecent liberties with a child." Such language doesnot provide useful information about what the offending conduct actuallyconsisted of, and the public may understandably assume the worst. Jameel N.described for Human Rights Watch the public response to his inclusion on hisstate's online registry:Whenpeople see my picture on the state sex offender registry they assume I am apedophile. I have been called a baby rapist by my neighbors; feces have beenleft on my driveway; a stone with a note wrapped around it telling me to "watchmy back" was thrown through my window, almost hitting a guest. What theregistry doesn't tell people is that I was convicted at age 17 of sex with my 14-year-oldgirlfriend, that I have been offense-free for over a decade, that I havecompleted my therapy, and that the judge and my probation officer didn't eventhink I was at risk of reoffending. My life is in ruins, not because I had sexas a teenager, and not because I was convicted, but because of how my neighborshave reacted to the information on the internet.[4]PublicHostility to RegistrantsJameel N.'sexperience of public hostility is all too typical. Former offenders included ononline sex offender registries endure shattered privacy, social ostracism,diminished employment and housing opportunities, harassment, and even vigilanteviolence. Their families suffer as well.Registrants andtheir families have been hounded from their homes, had rocks thrown throughtheir home windows, and feces left on their front doorsteps. They have beenassaulted, stabbed, and had their homes burned by neighbors or strangers whodiscovered their status as a previously convicted sex offender. At least fourregistrants have been targeted and killed (two in 2006 and two in 2005) bystrangers who found their names and addresses through online registries. Otherregistrants have been driven to suicide, including a teenager who was requiredto register after he had exposed himself to girls on their way to gym class. Violencedirected at registrants has injured others. The children of sex offenders havebeen harassed by their peers at school, and wives and girlfriends of offenders havebeen ostracized from social networks and at their jobs.ResidencyRestrictionsAmong lawstargeting sex offenders living in the community, residency restrictions may bethe harshest as well as the most arbitrary. The laws can banish registrantsfrom their already established homes, keep them from living with theirfamilies, and make entire towns off-limits to them, forcing them to live inisolated rural areas. For example, former sex offenders in Miami, Floridahave been living under bridges, one of the few areas not restricted for them bythe residency restriction laws of that city.There is noevidence that prohibiting sex offenders from living near where children gatherwill protect children from sexual violence. Indeed, the limited research todate suggests the contrary: a child molester who does offend again is as likelyto victimize a child found far from his home as he is one who lives or playsnearby. A study by the Minnesota Department of Corrections found thatindividuals who committed another sex crime against a child made contact withtheir victim through a social relationship.Moreover, the lawsapply to all registered sex offenders regardless of whether their prior crimesinvolved children. It is hard to fathom what good comes from prohibiting aregistered offender whose victim was an adult woman from living near a schoolbus stop. Stories of the senseless impact of residency restrictions are legion.For example, Georgia'sresidency restriction law has forced a 26-year-old married woman to move fromher home because it is too close to a daycare center. She is registered as asex offender because she had oral sex with a 15-year-old when she was 17.Some lawmakersadmit to another purpose for residency restriction laws. Georgia State HouseMajority Leader Jerry Keen, who sponsored the state's law banning registrantsfrom living within 1,000 feet of places where children gather, stated during afloor debate, "My intent personally is to make [residency restrictions] soonerous on those that are convicted of [sex] offensesthey will want to moveto another state."[5] Yet people who have committed sex offensesmust live somewhere. For those who do pose a threat to public safety, theyshould be able to reside in communities where they can receive the supervisionand treatment they need, rather than be forced to move to isolated rural areasor become homeless.Juvenile OffendersIn most states, children(age 18 and younger) who are convicted of sex offenses can be subject toregistration, community notification, and residency restrictions. The recentlypassed federal Adam Walsh Act requires states to register children as young as14. Some of their offenses are indeed serious-for example, raping much youngerchildren. But children are also subjected to sex offender laws for conduct that,while frowned upon, does not suggest a danger to the community, includingconsensual sex, "playing doctor," and exposing themselves. Some of the conductreflects the impulsiveness and perhaps difficulty with boundaries that manyteenagers experience and that most will outgrow with maturity. In some cases itseems nothing short of irrational to label children as sex offenders. HumanRights Watch spoke with a father whose 10-year-old son was adjudicated fortouching the genitals of his five-year-old cousin. He told us, "My son doesn'treally understand what sex is, so it's hard to help him understand why he has toregister as a sex offender."[6]According to childdevelopment experts, many children move past the misdeeds of their youth,although some will require special support and treatment to do so. Althoughthere is little statistical research on recidivism by youth sex offenders, thestudies that have been done suggest recidivism rates are quite low. Forexample, in one study only 4 percent of youth arrested for a sex crimerecidivated. Research also indicates that most adult offenders were notformerly youth offenders: less than 10 percent of adults who commit sexoffenses had been juvenile sex offenders. Applying registration, communitynotification, and residency restriction laws to juvenile offenders does nothingto prevent crimes by the 90 percent of adults who were not convicted of sexoffenses as juveniles. It will, however, cause great harm to those who, whilethey are young, must endure the stigma of being identified as and labeled a sexoffender, and who as adults will continue to bear that stigma, sometimes forthe rest of their lives.Are the LawsCounterproductive?Current registration, community notification, andresidency restriction laws may be counterproductive, impeding rather thanpromoting public safety. For example, the proliferation of people required toregister even though their crimes were not serious makes it harder for lawenforcement to determine which sex offenders warrant careful monitoring. Unfetteredonline access to registry information facilitates-if not encourages-neighbors,employers, colleagues, and others to shun and ostracize formeroffenders-diminishing the likelihood of their successful reintegration intocommunities. Residency restrictions push former offenders away from thesupervision, treatment, stability, and supportive networks they may need tobuild and maintain successful, law abiding lives. For example, Iowa officials told Human Rights Watch that theyare losing track of registrants who have been made transient by the state'sresidency restriction law or who have dropped out of sight rather than complywith the law. As one Iowasheriff said, "We are less safe as a community now than we were before theresidency restrictions."[7]Many child safety and rape preventionadvocates believe that millions of dollars are being misspent on registrationand community notification programs that do not get at the real causes of childsexual abuse and adult sexual violence. They would like to see more money spenton prevention, education, and awareness programs for children and adults,counseling for victims of sexual violence, and programs that facilitate treatmentand the transition back to society for convicted sex offenders. As one childadvocate told Human Rights Watch, "When a sex offender succeeds in living inthe community, we are all safer."[8]US Sex Offender Policies: Alone in the WorldSexual violence andabuse against children are, unfortunately, a worldwide problem. Yet the United Statesis the only country in the world that has such a panoply of measures governingthe lives of former sex offenders. It is the only country Human Rights Watchknows of with blanket laws prohibiting people with prior convictions for sexcrimes from living within designated areas. To our knowledge, six othercountries (Australia, Canada, France,Ireland, Japan, and the United Kingdom) have sex offenderregistration laws, but the period required for registration is usually shortand the information remains with the police. SouthKorea is the only country other than the United Statesthat has community notification laws.Officials in Australia, Ireland,and the United Kingdomhave considered and in each case rejected the adoption of universal communitynotification laws (although in some cases, police are authorized to notify thepublic about the presence of a convicted sex offender in the neighborhood). Afterreviewing the experience of the UnitedStates, they concluded that there is littleevidence that community notification protects the public from sex crimes, andthat such laws are often accompanied by vigilante violence against registrants.Rethinking Sex OffenderLawsIncreasingly severeregistration, community notification, and residency restriction laws haveencountered little public opposition. Given the widespread belief in the mythsabout sex offenders' inherent and incurable dangerousness, it is perhaps notsurprising that very few public officials have questioned the laws or theirefficacy.Proponents of sexoffender laws say their first priority is protecting the rights of victims. Yetfew public officials who have supported registration, community notification,and residency restriction laws have done so based on a careful assessment ofthe nature of sex crimes and the best way to prevent sexual violence. And few publicofficials have acknowledged their responsibility to protect the well-being andfundamental rights of all residents-including those who have been convicted ofcrimes.Protecting thecommunity and limiting unnecessary harm to former offenders are not mutuallyincompatible goals. To the contrary, one enhances and reinforces the other. In Minnesota, statelegislators and government officials, in consultation with child safety andwomen's rights advocates, have constructed carefully tailored evidence-basedlaws that aim to prevent sexual violence by safely integrating former sexoffenders into the community, restricting their rights only to the extentnecessary to achieve that goal. Before they are released from prison, convictedsex offenders in Minnesotaare assessed by a panel of experts, who determine whether an individual shouldbe subject to registration and community notification, and if so for how long. Thepanel has the authority to periodically reassess the convicted sex offender'slevel of dangerousness and adjust his or her registration and community notificationrequirements accordingly. Community notification is on a need-to-know basis. Asthe Minnesota community notification law states, "The extent of the informationdisclosed and the community to whom disclosure is made must be related to thelevel of danger posed by the offender, to the offender's pattern of offendingbehavior, and to the need of community members for information to enhance theirindividual and collective safety." Minnesotahas not adopted universal residency restriction legislation. Instead, lawenforcement and the assessment panel jointly assess whether an individual onprobation or parole should be subject to residency restrictions and what thoserestrictions should be.The recently passedfederal Adam Walsh Act forces states to either dramatically increase theirregistration and community notification restrictions or lose federal lawenforcement grant money. While some states have rushed to amend their sexoffender laws to comply with the Act, other states are considering not adoptingthe provisions, citing a concern that they will not benefit public safety.As a human rightsorganization, Human Rights Watch seeks to prevent sexual violence and to ensureaccountability for people who violate the rights of others to be free fromsexual abuse. We are convinced that public safety will be as protected, if notmore so, by modified registration laws targeted only at former offenders whopose a high or medium risk of reoffending, as determined through anindividualized risk assessment and classification process, and by communitynotification that is undertaken by law enforcement on a need-to-know basis. Weare also convinced that there is no legitimate basis for blanket residencyrestrictions. We do not object to time-limited restrictions that are imposed onindividual offenders on a case-by-case basis, for example, as a condition ofparole. But a wholesale banishment of a class of individuals should have noplace in the United States.Reforming sexoffender laws will not be easy. At a time when national polls indicate that Americansfear sex offenders more than terrorists,[9] legislators will have to show they have theintelligence and courage to create a society that is safe yet still protectsthe human rights of everyone.II. MethodologyHuman Rights Watch reviewed the sex offender registration,community notification, and residency restriction laws of the 50 states in the United States and the District of Columbia. We ascertained theoffenses that triggered mandatory registration requirements, the period of timefor which the offender must remain registered, whether states classifyregistrants by level of risk, and what types of review procedures exist eitherto alter a registrant's level of risk or allow him to be relieved of reportingor notification obligations. We cross-checked the offenses that triggerregistration and notification requirements with each state's criminal code toidentify precisely what kinds of conduct triggered registration requirements.We also searched each state's juvenile code for specific provisions dealingwith the obligation of young offenders to register and be subject to communitynotification.Human Rights Watch visited all 50 state sex offenderregistry websites and that of the Districtof Columbia to determine what kind of informationabout registrants is available to the public. We communicated with lawenforcement officials from 30 states about their state registries, inparticular about whether the states had mechanisms for reporting vigilantism orharassment against registrants.State laws and online registry information are constantlybeing modified. The information compiled in this report is accurate, to thebest of our knowledge, as of July 1, 2007. States are constantly changing theinformation distribution format of their online sex offender registries, andsome of the information in this report may already be outdated. For the mostcurrent registration and community notification requirements and distributionpolicies regarding a particular state's online sex offender registry, HumanRights Watch encourages readers to check their state's most current policies.In addition to an exhaustive review of the publishedscientific and legal literature about sex offenders, we interviewed 122 sex offendersand 90 of their loved ones, all of whom are referred to in the report bypseudonyms, given their concerns about privacy. We spoke with a number ofsurvivors of sexual abuse, members of victims' rights and child sexual assaultprevention groups, child safety experts, and sex offender researchers. Finally,we interviewed state officials responsible for enforcing sex offender laws,including probation and parole officers and county sheriffs.III.RecommendationsWith the goal of increasing the effectiveprotection of children and others from sexual violence while protecting formeroffenders from unnecessary, unjust, and even counterproductive laws, HumanRights Watch makes the following recommendations for changes in federal andstate legislation.Adam Walsh ActAllprovisions of the Adam Walsh Act that deal with state registration andcommunity notification requirements should be repealed.If Congressdoes not repeal the Adam Walsh Act requirements as they pertain to stateregistration and community notification, states should not adopt the AdamWalsh Act provisions to their registration and community notificationlaws. State Sex Offender RegistriesFormer offenders who have committed minor,non-violent offenses, such as prostitution between adults; non-lasciviousindecency offenses, such as streaking and public urination; and consensualsexual activity with a minor who is within five years of age of the offender(statutory rape) should not be required to register.No offender who was under the age of 18 at thetime of his or her offense should be required to register. If states do requirechild offenders to register, then they should do so only after a panel ofqualified experts determines that the child poses a high risk of sexual reoffense,and that public safety cannot be adequately protected through any means otherthan the child being subject to registration. A determination that registrationis necessary should be reviewed at least on an annual basis for as long as theregistration requirement lasts.States should institute mechanisms by whichoffenders are removed from registries if they are exonerated; their convictionshave been overturned, set aside, or otherwise vitiated; or if their conduct isno longer considered criminal.States should regularly review all registrationinformation to ensure its accuracy.Formeroffenders should not be required to register with their schools or placesof employment. Most state laws require, and employers always have theoption of running, a criminal background check for prospective employeeswho will be working with children.Registration should be limited to formeroffenders who pose a high or medium risk of committing a serious crime in thefuture, either of sexually abusing children or committing a violent sex crimeagainst adults. The risk should be assessed on a case-by-case basis for eachconvicted sex offender, using tools that have predictive validity and take intoconsideration a variety of factors found by research to be associated withrecidivism, including the nature of the crime, prior offending history, the ageof the offender at the time of the crime, treatment or therapy history, and thelength of time an individual has remained offense-free.Former offenders considered low-risk for reoffending,on the basis of individual assessment, should not be required to register.The period of inclusion on the registry forformer offenders assessed as medium- and high-risk should be initiallydetermined by his or her individual risk assessment and then be subject toperiodic review with a view to extension or termination. An initialdetermination of lifetime inclusion should not be permitted. At periodicreview, registrants should be able to present evidence of rehabilitation,change in life circumstances, incapacitation (for example, disease ordisability) or substantial time living in the community without reoffense inorder to obtain termination of the requirement to register or to have their assignedlevel of risk changed. After a fixed period of time, the burden should shiftfrom the registrant to the state to prove that a registrant poses a publicsafety risk and must remain on the registry.Community NotificationAccessto sex offender registries should be limited to law enforcement.LawEnforcementLawenforcement officials should only release information about registered sexoffenders on a need-to-know basis. This would include notification to theindividual(s) victimized by the offender. When determining who else in thecommunity should be notified, law enforcement officials should weighfactors such as the size of the community, the nature of the offense, thelevel of reoffense risk at which the registrant has been assessed, and thelikelihood that access to the information will enhance the recipient'spersonal safety or that of their children.Lawenforcement officials should eliminate the use of posters, flyers, andother easily replicable materials to alert communities of the presence of aregistered sex offender in their neighborhood. They should informcommunity members individually, using accurate and responsible language todescribe the potential threat posed by the registrant.Lawenforcement and other local officials must recognize their responsibilityand authority to keep all community members safe, including people whohave been convicted of sex offenses. In deciding the method and scope ofcommunity notification, officials should be required to take intoconsideration the potential for community hostility against registrantsand take any necessary steps to mitigate the potential hostility.Statesshould enact laws allowing all registrants to appear periodically before apanel of qualified experts to review the requirement that law enforcementpublicly release their personal information. Registrants should be able topresent evidence of rehabilitation, change in life circumstances,incapacitation (for example, disease or disability), or substantial timewithout reoffense in order to terminate community notificationrequirements.Localofficials should work with the Center for Sex Offender Management (CSOM)and local agencies or organizations with the capacity to conduct communitymeetings aimed at safe reintegration of registrants when they move into aneighborhood. Community meetings should be designed as an opportunity foreducation about where the risk for sexual victimization lies and how toprevent sexual abuse before it occurs. Organizations to include in thedevelopment and implementation of these community meetings should bevictim advocacy groups, sexual violence prevention and responseprofessionals, and sex offender treatment and management agencies.Online Sex Offender RegistriesStatesshould eliminate public access to online registries of sex offenders as aform of community notification.Statesthat do maintain online registries should only include information aboutoffenders assigned a high level of risk, and only for so long as they are individuallydetermined to pose such a risk.Onlineregistry search capabilities should only permit targeted searches (forexample, by specific personal name or zip code). No member of the publicshould be able to search the entire database. States should also takesteps to preclude the possibility of registry information being found viainternet search engines.Accountabilityfor those who search online databases should be ensured by requiring thedatabase user to specify the purpose for the search, and to provide his orher name and zip code (with such information kept confidential andaccessible only by state officials and law enforcement). Onlineregistry databases should provide enough information to enable a laypersonuser to understand the nature of the sex offense of which the offender wasconvicted and the registrant's risk of recidivism. This should includemore information than the identification of the statute he or sheviolated. Databases should indicate when the offense was committed, howlong has passed since the registrant was released from incarceration, and containboth the registrant's and the victim's age at the time of the offense.Theinformation about a registrant revealed online should be limited to whatis necessary to promote public safety. For example, information such asplace of employment or place of education should not routinely beavailable. Congressand state legislatures should incorporate stronger prohibitions againstand penalties for misuse of online registration and community notificationinformation to harass, threaten, or injure registrants or their familymembers, or to discriminate unreasonably against registrants in the denialof housing, education, or other necessary benefits and services. Onlineregistries must prominently display warnings against misuse of informationon the registry. Misuse of registration information should be vigorouslyprosecuted. Registrantsshould have a periodic opportunity to petition to be removed from the onlineregistry. Registrants should be able to present evidence ofrehabilitation, change in life circumstances, incapacitation (for example,disease or disability) or substantial time without reoffense in order toterminate community notification requirements. National SexOffender RegistryCongressshould eliminate public access to the national sex offender registry.Ifthe national sex offender registry is to be maintained, Congress shoulddirect the Department of Justice to ensure that the national sex offenderregistry includes only such information from state registries as is consistentwith the above criteria. Residency RestrictionsNeitherstates nor localities should have residency restriction laws that apply toentire classes of former offenders. Authorized residency restrictions shouldbe limited to individually tailored restrictions for certain offenders asa condition of the terms of his or her probation, parole, or othermandated supervision.Treatment, Research, and EducationFederal and state governments shouldsupport sex offender treatment programs as a key component of sex offendermanagement. The Department of Justice and statesshould encourage and fund research to assess and compare the effectivenessof different strategies to prevent the perpetration and reoffense ofsexual violence. This research should include efforts to identify andassess the impact that registration, community notification, and residencyrestrictions have on registrants, their families, and communities.The Department of Justice shouldcontinue to support and fully fund the Center for Sex Offender Management,a national project of the Department of Justice's Office of JusticePrograms, to provide training and education to communities to facilitatethe safe reintegration of registrants. Federal, state, and local governmentsshould support collaborative efforts between citizens, law enforcement,offenders, victim advocacy and sexual violence prevention groups, andspecialized sex offender treatment providers to enhance the successful reintegrationof convicted sex offenders into the community in ways that promotecommunity safety. Federal, state, and local governmentsshould support efforts to develop a range of strategies to prevent sexualabuse that go beyond control and treatment of former offenders, includingeducational programs for families, treatment and other resources forsurvivors of sexual violence, promotion of safety precautions by youth andadults, and those that treat the reduction of sexual violence as a publichealth campaign.IV. Sexual Violence in the UnitedStatesBeing sexually assaulted as a child, for me, was likehaving my heart ripped to shreds. I am still trying to put it all backtogether.-Naomi L., a 32-year-old child sexual abuse survivor, whowas molested from age six to 10 by her step-uncle[10]Sexual violence is a serious problem, and any recidivismrate is too high. But recidivism rates for sex offenders are not as high aspoliticians have quoted in their attempts to justify the need for overly harshsex offender laws.-Dr. Jill Levenson, expert on sex offender treatment andmanagement[11]Patty Wetterling, a national child safety advocate whose sonwas abducted in 1989 and is still missing, has aptly identified the coreproblem with USregistration, community notification, and residency restriction laws for sex offenders:"People want a silver bullet that will protect their children. There is nosilver bullet. There is no simple cure to the very complex problem of sexualviolence."[12]In order to effectively combat sexual violence, public officials must first understandit. Research on sexual violence reveals a very different picture of who theperpetrators are and what their likelihood of reoffending is compared to whatthe public assumes.Sexual ViolenceSex crimes constitute a relatively small proportion of reportedviolent crimes in the UnitedStates. According to crime victimizationsurveys, rape and sexual assault accounted for 3.7 percent of the violentcrimes in 2005 against people age 12 or older.[13]Nevertheless, given their impact on the victims, sex crimes must be seen as asignificant problem, particularly when children are the victims. Furthermore,sexual violence is perhaps the most underreported violent crime, meaning thatthe number of victims of sexual violence is far higher than what is reported.For example, a study by the National Institute of Justice found that only onein five adult women rape victims (19 percent) reported their rapes to police.[14]In one 2000 study that looked at data from 12 states, personsunder the age of 18 at the time of the crime accounted for two-thirds of allvictims of sexual assault reported to law enforcement agencies.[15]According to a 2006 report, an estimated 89,500 cases of child sexual abusewere substantiated by child protective agencies in 2000.[16]Children under the age of six represented one in every seven victims of sexualassault, or 14 percent of all victims.[17]In each of the different sexual assault categories (for example, forcible rape,forcible sodomy, sexual assault with an object and forcible fondling) childrenbelow the age of 12 comprised about half of the victims.In 2005 there were 191,670 recorded victims age 12 and olderof rape, attempted rape, or sexual assault.[18]These statistics almost certainly underestimate the extent of the crimes,because victim fear, shame, or loyalty to the abuser contribute tounderreporting.[19]Self-report victimization surveys have found that 23 percent of women weresexually abused before the age of 18.[20]Females are far more likely than males to be the victims of sexual violence,constituting 86 percent of all sexual assault victims.[21]Based on reported crimes, a male is most likely to be sexually assaulted at agefour, and even then his risk of sexual assault is half that of females of thesame age.[22]Among adolescents, females are victims of sexual assault at 10 times the rateof males.[23]Indeed, the proportion of female victims increases with age at the time ofoffense: by age 19, 95 percent of victims are female.[24]The reluctance or inability of survivors of abuse or their familymembers to report sexual assault crimes to law enforcement contributes to thefact that the majority of sex crimes never lead to arrests and convictions.[25]The Bureau of Justice Statistics estimates that an arrest is made in only 27percent of all cases of sexual assault. The assaults of juvenile victims weremore likely to result in an arrest (29 percent) than were adult victimizations(22 percent), but assaults against children under age six resulted in an arrestin only 19 percent of the cases.[26]Sexual violence in the US is, fortunately, decreasing-overthe period 1993-2005, the rate of reported adult rape and sexual assaultsdeclined 69 percent.[27]Incidents of reported sex crimes against children have also decreased significantlyin the past decade. According to a 2004 report by the Crimes against ChildrenResearch Center at the University of New Hampshire, cases of child sexual abusesubstantiated by child protection agencies fell 40 percent between 1992 and2000; the report's authors believe that some of this drop reflects a decline inthe occurrence of sexual abuse, in addition to other factors such as stricterreporting practices.[28]It would be difficult to overestimate the devastating effectsexual violence can have for survivors. For adults, the emotional andpsychological consequences of sexual violence can be profound and enduring,including depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder.[29]According to the American Psychological Association, children who have beensexually abused may suffer a range of short- and long-term problems, includingdepression, anxiety, eating disorders, guilt, fear, withdrawal,self-destructive behaviors, and sexual acting out.[30]Given the consequences of sexual violence, it is understandable that societywants it to end.Danger from Strangers?With the purpose of helping parents identify unknownconvicted sex offenders in the neighborhood, sex offender laws like communitynotification schemes reflect the assumption that children and adults are mostat risk from strangers. Yet sexual violence against children as well as adultsis overwhelmingly perpetrated by family members or acquaintances.The US Bureau of Justice Statistics has found that just 14 percentof all sexual assault cases reported to law enforcement agencies involvedoffenders who were strangers to their victims.[31]Sexual assault victims under the age of 18 at the time of the crime knew theirabusers in nine out of 10 cases: the abusers were family members in 34 percentof cases, and acquaintances in another 59 percent of cases.[32]When the sexual assault victim was under sixyears old, almost half (49 percent) of the offenders were family members.[33]Sex abuse crimes against children that have received themost media attention and have consequently generated great public concerntypically involve a child who has been kidnapped, sexually assaulted, andkilled by a stranger. Although such crimes are seared into the publicconsciousness, they represent a tiny fraction of crimes against children. TheUS Department of Justice (DOJ) estimates that around 115 children are abductedper year by non-family strangers-of which 46 result in the death of the victim.[34]The number of those cases that included sexual abuse is unknown. According to a1997 analysis of 1,214 juvenile kidnappings, 49 percent of juvenile kidnappingsare perpetrated by family members, 27 percent by an acquaintance, and 24percent by a stranger.[35]High Rates of Recidivism?Sex offender laws also reflect the assumption thatpreviously convicted sex offenders are responsible for most sex crimes. Yetaccording to a 1997 US Department of Justice study, 87 percent of the peoplearrested for sex crimes were individuals who had not previously been convictedof a sex offense.[36]The focus of sex offender laws on people who have previouslybeen convicted of sex offenses may originate in the misperception that most ifnot all of those who have committed sex crimes in the past will do so again. Legislators,public officials, and members of the public routinely claim that people whohave committed sex offenses pose a great risk to the public because they have"astronomically high" recidivism rates.[37]For example, federal legislators justified the need for federal sex offenderlaws by asserting sex offender recidivism rates of 40 percent, 74 percent, andeven 90 percent.[38]Legislators rarely cite, nor are they asked for, the source and credibility ofsuch figures. In addition, most of those who make public assertions about therecidivism rates of sex offenders take a "one-size-fits-all" approach; they donot acknowledge the marked variation in recidivism rates among offenders whohave committed different kinds of sex offenses, nor the influence of otherfactors on recidivism.Accurately measuring reoffense rates of people previouslyconvicted of sex offenses is difficult, confounded by many factors.[39]Some offenders claim to have committed many offenses prior or subsequent to theone for which they were arrested and convicted.[40]It may be that such self-reports of long offense histories by a few offendershave led to the perception that all sex offenders have high rates of reoffending.But numerous, rigorous studies analyzing objectively verifiable data-primarilyarrest and conviction records-indicate sex offender recidivism rates are farbelow what legislators cite and what the public believes.The US Department of Justice tracked 9,691 male sexoffenders in 15 states who were released from prison in 1994 and found thatwithin three years only 5.3 percent of all sex offenders were arrested, and 3.5percent convicted, for a new sex crime; 2.2 percent were rearrested for a sexoffense against a child.[41]Among the released child molesters (defined in the study as someone convictedof a forcible or non-forcible sex crime against a child), 3.3 percent wererearrested for a sex crime against a child.[42]Sex offenders with prior histories of sex offenses had somewhat higher rates ofrearrest: 7.3 percent of child molesters and 8.3 percent of all sex offenderswith more than one prior conviction for a sex offense were rearrested foranother sex crime.[43]The most comprehensive study of sex offender recidivism todate consists of a meta-analysis of numerous studies yielding recidivism ratesfor a period of up to 15 years post-release for people convicted of suchserious offenses as rape and child molesting.[44]The analysis, which included over 29,000 sex offenders, found that within fourto six years of release, 14 percent of all sex offenders will be arrested orconvicted for a new sex crime.[45]Over a 15-year period, recidivism rates for all sex offenders averaged 24percent.[46]This is not a trivial rate by any means, given the seriousness of the offensescommitted. Yet it also indicates that three out of four sexually violent offendersdo not reoffend.The study also found that recidivism rates varied markedlydepending on the kind of sex crime committed. For example, recidivism withinfour to six years of release from prison was 13 percent for child molesters,and 24 percent for rapists. There are also differences within types of crime. Forexample, men who molest boys have the highest measured rates of recidivism ofany sex offender.[47]Within five years, their rate of sexual recidivism was 23 percent, and anadditional 12 percent committed another sexual offense over the next decade.[48]Thus, over a 15-year period, about one out of every three men who have molestedboys will be arrested or convicted of another sex offense.State-specific studies have yielded similar results. Forexample, in Ohio,only 8 percent of former sex offenders were reincarcerated for another sexoffense within a 10-year period.[49]Sex offenders who returned for a new sex offense did so within a few years ofrelease.[50]Within three years of their release, 2 percent of New York inmates who had served time for asex offense returned to prison with a conviction for another sex offense.[51]Within nine years, the number was 10 percent.[52]Sex offenders do not recidivate at far higher rates thanother offenders, as is often believed. A federal study of prisoners released in1994 found that 67.5 percent of all former prisoners were rearrested for a newoffense within three years of their release.[53]Rearrest rates varied by category of crime:70.2 percent for those who had been in prison for robbery, 74 percent forburglary, and 41.4 percent for homicide. Released rapists had a rearrest rateof 46 percent.[54]These rearrests are for any crime, not necessarily the same type of crime for whichthey had been in prison. Only 2.5 percent of prisoners who had been convictedof rape were arrested for another rape in the three-year post-release period.[55]The other released rapists were either rearrested for something other than rape(for example, non-sexual assault or property offenses) or not rearrested atall.Some of the public misapprehensions about the rates at whichsex offenders recidivate may have originated with calculations by the Bureau ofJustice Statistics (BJS) as to the relative likelihood at which released prisonersare rearrested for the same type of crime as that for which they had been inprison. In a study published in 1997 based on prisoners released in 1983, theBJS calculated that relative to other offenders, a rapist was 10.5 times morelikely than other released prisoners to be rearrested for another rape.[56]More recently, based on a study of prisoners released in 1994, the BJScalculated a rapist's likelihood of being rearrested for rape as 4.2 times anon-rapist's odds.[57]However, the odds of 10.5 or 4.2 do not mean that rapists' rates of recidivism are 10.5 or 4.2 timesgreater than the recidivism rates of other offenders.[58]The figures are properly understood as indicating the "degree of specializing"that is apparent among many offenders.[59]For example, according to the BJS, a robber is 2.7 times more likely of being rearrestedfor another robbery as compared to an offender who had not been serving timefor a robbery.[60]Specialization is not absolute; non-rapists are also rearrested on rapecharges. For example, 1.2 percent of the prisoners who had been serving timefor robbery were rearrested for rape.[61]Indeed, people who had been serving time for rape were responsible for only 4.8percent of the rapes committed in the three-year post-release period by allprisoners released in 1994.[62]Most prisoners who are going to reoffend do so fairly soonafter their release from prison.[63]This is also true for sex offenders. For example, according to the Bureau ofJustice Statistics, during the three years following release from prison in1994, 40 percent of the rearrests of sex offenders for new sex crimes occurredin the first year.[64]In Ohio, ofall sex offenders who came back to prison for a new sex offense within a 10-yearpost-release period, one-half did so within two years, and two-thirds withinthree years.[65]The corollary-for people who have committed sex offenses as well as other kindsof crimes-is that the longer someone remains offense-free in the community, theless likely he or she will commit another offense. For example, the 2004meta-analysis of sex offender recidivism studies cited above indicated that anaverage of 20 percent of all sex offenders would be arrested or convicted foranother sex offense over a 10-year period after being released into the community.But, for offenders who remained offense-free for five years, their recidivismrate for the next 10 years declined to 12 percent; for those who remainedoffense-free for 10 years, their recidivism over the next five years declinedeven further to 9 percent. After 15 years offense-free, the recidivism rate forthe next five years was 4 percent.[66]A number of other factors are also correlated withrecidivism. One such factor is the relationship of the victim to the offender. Offenderswhose victims were within the family recidivate at a significantly lower ratethan offenders whose victims were outside of the family.[67]For all child molesters, the lowest reoffense rates were for those who abusedfamily members-13 percent after 15 years living in the community.[68]The age at which a sex offender commits the sex offense also has a substantialassociation with recidivism. Offenders older than 50 when released from prisonreoffended at half the rate of those younger than 50-12 percent versus 26percent, respectively, after 15 years.[69]Some experts whospecialize in the treatment of individuals who commit sex offenses are notsurprised that individuals caught for their sex crimes have a relatively lowrecidivism rate. As one treatment provider told Human Rights Watch, "When anindividual is caught and held accountable for his behavior, he often becomesmotivated to get better. His behavior is no longer a secret, and it becomes areckoning point for him-he must decide whether he is going to change his behavior,or face the consequences."[70]Case Study: North CarolinaHuman Rights Watch did a case study of North Carolinato determine how many of the offenders on its online sex offender registry hadbeen convicted of another sex offense after they were released from prison intothe community, and the kinds of crimes for which the registrants were requiredto register. We chose North Carolinabecause it is one of only two states that we could find whose registries listthe date of release into the community. NorthCarolina's registry includes persons convicted ofsexually violent offenses,[71]offenses against minors,[72]and other sex offenses.[73]Depending on the gravity of their offense,offenders must register either for 10 years or for life.[74]Ten-year registrants may petition for removal from the registry after 10 years,providing they fulfill certain requirements.[75]Lifetime registrants may not petition for removal from the registry.[76]Human Rights Watch analyzed the criminal historiesreported on the registry for a statistically significant randomly chosen sampleof 500 out of the total 10,073 registrants living in the community. Theoverwhelming majority, 98.6 percent, were one-time offenders, that is, theironly sex offense was the one for which they were currently required toregister. The earliest date of release in the sample was 12 years ago, and nooffender living in the community 10-12 years from release has been reconvictedfor another sex offense. Of the 36 percent of the sample (183 offenders) whohad been out of confinement for more than five but fewer than 10 years, only2.19 percent (four offenders) had been reconvicted. All four of theserecidivists were reconvicted for "indecent liberties with a minor."In our sample, 67 percent of the registrants reportedindecent liberties with a minor as the registerable offense (this is abroadly-defined offense[77]that need not include violence and need not even involve physical contact withthe minor victim).[78]Another 10 percent were registered for rape(first and second degree).[79]The other 23 percent were registered for other sex crimes.Among the 13 registered sex offenders in our samplewho were under 18 at the time of conviction, six were registered for indecentliberties with a minor, and four were convicted of second degree rape (rape notinvolving the use of a weapon).TreatmentTreatment of sex offenders can contribute to communitysafety. Offenders who participate in and complete treatment are less likely toreoffend than those who do not.As the Center for Sex Offender Management (CSOM) has pointedout, the current emphasis on registration, community notification laws, andresidency restrictions for individuals who have been convicted of sex offenses"has begun to overshadow the important role of treatment in sex offendermanagement efforts."[80]The CSOM believes mandated specialized treatment as part of probation or paroleconditions is an integral and important component of effective communitysupervision.The classification, diagnosis, and assessment of sexoffenders for treatment are complicated by a high degree of variability amongindividuals in terms of personal characteristics, life experiences, criminalhistories, and reasons for offending.[81]The effectiveness of treatment at reducing reoffending behavior depends on manyfactors, including the type of sexual offender (for example, child molester oradult rapist), the specific treatment models and modalities being used, and thenature and extent of probation or parole supervision.[82]Most sex offender treatment programs in the United States usecognitive-behavioral treatment as well as relapse prevention (designed to helpsex offenders maintain behavioral changes by anticipating and coping with theproblem of relapse).[83]According to the CSOM, effective sex offender treatment holds offendersaccountable and reflects the "notion that if an offender can be taught tomanage successfully his propensity to sexually abuse, he becomes less of a riskto past and potential victims."[84]Early studies, conducted in the 1970s and 80s, did notdetect differences in recidivism rates between sex offenders who had undergonetreatment and those who had not.[85]Some recent research has produced similar findings. These findings have beenwidely publicized, opening the door to public policies predicated on theassumption that "treatment doesn't work" and sex offenders will invariablyrecidivate.[86]Other studies, however, have testified to the positiveimpact of sex offender treatment. For example, a recent meta-analysis of 43studies of 9,454 convicted sex offenders (5,078 treated and 4,376 untreated)found that contemporary cognitive-behavioral treatment was associated with a 41percent reduction in recidivism.[87]V. Sex Offender Registration LawsLook, I did something wrong. I think it makes sense thatthe police have the information they need to monitor my whereabouts. I acceptthat. I committed a crime, and I accept that consequence. That consequencemakes sense. It's the rest of it that doesn't.-Paul G., convicted in 1994 of adult rape, released fromprison in 1995[88]If sex offender registries were limited to previouslyconvicted sex offenders who had committed sexually violent crimes or sex crimesagainst children and who have been individually assessed as presenting a highor medium risk of committing similar crimes again, registration might helpprotect the public. Indeed, at least some registrants convicted of sexuallyviolent crimes agree that registering with local law enforcement makes sense.[89]As a man convicted of rape in 1992 and released into his Idaho community in 2002 told Human RightsWatch, "The police should know where I live. They should monitor me. I have noproblem going down to the police station to register. It's the price I pay forwhat I did."[90]But registration is not limited to offenders who pose a significantrisk of committing another serious crime. This chapter describes who isrequired to register, for what, and for how long.The Role of Federal LawWhile a few states have had sex offender registries sincethe 1940s, most states began creating registries in the 1990s.[91]Today all 50 states and the Districtof Columbia have them. Federal law now requiresstates to maintain sex offender registries and has limited state discretionregarding who must register, and for how long.In 1994 the US Congress passed the Jacob Wetterling Crimesagainst Children and Sexually Violent Offender Registration Act, named after an11-year-old boy who was abducted at gunpoint while riding his bike near hishome.[92]The law required states to establish sex offender registries, subject to theloss of a percentage of federal funding if they did not.[93]Under the legislation, people convicted of sexual abuse of children or sexuallyviolent crimes against adults were required to register their current addresseswith local law enforcement for 10 years following their release into thecommunity.[94]The law authorized, but did not require, law enforcement officials to releaseto the public information on a registered sex offender when, in theirdiscretion, they determined public notification about the registered sexoffender's presence in the community was "necessary to protect public safety."[95]In 1996 Congress expanded the length of registrationrequired for individuals convicted of "aggravated" sexual violence and for sexcrime recidivists.[96]These individuals were required to register for life.[97]Ten years later, with the Adam Walsh Act of 2006, Congressagain passed legislation increasing the categories of people that states wererequired to register as sex offenders and for how long they would have to do so.[98]The Act also authorized a national registry that would incorporate theinformation from every state registry.The Adam Walsh Act significantly expands the federalrequirements of who must register as a sex offender. The Act defines a sexoffense as a "criminal offense that has an element involving a sexual act orsexual contact with another."[99]The law exempts consensual sexual conduct when the victim was at least 13 andthe offender was no more than four years older.[100]For the first time, federal law under the Adam Walsh Act requires somejuveniles to register (see Chapter VII, "Sex Offender Laws and Child Offenders").The Adam Walsh Act creates three tiers or levels ofregistrants, determined solely by the conviction offense, with Tier I crimesthe least serious and Tier III crimes the most serious. The tiers dictate theduration of the registry requirement.[101]The Act also sets the frequency with which a former offendermust update registry information: Tier I sex offenders must do so every year;Tier II sex offenders must do so every six months; and Tier III offenders mustdo so every three months. A registrant must not only register with local law enforcementin the jurisdiction where he or she resides, but must also register in thejurisdiction where he or she is employed or and goes to school.[102]The Act makes failure to register a violation of federal law, carrying with ita fine or imprisonment.[103]These registration requirements are applied to all registrants, for theduration of their registration. So, for example, a man convicted of solicitingan underage prostitute would have to register in the jurisdiction where he livesand also in the jurisdiction where he is employed (if different) and provideinformation about his employer to the police, even if his work does not involvecontact with children.One of the goals of the Act was to create more uniformityamong state registration schemes, to avoid some of the confusion as toregistration requirements when registrants moved to different states. However,since the Act does not limit the authority of states to go beyond federal law(see below), uniformity will still be elusive.Moreover, the Act will preclude state officials frominstituting registration laws they deem more reasonable or effective but which fallbelow the federal mandate.In 1996 Congress authorized the creation of a nationalregistry of offenders convicted of coercive, penetrative sex with anyone, sexwith children under the age of 12, recidivists of any sexual offense, andsexually violent predators.[104]In 2005 the national registry went online with links to state onlineregistries.[105]The Adam Walsh Act requires all states to upload their online sex offenderdatabase to the national database by 2009.[106]State Registration LawsThe only reason I am considered a sex offender is because Icommitted an offense that triggers registration. In any other context, my crimewould never be considered a sex offense, and I would not be considered a threatto society.-Trent B., a Pennsylvaniaregistrant convicted of streaking[107]While federal law requires states to register formeroffenders convicted of certain offenses, it does not limit states' authority toincrease the number of offenses that trigger registration or the duration ofthe requirement to register.Expanding the Definition of Sex OffenderMost people assume that a registered sex offender is someonewho has sexually abused a child or engaged in a violent sexual assault of anadult. A review of state sex offender registration laws by Human Rights Watchreveals that states require individuals to register as sex offenders even whentheir conduct did not involve coercion or violence, and may have had little orno connection to sex. For example:At least five states require registration foradult prostitution-related offenses;[108]At least 13 states require registration forpublic urination; of those, two limit registration to those who committed theact in view of a minor;[109]At least 29 states require registration for consensualsex between teenagers;[110]andAt least 32 states require registration forexposing genitals in public;[111]of those, seven states require the victim to be a minor.[112]Case study: OklahomaOklahoma law treats any type of publicexposure as a sex offense that triggers 10 years on the sex offender registry,even if the offender had no sexual or lascivious motivation or intent at thetime he or she exposed him- or herself.According to a local newspaper, nearly 600 registrants appear on Oklahoma's website forengaging in indecent exposure.[113]In 1999 a high school senior in Salina, Oklahomawas arrested for what his mother described to the local media as a "high schoolthing."[114]He reportedly exposed himself to a group of female freshman gym students on hisway to the restroom. School officials notified the police, who took the youngman away in handcuffs. He was incarcerated for four months pending trial, andpled guilty to indecent exposure. In addition to community service and afive-year suspended sentence, he was required to register as a sexoffender.According to his mother, the stigma of the label drovehim out of his community and away from his family. He dropped out of highschool and moved to Tulsa.He had a hard time finding and maintaining employment. "It seemed like afterthat happened, he didn't care," his mother told a local newspaper.[115]The youth was found shot to death in November 2000 in what officials ruled a suicide.He was one month away from his 20th birthday. His mother nowbelieves that some consideration should be given to sex offender registrationrequirements when the charge stems from a nonviolent act. "He was a prettynormal kid," she said. The sex offender registration requirements "changed hislife."[116]Increasing the Length of Time of RegistrationNo matter if I complete treatment, never reoffend, lead anexemplary life to the best of my ability, I will have to register as a sexoffender for the rest of my life.-Jacob V., SouthCarolina registrant convicted of possessing childpornography[117]If the goal of sex offender registries is to enhancecommunity safety, then the law should require registration for only so long asa former offender can reasonably be deemed to pose a meaningful risk ofcommitting another sexually violent offense.Yet federal and state registration laws often require individuals toregister for far longer.Federal law requires mandatory lifetime registration forsome offenders, and some states require lifetime registration for alloffenders, with the duration of the registration under both federal and most statelaws keyed solely to the crime of conviction. Under the Adam Walsh Act, Tier Isex offenders are required to register for 15 years, Tier II sex offenders for25 years, and Tier III offenders for life.[118]The Act does acknowledge in a limited way the significanceof living offense-free:Tier Iregistrants can petition for removal from registration requirements if they maintaina clean record for 10 years. But Tier II offenders and Tier III offenders mustregister for 25 years or the rest of their lives, respectively, regardless ofhow long they live offense-free or present other evidence of rehabilitation.[119]Under this law, for example, a man who sexually abused a child in his family buthas been living in the community offense-free for 20 years would nonetheless berequired to continue to register until he dies.[120]The Adam Walsh Act will extend the duration of registrationfor many offenders as states amend their laws to comply with it. But the lawdoes not prevent states from setting longer registration requirements.Seventeen states currently require lifetime registration for all registrants-from the most minoroffenders to the most serious.Two ofthese states, Alabama and South Carolina, do not provide any means bywhich a registrant might secure release from the registry requirement.[121]In Alabama,for example, a man convicted of soliciting an adult prostitute must registerfor life, with no way to obtain a release from the registration requirements. Theother 15 states allow some registrants to petition a court for removal fromregistration requirements after living in the community offense-free for aspecific number of years.[122]Thirty-three states require some, but not all, offenders toregister for life.[123]As best we can tell, lifetime registration in these states is typicallyreserved for more serious crimes.[124]In 24 of these states, former offenders who had been convicted of more seriouscrimes will have to register until they die, no matter how unlikely thepossibility of recidivism. Six of these states permit lifetime registrants topetition for early release of the registration requirements.[125]The Adam Walsh Act may eliminate that option for most, if not all, of theseregistrants.How Bad Can Registration Be? Chris F.'sStory[126]I am 29 years old. I was adjudicated when I was 12years old. I found some pornographic videos in my parents bedroom (they werewell hidden but I was a kid and overturned everything) and invited someneighbor friends over to watch it while my parents were away. The neighbor Ifirst invited was 12 years old. He told his friend who was 10 and that persontold his friend who was 8. So there were 4 of us (all males) in a room watchingthese videos. What started off a little more as "you show me yours, I'll showyou mine" turned into a bit more. There was not any force.I was adjudicated and placed in the California YouthAuthority (CYA). I was out in 1997. I enrolled in college to study criminaljustice, then switched to pre-law. I dropped out of classes when I found outthe registration laws changed to apply toward college campus policedepartments. I could not see myself going in to register with classmates thatwere working their work study jobs with the campus security department.At age 23 I became Director of Security for a hotel. Igot married at 25 and have a child now.[Among the incidents he experienced because of hisregistration status:]1. When I was attending college, I lived in Sacramento, CA but myschool was in Santa Rosa,which is about a 150 mile trip. I pulled over to sleep a bit during the commutein an empty parking lot. A city policy officer told me to move along, that it wasillegal to sleep in a car. She knew that I was a registered sex offender andasked me about the crime I had committed. I told her about it, and she said shedid not believe me.2. I was pulled over for speeding for doing 80 mph ina 65 mph zone. Even though my crime and offender registration was supposed toremain confidential, the police officer announced that I was a registered sexoffender to everyone in the car with me. That hurt my relationship with thepeople I was traveling with.3. When I went to register at the police station, theyhad me wait in a busy hallway in a court building. I had to get a finger printand the officer doing it calls out my name in the hallway and then says, "stepup for your sex offender registry finger print." Then the whole hallway knewwhat I was there for.4. When I was working in Reno, doing security, my boss calls me intohis office and lets me know I'm a registered sex offender based off thecriminal check they did. He said "there must be some mistake. The date of thecrime doesn't match. You aren't that old to be a sex offender." He allowed meto return to work. I quit shortly after that to save face.5. I was fired from a job because I didn't disclosethe fact that I was a registered sex offender, and they did a background check.This last firing was the reason I started pursuing toget my name off the law enforcement registry. I had had enough. I was taken offthe registry at age 28. I am 29, and feel like my life can start over again.Do Registries HelpLaw Enforcement?Police have used sex offender registries to identifypotential suspects when a sex crime has been committed in their jurisdiction.Yet, given that most sex crimes are not committed by registered offenders (SeeChapter IV above), the utility of the registries for law enforcement islimited. For example, a 1999 study about Massachusetts'sex offender registry showed that of the 136 new sex crimes in a particularjurisdiction, only six were committed by individuals listed on a police registry.[127]Human Rights Watch asked a state law enforcement official in Minnesota whether the sex offender registrychanged the way he investigated new sex crimes.He told us, "It gives us a place to start, but most suspects we arrestare not previously convicted sex offenders. Last year, Minnesota had 585 sex offender convictions,and only 58 of those individuals had a prior conviction for a sex offense."[128]With over 600,000 men and women listed on sex offenderregistries,[129]law enforcement cannot actively monitorall the registrants. Human Rights Watch spoke to a police officer who overseesthe sex offender registry for his city. He told us, "To be honest, it would behard to go out and patrol every registrant on the list. We don't follow theguys around on the registry. We don't really check in on them, unless theyfailed to register and we have to try to find them."[130]Another law enforcement official told Human Rights Watch, "The expansion ofstate sex offender registries to include more offenses and longer registrationperiods has really compromised our ability to monitor high-risk sex offenders."[131]The chief probation officer in an Arizonacounty told Human Rights Watch, "Lawmakers have no idea the kind of burden theyput on law enforcement when they increase the number of offenders who mustregister."[132]The volume of registrants is such that law enforcementofficials cannot even make sure that those who are supposed to register aredoing so. In 2003, for example, the state of California admitted that it had lost trackof 33,000 of the state's convicted sex offenders-44 percent of the 76,350 whoshould have been registering but were not.[133]As the lone officer responsible for tracking Sacramento's 1,945registered sex offenders put it, "We could definitely use some helpthere isso many of them out there, it's hard to keep track."[134]In 2005 a study of Florida'ssex offender registry found that over 7,000 registrants had run away or couldnot be found. "As a result, you have an excessively long list that does notgenerate enough accurate information to make registration useful to anyone,"noted a child safety advocate.[135]Rethinking RegistrationThere is little public safety purpose served by imposingregistration requirements on those who pose a minimal risk to the community.Legislators should replace one-size-fits-all registration with a system thatlimits registration to those who have been individually determined to pose a highor medium risk to the community. In determining that risk, states should takeinto consideration the offender's prior record, the specific offense committed,the period of time he or she has lived in the community offense-free, and otherfactors that are statistically correlated with the likelihood ofreoffending.For example, the Center forSex Offender Management advocates individualized risk assessment for sexoffenders that takes into consideration "the complex and varying nature ofsexual abuse and the individuals who perpetrate it."[136]States should also allow all registrants to periodically petition or appeal forreview of their initial risk-level status.Carefully tailored, sensible registration is possible. Forexample, in Minnesota, a coalition of publicofficials, law enforcement personnel, and victims' rights organizations have createdreasonable registration laws (see text box on Minnesota at the end of Chapter VI, "PublicAccess to Information on Sex Offenders").VI. Public Access to Information on SexOffendersWe knew nothing about him. If we had been aware of his record,my daughter would be alive today.-Maureen Kanka, whose daughter, Megan, was abducted,sexually assaulted, and murdered by a neighbor who was a convicted sex offender[137]Nothing is more threatening to our families and communitiesand more destructive of our basic values than sex offenders who victimizechildren and families. Study after study tells us that they often repeat thesame crimes. That's why we have to stop sex offenders before they commit theirnext crime, to make our children safe and give their parents piece of mind.-President Bill Clinton, in a 1996 radio address about thepassage of Megan's Law[138]Federal and state community notification laws give thepublic easy access to significant information about registrants. All 50 stateshave online sex offender registries which anyone with access to the internetcan view. As noted in our previous chapter, by 2009 all state registrationinformation that is publicly available will be uploaded onto the onlinenational sex offender registry.[139]Information on the registry typically includes not just aperson's criminal conviction-which is in the public record, except in the caseof juveniles-but also his or her current address and picture, and sometimes hisor her license plate number and place of employment, among other information.[140]Community notification thus does not, as some contend, simply make public whatis in already in the public record.Instead, it makes readily accessible additional information that wouldotherwise be private or difficult to obtain.[141]Legislative HistoryOn July 29, 1994, Jesse Timmendequas raped and murdered hisneighbor, seven-year-old Megan Kanka, luring her into his home by asking her ifshe wanted to see his new puppy.[142]Timmendequas had two prior convictions for sexual offenses against children.[143]The story of Megan's murder, which occurred in a small central New Jersey community,received significant national attention. In the aftermath of the crime, Megan'sparents stated that if they had known about Timmendequas' past, they would havebeen able to protect their daughter from him.[144]Parents and concerned citizens pressed for an expansion of the federal sexoffender registration law (The Jacob Wetterling Act) to include communitynotification. Congress responded by passing Megan's Law in 1996.[145]All 50 states and the District of Columbia also passed their ownMegan's Laws.[146]Support for Megan's Laws within both Congress and statelegislatures was overwhelming. When community notification came up fordiscussion in the US House of Representatives, only one representative voicedopposition and the bill eventually passed 418-0.[147]In Florida,legislators held no debate on the merits of making sex offender registrants'names public through community notification before unanimously passing thelaws.[148]Megan's Laws passed with similar ease in other states; in Virginia,Illinois, and Washington, for example, they passed withouta single "no" vote.[149]Proponents of community notification framed it as a means bywhich to protect children from child molesters. Speeches featured stories ofchild victims who suffered serious abuse.[150]Yet Megan's Laws are not limited to individuals who have committed sexuallyviolent crimes against children, who have abused children, or who havecommitted violent sex crimes against adults. Instead, in many states, communitynotification (just as registration per se) extends to individuals whose crimesbear a tenuous or no connection to either sex or violence.Advocates of community notification believe putting registryinformation directly in the hands of the public will enable them to take stepsto protect their children or themselves from convicted sex offenders-presumedto be dangerous and strangers.Asdiscussed above, most convicted sex offenders will not recidivate, sex offenderregistries include only a small percentage of people who will commit sexoffenses in the future, and most offenders are not strangers to their victims.Community notification occurs two ways: law enforcementofficials may notify communities directly and states make sex offenderregistries available online.CommunityNotification by Law EnforcementAfter the sheriff placed the flyers with [my husband's]face all over our neighborhood, neighbors stopped talking to us. People made copiesof the flyer and passed it out in front of my son's school. They posted the flyersalong my running trail. People came around at night and pounded on our windows.We eventually moved to a more isolated neighborhood. We couldn't handle thehumiliation.-Susan K., wife of a convicted sex offender[151]The police posted fliers notifying the neighbors that myson was a sex offender. He found it too hard to live in his apartment complex. Wenever told my son this, but the neighbors actually stood out in the hallway andapplauded as my wife and I moved his stuff out of his apartment.-Bob K., whose son was adjudicated at age 14 for sexualcontact with a minor[152]All 50 states require some form of direct communitynotification by law enforcement for offenders convicted of certain sex offenseswho have been released from custody and have moved into a community. Most statelaws do not provide guidance to the police regarding who to notify or themethod of notification.Some police departments and sheriff's offices hang postersin community centers and libraries, or send letters or postcards to homeswithin a certain distance of the registrant.[153]Others publish notices in the local newspaper or broadcast pictures andaddresses of the registrants on television.[154]Some law enforcement officials fund non-governmental non-profits to inform thecommunity about released registrants.InNew York, forexample, Parents for Megan's Law has a contract with the state to distributeinformation about registrants recently released from custody.[155]Under some state community notification schemes, lawenforcement is authorized to disseminate information about registrants to awide array of public and private entities and organizations. FFForexample, in New Jersey,notices about high risk ("Tier 3") registrants are distributed to privateresidences, businesses, schools, and community organizations in the area(s)where the offender lives and works. For moderate risk ("Tier 2") registrants,notices are provided to schools and community organizations. Notificationconcerning low risk ("Tier 1") offenders is provided only to law enforcement.[156]Absent care in how notification is handled, law enforcementofficials may inadvertently expand the scope of community notification beyondwhat is necessary to protect public safety, mislead the public about the actualrisk a sex offender poses, and inflame community hostility and fear. When lawenforcement notifies a community about the presence of a registrant by placinga notice in a local newspaper or on the local television station, for example,they expand notification to include more than those who live in close proximityto the offender.Human Rights Watch spoke with a man convicted of possessingchild pornography in 1996 who is subject to community notification laws in Florida:When we moved in, in 2004, the police put flyers all overmy neighborhood. I saw him hanging them up. It was my picture, and adescription of the crime I committed, and it directed them to [Florida's sex offenderwebsite]. Our neighbor made copies of the flyer, and started passing them outdoor-to-door. One of my neighbors works in my office, and soon the flyers werearound the office as well. I was let go a few days after they appeared. Oneday, as my wife dropped my son to school, there were the flyers, being passedout by one of my neighbors. When my wife asked her, she said she had madecopies of the ones the Sheriff posted. It was humiliating for all of us, and itjust made me want to hide. We eventually moved from the neighborhood.[157]In addition to community notification laws, some courts andlegislators have sought to notify the public about the presence of sexoffenders through means that could deliberately expose the offender to publichumiliation and degradation. A court in Georgia, for example, ordered J.B.,a 59-year-old registrant, to put signs up on his property declaring that he isa child molester.[158]Lawmakers in at least two states have proposed requiring registrants to obtainspecial color-coded license plates-pink-on the theory that such plates wouldmake them easily identifiable to children.[159]Law enforcement officials sometimes make little effort toaccurately inform the community about the conduct that triggered registration forthe offender and what safety risks he or she may pose. For example, HumanRights Watch spoke with an individual who had consensual sex with his 16-year-oldgirlfriend when he was 20. "I was convicted of statutory rape, but when thepolice notified the community I live in, they didn't make it clear thecircumstances. My neighbors, who are family friends, told us that the police[officer] just said I raped a girl. They didn't explain that she was mygirlfriend, that it was consensual, and that the judge, the prosecutor, and my probationofficer consider me to be a low-risk offender. He just said that I raped agirl.That makes people think I am amonster."[160]Human Rights Watch spoke with a mother in Texas who received a postcard notifying herthat a convicted sex offender moved into the neighborhood: "They might as wellhave written it in a foreign language," she said. "The postcard the police sentto my home was a bunch of legalese-I couldn't understand what exactly thisindividual had done to get his name on the registry, and I had no idea what hiscriminal history meant for the safety of my family. Now I worry that if thisguy does something to a child in the neighborhood, the police will blame theparents for not being vigilant enough, like 'we gave you fair warning, and you failedto heed our warnings.' But I don't understand the threat. I am not saying onedoesn't exist, I just don't understand it."[161]Minnesota's communitynotification law is one of the few laws that carefully prescribes how and towhom law enforcement officials can disclose information about released formersex offenders (see text box about Minnesotabelow).Internet Registries: Expanding CommunityNotification to the WorldMy husband is being encompassed into a group which thegeneral public is made to think contains only pedophiles, child molesters, andrapists. The descriptions on the web are very general and misleading.At the very least, our state should actuallytake the time to [assess] each case and determine those who should actually belisted rather than blanket cover everyone.-Heidi O., wife of a former prison guard convicted ofinappropriately touching a female inmate[162]Despite the rationale for community notification, onlineregistries are not limited to offenders who have committed serious crimes, orare assessed to pose a significant risk of reoffending in the future. Nor isaccess to the registries limited to those who have a legitimate "need to know."Some people insist that community notification via onlineregistries does not invade a registrant's privacy because the registriescontain information already in the public domain. This is an argument US courtshave adopted in upholding community notification.[163]It is true that criminal records are available at courthouses for those whowish to inquire. But, as noted above, the online registries pull together, inan easily accessible fashion, information that is not usually part of one'scriminal record.State Internet RegistriesI knew the planned internet registry had gone online whenmy neighbor came to my home and asked if I was a pedophile, because she hadentered our zip code to search the database, and my name and picture appeared.-Dave S., convicted in Oklahoma of possession of child pornography[164]Every state has a searchable state-wide website withinformation about individuals required to register as sex offenders. Anyonewith access to the internet can access state sex offender online databases andfind out who is a registered offender. The information provided online for eachoffender typically includes the crime that triggered the registrationrequirement, name, photograph, physical description, date of birth, and currentaddress of the registrant (although a few state online registries provide onlythe zip code of the individual). Some states provide additional personalinformation for certain offenders, including the address of the registrant'semployer and the make, model, and license plate number of any vehicle theregistrant drives.[165]Draft federal regulations for the Adam Walsh Act encourage states to list aregistrant's home telephone number and email address.[166]Users of online registries can search by name to see whethera specific individual is registered, or can find out if there are anyregistered offenders in a particular neighborhood. The user need not live inthe state whose registry is being searched, and states do not limit who canaccess the database. Those who search state and national databases can do soanonymously in every state except New York andVermont, wherethose seeking to search the website must provide their names and addresses (whichare kept confidential and seen only by state officials).[167]Thirty-two states include every registrant who was convictedas an adult on their online database (this includes youths who were under 18,but convicted as adults).[168]Eighteen states (and the District of Columbia) exclude low- and, insome cases, medium-risk adult sex offenders from the internet registry.[169]Thirty-two states require some youthwho were adjudicated as juveniles to be placed on the public registry.[170]The Adam Walsh Act now requires states to include on their online registrieschildren age 14 or older at the time of the offense who were adjudicateddelinquent in juvenile court, where the offense "was comparable to or moresevere than aggravated sexual abuse, or was an attempt or conspiracy to commitsuch an offense."[171](See section VII, "Sex Offender Laws and Child Offenders")Failure to Inform: Inaccurate and Missing InformationThe public needs to know there is a difference between asexual OFFENDER and a sexual PREDATOR. You can't tell that from the web-sitethat my father is a sexual offender, but he is not a predator.-Emily L., daughter of a Florida registrant convicted of indecentexposure to a minor[172]Most online registries do not provide information that willenable the user to understand the nature of the offending conduct or the likelihoodthat the offender will reoffend.The online registries of 22 states and the District of Columbia reflect no discernableindication of the offender's level of dangerousness.[173]The other 28 state registries reflect variousstrategies for suggesting dangerousness: at least nine indicate how long theoffender is required to register;[174]at least two indicate that they include "only high level offenders";[175]at least five include a section describing the offense in detail;[176]at least seven use the terms "aggravated" or "habitual" to define moredangerous offenders;[177]at least two have a separate database for level two (medium risk) and levelthree (high risk) offenders;[178]and at least 15 states designate some offenders as "sexual predators," or"sexually violent predators"[179]Only three state sites that Human Rights Watch could find providethe registrant's age at the time of the offense,[180]although all state registries provide the current age of the registrant. Thelack of information about the offender's age can be extremely misleading. Asthe age of the registrant is updated every year, the age of difference betweenhim and the victim becomes greater and greater. For example, Marcus A., who wasconvicted at 20 of having sex with his 15-year-old girlfriend, explained toHuman Rights Watch that his state's sex offender website "lists my age, whichis now forty-seven, and my victim's age, who I later married, as fifteen. Itmakes me look like a child rapist. I live alone now. I moved to a newneighborhoodand I worry that everyone will just think I am some dirty oldman living alone who likes to have sex with children."[181]Alabama, Minnesota, New Jersey, North Dakota and SouthDakota are the only states Human Rights Watch found whose online registryprovides crime descriptions that the general public may be able to understand(for example, "when male was 41, raped 14 year old female").[182]The other registries either cite the statute under which the offender wasconvicted or quote directly from it. The user is left to wonder what such termsas "lewd and lascivious behavior," "indecent liberties with a child," or "crimeagainst nature" actually mean and what the registrant actually did.Florida'swebsite is typical. It provides no detail about a registrant's crime beyond thename of the statute under which the registrant was convicted. One Florida registrant wasconvicted of "criminal sexual conduct in the fourth degree."[183]Someone not familiar with the law might believe the registrant had committed asexually violent act, when in fact he had groped a 29-year-old woman at aclothing-optional music festival-conduct that while unacceptable does not makehim a dangerous offender. At the other end of the spectrum is a Florida registrant whoseconviction is listed as "sexual battery of a child by an adult."[184]While most users may well note that his crime involved a child, they would haveno basis for knowing that he had had sex dozens of times with a 12-year-oldboy.[185]As a Floridalawmaker advocating for the inclusion of more information on the state's websitehas pointed out: "Parents don't have time to be mini-detectives. I want to knowthe crime this person has been convicted ofso I know the difference betweensomeone who was being mischievous and went streaking and someone who [has]donehorrible things to children."[186]Whatever utility registries are supposed to have is furtherundercut by serious inaccuracies and gaps. In 2003, the Boston Herald reportedthat nearly half of the online registered sex offenders in Massachusetts could not be located becausetheir listed addresses were no longer accurate.[187]Newspapers in Floridareported that almost half of the sex offenders on the state's internet registrywere incarcerated, dead, or missing.[188]In Kentucky,researchers determined that approximately 25 percent of the addresses on the internetregistry were incorrect.[189]"Other Offender" Registries: What's in a Name?In May 2006, the Illinois General Assembly passedlegislation to create a registry for people who commit violent but non-sexualcrimes against youth.[190]The registry provides the same kind of information that the sex offender registrydoes, and will be available to the public online.[191]According to a co-sponsor of the legislation, "We wanted to spare individualsconvicted of violent but non-sexual crimes against youth from the stigma ofbeing a registered sex offender."[192]Lance M., who was convicted of physically abusing achild in a crime that did not involve sexual assault sought to get his nameexcluded from the sex offender registry and placed on the separate violentoffender registry precisely because, as he pointed out, "I didn't want people tothink I was a sex offender."[193]The change in the law was also supported by some childsafety advocacy groups.Laura Ahern,executive director of Parents for Megan's Law noted at the time of the law'spassage, "Somehow, if it's not only sex offenders [on sex offender registries],it takes away the impact and the ability for the community to recognize thetype of danger they are dealing with."[194]Does Community Notification Work?Currently, there is insufficient evidence to determinewhether posting information about registered sex offenders on the internet is avaluable and effective public safety tool; howeverthe public feels that theinternet registry provides important information that can be used to protectfamilies and expects such information to be a matter of public record.-Findings of a special committee convened by the Vermont legislature toinvestigate the efficacy of internet registries[195]Given the popularity and prevalence of communitynotification laws, surprisingly little research has been conducted on theirimpact. We know of no research that has sought to determine, for example, howparents have used information available to them, and whether it has changed thesteps they take to protect their children either in general or against individualregistered offenders. A few studies have sought to determine whether communitynotification reduces the reoffense rates of former offenders; none haveestablished that they do.A 2005 study by the Washington State Institute for PublicPolicy found that the rates of felony sex recidivism declined by 70 percentafter the adoption of broad notification laws in WashingtonState. The authors concluded, however,that while community notification "should not be ruled out as a factor" in thereduced recidivism, there were other factors that could have contributedequally or more so to the reduction, including the factors that caused anational and state decrease in crime rates generally, as well as the state'sincreased incarceration of sex offenders.[196]An earlier study by the Institute concluded that communitynotification appeared to have little effect on sex offense recidivism. Theresearchers found no statistically significant difference in recidivism ratesover a four-and-a-half-year period between sexually violent offenders subjectedto notification in WashingtonState and those who hadcommitted their crimes before the community notification laws went into effect.The researchers also found that most (63 percent) of the new offenses committedafter community notification had been instituted occurred in the jurisdictionwhere notification took place, suggesting that notification neither deterredoffenders nor motivated them to venture outside those jurisdictions.[197]An investigation in 10 states led researchers to concludethat registration and community notification did not appear to yield systematicreductions in sex crime rates. In six states, sexual assault rates did notchange significantly in the three years after the implementation of communitynotification and online registries. In three states there were significant reductionsin sex crime rates. In one, the incidence of rapes increased.[198]Research in Wisconsin and Iowa also found no statistically significantimpact from community notification laws in those states.[199]Finally, ongoing research in New Jersey suggests that thedecline in sex crimes against children began several years before a communitynotification law went into effect in that state in 1994.[200]The study, funded by the federal government, is one of the first attempts toanalyze whether there is a connection between the decline in reported sex abusein the USand the implementation of community notification laws.[201]Human Rights Watch spoke with a researcher on the study, who cautioned that theresults were preliminary-the result of six months of an 18-month project-and noconclusions should be drawn until the study is complete.[202]Community notification may, however, contribute to earlierdetection of reoffending by registered offenders. A 1995 study of offendersconvicted of a sexually violent offense who were subject to communitynotification found that such individuals were arrested for new crimes (bothsex-based and non-sex-based crimes) "much more quickly" than comparableoffenders who were released without notification, although the overallrecidivism rate at the end of a five-year period was nearly the same.[203]There is no way to tell whether a registry available only to law enforcementwould have had the same effect.Impact on ResidentsAs noted above, we have not found research assessing howparents have used community notification about registered offenders to protecttheir children. A study on citizen attitudes toward sex offender laws foundthat notification actually increased some residents' anxiety becauseinformation about offenders was not accompanied by information about how toprotect oneself or one's children from assault.[204]Human Rights Watch spoke with a mother in Kansas who received a postcard in themail notifying her family that a convicted sex offender had moved into the neighborhood:"The card had the individual's picture, his crime-listed as aggravated indecentliberties with a child-the date of his crime, and where he lived.The card didn't tell me his level ofdangerousness, or how I might be able to protect my kids. It just made mescared."[205]Residents in Wisconsinwho were notified that a convicted child molester moved into the neighborhoodexperienced a "heightened sense of vulnerability," "a lack of control over theenvironment in which they lived," and a sense of "helplessness" and "anxietyabout what the future might hold for the neighborhood."[206]As Alison Feigh, a child safety specialist for the JacobWetterling Foundation, pointed out to Human Rights Watch, "If it is not doneappropriately, community notification just raises fears without helpingparents. No community notification is almost better than poorly done communitynotification."[207]Is Community Notification Counterproductive?Sex offender treatment experts point out that notificationmay exacerbate the stressors (for example, isolation, disempowerment, shame,depression, anxiety, and a disconnection from social supports) that can triggerrelapse and reoffending in some former offenders.[208]As an individual convicted of molesting his nephew and subject to communitynotification told Human Rights Watch, "It's so shaming, sometimes I worry thatI am not going to be able to hold myself together and be the healthy person Ineed to be for my family. My life is so unstable, upended each time notificationgoes out. Sometimes I want to just give up."[209]Rethinking Community Notification: Vermont as a ModelVermonthas a carefully tailored community notification law that limits notification toindividuals who pose a high risk to the community, only for so long as theypose that risk, and on a need-to-know basis.The online registry contains only offenders who havecommitted sexually violent crimes and "sexual predators," defined as offendersdetermined through an independent court proceeding to have a certain degree ofcompulsion to commit sexual crimes.[210]At present, only 282 out of 24,000 registered offenders in Vermont are listed on the state's sexoffender website. According to an official with the Vermont Department ofPublic Safety, "By limiting the number of offenders who are subject touncontrolled disclosure, the state hopes to make it easier for members of thepublic to identify the individuals who pose the most significant risk, and tosupport offender treatment and reintegration into society."[211]Members of the public can search the website by theoffender's last name or can browse the records by geographical area.[212]The site discloses the offender's city of residence but does not provide his orher full address.[213]Information about other registrants who are not online can be obtained throughlocal law enforcement offices.Membersof the public who wish to get such information must first provide certainpersonal information (name, address, etc.) and state they have a public safetyconcern. The police do a background check on the person seeking theinformation, including the electronic verification of the seeker's licenseplate number.This provides a papertrail and a safeguard against vigilantism.[214]Unlike other states, which have had a difficult time keepingtrack of individuals required to register by law, Vermont officials say that 97 percent ofoffenders were in compliance with their registration requirement.[215]A ModelRegistration and Community Notification Program: MinnesotaMinnesota has developed carefully tailored sexoffender registration and community notification, the work of thoughtfuldeliberation by experts on sex offender management, victims' rights groups, andlaw enforcement officials.In Minnesota,convicted sex offenders are assessed by a panel of experts before they arereleased from custody to determine whether they need to register, and if so,for how long. In addition, convicted sex offenders may appeal theirregistration status every two years to a panel of experts that includes lawenforcement and treatment providers. The panel has the authority to reassessthe convicted sex offender's level of dangerousness and adjust his or her registrationrequirements accordingly.[216]Minnesota'ssensible approach, however, is now jeopardized by the Adam Walsh Act, whichwill require the state to adjust its registry requirements to reflect the Act'smandatory minimum amount of time certain offenders must stay on the registry.At least 90 days before a sex offender is to bereleased, a group that by law includes a licensed sex offender treatmentprovider, a law enforcement official, and a caseworker who handles sexoffenders, convenes to determine the risk that a particular sex offender willreoffend. They take into consideration a wide range of factors, including thecircumstances of the sex offense which produced the conviction. The paneldecides whether an offender will be subject to community notification. Minnesota also includesa "need-to-know" limitation on community notification. According to the law,"The extent of the information disclosed and the community to whom disclosureis made must relate to the level of danger posed by the offender, to theoffender's pattern of offending behavior, and to the need of community membersfor information to enhance their individual and collective safety."[217]Low-risk offenders' information is given to lawenforcement officials in the jurisdiction where the offender will reside, aswell as to the victims of and any witnesses to the individual's offense. Moderate-to high-level risk offenders' information may also be given, as appropriate, toarea schools, daycares, and healthcare centers, and the police may hold acommunity meeting to explain the risks a particular sex offender poses for thecommunity.[218]VII. Sex Offender Laws and Child OffendersIt's a negative self-fulfilling prophecy when you label achild a sex offender. You place that kind of stigma on a kid and they tend tolive up, or rather down, to those expectations.-Scott Smith, a therapist who treats children with sexualbehavior issues[219]How many of you would like a poor decision you made at theage of 13 to follow you around for the rest of your life?-Lacy J., a mother of a 13-year-old convicted as an adultfor having sexual contact with his five-year-old cousin, speaking before apanel of Arizonastate legislators[220]He knows nothing about sex. There is no way to explain [theaccusation of sexual harassment] to him.-Michael V., whose five-year-old son was accused ofsexually harassing a kindergarten classmate after he pinched her buttocks[221]Teenagers and even young children who engage in certainsex-based conduct may find themselves subject to sex offender registration,community notification, and residency restriction laws. Some children are onregistries because they committed serious sex offenses, such as forcibly rapinga much younger child. Other children are labeled sex offenders for suchnon-coercive or nonviolent and age-appropriate activities as "playing doctor,"youthful pranks such as exposing one's buttocks, and non-coercive teen sex.Subjecting children to sex offender laws originallydeveloped for adult offenders is both unnecessary from a public safetyperspective and harmful to the child.The juvenile justice system acknowledges that children whobreak the law should be treated differently than adults, with a greateremphasis on rehabilitation, and that forcing them to carry the burden of apublic criminal record for childhood mistakes serves neither them nor thecommunity. The records of children caught up in the juvenile justice system canbe expunged or sealed, or entered into the public record as an "adjudication"when the offender reaches the age of majority.[222]State sex offender registration laws, however, can trump juvenile offenderlaws. Children thus find themselves subject to the shame and stigma of beingidentified as sex offenders on online registries, in some cases for the rest oftheir lives. For example, Kevin A. was adjudicated at age 12 for performing asex act on a child under 10. He told a journalist, "I was at school, atlunchtime, and one my best friends came up to me and asked me [about my namebeing found on the online sex offender registry after doing a Google search]. Itsort of hit me off balance. It just gave me a feeling of I don't want to bethere, knowing they know what I did wrong."[223]Every state requires children convicted in adult court ofcertain kinds of sex crimes to register as sex offenders. Thirty-two statesinclude in their online registries-sometimes for life-youthful offenders whowere convicted of specified offenses, regardless of whether they wereadjudicated in adult or juvenile courts.[224]The Adam Walsh Act requires all states to include in their online registriesoffenders who were 14 or older at the time they committed specified offenses,or risk the loss of federal funding for law enforcement resources.[225]Child offenders are not exempt from state and municipal residency restrictions;even while children they can be prohibited from living with their families inrestricted areas.Children as Sex OffendersWhen he was 12 years old, Paul L. performed oral sex on hissix-year-old cousin.[226]Paul pled guilty in adult court to one count of "criminal sexual conduct with achild under 13." Paul has been through an intensive sex offender treatmentprogram. He is in group therapy and is in individual counseling. Paul's mothertold Human Rights Watch that Paul is required to register with law enforcementfor 25 years, although he is not subject to community notification. Still, theordeal has had a significant effect on Paul. At 15, he is, in his mother'swords, "terrified to date, because, as he told me, 'Mom, I must be a monster. Nogirl should want to be around me.'" Looking at the proliferation of residencyrestriction laws around the country, Paul's mother is also concerned about thefuture. "I am worried that if the state that says sex offenders can't be incertain places where children gather, that my child, who is technically a sexoffender who molested a child, will no longer be able to go to school, or playwith his friends, or go to church."The NationalCenter on Sexual Behaviorof Youth, a program of the Office of Juvenile Justice Programs, reports thatadolescent sex offenders like Paul account for approximately one-third of allreported sex offenses against children.[227]According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics, 23 percent of all sexual assaultoffenders were under age 18 at the time of the offense. About 3.7 percent wereunder the age of 12. Indeed,a "detailedprofile of offenders in sexual assault crimes shows that the single age withthe greatest number of offenders from the perspective of law enforcement wasage 14."[228]Forty percent of the offenders against very young children(under the age of six) were themselves children; a similar proportion (39percent) of offenders whose victims were age six to 11 were children.[229]Many sex offenses committed by children resemble the manytypes of delinquent activities that the juvenile justice system is designed (intheory, if not always in practice) to enable teenagers to outgrow.[230]Most child sex offenders do not engage in aggressive or violent behavior. In astudy of children arrested for committing sexual offenses, 59 percent of theoffenses were categorized as indecent liberties (touching or fondling) and 27percent as rape. The rest were arrested for what were described as non-contactoffenses (public exposure).[231]In rape cases where the offender is under 18, the victim is likely to have beenthe same age as the perpetrator or older.[232]Human Rights Watch spoke with a young woman, Sharon D., now 23,who was convicted in Michigan of fondling her sister when Sharon was 10 and hersister was four. "I didn't really understand sex then, or what it meant to besexually appropriate with someone, to respect their boundaries. I made amistake, but it was a child's mistake, not an adult's mistake, and I think thedistinction matters."[233]A number of studies cite "nonsexual problems" as the biggestfactor behind the commission of coercive, violent, or other serious sex crimesby child offenders.[234]According to the Association for theTreatment of Sexual Abusers, "poor social competency skills and deficits inself-esteem can best explain sexual deviance in children, rather thanparaphilic interests and psychopathic characteristics that are more common inadult offenders. There is little evidence thatthese youths engage in acts ofsexual penetration for the same reasons as their adult counterparts."[235]The problems child sex offenders have that may have been a factor in their sexoffending are frequently ones that are quite amenable to treatment, forexample, conduct disorders, depression, and learning disabilities.[236]Mental health professionals who specialize in the treatment of children arehopeful about the prospects for success in treating child sex offenders and thepossibility treatment offers for reducing reoffense.[237]There is relatively little research on recidivism by childsex offenders, either while they are still under the age of 18 or after they aredeemed adults under the law. The research that exists supports the views ofmental health treatment providers that "normal development wins out most of thetime for these kids."[238]Recent studies reveal low recidivism rates for child sexoffenders. The Texas Youth Commission (TYC) followed a group of 72 youngoffenders who had committed violent sex crimes.[239]Three years after release from the TYC back to the community, only three (4.2 percent)had been rearrested for a sexual offense.[240]An analysis of the reoffense rates of 300 male sex offendersfrom around the country who committed sex offenses when they were childrenfound that, in a follow-up period of three to six years after they werereleased from custody, only 13 of the 300 (4.3 percent) had committed anothersex offense.[241]A study of 204 male child sex offenders and 41 female childsex offenders in Philadelphiafound that one in 10 of the boys committed another sex offense within eightyears of their 18th birthday. None of the female offenders committedanother sex offense in the same period.[242]The researchers also found that having committed a sex offense as a juvenilewas not a particularly strong predictor of committing a sex offense as anadult; indeed, boys with long (five or more) contacts with the police that didnot involve sex offenses were twice as likely to commit sex offenses as adultsthan boys who had committed sex offenses but had fewer than five policecontacts.[243]Similar results showed up in a study of 47 male child sexoffenders from Racine, Wisconsin: 8.5 percent of them committed asex offense within five to 12 years after their 18th birthday,compared with 6.2 percent of males with any non-sex juvenile contact.[244]The study also found that a lengthy record of non-sex juvenile offenses was abetter predictor of committing a sex offense as an adult than a record of asingle juvenile sex offense.[245]Examination of adult sex offender records in Philadelphia and Racinealso revealed that few adult sex offenders had been convicted of sex offensesas children. In Philadelphia,only 8 percent of adult sex offenders had been juvenile sex offenders.[246]In Racine thefigure was 4 percent.[247]Using juvenile sex crime records to predict who would become adult sexoffenders would miss 92 percent to 96 percent of all adult male sex offenders.[248]These findings contradict the idea that requiring juveniles to register as sexoffenders at all, much less for decades or a lifetime, makes a meaningfulcontribution to public safety.Jim T.'s story[249]As a mother, if we were talking abouta true child molester, I may want toknow these things, but we are talkingabout someone who made a mistakewhen he was a child. Jim's story islike a nightmare, where all the terriblethings in the world, it all collidestogether.-Nina T., Jim's motherWhen he was 15, Jim T. was convicted of molesting hisyounger sister starting when she was six and he was 10. Jim was accused oftouching his sister's vagina multiple times, and forcing her to touch his penismultiple times. Jim was tried as an adult, convicted, and spent three years ina Maricopa County, Arizona jail, where he was assaulted on a number of occasions.He was released when he was 18. Jim was not able to participate in his highschool graduation, so when he was released from jail, his parents bought agraduation cap and gown, and took a picture of Jim on the day he received hisG.E.D. "We call it our fake graduation day picture. Looking at it, you wouldnot guess all the pain surrounding this time in our lives."Jim is subject to community notification for life. Heregisters every 90 days, and each time he registers with the law enforcementofficials, they, according to Jim's mother, "go door-to-door, put a flyer andtape it to his neighbors' door, and do this for a two-mile radius. We live amile-and-a-half from Jim, so we are notified. On the flyers, they keep his agethe same [current-meaning that he is now listed as age 20; his victim is listedas her age at the time of the abuse], and publish the vehicle he drives."Jim lives in a small home his parents bought him. Accordingto his mother, "He never goes outside, he never opens his shutters. He ishorrified that his picture is posted in his neighborhood. He is horrified thathis neighbors think he is a baby rapist."Jim's mother says that he has been incarcerated threetimes for violating parole, but for things that have nothing to do with endangeringthe community-he was late to work, he was at a nursing home visiting his grandfather,and he was on a college campus.Jim works in construction, because, through a friend,his mother was able to explain his situation to the company manager. Themanager continues to employ Jim, despite his arrests.Jim's mother says, "And yet, at the end of the day,even with a house and a job, Jim will talk to us at times about ending itall-committing suicide. I don't think he will, but, you never know."Consensual Teenage SexSome of the sexual behaviors by youth that lead to a sexoffense conviction and the application of sex offender laws do not involve thesort of acts or intent normally associated with criminal offenses. Most childbehavior experts agree that sexual experimentation is a normal part of a youngperson's development.[250]Some of the youthful offenders who are currently required to register as sexoffenders were exploring their sexuality, or engaging in other typicaladolescent behavior such as genital play or consensual sexual intercourse.According to a survey conducted by the US Department ofHealth and Welfare, by age 14, more than one-third of the survey's respondentsreported genital play with another youth under the age of 18, and about one-fifthhad started having sexual intercourse.[251]By age 16, over 40 percent of both sexes report intercourse, and that rises to55 percent for both boys and girls at age 17.[252]Child development experts agree that consensual sex play among children,including intercourse between teenagers, "is not psychologically harmful underordinary circumstances and is probably a valuable psychosocial experience indevelopmental terms."[253]EEvery statein the United Statescriminalizes sexual activity with someone below the "age of consent," a crimetypically called "statutory rape." Legislators have created "Romeo and Juliet"exceptions to these laws so as to lessen or eliminate criminal penalties foryoung people close in age who have non-coercive sex with each other.At least 39 states exclude at least someteenage voluntary sexual activity from the category of statutory rape,typically by either setting a minimum age for the defendant (for example, 16 or17) and/or by specifying that there is no crime committed if the defendant isno more than a specified number of years older than the victim (typicallybetween two and four years).These exceptions still leave many teenagers at risk of beinglabeled as sex offenders for engaging in sexual conduct that is legal for adults.At least 28 states require registration as a sex offender for someone convictedof having consensual sex with another teenager, if the offender was either age 17or two years older than the other party. In 11 states, there are no "Romeo andJuliet" exceptions; anyone who has sex with a person below the minimum age ofconsent is committing a crime and could, if convicted, be required to registeras a sex offender.During research for this report, Human Rights Watch spokewith or came across the stories of a number of men and women who because ofconsensual teenage sex with willing partners must now register as sexoffenders-in some cases for life-and suffer all the adverse consequences thatcome with that status. For example, in Georgia, a 26-year-old married woman wasmade to register as a sex offender for life and had to move from her homebecause it falls within an area inwhich sex offenders are prohibited from living, because as a teenager she hadoral sex with a willing fellow high school student when she was 17 and he was 15.[254]It is difficult, if not impossible, to fathom what public safety purpose isserved by subjecting her to registration, community notification, and residencyrestriction laws.As one individual who was convicted of statutory rape at age16 for having consensual sex with his 14-year-old girlfriend told Human RightsWatch, "We were in love. And now we are married. So it's like I am on theregistry for having premarital sex. Does having premarital sex make me a dangerto society? My wife doesn't think so."[255]A mother of a young man from Texas who has to register for having consensualsex at age 19 with his 14-year-old girlfriend noted, "Our family has beendevastated by this law that treats a young man in a consensual dating relationshipthe same as a violent rapist or a predator of young children."[256]Case Study: Dan M.'s story[257]I was convicted of statutory rape when I was 17. Thegirl was 15. Now I am in college.Iregister everywhere and every time I am suppose[d] to. I must register every 90days. I must register between the hours of 8 and 5 Monday thru Friday beforethe 15th [of the] month.Right now I can handle that. I am a student, my hours are flexible, butonce I start work, I will either have to work near the police office I registerat to do it on my lunch hour or take time off from work.I get a call from the [college baseball] head coach tocome to the office. My heart is in my throat. He takes me to the athleticdirector's office. The athletic director is beside himself. He tells me that anofficer from the police station comes in to see him and that he says that wehave a sex offender on campus that is on his baseball roster. He is angry. Hesays I must have lied on my application, because I checked no on my collegeapplication when it asked if I was ever convicted of a felony. I said I did notlie. [He was adjudicated and has no public criminal record]. I am not a felon. Hesays that being on the list makes me a felon. I said I'm not.I am use[d] to my family confronting these people [whoask me about being on a sex offender list]. It is hard to tell people over andover. The looks on their faces are hard to read. You never know what they arereally thinking until much later. Here I am in a new school. I know no one andvery early on I have to explain my past to total strangers.When my family and I go on vacation to visit relativesin other states I must always look up the law as to my duties regarding thelist in a particular state. More than two weeks in New York I must register. More than threeconsecutive days in one county in FloridaI must register. My parents moved to Arkansas.If you are in Arkansasyou must register after 14 days. They take a statement and fingerprint you. Itis always like starting it up all over again. I will be visiting my parents formore than 30 days in a year so I had to be assessed as to my level of risk toreoffend. I had to take a psychological test. I wanted to puke [the questions]were so disgusting. Is that the type of person people think I am? I am notattracted to children, or dead people. I would never rape anyone. I respectwomen; I have three sisters, a mother, grandmothers, aunt and girlfriend who Ilove. I am a good person who made a bad decision with a peer 16 months myjunior seven weeks after my 17th birthday. My coach might send me toNew York nextsummer to play baseball. I will have to be assessed by them too. I will have todo this for another 23 years. That is how long I have to register.Adjudicated Youth on Public Registries:Sealed Records "Unsealed" by Sex Offender LawsI attempted to explain that I have no criminal historytowhich they replied, "Well while we do not find any actual record of misconduct,you are on the sex offender registry, so that means that you have to have donesomething horrible."-Henry F., adjudicated at 17 in Michigan for having consensual sex with his 15-year-oldgirlfriend[258]Sex offender laws can also trump other laws designed toenable young offenders to have clean public records and keep their misconductprivate.Michigan provides a powerful example of thisproblem.Case Study: MichiganIn Michiganchildren can be tried and convicted as adults, with the conviction entering thepublic record. The state created an alternative procedure, however, for youthbetween the ages of 17 and 21 who commit certain crimes, including sexoffenses. Under the Holmes Youthful Trainee Act (HYTA), judges have the optionof allowing a young offender to plead guilty, and if he or she completes theperiod of supervision without incident the conviction is never entered into thepublic record and the young offender keeps a clean record. The goals andbenefits of the HYTA are, however, compromised by sex offender registration andcommunity notification laws. Young sex offenders who accepted a plea deal underHYTA have found that they are nonetheless required to register as sexoffenders.A federal class action lawsuit has been filedcontending that placing a HYTA youth's name on a public sex offender registryis akin to giving him a public criminal record.[259]One of the plaintiffs is Sean C., who was adjudicated at 17 for havingconsensual sex with a girlfriend who was three weeks shy of 16, the age ofconsent in the state. At Sean's sentencing, the judge said,So, what should be the consequencesfor a 17-year-old who commitsan offense under these circumstances,particularly one who'sremorseful? By all accounts you are areliable, bright and thoughtfulyoung man, and there are many glowingstatements about yourpersonal qualities. So the question thenbecomes should this actof indiscriminate behavior on yourpart relegate you to the status ofa convicted felon, and in my judgmentthat would not be fair .Therefore, it is my decision that Iwill sentence you under the HolmesYouthful Trainee Act .[260]Although Sean C. successfully completed his HYTAsentence, he is required to register as a sex offender and is included on thestate's online registry.Sean wroteabout his experience of being placed on the sex offender registry:I thought the whole purpose behindbeing sentenced under HYTA wasso that I could start my life over,and basically be given a secondchance. In my opinion, the registryis far worse and has a much biggerstigma attached to it than having aconviction on my record. A friendof mine was sentenced under HYTA forsomething which does notrequire registering and he canhonestly say he has never beenconvicted of a crime and it does notshow up anywhere else, to ruinhis life.[261]Plaintiffs in the lawsuit report that they have hadproblems finding employment, housing, access to education and otheropportunities because they are included as sex offenders on the state's policeand online registry.[262]They also report ostracism, harassment, and vigilantism.[263]As Sean wrote to the court, "I was promised a cleanstart under HYTA, if I followed the rules. I followed the rules, but my name onthe sex offender registry prevents me from having my clean break."[264]Rethinking Sex Offender Laws for JuvenileOffendersIt is questionable that any good comes from turning childrenand teenagers who have engaged in sexual misconduct into registered sexoffenders whose photos and offenses are online for all to see. Requiringcommunity notification for teenagers who have engaged in consensual sex withothers seems particularly problematic. The public has a strong interest inmaking sure that those youth who are troubled and are at risk of reoffendingreceive the help they need to avoid engaging in such conduct again. Treatmentand rehabilitation of children is rarely furthered by publicizing that theywere adjudicated or convicted of a sex crime. Moreover, as noted above, sincemost adult offenders were never youthful sex offenders, requiring adults toregister for crimes committed as youth contributes little to the publicinterest in identifying and monitoring people likely to engage in sex offenses.Human Rights Watch is not persuaded that there is ever aneed to have child offenders register and subject them to communitynotification laws. The terms of an individual offender's post-adjudicationsupervision should be able to incorporate legitimate community safety precautions.However, if the law is going to authorize registration of children, no childshould ever be required to register unless a court or authorized panel ofexperts determines he or she poses such a serious risk to public safety thatother safety measures are insufficient and registration is necessary. Eventhen, a child who is registered should not be included on online sex offenderregistries. If the court or panel determines that some form of communitynotification is necessary, law enforcement should undertake to do so in acareful and limited way that would minimize the harm to the child whileprotecting public safety. Any registration requirement should also beperiodically reviewed to ensure it remains necessary.VIII. Consequences of Registration andCommunity Notification Laws for Registrants and Their Loved OnesSleep is hard to come by. I stay up at night, worried thatI can't find a job, worried that I can't find an apartment, worried that I amgoing to be killed like other sex offenders have been killed, worried that theywill take away my family, won't let me see my children and grandchildrenanymore.-Jessie K., registrant in California, convicted of sexual assault 23years ago[265]While the public safety benefits of sex offenderregistration and community notification laws may be up for debate, the tollthey have exacted upon registrants and their families is not. The damage isless from registration itself than from having their status as a registered sexoffender disseminated to the community and, indeed, to the entire world. Beingidentified as a registered sex offender elicits public hostility, fear, andloathing-strong emotions that motivate conduct that all too often far exceedslegitimate safety precautions.Registered sex offenders face ostracism, job loss, evictionor expulsion from their homes, and the dissolution of personal relationships.[266]They confront harassment, threats, and property damage. Some have enduredvigilantism and violence.[267]A few have been killed. Many experience "despair and hopelessness;"[268]some have committed suicide.[269]These consequences extend beyond the individual offenders to their families aswell.[270]A recent study of the impact of community notification in Florida found thatone-third to one-half of sex offenders subjected to community notificationreported "dire consequences" such as the loss of a job or home, threats orharassment, or property damage.[271]About 16 percent of the registrants reported being physically assaulted.[272]About 19 percent of sex offenders reportedthat these negative consequences had affected other members of theirhouseholds.[273]Unnecessarily expansive community notification laws(especially when combined with residency restrictions, described in the nextchapter) may drive more and more offenders underground, away from supportiveservices like sex offender treatment, and away from the supervision and monitoringof law enforcement. Harsh enduring consequences also provide little incentivefor former offenders to live without offending. To the contrary, the laws maybe a disincentive: as one registrant has said, "No one believes I can change,so why even try?"[274]There are some people who say that such adverse consequencesare the fault of the offenders-if they hadn't committed the crimes, theywouldn't be facing public hostility now. For example, a public official in Miami, Florida,in commenting on residency restrictions in his city, noted, "My main concern isthe victims, the children that are the innocent ones that these predatorsattack and ruin their lives. No one really told them to do this crime."[275]Yet everyone, even former sex offenders, has rights thatshould be respected and protected. Registration and community notification lawsdirectly and all too often unnecessarily interfere with former offenders'rights to privacy. The invasion of their privacy in turn leads to violations ofmany other rights, including the rights to employment, housing, and personalsafety.Case study: Walter D.Walter D., 58, unknowinglysolicited an underage prostitute in 1986, for which he was jailed in WashingtonState. Released from prison in 1992, heis required to register and his picture appears on the state online sexoffender registry. Walter has tried to hold down a job as a computertechnician, but he has been fired at least four times after colleagues foundhis profile on WashingtonState's online registry. Walterhas a hard time finding landlords who will rent to him, and when he has foundan apartment, within weeks flyers with his registry profile, downloaded fromthe online registry, appear all over his neighborhood. Walter told Human RightsWatch, "I will never be given a second chance. It doesn't matter how long Idon't reoffend, I will always be a sex offender in everyone else's eyes."[276]PrivacyIt is difficult to overstate the impact of communitynotification, particularly online registries, on the privacy of registered individualsand their families. Community notification makes readily available informationthat would otherwise be difficult to obtain. The lack of "need-to-know"restrictions on who can access the registries means registry information isavailable to all, regardless of why they want to see it and how they will useit. The breadth of information and extent of access all but eliminates thepossibility that a former offender can move into a community and rebuild his orher life without notice.Community notification does not just obliterate a registeredperson's privacy. Publicly identifying someone as a registered sex offenderbrands that person-in many people's eyes-as a dangerous and particularlyloathsome person. The branding-which can last for a lifetime-has the entirelyforeseeable result of making it very difficult (if not entirely impossible) forformer offenders and their families to live peaceful, safe, stable, andproductive lives.US Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas described theinvasive and damaging nature of registration and community notification:Widespread dissemination of offenders' names, photographs,addresses, and criminal history serves not only to inform the public but alsoto humiliate and ostracize the convicts. It thus bears some resemblance toshaming punishments that were used earlier in our history to disable offendersfrom living normally in the community. While the [majority] accepts the State'sexplanation that the Act simply makes public information available in a newway, the scheme does much more. Its point, after all, is to send a message thatprobably would not otherwise be heard, by selecting some conviction informationout of its corpus of penal records and broadcasting it with a warning. Selectionmakes a statement, one that affects common reputation and sometimes carriesharsher consequences, such as exclusion from jobs or housing, harassment, andphysical harm.[277]Public identification as someone who committed a sex offenseleads to a host of problems that are described throughout this report and aredetailed as well below.EmploymentBeing publicly identified through online registries as a sexoffender restricts employment in several ways. With some employers mandated tocheck the sex offender registry, and many others implementing the checks aspart of their private business policy, many sex offenders are findingthemselves unable to secure and maintain a job. Our research shows that privateemployers are reluctant to hire sex offenders even if their offense has no bearingon the nature of the job. Offenders who tell prospective employers they areregistered sex offenders are usually denied employment; those who fail to tellare eventually fired when employers find out-often through fellow employees whofound the information through searching online sex offender registries.The difficulty Carl B., convicted of possessing childpornography, has had in finding stable employment is typical of the stories ofmany registered offenders: "I have been unable to find decent employment and Idoubt I will be able to. I have worked in a few bars as a bartender but someonealways seems to find out although no one has said that is the reason. In onejob I was fired just 2 days after receiving a raise and that seemed strange.That was also within afew days thatsomeone posted my internet [sex offender] picture on my front door and in thecommunity. The chances of me working for a company that offers insurance, retirement,etc. are quite unlikely."[278]Some state laws place employment restrictions on sexoffenders, prohibiting them from working in schools, childcare centers,child-oriented non-profit organizations, and other places where they may comeinto regular contact with children. These laws are typically directed atindividuals who committed sex crimes against children. Laws barring personsconvicted of sexually abusing children from working directly with children maybe reasonable. For example, Virginiaprohibits sex offenders convicted of sex crimes that involved children fromworking or volunteering at a school or daycare center.[279]But state employment restriction laws that bar all registered sex offenders-regardlessof the nature of the crime-from employment where they may inadvertently comeinto contact with children effectively bar registered sex offenders fromemployment in large sectors of the economy.Members of the community can also react so strongly to thepresence of a registered offender on the job that employers will end up firingthem. One employer fired his employee,aregistered sex offender,from anoffice job involving no interaction with children, despite his goodperformance, because of the community's reaction. The termination letterstated, "Several neighbors and the sheriff have brought to my attention thecriminal extent of your past. It is with regret that I must inform you of theloss of your job with us as of today. I hope you understand. You have put in alot of valuable hours and have been a good hired man, and we appreciate that .This was a hard decision for us, but we feel we have no choice in the matter. Wewill have no problem giving you a good recommendation in your quest for a newjob."[280]Community hostility towards employers who hire registeredsex offenders is also reflected in the following case, recounted to HumanRights Watch by the mother of a registered offender:[My son] is currently working with a construction group andis very happy with the occupation. Two weeks ago, someone on the street wherehe was working discovered that the boss of the group is a registered offenderas well and freaked out by calling all the neighbors on the block to informthem of the situation. During the time the group had been working in thisprestigious neighborhood, several of the neighbors had hired them for futurework on their homes. After hearing from the woman, all of the jobs werecanceled, which caused a huge gap in the guys' work schedule and in theirpaychecks. The overreaction was a big hit to my son and the others as they arejust trying to make a living for their families and themselves. All of the menhave served their time, still attend counseling every week and are watchedcarefully by the courts.[281]Parole officers supervising former sex offenders alsotestify to the difficulty registrants have in finding work. An officer in Michigan told HumanRights Watch that "most employers, whether they are required by law or not,refuse to employ sex offenders, even if the crime the individual committed wasnot violent. They say it's bad for business. So now, I have a hard time liningup work for my sex offender parolees, so my parolees are stuck in halfwayhomes, unable to meet the full conditions of their parole."[282]An Arizonaparole officer expressed similar concerns: "I have found it near impossible tofind an employer willing to take a chance on a convicted sex offender."[283]As a parole officer in Floridatold Human Rights Watch, "We have to find ways to find appropriate jobs for sexoffenders, in a way that will both protect the public and also help sexoffenders successfully reintegrate into society."[284]The inability to find and keep work can lead to despair andhopelessness. Lyndon G., who was convicted of child molestation and is registeredin Alabama,told Human Rights Watch, "I have given up hope of finding a job, which makes megive up hope of succeeding out of prison."[285]A registrant in California,who pled guilty to a misdemeanor sex offense in 2001, told Human Rights Watchabout his five-year struggle to find and maintain employment: "I have sincegiven up looking for work. When I am honest I feel humiliated time and again."[286]Making it difficult for former sex offenders to find andkeep gainful employment is counterproductive for public safety. Structured,full-time employment is a cornerstone of nearly all re-entry programs foroffenders. According to the Center for Sex Offender Management, "Research hasshown that meaningful employment can provide a stabilizing influence by involvingoffenders in pro-social activities and assisting them in structuring theirtime, improving their self-esteem, and meeting their financial obligations."[287]Employment contributes to the likelihood that people whohave previously committed crimes, including sex crimes, will not reoffend.[288]A 2001 risk assessment study by Virginia'sCriminal Sentencing Commission found employment to be a major factor affectingwhether paroled sex offenders relapse and reoffend: sex offenders who had beenunemployed or not regularly employed were found to recidivate at higher ratesthan sex offenders who experienced stable employment.[289]Another recent study showed that former sexoffenders who committed subsequent offenses were more likely to be unemployed.[290]According to a different study, the only factors associated with reduced reoffendingamong sex offenders were the combination of stable employment and sex offendertreatment.[291]Threats to Employment: Tom K.'s Story[292]Fifteen years ago, Tom K. committed a sex offense andwas required to register in the state of Florida.He was sentenced to two years house arrest and five years probation, from whichhe was released in 1999. He subsequently moved to New Mexico [NM] with his family, because ofhis wife's job. Tom told Human Rights Watch,"In December of 2001, we became the proud parents of ababy boy. Tragically, [my wife] died 3 hours after delivery leaving me to raisemy son alone."Recently, in May of 2004, with changes to the NM law,I was forced to register in NM."As a professional composer/arranger I write music forthe local high school marching band. I write this music at my home studio. Ithen deliver it to the band director, and the band director rehearses the musicwith the students. I have no contact whatsoever with the students. I shouldpoint out that I am not under any restrictions regarding contact with minors,so there should not be any concern to begin with. This commissioning representsa significant portion of my income. I should also point out that my work ispaid for out of the private account of the band booster organization. Publicfunds are not used to reimburse my services. However, one woman has mounted acrusade saying that my involvement puts children in danger. This woman [wholearned about my status as a registered sex offender from the online registry]has several times now tried to force the band and the school to sever theirbusiness arrangement with me. To this end, the woman in question has obtainedcopies of the handwritten arrest record from fifteen years ago (through the[Freedom of Information Act]), created a typed out version of it, and distributedit throughout my community. She has also called meetings of "concernedcitizens" in an effort to essentially try and remove me from the community.This same woman has also mounted a campaign to get the band director fired inan effort to keep me from writing the music and therefore diminishing myability to earn a living.Members of the community have protested several performing groups in which Iparticipate, requesting that they be denied access to the use of publicfacilities."Vigilante ViolenceI just want my son back.-Shirley Turner, mother of a convicted sex offendermurdered by a stranger who looked up his address on Maine's online sex offender registry[293]Information provided by state online sex offender registries,as well as information provided during community notification by lawenforcement, is not just used by private citizens to determine what streetstheir children can walk on, or whom to avoid. Neighbors as well as strangersharass, intimidate and physically assault people who have committed sexoffenses. At least four registered sex offenders have been killed.Richard R. was convicted in 1986 of molesting his step-daughter.In 1999 Richard was released from a NewJersey state prison. About two weeks later,notification went out to the community. A short time later, neighbors startedthrowing garbage on Richard's lawn, and people rang his doorbell late at nightand ran away. On another occasion, someone drove by Richard's home and yelledout, "Stop fucking little girls! I'm going to kill you!" Late one eveningRichard heard a knock on his front door. Richard looked through the door'swindow and did not see anyone. When Richard opened the door, a man who had beencrouching down in front of the door stood up. The man was wearing a ski maskand carried a handgun. He pointed the gun at Richard and said, "If you don'tget out of this neighborhood I'm going to kill you." The man turned and fled. Afew days later, Richard moved out of the community.[294]One of the fundamental obligations of government is to putin place measures to protect the lives and safety of those within itsjurisdiction. This duty to protect extends to people who have been convicted ofcrimes, including sex offenses.Whenpublic officials affirm the importance of public safety, that public includesdisfavored people living in the community. Indeed, when public officials andlaw enforcement know a particular individual or group is likely to be or isbeing targeted for harassment or violence by private actors, they must takeappropriate measures to protect them, even when that means standing up to widespreadcommunity sentiments. In the case of former sex offenders, such measures shouldinclude limiting access to online registries, carefully limiting communitynotification efforts, and taking steps to signal forcefully to the communitythat harassment and violence are unlawful and will be prosecuted.[295]For a case challenging community notification laws, New Jersey publicdefenders collected over a hundred affidavits from people convicted of sexoffenses who experienced vigilante violence soon after their whereabouts weremade available to the public, either through the internet registry or someother community notification scheme.[296]Registrants speak of having glass bottles thrown through their windows; being"jumped from behind" and physically assaulted while the assailants yelled "Youlike little children, right?"; having garbage thrown on the lawn; peoplerepeatedly ringing the doorbell and pounding on the sides of the house late atnight; being struck from behind by a crowbar after being yelled at by theassailant that "People like you who are under Megan's Law should be kept injail. They should never let you out. People like you should die.When you leave tonight, I am gonna kill you."Among the affidavits are stories like this one:In 1998, six years after H.M., convicted for molesting a child,was released from prison, notification about his crime was distributed to hiscommunity in New Jersey.The very same day that notices went out, members of the public began to harassand threaten H.M. Although the notices were distributed only to H.M.'sneighbors, local newspapers were provided with the information and theypublished stories about H.M.'s presence in the community. A few days later,H.M. received an anonymous letter that read "We'll be watching you asshole." Thismessage was spelled out using letters cut out from a magazine. Late that sameevening, someone fired five shots from a high caliber handgun into H.M.'s home.Several bullets almost hit one of H.M.'s family members. The shooting generatedadditional publicity and by 4:30 in the afternoon the next day, a crowd ofabout 250 people had gathered in front of H.M.'s home. The stress of theseevents caused H.M. to fear not only for his own safety, but also for the safetyof his family. He checked himself into a hospital and was placed on suicidewatch. According to H.M., community notification "is a far worse punishmentthan jail ever was."[297]Reviewing the record of such incidents, the Third CircuitCourt of Appeals concluded "they happen with sufficient frequency and publicitythat registrants justifiably live in fear of them."[298]A mother described to Human Rights Watch what happened toher son, a convicted sex offender living in Colorado, when neighbors found outabout his status: "A few teens on their bikes were riding by [her son's home]and yelled to his wife 'Someone should burn their house down.' My son wasreleased [from prison]and sure enough, about a week later someone did burntheir house down while they were asleep in their beds." Her son and his wifewere able to make it out alive.[299]A convicted rapist from Georgia spoke to Human Rights Watchabout the effect of community notification on his family. When the registrant,Donald V., was released from prison in 1994 he went to stay with his parents,who were elderly. One morning, his mother woke up and went outside to get thepaper. On the driveway, someone had written in a black "tar-like" substance,"FUCK YOU RAPIST" in letters that spanned the entire driveway. "It took monthsfor it to fade away, even though we tried to wash it off every weekend or sofor a number of months."[300]A number of convicted sex offenders have been targets ofviolence from strangers who take it upon themselves to "eliminate" sexoffenders from communities. In April 2003, Lawrence Trant stabbed one New Hampshire registrantand lit fires at two buildings where registrants lived. When he was arrested,police found a printout of NewHampshire's sex offender internet registry, withcheckmarks next to the names of those already targeted.[301]In 2006, four convicted sex offenders moved into a home nearDonald Keegan in New Yorkstate. Later that year Keegan was arrested for plotting to blow up the home wherethe offenders were living. Police found a concoction of paint thinner and roadflares in Keegan's garage that they believe Keegan planned to use to kill theoffenders.[302]Subsequently, two of the four offenderresidents moved from the home.[303]In August 2005, a man shot and killed two registrants in Bellingham, Washington.[304]The assailant, Michael Anthony Mullen, posed as a federal agent and gainedaccess inside the home that two registrants shared, under the guise of warningthem that they were on a "hit list" on the internet.[305]Messages appearing on blogs days after the double murder praised Mullen'sactions. "Two down," one poster wrote, "Let's hope he continues his meetingswith offenders in his city without interference from the boys in blue."[306]The writer continued, "The public must often do what our elected officials willnot."[307]Despite well-documented andpublicized cases of harassment and vigilante violence against registered sexoffenders, Human Rights Watch found only 14 states and the District of Columbiathat have statutes that specifically prohibit the misuse of registryinformation for purposes of harassment, discrimination, or acts of vigilantism.[308]In those states where misuse of information is prohibited, persons who misusethe information may be subject to prosecution.In addition to state lawsprohibiting harassment, some states have specific legislation allowing aregistrant to bring a civil action against the person misusing the databaseinformation.[309]New Jersey and California prohibit the use of registryinformation to deny registrants housing, credit, education, health insurance,loans, and credit.[310]Shirley Turner Loses a Son[311]Click to expand ImageIn April of 2006, a young man from Nova Scotia,Canada,shot and killed two convicted sex offenders living in Mainewhose information he had found on the internet registry.[312]The assailant shot himself as police attempted to capturehim.[313]One of the victims was 24- year-old William Elliot,convicted at age 19 of having consensual sex with his 15-year-oldgirlfriend.[314]His mother, Shirley Turner, said,"Without the registry, he would still be alive today. I wouldstill have him." She spoke toHuman Rights Watch about thecrime."William had a girlfriend. He was 19 and she was 15 [threeweeks from being 16, the age of consent in Maine]. Herparents found out, and William was convicted of statutoryrape.William was in prison for about two years. When hewas released, I told him he could live in my home with me,but he wanted toprove he was an adult, and he bought atrailer and moved to a small town next to mine."William did okay adjusting to life after prison. Hewas always a quiet and really sweet person, and he mostly kept to himself. Hedidn't really have any neighbors, because his trailer was in the woods. Heliked it, it was quiet. William was working in construction."One day, I came home from work, and my husband toldme sit down. I sat down, and he told me that William had been killed. Myhusband found out on the evening news. William had been killed that morning,but the police had not come by to tell usI thought, as William's mother, thepolice should have come to tell me first before his name was on the news."It took me a bit to understand the details. A youngman came to William's home. This man didn't know William, but he found hisinformation on Maine'ssex offender registry. The man thought William was a pedophile. The man shotWilliam in the face. William was found in his doorstep, so they think the manjust shot him right after William opened the door."It is impossible to make sense of any of this. Once,I asked William what he wanted to be when he grew up. He said he didn't know,but that he wanted to be known as a person who shook everyone's hand and smiledat everyone he met. That is how people who knew William would describe him. Hewas not a violent person, but he was killed because someone thought he was."At least 40 state online sex offender registries warn usersagainst misusing information they obtain from the internet. In the other 10states, Human Rights Watch could not locate a warning (see Appendix for sites).The line between harassment and legitimate reproduction of internet informationis not clear. Only one state (Utah) that Human Rights Watch could find specificallyprohibits any reproduction of registry information (for example, printing acopy of the registrants information from the internet and reposting ordistributing it), an action that can certainly lead to harassment. But at leastfour states now have "click to print" options apparently designed to facilitateprinting out individual flyers with the picture, name, and address ofregistered offenders.[315]And at least one state, Texas,uses language on its online registry that seems to encourage widespread disseminationof the information: "The information provided through this Web site is openrecord. It may be used by anyone for any purpose."Living Peacefully at HomeI have not felt safe living heresince that night in February when someone in the night left that poster [of myhusband's online profile] on my porch, and then banged on all our windows. Nowall we want to do is move.-Linda L., wife of a Californiaregistrant[316]Former sex offenders have an extremely difficult timefinding and keeping homes. In some cases, neighbors find their names via onlineregistries or through community notification by law enforcement and begincampaigns to force registered sex offenders out of their neighborhoods. Privatelandlords do not want to rent or sell to them; federally funded publiclandlords are prohibited from doing so. As discussed in the next chapter,residency restriction laws force them to move from or prohibit them from movinginto countless communities.Community HostilityCommunity members have used the notification informationthey have been provided about registered sex offenders in their area to bothdiscourage sex offenders from moving into their neighborhoods, and to encouragethose who already live there to leave. By far the most common tactic has beento print information from the internet about sex offenders and post copies ofthese printouts throughout the neighborhood.Many registered former offenders told Human Rights Watch howneighborhood flyers forced them and their families to move. One formeroffender, convicted of a misdemeanor sex crime, described what happened in hiscase: "Shortly after I moved into an upscale neighborhood in [Ohio], the neighbors found out my situationand delivered a 40+ page packet to all 200 homes in the subdivision of courtrecords, newspaper clippings, etc. A few weeks later they sent around anotherpacket, about 28 pages, with more information, including a whole host ofnewspaper clippings about property values. We received several letters tellingus to move and some people even came to our door to tell us to move. Someoneeven sent a flyer to my wife at her place of employment, an act the prosecutordeemed as harassment although they did nothing to find the culprit (nofingerprints were taken from the letter). We had to move. We couldn't stand theshaming."[317]In some instances, the stigma of being a registered sexoffender affects not just the registrant's employment but that of family membersas well. The wife of Ted P., a registrant from Michigan, had worked for a company for fiveyears. One of her co-workers found Ted P.'s name on the state's website (for aconviction that happened 15 years earlier). The co-worker "told the otheremployees and started giving my wife a hard time." The job became so difficultthat she decided to resign and look for other employment[318]In Floridaseveral people posted printouts from the state's sex offender websiteidentifying their new neighbor, Sam Z., as a sex offender. They repeatedlyplastered the running route of Sam Z.'s wife and their son's bus stop withcopies of the printout. Their campaign of harassment succeeded in driving thefamily from the neighborhood. The family sold the home they had builtthemselves and moved to another community, where they again faced overthostility, as Sam Z.'s wife explained to Human Rights Watch:We built another home similar to the one we sold [in aremote area not far from where they had moved]We also added an 8ft.privacy fence, a security system, a gated entry w/ keypad, andasurveillance system.Whenwe first started building [the new home],our neighbors met with the homeowners' association of our new home anddiscussed ways to eradicateus from the neighborhood.Severalneighbors took part in posting flyerson trees, mailboxes, andpoles.A police officer along with three others pulled Jeff's originalrecords, made copies, and distributed them throughout the neighborhood.Imet with the Chief Inspector of the County and aired my concerns.He spokewith an Officer and, immediately after that meeting,there were no otherproblems in the neighborhood.No one speaks to us with the exception ofone couple but no one has threatened us with weapons directly or vandalized ourhome.We are praying thatwe canlive here without future harassment.I purposely drive my son to and fromschool so there are no problems on the bus or at the bus stop with otherparents.My son socializes with other students who do not live in ourneighborhood.The monetary loss [of buying a newhome]is nothingcompared to the emotional toll it's taken on myfamily.I know I've aged in the last three years considerably.I lookat pictures of ourwedding and cannot believe I looked that way only threeyears ago.My hairis turning gray, the lines on the face are sopronounced. I've gained weight.My son has become more withdrawn and stayson his computer most of the time.[319]Private and Public LandlordsPrivate landlords increasingly require criminal backgroundchecks from prospective tenants and refuse to rent to those with criminalrecords. Registered sex offenders have a particularly difficult time findinglandlords willing to rent to them. As one registrant told Human Rights Watch, "Ihave been turned down from a number of apartments. When I asked one landlordwhy I was rejected (because I have a good credit and rental history) he said hechecked the online registry and saw me listed.He told me he does that search for all his tenants."[320]In an effort to exclude "dangerous sex offenders" from regular public housing,federal law prohibits anyone subject to lifetime registration on a state sexoffender registries from admission to public housing.[321]With no one willing to rent to them, particularly when theregistered offender has been the recipient of a lot of media attention, manyregistered sex offenders face homelessness. Some local law enforcement officialshave tried to help sex offenders from becoming homeless. When they fail, theyimprovise. A local sheriff in Oregonspent months searching for a landlord willing to rent to Bruce E., a registeredsex offender with a mental health diagnosis. He was unsuccessful, so in the endthe county spent $45 for a camping tent with an army surplus cot. "Transitionalhousing" for Bruce E. was, as a result, a tent in a yard behind the jail with atin can for a toilet.[322]Bruce E. was moved to a $155-a-week motel when he contracted pneumonia after aperiod of cold weather.[323]Rory W., a convicted sex offender whocompleted his prison sentence, was housed in a tent outside of downtown Bellingham, Washingtonwhen he was unable in 2003 to find a place to live in the community.[324]In Suffolk County,New York, officials have resortedto placing sex offenders in county-owned trailers that will be movedperiodically around the county.[325]The officials explained their policy, "Finding housing resources for sexoffenders in nonresidential areas is very difficult, so the trailer allows usto create housing in a nonresidential area."[326]A social worker who works with convicted sex offenders expressed reservationsabout the plan: "Its going to be a challenge, because every now and then theywill be moved and have to figure out how to get to work. If people startshowing up late for work, they can get fired."[327]Housingand Public SafetyIndividuals releasedfrom prison who have stable housing may be less likely to reoffend than theircounterparts.[328]Human Rights Watch knows of no studies that specifically addressthe connection between reoffending by sex offenders and housing. Nevertheless,those who work closely with convicted sex offenders believe it plays animportant factor in their reintegration. For example, New Hampshire's chiefparole and probation officer concluded recently that sex offenders readjust tosociety better when they have access to "employment, housing, family support, [and]social interaction."[329]Suicide and DespairI thought of suicide because I felt people were talking badabout me.Maybe some people want for meto die. Maybe that's what this law is about, to cause enough stress on theoffender so he will take his own life.-Frankie A., registrant in Texas convicted of possessing childpornography[330]A number of the sex offenders and their family members withwhom Human Rights Watch spoke talked of ending the ordeal of sex offender lawsand the consequences that flow from it by taking their own lives.One sex offender told Human Rights Watch that despite beingemployed, and suffering no overt threats from his neighbors, he "fear[s] thatwith the changing laws and the views of all sex offenders being dangerous, thismay change. I am constantly haunted by this and it has left me to live a shellof a life. It has made it very difficult to make friends, do the things I usedto enjoy, and has left me with suicidal thoughts nearly every day. Luckily, Iam talking with professionals for my mental health, but the thoughts are stillthere."[331]One mother said of her son, convicted of a statutory rapeoffense for having sex with his girlfriend several years his junior, "[He is] failingin all areas of life andhas often said that he should just kill himself. Ido believe that there are already young men who have committed suicide andsadly, who like my son felt that a lifetime sentence for a youthful offense isjust too damningI do believethat if I cannot get help soon that I willlose him and not to a prison, but to the ultimate absolute: death."[332]The daughter of a Floridaregistrant told Human Rights Watch, "My father also became extremely depressedand I am often afraid of him ending his life. Everything has been taken away fromhim and it must be so hard. The future looks grim. It seems like each month,another living restriction is placed for offenders."[333]Justin F. died of a drug overdose shortly after being toldhe would have to register as a sex offender. He was prosecuted, along withthree other teenage boys, for statutory rape in Michigan after a 14-year-old girl's parentsfound their daughter's "sex diary," which detailed sexual encounters the girlhad had with over 20 partners between the ages of 14 and 20. Initially, thefour defendants in the sex diary case were spared registration requirementswhen the judge allowed them to enter a guilty plea to the lesser offense ofseduction.[334]However, subsequent changes to Michiganlaw required registration for the charge of seduction, and the four young menwere required to register.Justin F.'s parents said that they believed that "learninghe would live as a marked man came as a shock."[335]After his death, Justin F.'s parents pledged to work to "make the sex-offenderlist more meaningful." "The sex offender list was created so that people couldknow if there is a predator in their neighborhood," Justin F.'s father said. "Justinwas not a predator, he was not a threat to anyone, and he should not have beenon that list."[336]Clovis Claxton, a developmentally disabled 38-year-old from Florida who lived withhis parents, killed himself after neighbors posted laminated reproductions ofhis entry on the state's online sex offender registry throughout hisneighborhood.[337]Whoever posted the signs, however, hadaltered them, scrawling the words "Child Rapist" on them. Claxton was, in fact,not a child rapist. At 20, he had the mental capacity of a 10-to-12-year-olddue to meningitis as a child, and he pled guilty to inappropriately touching aneight-year-old neighbor.[338]None of this information, however, was reflected on the registry.After seeing the signs, Claxton had called the local police,telling then that he was frightened that he would be harmed; he also threatenedsuicide.[339]The morning after he called the police, Claxton was found dead of an apparentsuicide, with one of the flyers lying next to him.[340]"I think this is a clear example of an unintendedconsequence which can occur when we go beyond what we call police protocol whenhandling sex offenders," the local sheriff told a newspaper. But the countycommissioner, who initially proposed the idea of public posting, said thatpeople had a right to know who their neighbors were. "I don't blame his deathto the signs," he told the press. "That (death) doesn't deter me from theproposal to do the best job of informing people in their neighborhoods[it] hasin no way removed my efforts."The local paper reported that many of Claxton's neighborswere saddened by his death, but others, "who did not want their namespublished, said they were glad there was one fewer sex offender to worryabout."[341]IX. Residency Restriction LawsMy intent personally is to make it so onerous on those thatare convicted of these offensesthey will want to move to another state.-Georgia State House Majority Leader Jerry Keen, co-sponsorof a bill, signed into law, which prohibits sex offenders in Georgia from living within 1,000feet of schools, daycares, churches, playgrounds, and bus stops[342]The proliferation of these types of restrictions is makingit more difficult for communities to fulfill their mandate of helping offendersmake a successful re-entry into society.-Paul Olney, research associate for the Center for SexOffender Management[343]As detailed above, registered offenders may be hounded fromtheir homes by angry neighbors or denied housing by private and publiclandlords. But their right to establish and maintain homes in which they canlive with their families is also threatened by a growing number of state andmunicipal laws that expressly forbid them from living near places wherechildren gather. At least 20 states have enacted laws that prohibit certain sexoffenders from living within a specified distance of schools, daycare centers,parks, and other places where children congregate (for a list of residencyrestriction statutes by state, see Appendix).In addition, hundreds of municipalities (in states with andwithout residency restriction statutes) have also passed similar ordinancesprohibiting registered sex offenders from living within specified distances ofplaces where children congregate.Theleast restrictive distance requirement is in Illinois (500 feet), but most common are1,000- to 2,500-foot boundaries.Public officials have discovered that by increasing thelength of the restrictions and expanding the list of the places that trigger aresidency restriction (in addition to schools and daycare centers, pet stores,movie theatres, public parks, and swimming pools are being added) they cancreate "sex offender-free zones."[344]Some laws prohibit registered offenders from "loitering" within designatedareas.[345]Legislators have even proposed banningoffenders from entering or working in certain public areas, such as shoppingmalls and municipal buildings.[346]Although all the residency restrictions are keyed todistances from areas in which children congregate, only four states that HumanRights Watch knows of limit their residency restriction laws to personsconvicted of sex offenses involving child victims.[347]In the other states and municipalities, residency restriction laws apply to allregistered offenders, regardless of whether their crimes involved children.The number of residency restrictions in the UScontinues to grow, in part because of the horrific abduction, rape, and murderof nine-year-old Jessica Lunsford in 2005. The man convicted of Jessica'smurder is John Couey, a convicted child molester who lived within sight ofJessica's home.[348]Jessica's father has advocated for "Jessica's Law," which, among other things,calls for residency restrictions for sex offenders. In 2006 alone, at least 10states and a number of municipalities adopted or enhanced laws restrictingwhere sex offenders could live.The inability of convicted sex offenders to find housingwhen they are released from prison has become a significant barrier to theirsuccessful reintegration into society.This is particularly problematic for registrants who have limitedresources, or for those who because of work, community, or family obligationswant to live in particular locations. Residency restrictions prevent offendersfrom living in the areas closest to jobs and public transit, since schools, daycarecenters, and parks are often built in the center of main residential areas ofcities and towns.Registrants and their family members have found that in somecities there is literally nowhere they are allowed to live.[349]For example, a study in Orange County, Florida, which has a 1,000-footrestricted buffer zone around attractions, bus stops, daycares, parks, andschools, found that only 5 percent of the city's residential areas were outsidethe residential restriction zone.[350]Max C., who is on the Georgiasex offender registry, told Human Rights Watch that because of that state'sresidency restrictions, "I can honestly say that I have nowhere to live in thecommunity I have lived in for 30 years."[351]An Iowa sexoffender was found living with his family of three in a car on an abandonedfarm property because residences in the small farm towns were either off-limitsor too expensive.[352]In Florida, a2004 survey of sex offenders found that half of the respondents reported thatresidency restrictions had forced them to move from a residence in which theywere living, and 25 percent were unable to return to their residence aftertheir conviction.[353]Nearly half reported that residency restrictions prevented them from livingwith supportive family members.[354]Recently, newspapers have reported that in Miami, five sex offenders are living under abridge-with the state's approval-because the residency restrictions in theircounty made it impossible for them to find housing.[355]A mother of a Floridaregistrant told Human Rights Watch about her son's search for housing after hewas released from prison:My husband and I wanted him to come live with us forawhile, while he got adjusted to life on the outside and got on his feet.Hewas not allowed to do so because we live within 1,000 ft. of a school busstop.So he had to go to a different county, where he had no supportsystem.He was placed in a dirty disgusting motel because it was the onlyplace he could find to live.It was next door to a XXXnudieplace.He had to be in his motel room from 6pm until 7am daily.Hecould not attend church services and church support groups due to this timeconstraint.He was very lonely and depressed.The motel was veryexpensive and between that and paying for probation and counseling, he wasfinding himself further and further in the hole financially. Heeventually started drinking again and violated parole by staying outtoolate.[356]Residency laws even preclude registered offenders fromliving in homeless shelters within the restricted area. A Texas registrant told Human Rights Watch,I was homeless-Iwent to two homeless shelters-told them the truth-I was a registered sexoffender-I could not stay. No one helps sex offenders I was told. The 3rdshelter I went to-I did not tell them. I was allowed to stay, November 2002 Iwas to register again-my birthday. If I told them I lived at a shelter-I wouldbe thrown out-if I stayed on the streets I would not have a [sic] address togive-violation. So I registered under my old address-the empty house, which wastoo close to a school.Someone calledthe police-told them I did not live at that address anymore-! I was locked up,March 2003. I was given a 10-year sentence for failure to register as a sexoffender.[357]Some public officials want to limit sex offenders' access toemergency shelters. A Tampasheriff is sending "letters to registered sex offenders and predators, urgingthem to plan now for a safe place to stay in the event of a hurricane." When acolleague asked whether the county should plan to offer alternative emergencyaccommodations, the sheriff told the local paper, "I think my answer was no,they can take care of themselvesAs far as spending resources to have someschool or jail special for them, I think there are other people more needy ofour resources."If a sex offender is foundin a hurricane shelter, the sheriff vows that the offender "could be arrestedas a violation of the conditions of his release."[358]The state now directs registrants to report directly to prison in case of a hurricane.Six registrants stayed in prisons during July 2005 hurricanes.[359]Residency restrictions are justified as a means of "takingaway a portion of the opportunity for sex offenders to reoffend."[360]While residency restriction laws are popular, there is little evidence thatthey make sense or that they make children safer from sexual violence.Indeed, the experience of several statessuggests the laws are counterproductive as well as unnecessary and profoundlyunjust.IowaWe made a mistake.-Republican Iowa state legislator, on the state legislature'ssupport of a 2,000-foot state-wide residency restriction[361]In 2002 Iowalegislators passed a law prohibiting registered offenders whose victims were minorsfrom living within 2,000 feet of any school or child care center.[362]Violators face up to two years in prison and a $5,000 fine.[363]Legal challenges delayed it from taking effect until 2005,when a federal court of appeals declared the law constitutional. Therestrictions apply regardless of the length of time a former offender has livedoffense-free in the community- and the restrictions remain in place for life.[364]The restrictions apply to all individuals convicted of a sex offense against achild, regardless of whether the conviction required them to register as a sexoffender. The only exception to the law is that offenders do not have to movefrom their residences if they had been living there before the law was enacted.[365]The Iowalaw has had the effect of excluding sex offenders from entire communities,driving them underground or across state lines to municipalities withoutresidency restrictions. For this reason, some of the toughest and most vocalcritics of Iowa'sresidency restrictions are law enforcement officials.As one law enforcement official points out, "We've takenstable people who have committed a sex crime and cast them out of their homes,away from their jobs, away from treatment, and away from public transportation.It's just absolutely absurd what these laws have done, and the communities areat greater risk because of it."[366]The Iowa CountyAttorney's Associationasserts that the state has lost track of over half its registered sex offenderssince the restrictions went into effect.[367]Lynn County, Iowa Sheriff Don Zeller reports that his county had 435 sexoffenders registered in 2002. After the residency restriction went into effectin 2005, 114 moved, 74 have been charged with violating the ordinance, andothers disappeared. "We went from knowing where about 90 percent of them were. We'relucky if we know where 50 to 55 percent of them are nowthe law created anatmosphere that those individuals can't find a place to live."[368]Douglas Dykstra, a probation and parole supervisor for theIowa Department of Corrections says that many individuals can be safelysupervised in the community without distance restrictions. "You can't take anylaw and blanketly apply it to everybody, because people are different and posedifferent degrees of risk to the community," Dykstra said. "To all of a suddenup the ante and treat everyone as if they are the highest risk is not really awise use of resources."[369]The county attorney of Dubuque,Iowa, Fred McCaw, worries aboutthe law's inflexibility: "The law doesn't take into account the ones that havebehaved themselves for however many years and have done the rehabilitationprograms and are now contributing members of the community. None of that isconsidered."[370]In January 2006 the Iowa County Attorney's Associationissued a statement opposing Iowa's 2,000-foot sex offender residencyrestriction law, citing the fact that the law "does not provide the protectionthat was originally intended and that the cost of enforcing the requirement andthe unintended effects on families of offenders warrant replacing therestrictions with more effective protective measures."[371]Iowaresident Zane S., who was convicted of child molestation in 1997 and releasedin 2003, explained to Human Rights Watch why the law led him to leave thestate. "When I was released, I went to live with my grandmother, who is sick. Ithought I could help take care of her. But then the zoning law went into effectand, because I moved in with my grandma after 2002, I could not stay there-sheis too close to a daycare. There was nowhere I could live legally in the countythat I could afford. A group of sex offenders were thinking about living in atrailer park at the edge of town, but I didn't think that would be good for myrecovery. So I had to leave my grandma.I decided to go live in Nebraska,because there were no residency restrictions."[372]Registrants in DesMoines, Iowa'slargest and most densely populated city, have had a particularly hard timefinding housing outside the sex offender-free zones created by the residencyrestriction law. In effect, sex offenders who have committed crimes againstchildren are zoned out of Des Moines.All sex offenders required to register must provide a homeaddress, but because of the residency law, some sex offenders do not have ahome. Law enforcement officials in DesMoines have resolved this conundrum by allowingindividuals to register as homeless, as long as they specify a location.[373]When users go to Iowa's online registry, they may be surprised to see aregistrant's address listed as "on the Raccoon River between Des Moines andWest Des Moines," "behind the Target on Euclid," or "underneath the I-80bridge."[374]The areas are industrial, polluted, noisy, full of debris, and, in one case,right next to an active railroad track.[375]A Des Moines law enforcement officerexplained to Human Rights Watch, "We don't expect that the registrants areactually living under the bridge, its just one of the few places where they arelegally allowed to admit they are living, and so they list that as theiraddress, and go live someplace else."[376]The officer estimated that city police had lost track of at least 300 sexoffenders who were registered as living in Des Moines before the residency restrictionwent into effect.[377]GavinD.'s StoryIn 1999 Gavin D. grabbed and twisted the flesh of a 12-year-oldgirl's buttocks during a girls' softball game he was coaching. "I had someanger issues to work out, and I took out my anger at the game on this girl,"Gavin told Human Rights Watch.[378]"I know that what I did was wrong, and I take full responsibility for whathappened."Thirty-one at the time, Gavinhad a full-time job at a warehouse, and lived in a home in Dubuque with his wife and two young children.Gavin agreed to plead guilty to "Indecent Contact with a Child," an aggravatedmisdemeanor.[379]In exchange, Gavin would be placed on probation for two years, with theunderstanding that if he successfully completed treatment his record would beexpunged.Under Iowalaw at the time, Gavin was required to register as a sex offender, but wouldnot be subject to community notification. "The judge said he felt funny aboutme being registered because he thought I was low-risk, but because my offensewas against a child, I was required to register with the police," Gavin said.In 2001, Gavin successfully completed the terms of his probation. According tohis probation officer, in her recommendation to the judge, Gavin "appears tohave gained insite [sic] into his offending behavior and has been an activeparticipant in the [sex offender treatment] group."[380]When Iowapassed its residency restriction law, Gavin was subject to it as a registeredoffender who had committed a sex offense against a child. Gavin was also addedto the public registry, pursuant to a provision of the residency restrictionlaw that required all persons subject to those restrictions to be on the publicregistry.[381]In 2005, after Iowa'shighest court upheld the constitutionality of the residency restrictions, Gavinwent to the Sheriff to see whether he would have to move. "The Sheriff told mehe was sorry, but we couldn't stay in our home, because we bought it after 2002and so we couldn't get an exemption from the law."Gavin and his wife decided that he would move out, andshe and the children would stay in the home. Gavin could not find a place tolive in Dubuquethat was affordable and in compliance with the residency restrictions. Hedecided to move across the border to Wisconsin,to live in the basement of a friend, where he has lived for over a year.Because the residency restriction law only prohibitsGavin from sleeping in his home, not from visiting there, Gavin spends as muchtime there as possible. "I can be there 23 hours a day if I stay awake. On theweekends I stay there as long as I can keep my eyes open. I just want to be withmy kids as long as possible. I at least always wait to leave until they havegone to bed, and I try to leave Wisconsinto get back home to them before the kids wake up. I don't get much sleep, but Ineed to be a father to my children."My nine-year-old son is starting to figure out thatsomething is not quite right with Dad. He thinks there is something wrong withme. Sometimes he wakes up in the middle of the night, and he asks for me, andmy wife has to tell him I am not there."I just can't understand why I can't just live with mykids. I have not reoffended, and it's been seven years. But because of thislaw, I may never live with my family again."Human Rights Watch asked Gavin if he had ever considered notregistering. "It's tempting," he said. "But believe it or not, I am a guy thatrespects the law. I want to get back home, but I won't break the law to do it."OklahomaIowais not the only state experiencing increased difficulties keeping track of sexoffender registrants after residency restrictions have been enacted. Recently,Oklahoma City law enforcement officials reported that since a 2005 stateresidency restriction law went into effect, banning offenders from livingwithin 2,000 feet of a school or daycare, less than 16 percent of the OklahomaCity area is available for sex offenders to live, and most of that consists ofland surrounding industrial areas that does not have residential housing. As of2006, nearly 200 offenders have dropped off the state registry.[382]"We recognize that's directly attributable to these laws," said Mark Pursley, asenior probation officer with the Oklahoma Department of Corrections whospecializes in the supervision of sex offenders. "[The law has] raised the bartoo high."[383]GeorgiaIn 2006, Georgiapassed a sex offender zoning law which would prohibit any registered sexoffender from living within 1,000 feet of places where children gather,including bus stops and places of religious worship.[384]One of the state senators sponsoring the bill asserted that his goal was tomake Georgiaa sex offender-free state. "We want them all out of here," Georgia HouseMajority Leader Jerry Keen said."If itbecomes too onerous and too inconvenient, they may just want to live somewhereelse. And I don't care where, as long as it's not in Georgia."[385]Before the law could go into effect, the Southern Center forHuman Rights and the American Civil Liberties Union of Georgia filed a class-actionlawsuit to enjoin the state from enforcing the law, especially as applied toplaces of religious worship and bus stops, because it would have the effect ofvirtually "banning the state's 11,000 registered sex offenders from living inGeorgia."[386]Among the plaintiffs who would have to leave their homes under the law is anelderly man with Alzheimer's, living in a nursing home; a blind man; a disabledman; a woman convicted as a teenager of statutory rape for having consensualsex with her teenage boyfriend; and a woman convicted as an accessory tostatutory rape for allowing two teenagers, one of whom was her child, to havesex in her home.[387]In July 2006 the judge issued an order enjoining the state from enforcing thebus stop provision of the Georgialaw. As of July 2007 the rest of the restrictions are in effect, banningregistered offenders "from living within 1,000 feet of schools, child carefacilities, churches, swimming pools, and areas where minors congregate,including public and private parks, recreation facilities, playgrounds, skatingrinks, neighborhood centers, gymnasiums, and similar facilities providingprograms or services directed towards persons under 18."[388]Human Rights Watch spoke with John A., who was convicted ofrape in 1984 and who has spent the past 20 years working at a faith-basedshelter for homeless men.[389]His home near the shelter fell within 1,000 feet of a church and he was unableto find another place to live that was affordable and within a reasonabledistance from his workplace. John A. has become a devout Christian since hisconviction for rape, and he wanted to continue to work for a Christianorganization. He told Human Rights Watch, "I did not see how it would bepossible to continue to live in Georgiaand be allowed to work with Christian-based shelters." He thought about movingto another state, "but I had a feeling that Georgia will not be the last stateto pass a law restricting where sex offenders can live." With the support ofhis mentor, the Rev. Jim Lewis, who runs a number of faith-based communityprograms, John A. applied to become a missionary in Costa Rica. He was accepted and heleft the United Statesin August 2006.[390]Human Rights Watch also spoke with another person in Georgiasubject to the residency restrictions, a man in his 70s who had been convictedof molesting his granddaughter a decade ago. The residency restriction lawforced him to leave his home and he moved to a trailer in a wooded area outsideof Atlanta, Georgia. "I couldn't afford to moveto a trailer park. I didn't know where to go. I feel like there is no otherplace I can go except here. But here I am isolated. I don't have easy access tothe world. What if I fall down and break my hip? I will admit that at first Iconsidered not registering, going underground. But I wanted to do the rightthing, whatever that is in this situation, and so I am trying to abide by thelaw."[391]Sheriffs in Georgia,who are responsible for enforcing the residency restrictions, are not uniformlysupportive of the law. "I think anyone who knows anything about tracking andmonitoring sex offenders would not support this law," one county sheriff toldHuman Rights Watch. "It's going to be a disaster for us. We are certainly goingto lose track of the sexually violent offenders."[392]CaliforniaIn November 2006 Californiavoters by a large measure (70 percent) passed Proposition 83, a ballotinitiative that, among other things, prohibits any registered sex offender fromliving within 2,000 feet of any school, daycare facility, or place wherechildren gather.[393]The law applies to all 90,000 of the state's registered sex offenders.[394]Proponents of Proposition 83 argued that residencyrestrictions are a tool to keep "dangerous child molestersaway from ourchildren and monitored for life."[395]A rebuttal by the California Attorneys for Justice argued that Proposition 83"ignores the sad lessons learned by other statesthat [residency restriction]laws should be repealed because they have proven to be ineffective, a drain oncrucial law enforcement resources, and far too costly to taxpayers."[396]The rebuttal also pointed out that "proponents claim that the law is directedat 'child molesters' and 'dangerous sex offenders,' butwould apply far morebroadly: even to those convicted of misdemeanor, nonviolent offenses."[397]Opponents of Proposition 83 included the CaliforniaCoalition against Sexual Assault (CALCASA), a state-wide coalition of 84 rapecrisis centers and sexual assault prevention programs. Calling the law "ashortsighted approach to sex offender management that will place California communitiesin greater danger," CALCASA believes the law will "waste valuable resources onsex offenders who are unlikely to reoffend, while leaving a deficit oftreatment, supervision, and focus on offenders who we know should be receiving more intense scrutiny."[398]Before the election, analysts from the California ResearchBureau[399]concluded the residency restrictions limit would effectively prohibitregistered offenders from living in many Californiacities. In August 2006 it released a study on the impact of residencyrestrictions in other states that have them.[400]The report found that parole officers in those states have trouble findinghousing for sex offenders just released from prison, and warned that the newlaw may actually place communities at greater risk by leaving some offendershomeless and driving others underground and off the registries.[401]A federal judge temporarily enjoined enforcement ofProposition 83, pending the conclusion of a suit challenging the constitutionalityof the law.[402]The suit was filed by an anonymous plaintiff, John Doe, whose sex offenseoccurred decades ago and who has lived in the same community for 20 years.[403]In granting the temporary restraining order, the judge said, "'John Doe' hasbeen a law-abiding and productive member of the community since his convictionand will suffer irreparable harm if forced to comply with Proposition 83."[404]After the court order, then-California Attorney General BillLockyer declared that Proposition 83's residency restrictions were not meant tobe retroactive even though the law's language would cover offenders whoregistered prior to its enactment.[405]As CALCASA noted, "[Supporters of Proposition 83] cannot argue that theinitiativeonly affects future offenders and at the same time argue that itwill protect the community from the threat of offenders currently in ourcommunity."[406]A federal judge eventually ruled that Proposition 83 may not be appliedretroactively, meaning that those offenders living in the community prior towhen the residency restriction law went into effect are not subject to therestriction.Local OrdinancesAn estimated 400 municipalities have enacted local zoningordinances restricting where sex offenders can live within their boundaries.[407]At least 113 municipalities in NewJersey alone have local residency restrictions.[408]For example, the township of Jackson, New Jersey,restricts sex offenders from living within 2,500 feet of any park orplayground, movie theater, or amusement park (Jacksonis home to the SixFlagsGreatAdventurePark).[409]In Florida, where more than 60 municipalities have residency restrictionordinances,registered offenderscannot live within specified distances of parks, playgrounds, churches,libraries, bus stops or any other place where minors normally congregate. In Snellville, Georgia,the city council implemented an ordinance banning sex offenders from livingwithin 2,500 feet of any school, over twice the distance of the restricted areaunder the state's residency restriction law.[410]Do Residency Restrictions Protect PublicSafety?As a city council member who supported restrictions for hisdistrict acknowledged, "If we can get these people out of our community, it'snot that these crimes won't happen, [i]t's just that they won't happen in mycommunity."[411]There is no evidence, however, that these laws do in factdiminish crimes against children. For registered offenders, the main impact ofthe laws may be simply to drive them underground or to uproot them from theirfamilies and communities. Iowa'sexperience with residency restrictions has caused at least one state to resistenacting such laws. In November 2006 lawmakers in Kansasdecided not to adopt residency restrictions after reviewing evidence that Iowa's law had doubledthe number of registered offenders unaccounted for since it took effect.[412]Residency restriction laws reflect an assumption that formeroffenders are most likely to commit new offenses against children who gathernear where they live-either because the proximity of children tempts them orsimply because they are easier to access. But this assumption is not borne outby research. The Colorado Department of Public Safety found that convictedchild molesters in Coloradowho reoffended while on probation were randomly scattered throughout thegeographical area, and did not seem to live closer than non-recidivists toschools or child care centers.[413]A small study by the Minnesota Department ofCorrections found that the proximity of a former offender's residence toschools or parks was not a factor in recidivism. In fact it found the opposite:sex offenders who recidivated were more likely to travel to anotherneighborhood to seek victims. During the study period, the only two recidivistacts of child sexual assault committed in parks on unknown victims occurredseveral miles away from the offenders' homes.[414]Most recently, a 2007 study by the Minnesota Department ofCorrections analyzed the sexual reoffense patterns of 224 sex offenderrecidivists released between 1990 and 2002 to determine whether the crimeswould have been prevented by residency restrictions.[415]The study found that residential proximity had very little impact on a recidivist'sopportunity to reoffend. More than half the recidivists, 113, came into contactwith their victims not through residential proximity but through "social orrelationship proximity" to the individual.[416]The most common example was that of a male offender who came into contact withhis child victim(s) in the course of dating their mother.[417]A few years before Proposition 83 was passed, a Californianewspaper reviewed the criminal histories in a one-year period of nearly 500 releasedsex offenders who lived near schools and daycare facilities to see whether theyhad tended to commit new abuses against children they lived near.[418]The newspaper found that former offenders were not tempted into new offenses byproximity to children, and that only one of the 500 convicted sex offenders wasarrested during the year, and that was for committing a parole violation andnot another sex crime.[419]Residency restrictions may also be counterproductive from acommunity safety perspective. As evident in the experience of Iowaand Oklahoma,residency restrictions can push former offenders into homelessness andtransience, interfering with effective tracking, monitoring, and closeprobationary supervision.[420]If registrants are forced to move to rural areas to find affordable places inwhich they can legally live, they may find themselves with diminished access toemployment and treatment options, both of which help reduce reoffending.[421]Sex offenders with positive, informed support systems-including stable housingand social networks-have significantly lower criminal and technical violationsthan sex offenders who had negative or no support.[422]Yet residency restrictions upend such support and stability.A survey of 135 sex offenders in Florida revealed thathousing restrictions increased isolation, created financial and emotionalstress, and led to decreased stability.[423]As a psychologist who specializes in treating sex offendersnoted, "Residency restrictions meant to protect the community may instead leadto banished sex offenders coming to believe their essential identity is as asex offender, which then stimulates reoffense."[424]Impact on Family UnityHuman Rights Watch spoke to a number of families who were nolonger able to live together because of residency restrictions.Doug E., a registrant in Oklahoma, spoke to Human Rights Watch abouthis family's decision to live separately rather than try to find affordable andsafe housing outside the prohibited zone for sex offenders: "I want to live withmy wife and kids very much.But I didn'twant to make my kids move to a bad situation, a bad part of town. I didn't wantthem to leave school, and I didn't want my wife to have to give up our familyhome-the only one we have ever had. So I moved to the edge of town."[425]Another registrant subject to residency restrictions in Michigan discussed thefinancial stress of trying to keep two households, "I could only find a placeto live at a seedy motel, and I was not dragging my family there with me. Thekids cry when I leave at night, and my wife worries sick that I have to stayaway at night. This restriction only makes us more stressed. I think if I couldjust fall asleep next to my wife, with my kids in the house, everything wouldwork out okay."[426]Rethinking Residency RestrictionsResidency restrictions that apply to whole categories of sexoffenders should be abolished. This does not mean that limitations cannot beplaced on where former offenders may live. Residency restrictions for convictedsex offenders should be determined on a case-by-case basis, for example bycourts or probation and parole officers, and be subject to periodic review. Therestrictions should be reasonably tailored to such factors as the specificcrime the offender committed; an assessment of his or her employment, familyand other support systems; the nature of supervision and treatment the offenderis receiving; and the length of time the individual has lived in the communityoffense-free. For former offenders who are not subject to probation or parolesupervision, states could create expert panels to undertake similarperiodically reviewed assessments to determine whether any type of residencyrestriction is warranted for a particular individual and for how long.Other Countries and Sex Offender LawsThe United Statesis one of just eight countries that have sex offender registries, and the onlycountry besides South Koreaknown to have community notification provisions. Australia,Canada, France, Ireland,Japan, and the United Kingdomhave sex offender registries that are kept by the police. The European Union(EU) has voiced approval of the UnitedKingdom's sex offender registry, and hasencouraged EU Member States to implement registries "throughout the EU." Victims'rights groups in Australia,the United Kingdom, and Japanare advocating for community notification laws. Singaporeis also considering a system of sex offender registration and communitynotification modeled on the USas well.[427]Human Rights Watch knows of no other country besides the United States with residencyrestriction laws for sex offenders.Lawmakers in the UnitedKingdom recently considered and rejected adoptingcommunity notification laws, noting the United States' experience withvigilante violence and the lack of proven effectiveness.X. Human Rights and Sex Offender LawsGovernments have an obligation to protect people and take appropriatesteps to safeguard the lives of those within its jurisdiction to protect themfrom violence. One element of that duty is to take measures to deter andprevent crime.[428]They must do so, however, within a human rights framework, which placesrestrictions on those measures that infringe on the human rights guaranteed toall. A person's conviction of a crime does not extinguish his or her claim tojust treatment at the hands of government.Sex offender laws interfere with a panoply of protectedrights: the rights to privacy,[429]to family[430]and home,[431]to freedom of movement and liberty (including the right to work[432]and to reside where one chooses[433]),and to physical safety and integrity (including protection from harm by privateas well as public actors).[434]None of these rights are absolute. But laws that infringe upon them must benecessary to serve a legitimate public interest, the relationship between theinterest and the means chosen to advance it must be a close one, and the lawsmust be the least restrictive possible. For example, as the UN Human RightsCommittee, which assesses compliance with the International Covenant on Civiland Political Rights (ICCPR), has stated with regard to limiting the right tomovement:[I]t is not sufficient that the restrictions serve thepermissible purposes; they must also be necessary to protect them. Restrictivemeasures must conform to the principle of proportionality; they must beappropriate to achieve their protective function; they must be the leastintrusive instrument amongst those which might achieve the desired result; andthey must be proportionate to the interest to be protected.[435]If a state action restricts a right, it can only do so tothe extent consistent with "the provisions, aims, and objectives of theCovenant" and only to the extent "reasonable in the particular circumstances."[436]Reasonableness is achieved if the restriction is "both proportional to the endsought andnecessary in the circumstances."[437]The Siracusa Principles on the Derogation from theInternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Siracusa Principles) wereformulated to clarify when and to what extent a state can limit a human rightaffirmed by the ICCPR, and how to measure whether the restriction of the right isproportionate to the public safety concern.[438]The Siracusa Principles emphasize that limitations onindividual rights are to be narrowly construed.[439]Under the Siracusa Principles, interference with an ICCPR freedom: (1) must notjeopardize the essence of the right concerned;[440](2) must further a legitimate aim in a manner proportionate with that aim;[441](3) must be subject to the possibility of challenge to and remedy against itsabusive application;[442]and (4) must not be imposed in an arbitrary manner.[443]The Human Rights Committee has held that a lack of consideration for "personalcircumstances" when depriving citizens of a fundamental right is prohibitedunder the ICCPR.[444]The Committee also stated that the ICCPR did not allow rights to be taken away"based solely upon the category of the crime for which the offender is foundguilty."[445]The principle of "proportionality" as it applies toassessing the legitimacy of restrictions imposed on human rights is used toensure that rights are not denied arbitrarily, and that any human rightsrestrictions are rational and evidence-based.Special Rights of Child OffendersInternational law recognizes that juvenile offenders requirespecial protection. The Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) and theICCPR prohibit arbitrary or unlawful interference with a child's privacy.[446]This prohibition, along with other international legal guarantees of treatmentwith dignity, respect, and protection from cruel, inhuman or degradingtreatment, underlie the minimum standards for privacy set forth in the UNStandard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice (the BeijingRules). These minimum standards require that every child's privacy be respectedat all stages of the juvenile justice process, including with regard todissemination of a child offender's criminal record, and that safeguards betaken during transport to shield children and protect them from "insult,curiosity and publicity in any form."[447]A Human Rights Analysis of US Sex OffenderLawsProtection of public safety is unquestionably a legitimateaim. But US registration, community notification, and residency restriction lawsare neither proportional to nor necessary to further that goal, nor are they theleast restrictive measures possible consistent with the goal.RegistrationRegistration requirements have not been carefully drafted ina way which balances the duty to protect individuals from sexual violence withthe basic human rights of an individual who has committed a sex crime and isreleased into the community.Theexamination of registration requirements in this report reveal that they areoverbroad, often severely impacting people who committed minor nonviolentoffenses, including acts such as public or indecent exposure, and consensualsex by teenagers.Even for people who have committed serious offenses, thatfact alone is not determinative of their future dangerousness to society, norcan that factor be the basis on which an individual is effectively stripped oftheir rights. Yet, with only a few exceptions, states have not establishedprocesses by which registration requirements are keyed to an individualizeddetermination of whether a particular offender poses a risk of future reoffending.Moreover, the requirement to register continues long after the point at whichthe offender poses negligible risk of reoffense.In contrast, registration in the United Kingdom takes more care tostrike the balance between the duty to protect society from sexual violence andthe post-release rights of former offenders. By having a limited registrationscheme which requires certain personal information to be retained only by thepolice, the United Kingdom'ssex offender registry has been held to not impermissibly infringe on the rightto privacy and other rights.TheEuropean Court of Human Rights and UK Sex Offender RegistrationThe European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) hasconsidered three challenges to the United Kingdom Sex Offenders Act 1997 frompersons convicted of sex offenses that required them to register informationwith the police, including their name, date of birth, home address, and anychanges of name or home address. There was no public access to the registrationin question and no notification requirement. The court found that no evidencewas presented to it to suggest that individuals were at risk of publichumiliation or attack as a result of the obligations to register with policeunder the Act.The court considered that the requirement to providethe information to the police "amounts to an interference with his private life."However, the measures were "in accordancewith the law" and "pursue legitimate aims, namely the prevention of crime andthe protection of the rights and freedoms of others." The court then consideredwhether they are "necessary in a democratic society," that is, proportionate tothe aims pursued.The court examined the proportionality of the measureson the basis that the interference with private life extended only to therequirement to register with the police. The court found that the interferencewas proportionate, in light of the gravity of the harm that may be caused to thevictims of sexual offenses and in the absence of evidence presented to it that theindividuals were at risk of public humiliation or attack as a result of thisform of registration. The court left open the possibility that if evidence waspresented that suggested attacks on registered individuals were connected inany way with the registration process in question, that individuals were atrisk of public humiliation or attack, or that the requirement to register wouldlead to information that is not already publicly available becoming known tothe media or the general public, its assessment as to its proportionality orinterference with other rights would be different.[448]Community NotificationMost of the damage to the rights of sex offender registrantsoccurs because of community notification, both because the laws directlyinterfere with their ability to live private lives with their families andbecause the laws have generated public responses that have led to harassmentand violence.Current community notification laws, while ostensiblyenacted with the goal of promoting public safety, are neither necessary norproportionate to that goal. Most notification laws simply reproduce theover-breadth of registration requirements, providing information to the publicabout people who pose little or no risk. Further, they ensure universal accessto registration information, so that people who have no legitimate need-to-knowhave access to the information on state sex offender registries. This universaldissemination subjects former offenders and their families to needless stigmaand hostility.Residency RestrictionsLaws that prohibit convicted sex offenders from moving todesignated areas otherwise open to residential use and that banish them fromexisting homes in such areas cannot be squared with human rights principles.On a number of occasions, the ECtHR has addressed humanrights challenges to residency restrictions applied against particularindividuals. The court's rulings reflect the importance of assessing necessityand proportionality on an individualized basis.For example, the court considered the case of a Dutchcitizen who had "repeatedly and overtly" used hard drugs in a designatedemergency area (high crime area) of Amsterdam, who had received several ordersprohibiting him from the area but had nevertheless returned to the area to usehard drugs in public, and who consequently was banned from this area for 14days.[449]In this case, the court found that the restriction was proportionate becauseit: (1) was limited in duration; and (2) did not result in undue hardship tothe drug abuser, as he did not work or live in the area in question and wasstill able to collect his social security benefits and mail from the area. Butthe ECtHR did not accept residency restrictions in a case in which the Italianpolice placed a suspected mafia member under special supervision that includedsevere restrictions on his freedom of movement for three years.[450]The Court ruled that although the measures pursued legitimate aims (namely, themaintenance of public order and the prevention of crime), they failed tofulfill the requisite condition of being "necessary in a democratic society" toachieve those aims, because there was insufficient concrete evidence to show"that there was a real risk that [the suspect] would offend."[451]Sex Offenders Laws in US CourtsWith few exceptions, judges have upheld sex offender laws,rejecting procedural due process challenges, equal protection, banishment, andex post facto claims, and arguments that such laws violate fundamental rights,including the right to privacy.[452]Community NotificationThe US Supreme Court has twice upheld state (Alaska and Connecticut)community notification laws.[453]The specific constitutional issues raised in the cases differed, but in bothcases the Court failed to grapple forthrightly with the practical implicationsof community notification. It gave little weight to the shaming and stigma thatinevitably and necessarily accompany community notification, and overlooked theunnecessarily broad scope of the statutes with respect to both who is requiredto register and who may access the registry.[454]Lower courts have similarly failed to acknowledge the serious rights violationsthat accompany community notification laws. For example, with regard to theprivacy rights violated by community notification laws, a federal court noted,"a state's publication of truthful information that is already available to thepublic does not infringe the fundamental constitutional rights of liberty andprivacy."[455]Dissenting justices have acknowledged the significantconsequences of community notification. For example, Justice Ginsburg notedcommunity notification's "onerous and intrusive obligations" on the offender,the resulting "profound humiliation and community-wide ostracism," itsresemblance to historical practices of shaming, reliance upon convictionsrather than present dangerousness, and the law's "excessiveness in relation toits non-punitive purpose."[456]Former offenders in a number of cases have claimed that sexoffender registration and notification laws impermissibly infringe on protectedrights. After concluding that fundamental rights were not, in fact, implicatedby the laws, the courts did not subject them to close scrutiny, nor did theyquestion the laws' proportionality. For example, a registrant in Tennessee argued thatthe state's registration law "depriv[ed] him of his constitutional rights ofprivacy and employment, and the right to be free from stigma, without dueprocess of law."[457]The Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals, however, refused to recognize a privacyright in this context as a fundamental right.[458]Similarly, residents in Floridachallenged that state's sex offender registration law, arguing that the lawinfringed on their right to associate with their families, the right to be freefrom threats, and their right to find and/or keep employment and housing.[459]The appellate court ruled that none of these are fundamental rights.Under USconstitutional jurisprudence, if a fundamental right is not involved (andabsent discrimination), courts will not require regulations to be anything morethan "rationally" related to a legitimate public purpose, and the rationalitytest is easily satisfied unless a law is utterly irrational.Residency RestrictionsThe United States Supreme Court has yet to consider theconstitutionality of residency restrictions.Federal and state courts have, for the most part, upheld these lawsagainst challenges that the restrictions are unconstitutionally overbroad[460]and vague;[461]permit a regulatory taking without just compensation;[462]interfere with the right to contract;[463]and violate substantive due process rights to housing,[464]the Ex Post Facto Clause against retroactive punishment,[465]and the Eighth Amendment ban on cruel and unusual punishment.[466]The Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals unanimously upheld the Iowa residencyrestriction statute, concluding that residency restrictions are a form of civilregulation, and that keeping sex offenders a certain distance from wherechildren gather was rationally related to the legitimate legislative goal ofprotecting children.[467]The court found that the federal constitution does not include a "right to livewhere you choose."[468]The Court rejected the registrants' contention that the law violated theirfundamental right to live with their family members, because the law onlylimited where registrants could live, not with whom-any impact on the familywas only incidental or unintended.[469]Although, as the dissent in the case noted, Iowa's residency restriction law leaves "sofew legal housing options that many offenders face the choice of living inrural areas or leaving the state,"[470]the majority court refused to lend such consequences any legal significance.Sex offenders have challenged the rationality of residencyrestrictions by pointing to a lack of evidence that the exclusion zones enhancechildren's safety.[471]Courts have conceded that the efficacy of the restrictions is unproven[472]but have responded that the legislature deserves broad discretion to deal withpotentially dangerous situations.[473]No court applying rational basis review has held that residency restrictionsare an unreasonable means to achieve the state's legitimate purpose ofprotecting children.[474]US Courts, Juveniles and Sex Offender LawsCourts have not been notably more protective of the rightsof juveniles subjected to registration and community notification laws than theyhave of adults. Some juvenile offenders have challenged registration andnotification on the basis that those laws open their records to public view,whereas criminal law has generally permitted children to have their juvenilerecords kept confidential or expunged.Federal courts have recognized the validity of the argumentthat juveniles have a protected liberty interest in the confidentiality oftheir records, but have yet to overturn any laws because that interest has beenviolated. One court specified that the issue of confidentiality was immaterialin that particular jurisdiction, mainly because disclosure of juvenileinformation under its community notification law was limited to lawenforcement,[475]implying that if notification went beyond law enforcement, it would violatejuveniles' expectation of privacy. Another federal court held that juvenileshave a particularized liberty interest in the established policy of "settingaside" their criminal records.[476]However, the court stopped short of finding community notification animpermissible violation of this particularized liberty interest for alljuveniles.[477]Rather, it held that procedures to determine who would be subject tonotification must consider juveniles' heightened liberty interests.[478]XI. ConclusionOne of the things sex offenders know is what the worldthinks of them.They know most peopleare driven by fear, and that fear is driven by ignorance. Convicted sexoffenders released into the community are trying to work through it on theirend, trying to be good citizens, but it's hard to get the community to live upto its end of the bargain.-Barbara Johnson, supervisor, Sex Offender Program for the County of Pima,Arizona[479]We have sat and been quiet for so long, but it's time nowto say, "It's time for there to be some changes. These kids have to be free."They made a huge mistake, but should they be punished for the rest of theirlives?-Nancy D., mother of a registrant[480]Human rights protections and guarantees create a duty toprotect children-and everyone-from sexual abuse and to hold accountable thosewho commit acts of sexual violence. For Human Rights Watch, criticizing sexoffender laws and demanding that public officials take more care in how theyaddress the problem of sexual violence reflects our commitment to protectingall members of society from sex crimes. There is, however, no inherentcontradiction between protecting the rights of children and protecting therights of former offenders. Both are protected if registration is limited to formeroffenders who have been individually assessed as dangerous, and only for solong as they pose a high or medium risk of reoffending; if communitynotification is restricted on a need-to-know basis to those who genuinely canbenefit from knowledge about dangerous former offenders in their midst; and ifresidency restrictions are imposed, if at all, only as part of individualsupervision measures established on a case-by-case basis and periodicallyreviewed, and with child offenders exempted from sex offender laws unless apanel determines them to be of significant risk to the community. We urgelegislators and the public to support reform to sex offender laws along theselines.Human Rights Watch also urges legislators and the public toexpand their efforts to prevent sexual violence beyond punitive monitoring andinformation dissemination measures targeting former offenders. Comprehensiveapproaches to the prevention of sex crimes against children would entail makingsure parents have the tools they need to detect signs of adults with sexbehavior problems, to help teach their children about warning signs, and tofind the support they need for healthy parenting. Efforts to prevent childsexual abuse and to provide for early interventions with children and familiesat risk must be strategically examined and strengthened.Broad-based community notification and residency restrictionlaws are not the panacea to stopping sexual violence. Those who care aboutending sex crimes must demand that policymakers reject one-size-fits-all lawsto address sex abuse and begin to invest the political and financial resourcesin policies that actually work.AppendixOnline Sex Offender Registry Warning Text by StateStateWarning TextAlabamaTHE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS SITE IS INTENDEDFOR COMMUNITY SAFETY PURPOSES ONLY AND SHOULD NOT BE USED TO THREATEN,INTIMIDATE, OR HARASS.MISUSE OF THIS INFORMATION MAY RESULT IN CRIMINALPROSECUTION.AlaskaUsing information from this site to commit acrime may result in criminal prosecution.ArizonaTHE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS SITE IS INTENDEDFOR COMMUNITY SAFETY PURPOSES ONLY AND SHOULD NOT BE USED TO THREATEN,INTIMIDATE, OR HARASS.MISUSE OF THIS INFORMATION MAY RESULT IN CRIMINALPROSECUTION.ArkansasThis information is made available for thepurpose of providing the public information concerning Level 3 and Level 4Registered Sex Offenders who may reside in your area. Anyone who uses thisinformation to commit a criminal act against another person is subject tocriminal prosecution.CaliforniaThe information on this web site is madeavailable solely to protect the public. Anyone who uses this information tocommit a crime or to harass an offender or his or her family is subject tocriminal prosecution and civil liability.ColoradoExtreme care should be exercised when using anyinformation obtained from this website.ConnecticutANY PERSON WHO USES INFORMATION IN THIS REGISTRYTO INJURE, HARASS OR COMMIT A CRIMINAL ACT AGAINST ANY PERSON INCLUDED IN THEREGISTRY OR ANY OTHER PERSON IS SUBJECT TO CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.DelawareNoneDCUnlawful use of this information tothreaten, intimidate, harass, or injure a registered sex offender will not betolerated and will be prosecuted to the full extent of the law.FloridaIt is illegal to misuse public recordsinformation regarding a sexual predator or a sexual offender as defined byFlorida Statutes and to secure a payment from such a predator or offender; toknowingly distribute or publish false information relating to such a predatoror offender and to misrepresent such information as being public recordsinformation; or to materially alter public records information with theintent to misrepresent the information, including documents, summaries ofpublic records information provided by law enforcement agencies, or publicrecords information displayed by law enforcement agencies on websites orprovided through other means of communication. Section 775.21(10)(c), Florida Statutes.GeorgiaNoneHawaiiAny person who uses the information in thisregistry to injure, harass, or commit a criminal act against any personincluded in the registry may be subject to criminal prosecution, civilliability, or both.IdahoThe information in the sex offender registries isprovided only for the purpose of protecting the public.It is not to be used for the purpose ofharassing or intimidating anyone.Aperson who uses registry information to commit a criminal act against anotherperson is subject to arrest and prosecution under section 18-8326 or 18-8413,Idaho Code.IllinoisAnyone who uses this information to commit acriminal act against another person is subject to criminal prosecution.IndianaInformation in this registry may not be used toharass or threaten sex offenders or their families. Harassment, stalking, orthreats may violate Indianalaw.IowaAny actions taken by you against these subjects,including vandalism of property, verbal or written threats of harm orphysical assault against these subjects, their families or employers canresult in your arrest and prosecution.KansasAny person who uses information obtained throughthis website to threaten, intimidate or harass another, or who otherwisemisuses the information may be subject to criminal prosecution and/or civilliability.KentuckyUNDER KRS 525.070 AND 525.080, USE OF INFORMATIONFROM THIS WEB SITE TO HARASS A PERSON IDENTIFIED ON THIS WEB SITE IS ACRIMINAL OFFENSE PUNISHABLE BY UP TO NINETY (90) DAYS IN THE COUNTYJAIL. MORE SEVERE CRIMINAL PENALTIESAPPLY FOR MORE SEVERE CRIMES COMMITTED AGAINST A PERSON IDENTIFIED ON THISWEB SITE.LouisianaAny person who uses information contained in oraccessed through this Website to threaten, intimidate, or harass anyindividual, including registrants or family members, or who otherwise misusesthis information, may be subject to criminal prosecution or civil liability.MaineUse of this information to threaten, intimidate,or harass any registrant or any other person may result in criminalprosecution.MarylandThe information presented on this Web site shouldnot be used in any manner to injure, harass, or commit a criminal act againstany individual named in the registry, or residing or working at the reportedaddress. Any such action could subject you to criminal prosecution.MassachusettsInformation shall not be used tocommita crime or to engage in illegal discrimination or harassments ofan offender. Any person who uses information disclosed pursuant toM.G.L. C. 6178C - 178P for such purposes shall be punished by not morethan two and one half (2 ) years in a house of correction or by a fine ofnot more than one thousand dollars ($1000.00) or both (M.G.L. C.6,178N). In addition, any person who uses Registry information tothreaten to commit a crime may be punished by a fine of not more than onehundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months(M.G.L. C. 2754).MichiganExtreme care should be exercised in using anyinformation obtained from this web site.MinnesotaNoneMississippiIt is not the intent of the Legislature that thisinformation be used to injure, harass, or commit a criminal act againstpersons named in the registry, their families, or employers. Anyone who takesany criminal action against these registrants, including vandalism of property,verbal or written threats of harm or physical assault against theseregistrants, their families or employers is subject to criminal prosecution.MissouriNoneMontanaAnyone who uses this information to injure,harass or commit a criminal act against any person may be subject to criminalprosecution.NebraskaSex offender registry information shall not beused to retaliate against the registrants, their families, or their employersin any way.Vandalism, verbal orwritten threats of harm are illegal and will result in arrest andprosecution.NevadaUnder the provisions of state law and as furtherdefined by the State Attorney General, this information is provided forgeneral public safety. A person is authorized to use this informationonly to protect him/herself or a child who may be at risk.The releaseof this information to the public is meant to assure public protection, notto punish the offender. It is illegal to use information obtained throughthis web site to commit a crime against a registered sex offender or toengage in discrimination or harassment against a registered sexoffender. Anyone who uses this information to commit a criminal actagainst another person is subject to criminal prosecution and/or civilaction.New HampshireNoneNew JerseyPublic access to registry information is intendedsolely for the protection of the public, and should never be used tothreaten, intimidate or harass another. (See "Prohibitions on Misuse ofRegistry Information" below.)New MexicoThe information provided is intended forcommunity safety purposes only and should not be used to threaten,intimidate, or harass. Without a fingerprint comparison, there is noguarantee an individual identified in the response is in fact the individualin question.New YorkAnyone who uses this information to injure,harass, or commit a criminal act against any person may be subject tocriminal prosecution.North CarolinaThis information is made available for purposesof protecting the public, for keeping them informed and for allowing them totake proactive measures to ensure safety in their communities. Use and/ormisuse of this information by individuals, groups or entities to commitcriminal acts (to include, but not limited to, threats, intimidation, stalking,harassment) against other persons is subject to criminal prosecution.North DakotaAny actions taken by persons against thesesubjects, including vandalism of property, intimidation, harassment or verbalor written threats of harm against these subjects or their families,landlords, or employers, are not acceptable, and will likely result in arrestand prosecution of those persons.OhioNoneOklahomaNoneOregonUnder the provisions of state law thisinformation is provided for general public safety. A person is authorized touse this information only to protect him/herself or a child who may be atrisk. The release of this information to the public is meant to assure publicprotection, not to punish the offender. It is illegal to use informationobtained through this web site to commit a crime against a registered sexoffender or to engage in discrimination or harassment against a registeredsex offender. Anyone who uses this information to commit a criminal actagainst another person is subject to criminal prosecution and/or civilaction.PennsylvaniaANY PERSON WHO USES THE INFORMATION CONTAINEDHEREIN TO THREATEN, INTIMIDATE, OR HARASS THE REGISTRANT OR THEIR FAMILY, ORWHO OTHERWISE MISUSES THIS INFORMATION, MAY BE SUBJECT TO CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONOR CIVIL LIABILITY.Rhode IslandInformation contained on this Web site should notbe used to threaten or harass any identified individual as such conduct maybe prohibited under the general laws of Rhode Island.South CarolinaNoneSouth DakotaANY PERSON WHO USES INFORMATION CONTAINED IN ORACCESSED THROUGH THIS WEBSITE TO THREATEN, INTIMIDATE, OR HARASS ANYINDIVIDUAL, INCLUDING REGISTRANTS OR FAMILY MEMBERS, OR WHO OTHERWISE MISUSESTHIS INFORMATION, MAY BE SUBJECT TO CRIMINAL PROSECUTION. A violation is aClass 6 felony and the violator could be sentenced to the South Dakota StatePenitentiary for up to two years and could be fined up to $4,000.TennesseeThe Tennessee Bureau of Investigation cannotguarantee the accuracy of this information. It should be noted thatoffenders may have moved without notification. Therefore, thisinformation should not be used in any manner to injure, harass, or commit acriminal act against any person named in the registry. Any such actioncould subject you to criminal prosecution.TexasNoneUtahPursuant to Utah Code Ann. Section77-27-21.5(22)(b) and (c), members of the public are not allowed to publicizethe information or use it to harass or threaten sex offenders or members oftheir families; and harassment, stalking, or threats against sex offenders ortheir families are prohibited and doing so may violate Utah criminal laws.VermontAny person who uses information in this registryto injure, harass, or commit a criminal offense against any person includedin the registry or any other person is subject to criminal prosecution.VirginiaNoneWashingtonTHE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS SITE IS INTENDEDFOR COMMUNITY SAFETY PURPOSES ONLY AND SHOULD NOT BE USED TO THREATEN,INTIMIDATE, OR HARASS. MISUSE OF THIS INFORMATION MAY RESULT IN CRIMINALPROSECUTION.West VirginiaThis information is provided in the interest ofpublic safety and should be used only in order to take appropriateprecautions. The information accessed through the use of this website may notbe used to threaten, intimidate or harass registered sex offenders andviolations of law will be investigated by the West Virginia State Police.WisconsinItis not the intent of the Legislature that this information be used to injure,harass, or commit a criminal act against persons named in the registry, theirfamilies, or employers. Anyone who takes any criminal action against theseregistrants, including vandalism of property, verbal or written threats ofharm or physical assault against these registrants, their families oremployers is subject to criminal prosecution.WyomingANY PERSON WHO USES INFORMATION CONTAINED INOR ACCESSED THROUGH THE WYSORS WEBSITE TO THREATEN, INTIMIDATE, OR HARASS ANYINDIVIDUAL, INCLUDING REGISTRANTS OR THEIR FAMILY MEMBERS, OR WHO OTHERWISEMISUSES THIS INFORMATION, MAY BE SUBJECT TO CRIMINAL PROSECUTION, OR CIVILLIABILITY UNDER FEDERAL AND/OR STATE LAW.List of Sex Offender Registries by StateStateWebsiteAlabamahttp://community.dps.alabama.gov/Pages/wfWelcome.aspxAlaskahttp://www.dps.state.ak.us/sorweb/Sorweb.aspxArizonahttps://az.gov/webapp/offender/main.doArkansashttp://www.acic.org/Registration/index.htmCaliforniahttp://meganslaw.ca.gov/Coloradohttp://sor.state.co.us/Connecticuthttp://www.ct.gov/dps/cwp/view.asp?a=2157&Q=294474&dpsNav=Delawarehttp://sexoffender.dsp.delaware.gov/DChttp://mpdc.dc.gov/mpdc/cwp/view,a,1241,Q,540704,mpdcNav_GID,1523,mpdcNav,|.aspFloridahttp://offender.fdle.state.fl.us/offender/Search.jspGeorgiahttp://services.georgia.gov/gbi/gbisor/disclaim.htmlHawaiihttp://sexoffenders.ehawaii.gov/sexoff/Idahohttp://isp.state.id.us/identification/sex_offender/Illinoishttp://www.isp.state.il.us/sor/Indianahttp://www.insor.org/insasoweb/Iowahttp://www.iowasexoffender.com/Kansashttp://www.kansas.gov/kbi/ro.shtmlKentuckyhttp://www.kentuckystatepolice.ky.gov/sor.htmLouisianahttp://lasocpr1.lsp.org/Mainehttp://sor.informe.org/sor/Marylandhttp://www.dpscs.state.md.us/onlineservs/sor/Massachusettshttp://sorb.chs.state.ma.us/Michiganhttp://www.mipsor.state.mi.us/Minnesotahttp://www.doc.state.mn.us/level3/search.aspMississippihttps://por.state.mn.us/Missourihttp://www.mshp.dps.mo.gov/MSHPWeb/PatrolDivisions/CRID/SOR/SORPage.htmlMontanahttp://www.doj.mt.gov/svor/Nebraskahttp://www.nsp.state.ne.us/sor/find.cfmNevadahttp://www.nvsexoffenders.gov/New Hampshirehttp://www.egov.nh.gov/nsor/New Jerseyhttp://www.state.nj.us/njsp/info/reg_sexoffend.htmlNew Mexicohttp://www.nmsexoffender.dps.state.nm.us/New Yorkhttp://www.criminaljustice.state.ny.us/nsor/North Carolinahttp://ncfindoffender.com/North Dakotahttp://www.sexoffender.nd.gov/Ohiohttp://www.esorn.ag.state.oh.us/Secured/p1.aspxOklahomahttp://www.sde.state.ok.us/sexregistry.htmOregonhttp://sexoffenders.oregon.gov/Pennsylvaniahttp://www.pameganslaw.state.pa.us/Rhode Islandhttp://www.paroleboard.ri.gov/sexoffender/agree.phpSouth Carolinahttp://services.sled.sc.gov/sor/South Dakotahttp://sor.sd.gov/disclaimer.asp?page=search&nav=2Tennesseehttp://www.ticic.state.tn.us/SEX_ofndr/search_short.aspTexashttps://records.txdps.state.tx.us/DPS_WEB/Sor/index.aspxUtahhttp://www.cr.ex.state.ut.us/community/sexoffenders/Vermonthttp://www.dps.state.vt.us/cjs/s_registry.htmVirginiahttp://sex-offender.vsp.virginia.gov/sor/Washingtonhttp://ml.waspc.org/West Virginiahttp://www.wvstatepolice.com/sexoff/websearchform.cfmWisconsinhttp://offender.doc.state.wi.us/public/Wyominghttp://attorneygeneral.state.wy.us/dci/so/so_registration.htmlCriteria for Presence on an Online Sex Offender Registryby StateStateCriteriafor Online RegistryIncludes Everyone Convicted Asan AdultExcludes Low and/or Medium RiskOffendersAlabamaxAlaskaxArizonaxArkansasxCaliforniaxColoradoxConnecticutxDelawarexDCxFloridaxGeorgiaxHawaiixIdahoxIllinoisxIndianaxIowaxKansasxKentuckyxLouisianaxMainexMarylandxMassachusettsxMichiganxMinnesotaxMississippixMissourixMontanaxNebraskaxNevadaxNewHampshirexNewJerseyxNewMexicoxNewYorkxNorthCarolinaxNorthDakotaxOhioxOklahomaxOregonxPennsylvaniaxRhodeIslandxSouthCarolinaxSouthDakotaxTennesseexTexasxUtahxVermontxVirginiaxWashingtonxWestVirginiaxWisconsinxWyomingxSex Offender Residency RestrictionStatutes by StateStateResidency RestrictionsCode/StatuteAlabamaMay not reside or workwithin 2,000 feet of school or childcare facilities.Code of Ala.15-20-26(a)ArkansasA level 3 or 4 (mostserious) sex offender cannot live within 2,o00 feet of schools or daycarefacilities.A.C.A. 5-14-128(a)CaliforniaA sexually violentpredator and serious paroled sex offender cannot live within one-fourth of amile of a school.California Wel & I nst Code 6608.5(f); CalPen Code 3003FloridaA sex offender whosevictim is under 18 years old cannot live within 1,000 feet of schools, parks,playgrounds, and public school bus stops, or where children congregate.Fla. Stat. 947,1405(7)(a)(2)GeorgiaNo sex offender mayreside, work, or loiter within 1,000 feet of any school, childcare facility,church, school bus stop, or where minors congregate.O.C.G.A. 42-1-15Mandates that noregistered sexual offender will be allowed to reside, loiter or work within1000 feet of an area where minors congregate. Defines "where minorscongregate" as schools, churches, day care centers, public swimmingpools, neighborhood centers, gymnasiums, and school bus stops, skating rinks,recreation facilities, public and private parks, and playgrounds.Georgia H 1059, Signed by governor on April 30,2006IdahoProhibits registeredsex offenders from loitering or residing within 500 feet of a school withchildren under eighteen.Providesexceptions for parents dropping transporting their children, students meetingthe definition of sex offender enrolled in school, parents attending parentteacher conferences, and for dropping off food, mail, or other delivery.Idaho Code 18-8329IllinoisA child sex offendermay not reside or loiter within 500 feet of a school.720 ILCS 5/11-9.3(b), (b-5)IndianaProhibits sexoffenders from residing within 1,000 feet of a school, public park, or youthprogram shelter.Also prohibitsresidence within one mile of the victim's residence.Burns Ind.Code Ann. 11-13-3-4(g)(2)IowaA sex offender whosevictim was a minor may not reside within 2,000 feet of a school or childcarefacility.Iowa Code 692A.2AKentuckyA sex offender may notreside within 1,000 feet of a school, childcare facility, and public playgrounds.KRS 17.545LouisianaA sexually violentpredator and sex offenders whose offense involved a minor may not residewithin 1,000 feet of a school, daycare facility, playground, public orprivate youth center, public swimming pool, or free standing video arcadefacility; in addition, sex offenders whose offense involved a minor may notstep foot within 1,000 feet of any of the above mentioned facilities.La. R.S. 14:91.1, 15:538MichiganA sex offender cannotreside within 1,000 feet of any school safety zone; applies apenalty to persons working, loitering, orresiding within a student safety zone.MCLS 28.733, 28.734, 28.735MississippiProhibits registeredsex offender from residing within 1,500 feet of school or child carefacility.Exempts those with suchresidence before July 1, 2006 and persons who or a minor or ward under aguardianship.Miss. Code Ann. 45-33-25(4)OhioA sex offender cannotreside within 1,000 feet of any school or child-care facility.ORC Ann. 2950.034OklahomaIt is unlawful for aregistered sex offender to reside within a 2,000 feet radius of a school,playground, park, or childcare facility.57 Okl. St. 590SouthDakotaA sex offender cannotreside or loiter withinfeet 500 feetof schools, public parks, playgrounds, or public pools.S.D. Codified Laws 22-24B-22, 22-24B-24,22-24B-27, 22-24B-28TennesseeNo violent sexoffender or sex offender who se victim was a minor can reside within 1,000feet of schools, childcare facilities, public park, playground, recreationcenter, or public athletic field.Tenn. Code Ann. 40-39-211VirginiaProhibits certain sexoffenders from residing within 500 feet of a school or child daycare center.Va. Code Ann. 18.2-370.1-3WashingtonA sex offenderconvicted of a serious offense with a high risk assessment (Levels II andIII) cannot reside within 880 feet of any school.Rev. Code Wash.9.94A.030WestVirginiaA paroled sex offendercannot reside within 1,000 feet of a school or childcare facility.W.Va. Code 62-12-26(b)[1]Ryan Keith, "Illinois Measure WouldMove Some from Sex Offender List," Associated Press, June 24, 2006.[2]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Patty Wetterling, January 8, 2007.[3]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Brandon M.'s mother, November 13, 2006.[4]Email communication from Jameel N. to Human Rights Watch, June 4, 2005.[5]Peter Whoriskey, "Some Curbs on Sex Offenders Called Ineffective, Inhumane," Washington Post, November 22, 2006.[6]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with the father of a minor who wasadjudicated for a sex offense, October 27, 2006.[7]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with an Iowa sheriff who requested anonymity, August15, 2006.[8]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Alison Feigh, child safetyspecialist, Jacob Wetterling Foundation, September 8, 2006.[9]The Gallup Poll, "SexOffenders," video report, June9, 2005, http://www.galluppoll.com/videoArchive/?ci=16708&pg=(accessed March 19, 2007).The poll found that 66 percent of people surveyed were "very concerned" aboutsex offenders, compared to 52 percent who were concerned about violent crimeand 36 percent who were concerned about terrorism.[10]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Naomi L., October 12, 2006.[11]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Dr. Jill Levenson, professor ofHuman Services at LynnUniversity and nationalexpert on sex offender management, October 31, 2006.[12]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Patty Wetterling, January 8, 2007.[13]Shannan Catalano, US Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), "2005 National CrimeVictimization Survey," September 2006, http://www.rainn.org/docs/statistics/ncvs_2005.pdf(accessed July 13, 2007).[14]Patricia Tjaden and Nancy Thoennes, National Institute of Justice (NIJ),"Extent, Nature, and Consequences of Rape Victimization: Findings from theNational Violence against Women Survey," January 2006, http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/210346.pdf(accessed July 13, 2007).[15]Howard Snyder, BJS, "Sexual Assault of Young Children as Reported to LawEnforcement," July 2000, http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/saycrle.pdf(accessed July 13, 2007), p. 2.The data reflect reports tolaw enforcement agencies in 12 states gathered between 1991 and 1996.[16] DavidFinkelhor and Lisa Jones, US Department of Justice Office of Juvenile Justiceand Delinquency Prevention (OJJDP), "Explanations for the Decline in ChildSexual Abuse Cases," Juvenile JusticeBulletin (January 2004),http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/ojjdp/199298.pdf(accessedDecember 4, 2006).[17]Snyder, BJS, "Sexual Assault of Young Children," p. 11.[18]Catalano, BJS, "2005 Crime Survey."[19] AnnaSalter, Transforming Trauma: A Guide toUnderstanding and Treating Adult Survivors of Child Sexual Abuse (New York:Sage Publications, 1995).[20] DavidFinkelhor, "Sexually Abused Children in a National Survey of Parents:Methodological Issues," Child Abuse andNeglect: The International Journal, vol. 21 (1997), pp. 1-9.[21] Catalano, BJS, "2005 Crime Survey."[22] Ibid.[23]Ibid.[24]Ibid.[25]Snyder,BJS, "Sexual Assault of Young Children," p. 11.[26] Ibid.[27]Catalano, BJS, "2005 Crime Survey."[28]Finkelhor and Jones, OJJDP, "Explanations for the Decline."[29] SafeHorizon, "After Sexual Assault: A Recovery Guide for Survivors," http://www.safehorizon.org/files/After_Sexual_Assault_Bklt.pdf(accessed January 8, 2007).[30]American Psychological Association, "Understanding Child Sexual Abuse: Education,Prevention, and Recovery," 2001,http://www.apa.org/releases/sexabuse/effects.html(accessed July 13, 2007).[31]Catalano, BJS, "2005 Crime Survey."[32]Snyder,BJS, "Sexual Assault of Young Children."[33] Ibid.[34] HowardSnyder and Melissa Sickmund, OJJDP, "Juvenile Offenders and Victims: 2006National Report," http://www.ojjdp.ncjrs.org/ojstatbb/nr2006/downloads/NR2006.pdf(accessed November 28, 2006), p. 44. Of the 1.3 million children or youth underthe age of 18 reported missing from home in 2005, the vast majority of non-familyabductions were teens-not younger children-and most were kidnapped by someonethey knew somewhat, not by strangers or slight acquaintances.[35]Ibid.[36]Lawrence Greenfeld, BJS, "Sex Offenses and Offenders: An Analysis of Data on Rape and SexualAssault," February 1997, http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/soo.pdf (accessedJuly 16, 2007).[37] CongressionalRecord, vol. 140, statement of then-Representative Jennifer Dunn (R-WA) insupport of Megan's Law ("[t]he rate of recidivism for these crimes isastronomical because these people are compulsive.").[38]Congressional Record, vol. 142, statement of Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson(R-TX) ("we know that more than 40 percent of convicted sex offenders willrepeat their crimes"); Congressional Record, vol. 139, statement of RepresentativeJim Ramstad (R-MN) ("[a] study of imprisoned child sex offenders found that 74percent had a previous conviction for another child sex offense."). A few minutesafter the statement of Representative Ramstad, then-Representative Fishrepeated the same recidivism rate of 74 percent. Congressional Record, vol.151, statement of then-Representative Mark Foley (R-FL) ("Thereis a ninety percent likelihood of recidivism for sexual crimes againstchildren. Ninety percent. That is the standard. That is their record.That is the likelihood. Ninety percent.").[39]It is also important to note that studies on recidivism rates vary depending onhow recidivism is defined. Some studies look at arrest rates, others at convictionrates, and some include informal reports to child protection agencies andself-reports. The length of the follow-up period may vary as well. As the follow-upperiod increases, so does the cumulative number of recidivists. Furthercomplicating matters is that many sex offenses are never reported to thepolice.[40]Gene Abel et al., "Self-Reported Sex Crimes of Non-Incarcerated Paraphiliacs," Journal of Interpersonal Violence(1987), pp. 3-25.[41]Greenfeld,BJS, "SexOffenses and Offenders."[42]Ibid.[43] Ibid.[44]Andrew Harris andR. Karl Hanson, Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness Canada, "Sex OffenderRecidivism: A Simple Question," 2004,http://ww2.psepc-sppcc.gc.ca/publications/corrections/pdf/200403-2_e.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007), pp. 3-6. The study used data from 10 follow-upstudies of adult male sexual offenders (a combined sample of 4,724) from Canada, the UnitedKingdom, and the United States. Ibid. p. ii.[45]Ibid., p. 7.[46] Ibid.[47]Ibid., p. 23.[48]Ibid.[49]State of Ohio Department of Rehabilitation andCorrection, "Ten Year Recidivism Follow-up of 1989 Sex Offender Releases,"April 2001, www.drc.state.oh.us/web/Reports/Ten_Year_Recidivism.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007), p. i.[50]Ibid.[51]Based on an analysis of 12,863 releases between 1985and 2002 of inmates whose most serious conviction offense had been rape,sodomy, sexual abuse or other sex crimes. Leslie Kellam, State of New York Departmentof Correctional Services, "2001 Releases: Three-Year Post Release Follow-Up,"2002, http://theparson.net/so/2001_Releases_Three_Year_Post_Release_Follow_Up_NY.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007), pp. 17-18.[52]Based on an analysis of 556 sex offenders released in 1986 and followed through1995. State of New York Department of Correctional Services, "Profile andFollow-up of Sex Offenders Released in 1986," 1995, http://theparson.net/so/Profile_and_follow_up_of_sex_offenders_released_in_1986.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007), p. 20.[53]Patrick Langan, BJS, "Recidivism of Prisoners Released in 1994," June 2002, http://www.ojp.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/rpr94.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007), p. 1.[54]Ibid.[55]Ibid., p. 9.[56]Allen Beck, BJS, "Recidivism of Prisoners Released in 1983," 1997, http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/rpr83.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007), p. 6.[57] Langan, BJS, "Recidivism 1994,"p. 10. Someone convicted of a sexual assault other than rape was 5.9 times morelikely than someone convicted of a non-sexual crime of being rearrested forsexual assault. Ibid.[58]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Allen Beck, chief, BJS CorrectionsStatistics Program, April 30, 2007.[59]Ibid.[60]Langan, BJS, "Recidivism 1994," p. 10.[61]Ibid., p. 9.[62] Ibid.[63]For example, in "Recidivism 1994," as much astwo-thirds of all recidivism occurred in the first year after release.Recidivism rates were also highest in thefirst year for prisoners released in 1983 and tracked for three years. Beck,BJS, "Recidivism 1983," p. 1.[64]2.1percent out of the total of 5.3 percent who were rearrested by the end of yearthree.Patrick Langan, Erica Schmitt, and Matthew DuRose, BJS, "Recidivismof Sex Offenders Released from Prison in 1994," November 2003, http://www.ojp.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/rsorp94.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007), p. 25.[65]Ibid.[66]Harris andHanson, "Sex Offender Recidivism: A Simple Question," 2004, p. 1.[67] Ibid.[68]Ibid., p. 7.[69]Ibid.[70]Human RightsWatch interview with a treatment provider, June 26, 2007.[71]The following offenses are defined as "sexually violent": first degree rape,second degree rape, first degree sexual offense, second degree sexual offense,attempted rape or sexual offense, intercourse and sexual offense with certainvictims, statutory rape or sexual offense of a person who is 13, 14, or 15years old where the defendant is at least six years older, subjecting ormaintaining a person for sexual servitude, incest between near relatives,employing or permitting minor to assist in offenses against public morality anddecency, felonious indecent exposure, first degree sexual exploitation of aminor, second degree sexual exploitation of a minor, third degree sexualexploitation of a minor, promoting prostitution of a minor, participating inthe prostitution of a minor, taking indecent liberties with children, and solicitationof child by computer to commit an unlawful sex act. The term also includes thefollowing: a solicitation or conspiracy to commit any of these offenses; and aidingand abetting any of these offenses. N.C. Gen. Stat. 14-208.6 (2006).[72]"Offense against a minor" means any of the following offenses if theoffense is committed against a minor, and the person committing the offense isnot the minor's parent: kidnapping, abduction of children, and feloniousrestraint. The term also includes the following if the person convicted of thefollowing is not the minor's parent: a solicitation or conspiracy to commit anyof these offenses; and aiding and abetting any of these offenses. N.C. Gen.Stat. 14-208.6 (2006).[73]Under N.C. Gen. Stat. 14-208.6 (2006), the following persons must register: (a)Those convicted of an offense against a minor, a sexually violent offense, oran attempt to commit any of those offenses, unless the conviction is for aidingand abetting (a conviction for aiding and abetting requires reporting only upona court determination); (b) Those convicted in another state of an offenserequiring registration under the laws of that state; (c) Those convicted inanother state or in a federal jurisdiction of an offense that is substantiallysimilar to an offense against a minor or a sexually violent offense under NorthCarolina law; (d) Those convicted of secretly peeping into a room occupied byanother person if: (i) using a device to create a photographic image of anotherperson in that room for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desireof any person; (ii) the person secretly or surreptitiously uses any device tocreate a photographic image of another person underneath or through theclothing being worn by that other person for the purpose of viewing the bodyof, or the undergarments worn by, that other person without their consent;(iii) the person for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire ofany person, secretly or surreptitiously uses or installs in a room any devicethat can be used to create a photographic image with the intent to capture theimage of another without their consent; (iv) the person knowingly possesses aphotographic image that the person knows, or has reason to believe, wasobtained in violation of the sex offender statute; or (v) the person whodisseminates or allows to be disseminated images that the person knows, orshould have known, were obtained as a result of the violation of the sex offenderstatute.[74]Under N.C. Gen. Stat. 14-208.6A (2006), there is a 10-year registrationrequirement for persons convicted of certain offenses against minors orsexually violent offenses. Lifetime registration is required for recidivists,persons who commit aggravated offenses, and sexually violent predators.[75]N.C. Gen. Stat. 14-208.12 (2006).[76]N.C. Gen. Stat. 14-208.23 (2006). For any registrant, the time period requiredfor registration can only be terminated if conviction was set aside, vacated,reversed, or pardoned. N.C. Gen. Stat. 14-208.6C (2006).[77]N.C. Gen. Stat 14-202.1 (2006)(a). A person is guilty of taking indecentliberties with children if, being 16 years of age or more and at least fiveyears older than the child in question, he either: (1) Willfully takes orattempts to take any immoral, improper, or indecent liberties with any child ofeither sex under the age of 16 years for the purpose of arousing or gratifyingsexual desire; or (2) Willfully commits or attempts to commit any lewd or lasciviousact upon or with the body or any part or member of the body of any child ofeither sex under the age of 16 years.[78]State v. Turman, 52 N.C. App. 376,278 S.E.2d 574 (1981) (holding that touching of the child by the defendant isnot necessary in order to constitute an indecent liberty under this statute).[79]N.C. Gen. Stat. 14-27.2-14.27.3 (2006).[80]Center for Sex Offender Management (CSOM), "Understanding Treatment for Adultsand Juveniles Who Have Committed Sex Offenses," November 2006, http://www.csom.org/pubs/treatment_brief.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007), p. 11.[81]Robert Prentky, Raymond Knight, and Austin Lee, US Department of JusticeNational Institute of Justice (NIJ), "Child Sexual Molestation: ResearchIssues," June 1997, http://www.ncjrs.gov/txtfiles/163390.txt (accessed August24, 2007), p. v.[82]CSOM, "Understanding Treatment," pp. 5-9.[83] CSOM, "Myths and Facts about SexOffenders," August 2000, http://www.csom.org/pubs/mythsfacts.html (accessedAugust 24, 2007). ("Offense specific treatment modalities generally involvegroup and/or individual therapy focused on victimization awareness and empathytraining, cognitive restructuring, learning about the sexual abuse cycle,relapse prevention planning, anger management and assertiveness training,social and interpersonal skills development, and changing deviant sexualarousal patterns.").[84]CSOM, "Community Supervision of the Sex Offender: An Overview of Current andPromising Practices," January 2000, http://www.csom.org/pubs/supervision2.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007).[85] L.Furby, M. Weinrott, and L. Blackshaw, "Sex Offender Recidivism: A Review," Psychological Bulletin, vol. 105(1)(1989), pp. 3-30.[86]For examples of current public and professional doubt regarding the efficacy oftreatment of sex offenders, see Abby Goodnough and Monica Davey, "For SexOffenders, A Dispute Over Therapy's Benefits," New York Times, March 6, 2007.[87] The rateof recidivism declined from 17 percent to 10 percent after approximately fiveyears of follow up. R.Karl Hanson et al., "First Report of the Collaborative Outcome DataProject on the Effectiveness of Treatment for Sex Offenders," Sexual Abuse: A Journal of Research andTreatment, vol. 14(2) (2004), pp. 169-194.[88] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Paul G., August 10, 2006.[89]RichardTewksbury, "Sex Offender Registries as a Tool for Public Safety: Views fromRegistered Offenders," WesternCriminology Review, vol. 7(1) (2006), pp. 1-8.[90] Human Rights Watch interview withJames T., who was convicted of rape in Idaho,June 30, 2006.[91]California'swas established in 1947. California Research Bureau (CRB), "The Impact ofResidency Restrictions on Sex Offenders and Correctional Management Practices:A Literature Review," August 2006, www.library.ca.gov/html/stateseg2a.cfm(accessed January 21, 2007). WashingtonState established itspolice registry in 1990. WashingtonInstitute for Public Policy, "Sex Offender Sentencing in WashingtonState:Has Community Notification Reduced Recidivism?" December 2005, http://www.wsipp.wa.gov/rptfiles/05-12-1202.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007). The other states-except for Washington-created sex offender registriesin the 1950s and 60s. Elizabeth Pearson, BJS, presentation at the National Conference onSex Offender Registries,"Status and Latest Development in Sex Offender Registration and Notification,"April 1998, http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/ascii/ncsor.txt (accessed August24, 2007). Washingtoncreated their registry in 1990. Ibid.[92] JacobWetterling Crimes Against Children and Sexually Violent Offender RegistrationAct, Pub. L. 103-322, Title XVII, Subtitle A, 170101, Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat.2038, 42 USC. 14071. In October 1989,while riding his bike with his brother and a friend in St. Joseph, MN,11-year-old Jacob Wetterling was abducted by an unknown male assailant. Fewsuspects were identified; to date, no arrest has been made in the case, andJacob remains missing. Jacob's parents became advocates for more effective lawsto aid in the recovery of missing children and the prevention of sexualviolence against children. For more information on Jacob's abduction, see Jacob WetterlingFoundation, http://www.jwf.org/ReadArticle.asp?articleId=78(accessed September 8, 2006).[93]If states do not comply with federal registration and community notificationlaws, they lose 10 percent of their appropriation from the federal Edward ByrneJustice Assistance Grant Program, which provides funding for state and localcrime prevention and control programs. Jacob Wetterling Crimes Against Children andSexually Violent Offender Registration Act, Pub. L. 103-322, Title XVII,Subtitle A, 170101, Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 2038, 42 USC. 14071.[94] Thosedetermined by a court to be "sexually violent predators" were required toregister under the Wetterling Act until they were found by the state (usingguidelines set forth by the Act) to be no longer dangerous.[95] CSOM,"Sex Offender Registration Requirements," April 2001.[96]Department of Justice Office of the Attorney General, "Megan's Law; FinalGuidelines for the Jacob Wetterling Crimes Against Children and SexuallyViolent Offender Registration Act, as Amended," December 17, 1998, http://pub.bna.com/cl/19990120/2196.htm(accessed August 24, 2007). An aggravated sexual act is defined as "(1)engaging in sexual acts involving penetration with victims of any age throughthe use of force or the threat of serious violence; and (2) engaging in sexualacts involving penetration with victims below the age of 12."[97]Ibid. Megan's Law is most commonly associated, however, with its communitynotification provisions, discussed below.[98]The act is named after a six-year-old boy who was abducted and murdered in1981. Adam'ssevered head was found in a canal about 100 miles from his family home. Therest of his remains have never been found, nor has anyone been convicted of hismurder. His father, John Walsh, is a prominent national victims' rightsadvocate and the host of the television show America's Most Wanted. "About JohnWalsh," http://www.amw.com/about_amw/John_Walsh.cfm(accessed January 14, 2007).[99]Adam Walsh Act, Title I, Sec. 111(5)(A)(i).[100] Ibid.,Sec. 111(5)(C).[101]Ibid.,Sec. 111. Tier III registrants are those who committed a sex crime punishableby more than one year in prison and comparable or more severe than aggravatedsexual abuse, abusive sexual contact with a child under 13, kidnapping of achild by someone other than the guardian, anysex crime occurring after the offender was a Tier II offender.Ibid., Sec. 111(4). Tier II registrants are "those who are not a Tier IIIoffender" and whose offense is against a minor, is punishable by imprisonmentof more than one year, and is comparable or more severe to sex trafficking,coercion and enticement, transportation with intent to engage in criminalsexual activity, abusive sexual contact, involves the use of a minor in asexual performance, solicitation of a minor to practice prostitution,production or distribution of child pornography, or if the sex offense occursafter the offender becomes a Tier I sex offender. Ibid. Sec. 111(3). A Tier Isex offender is defined as "a sex offender other than a Tier II or Tier III sexoffender." Ibid. Sec. 111(2).[102]Ibid. Sec. 113(a).[103]Ibid. Sec. 141. Failure to register is also a deportable offense for non-citizens.[104] ThePam Lyncher Sexual Offender Tracking and Identification Act of 1996, 42 USC.Sec. 14072. Pam Lyncher was a victim of sexual assault and the founder ofJustice for All, a victims' rights group. She died with her two daughters whenTWA Flight 800 crashed in New Yorkin July1996. Justice for All, "InMemory," http://www.jfa.net/memory.html(accessed September 8, 2006). The FBI maintains the registry. 42 USC. sec.14072.[105]DruSjodin National Sex Offender Public Website, http://www.nspor.gov(accessed March 16, 2007).[106] Ibid.[107] Emailcommunication from Trent B. to Human Rights Watch, January 11, 2007.[108]Alabama, Ala.Code 13A-200(b); Michigan, Mich.Comp. Laws 28.722 & 750.455; Oregon,Or. Rev. Stat. 181.594, 595; Tennessee, Tenn. Code Ann 40-39-202, 203; WestVirginia, W. Va.Code 15-12-2, 61-8-6, 61-8-7. These provisions are distinct fromprostitution-related offenses with children. At least 39 states require personsto register as sex offenders for prostitute-related offenses against children.[109]Arizona, Ariz. Rev. Stat. 13-3821 (if theindividual has more than one previous conviction for public urination-two ifexposed to a person under 15; three if exposed to a person over 15);California, Cal. Penal Code 314(1)-(2), 290; Connecticut, Conn. Gen. Stat.53a-186, 54-250, 54-251 (if the victim was under 18); Georgia, O.C.G.A.42-1-12, 16-6-8 (if done in view of a minor); Idaho, Idaho Code Ann. 18-4116,8306, 8304; Kentucky, Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann. 510.148, 17.520, 500, 510.150;Massachusetts, Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 272 16, ALM GL ch. 6 178G, 178C; Michigan,Mich. Comp. Laws 167(1)(f), 28.722, 723; New Hampshire, N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann.651-B:1, RSA 651-B:2, 645:1(II), (III); Oklahoma, 57 Okl.St. 582.21, 1021; South Carolina, S.C. Code Ann. 23-3-430; Utah, Utah Code Ann.77-27-21.5, 76-9-702.5; Vermont, Vt. Stat. Ann. Tit. 13,2601, 5407, 5401.[110]Alabama, Ala. Code 13A-6-63, 13A-11-200; Alaska, Alaska Stat. S11.41.434, 12.63.010, 100; Arizona,A.R.S. 13-1405, 3821; Arkansas, Ark. Code Ann 12-12-903, 905, 5-14-110;Colorado, Colo. Rev. Stat. 16-22-103,18-3-402, 411; Connecticut, Conn. Gen. Stat.54-250,54-251,53a-70; Florida, Fla. Stat. Ann. 775.21,794.011;Indiana, Burns Ind. Code Ann11-8-8-7,11-8-8-5; Louisiana,La. R.S. 15:542, 15: 541, 14:92(A)(7); Maine,34-A M.R.S.11222, 34-A M.R.S.11203, 17-A M.R.S.254;Maryland, Md. Criminal Procedure Code Ann.11-704, 11-701,3-308; Massachusetts, ALM GL ch. 6,178C, 178D,ALM GL ch. 272,35A; Michigan, MCLS28.723, 28.722,750.520e; Minnesota, Minn. Stat.243.166, Subd.1b(a)(1)(iii), 609.345 (2006); Missouri,589.400 R.S.Mo.,566.032 R.S.Mo.; New Hampshire, N.H. Rev.Stat. Ann. 651-B:1, RSA 651-B:2, RSA 632-A:2;New Jersey, N.J. Stat. Ann. 2c 14-2,2C:7-2, 2C:14-3b;North Carolina, N.C. Gen. Stat.14-208.7, 14-208.6, 14-27.7A;North Dakota, N.D. Cent. Code12.1-32-15, 12.1-20-07;Oklahoma, 57Okl. St.582, 21 Okl. St.1123;Rhode Island, R.I. Gen. Laws11-37.1-3, 11-37.1-2;South Carolina, S.C. Code Ann.23-3-430,16-3-655;South Dakota, S.D. Codified Laws22-24B-2, 22-24B-1, 22-22-7;Tennessee, Tenn. Code Ann.40-39-202, 40-39-203, 39-13-506;Texas, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 62.002, 62.001, Tex. Penal Code 21.11; Utah,Utah Code Ann.77-27-21.5,76-5-401, 76-5-401.2; Washington, Rev.CodeWash.(ARCW)9A.44.130,9A.44.096; WestVirginia, W.Va.Code15-12-2,61-8B-9; Wisconsin, Wis. Stat. 301.45,948.02 (2006).[111]Alabama: Code of Ala.13A-11-200, 13A-6-68; Arizona: A.R.S.13-3821,13-1402; Arkansas: A.C.A.12-12-905,12-12-903,5-14-112; California: CalPen Code290,314; Colorado: C.R.S. 16-22-103 (2006), 18-3-411 (2006),18-7-302 (2006);Connecticut: Conn. Gen. Stat.54-250, 54-251, 53a-186; Idaho:Idaho Code18-8304, 18-4116 ;Illinois: 730 ILCS 150/3, 730 ILCS 150/2, 720ILCS 5/11-9; Iowa: Iowa Code692A.2, 692A.1, 709.9 (2006); Kansas: K.S.A.22-4904, 22-4902, 21-3508 (2006); Kentucky: KRS 17.510, 17.500, 510.148,510.150 (2006); Louisiana: La. R.S. 15:542, 15:541, 14:81;Massachusetts: ALM GL ch. 6,178E, 178C, ALM GL ch. 272,16; Michigan: MCLS28.723, 28.722, 750.335a; Minnesota: Minn. Stat.243.166,617.23 (2006); Montana: Mont. Code Anno.46-23-504, 46-23-502, 45-5-504(2005); Nevada: Nev. Rev. Stat. Ann.179D.450, 179D.400, 179D.410, 201.220; New Mexico:N.M. Stat. Ann.29-11A-4, 29-11A-3, 30-9-14.3; North Dakota: N.D. Cent. Code12.1-32-15,12.1-20-12.1; South Carolina: S.C. Code Ann.23-3-430, 16-15-130 (2006); South Dakota: S.D.Codified Laws22-24B-2, 22-24B-1, 22-24-1.2; Tennessee:Tenn. Code Ann.40-39-203, 40-39-202,39-13-511; Texas: Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 62.051, 62.001, Tex. Penal Code21.08; Vermont:13 V.S.A.5407, 5401, 2601; West Virginia: W.Va. Code15-12-2,61-8-9.[112]Alaska: Alaska Stat.12.63.100,11.41.460 (to anyone under 16 AND theoffender has a prior conviction for the offense); Delaware: 11 Del. C.4120,4121(a)(4), 765 (exposed to person under 16); Florida: Fla. Stat.775.21,800.04 (exposed to anyone under 16 and must be in a lewd or lascivious manner);Georgia: O.C.G.A.42-1-12, 16-6-8; Missouri:589.400 R.S.Mo.,566.083R.S.Mo. (exposure to a child less than 14 years old); NorthCarolina: N.C. Gen. Stat.14-208.7, 14-208.6, 14-190.9 (exposureby anyone over 18 to anyone under 16; must be for the purpose of sexualarousal/gratification); Utah:Utah Code Ann.77-27-21.5, 76-9-702.5 (exposure to a child under age 14).[113] CurtisKillman, "Sex Offenders Struggle to Find Jobs," Tulsa World, July 10, 2005.[114] Ibid. Thepaper did not report the name of the youth.[115]Ibid.[116]Ibid.[117] Emailcommunication from Jacob V. to Human Rights Watch, March 30, 2005.[118] The Adam Walsh Act, Sec.115.[119]TierIII registrants adjudicated as juveniles, however, may petition to reduce theirtime on the registry by maintaining a clean record for a specified amount oftime.Ibid. Sec. 115(b)(1)-(3).[120]An estimated 4 percent of such offenders will recidivate after 20 yearsoffense-free. Harris and Hansen, "Sex offender Recidivism: A Simple Question," p. 7.[121]AL St 15-20-33;S.C. Code Ann. 23-3-460.[122] In these states,a registrant can only be taken off the sex offender registry if they petition,unless the reason for registration no longer exists (i.e. due to convictionreversal, a pardon, ect). California (Cal Pen Code290.5) (no relief for someoffenses), Colorado (C.R.S. 16-22-113), Florida (Fla. Stat.943.0435(11)),Georgia (O.C.G.A.42-1-12(g)) (offender has to have been sentenced to lessthan the mandatory minimum due to certain mitigating factors in order to beeligible for petition for relief from registration), Hawaii (HRS846E-10),Idaho (Idaho Code18-8310) (those convicted of aggravated offenses or whohave been designated violent sexual predators may not petition for relief fromregistration), Mississippi (Miss. Code Ann.45-33-47) (no relief for someoffenses), Missouri ( 589.400(3) R.S.Mo.) (no relief for some offenses),Montana (Mont. Code Anno.46-23-506(3)) (no relief for some offenses), Nevada(Nev. Rev. Stat. Ann.179D.270(2)) (no relief for some offenders), New Jersey(N.J. Stat.2C:7-2(f)) (no relief for some offenders), Oregon (ORS181.600)(no relief for some offenders), South Dakota (S.D. Codified Laws22-24B-19)(no relief for some offenses), Tennessee (Tenn. Code Ann.40-39-207) (norelief for some offenders), Virginia (Va. Code Ann.9.1-909) (relief onlyavailable to those who, due to a physical condition, are incapable ofreoffending and reregistering).[123]Alaska, Alaska Stat.12.63.020; Arizona, A.R.S. 13-3821; Arkansas , A.C.A. 12-12-919; Connecticut,Conn. Gen. Stat. 54-251-254; Delaware, 11 Del. C. 4121; Illinois, 730 ILCS 150/7; Indiana, Burns Ind. CodeAnn. 11-8-8-19; Iowa, IowaCode692A.2; Kansas, K.S.A. 22-4906; Kentucky, KRS17.520; Louisiana, La.R.S.15:542.1; Maine, 34-AM.R.S. 11225-A, 34-A M.R.S. 11203; Maryland, Md. Criminal Procedure Code Ann.11-707; Massachusetts, ALM GL ch.6, 178G; Michigan, MCLS 28.728c, 28.728d;Minnesota, Minn. Stat. 243.166; Nebraska, R.R.S. Neb. 29-4005; New Hampshire,RSA 651-B:6; New Mexico, N.M. Stat. Ann. 29-11A-4(L); New York, NY CLS Correc168-h; North Carolina, N.C. Gen Stat. 14-208.23; North Dakota, N.D. Cent.Code 12.1-32-15(8); Ohio, ORC Ann.2950.07(B); Oklahoma,57 Okl. St. 583(B)(4); Pennsylvania,42 Pa.C.S. 9795.1; Rhode Island, R.I. Gen.Laws 11-37.1-4; Texas, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. Art. 62.101; Utah, Utah Code Ann.77-27-21.5(10); Vermont, 13 V.S.A.5407(e)-(f); Washington, Rev. Code Wash.(ARCW) 9A.44.140; West Virginia, W.Va. Code 15-12-4; Wisconsin,Wis. Stat. 301.45(5); Wyoming,Wyo. Stat.7-19-304.[124] Ibid.[125]Massachusetts, ALM GL ch.6, 178G; Michigan,MCLS 28.728c; New York, NYCLS Correc 168-0; Ohio, ORC Ann. 2950.07(E); Texas, Tex. Code Crim.Proc art. 62.404; Wyoming, Wyo. Stat. 7-19-304(d).[126] Emailcommunication from Chris F. to Human Rights Watch, September 21, 2006.[127]Anthony and Carolyn Petrosino, "The Public Safety Potential of Megan's Law in Massachusetts: AnAssessment from a Sample of Criminal Sexual Psychopaths," Crime and Delinquency, vol. 45 (1999), pp. 140-158.[128]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with a Minnesota law enforcement official who requestedanonymity, January 26, 2006.[129]The exact number is 602,245. NationalCenter for Missing and Exploited Children (NCMEC), "RegisteredSex Offenders in the UnitedStates," http://www.missingkids.com/en_US/documents/sex-offender-map.pdf(accessed March 16, 2007).[130]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with a law enforcement officer whorequested anonymity, January 25, 2006.[131] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with two probation supervisors from Grand Rapids, MIwho requested anonymity, December 6, 2006.[132] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with a probation officer in Arizona who requested anonymity, August 11,2006.[133] "California Loses Trackof 33,000 Sex Offenders: Overworked Police Unable to Enforce Megan's Law," AssociatedPress, January 8, 2003.[134]Ibid.[135]Melanie Payne and Jeff Cull, "Sex Offender Site Criticized Half on List AreDead, Jailed or Missing," News-Press(Florida),December 18, 2005.[136]CSOM, "An Overview of Sex OffenderManagement," July 2002, http://www.csom.org/pubs/csom_bro.pdf (accessed August24, 2007), p. 5.[137]Megan Nicole Kanka Foundation, "Statement of Maureen Kanka," http://www.megannicolekankafoundation.org(accessed January 14, 2007).[138] President William J. Clinton,"Presidential Radio Address," August 24, 1996, http://www.answers.com/topic/presidential-radio-address-24-august-1996(accessed August 24, 2007).[139]Dru Sjodin National Sex Offender Public Website, http://www.nspor.gov (accessedMarch 16, 2007).[140]RichardTewksbury and George Higgins, "What Can Be Learned from an Online Sex OffenderRegistry Site?" Journal of CommunityCorrections, vol. 14(3) (2005), pp. 9-11, 15-16.[141]Smith v. Doe, 123 S.Ct. at 1608, (Souter, J., concurring). ("Although[community notification] may have a lasting and painful impact on the convictedsex offender, these consequences flow not from the Act's registration anddissemination provisions, but from the fact of conviction, already a matter ofpublic record.").[142] John J. Goldman, "Sex OffenderGuilty of Killing Megan Kanka," Los Angeles Times, May 31, 1997.[143] Thomas Zambito, "New HearingsWill Determine if Wyckoff Rapist Can Be Freed,"Record (Bergen County, N.J.),August 4, 1994.[144] StevenW. Dill, "Pink Ribbons Symbolize Drive for Megan's Law," Record (BergenCounty,NJ), Aug. 3, 1994; also, TheMegan Kanka Foundation, http://www.megankankafoundation.org(accessed October 8, 2006).[145] CongressionalRecord, vol. 142, statement of Representative Melvin Watt (D-NC), September 25,1996. The final vote in the House was 418-0. Congressional Record vol. 142,H10,354, 1996. The Senate passed Megan's Law by voice vote with unanimousconsent.[146]USDepartment of Justice guidelines give states discretion as to what kind ofinformation is relevant to protect the public, who among the public should benotified, and how such notification should be done. DOJ Guidelines,64 Fed. Reg. 572, 582 (Jan 5, 1999).[147] CongressionalRecord, vol. 142. The final vote in the House was 418-0. The Senate passedMegan's Law by voice vote with unanimous consent.[148]Transcript, FloridaState House of Representatives, "Debate and Vote on H.R.1665," April 2, 1993; Transcript, FloridaState Senate, "Debate andVote on S. 56, Law.6," May 1, 1995.[149] "TheGeneral Assembly 1998 Session," Virginian-Pilot(Norfolk, VA), Mar. 4, 1998; David Heckelman, "House OKs Notice Law CoveringSex Offenders," Chicago Daily LawBulletin, Nov. 3, 1995; David Heckelman, "Senate OKs Bill Linking CrimeMeasures, Storage-Tank Repairs," ChicagoDaily Law Bulletin, Nov. 16, 1995; Debera Carlton Harrell, "Sex-OffenderNotification Guidelines Set; Police Can Defer in Some Cases," Seattle Post-Intelligencer, May 30,1990.[150] DanielM. Filler, "Making the Case for Megan's Law: A Study in Legislative Rhetoric," Indiana Law Journal, vol. 76 (2001).[151]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Susan K., November 2, 2006.[152] Emailcommunication from Bob K. to Human Rights Watch, September 21, 2006.[153]Jennifer Kowalewski, "Madison Residents Fight Sex Offenders with Knowledge," News Journal (Mansfield, OH),June 14, 2005 (notification to neighbors within 1,200 feet of the registrant'saddress).[154] TaniaVeldemor, "Boca Putting Sex Offenders on Television Channel 20," Palm Beach Post, June 15, 2005.[155] Parentsfor Megan's Law (PFML) is a "community andvictim's rights organization dedicated to the prevention and treatment ofsexual abuse through the provision of education, advocacy, counseling, victimsservices policy and legislative support services." Parents for Megan's Law, "MissionStatement," http://www.parentsformeganslaw.com/html/about.lassosee(accessed March 16, 2007). Human Rights Watch signed up to receive the Parents for Megan's Lawemail alerts. In the period between September 5, 2006 and January 12, 2007,Human Rights Watch received 26 email alerts from Parents for Megan's Law,including the information for 146 registrants recently released into either Suffolk or Long Islandcounties.[156]N.J.Stat. 2C:7-8(c).[157] Emailcommunication from Daniel Y. to Human Rights Watch, August 11, 2005.[158] SharonE. Crawford, "Judge Orders Sex Offender to Post Signs on Property," Macon Telegraph (GA), August 25, 2004; State v. Jordan, 716 So.2d 36 (1998). InJordan,the court ruled that a sex offender could not be forced as a condition ofparole to place a sign on his lawn that identified him as a sex offender, buthe could be so required under Louisiana'ssex offender registration statute. The statute specifies that a sentencingcourt can require any kind of community notification it deems appropriate,"including but not limited to signs, handbills, bumper stickers, or clothinglabeled to that effect." LA.R.S. 15:542(B)(3).[159] DaveWedge, "IMAPERV Plate Proposed: Advocates: Pink would Warn Kids to Stay Away," Boston Herald, June 10, 2005; "LawmakerWants Pink Plates Put on Cars of Sex Offenders," Columbus Dispatch, May 3, 2005. Afteropposition from Avon and breast cancerawareness organizations-whose signature color is pink, one state changed theproposed license plate color to fluorescent green. "Ohio Lawmakers Propose Fluorescent GreenLicense Plates for Convicted Sex Predators," Associated Press, March 1, 2007.[160]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Jason D., August 7, 2006.[161]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Marie D., November 13, 2006.[162] Emailcommunication from Heidi O. to Human Rights Watch, July 20, 2005.[163]Connecticut Dep't of Public Safety v. Doe, 123 S.Ct.1160 (2003) ("any stigma or shame that resulted from thepublication of a registrant's information came not from the "public display forridiculebut from the dissemination of accurate [and public] informationabout a criminal record.").[164] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Dave S., November 15, 2006.[165]For example, Indiana'sonline sex offender registry lists the home, work, and school addresses of theregistrants, and has a function that allows someone to map the address. IndianaSheriffs' Sex and Violent Offender Registry, http://www.insor.org/insasoweb (accessedJuly 18, 2007).[166] US Department of Justice, Office of JusticePrograms (OJP), "National Guidelines for Sex Offender Registration andNotification: Proposed Guidelines," May 2007, http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/smart/proposed.htm(accessed August 24, 2007).[167]NewYork State Sex Offender Registry, http://criminaljustice.state.ny.us/nsor(accessed March 19, 2007); Vermont Criminal Information Center Sex OffenderRegistry, http://www.dps.state.vt.us/cjs/s_registry.htm (accessed August 29,2007).[168] For alist of state online databases, see Appendix.[169]See Appendix for details.[170] Ibid.[171] Adam Walsh Act, Sec. 111 (8).However, "if the victim was at least 13 years old and the offender was not morethan 4 years older than the victim" and the conduct was consensual, the conductis not a sex offense for the purposes of this Act, and the offender is notincluded in the registration requirements. Ibid. at 111 (5)(C).[172] Email communication from Emily L.to Human Rights Watch, October 12, 2005.[173] Alabama, Alaska, California,Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Kansas, Louisiana, Maine, Michigan,Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Utah, Virginia,Washington D.C., West Virginia.[174]Arizona,Arkansas, Colorado,Delaware, Illinois,Indiana, Iowa,Kentucky, Wisconsin.[175]Maryland, Minnesota.[176]Alabama, Minnesota,New Jersey, North Dakota,South Dakota.[177]Montana, Nevada, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, North Dakota,Oklahoma.[178]Oregon, RhodeIsland.[179] Thereis no uniform definition of these terms. State online registries list thedefinition of sexually violent or predatory offenders in various ways-and notwo states are the same. For example, Coloradostates that "SVPs [Sexually ViolentPredators] are considered the highest risk sex offenders," while Maryland refers to"Sexually Violent Predators" as "Th[o]se registrants [that] have been convictedof a sexually violent offense. They have also been determined to be at risk ofcommitting a subsequent sexually violent offense." Oregon states, "Sexoffendershave been designated as Predatory who have also been determined topresent the highest risk of re-offending and to require the widest range ofnotification; or found to be a sexually violent dangerous offender."[180]Alaska, Illinois, Missouri.[181] Emailcommunication from Marcus A. to Human Rights Watch, August 25, 2005.[182] SouthDakota Sex Offender Registry, http://sor.sd.gov/disclaimer.asp?page=search&nav=2(accessed August 24, 2007).[183]Stephanie Slater, "Sex Offender Website Lacks Key Details, Lawmaker Says," Palm Beach Post, August 8, 2005.[184] Ibid.[185] Ibid.[186] Ibid. Forreasons that are not clear-given the purpose of sex offender registries-theonline registries in at least three states (Kansas,Montana, and Oklahoma) also include people who were notconvicted of sex crimes. Kansas (K.S.A.22-4904, 4902, 4909); Montana (Mont. Code Anno. 46-23-508, 504, 502); Oklahoma (57 Okl. Stat. 595, 593).[187] MaggieMulvihill et al., "Special Report: State Losing Track of Sex Offenders; MonsterNext Door," BostonHerald, November 5, 2003.[188]Melanie Payne, "Sex Offender Site Criticized," Southwest Florida News-Press, December 18, 2005.[189]Richard Tewksbury, "Validity and Utility of the Kentucky Sex Offender Registry," Federal Probation, vol. 68(3) (2004).[190] 730ILCS 154; Illinois State Police Child Murderer and Violent Offender againstYouth Registry, http://www.isp.state.il.us/cmvo/ (accessed August 24, 2007).[191] Ibid.[192] State RepresentativeJohn Fritchey (D-IL), co-sponsor of a bill to create a separate registry forpeople who commit violent but non-sexual crimes against youth. Ryan Keith, "Illinois May CreateViolent Offender Registry," Associated Press, July 24, 2006.[193]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Lance M., August 24, 2006.[194]Keith, "IllinoisMay Create Violent Offender Registry," Associated Press.[195]Vermont Legislative Council, "Sex Offender Supervision and CommunityNotification Study Committee Report," March 2005, http://www.leg.state.vt.us/reports/05SexOffender/report.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007), p. 11.[196]WashingtonInstitute for Public Policy, "Sex Offender Sentencing in WashingtonState:Has Community Notification Reduced Recidivism?" December 2005, http://www.wsipp.wa.gov/rptfiles/05-12-1202.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007), p. 1.[197] DonnaSchram and Cheryl Milloy, Washington State Institute for Public Policy,"Community Notification: A Study of Sex Offender Characteristics andRecidivism," October 1995, http://www.wsipp.wa.gov/rptfiles/chrrec.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007).[198]Jeffrey Walker et al., Arkansas Crime Information Center, "The Influence of SexOffender Registration and Notification Laws in the United States," 2005, http://www.acic.org/statistics/Research/SO_Report_Final.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007).[199]Richard Zevitz and Mary Ann Farkas, "Sex Offender Community Notification: ItsRole in Recidivism and Offender Reintegration," Criminal Justice Studies, vol. 19(2) (2006), pp. 193-208 (Nostatistically different rate in recidivism among sexually violent offendersover five-year period). Geneva Adkins, David Huff, and Paul Stageberg, IowaDepartment of Human Rights, Division of Criminal and Juvenile Justice Planningand Statistical Analysis Center, "The Iowa Sex Offender Registry andRecidivism," December 2000, http://www.state.ia.us/government/dhr/cjjp/images/pdf/01_pub/SexOffenderReport.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007). (No statistically significant difference amongoffenders subject to community notification compared to those who had notbeen).[200]Sam Wood, "N.J. Study Scrutinizes Megan's Law Effect: The Declining Trend ofSex Attacks against Children Began Several Years before the Measure Started in1994, Researchers Weighing Expense," PhiladelphiaInquirer, May 10, 2007.[201]Ibid.[202]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Matt Shuman, press affairs officer,New Jersey Department of Corrections, May 10, 2007.[203]Schramand Milloy, "Community Notification: Recidivism," pp. 18-19. Forthe offenders subject to community notification, the medium rearrest period was25 months after release from prison; for those not subject to community notification,it was 61 months. Ibid. The authors speculated that notification may have ledthe public to watch registered sex offenders more closely, resulting in earlierdetection of criminal behavior. Ibid. p. 20.[204] A. A.Caputo, "Community Notification Laws for Sex Offenders: Possible Mediators andModerators of Citizen Coping," DissertationAbstracts International, vol. 61(9-B) (2001); A. A. Caputo and S.L.Brodsky, "Citizen Coping with Community Notification of Released SexOffenders," Behavioral Sciences & theLaw, vol. 22(2) (2004), pp. 239-252.[205] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Donna L., September 29, 2006.[206]Richard Zevitz, "Sex Offender Placement and Neighborhood Social Integration:The Making of a Scarlet Letter Community," CriminalJustice Studies, v0l. 17, no. 2 (2004), pp. 203-222, 212.[207]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Alison Feigh, child safety specialist,Jacob Wetterling Foundation, September 8, 2006.[208]Jill Levenson and Leo Cotter,"The Effects of Megan's Law on Sex Offender Reintegration," Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice,vol 21, no. 3 (2005), pp. 298-300. Richard Tewksbury, "Collateral Consequencesof Sex Offender Registration," Journal ofContemporary Criminal Justice, vol. 21, no. 1 (2005), pp. 67-81; HumanRights telephone interview with Dr. Jill Levenson, October 11, 2006; and HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Dr. Robert Prentky, March 20, 2007.[209]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Peter C., North Carolina, January 8, 2007.[210]Vermont SexOffender Registry, http://www.dps.state.vt.us.cjsd/sd_registry.htm(accessed March 21, 2007).[211]Kate Fitch, National Societyfor the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC), "Megan's Law: Does itProtect Children?" November 2006,http://www.nspcc.org.uk/Inform/publications/Downloads/meganslaw2_wdf48102.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007), p. 32.[212]VermontCriminal Information Center Sex Offender Registry, http://www.dps.state.vt.us/cjs/s_registry.htm(accessed August 30, 2007).[213]Ibid.[214]13V.S.A. 5411(c)-(d).[215]Kate Fitch, NSPCC, "Megan'sLaw," p. 33.[216] Minn. Stat. 243.166, 244.052.[217] Minn. Stat. 244.052, Subd. 4(a).[218] Minn. Stat.244.052, Subd. 4(b); Subd. 4(c).[219] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Scott Smith, MA, LCPC, P.G., DoverCounseling, Galesburg, Illinois, August 25, 2005.[220] DougRamsey, "Parents of Young Sex Offenders Say Arizona's Laws Too Strict," KTAR News,October 30, 2006.[221] "Boy,5, Accused of Sex Harassment for Pinching Girl's Butt," NBC4.com, http://www.nbc4.com/news/10577111/detail.html(accessed December 20, 2006). According to the news report, 28 Marylandkindergarten students were suspended during the 2005-06 school year for "sexualoffenses," including sexual assault, sexual harassment, and sexual activity. InNovember 2006 school administrators in Waco,TX gave a four-year-oldpre-kindergarten student a suspension for allegedly rubbing his face in thechest of a female teacher's aide while hugging her. Ibid.[222]Most developed nations and every jurisdiction in the United States maintain two separateinstitutions with responsibility for adjudicating criminal charges-criminalcourts for persons over a stipulated age of majority, and juvenile courts, forminors. Human Rights Watch, For the Restof Their Lives: Life without Parole for Child Offenders in the United States,October 2005,http://hrw.org/reports/2005/us1005/,pp. 14-24; Human Rights Watch, UnitedStatesCustody and Control: Conditions of Confinement in New York's JuvenilePrisons for Girls, September 2006, http://hrw.org/reports/2006/us0906/; FranklinZimring, Confronting Youth Violence (NewYork: Oxford University Press, 1998). In the past 30 years, state laws have cutback juvenile court jurisdiction in some serious cases, and there is an overalltrend toward trying children in adult courts. Juvenile courts recognize thatchildren's crimes should be treated differently than adult crimes. In theory,juvenile courts emphasize rehabilitation over punishment. Ibid.[223]"Kids as Young as 12 are Being Put on the Kansas Sex Offender Website," KAKENews, November 16, 2006.[224]Linda A. Szymanski, NationalCenter for JuvenileJustice (NCJJ), "Megan's Law: Judicial Discretion over Requiring Juveniles toRegister as Sex Offenders," March 2005.[225] The Adam Walsh Act, Sec.118, 113, 111(registration and online notice requirements) and Sec.125 (for withholding offunding).[226]Email communication from Paul L.'s mother to Human Rights Watch, September 14,2006.[227]NationalCenteron Sexual Behavior of Youth, "What Research Shows About Adolescent Offenders,"July 2003, http://www.ncsby.org/pages/publications/What%20Research%20Shows%20About%20Adolescent%20Sex%20Offenders%20060404.pdf (accessed August 24, 2007); andKatrina Baum, BJS, "Juvenile Victimization and Offending, 1993-2003," August2005, http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/jvo03.pdf (accessed August 24, 2007).[228]Howard Snyder, BJS, "Sexual Assault of Young Children as Reported to LawEnforcement: Victim, Incident, and Offender Characteristics," July 2000, http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/saycrle.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007), p. 8.[229]Ibid., pp. 8-10, fig. 7.[230]Glen E. Davis and Harold Leitenberg, "Adolescent Sex Offenders, 101," Psychology Bulletin (1987), pp. 417-419.[231]Ibid.[232]Ibid.[233] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Sharon D., August 18, 2006.[234]Mark Chaffin and Barbara Bonner, "'Don't Shoot, We're Your Children': Have WeGone Too Far in Our Response to Adolescent Sexual Abusers and Children withSexual Behavior Problems?" ChildMaltreatment, vol. 3, no. 4 (1998), pp. 314-316. Holly Smith and Edie Israel,"Sibling Incest: A Study of the Dynamics of 25 Cases," Child Abuse & Neglect, vol. 11, no.1 (1987), pp. 101-8.[235]Associationfor the Treatment of Sexual Abusers (ATSA), "Position Statement: The EffectiveLegal Management of Juvenile Sexual Offenders," adopted by the ATSA ExecutiveBoard, March 11, 2000, www.atsa.com/ppjuvenile.html(accessed December 4, 2006).[236]B. Gordon & C.S. Schroeder, Sexuality:A Developmental Approach to Problems (New York: Plenum Press, 1995).[237] TheolaS. Labbe, "New Approach to Young Offenders: Therapy Addresses Spate of Sex Crimes,"Washington Post, January 9, 2005.[238] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Dr. Robert Longo, a child psychiatristwho specializes in treating child sex offenders, August 1, 2005.[239] D. Leideckeand M. Marbibi, TexasYouth Commission, "Risk Assessment and Recidivism in Juvenile Sex Offenders: AValidation Study of the Static-99," 2000.[240] Ibid.[241]Donna Vandiver, "A Prospective Analysis of Juvenile Male Sex Offenders:Characteristics and Recidivism Rates as Adults," Journal of Interpersonal Violence, vol.21, no.5 (2006), pp.673-688.[242]Franklin Zimring et al., "The Predictive Power of Juvenile Sex Offending:Evidence form the Second Philadelphia Birth Cohort Study," June 2007, pp.13-14.[243]Ibid.[244]Frank Zimring et al., "Juvenile and Adult Sex Offending in Racine, Wisconsin:Does Early Sex Offending Predict Later Sex Offending in Youth and YouthAdulthood?" January 23, 2007.[245]Ibid., p. 23.[246]Zimring et al., "The Predictive Power," pp. 13-14.[247]Zimring et al., Alex Piquero, "Juvenile and Adult Sex Offending in Racine, Wisconsin,"January 23, 2007.[248]Ibid., p. 14.[249] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Nina T., November 20, 2006.[250] RobertLongo and D.S. Prescott, eds., CurrentPerspectives: Working with Sexually Aggressive Youth and Youth with SexualBehavior Problems (Holyoke,MA: NEARI Press, 2006).[251] USDepartment of Health, Education, and Welfare, National Institute of ChildHealth and Human Development, "National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health,"2000.[252] Ibid.[253]Center for Disease Control, "Sexual Behavior Among High School Students-U.S.1990," Morbidity and Mortality WeeklyReport vol.40 (1992), pp. 885-88.[254]Complaint - Class Action for Injunctive Relief, Whitaker v. Perdue, Civil Action No._____, June 20, 2006.[255] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Kareem J., August 5, 2005.[256] Emailcommunication from Janet Y. to Human Rights Watch, October 2, 2006.[257]Letter from Dan M. to Judge Nancy G. Edmunds, copy on file with Human RightsWatch.[258]Letter from Henry F. to Judge Nancy G. Edmunds, copy on file with Human RightsWatch.[259]John Doe and Samuel Poe v. TadarialSturdivant, Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals No. 05-2631, Plantiff's Brief, July25, 2006.[260] Ibid.at 4.[261] Ibid.[262] Seeaffidavits of Doe VI (fired); Doe V (fired; denied housing); Doe IV (fired, unable to attendcollege); Doe I (denied employment); Doe II (evicted); Doe IX (expelled from law school); Poe X (unable to live with his child in subsidized housing); Doe XI (unable to coach or teach SundaySchool). Also, John Doe and Samuel Poe v.Tadarial Sturdivant, Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals No. 05-2631; AmicusCuriae Brief of the ACLU of Michigan, July 25, 2006.[263] Ibid. Doe VIII (obscene materials sent to homeand work); Doe XVIII (600-personlecture class informed that Doe was sex offender).[264]Ibid.[265] Emailcommunication from Jessie K. to Human Rights Watch, June 15, 2006.[266]USDepartment of Justice, National Institute of Justice (NIJ), "Sex OffenderCommunity Notification: Assessing the Impact in Wisconsin," December 2000, http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/179992.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007), p. 10. The study surveyed 30 sex offenders subjectto community notification in Wisconsin.The results: 83 percent reported that notification resulted in "exclusion fromresidence," 77 percent reported "threats/harassment," 67 percent reported"emotional harm to family members," and being "ostracized byneighbors/acquaintances," and 50 percent reported "loss of employment." Seealso, Levenson and Cotter, "The Effects of Megan's Law on SexOffender Reintegration," Journal ofContemporary Criminal Justice, vol 21, no. 3 (2005), pp. 298-300. Richard Tewksbury,"Collateral Consequences of Sex Offender Registration," vol.21, no.1 (2005), Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice,pp. 67-81.[267] Therehas been no national survey on the extent of threats and assaults onregistrants. Indeed, of those states that responded to Human Rights Watch'squery, none had in place any formal mechanisms for receiving such reports. Moststate registration officials we spoke to told Human Rights Watch thatregistrants could contact local law enforcement if they experienced anyharassment or violence.[268]Levenson and Cotter, "The Effects of Megan's Law;" Tewksbury, "Collateral Consequences."[269] Registrantsuicides (and other consequences) are chronicled on this website: http://www.geocities.com/eadvocate/issues/topic-pedophiles.html(accessed December 15, 2005).[270]Ibid.[271]Levenson and Cotter, "The Effects of Megan's Law," pp. 49-66.[272] Ibid.[273] Ibid.[274] Ibid.[275]John Pain, "Sex-Offender Restrictions Leave 5 Men Living Under MiamiBridge,"Associated Press, April 8, 2007.[276]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Walter D., December 4, 2006.[277]Smith v. Doe 538 U.S. 84,1156 (Thomas, C., concurring).[278] Emailcommunication from Carl B. to Human Rights Watch, February 16, 2005.[279] VaCode Ann. 18.2-370.4.[280] Letter to Cliff M., a registeredsex offender in Colorado,July 20, 2005, on file with Human Rights Watch.[281] Emailcommunication from Sarah V., mother of a registered offender in Oklahoma, to HumanRights Watch, July 6, 2005.[282] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with a parole officer in Michigan who requested anonymity, December5, 2006.[283] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with a parole officer in Arizona who requested anonymity, November28, 2006.[284]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with a parole officer in Florida who requestedanonymity, March 28, 2007.[285]Email communication from Lyndon G. to Human Rights Watch, January 5, 2006.[286]Email communicationfrom Matt W. to Human Rights Watch, February 28, 2005.[287]CSOM, "Time to Work: Managing the Employment of Sex Offenders under Community Supervision,"January 2002,http://www.csom.org/pubs/timetowork.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007), p. 1.[288]P. Gendreau, T. Little, and C. Goggin, "A Meta-Analysis of the Predictors ofAdult Criminal Recidivism: What Works," Criminology,vol. 34 (1996), pp. 575-607.[289] VirginiaCriminal Sentencing Commission, "Assessing Risk Among Sex Offenders in Virginia," January 15,2001, http://www.vcsc.state.va.us/sex_off_report.pdf (accessed August 24,2007).[290]R. Karl Hanson and Andrew Harris, Department of the Solicitor General ofCanada, "Dynamic Predictors of Sexual Offense Recidivism," 1988, http://ww2.ps-sp.gc.ca/publications/corrections/199801b_e.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007).[291]Candace Kruttschnitt, Christopher Uggen, and Kelly Shelton, "Predictors ofDesistance among Sex Offenders: The Interactions of Formal and Informal SocialControls," Justice Quarterly, vol.17, no. 1 (2000), pp. 61-87.[292] Emailcommunication from Tom K. to Human Rights Watch, January 11, 2006.[293]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Shirley Turner, October 11, 2006.[294]A.A.v. State of New Jersey, CA: No. A-002153-0441, Appellant's Brief.[295] TheUnited States ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights(ICCPR), G.A. res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. DocA/6316 (1966), 999 U.N. T.S. 171, entered into force March 23, 1976, on June 8,1992. The UN Human Rights Committee,which oversees the implementation of the ICCPR, has noted that under theCovenant, states must protect their residents "not just against violations ofCovenant rights by its agents, but also against acts committed by privatepersons or entities that would impair the enjoyment of Covenant rights." Moreover,public officials violate their obligations under the Covenant when they permitor fail "to take appropriate measures or to exercise due diligence to prevent,punish, investigate, or redress the harm caused by such acts by private personsor entities." UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment 31, Nature of the General LegalObligation on States Parties to the Covenant, U.N.Doc. CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.13(2004), http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/gencomm/hrcom31.html(accessed June 19, 2006), para. 8.[296]Through New Jersey's internet registry, the public may, without restriction,obtain access to the following information about registrants who have beendeemed to be at moderate or high risk of reoffense, and for whom a court hasordered community notification: the offender's name and any aliases used; anysex offense committed, with a brief description; the offender's assessed riskof reoffense; the offender's age, race, sex, date of birth, height, weight,hair, eye color and distinguishing marks; a photograph of the offender; adescription of the offender's car and license plate number; and the streetaddress, zip code, municipality and county in which the offender resides.[297]A.A. v. State of New Jersey, CA:No. A-002153-0441,Appellant's Brief.[298]E.B. v. Verniero, 119 F.3d 1077, 1102 (3d Cir. 1997).[299] Emailcommunication from Betty L. to Human Rights Watch, February 10, 2005.[300] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Donald V., August 11, 2006.[301] GaryHunter, "Ex Con 'Helps Police' By Trying to Murder Sex Offenders," Prison Legal News, June 2004, p. 7.Trant was sentenced to 10-30 years in prison after pleading guilty to attemptedmurder of two registrants. He told a reporter that he was "morally justified"in doing what he did. "I think I'm a good guy; I don't think I should receivethis kind of punishment. I thought people would accept it. But I was wrong. Ihope I've done a service to the communityThese guys are sexual terrorists."Man Anticipates Support, not Jail, for Attacking Pedophiles," Portsmouth Herald (NH), May 6, 2005.[302] CoreyKilgannon, "Threats of Violence as Homes for Sex Offenders Cluster in Suffolk," New York Times, October 9, 2006.[303] Ibid.[304] KiraMillage, "Charges Filed in Double Homicides," Bellingham Herald, September 9, 2005.[305] KiraMillage, "Suspect Sought after Double Homicide in City," Bellingham Herald, August 28, 2005.[306] Ibid.[307] Ibid.[308]California, Cal Pen Code 290.4(c); Connecticut, Conn. Gen. Stat. 54-258a;Idaho, Idaho Code 18-8326(2007); Hawaii, HRS 846E-3(g); Kentucky, KRS17.580(3); Massachusetts, ALM GL ch.6, 178N; Mississippi, Miss. Code Ann.45-33-51; New Jersey, N.J. Stat. 2C:7-16(b); New York, NY CLS Correc168-q(2); Pennsylvania, 42 Pa.C.S. 9798.1(b)(2); SouthCarolina, S.C. Code Ann 23-3-510; Utah,Utah Code Ann. 77-27-21.5(22); Vermont,13 V.S.A. 5411a(h)(2007); Virginia, Va. CodeAnn. 9.1-919(2007); and WashingtonD.C. D.C. Code 22-4011(d).[309] See,for example, New York, NYCLS Correc 168-q(2); Michigan,MCLS 28.730.[310]New Jersey, N.J. Stat 2C:7-16(c); California, Cal Pen Code 290.4(d)(2).[311]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with ShirleyTurner, October 11, 2006.[312] "SexOffender Murderer Kills Self," Associated Press, April 17, 2006.[313] Ibid.[314] JohnR. Ellement and Suzanne Smalley, "Sex Crime Disclosure is Questioned: MaineKillings Refuel Debate Over Registries," BostonGlobe, April 18, 2006.[315]Alabama, Florida, Illinois, Missouri.[316] Letter from Linda L., wife of a California registrant, toHuman Rights Watch, May 21, 2005.[317]Email communication from Marcus T. to Human Rights Watch, July 4, 2005.[318]Email communication from Ted P. to Human Rights Watch, July 21, 2005.[319]Email communication from Diane Z. to Human Rights Watch, June 1, 2005.[320]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Tom M., November 13, 2006.[321]42 USCS13663 (2004) explicitly purports to deny 'dangerous' sex offendersfrom such housing, but in fact, requires Public Housing Authorities (PHA) todeny eligibility to anyone listed on a state sex offender registry forlife.Many PHAs go beyond federal law and ban all sex offenders fromliving in public housing. In 1999, a WashingtonState local PHA foundthat three of its public housing residents were convicted sex offenders.Becauseit interpreted federal law to mean that sex offenders were ineligible forhousing assistance, the PHA sought to evict Mr. Demmings, a convicted sexoffender who had been living without incident in the development since 1996 andwas compliant with his treatment plan. Demmings argued both that he posed norisk to other tenants, and that he suffered from a documented mental illness.While the court expressed sympathy and "applaud[ed] his successfulrehabilitation," Housing Authority v.Demmings, 2001 Wash. App. LEXIS 2276 (Wa. Ct. App 2001), 3-4, it affirmed Demmings'eviction nonetheless. The court concluded its opinion by noting, "The rule isharsh as to all sex offenders who increasingly struggle to find housing upontheir releaseThe rule is, however, reasonable." Ibid., p. 9.[322] AndrewKramer, "OregonHouses Paroled Sex Offender in Tent," Associated Press, August 4, 2003.[323] "SexOffender Kept in Tent Gets Pneumonia," Associated Press, November 17,2003.[324] "SexOffender Living in Tent," Bellingham Herald, August 8, 2003.[325]Brandon Rain, "Sex Offenders Moved from Neighborhoods-by the Trailer," Newsday, February 16, 2007.[326]Ibid.[327]Ibid.[328]For example, a 2004 study tracked almost 50,000 individuals who were releasedfrom New York State prisons and returned to New York City between 1995and 1998. Eleven percent of these individuals entered a city homeless shelter, and33 percent of that group were reincarcerated within two years of their release.Shelter use, both before incarceration and after release, was associated withan increased risk of return to prison: risk of reincarceration increased 23percent with pre-release shelter stay, and 17 percent with post-release shelterstay. Stephen Metraux and Dennis P. Culhane, "Homeless Shelter Use and ReincarcerationFollowing Prison Release: Assessing the Risk," Criminology & Public Policy, vol. 3, no. 2 (2004), pp. 201-222.A national study found that two-thirds of former prisoners who did not havestable housing recommitted crimes within the first 12 months of release,whereas only one-quarter of those who obtained housing reoffended in the sametime frame. Jeremy Travis, Amy L. Solomon, and Michelle Waul, The UrbanInstitute, "From Prison to Home: The Dimensions and Consequences of PrisonerRe-entry," June 2001, http://www.urbaninstitute.org/UploadedPDF/from_prison_to_home.pdf(accessed August 24, 2007).[329]Mark Hayward, "Registered Sex Offenders in the Community: From Prisoners to Pariahs,"Union Leader, June 4, 2006.[330]Emailcommunication from Frankie A. to Human Rights Watch, January 5, 2005.[331] Emailcommunication from Jarrod B. to Human Rights Watch, July 22, 2005.[332] Emailcommunication from Brenda H. to Human Rights Watch, July 21, 2005.[333] Letterfrom Elizabeth L. to Human Rights Watch, October 12, 2005.[334] "Teensget Probation in Sex Case," Associated Press, October 22, 2002.[335] MarshaLow, "Oakland Youth in Sex Diary Case FoundDead; Parents Blame Overdose," Detroit Free Press, March 23, 2004.[336] Ibid.;Carolyn Starks and Jeff Long, "Abuser Killed Self, Family Says," Chicago Tribune, May 27, 2005(registrant took his own life after he was taunted by neighbors and his homewas set ablaze).[337]Cara Buckley, "Town Torn over Molester's Suicide," Miami Herald, April 23, 2005; Daniel Ruth, "Who was the Rape Threatto the Town?" TampaTribune, April 27, 2005.[338]Ibid.[339]Ibid.[340]Ibid.[341] MabelPerez, "Sex Offender Found Dead: Family says Flyers Led to Apparent Suicide," Star Banner (Florida), April 22, 2005.[342]Dick Pettys, "Republicans Unveil FirstDraft of Proposed Sex Offender Law," Associated Press, September 28,2005.[343]Kavan Peterson, "Anti-Sex-Offender Zoning Laws Challenged," Stateline.org, December 9, 2006, http://www.stateline.org/live/details/story?contentId=163253(accessed January 15, 2007).[344]Miami Beach,FL and Davie,FL, became the firstjurisdictions to prohibit by local ordinance registered sex offenders fromliving within the jurisdiction's limits. Several other cities in Florida have followed.Lori Sykes and Sallie James, "Dania Moves to Tighten Limits on Sex Offenders:Ordinance Wins Tentative Approval," Florida Sun-Sentinel, June 15, 2005. Also,Annysa Johnson, "Two Suburbs Weigh Measures to Bar Sexual Predators," Milwaukee Journal Sentinel,February15, 2005 (the Oak Creek andFranklin suburbs are just outside of Milwaukee). A new law in Binghamton, NYprohibits sex offenders "from being a quarter mile from any school, daycarecenter or park. That leaves few islands where they can live, and because theyare not allowed to travel through the other areas, they are effectively bannedfrom the city." Marnie Eisenstadt, "80+ Sex Offender Bills: Will any Make UsSafer?" The Post Standard (Syracuse, NY),June 12, 2005.[345]For example, in Michigan,MCLS 28.734 applies a penalty to registered sex offenders working, loitering,or residing within a student safety zone.[346]Megan Woolhouse, "City Advances Revised Sex-Offender Limits: Wide Limits Posedin Marlborough,"Boston Globe, May 8, 2007,http://www.boston.com/news/local/articles/2007/05/08/city_advances_revised_sex_offender_limits/(accessed June 21, 2007); Megan Woolhouse, "Offender Plan Draws Questions," Boston Globe, March 29, 2007.[347]Illinois, 720 ILCS 5/11-9.3(b-5); Indiana,Burns Ind.Code Ann. 35-42-4-11; Iowa,Iowa Code692A.2A(1); Tennessee,Tenn. CodeAnn.40-39-211(a).[348]CurtAnderson, "Jury Votes for Death Penalty for Killer of 9-year-old JessicaLunsford in Florida," Associated Press, March14, 2007; Jim Ross, "Judge: Couey confession out," St. PetersburgTimes, June 30, 2006. See also, TheJessica Marie Lunsford Foundation, http://www.jessicamarielunsford.org(accessed January 15, 2007).[349]SusanMiller, "Doubts Emerge over Sex Offender Buffers," Palm Beach Post, June 16, 2005; Joe Kollin, "Pines Favors ExtendingBan on Sexual Offenders," FloridaSun-Sentinel, June 9, 2005 ("The revised measure that they approvedspecifically requires the distance to be measured from property lines ratherthan doors. This increases the area where offenders are banned.").[350]Paul A. Zandbergen and Timothy C. Hart, "Reducing Housing Options for ConvictedSex Offenders: Investigating the Impact of Residency Restriction Laws UsingGIS," Justice Research and Policy,vol. 8 no.2 (2006).[351]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Max C., September 14, 2006.[352]State v. Seering, 701 N.W. 2d 655,660 (Iowa 2005). The court noted that Seering was ejected from the farmproperty.[353]Jill Levenson and Leo Cotter, "The Effects of Megan's Law on Sex OffenderReintegration," Journal of Contemporary CriminalJustice, vol 21, no. 3 (2005), pp. 298-300.[354]Ibid.[355]John Pain, "Sex Offender Restrictions Leave 5 Men Living Under Bridge in Miami," Associated Press,April 8, 2007.[356]Emailcommunication from Cindy P. to Human Rights Watch, July 4, 2005.[357]Letterfrom William K. to Human Rights Watch, September 12, 2005.[358]ShannonColavecchio-Van Sickler, "Hillsborough Shelters Shut out Sex Offenders," St. Petersburg Times, June 16, 2005.[359]"SexOffenders Banned from Storm Shelters," Associated Press, August 7, 2005.[360]"Court Hears Sex Offender Challenge," Iowa City Press-Citizen, April 1, 2004.[361]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with an Iowa lawmaker who requested anonymity,August 14, 2006.[362]Iowa Code692A.2A(1) (2006).[363]Ibid.[364] Ibid.[365] Ibid.[366]Sean Murphy, "Experts Say Sex Offender ZonesProblematic," Associated Press, November 9, 2006.[367]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with CorwinRitchie, executive director, Iowa County Attorney's Association, September 11,2006.[368]Sea Stachura, "The Consequences of Zoning SexOffenders," MinnesotaPublic Radio, April 25, 2006.[369]Emily Block, "Authorities Say New Sex Offender LawFlawed: Residency Limits Could be an 'Enormous' Waste of Time for ThoseEnforcing Them," Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA),September 8, 2005.[370]Ibid.[371]"Statement on Sex Offender Residency Restrictionsin Iowa,"Iowa County Attorney's Association press release, December 11, 2006,http://www.iowa-icaa.com/ICAA%20STATEMENTS/Sex%20Offender%20Residency%20Statement%20Dec%2011%2006.pdf(accessed January 15, 2007).[372]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Zane F., October 23, 2006.[373]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with anofficer in the Des Moines, IA police department who requestedanonymity, August 14, 2006.[374]Ibid.[375] On January 1, 2007, HumanRights Watch visited addresses in DesMoines, IA, thatseemed to indicate an offender was officially living in a non-residential areaof the city.[376]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with anofficer in the Des Moines, IA police department.[377]Ibid.[378]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with GavinD., September 18, 2006.[379]Iowa Judicial Department of Correctional Services,"Discharge Report" of Gavin D., copy on file with Human Rights Watch.[380]Ibid.[381]Ibid.[382]Murphy,"Experts Say Sex Offender Zones Problematic," Associated Press.[383] Ibid.[384]GACode Ann.42-1-15 (2007).[385]Whitaker et al.v. Perdue et al., CA no. 4:06-140-CC, Briefin Support of Motion for Temporary Restraining Order, June 22, 2006, p. 9.[386] Ibid.,p. 1.[387] Ibid.[388]Email communication from Sarah Geraghty, attorneyfor the plaintiffs, Southern Center for Human Rights, to Human Rights Watch,January 4, 2006.[389]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with JohnA., June 15, 2006 and August 11, 2006.[390] Ibid.[391]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Ralph F., August 11, 2006.[392]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with a Georgia county sheriff whorequested anonymity, August 9, 2006.[393]CaliforniaProposition 83: "Sex Offenders. Sexually Violent Predators. Punishment,Residence Restrictions and Monitoring. Initiative Statute," passed by votersNovember 7, 2006.[394]Ibid. Proposition 83 also lengthens prison and parole terms for repeat andviolent offenders and requires some convicted sex offenders to undergo satellitemonitoring for life, by wearing a tracking device (GPS) on their ankle. Stateanalysts estimate the provision will cost taxpayers at least $88 million ayear, with some estimates as high as $300-450 million. GPS units costapproximately $3,500 each and have a total lifespan of six to nine months.Therefore, they would have to be replaced one to two times a year. If allregistered sex offenders in Californiaare required to wear the GPS unit, as required by Proposition 83, the annualcost for GPS hardware could range from $300-700 million, depending on how oftenthe hardware needs to be replaced. GPS units lose reception like cellulartelephones. They must be recharged every 6-12 hours. Each loss of reception orlow-battery failure sends a false alarm to dispatchers who must alert law enforcementand decide whether to respond to thecall. California Coalition against Sexual Assault (CALCASA), "Proposition 83CALCASA Position Paper," 2006, http://www.calcasapublicpolicy.org/?page_id=58(accessed January 2, 2007); and testimony from California probation and paroleofficials before the California High Risk Sex Offender Taskforce, July 14,2006. Another provision makes sexually violent predators eligible forindefinite commitment to state mental hospitals. These aspects of the statutehave not been challenged.[395]GovernorArnold Schwarzenegger, San Diego County District Attorney Bonnie Dumanis, andHarriet Salarno, president, Crime Victims United of California, "Argument inFavor of Proposition 83," appearing on the November 7, 2006 ballot.[396]CarleenR. Arlidge, president, California Attorneys for Criminal Justice, "Rebuttal toArgument in Favor of Proposition 83," appearing on the November 7, 2006 ballot.[397] Ibid.[398]CALCASA,"Proposition 83 CALCASA Position Paper."[399]TheCalifornia Research Bureau (CRB) is a nonpartisan research service thatprovides reports to the Governor and his staff, to both houses of the legislature,and to other elected state officials. See http://www.library.ca.gov/html/statseg2a.cfm(accessed March 23, 2007).[400]MarcusNieto and Prof David Jung, CRB, "The Impact of Residency Restrictions on SexOffenders and Correctional Management Practices: A Literature Review,"http://www.library.ca.gov/crb/06/08/06-008.pdf (accessed January 21, 2007). Thereport was issued at the request of California State Assembly member Mark Leno,who is the Chair of the Public Safety Committee.[401] Ibid.[402]Doe v.Schwarzenegger et al., CA no.06-cv-06968-JSW, Temporary Restraining Order to Show Cause Why Relief ShouldNot Be Granted, November 8, 2006.[403]Ibid.[404] Ibid.[405]DavidKravets, "Judge: Lockyer is Changing Interpretation of Sex Offender Law,"Associated Press, November 27, 2006.[406]CALCASA,"Proposition 83 CALCASA Position Paper."[407]Nietoand Jung, CRB, "The Impact of Residency Restrictions," p. 21.[408]"TrackingSex Offenders: Town by Town Summary of Local Restrictions," Home News Tribune (NJ), March 5, 2006.[409]"TownshipAdopts Ordinance to Create Residency Restrictions for Convicted Sex Offenders,"Atlantic Highlands Herald (New Jersey), October 20,2005.[410]JohnGhirardini, "No Room in the City for Sex Offenders, Council Toughens LivingRestrictions," Atlanta-JournalConstitution, May 21, 2006.[411]John-ThorDahlburg, "Limits on Sex Offenders Spread in Florida,"LosAngelesTimes, July 5, 2005.[412]KansasDepartment of Corrections, "Twenty Findings of Research on ResidentialRestrictions for Sex Offenders and the Iowa Experience with Similar Policies,"2006, http://www.dc.state.ks.us/SOHR/Twenty_Findings_on_Restrictions_for_Sex_Offenders.htm(accessed June 21, 2007).[413]Colorado Department of Public Safety, "Report on Safety Issues Raised by LivingArrangements for and Location of Sex Offenders in the Community," March 15,2004, http://dcj.state.co.us/ors/pdf/docs/FullSLAFinal.pdf (accessed June 20,2007).[414]Ibid.[415]Minnesota Department of Corrections, "Level Three Sex Offenders ResidentialPlacement Issues: 2003 Report to the Legislature," January 2003,http://www.leg.state.mn.us/docs/2003/mandated/030175.pdf (accessed June 20,2007).[416]Ibid., p. 2.[417]Ibid.[418]LoisGormley, "Where are Valley Sex Offenders?" TheDesert Sun (Palm Springs,CA), June 13, 2004.[419]Ibid. The article indicated the rearrest was for a parole violation and did notspecify what the violation entailed.[420]JillS. Levenson, Civil Research Institute, "Sex Offender Residence Restrictions,"2005.[421] Ibid.[422]ColoradoDepartment of Public Safety, "Report on Safety Issues," p. 15.[423] Ibid.[424]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Dr. Jill Levenson, September 13, 2006.[425]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Doug E., September 18, 2006.[426]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with James O., June 23, 2006.[427]Women's rights advocates in Singaporehave recently been calling for the establishment of a sex offender registry. TheresaTan, "Aware Calls for Stiffer Laws on Child Sex Abuse," The Straits Times (Singapore),September 9, 2006.[428]The European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) has explicitly noted that thegravity of the harm that may be caused to the victims of sexual violence placesstates under a duty to take measures to protect people from such harm. Stubbings and Others v. the United Kingdom,Judgment of October 22, 1996, Reports 1996-IV, paras. 62-64.[429]The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), to which the US isa State Party, protects against "arbitrary or unlawful interference with[anyone's] privacy, family, home or correspondence," article 17.[430]Article 23 of the ICCPR provides that "[t]he family is the natural and fundamentalgroup unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the state,"and that all men and women have the right "to marry and to found a family." Theright to found a family includes the right "to live together." The UN HumanRights Committee, which oversees the implementation of the ICCPR, has set out,in General Comment No. 19: Protection of the Family, the right to marriage andequality of the spouses, article 23, 27/07/90, that the right to found a family"implies the possibility to live together."The Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) G.A. res. 44/25. annex,44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered intoforce September 2, 1990, requires, in Article 9 (1) that State Parties "ensurethat a child shall not be separated from his or her parents against theirwill," allowing for exceptions only where "separation is necessary for the bestinterests of the child" and where such a determination has been made by"competent authorities subject to judicial review." Article 10 (2) establishesa child's "right to maintain on a regular basis, save in exceptionalcircumstances[,] personal relations and direct contacts with both parents." TheUnited States signed, but did not ratify, the CRC on February 16, 1995, meaningthat while it is not a party to the Convention, it cannot take measures thatwould defeat the object and purpose of the treaty (see article 18 of the ViennaConvention on the Law of Treaties).[431]The right to housing is recognized in the Universal Declaration of HumanRights. Also, The International Covenant on Economic, Social, and CulturalRights (ICESCR), G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No.16) at 49, U.N.Doc. A/6316 (1966), U.N.T.S. 3, entered into force January 3, 1976, providesthat everyone is entitled to "adequate" housing (art. 11(1)).The United Statessigned, but did not ratify, the ICESR on October 5, 1977. Adequacy must beevaluated from multiple perspectives, including security of tenure,affordability, and location.ICESCR General Comment 4 (1991), para. 7: "Adequate shelter meansadequate privacy, adequate space, adequate security, adequate lighting andventilation, adequate basic infrastructure and adequate location with regard towork and basic facilities-all at a reasonable cost." TheUN Committee on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights has emphasized that noone shall be subject to housing discrimination, irrespective of their status."The right to adequate housing applies to everyone . Furthermore, individuals,as well as families, are entitled to adequate housing regardless of age,economic status, group or other affiliation or status, and enjoyment of thisright must not be subject to any form of discrimination." ICESCR GeneralComment 4 (1991), para 6.[432]The ICESCR recognizes the right to work and to an adequate standard of livingin articles 6 and 11.[433]Article 12 of the ICCPR recognizes the right to liberty of movement and freedomto choose one's residence. Under article 12(3) of the ICCPR, a state may limitthis freedom only insofar as it is necessary for the protection of the rightsof others, national security or public order, or public health or morals. Theselimitations must be expressly provided for by the law and must be strictlyconstrued.[434]The UN Human Rights Committee, in its general comments to the ICCPR, notes thatStates have an obligation to protect their citizens from private actors: "Thepositive obligations on States Parties to ensure Covenant rights will only befully discharged if individuals are protected by the state, not just againstviolations of Covenant rights by its agents, but also against acts committed byprivate persons or entities that would impair the enjoyment of Covenantrights." UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment 31, Nature of the General LegalObligation on States Parties to the Covenant. UN States are inviolation of their obligations under the ICCPR where they are found to be"permitting or failing to take appropriate measures or to exercise duediligence to prevent, punish, investigate, or redress the harm caused by suchacts by private persons or entities."[435]General Comment 16/32, in ICCPR/C/SR.749, March 23, 1988, para. 4. Nicholas Toonen v. Australia, HumanRights Committee, 50th Sess., Case No. 488/1992, U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/50/D/488/1992,para. 8.3. Although the Committee was addressing freedom of movement, thecriteria it enunciated apply for all protected rights.[436]Ibid.[437]Ibid.[438] U.N.Doc. E/CN.4/1985/4, Annex (1985); "The Siracusa Principles on theLimitation and Derogation Provisions in the International Covenant on Civil andPolitical Rights," Human RightsQuarterly, vol. 7, no. 1 (February 1985).[439] Ibid.[440] Siracusa Principle 2.[441] Siracusa Principle 10.[442]Siracusa Principle 8.[443]Siracusa Principle 7.[444]Mr. Rawle Kennedy v. Trinidad and Tobago,Communication No. 845/1998, U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/74/D/845/1998 (2002), para. 7.3, http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/undocs/845-1998.html(accessed June 19, 2006).[445]Eversley Thompson v. St. Vincent and theGrenadines, Communication No. 806/1998,U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/70/D/806/1998 (2000), para. 8.2, http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/undocs/806-1998.html(accessed June 19, 2006).[446]Article 16 of the CRC, following closely the language of article 17 of theICCPR, states "(1) No child shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawfulinterference with his or her privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor tounlawful attacks on his or her honor and reputation. (2) The child has theright to the protection of the law against such interference or attacks."[447]Administration of Juvenile Justice ("The Beijing Rules"), adopted November 29,1985, G.A. Res. 40/33, annex, 40 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 53) at 207, U.N. Doc.A/40/53 (1985) ("The juvenile's right to privacy shall be respected at allstages in order to avoid harm being caused to her or him by undue publicity orby the process of labeling.").[448]ECtHR, Adamsonv United Kingdom,Application 4223/98, Decision of January 26, 1999. A previous application, Ibbotson v. UK, No. 40146/98 (October21, 1998), had been considered inadmissible on similar grounds by the now-defunctEuropean Commission on Human Rights (which was replaced on November 1, 1998 bythe current full-time European Court of Human Rights), and in Massey v. United Kingdom, ApplicationNo. 14399/02, Partial Decision on Admissibility, April 8, 2003, the Court alsohad to consider, amongst other complaints, that registration was aninterference with Massey's private life and that the registration requirementis automatic, with no assessment or review of the necessity of registration inhis particular case. The Court applied the reasoning in Adamson in declaring that part of the application inadmissible.[449]Landvreugd v. The Netherlands, 37331/97, June 4,2002.[450]Labita v. Italy, 26772/95, April 6, 2000.[451]Ibid.[452] Forexample, in US law: Dean v. Texas, 60S.W.3d 217 (Tx Ct App. 14th Dist 2001) and Degrijzevv. Pataski, 2004 US Dist. LEXIS 2260 (both holding that registration schemedoes not violate ex post facto clauseof USconstitution because it is not punitive); A.A.v. New Jersey, 341 F.3d 206 (2003) (rejected registrant's privacy challengebecause purpose of the registration statute was not to humiliate); and thefollowing cases in which the court found that registration and notificationrequirements turn on conviction, not a determination of dangerousness, and noprotected liberty interests are at stake. Milksv. Florida, 894 So.2d 924 (S.C. Florida 2005), certiorari denied, 2005 USLexis 6201 (Oct. 3, 2005); Haskell v.Maine, 2003 US Dist. LEXIS 6384 (Maine 2003); Allen v. Dretke, 2004 US Dist. LEXIS 5308 (Texas 2004); Gunderson v. Hvass, 339 F.3d 639(Minnesota 2003); Fullmer v. MichiganDepartment of State Police, 360 F.3d579 (2004); Doe v. Tandeske, 361 F.3d594 (Alaska 2004). But see In re Ronnie A.,585 S.E.2d 311 (Sup. Ct. S.C. 2003) (no violation of due process where youth,under 12 at the time of his crime, required to register because registrationinformation about juveniles is not made public by the law).[453]Smith v. Doe, 123 S.Ct 1140 (2003) and Connecticut Department of Public Safety v.Doe, 123 S.Ct. 1160 (2003). The Court has declined to review any of the sexoffender cases that have come before it since, including a challenge to the Iowa residencyrestrictions law that prevents sex offenders from living within 2,000 feet ofparks or other places where children might be expected to congregate. Doe v. Miller, 405 F.3d 700 (8th Cir.Iowa 2005), motion for stay denied, 418 F.3d 950, petition for certioraridenied, 2005 US Lexis 8630 (November 28, 2005).[454] Ibid., at 100.[455] Ibid., at 1343-45.[456] Ibid., at 104. The trialcourt in the Connecticut case also noted theoverly broad nature of the notification scheme: "Connecticut's [sex offender] web site makesinformation available to more people than is necessary to achieve its publicsafety and enforcement goals . The website makes information available tomillions of people who will never come to the state or otherwise come intocontact with the registrant. Doe v. Lee,132 F. Supp. 2d57, 69 (D. Conn.2001).[457]Cutshall v. Sundquist, 193 F.3d466, 478(6th Cir. 1998), certiorari denied, 529 US 1053 (2000).[458] Ibid.[459]Doe v. Moore, 410 F.3d 1337 (11th Cir.2005), cert. denied, 126 S.Ct 624 (US 2005).[460]Mann v. State, 603 S.E. 2d 283, 286 (Ga. 2004); People v. Leroy , 828 N.E.2d 769, 784(Ill. App. Ct. 2005); Seering I, No.Crim. AGINOO6718, 2003 WL 21738894, at 14 (Iowa Dist. Ct. April 30, 2993), 701N.W.2d 665 (Iowa 2005).[461]Mann, 603 S.E.2d, at 286.[462] Ibid., at 285.[463]Doe v. Petro, No. 1:05-CV-125, 2005WL 1038845, at 5 (S.D. OhioMay 3, 2005).[464]Petro, 2005 WL 1038846, at 1, 5; Miller I, 298 F. Supp. 2d 844, 871-76(S.D. Iowa 2004), 405 F.3d 700 (8th Cir. 2005); Leroy, 828 N.E. 2d at 776-77; SeeringI, 2003 WL 21738894, at 4-9.[465]Petro, 2005 WL 1038846, at *2; MillerI, 298 F. Supp. @d at 866-71; Lee v. State, 895 So. 2d 1038, 1041-44 (Ala. Crim. App. 2004); Thompson v. State, 603 S.E. 2d 233, 234-36 (Ga. 2004); Denson v. State, 600 S.E. 2d 645, 647 (Ga. Ct. App. 2004); Leroy, 828 N.E. 2d at 778-79; Seering I, 2003 WL 21738894, at 10-12.[466]MillerI, 298 F.Supp.2d at 879-80; Leroy, 828 N.E. 2d at 784; SeeringI, 2003 WL 21738894, pgs 13-14.[467] Ibid.[468]Ibid.[469]Doe v. Miller, 405 F.3d 700 (8th Cir.2005), at 710.[470]Ibid., at 724 (Melloy, J. dissenting).[471]For example, Miller II, 405 F.3d, at 714 ("[Plaintiff sex offenders] contendthat the statute is irrational because there is no scientific study thatsupports the legislature's conclusion that excluding sex offenders fromresiding within 2,000 feet of a school or child care facility is likely toenhance the safety of children.").[472]Ibid., at 714 (describing target of statute as "an area where precisestatistical data is unavailable and human behavior is necessarilyunpredictable"); Leroy, 828 N.E.2dat 777 ("[T]he record is bare of any statistics or research correlatingresidency distance with sex offenses ."); Seering II, 701 N.W.2d 655, 665 (Iowa 2005) ("[T]estimonyrevealed that the two- thousand-foot restriction was not necessarily a perfect protectionagainst this threat .").[473]For example, Miller II, 405 F.3d ,pg. 715 ("The legislature is institutionally equipped to weigh thebenefits and burdens of various distances, and to reconsider its initialdecision in light of experience and data accumulated over time."); Leroy, 828 N.E.2d at 776-77 ("[T]hestate has broad powers, subject to constitutional confines, to avertpotentially dangerous situations."); SeeringII, 701 N.W.2d, 665 (noting that risk of recidivism posed by sex offendersis high and explaining that a perfect fit "is not necessary to meet therational basis standard.").[474]See Miller II, 405 F.3d, 716("[W]e are not persuaded that the means selected to pursue the State'slegitimate interest are without rational basis."); Leroy, 828 N.E.2d, 777 ("[W]e conclude that by prohibitingchild sex offenders from living within 500 feet of a playground or [similar]facilitysubsection (b-5) also bears a reasonable relationship to the goal ofprotecting children from known child sex offenders and sets forth a reasonablemethod of furthering that goal."); SeeringII, 701 N.W.2d, 665 ("We believe there is 'a reasonable fit betweenthe government interest' of preventing sex offenders from re-offending and theresidency restriction statute, 'the means utilized to advance thatinterest.'") (quoting State v.Hernandez-Lopez, 639 N.W.2d 226, 238 (Iowa 2002)).[475]In re Appeal in MaricopaCountyJuvenile Action No. JV-132744, 933 P.2d 1248 (Ariz. Ct. App. 1996).[476]Doe No. 1 v. Williams, 167 F.Supp. 2d45, 64 (D.D.C. 2001).[477]Ibid.[478]Ibid.[479] Human Rights Watch telephone interviewwith Barbara Johnson, July 6, 2006.[480]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Nancy D., December 11, 2006.Related ContentSeptember 11, 2007News ReleaseUS: Sex Offender Laws May Do More Harm Than GoodEnd Registration of Juveniles, Residency Restrictions and Online RegistriesSeptember 11, 2007News ReleaseUS: Sex Offender Laws May Do More Harm Than GoodRegion / CountryUnited States Criminal JusticeProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3)nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch