"This Old Man Can Feed Us, You Will Marry Him": Child and Forced Marriage in South Sudan | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload the summary and recommendations: photo featureDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload the summary and recommendations: photo featureMarch 7, 2013"This Old Man Can Feed Us, You Will Marry Him"Child and Forced Marriage in South SudanA young, unmarried girl stands amid a herd of cattle outside Bor, the capital of Jonglei State.  Cattle carry significant social, economic, and cultural importance for South Sudan's pastoralist ethnic groups, which use cows for payment of dowry - a key driver of child marriage. Bor Jonglei State, February 2013.© 2013 Brent Stirton/Reportage for Human Rights WatchSummaryI did not know him before. I did not love him. I told myfamily, “I don’t want this man.” My people said, “Thisold man can feed us, you will marry him.”—AtongG., 16, forced to marry a 50-year-old man in July 2011Akech B. loved to study and dreamed of becoming a nurse. Butwhen she was 14, her uncle who was raising her, told her she was too old forschool. He forced her to leave school and told her that she had to marry a manwhom Akech described as old, gray-haired, and married to another woman withwhom he had several children.Akech begged her uncle to allow her to continue hereducation. He refused. “Girls are born so that people can eat. All I wantis to get my dowry,” he told her. The man paid 75 cows for Akech, whichsignified that the marriage had taken place. She tried to resist, but her malecousins beat her severely, accused her of dishonoring her family, and forcedher to go to the man’s house.Akech fled and hid with a friend. Her uncle found herand took her to prison, where he told officials that she had run away from herhusband and needed to be taught a lesson. They imprisoned her for a night. Whenher cousins came for her they beat her so badly that she could hardly walk.Then they took her back to her husband.After that, Akech felt that she had no choice, but to stay.***South Sudanese women facemyriad hardships and obstacles in their daily lives, including high levels ofpoverty, low levels of literacy, pronounced gender gaps in education, and thehighest maternal mortality rate in the world—estimated at 2,054 deathsper 100,000 live births.For women and girls like Akech, these hardships are all toooften compounded by a serious human rights violation: child marriage. Close tohalf (48 percent) of South Sudanese girls between 15 and 19 are married,according to the 2006 Sudan Household Health Survey. Some are as young as 12when they are married.Many South Sudanese communities see child marriage as beingin the best interests of girls and their families, and an important way forfamilies to access much-needed assets, such as cattle, money, and other giftsvia the traditional practice of transferring wealth through the payment ofdowries. It is also viewed as a way to protect girls from pre-marital sex andunwanted pregnancy that undermines family honor and decreases the amount ofdowry a family may receive. For some girls, marriage may also be the only wayto escape poverty or violence in the home.Much of the research on child marriage in South Sudan hasfocused on the physical impact it has on girls' and women's bodies. This reportexamines this problem, and reinforces studies by experts and women’srights groups in South Sudan that indicate that child marriage has asignificant negative impact on women and girl’s realization of key humanrights, including their rights to health and education, physical integrity andthe right to marry only when they are able and willing to give their freeconsent.Based on extensive interviews with 87 girls and women inthree states between March and October 2012—and with governmentofficials, traditional leaders, health care workers, legal and women’srights experts, teachers, prison officials, and NGO, UN, and donorrepresentatives—this report describes the severe consequences of thispractice, and the risks that women and girls face when they resist or try toleave these marriages. It also examines the near total lack of protection forvictims of child marriage and the many obstacles they face in attempting tofind redress.South Sudan has taken somesteps since it gained autonomy from Sudan in 2005 and independence in 2011, toaddress women’s rights. These include calls by President Salva KiirMayardit for women to participate in all spheres of life and the elimination ofharmful traditions that limit their progress, and promises by the governmentand its international development partners to make gender equality acornerstone of the country’s development agenda.There have been actions to tackle child marriage: provisionsin the Transitional Constitution—which entered into force at SouthSudan’s independence in 2011—guaranteeing women and girls the rightto consent to marriage; penal code provisions criminalizing “kidnappingor abducting a woman to compel her to get married”; and the 2008 ChildAct provisions that protect children under 18 from early and forced marriagesand guarantee them the right to non-discrimination, health, education, life,survival and development, an opinion, and protection from torture, degradingtreatment, and abuse.  Many girls and women also benefit from analternative education system that allows pregnant girls and mothers andindividuals who have not had access to formal education or who have droppedout, to continue school.However, the report finds that these measures alone are notenough, and are often stymied by a range of problems and limitations. These includegaps in existing laws, failure to understand and implement existing policiesand legislation, poor coordination among government ministries responsible forprotecting children from abuse, and an absence of guidelines about how theyshould address child marriage cases. Systemic problems in the justice system,such as lack of infrastructure, resources, and well-trained personnel, compoundthe inability of women and girls to obtain justice for gender-basedcrimes—including child and forced marriages—or to seek redressagainst those who have forced them to marry without their consent.There are also gaps in theTransitional Constitution, Penal Code, and Child Act related to this harmful practice—includingno minimum age of marriage —and no systematic or comprehensive programsto address the root causes of child marriage at the community level. TheMinistry of Gender, Child and Social Welfare finalized a Gender Policy in 2012that would go some way to addressing many of these gaps, and proposesdeveloping a National Plan of Action, new laws to tackle sexual and genderbased violence, and establishing ‘safe centres’ for traumacounseling of victims. However, it remains largely unimplemented at thiswriting.Many girls and women are not aware of their rights under thelaw to seek help, or do not know where to look for assistance other than theirown families or community elders, who often fail them. The absence of statutoryfamily legislation means that most matters relating to marriage, divorce, childcustody, maintenance payments and domestic violence are handled by customarycourts that frequently discriminate against women and girls. Widespread discriminatoryattitudes that see women as second class citizens perpetuate the practice. MoreoverSouth Sudan does not have sufficient or specialized safe spaces to offerprotection to victims of forced marriage and other gender-related abuses.As a result of these failures andinadequacies, many women and girls continue to struggle with the often devastatingand long-lasting consequences of child marriage. Girls who marry young areremoved from school, denying them the education needed to provide forthemselves and their families. Reproductive health studiesshow that young women face greater risks in pregnancy and child birth thanolder women, including life-threatening obstructed labour due to their smallerpelvises and immature bodies—problems accentuated by South Sudan’slimited prenatal and postnatal healthcare services. Because earlymarriage limits young married girls’ knowledge and skills, resources,social support networks, mobility and autonomy, they often have little power inrelation to their husband or his family, including pressing for family planningand contraception.Today, there are a number of small ongoing initiativesimplemented or funded by local and international organizations, donors, and thegovernment that address aspects of child marriage. However, these efforts aresporadic, uncoordinated, and limited in scope.Fortunately, child marriage is an area where concretereforms are possible, even considering the current challenges facing the newcountry. Moreover, it is an area in which reforms are vital because thepractice constrains the social, educational, health, security, and economicprogress of women and girls, their families, and their communities. As aresult, failure to combat child marriage is likely to have serious implicationsfor the future development of South Sudan.The government of South Sudan should take immediate andlong-term steps to protect girls from child and forced marriage and ensure thefulfillment of their human rights. While resource constraints are a majorconcern, some reforms can be made without a large investment, and these shouldbe implemented quickly. Others that may be costly are crucial components ofensuring that the government meets its obligations to uphold rather thanviolate girls’ and women’s human rights.The government, with the support of South Sudan’sdevelopment partners, should:Develop and implement a comprehensivenational action plan to prevent and address the consequences of child marriage;Develop and implement guidelines on hownational and state level government ministries and agencies should addresschild marriage cases;Conduct training for relevant government andlaw enforcement officials about the legal rights of girls under the Child Act,particularly their right to be protected from child marriage;Carry out a nationwide awareness-raisingcampaign to inform the public about the harms caused by child marriage;Work toward comprehensive reform of SouthSudan’s laws on marriage, separation, divorce, and related matters; andTake programmatic and policy measures toensure that girls and women who seek help from authorities for forced marriagescan get it.MethodologyThis report is based on research conducted between March andOctober 2012 in Western Equatoria State, Central Equatoria State, and JongleiState. Human Rights Watch researchers interviewed 87 girls and women. Somegirls and women were unsure about their age, but most girls and women weinterviewed were with girls and women who were married as children, under theage of 18.Other interviews were conducted with government officials inthe Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Gender, Child and Social Welfare, Ministryof Education and Ministry of Health. We also spoke to the Chief Justice andofficials from the South Sudan Human Rights Commission; representatives ofnongovernmental organizations (NGOs) working on women’s rights, UnitedNations and international donor organizations; women’s rights experts andactivists, a doctor, a nurse, teachers, traditional leaders and eldersincluding chiefs; and three prison officials.Individual women interviewees were identified with theassistance of local NGOs providing services to women and most interviewsoccurred in their private offices. Where women were interviewed in villages,the interviews were conducted in their homes with as much privacy as possible.All participants were informed of the purpose of the interview, its voluntarynature, and the ways the information would be used. Each orally consented to beinterviewed. Women were told they could decline to answer questions or end theinterview at any time, particularly where they were recounting traumaticpersonal experiences. Interviews lasted between thirty minutes and one hour.Some interviews were conducted in English but most interviews were conducted invarious local languages with the assistance of a female interpreter.Care was taken to minimize the risk to women who wererecounting difficult experiences that could further traumatize them.Interviewees did not receive any material compensation, but were reimbursed thecost of public transport to and from the interview.Pseudonyms have been used to protect the privacy andsecurity of the women and girls interviewed for the report. In some cases otheridentifying information about interviewees has also been withheld upon request.Human Rights Watch also conducted a review of relevant laws,policies, surveys, and reports from the government of South Sudan, the UnitedNations, academics, NGOs, and other sources. We have conducted an extensive reviewof literature on child marriage in South Sudan and other countries where thereare similar negative consequences on the lives of girls and women.I. Women’s andGirls’ Rights in South Sudan, Government Efforts to Protect ThemSouth Sudan has adopted an impressive array of measures topromote and protect women’s and girl’s rights since it gainedregional autonomy in 2005 following 22 years of civil war, and independence inJuly 2011, after a referendum on self-determination.[1]These initiatives include establishing institutions andpositions to spearhead gender equality and women’s empowerment innational development programs and policies, such as a parliamentary gendercommittee, a presidential adviser on gender and human rights, and the Ministryof Gender, Child and Social Welfare.[2]The government has also pledged to make gender equality acornerstone of the country’s development agenda,[3]identifying gender equality in the three-year post-independence developmentplan as one of seven crucial cross-cutting issues.[4]President Salva Kiir Mayardit has called for women’s participation in allspheres of life, and the elimination of harmful traditions that limit theirprogress.The 2011 Transitional Constitution recognizes that“[A]ll persons are equal before the law and are entitled to the equalprotection of the law without discrimination as to race, ethnic origin, colour,sex, language, religious creed, political opinion, birth, locality or socialstatus.”[5]Other provisions call for “all levels of government [to] enact laws tocombat harmful customs and traditions which undermine the dignity and status ofwomen;”[6]and for the recognition of women’s “right to equal pay for equalwork and other related benefits with men.”[7]  The constitutionalso establishes a 25 percent quota for female representation in all nationaland state executive and legislative organs of government.These initiatives have helped toproduce some encouraging change. For example, women have become more visible inpublic and political life and hold a number of political offices: 33.5 percentof members of the national legislative assembly are women[8] andthere is a female paramount chief in Eastern Equatoria State.[9]Women have begun to engage in politics (many voted in the referendum), andcivil society groups are gaining strength. A new, albeit fragile, movement tosupport women’s equality has been growing steadily.However, despite these encouraging signs, the rights ofgirls and women in South Sudan remain significantly curtailed. The followingsections detail four of the most significant areas in which these limitationsare felt: marriage and divorce; education; reproductive, maternal and childhealth; and physical safety.Marriage and DivorceMarriage shapes South Sudanese women’s experiences,status, and security, and is at the center of many violations of their rights.[10]Women are traditionally subservient to their husbands and other men in theirfamily, where gender roles and positions are clearly defined and strictlyenforced.[11] Womenhave very few rights in marriage which is governed by the customarylaws of ethnic groups in the absence of statutory family legislation governingmarriage, separation, divorce, and other aspects of family life.[12]Families reach marriage agreements between themselves andchoose marriage partners without the consent or even knowledge of girls. They havean interest in marrying off their girls as early as possible, and to thehighest bidder, since dowry, unlike in many other countries, is paid by thegroom and his family to the girl’s family and can include cattle, moneyand other gifts.Dowry also makes divorce andseparation more difficult for women. Many women forfeit all their belongings ifthey separate or divorce.[13]Under many South Sudanese customary law systems, divorce is notwidely accepted and only possible when the dowry is repaid to thehusband’s family—a requirement that can create tensions, especiallysince the dowry is often shared amongst the bride’s extended family.[14]As a result, families have a financial incentive toensure that marriages remain intact even if the girl faces abuse, and women whoface violence in their marriages, may face pressure to reconcile despite risksto their safety and wellbeing.[15]Alek P., who fled from her husband and his other wife who beat her, said,My uncles tell me, ‘We can’t find the cows topay back your husband so you have to return to him.’ My uncles andcousins watch me all the time.... If I go somewhere and they find out, theybeat me and threaten to take my mother to prison.[16]A woman who leaves herhusband without obtaining a divorce, and any man with whom she subsequently hasa relationship, can be accused of adultery[17]—an offence under South Sudan’s penal codepunishable by customary compensation awards, court fines, and/or up to twoyears’ imprisonment.[18]Women are disproportionately affected by adultery charges, even though theycan be brought against both men and women.[19]Where divorce does occur,children generally stay with the father and his family.[20]Custody decisions are mostly made by customarycourts that rule in accordance with their customs, even though they aresupposed to be governed by the Child Act and the child’s best interests.[21]Some women opt to stay in abusive marriages ratherthan lose custody of their children.[22]Limited Access toEducationAs a result of decades of civil war, most adults andchildren in South Sudan have not attended school. The 2008 Child Act and TransitionalConstitution (articles 14 and 29) provide for the right to free and compulsory primaryeducation. South Sudan has an Alternative Education System that offers individuals,including pregnant girls and mothers, who have not had access to formaleducation, the opportunity to go to school.[23]  In 2011, closeto 70,000 female learners participated in this scheme.[24]The Child Act also explicitly states that no girl can be expelled from schooldue to pregnancy and young mothers must be allowed to continue their education(article 26.3).In addition, the government is trying to advance the rightsof girls to education and to protect them from abuse and violations of theirrights through a number of other initiatives:A curriculum for a “Life SkillsProgram”—currently being developed by the Ministry of GeneralEducation[25]—whichwill include components on human rights, gender and gender-based violence, andreproductive health.[26]The program will be an important opportunity to educate and inform girls abouttheir human rights and child marriage.A “Girls’ Education Strategy,”also developed by the Ministry of General Education to increase access toeducation for girls;The General Education Bill, pendingbefore the legislature, which prohibits sex between students and teachers andprovides for dismissing and decertifying any educator who impregnates astudent. [27] A draftteachers’ code of conduct has not yet been finalized;Encouraging women’s access tohigher education via the Ministry of Higher Education in order to increasethe supply of secondary school teachers, and encouraging, via the Ministry ofGeneral Education, more women to become primary school teachers through thedevelopment of an affirmative action policy.[28]Despite the efforts describedabove, and an increase in the enrollment of girls in school since 2009,government statistics for 2011 show that only 39 percent of primary schoolstudents and 30 percent of secondary students are female.[29]Girls face several barriers to accessing education, and may be withdrawn fromschool to marry, to help with household chores or care for smaller children,which is viewed as training for their future roles as wives and mothers. Despitelack of accurate statistics, it is also believed that teenage pregnancy andsexual harassment by teachers and the community affects girls’ ability tostay in school.[30]Reproductive, Maternal, and ChildHealthSouth Sudan has some of the worsthealth indicators in the world:Some 33 percent of children are moderatelyto severely underweight.[31]Only 3.5 percent of women use any form ofcontraception.[32]Some 41 percent of women do not receive anyantenatal care.[33]Only 10 percent of women are attended byskilled health personnel during delivery.[34]Just 13.6 percent of births occur in healthfacilities.[35]About 5,000 girls and women are affected byobstetric fistula each year.[36]Maternal mortality is recognized as a key health concern inSouth Sudan, which has one of the highest maternal mortality ratios (MMR) inthe world (around 2,054 deaths per 100,000 live births).[37]In 2012, the Ministry of Health completed a health sector development plan thatprioritizes maternal and child health, under the slogan, “One maternaldeath is one too many.”[38]The ministry, withsignificant donor support, has expended a great deal of effort to improve thequality and availability of health services generally. However, manyservices—including for reproductive and maternal health—remainlimited, and often of poor quality or not timely when available due to a dearthof qualified health personnel, equipment, and supplies.According to a Comprehensive Gender Assessment, the ministry“lacks adequate capacity to mainstream gender in the available healthplans in order to achieve gender equality in service distribution andutilization.”[39]Awareness about the importance of reproductive health careis low, resulting in a high risk of death and disability for pregnant women,especially young women and girls.[40]The ministry has developed a Sexual and Reproductive Health Strategic Plan, aReproductive Health Policy, and a Family Planning Policy.  All of theseidentify early and forced marriage as a contributing factor to high maternalmortality rates. The Sexual and Reproductive Health Plan undertakes to respondto the reproductive needs of youth and adolescents through the development of aNational Youth and Adolescent Reproductive Health Strategy. The strategy willpay special attention to the needs of adolescents in marriage, and will includeadvocacy for enacting a law to limit the age of marriage for boys and girls.[41]Violence against Girlsand WomenAnecdotal evidence from researchers and organizationsworking with women suggests that violence against women ispervasive.[42] Domestic violence is seen as normal by both men and women.Common forms include physical and verbal abuse, sexual violence, early andforced marriage, and economic deprivation.[43]Although exacerbated by years of conflict, these forms ofabuse are also based on long-standing patriarchal systems, making them evenharder to eliminate. Most violence against women occurs in the home, within thefamily unit.[44]But it also happens within communities, and at the hands of militia groups andgovernment security forces. Ongoing internal conflict and insecurity make womenparticularly vulnerable to such abuses.[45]There is no specific law on violence against women in SouthSudan. The penal code criminalizes assault and rape, but does not criminalize maritalrape.[46]Meanwhile, statutory and customary justice systems fail toprovide redress for survivors of violence, whose security and access to justiceis often compromised by family and customary courts prioritizing familyreconciliation. Some girls and women are forced to marry their rapists, anoption that families and communities often prefer as it prevents men from goingto jail and supposedly maintains a woman’s or girl’s dignity withinthe community, while the dowry compensates her family.[47]Survivors of violence who seek help via theformal justice system, for example by bringing criminal charges againstperpetrators of violence, mostly fail as police and the courts are ill-equippedto respond effectively.[48] Most survivors also do not have access to services, such as health care, counseling, and safe recovery spaces.[49]The Police Service, with support from various UN agencies,has developed Special Protection Units (SPUs). These specialized units, whichare situated at police stations, are staffed by officers trained to investigateand prosecute cases involving women and children, and to ensure provision oflegal aid, protection, medical care, and psychosocial support. The utility ofthese units has been undermined by a shortage of trained personnel and by thetransfer of trained officers to police stations without SPUs. They currentlyremain largely ineffective and unavailable outside of major urban centers.[50]The Ministry of Gender finalized a national Gender Policy in2012 that prioritizes sexual and gender-based violence. According to thepolicy, a National Plan of Action will be developed, along with new laws, toeradicate sexual and gender-based violence. The policy also calls for thedevelopment and implementation of standard operating procedures for preventionand response to sexual and gender-based violence and the establishment of‘safe centers’ for the trauma counseling of victims.[51]Concrete progress in these areas has not yet been achieved.Currently, a small number of UN agencies, international, andnational NGOs are trying to respond to violence against women, but resourcesare scarce.[52] Somelocal organizations and government officials say they are trying to addresschild marriage, although their efforts are limited by lack of a comprehensiveaction plan. According to one local NGO executive director, “We’vebeen talking about the issue of early marriage for a long time, but therehasn’t been any structured or systematic lobbying or advocacystrategy.”[53]II. Factors Contributing to Child Marriage in SouthSudanSouth Sudan is a “hot spot” for child marriagein Africa.[54]According to the 2006 Sudan Household Health Survey, close to half (48 percent)of all South Sudanese girls between the ages of 15 and 19 are married.Research by Human Rights Watch and other organizations showthat several factors—accentuated by a lack of strong judicial or policyframework to ensure that existing laws designed to prevent and address earlymarriage are enforced—contribute to this harmful practice in South Sudan.Below are perhaps the mostsignificant contributing factors to child marriage: dowry payment; poverty; andtradition and culture, including fear of teenage pregnancy outside marriage.DowryDowry payment is a keydriver of child marriage in South Sudan, where families see their daughters assources of wealth. A marriage is sealed after a man and his family negotiatesand pays a dowry to a woman’s family in the form of cattle, otheranimals, or, increasingly, money. Human Rights Watch interviewed 47 girls whosaid they were forced to marry because their families wanted to get dowry. Inpastoralist communities, dowry is largely paid in cattle, while agriculturalistcommunities combine money with cattle or other livestock. Although common inSouth Sudanese communities, dowry payments vary depending on ethnic group,social status, and family wealth.[55]According to Ayen C., from Bor County,My husband paid 75 cows as dowry for me. We never talked orcourted before we got married. When I learned about the marriage, I felt verybitter. I told my father, “I don’t want to go to this man.”He said, “I have loved the cattle that this man has, you will marryhim.”[56]Customary practices attach great social and economicimportance to dowry payment, and a husband’s consequent rights over hiswife.[57]It may increase the likelihood of violence against women by reinforcing genderstereotypes that view the woman as the property of her family or husband. Manywomen, including Ageer M., said that they were beaten if they resistedmarrying:The man I loved did not have cows and my uncles rejectedhim. My husband paid 120 cows…. I refused him but they beat me badly andtook me by force to him. The man forced me to have sex with him so I had tostay there.[58]PovertyPoor families may view girlsas a financial burden, prompting them to marry them off to alleviate thatburden. In a context of limited economic resources and opportuni­ties,girls are also seen as economic assets as their marriages provide cattle, otheranimals, money, and gifts.[59]Some families believe that giving away their daughters in marriage may give hera chance for a better life and better prospects for the future.Girls get married when theirfamilies cannot meet their basic needs or pay for them to continue schooling. Someof the girls interviewed told us that they got married hoping to escape poverty.Pontinanta J. has nine siblings and neither of her parents is employed. Shetold Human Rights Watch that she was married in 2006 at the age of 13 because “myfather did not want to pay my school fees. Sometimes we had no food athome.”[60]Tradition and CultureChild marriage is deeplyembedded in South Sudanese traditions and patriarchal cultures. Girls aregenerally considered ready for marriage as soon as they reach puberty and they maybe pressured to marry as soon as they do. Marriage, especially early marriage,is considered the best option for girls. Those who delay marrying may bescorned by the community and labeled as “expired” goods.[61]Twenty four-year-old Poni W. was completing her first yearof university when Human Rights Watch interviewed her. She is unmarried, andhas no children. She told us,In our village, people have negative attitudes if you aremature and unmarried. People will pester you to get married. When I go homethey all ask when I will get married. The boys also abuse you, saying you areexpired.[62]One significant factor contributing to child marriage is thewidespread perception amongst many South Sudanese that teenage pregnancy underminesfamily honor. Early marriage is viewed as a way to protect girls frompre-marital sex and unwanted pregnancy, which is seen as undermining familyhonor—potentially reducing the amount of dowry and the family’seconomic advancement. A woman interviewed by Human Rights Watch told us,If you decide to delay your daughter’s marriage, shemay get pregnant. The man may not pay many cows. That is why we marry themearly. There is a big fear of girls getting pregnant out of wedlock.[63]Akuot M. was 15 when she married a 30-year-old man in 2010and said her father forced her into marriage becauseHe feared that the boda boda men [motorcycle taxidrivers] would impregnate me and reject me. He said I had already reachedpuberty and was too big to be in school. He said I needed to bring dowry.[64]When unmarried girls get pregnant, or even if they aresuspected of being sexually active, they may be forced to marry the maninvolved. Poni W. told Human Rights Watch, “In our village, once you getpregnant at home they chase you to go to the boy’s home. They don’tallow you to stay at home.” Poni told us that her brothers forced her17-year-old sister to marry the man who impregnated her, although she did notwant to and hoped to finish secondary school.[65]Keji L., 29, wept as she told Human Rights Watch that heruncle forced her to marry her boyfriend when she was 14, convinced that she wassleeping with him after she visited him at his home:When I returned home my uncle started beating me sayingthat I have chosen to visit boys so it means I want to get married…. Hebeat me so badly using a big stick for about an hour … asking me,“Where is the man you are sleeping with?” Some pieces of the woodgot into my face and upper arm near the shoulder and I had to go to hospital[shows scars]. He beat me till we reached the boy’s home, and he left methere.... I feel a lot of pain when I remember this because I was notinterested in getting married. He messed my education[66].She said her sister was also forced to marry under similarcircumstances:She went to disco and my uncle said she had spent the nightwith a boy. He told her to go to him. He carried her to the man’s home.[67]Lack of a Strong Legal and Policy FrameworkSouth Sudan also lacks astrong legal and policy framework, and there is poor enforcement of existinglaws to effectively prevent and address early and forced marriages (see SectionIV).III. Impact of Child Marriage onWomen and GirlsChildmarriage violates a range of human rights recognized under international law.These include: the right to bodily integrity and to be free fromviolence—as girls may experience verbal, physical, and psychologicalviolence at the hands of spouses and their families and their own families; theright to education—which child marriage interrupts or ends; the right todecide when and who to marry; and the right to health.ViolenceA World Health Organization multi-country study onwomen’s health and domestic violence found that younger women, particularlythose aged 15–19, and those with lower levels of education faced a higherrisk of physical or sexual violence at the hands of a partner in almost all thecountries studied, than older and more educated women.[68]Research suggests that spousal age difference is also a risk factor- associatedwith violence and abuse, including marital rape.[69]Child marriage creates anenvironment that increases young brides’ vulnerability to physical,sexual, psychological, and economic abuse. Because early marriage limits youngmarried girls’ knowledge and skills, resources, social support networks,mobility and autonomy, they often have little power in relation to theirhusband or his family.In addition, the large age gap between child brides andtheir spouses makes them less able to negotiate when and how sex takes place ina marriage, including safer sex and family planning.[70] InSouth Sudan, a married girl or woman often leaves her maternal home to livewith her husband and his family. Power and authority in the home is customarilyheld by men and older women, and this can place young married girls at greaterrisk of abuse and violence.[71]Violence to Force Girlsto MarryAs this report shows, girls who try to resist early andforced marriages may suffer brutal consequences at the hands of their families.In cases documented by Human Rights Watch, girls were physically assaulted andverbally abused. In some cases, they were held captive and even murdered bytheir families.Aguet N. married in 2003 at the age of 15. She told HumanRights Watch that she was in school in year five and wanted to finish hereducation, but her uncles beat her and her mother to force her to marry a 75-year-oldman:This man went to my uncles and paid a dowry of 80 cows. Iresisted the marriage. They threatened me. They said, “If you want yoursiblings to be taken care of, you will marry this man.” I said he is tooold for me. They said, “You will marry this old man whether you like itor not because he has given us something to eat.” They beat me so badly.They also beat my mother because she was against the marriage.Families also coerce girls into marriage. Anyier D., 18,told Human Rights Watch that her family forced her to marry a 40-year-old manwhen she was 14. She said,I wanted to say no, but they cursed me. They really cursedme saying, “If you refuse to get married to this man you will never findhappiness in your life for you will never have a home and you will bebarren.”[72]Eleven girls told us that their families restricted theirmovements after they became engaged. Atong G., 18, was engaged in July 2011against her will. She was living with her parents because her husband-to-be hasnot completed paying the dowry of 70 cows asked for by her family. She toldHuman Rights Watch,I am now confined at home. My family does not allow me toleave home because they think I will get another man…. I don’t evengo to the market anymore or see my friends.[73]Girls Murdered forResisting Forced MarriagesGirls who refuse to accept or stay in forced marriages, orwho elope because they want to marry someone not chosen or approved of by theirfamilies, are often at risk of violence and in extreme cases, may be killed bytheir families or husbands. Although this aspect of gender-based violence isnot well documented, local women’s rights activists and media reports indicatethat there may be many cases of murder that go unreported, especially amongstpastoralist communities that pay dowry in cows.[74]Local women’s rights organizations pointed out toHuman Rights Watch that society is generally tolerant of such violence becausethe girl is seen as having gone against her family’s wishes and societalnorms.[75] As aresult, perpetrators are rarely held to account, perpetuating a culture ofviolence against women in the country.Samuel Dem, senior inspector in the Directorate of AlternativeEducation, told Human Rights Watch about a girl who was killed for refusing tomarry a wealthy old man:The girl was 17 years old and studying in Rumbek East Countyin Lakes State. The father decided to give her in marriage to an old man whohad … 200 cows. The old man had never spoken with the girl. In our area,people don’t even inform the girl [if they want to marry her]. So the oldman went and asked her family. Her family went to the cattle camp and saw the200 cows. In the evening, they told the girl, “We want to hand you overto this man.” The girl refused. She said, “I don’t know thisman. I have never spoken to him, and he is not my age.” Then some youngpeople took the girl to a nearby forest. They tied her to a tree and beat herup until she died. There are so many other stories. [76]SuicideGirls who do not wish to marry or who want to escape forcedmarriages may also be at risk of suicide. Dem told Human Rights Watch that heis aware of cases of girls who have killed themselves “because they areforced to marry someone that they don’t love.”  He said,“I am from Lakes State, and I know of so many such cases. There are alsomany cases like this in Warrap and Jonglei.” [77]Girls who are forced into marriage suffer great emotionalpain. Agata N. told us about her sister’s tribulations after she wasforced to marry a boy who had made her pregnant:My sister is having problems because she is married to aman she doesn’t love and the man doesn’t love her. She got pregnantand was chased to that boy. He doesn’t support her. The childdoesn’t even look healthy. They don’t talk. Sometimes hedoesn’t sleep at home. He doesn’t show concern when the child issick. My sister says she might kill herself.[78]Violence in MarriageThe majority of girls and women interviewed by Human RightsWatch said that they were abused by their husbands after the marriage. Theytold us that they were beaten and verbally abused  for not being good athouse chores, for not conceiving, for asking for financial support, orquestioning their husband’s fidelity. Eight told us that their husbandskept them from contacting their family or friends, going to the market, orlooking for a job. Other girls complained that their husbands constantlyaccused them of being unfaithful, slept at the homes of other women, or broughtother women home.Kolong K., 30, married at the age of 16. She toldHuman Rights Watch that she faced many problems in her marriage because she wasyoung and did not know how to run a home:I did not know anything about marriage when I got married.The man [husband] used to fight me all the time because I was unable to do thehouse chores. Sometimes he would fight me if I went to visit my lady friends. Iliked to play football with other girls. I would go to play and be late to makefood and he would beat me. We still fight. It has never stopped.[79]Aguet told us that her husband also physically abuses her.“My husband beats me because he says I am not working for him well,”she said.[80]Married girls may also suffer abuse by elder co-wives andother relatives. Alek P. guesses she is 16. She told Human Rights Watch thather uncles forced her to marry a 45-year-old man who already had a wife. Shesaid,The first wife is strong in the house. She saw me as anenemy and she did not accept me. She was harassing me all the time and evenbeat me, so I left.[81]Christina G., 13, said she got married to escape from heralcoholic and violent parents. She now faces violence from her husband andfather-in-law:My husband is a casual worker but he does not support us.He is not at home a lot of times and does not tell me where he goes. If hecomes home and does not find food, he quarrels and beats me. I tell him Idon’t have money to buy food and he asks why I cannot go to the bush likeother women to collect greens and cook them. But I don’t know what greensto get. Sometimes I even sleep hungry. I cry a lot and I regret why I gotmarried.I live with my husband’s family. My father-in-lawalso quarrels [with] me about lack of food in the house and says his sonmarried a lazy woman. I sell firewood to make money. Sometimes I get two orfive pounds in a day and sometimes I don’t sell. At home I had problems,and here I have more problems. I will persevere in the marriage as I havenowhere to go.[82]Some of the girls and women interviewed said that theirhusbands did not allow them to leave home, or to visit friends. Gloria C., pointingto a scar on her right hand below the elbow, told us,My husband told me not to go to the market, visit friendsor my relatives. If I did, he would quarrel [with] me and beat me. One time hewas beating me and the wood broke and got into my hand.[83]Marital rape is common in South Sudan, although, as earliernoted, it is not recognized in law. Seven of the girls whom Human Rights Watch interviewedsaid their husbands had forced them to have sex. Ageer M. told us her husbandraped her, aided by his brothers:I had refused to have sex with him, but he forced me. My brothers-in-lawused to lock me up in the house during the day so that I don’t goanywhere, and so that I can have sex with him.[84]Margaret B. told Human Rights Watch that her husbandphysically, emotionally, and sexually abused her. She said,I had fibroids and was in a lot of pain. Sex was painful.If I told my husband I had pain, he would get out shouting that he was going tolook for sex elsewhere because I had refused him. Sometimes he would have sexwith me anyway.[85]Leaving Violent MarriagesVictims of early and forced marriages may be unable to leaveabusive marriages because of economic pressures, lack of family support, andother social circumstances, worsening their vulnerability. Ayen C., 21, toldHuman Rights Watch that she married at 14:My in-laws were abusing me saying, “We have given outour cows for you and you are not producing.” My husband was alsocomplaining that he had wasted his cows on me and I could not give himchildren. He talked with bitterness, always complained, and sometimes wasverbally abusive. I was very sad, very stressed. I had nowhere to go. I couldnot go to my father because it is him who had forced me to get married. Idecided to stay even if it meant dying in the home. Even if he had been beatingme, I would have stayed because in our culture people stay in marriages withproblems.[86]Penina W. spoke about her abusive marriage and herdifficulty getting help:After a few months of getting married, he became verydifferent. He did not allow me to go out to the market or to visit my friendsand relatives. If he saw me talking to my friends, he got upset and quarreledor beat me. I could not talk to friends whom I knew before marrying him, andthis was making me very sad. Life was very difficult for me. I told my uncleabout these problems and he said since I am married I should take care of myproblems. I went to the headman and the headman told me to go back to myhusband and sort out our problems.[87]Limited Literacy,Access to EducationMy father refused me to go to school. He said it is a wasteof money to educate a girl. He said marriage will bring me respect in thecommunity. Now I have grown up and I know that this is not true. I cannot getwork to support my children and I see girls who have some education can getjobs.—Mary K., Yambio County, March 7, 2012The 2008 Child Act and Transitional Constitution (articles14 and 29) provide for the right to free and compulsory primary education forall citizens without discrimination, including on the basis of gender, amongother grounds.[88]It states that no child shall be subjected to exploitative practices or abuse,harmful to his or her education, health or wellbeing.[89]Child marriage frequently interrupts girls’ educationor deprives them of it altogether. Most of the girls and womeninterviewed—43 out of 61— who had attended school, left after threeto five years of primary education.  Mary K., from Yambio County, said,My father refused me to go to school. He said it is a wasteof money to educate a girl. He said marriage will bring me respect in thecommunity. Now I have grown up and I know that this is not true. I cannot getwork to support my children and I see girls who have some education can getjobs.[90]The Ministry of Education told Human Rights Watch that theydo not collect data on the number of girls who drop out of school to getmarried or due to pregnancy.[91] However,the director general for education in Western Equatoria State said that despitethe lack of statistics, “from what we see in schools, drop-out rates dueto marriage and pregnancy are very high.”[92] Ahead teacher at a school in Bor County, Jonglei State, told us,Parents sometimes don’t allow girls to attend school.There are very many girls dropping out because of marriage. Dropout rates arevery high once they reach teenage years, especially between ages 15 and 17. Ihave not seen many that drop out to stay at home. Most drop out to get married.[93]Out of the 61 girls interviewed who had been in school, 39told us that they had dropped out to get married. Fourteen had dropped out dueto pregnancy.According to Alfred Lodiong, deputy director of the Directorateof Gender Equity and Social Change, part of the Ministry of General Education,Juba,Parents sell their girls. They don’t value education;they value cows. The question is how to make them understand that education ismore valuable than cows.[94]Some parents keep girls out of school, especially after theyhave reached puberty, for fear that schooling may expose them to risks ofpremarital sex and pregnancy that would decrease their chances of gettingmarried or fetching a high dowry upon marriage. One woman told us,“Sometimes a girl becomes big in school and boys start noticing her. Badthings can happen, so it is better she gets married.”[95]There are also fears that education makes girls“strong headed” or less traditional so that they do not make“good” wives. A member of a group of elders that we interviewedabout their views on girls’ education, told us,Education is not good. It brings much freedom to the woman,and she will not listen to you. You can even lose a woman you have married withso many cows because of education.[96]Human Rights Watch interviewed 15 girls who were married andin school attending alternative education programs. However, the majority ofgirls we spoke to had dropped out of school and said it was difficult tocontinue school after marriage or becoming pregnant. Some of the reasons givenby girls were lack of money to pay school fees, lack of child care and unavailabilityof adult classes, or the need to do chores. Others said that their husbandswould not allow them to continue school after marriage alleging that they wereunfaithful if they insisted on going to school.Atong G. told us, “I was going to school in classfive. I stopped school after getting engaged because my husband said other menwill see me.[97]Those girls and women who had not returned to school aftermarriage said they regretted not being able to complete their education. AkurL., 19, was married at the age of 13 in 2003 and dropped out of school. Shetold Human Rights Watch,My uncles forced me to marry a man who was old enough to bemy grandfather. I was going to school and in class six. I liked school. If Iwas given a chance to finish school, I would not be having these problems,working as a waitress and having separated from my husband.Akur said she wanted to return to school but there was no schoolfor adult learners in her area of Jonglei state.[98]Anyier D., 18, told Human Rights Watch that her unclesforced her to leave school in 2008 to marry an old man she did not know. Shewas 14, and in class one. She said,I would wish to return to school even if I have children.People think that I am happy but I am not because I don’t have aneducation. I don’t have something of my own and I am only cleaningoffices. If I had gone to secondary school, I would get a good job.[99]The girls and women interviewed by Human Rights Watch whohad returned to school following pregnancy or marriage enjoyed learning andappreciated the benefits that would come with having an education. Penina W.,21, told Human Rights Watch why she decided to return to school:I stayed with my husband for four years but because I didnot conceive, he became distant and abusive. The fifth year he chased me away.I got another boyfriend who is the father to my young boy. But he has refusedto marry me or take care of the child. I stay with my younger sister and mychild. My sister finished senior three and got a job. So I decided to return toschool so that I can also get education and get a job.[100]Penina completed primary school and passed her finalexamination. She plans to go to secondary school, although she said she did nothave the school fees or someone to look after her baby while she goes toschool. She is cultivating food crops that she sells and uses the money to buyfood and save for her school fees.Denial of the Right toFull and Free Consent to MarriageIf someone comes in the right way and asks for the hand ofthe girl in marriage, we can give out the girl. The problem is when she decideson her own to get married to someone who is not chosen by the family.—Chief Akech Malek, Bor County, March 14, 2012The Transitional Constitution gives women the rightto consent to marriage, but this legal provision is largely symbolic.[101]As testimonies in this report show, girls are commonly forced by their familiesto marry.Generally, child marriage involves the imposition of alife-long partner on children. Child marriage is also considered forcedmarriage since children are not legally capable of giving free, full, andinformed consent to marriage.[102]In terms of international law, older children have the rightto participate in decisions about whom and when they marry as soon they havethe maturity to understand the implications of their decisions.[103]But no matter what their age, children’s traditionallylow status in many African societies and well-entrenched cultural beliefsundermine their ability to oppose the wishes or opinion of a parent, guardian,or elder. Some families in South Sudan coerce or force girls into marriage anduse violence, threats of death or being cursed, or the need to protect familyhonor and family well-being.Almost all the girls we interviewed, including those aged17-18, told Human Rights Watch that they had been forced into marriage; andthat no one had asked for their views on whether they wanted to get married orto the chosen person.Furthermore, many of the girls we interviewed told us thatno one had explained to them the responsibilities that come with marriage,including issues around sexual relations, childbirth and childcare, and otherfamily obligations.Rosa B. married before she had reached puberty. She toldHuman Rights Watch,I did not know what is involved in marriage. I had beenhearing other women talking about having sex between men and women when theyare married. I was scared of having sex for the first time. I was not ready forit.Rosa said when she asked her elder sister about what toexpect in marriage, she advised her, “to provide whatever my husbandsays, and to respect and obey him and his relatives because he had paid dowryfor me.”[104]Penina W., 21, married at 14 and is separated from herhusband. She said,I did not know anything about what it means to be married.I got married because I was hoping that the man will support me because I wassuffering at home.[105]Health ConsequencesEarly marriage contributes to violations of the right tohealth.[106]It puts girls at greater risk of dying or ill-health as a result of early pregnancyand childbirth.[107]Their children also face higher mortality rates.[108]These increased risks are not only related to age, but also to girls’ lowlevels of education, low social and economic status, and lack of access tohealth related information and services.[109]Householdresponsibilities and other factors that may cause stress and anxiety mayfurther aggravate the negative outcomes of pregnancy.[110]When they are physicallymore mature, girls have a better chance of surviving pregnancy and are able tobetter care for their children.[111]Studies have also shown that girls who continuetheir education, especially until completing secondary school, are more likelyto invest in their own children’s education, enabling future generations to become economically independent andpositive contributors to society.[112]On the other hand, children of young and illiterate mothers tend to facetheir same cycle of childhood deprivation and abuse.[113]Obstetric FistulaEarly marriage is a major risk factor for fistuladevelopment—a devastating childbirth injury that leaves its victims withurine and/or fecal incontinence that causes infection, pain,and bad smell, and triggers stigma and the breakdown of marriages, loss ofemployment, and challenges in family and community life.The risk of obstetric fistula is heightened by young marriedgirls’ poor socio-economic status, and lack of education and access toappropriate reproductive and maternal health care. However, studies show thatphysical immaturity is the key risk for girls under 15[114]because their pelvises are not fully developed and thus susceptible toobstructed labor—the main cause of fistula.[115]About 5,000 girls and womenin South Sudan suffer from fistula each year.[116]A doctor at Juba teaching hospital told HumanRights Watch that although the hospital lacks accurate fistula statistics, theysee many cases of teenagers with obstructed labor, not only from Juba but otherstates in the country.[117]“I see many girls who come here with obstructed labor. You knowtheir bodies are still young,” a midwife at a government hospital in WEStold us.[118]Victoria J. married in 2009 at 14, and became pregnantshortly thereafter. She said,I started labor in the morning on a Friday…. Thenurse kept checking and saying I will deliver safely. On Monday she said I wasweak. The doctor decided to operate on me. At operation they found the baby wasdead. The doctor said the baby had died due to the long labor. After that I foundout that urine was coming out all the time.[119]Limited Access to ContraceptionA midwife at a government hospital told Human Rights Watchthat it was difficult to offer family planning services to women because manyhusbands want their wives to continue having children. She told us,It is very difficult to offer family planning services towomen. Sometimes husbands come and complain that their wives are not givingbirth because we are giving them family planning. Even some of my colleaguesdon’t want to do it because of this intimidation.[120]Margaret B. told Human Rights Watch that her husband forcedher to stop using contraception although she was not ready to have anotherchild:After the third child I used an injectable contraception.My husband allowed me to take it two times then he refused saying that hewanted another child. I was not ready. I had just had surgery to removefibroids. But he is my husband and I had to obey him. So I stopped theinjection and that is when I got pregnant with my fourth child. I had manyproblems with the pregnancy.[121]Limited Access to Health-Related Information,Inability to Make Healthcare DecisionsMany of the girls we interviewed lacked accuratereproductive health knowledge. We spoke to some girls who displayed a lack ofbasic knowledge about sexuality and contraception, while others said they didnot have this knowledge before getting married.Girls told us they did not discuss sex with their parents,and those that had been to school said they did not receive sex education.Gloria C. said she got pregnant at 14 or 15. “I didn’t know that Iwould get pregnant by having sex,” she said. “I was just playingsex.”[122]A nurse in Western Equatoria State commented about thisissue in her community:Girls here are very sexually active. They say they are“playing” sex (South Sudanese common expression for sexualintercourse). But they have very little information about pregnancy andcontraception.[123]Human Rights Watch interviewed 10 girls who told us thatthey became pregnant after their first sexual encounter. All believed that theywould not get pregnant because it was their first time. All of them said theydid not have information on family planning and contraception. Other girls whowere married also told us they did not have this information.Young married girls also have limitedability to make decisions about their health and that of their children. They arerelatively powerless in their families, and often lack the autonomy,information, and economic means to access contraception and other reproductivehealth care. Violence and discrimination in the home may also limit theiruptake of reproductive and sexual health services, even in cases of emergency.Rosa B., 20, thinks she married at the age of 12. She toldHuman Rights Watch that she gave birth to her first child at home because,“My husband refused me to go to the hospital. He told me there is an oldwoman who helps other women and I will use her.”[124] Rosasaid that after delivery, her right leg was paralyzed and she could not walkwell for two months. She told us that her husband sought traditional treatmentfor her although she kept asking him to take her to the hospital.Christina G. is also not sure of her date of birth but saysher mother told her she is 13. She told Human Rights Watch that they live neara hospital, but when she went into labor,My husband refused me to go to hospital. I labored at homefor three days with a traditional birth attendant before he agreed to take meto hospital. The doctor said my body was too young. He operated on me to removethe baby.[125]Mental Health ConsequencesChild marriage deprives girls of their childhood andadolescence, a time necessary to develop not only physically, but emotionallyand psychologically. It burdens them with adult responsibilities for which theyare unprepared, including those related to marriage and childbearing. The practicecurtails girls’ freedom and denies them the chance to develop theirintellect and independent identities.[126]Early marriage can haveprofound psychological health consequences for girls, particularly youngergirls, and these consequences may impact women throughout their lives. Earlymarriage inflicts great emotional stress on girls who are forced to move fromtheir parents’ home to that of their husband and in-laws, who arestrangers to them. They are obliged to have sexual relations, although manymight not be fully developed physically and emotionally.As discussed, young marriedgirls may suffer social isolation and restricted freedom of movement. They mayhave few options to socialize and participate in public life, and experiencefeelings of worthlessness, depression, and suicidal thoughts.[127]They areexpected to take on household chores and care for children and families whilethemselves children. They are denied access to education, and often lacksupport when faced with marital problems.Many of the girls and women interviewed said they wereunhappy in their marriages and regretted having been married early. Many brokedown crying during the interviews when they recalled the suffering they hadendured in the forced marriages, and their lost opportunities for happiness andpersonal development.IV. No Protection, No Justice for Child MarriageVictimsGirls and women in SouthSudan have few rights in their homes and in marriage, and face many risks whenthey resist or try to leave forced marriages.Many of the girls interviewedby Human Rights Watch said they had tried to reason with their families whenfaced with imminent marriage to someone they did not wish to marry. When theseefforts failed—and they did in most cases—many had no choice but toget married. Some women and girls try at great personal risk to avoid forcedand early marriages. Some seek help from their families, traditionalauthorities or elders. Others flee to religious leaders or human rightsorganizations, or look for assistance from government officials and the police.Even if they manage to flee, they face many hurdles to getting protection andaccessing justice, and rarely get the help they need.There are many weaknesses inthe administration of justice in South Sudan, such as lack of infrastructure,resources, adequate laws, and well-trained personnel.[128]Generally, these weaknesses affect women’s ability to obtain justice forgender-based crimes, including forced marriages. Statutory courts are ofteninaccessible; they are far away and women lack legal counsel to help themnavigate the system, or the necessary protection to lodge complaints. As earlyand forced marriages are accepted in many South Sudan traditions and cultures,customary courts offer limited hope for escape. With both statutory and customarycourts staffed almost entirely by men, women encounter discrimination whenseeking justice in either forum.RachelB.’s Story: Failedby the Government and Forcedinto MarriageFifteen-year-oldRachel B. loved to study.[129]When Human Rights Watch interviewed her in March 2012 she was attendingschool. But she told us her dream of getting a good education began to fadein 2011 when her parents decided to marry her to a man who was about 40 yearsold and already had a wife and children:My familyand the man’s family got together and agreed on the dowry of 26,000pounds [about $7,429], which was paid in December 2011. Afterwards, my motherand father came to me and said, “Today you are going to your house[getting married].”I toldthem I didn’t want to get married because I wanted to study. Theyinsisted I had to marry him because he had paid dowry. They forcefully tookme to his house in New Site.[130]I spentthree days there. I was crying all the time. On the third day I escaped andreturned home. My father called my mother and said I should stay at homeuntil he returned home to settle the matter. I told them that I would killmyself if I had to go [with the man her parents wanted her to marry].Racheltook the advice of one of her friends and sought help from the Human RightsCommission (HRC). The HRC sent her to a center for vulnerable childrenmanaged by the Central Equatoria State Ministry of Social Development whereshe stayed for two weeks. She was then told to return home to her family. InMarch 2012, when Human Rights Watch first interviewed her, she was living athome, under constant threat, and desperate to continue her education. Shetold us:Idon’t feel safe at home. Every day [my family] are fighting me, and Ibelieve that they can kill me. I am always thinking about how unsafe I am,even when I am at school. I cannot concentrate in class because of thesefears. I also fear that the man can kidnap me on my way to school, rape me,or he can beat me or kill me. I want the government to help me, to send mesomewhere where I can be safe and study. If there was a shelter where I wouldbe safe, I would go there.Her familycontinued with their plan to have her married. Rachel told Human Rights Watchabout the marriage when we interviewed her again:In April[2012], my uncle’s son came to our home and said that he wanted me togo to my husband. He beat me and told me that he would kill me if I refusedto get married to the man. He said the family had used the money my husbandgave and were not in a position to repay, so I had to marry him. He took meto my uncle’s home. There, my uncle beat me, tied my ankles and wristswith metalwire, and locked me inside a room. They took my phone and people at the home watched meconstantly. I was not allowed to go to school.Rachelescaped and again sought help from the HRC who placed her at a center forgirls, where she remained for two weeks. In mid-April, Rachel’s familywent to the offices of the HRC, armed, and demanded that Rachel be released tothem.  They eventually took her away.TheHRC referred Rachel’s case to the Ministry of Justice where prosecutorssaid they were pursuing her case, though no charges have ever been broughtagainst her family members, nor any arrests made. After her second attempt toescape, Rachel made a statement to the police, which included testimony aboutthe abuse she had suffered.Despitethe involvement of multiple government agencies in Rachel’s case, nonewere able to protect her and her whereabouts at time of writing were unknownto Human RightsWatch.Officials from the HRC and the government told Human Rights Watch that theybelieve Rachel is married and living with her husband.Impunity for Sexual and Gender-BasedCrimesThere is critical lack of implementation ofwomen's human rights among the police and judiciary in South Sudan, which makesbringing perpetrators to justice very difficult and encourages impunity forthese crimes.[131]Police insensitivity can be a significant barrier for women whoare seeking protection. The newly developed Special Protection Units (SPUs)seek to address this shortfall, but as mentioned, are plagued by a lack oftrained personnel and are not available in all police stations.Across the country, law enforcement services are weak andpolice are under-trained and under-resourced.[132] Inparticular, aside of the SPUs, police are given little training on how tohandle cases of gender-based violence and for the most part, they have littleknowledge of women’s rights.Most police officers are men, many of whom are older,uneducated former soldiers with conservative views about women’s place insociety. Reports by local and international organizations indicate police oftenrefuse to assist women who report domestic abuse, claiming that this fallsoutside of their jurisdiction and sending them home to address the issue withintheir families.[133]A recent study by the Ministry of Gender,Child, and Social Welfare noted the lack of urgency by the police andgovernment prosecutors—key institutions responsible for addressinggender-based crimes in terms of protection, investigation, prosecution andenforcement—in dealing with cases of gender-basedviolence. It stated,Both institutions are … mostly unaware of themagnitude and manifestations of gender based crimes…. The result has beende-prioritization of SGBV offences like rape and concentration on cases likemurder, which the public attorney thought [were] more important. Thus, fewgender-related cases reach [the] court or are prosecuted. For example, thosewho kill girls … engaging in commercial sex go scot free. A man who beathis sister to death for refusing to marry an elderly man was released the sameday without any charges.[134]Lack of SheltersSouth Sudan has no shelters designed to assist survivors ofgender-based violence (GBV). As Rachel’s case demonstrates, lack ofshelters or safe spaces where girls can seek protection and help when at riskof forced marriage, or when they run away from them is a key barrier toeffectively responding to forced marriages and domestic violence generally.Girls who resist forced marriages may face physical, verbal, and psychologicalviolence from their families or husbands and are not safe at home.A center run by an NGO, Confident Children out of Conflict,has occasionally accommodated victims of forced marriage. Another small center,known as Toto-Chan, run by the Central Equatoria State Ministry of Gender andSocial Welfare has also housed such girls, including Rachel. A ministryofficial however noted that “it is not our mandate to keep such girls. Weare not a safe house.”[135] TheJuba Orphanage has also served as a temporary refuge in at least three cases ofwhich Human Rights Watch is aware. The supervisor emphasized however that thecenter is in fact intended to provide long-term accommodation for orphans.[136]Donors and some government officials have expressed concernsabout how shelters can respond to GBV cases. While some support theirestablishment, others fear that women there can more easily be targeted bytheir husbands and families. For example, Konga said the following about lackof shelters:We would like the government to look into establishing acenter where cases such as Rachel’s can be referred. Right now, girls whoare being forced into marriage have nowhere to go. So they can’t reportbecause even if they do so there is no way of protecting them. Mostly they goto the police and don’t get the services they need. So they go home andget married. Girls need support when they run. Sometimes they come with onlyone dress and need sanitary pads. Some children are really traumatized by thebeatings and need time to heal. If there is a place where people can report GBVcases, many more will come if they are assured of confidentiality and security.[137]Human Rights Watch asked the head of the women and juvenilejustice department in the national Ministry of Justice about protection forgirls who bring complaints against their own families in cases of forced marriage.He commented,There is no solution in such cases. In case a child goes tothe prosecuting attorney and opens a case against her own family or guardians,where is she going to stay? This is something the Ministry of Justice, UNICEF,and the Ministry of Social Welfare need to deliberate on.[138]Lack of Coordination amongstRelevant Government Ministries and AgenciesAnother problem in protecting victims of forced marriage andenabling them to access justice is lack of coordination between relevantgovernment ministries. There are no guidelines on how the authorities shouldhandle these cases, and ministries respond to cases in an ad hoc manner, oftenwithout offering any real solutions to the girls who go to them for protection.In the end, their inefficiency helps perpetuate child marriages and relatedabuses against girls.In the absence of a coordinated and procedural response tocases of forced marriage—and the lack of a clear delegation ofresponsibilities to specific police or health authorities— the ad hocefforts of government ministries have thus  proved inadequate due to thefailure to develop a comprehensive strategy detailing specific and targetedaction.For example, Rachel’s case was handled by the nationalministries of Gender, Child and Social Welfare, Justice, and that of Gender andSocial Development in Central Equatoria State. Lack of coordination betweenthem, including ineffective coordination with the Human Rights Commission,meant that Rachel did not get help from any of them. This gap also underminesaccountability as the roles of each ministry are not clear.For example, the director ofchild protection at the Central Equatoria State Ministry of Gender and SocialDevelopment blamed the Ministry of Justice for Rachel’s forced marriage:Rachel was a child who suffered so much from the threat ofmarriage. She wanted to go to school, but this dream was taken from her. Wetried to solve this case, but we couldn’t. The Ministry of Justice shouldhave stopped Rachel from being forced to marry that man, but they didn’t.Instead, they returned her back to her family. They should review their lawsand cooperate with the Ministry of Social Development in order to solve suchissues.[139]The SSHRC also felt that the Ministry of Justice had failedto take effective steps to protect Rachel from violence and the marriage.Poor Monitoring of CasesGovernment institutions do not adequately monitor theoutcome of cases that they handle. Officers, particularly social workers, inthe state Ministries of Social Welfare, should ensure that they have sufficientcontact information to follow up on and visit girls whose cases they havehandled. Where courts do issue restraining orders or order that a marriageshould not take place, police should monitor compliance with the court order.Currently, although government institutions may claim tohave resolved cases, they cannot be certain without adequate follow up with thegirls on whether they were later married. For example, the Central Equatoria StateMinistry of Gender and Social Welfare told Human Rights Watch that they hadintervened in a few cases of forced marriage, although they were unaware ofwhat happened to the girls once they returned to their families:I have seen three cases of forced marriage. In one case, aschool girl was being forced to marry. We kept her somewhere for a week thenshe was given back to her family who said they would not force her to marry. Uptill now I don’t know what has happened to her. Her name was Jane, andshe was 15 years old and Dinka. There was another 16-year-old Dinka girl calledMary. She was taken back to her family. The family convinced us that they wouldwait. We don’t know where she is now. We have solved these casespeacefully by talking to the parents, but we don’t actually know what hashappened to these girls.Gaps in the Law and Conflicts between LawsSouth Sudan’s national laws have important protectionsfor girls and women.[140]However, South Sudan needs legislation that sets the minimum age of marriage at18 and protects women’s right to choose their own spouse and to enterinto marriage with their full and free consent. South Sudan should also take necessary legislative and other measures to ensurethat anyone who intentionally forces an adult or a child to enter into amarriage is appropriately penalized, and that marriages concluded under forcemay be voidable, annulled, or dissolved without undue burden placed on thevictim.The Child Act defines a child as anyone under 18 and statesthat, “every child has the right to be protected from early marriage.[141]The Child Act includes the rights of children to non-discrimination, birthregistration, health, education, life, survival and development, an opinion,protection from torture and degrading treatment, and to protection from abuse.[142]Article 22 states that, “Government shall take concrete measures toprotect children from all forms of abuse and to ensure that any child whobecomes the victim of abuse … shall be accorded appropriate treatment andrehabilitation.[143]Article 22 provides that those convicted of abusing a child can be sentenced to14 years, and article 30 provides that anyone convicted of violating the rightsof a child as guaranteed by the Child Act can be convicted and sentenced to upto seven years.While these articles can be read together to prohibit childmarriage and sanction those who force their children to marry, there is a need forclearer and more direct legislation, or at least for the judiciary to clarifyhow these provisions should be applied through judicial opinions or circulars.The 2011 Transitional Constitution of the Republic of SouthSudan does not set a minimum age of marriage. Instead, it ambiguously statesthat, “Every person of marriageable age shall have the right to marry aperson of the opposite sex and to found a family according to their respectivefamily laws, and no marriage shall be entered into without the free and fullconsent of the man and woman intending to marry.”[144] ThePenal Code does not criminalize those who procure a child marriage, but doescontain a provision criminalizing “kidnapping or abducting a woman tocompel her into marriage.”How the current definition of rape applies to sexualintercourse in the context of child marriage is also unclear. Under the PenalCode, 18 is the age of consent to sex. The same article excludes “sexualintercourse by a married couple” from the definition of rape.These gaps in the law perpetuate discrimination andinequality between men and women in the right to marry and found afamily.Customary LawChallengesOne key source of confusion in South Sudan is how toreconcile the Transitional Constitution’s recognition of customary law asa source of law when confronted with customary practices that arediscriminatory, harmful, or otherwise violate the human rights also affirmed bythe constitution.It is, however, clear in the constitution that all laws,whether customary or statutory, are subject to the Bill of Rights.[145]The Child Act provides further support for the non-application of harmfulcustomary practices, such as child marriage, through a provision providing thatcustomary and traditional laws shall be applied “except where those lawsare contrary to the best interests of the child.”[146]Unfortunately, neither courts nor the government have provided anyguidance as to what constitutes the best interests of the child, for thepurposes of the Child Act.Under the Code of Civil Procedure Act, customary law is the sourceof law for marriage, divorce, child custody and other family- related issues.[147]The Code of Civil Procedure also includes a caveat that such customs should notbe applied if they are “contrary to justice, equity or goodconscience.”While the provisions of the Transitional Constitution, theChild Act and the Code of Civil Procedure offer solutions for how conflictsbetween customary laws and human rights should be resolved, there are no publishedcourt decisions articulating this line of reasoning or offering guidance ininterpretation of customary laws consistent with the Transitional Constitution.The Supreme Court has not issued any judicial circulars offering clarificationto courts on how to use the provisions of the Transitional Constitution.A government official commented on the challenges posed bycustomary law in addressing child marriage, noting,There is a law, but … early marriage is a traditionalact. If you try to stop it, people will accuse you of wanting to change theirculture. Judges are having a hard time passing sentences for early marriage.The Child Act cannot be implemented completely because of tradition.[148]Customary courts are familiar and accessible, and are thereforeused by the vast majority of the population including women and girls. Theyserve as the primary institutional recourse for communities in matters ofmarriage. But the chiefs who preside over customary courts are usually oldermen, and their decisions frequently reflect deeply ingrained patriarchal views.They generally do not enforce the same definition of a child as the Child Act.Normally, girls are considered ready for marriage as soon as they reach puberty—ataround 12—rather than 18.[149]Customary courts generally favor restorative and consensualsolutions over punitive ones. Under customary law, for example, homicide,adultery, theft, and injury may be resolved through awards of compensation,often in the form of cows or other livestock, from the perpetrator to theinjured party.[150]While these are accepted ways of settling disputes withincommunities, the failure of customary courts to address the criminal elementsof certain gender-based crimes leaves victims without an adequate remedy. InRachel’s case, the Ministry of Justice agreed to release her to herfamily, despite the violence that she faced, because the family said they wouldsettle the issue as a family matter.While South Sudan is struggling with how to harmonize itsplural justice system,[151]these legal inconsistencies add to a culture of impunity for violations ofwomen’s rights including through child marriage.Punishment for Adulteryand Offences not Defined in LawAnother gap in the law in South Sudan relates to“offences” that do not exist in the Penal Code or in any writtenform. These include “elopement,” “pregnancy,” or“playing sex.”[152]Girls and women may also be arrested or imprisoned for attempting to marrywithout the consent of their families, for refusing to marry the man chosen forthem, or for running away after dowry has been paid. Human Rights Watch hasalso documented cases of women being imprisoned because they requested adivorce.[153]As noted in Section I, women and men, adults and minors, are also imprisonedfor adultery.These gaps in the legal system create opportunities forfamilies and husbands to intimidate women, and to coerce them into forcedmarriages or into continuing in marriages that they did not want, with husbandswho may be abusive. They may also be used to intimidate and to discourage thosewho try to assist girls to escape forced marriages, and generally women who tryto escape violent marriages. A human rights investigator at the Human RightsCommission who had tried to help Rachel told us that her family threatened totake him to court, claiming that he wanted to marry her, but dowry had beenpaid by another man.[154]Birth and Marriage RegistrationsBirth and marriage registrations are important in combatingchild marriage because they assist in providing documentation of the age of thespouses at the time of marriage, and can help with government monitoring ofunderage marriages.According to article 11 of the Child Act, birth registrationis the right of every child in South Sudan, and the government is required toput in place a birth registration law throughout the country. However, only 5percent of births in South Sudan are registered.[155] As aresult of decades of war and the attendant lack of education, people often lackrecords showing a child’s age, making it difficult to take age intoaccount before a marriage.Neither the Child Act nor the Transitional Constitutionprovide for the need for marriage registration. There is currently no statuteoutlining the legal requirements for marriage.Lack of Awareness about Rights and Information on Where toSeek HelpGenerally, women in South Sudan are not knowledgeable oftheir rights under South Sudanese laws.[156] Ayen C., 21, toldHuman Rights Watch that she married at 14 and suffered abuse from her husbandand in-laws, but chose to stay in the abusive marriage:My in-laws were abusing me saying they had wasted theircows on me and I was not giving birth. My husband also talked to me withbitterness, always complained, and sometimes was verbally abusive. I was verysad; very stressed. I had nowhere to go. I could not go to my father because itis him who had forced me to get married. I decided to stay even if it meant dyingin the home. Even if he had been beating me, I would have stayed because in ourculture people stay in marriages with problems.[157]Article 36 of the Child Actrequires that all levels of government “should provide effective remediesto redress violations of the rights in this Act, including through access tochild friendly, independent complaints procedures and competent Courts.”However, the girls with whom Human Rights Watch spoke did not know where toseek help when faced with a forced marriage or once they had entered one. Manyof the girls we interviewed told us that their only option was to go to theirfamilies or community elders.When Human Rights Watch askeda head teacher if any girls had sought help from him for forced marriage, hetold us,No girls have reported to me that they are being forcedinto marriage. Of course there are many cases, but these are considered familyaffairs and the girls are not allowed talk about them to outsiders. Girlsdon’t report these cases because they have no power in their families,and fear retribution if they challenge their decisions. Even girls who want torefuse forced marriages don’t know where to report these cases.[158]Because of this lack of information many girls and women donot report forced marriage cases to the authorities.Lack of Family and Community SupportMany of the victims of earlyand forced marriages that we interviewed also suffered from prolonged domesticviolence, but felt unable to leave the marriage because of economic pressures, lackof family support and other social circumstances, worsening theirvulnerability.None of the girls we interviewed said that their familieshad listened to them when they tried to resist marriage. Instead, as discussedin previous sections, many were brutally beaten, threatened with curses, takento the police, or their movements restricted to coerce them into marriage.Some girls run to their families or went to traditionalauthorities for assistance because their husbands were abusing them, only to bereturned to their abusive husbands.V. International Legal ObligationsRegarding Child MarriageThere is an evolving consensus in international law that 18should be the minimum age for marriage. According to the Committee on theRights of the Child, the minimum age for marriage should be 18, regardless ofthe wishes of the parents.The government of South Sudan has obligations underinternational and regional human rights law to protect the rights of girls andwomen. These include the rights to health, to equality and non-discrimination,to information, to free and full consent to marriage, to choose one’sspouse, to education, to be free from physical, mental, and sexual violence, toan effective remedy when any of these rights are violated, and to be protectedfrom slavery, trafficking and sale. The inadequate fulfillment and protectionof these rights is both a cause and consequence of child marriage in SouthSudan.South Sudan has not ratified any major international orregional human rights treaties, despite the president promising to do so in his2011 independence-day speech.[159]However, international law favors the automatic continuation of human rightsobligations from predecessor to successor states.[160]As a result, South Sudan inherited a duty to respect,protect, and fulfill rights guaranteed under: the International Covenant onCivil and Political Rights (ICCPR), including its Optional Protocol on the Saleof Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography, the Convention on the Rightsof the Child (CRC), the International Covenant on Economic, Social and CulturalRights (ICESCR), the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities(CRPD), the Supplementary Convention on Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutionsand Practices Similar to Slavery, and the  Protocol to Prevent, Suppressand Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children (PalermoProtocol), the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights (AfricanCharter), the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child (ACRWC);[161]and a responsibility not to take any actions that would undermine the objectand purpose of the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa (the Maputo Protocol) that Sudan has signedbut not ratified.[162]Right to Equality andNon-DiscriminationSouth Sudan has obligations under the ICCPR, the ICESCR, andthe CRC to ensure women’s rights to equality and non-discrimination. TheICCPR calls for “the equal right of men and women to the enjoyment of allcivil and political rights set forth in the … Covenant,” includingthe right to birth registration, to free and full consent to marriage, toequality of rights and responsibilities of spouses during marriage and at itsdissolution, to life, to liberty and security of the person, and to freedom ofexpression.The ICESCR makes similar provisions in article three.[163]The CRC in article 2 recognizes the right of children to be free fromdiscrimination, including on the grounds of sex and age.[164]The ACRWC states in article 21 that, “Child marriageand the betrothal of girls and boys shall be prohibited.” Prohibitions onchild marriage and non-discrimination are also included in the Maputo Protocoland the African Charter.[165]Child marriage is considereda form of gender-based discrimination because the practice disproportionatelyaffects girls, and negatively impacts the realization of girls’ andwomen’s many other human rights. The impact of these violations is feltby women throughout their lives, and extends to their families and societies.The South Sudanese governmenthas an obligation to effectively address child marriage and the human rightsabuses that result from child marriages, which subject women and girls to unequaland discriminatory treatment. Failure to do so constitutes a violation of thestate’s obligation to guarantee women equal protection of the law.Right to Free and Full Consentto Marriage, and to Choose a SpouseSouth Sudan must ensure thatthose entering marriage do so with their full and free consent. The right to marriage based on “full and freeconsent” of the spouses is recognized in the Universal Declaration ofHuman Rights, the ICCPR and the ICESCR.[166] The Convention on theConsent to Marriage further specifies that each spouse must give his or herconsent “in person ... as prescribed by law.”[167] TheMaputo Protocol specifies in article 16 that, “no marriage shall takeplace without the free and full consent of both parties.”Consent cannot be “freeand full” when one of the parties involved is not sufficiently mature tomake an informed decision about a life partner. To exercise full, free andinformed consent, a woman needs to have the capacity to understand the meaningand responsibility of marriage; access to full information about her futurespouse; knowledge of the institution of marriage; and her right to exercise achoice as to whether or not to marry, who to marry, and when to marry.[168]The Right of Children to Express Their Views FreelyChild marriage isincompatible with international human rights laws, even if children do“consent” to the marriage. This does not mean however that SouthSudan should not respect the right of children to express their views. Theright of children to express their views is set out in article 12 of the CRCwhich stipulates that they have this right in all matters affecting them,according to their age and maturity.[169] The 2009 CRCcommittee’s General Comment no. 12 on the right of the child to be heardaffirms this right in any judicial or administrative proceeding affecting hisor her well-being.[170]In its comment, the committee goes on to set out States Parties’obligations to establish reporting mechanisms such as telephone help lines andsupport mechanisms to assist children to express their views. This includesaccess to physicians and to teachers who can offer a safe space for children toexpress their views or to seek help in any matter related to their well-being.[171]Therefore, South Sudan should take policy and programmaticmeasures to ensure children’s right to be heard in matters concerningmarriage.The Obligation to Enforce aConsistent Definition of a Child, a Minimum Age for Marriage, and Birth andMarriage RegistrationTo protect children from the harmful practice of early andforced marriages, the government of South Sudan has an obligation to enforce aconsistent definition of a child and a minimum age of marriage in all judicialand customary laws and practices. It also has a duty to ensure that all birthsand marriages are registered by a competent authority.The CRC committee has repeatedly addressed the need forcountries to establish a definition of a child in all domestic legislation thatis consistent with the provisions of the CRC. It has also taken a clearposition on 18 as the minimum age for marriage, regardless of parental consent.[172]At the Africa regional level, the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare ofthe Child explicitly requires states to take effective action, including legislation,to specify the minimum age of marriage as 18 years.[173] The MaputoProtocol also specifies that states are to “enact appropriate nationallegislative measures to guarantee that the minimum age of marriage for womenshall be 18 years.”[174]The CRC defines a child asanyone below the age of 18 years.[175]South Sudan should amend the Child Act to reflect this standard. Because SouthSudan recognizes customary law as integral to its legal system, it needs toensure that both judicial and customary legal processes adopt and enforce thesame definition of a child and a minimum age for marriage.South Sudan should also pass legislation requiring theregistration of marriage. The Convention on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Agefor Marriage, and Registration of Marriages states that all marriages should beregistered by a competent authority.[176] The Maputo Protocolalso calls on governments to ensure that all marriages are recorded in writingand registered in accordance with national laws.[177] TheCRC committee has also addressed the obligation of governments to make theregistration of all births and marriages compulsory and to put in placemeasures to enforce implementation.Right to HealthBy virtue of its inherited international human rightsobligations, South Sudan is required to fulfill the right to health on anondiscriminatory basis. This right is enshrined in numerous internationalhuman rights instruments, including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,the ICESCR, the African Charter, the Maputo Protocol, and the CRC. The ICESCRspecifies that everyone has a right “to the enjoyment of the highestattainable standard of physical and mental health,” and requires that itbe implemented without discrimination on the basis of sex, age, or otherprohibited grounds.[178]Article 24 of the CRC recognizes children’s rights to health and toaccess health services, and notably the right to be protected from traditionalpractices prejudicial to the health of the child. [179]The African Charter recognizes that every individual has“the right to receive information” and “the right toeducation.”[180]The Maputo Protocol specifically includes “the right to have familyplanning education” and further obligates governments to “provideadequate, affordable and accessible health services, including information,education and communication programs to women especially those in ruralareas.”[181]Several treaties and authoritative interpretationsspecifically note that reducing maternal mortality rates and improving maternalhealth services should be considered priorities in the progressive realizationof the right to health. The ICSECR provides that the full realization of theright to health requires States Parties to take steps to reduce rates ofstill-births and infant mortality. The committee that monitors the ICESCR hasnoted “a need to develop and implement a comprehensive national strategyfor promoting women's right to health throughout their life span,”noting,A major goal [of a national strategy] should be reducingwomen's health risks, particularly lowering rates of maternal mortality andprotecting women from domestic violence. The realization of women's right tohealth requires the removal of all barriers interfering with access to healthservices, education and information, including in the area of sexual andreproductive health. It is also important to undertake preventive, promotiveand remedial action to shield women from the impact of harmful traditionalcultural practices and norms that deny them their full reproductive rights.[182]Underage marriage has serious health consequences for girlsand contributes to South Sudan’s extremely high maternal and infantmortality rates. The government of South Sudan should take steps to reduce itshigh rates of child marriage, and to improve girls’ and women’saccess to reproductive health care and information to ensure that it fulfillsits right to health obligations.Right to EducationThe ICESCR and the CRCguarantee to everyone the right to free and compulsory education.[183]The right to equal opportunity in education is stipulated in the CRC, theAfrican Charter, the Maputo Protocol, and the African Charter on the Rights andWelfare of the Child.[184]In its general recommendation on the aims of education, theCRC committee explains the purpose of education to develop a child’s“personality, talent, mental and physical abilities to fullpotential” and to prepare a child to assume life’sresponsibilities.[185]It remarks that an education provides children with life skills such ascritical thinking, the ability to make well-balanced decisions, to develop ahealthy lifestyle and good social relationships; and empowers them bydeveloping their self-esteem and confidence.[186]Early and forced marriages are a major contributor to SouthSudan’s extremely low rates of school enrollment—particularly atthe secondary level—among girls and literacy among women. It is also amajor cause of school drop-out for girls. By failing to curb child marriages,South Sudan is failing in its obligation to ensure access to education for boysand girls on an equal basis.The Right to be Free from Physical, Mental, and SexualViolenceUnder international and regional law, the government ofSouth Sudan has an obligation to prevent, investigate, prosecute, and punish violenceagainst girls and women.[187]The responsibility is grounded in the rights of non-discrimination andequality, security of person, health, and freedom from torture provided intreaties whose human rights obligations South Sudan inherited from Sudan followingindependence.The CRC requires that states parties protect children fromphysical, mental, and sexual abuse or exploitation through legislation andother social and educational measures. The obligation to protect children fromviolence includes protection from parents or other caregivers.[188]Article 34 of the CRC clearly delineates the obligation of states to protectchildren from sexual exploitation and abuse.[189]The Maputo Protocol calls on States to adopt legislative,administrative, social and economic measures as may be necessary to identifythe causes and consequences, and ensure the prevention, punishment, anderadication of all forms of violence against women, including sexual violencewhether it occurs in private or public.[190] It specifically requiresthat States take measures to protect women who are at risk of being subjectedto harmful practices or all other forms of violence, abuse and intolerance, andto establish mechanisms and accessible services for effective information,rehabilitation and reparation for victims of violence against women.[191]As this report shows, girls who are subjected to childmarriage may experience violence from their spouses, in-laws, and other familymembers. This includes physical, verbal, sexual, and psychological abuse. Girlsand women don’t always report violence to the authorities due to a numberof cultural and legal barriers noted earlier. Nonetheless, some women do reportabuse, including forced marriages, but they rarely get help.South Sudan’s obligation to prevent, investigate,prosecute, and punish violence against girls and women includes ensuring thatstate actors, such as the police, the judiciary and customary courts take allreasonable steps to provide everyone within its territory with effective protectionagainst such violence by private parties.[192] Included in thisobligation is the State’s duty to effectively investigate whenever suchviolence occurs, which international human rights tribunal case law saysinvolves an investigation capable of leading to the identification andpunishment of those responsible.[193]In a case involving sexual assault one humanrights court has noted,The Court finds further thatrape is for its victim an offence of manifestly debasing character and thusemphasizes the State's procedural obligation arising in this context….The effective official investigation should be capable of leading to theidentification and punishment of those responsible…. Theminimum standards as to effectiveness defined by the Court's case-law alsoinclude the requirements that the investigation must be independent, impartialand subject to public scrutiny, and that the competent authorities must actwith exemplary diligence and promptness.[194]Police and customary courts inaction in the face of violenceagainst women creates an atmosphere of impunity facilitating further violence,and dissuades women from seeking help. Their failure to act exposes girls andwomen to further violence, especially once the perpetrator knows the survivorhas reported the attack, as some cases in this report show.VI. Good Practices in Ending Child MarriageA Global PerspectiveData published by the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)in October 2012 indicates that for the period 2000-2011, an estimated 34 percentof women aged 20 to 24 years in developing regions were married or in unionbefore their eighteenth birthday. In 2010 this equaled nearly 67 million women.About 12 percent of them were married before age 15.[195]The report says that in 41 countries, 27 of them insub-Saharan Africa (SSA), 30 percent or more of women aged 20 to 24 weremarried or in union when they were still children.[196] Itnotes that there has been little change in rates of global child marriagethough some countries have made notable progress,[197] andthat 142 million girls worldwide will be married in the next decade (during theperiod 2011-2020) if current trends continue.[198]Statistics on child marriage reveal that South Asia, at 46percent, and SSA at 37 percent, have the highest prevalence of child marriage. Inthe two regions, two out of five girls marry or enter into union before the ageof 18.[199]In SSA, the practice is most common in West and Central Africa where 41 percentof 20-24-year-olds were married before they reached 18. The rate for East andCentral Africa is also high at 34 percent.[200]Generally, child marriage mostly affects women who live inrural areas, come from poor households, and have less schooling.[201]International Response to Child MarriageThere is growing global momentum and support by NGOs,international agencies, governments, and high-level global leaders to addressthe problem of child marriage. This is in recognition of the impact of childmarriage on girl’s and women’s human rights, and on developmentefforts. Recent major efforts include:In 2011, The Elders—an independent group of eminent global leaders brought together byNelson Mandela that works for peace and human rights—initiated“Girls Not Brides: The Global Partnership to End Child Marriage.”Girls Not Brides brings together organisations that work to tackle childmarriage at the grassroots, national, and global levels around the world.[202]The introduction in 2012 bythe UN of the first International Day of the Girl, which had child marriage asits theme.Focus by the special rapporteuron contemporary forms of slavery in her recent report on forced marriages.[203]The InternationalProtecting Girls by Preventing Child Marriage Act (S.414), passed by the USSenate in May 2012. The legislation recognizes child marriage as a human rightsviolation, establishes a strategy to prevent it and promote the empowerment ofgirls, integrates the issue of preventing child marriage into existing USdevelopment programs, and requires that relevant agencies collect and makeavailable data on the rates of child marriage and its impact on meeting keydevelopment goals.[204]The bill is currently before the House Committee on Foreign Relations.[205]Innovative programs, policies, and strategies to tackle childmarriage have been developed in other countries. These programs are implementedand supported by a combination of local and international NGOs, nationalgovernments, bilateral donors, UN entities, international financialinstitutions, and foundations.Many programs to end child marriage are not well documentedor evaluated. There are, however, evaluations available for programs in India,Bangladesh, Egypt, Ethiopia, Afghanistan, Indonesia, Kenya, Malawi, Nepal,Senegal, and Yemen. A review of the available programmatic evaluations andanalysis suggest that successful efforts reach across sectors and integrate arange of approaches that address the root causes of child marriage, andsimultaneously promote girls’ human rights. Five approaches seem essentialin these efforts:[206]Empowering girls with information, skills, and supportnetworks: These programs aim to empower girls at risk of child marriagethrough life skills, vocational and livelihoods training, safe spaces for girlsto discuss their futures, the provision of information about their options, andthe development of support networks. Such interventions can help equip girlswith knowledge and skills in areas relevant to their lives, including sexualand reproductive health, nutrition, and their rights under the law. Girls areempowered when and if they are able to learn skills that help them to develop alivelihood, help them to better communicate, to negotiate and advocate forthemselves both in the short and long term, and to make decisions that directlyaffect their lives.Improving girls’ access to quality formaleducation: Girls’ education, especially at the secondary level, isstrongly associated with delayed marriage. Education is a right in itself, andbeing in school confers numerous protections and benefits for girls.Educational opportunities offer girls positive alternatives to child marriagethat are generally acceptable to the family and community. From a culturalstandpoint, being in school can support the perception that girls are stillchildren and not of marriageable age. Schooling helps a girl develop socialnetworks and acquire skills and information, which contribute to her ability tocommunicate, negotiate for her best interests, and participate in decisionsthat affect her life.Educating and mobilizing parents and community members tochange harmful social norms: Families and community elders usually make thedecision for a girl to marry early. Sanctions for failing to meet socialexpectations for marriage are also administered by the family and broadercommunity. Programs in this category educate parents and mobilize communitiesto try and change social norms and forge a more supportive, less punitiveenvironment for girls and families who are willing and ready to change the customof early marriage. Enlisting parents and community members helps to mitigatepossible unintended consequences of girls’ participation in programs, andalso reinforces a program’s messages and activities.Enhancing the economic situation of girls and theirfamilies: Poverty and lack of viable income-generating options for girls andtheir families contribute to the high rate of child marriages. This approachaims to provide immediate and long-term economic opportunities for families toenable them to postpone the marriage of their daughters, and to keep them inschool through secondary levels. Incentives may include loans, scholarships,subsidies, and conditional cash transfers. Increasing employment opportunitiesfor girls through microfinance schemes or vocational training can generateviable alternatives to child marriage, especially for girls unable to continuetheir formal schooling. Improving girls’ economic standing can also givethem a higher status in their families and on this basis, greater control overtheir lives. For families themselves, direct cash transfers andincome-generating activities for their daughters can help to alleviate economicand social pressures that lead to early marriage.Fostering an enabling legal and policy framework: Legislationand appropriate enforcement measures are fundamental for defending the humanrights of girls at risk of child marriage. Essential components include: ensuringthat domestic legislation—in line with international human rightsstandards—upholds the age of 18 as the minimum legal age of marriage forboth males and females; promoting birth and marriage registration; andchallenging harmful customs, traditions, and practices that do not comply withhuman rights standards—such as tolerance for gender-based violence—throughnational and sub-national laws and social programs.VII. RecommendationsTothe President of South SudanDeclare zero tolerance for child marriage,and publicly and forcefully condemn acts of violence against girls and womenwho resist child marriages.Publicly support a national action plan toend child marriage.Publicly support efforts to address theissue of dowry and its negative impact on the rights of girls and women inSouth Sudan.Call for initiatives to encourage ethniccommunities to regulate dowry through consultation with all stakeholders,including women and girls.Call on the national legislature todecriminalize all consensual adult sex.To The Ministry of Gender,Child, and Social WelfareOn a National ActionPlan to End Child MarriageDevelop and implement a national action planto prevent and end child marriage in accordance with international goodpractices. Ensure there is broad public participation in the development of theplan by relevant government ministries and bodies, including the Ministry ofJustice, Ministry of Interior, Ministry of Health, Ministry of GeneralEducation and Instruction, and the Judiciary. The South Sudan Human RightsCommission, legislative bodies, NGOs, and UN and donor agencies should alsoparticipate in the development of the action plan.Work with the National Legislative Assemblyto ensure that appropriate funding is allocated in the annual national budgetto implement the national action plan to end child marriage once it isdeveloped.On Improving Coordination, Investigation, and Response toChild Marriage CasesDevelop and implement guidelines on how national and statelevel government ministries should address child marriage cases. Theguidelines should include the following information:Relevant government ministries, departments, and agenciesand their responsibilities;Officials responsible for handling cases;Available remedies;Referral procedures within government structures.Relevant government ministries and agencies, including theMinistry of Justice, the Ministry of Interior, the judiciary, and the SSHRC andNGOs should also participate in developing these guidelines.Develop simple procedures (in the form of a poster orsimilar communication tools), and establish mechanisms (such as helplines) for girls, families, or concerned individuals to report childmarriage cases and seek help. The guidelines should explain the reporting procedures,authorities responsible for handling the cases, available remedies andprotection measures, and appeal procedures. Inform the public about theseguidelines.Issue regulations on the Child Act,specifying the mandate of each government ministry or agency particularlyregarding the protection of children from child marriage.Conduct training for relevant government officials aboutthe legal rights of girls under the Child Act, particularly their right tobe protected from child marriage.OnProtection of Girls Seeking Help from Forced Marriage and Domestic ViolenceSupport and advocate for establishing safe spaces, such asshelters, for girls threatened by early and forced marriages or otherforms of domestic violence. Once established, work with the Ministries ofJustice and Interior to ensure that these shelters are protected fromattacks by families and spouses, and support outreach programs that advisewomen and girls about the existence of shelters, and how they can be accessed.Develop and implement measures to protect girls who seekhelp from forced marriages, including those who bring charges againsttheir families for forced marriage. Do this together with relevantgovernment ministries and agencies, including the Ministry of Justice, theMinistry of Interior, and the judiciary. NGOs should also participate.Create public awareness about the availability of these protectionmeasures.OnIncreasing Awareness about Child Marriage in CommunitiesCarry out a nationwide awareness-raising campaign toinform the public about child marriage. Involve girls and women, relevantgovernment ministries, traditional and religious leaders, and NGOs in thecampaign. Include information on:Harms that the practice causes and the benefits ofdelayed marriage and childbearing; Information about protection measures, legal remedies,medical and psycho-social care available to girls and women, and consequencesfor perpetrators;Encourage girls and the public to report child marriagecases.ToThe Ministry of JusticeWork toward comprehensive reform of South Sudan’s lawson marriage, separation, divorce, and related matters, in collaboration withrelevant government ministries and agencies, the National Legislative Assembly,experts, and NGOs and civil society groups working on women’s rights. Inparticular:On Lack ofComprehensive Family LegislationEnact legislation that:Clearly sets the minimum age for marriage at 18 years ofage for both spouses;Clearly establishes the requirement for full and freeconsent of both partners to a marriage;Prohibits  forced marriage and related harmfulpractices including bride kidnapping, girl-child compensation, marriageas dispute settlement or debt payment, polygamy, and wife inheritance;Sets clear penalties and punishment for acts of violenceagainst girls and women carried out as intimidation or retribution forrefusal to marry; and provides for adequate legal, medical, andpsycho-social services to victims of these attacks;Grants the same legal status to parties in customarymarriages as those in civil marriages; Sets clear criteria for child custody and maintenance,and fully affirms women’s rights to child custody upon separationand divorce;Grants women and men equal rights to apply for divorceand to a fair determination;Fully affirms the concept of marital property and allowsfor its division on an equal basis between spouses at the time ofdissolution of marriage, recognizing financial and non-financialcontributions made by women;Ensures that girls and women who are forcibly marriedshall have the right to press criminal charges, seek a divorce, and seekalimony;Sets clear penalties for anyonewho intentionally forces an adult or a child to enter into a marriage;Ensures that girls married prior to the enactment of thenew legislation have the option of terminating their marriage, andprotects their rights to property, child custody, and maintenance.Ensures that children born to mothers under 18 shall havethe same rights as children born in a legally recognized marriage;Makes marriage registration compulsory.Once the new family law is in place, together with theMinistry of Gender, Child and Social Welfare, conduct public educationcampaigns about the provisions of the law, aiming at raising awareness inboth urban and rural areas.On Addressing Gaps inCurrent Laws Governing Marriage and Related MattersRevise the Penal Code so that: individuals are notimprisoned for adultery; and so that it recognizes marital rape as acriminal offense, clearly stating that no marriage or other relationshipshall constitute a defense to a charge of sexual assault under thelegislation. Clearly define the practice of“elopement”—considered a crime in customarycourts— to ensure criminalization when it involves non-consent orforce, and decriminalization when it involves the consent of both parties.Together with the Ministry of Gender, Child, and SocialWelfare, inform girls and women about their rights to seek childmaintenance from fathers of their children as per the Child Act.On Strengthening SouthSudan’s Human Rights Framework to Protect WomenTogether with the relevant government ministries and theNational Legislative Assembly, take the necessary steps to ensure theprompt ratification, without reservations, of the Convention on theElimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) and itsOptional Protocol; the Protocol to the African Charter on the Rights ofWomen in Africa (Maputo Protocol); the African Charter on the Rights andWelfare of the Child (ACRWC); and the Convention on the Rights and Welfareof the Child (CRC). Use these treaties as guidance in drafting the new constitutionand other laws to promote women’s rights.To the JudiciaryIssue judicial circulars that:Instruct both statutory and customary judges thatproceedings on child marriage adopt the definition of a child as anyoneunder the age of 18 as per the provisions of the 2008 Child Act; More broadly define, and clarify, how provisions on the“best interests of the child” as per the Child Act should beapplied in practice; and clearly stipulate that the “best interestsof the child” be the guiding principles in all judicial andcustomary court proceedings on child marriages; Clarify the provision in the Civil Procedure Act thatcustoms governing family issues that are “contrary to justice,equity or good conscience” should not be applied.Raise awareness amongst judicial and customary courtofficials of these provisions.To the Ministry ofJustice and Ministry of InteriorImprove training for lawyers, public prosecutors, judges,and the police on gender-based violence, including child marriages.Include information on forms of gender based violence, contributingfactors and risks, legal protections under South Sudanese and applicableinternational law, and consequences for perpetrators.Provide regular and up-to-date trainings to lawenforcement officers on the requirements of the family law once it isenacted.Ensure that judges, traditional authorities, and otherrelevant authorities report cases of child marriages.The Ministry of Interior should consider increasing thenumber of officers belonging to the Special Protection Units (SPUs) atpolice stations, with particular attention to increasing the number offemale officers, as well as expanding the coverage of the SPUs to allpolice stations in South Sudan.To the Ministry ofGeneral Education and InstructionOn Improving Girls’ Access to Formal and Non-formalEducationTogether with the Ministry of Gender, Child, and SocialWelfare, continue efforts to raise public awareness on the importance ofeducation for girls.Develop retention strategies to ensure that girls whoenroll in school are able to remain in school, such as incentives forfamilies to keep girls in school and to subsidize the costs of uniformsand textbooks.Expand efforts to provide continuing formal education andvocational training opportunities for married girls and women. Inparticular, expand access to alternative education programs in all states,and inform the public about their existence.Together with the Ministry of Gender, Child, and SocialWelfare, develop and implement child care support programs to enable girlswho have children to attend school.Improve data collection on the number of girls who dropout of school due to pregnancy or to get married.On School-Based Human RightsEducation, including Comprehensive Sexuality EducationIntegrate human rights education focusing onchildren’s rights into the school curriculum and include childmarriage among topics discussed. Ensure that teachers are trained in itscontents and allocate time to teach it.Make comprehensive sexuality education part of the schoolcurriculum, and ensure that teachers are trained in its contents andallocate time to teach it. Work with the Ministry of Health to reachout-of-school adolescents.To the Ministry ofHealthImprove access to reproductive health services andinformation for all girls and women, including access to emergencyobstetric care and family planning.Provide tailored health information to young mothers aboutproper nutrition and care for their health and the health of their babies.Raise awareness among health workers and the public on theimportance of registering all births, including home deliveries.To the South SudanHuman Rights CommissionIncrease monitoring of child marriage cases. Investigateand publish reports on child marriages and gaps in protection and accessto justice for victims.Work with NGOs and civil society organizations to:Support the development of a national action plan to endchild marriage, and once developed, design programs to aid itsimplementation. Raise public awareness about the dangers of childmarriages, including through holding dialogue with communities andtraditional leaders about the harms of child marriage.Assist girls in seeking legal remedies for forcedmarriage and abuse, obtaining maintenance, and in continuing theireducation.Support the development of a comprehensive family law,and once it is passed, advocate for its implementation.To NGOs and CivilSociety OrganizationsSupport the development of a national action plan to endchild marriage, and once developed, design programs to aid itsimplementation.Raise public awareness about the dangers of childmarriages, including through holding dialogue with communities andtraditional leaders about the harms of child marriage.Assist girls in seeking legal remedies for forced marriageand abuse, obtaining maintenance, and in continuing their education.Support the development of a comprehensive family law, andonce it is passed, advocate for its implementation.To United NationsAgencies (especially UN Women, UNFPA and UNICEF), and International Donors (especially USAID,DFID, the EU, and the Joint Donor Team)Make the development and implementation of anational action plan to end child marriage, a comprehensive family law, andreforms of other laws that govern marriage and related matters key issues inpolitical engagement with the South Sudanese government.Fund programs to implement the nationalaction plan once it is developed.Support the government of South Sudan, NGOsand civil society organizations to raise public awareness about the dangers ofchild marriage.Support the establishment of shelters forsurvivors and gender-based violence, including programs to provide protectionfor girls who seek help from child or forced marriages.Ensure that donor support for justice sectorreform pays specific attention to addressing discrimination against women inlaw and in practice.Design and implement programs that willempower girls and women—as well as families—economically, sincegirls’ vulnerability to child marriages and abuse stems from lack ofeconomic opportunities for them and their families.Fund programs that seek to address barriersto girls’ education, such as subsidies for school-related costs.Encourage and support provision ofsystematic, comprehensive sexuality education for in- and out-of-schooladolescents.Expand support to improve access toreproductive health services and information for all girls and women, includingaccess to emergency obstetric care and family planning.Support awareness campaigns on theimperative to register births and marriages.Develop a coordinated mechanism fordifferent countries to take steps to protect, including by accepting forrelocation, a small number of girls who cannot safely remain in South Sudan dueto the threat of forced marriage.AcknowledgementsThis report was written by Agnes Odhiambo, Africa researcherin the Women’s Rights Division. The report is based on research conductedby Agnes Odhiambo and Women’s Rights Consultant Elizabeth Ashamu Deng.The report was edited by Liesl Gerntholtz, director of the Women’s RightsDivision; Jehanne Henry, senior researcher with the Africa Division; DiederikLohman, senior researcher with the Health and Human Rights Division; JulianeKippenberg, senior researcher with the Children’s Rights Division;Aisling Reidy, senior legal advisor; and Danielle Haas, senior program editorat Human Rights Watch.All images were taken by BrentStirton, photojournalist reporting for Human Rights Watch. Multimediaconception and coordination was provided by Veronica Matushaj, creativedirector; Anna Lopriore, creative manager; and senior associates Ivy Shen andJenny Catherall.Report production and editorial assistance was provided byMatthew Rullo, coordinator of the Women’s Rights Division; Grace Choi,publications director; Kathy Mills, publications specialist; and FitzroyHepkins, administrative manager.Human Rights Watch would like to express our deepappreciation to all of the individuals who agreed to be interviewed for thisreport, as well as the local women’s rights activists and NGOrepresentatives who helped to facilitate our research in South Sudan. We alsogreatly acknowledge the generous donors who support the work of theWomen’s Rights Division at Human Rights Watch, in particular the Ribbink van den Hoek Family Foundation, which funded the research and multimedia for this report.[1] The CPA was signedby the Government of Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army(SPLM/A) in January 2005, bringing an end to the 22-year civil war that startedin 1983. It granted regional autonomy to Southern Sudan and provided for thesharing of oil revenues between the parties. It further set a timetable bywhich Southern Sudan would hold a referendum on its independence.[2] The ministry facessignificant challenges that have limited its operation. These includeinadequate budget, poor understanding and appreciation of the role of the ministryby other government ministries, and lack of technical capacity. For a detailedanalysis of these weaknesses see, Ministry of Gender, Child and Social Welfare,“Comprehensive Country Gender Assessment,”  April 2012, onfile with Human Rights Watch (HRW), pp. 148-151.[3] For example see,Joint Donor Team, “Fact-Sheet: Gender Equality,” undated,http://www.jdt-juba.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/Gender_fact_sheet_update_sep_2011.pdf(accessed October 8, 2012). The Joint Donor Team to the Republic of South Sudanis comprised of the governments of Norway, Denmark, Sweden, United Kingdom,Canada and the Netherlands. Ibid; UK Department for International Development(South Sudan), “Operational Plan: 2011-2015,” July 2011,http://www.dfid.gov.uk/Documents/publications1/op/2011/south-sudan-1.pdf(accessed October 8, 2012), p. 4; United States Agency for InternationalDevelopment (USAID), “South Sudan Transition Strategy 2011-2013,”June 2011, http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PDACR770.pdf (accessed October 8,2012), pp. 29, 40, and 48.[4] “South SudanDevelopment Plan 2011-2013: Realising Freedom, Equality, Justice, Peace andProsperity for All,” August 2011,http://www.jdt-juba.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/South-Sudan-Development-Plan-2011-13.pdf(accessed October 8, 2012), pp. 21 and 87.[5] TransitionalConstitution, arts. 5(c), 33,126 and167.[6] Ibid., art. 16(4d).[7] TransitionalConstitution, art. 16 (2).[8] See Ministry ofGender, Child and Social Welfare, “Comprehensive Country GenderAssessment,” p. 28.[9] The World Bank,“Review of Interim Constitution of Government of Southern Sudan 2005 Froma Gender and Women’s Rights Perspective,” on file with Human RightsWatch, p.4.[10] Orly Stern,‘“This Is How Marriage Happens Sometimes’: Women and Marriagein South Sudan,” Friederike Bubenzer; Orly Stern, Hope, Pain andPatience: The Lives of Women in South Sudan (Johannesburg: Jacana Media, 2011),p. 1.[11] Small ArmsSurvey, “Sudan Human Security Baseline Assessment: Women’s Securityand the Law in South Sudan,” 2012, http://www.smallarmssurveysudan.org/fileadmin/docs/facts-figures/south-sudan/womens-security/HSBA-women-security-law.pdf(accessed October 2, 2012), p. 4.[12] Orly Stern,‘“This Is How Marriage Happens Sometimes’: Women and Marriagein South Sudan,’ in Friederike Bubenzer and Orly Stern, eds., Hope, Painand Patience: The Lives of Women in South Sudan, p. 10.[13] Small ArmsSurvey, “Sudan Human Security Baseline Assessment: Women’s Securityand the Law in South Sudan,” p. 6; Human Rights Watch interview withPaleki Matthew, executive director, South Sudan Women’s EmpowermentNetwork, Juba, October 31, 2012.[14] NPA,“Gender-based Violence and Protection Concerns in South Sudan,” p.23. The amount of dowry to be returned depends on the number of children awoman has borne during the marriage. The more the children, the less the amountrepaid. Stern, ‘“This Is How Marriage HappensSometimes’”, Friederike Bubenzer; p. 18.[15] Small ArmsSurvey, “Sudan Human Security Baseline Assessment: Women’s Securityand the Law in South Sudan,” p. 5.[16] Human RightsWatch interview with Alek P., Bor County, March 15, 2012.[17] To change thissituation, a prospective suitor will have to pay the remaining dowry to thewoman’s husband, a requirement that affects the ability of separatedwomen to remarry. NPA, “Gender-based Violence and Protection Concerns inSouth Sudan,” p. 28.[18]Penal Code, 2008, art. 266. Under this article, adultery is defined asconsensual intercourse with the spouse of another person.[19]HumanRights Watch, South Sudan - Prison Is Not for Me: Arbitrary Detention inSouth Sudan, June 2012,http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/southsudan0612_forinsert4Upload.pdf(accessed August 10, 2012), p. 55. Also see, NPA, “Gender-based Violenceand Protection Concerns in South Sudan,” p. 28.[20]NPA,“Gender-based Violence and Protection Concerns in South Sudan, p. 25.[21]Transitional Constitution, art. 17 (2) and Child Act, 2008, arts. 6 and 8.[22]Stern, ‘“This Is How Marriage Happens Sometimes’: Women andMarriage in South Sudan,” Friederike Bubenzer; p. 18.[23]For a comprehensive overview of the alternative education system see Ministryof General Education and Instruction, “Alternative Education SystemsBaseline Survey and Evaluation, June 2012, on file with HRW.[24]Education Statistics for the Republic of South Sudan, Ministry of GeneralEducation, p.88.[25]This program is being supported by UNICEF and Canada.[26]Human Rights Watch interview with Thelma Majela, Juba, January 17, 2012.[27]General Education Bill, art. 16. There have been numerous media reports ofsexual relationships between students and teachers. See for example,“Teachers suspended for impregnating school girls,” Gurtong,January 11, 2013,http://www.gurtong.net/ECM/Editorial/tabid/124/ctl/ArticleView/mid/519/articleId/9123/categoryId/4/Teachers-Suspended-For-Impregnating-School-Girls.aspx(accessed January 20, 2013); “Teacher dismissed over schoolgirlpregnancies in Rumbek,” Sudan Tribune, December 3, 2011,http://www.sudantribune.com/Teachers-dismissed-over-schoolgirl,40897 (accessedJanuary 20, 2013).[28]These programs are supported by USAID.[29]Republic of South Sudan Ministry of General Education, “EducationStatistics for the Republic of South Sudan,” 2011, pp. 17, 22.[30]See, Schockland Project Partners with Save the Children as lead coordinator, Astudy report on school levies in south sudan: impact on enrolment and retention,June 2010; and Ministry of Gender, Child and Social Welfare,“Comprehensive Country Gender Assessment,” pp. 115-117.[31]Ministry of Health, “2006 Sudan Household Health Survey (SHHS),”2007, on file with HRW, p. xiv.[32]Ibid., p. xviii.[33]Ibid.[34]Ibid.[35]Ibid.[36]Ibid., p. 135.[37]Ministry of Health, “2006 Sudan Household Health Survey (SHHS),”2007, on file with HRW, p. xviii. South Sudan’s MMR is higher than thatof Chad and Somalia, estimated by WHO and others to have the highest rates inthe world. WHO et al., Trends in Maternal Mortality, 1990-2010, p. 1.[38]Ministry of Health, “Health Sector Development Plan,” 2012-2016,http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=republic%20of%20south%20sudan%20ministry%20of%20health%2C%20%E2%80%9Chealth%20sector%20development%20plan&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CC8QFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.bsf-south-sudan.org%2Fsites%2Fdefault%2Ffiles%2FHSDP%2520-Final%2520draft%2520January%25202012.doc&ei=ikAZUcaLHczH0AG_k4CYDQ&usg=AFQjCNELtQGNGSqmiid3duX_2Pko0sRtPw(accessed February 11, 2013).[39]Ministry of Health, “Comprehensive Gender Assessment,” p. 116.[40]USAID, “Southern Sudan Maternal and Reproductive Health RapidAssessment,” 2007, http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNADN752.pdf (accessedJanuary 2012), p. 5. Another study by UNICEF in Lakes, UpperNile, and Central Equatoria States found that communities have poorunderstanding of the consequences of child marriage, especially the impact onthe health of the mother and child. UNICEF, “Knowledge, Attitudes andPractices on Child Marriage in Southern Sudan: The Case of Lakes, Upper Nileand Central Equatoria States,” February 2010, on file with HRW, p. 21.[41]Ministry of Health, “Sexual and ReproductiveHealth Strategic Plan,” p. 9.[42]An increase in violence in post-conflict countries has been noted in othercountries. It is commonly reported that violence against women increases whenwar-related fighting dies down. See, Rachel Jewkes, “ComprehensiveResponse to Rape needed in Conflict Setting,” 2007, Lancet, (369),pp. 2140-41.[43]Small Arms Survey, “Sudan Human Security Baseline Assessment:Women’s Security and the Law in South Sudan,” p.6; Nada MustafaAli, “Gender and State Building in South Sudan,” 2011,http://www.usip.org/files/resources/SR%20298.pdf (accessed April 15, 2012), p.9; NPA, “Gender-based Violence and Protection Concerns in SouthSudan,” pp. 31-34; Accord, “Initial Support to Develop a Road Mapfor a South Sudan National Action Plan for the Implementation of United NationsSecurity Council Resolution 1325,” p. 21; Ministry of Gender, Child andSocial Welfare, “Comprehensive Country Gender Assessment,” p. 140.[44]NPA, “Gender-based Violence and Protection Concerns in South Sudan,”p. 34.[45]Nada Mustafa Ali, “Gender and State Building in South Sudan,” p. 9.[46]Penal Code, arts. 21 and 247. While coerced marital sex is not against the law,the violence accompanying the act may constitute a different crime.[47]Small Arms Survey, “Sudan Human Security Baseline Assessment:Women’s Security and the Law in South Sudan,” p. 6. South Sudanesesocieties stigmatizes rape survivors. See, D’Awol, Anyieth. 2011.‘“Sibu ana, sibu ana” (“Leave Me, Leave Me”):Survivors of Sexual Violence in South Sudan.’ In Friederike Bubenzer andOrly Stern, eds. Hope, Pain and Patience: The Lives of Women in South Sudan(Johannesburg: Jacana Media), p. 54; NPA, “Gender-based Violence andProtection Concerns in South Sudan,” p. 41.[48]This includes many of the challenges discussed in Chapter IV. on barriers tojustice for victims of child marriage, including lack of training for policeand other law enforcement officials on women’s rights, lack of resources,and weak legal context for addressing violence against women.[49]Marcy Hersh, “For South Sudan’s Women, the War hasn’tEnded,” August 5, 2012,http://www.globalpost.com/dispatches/news/regions/africa/south-sudan-women-violence-assault(accessed October 8, 2012); D’Awol, Anyieth, ““Sibu ana, sibuana” (“Leave me, Leave Me”): Survivors of Sexual Violence inSouth Sudan,” p. 69.[50]Small Arms Survey, “Sudan Human Security Baseline Assessment:Women’s Security and the Law in South Sudan,” p. 3; NPA,“Gender-based Violence and Protection Concerns in South Sudan,” pp.40-41. The Police Service and UN agencies are hoping to address shortcomingsthrough additional trainings and through the establishment of a NationalSpecial Protection Unit coordination office that will oversee and supervise allSPU’s in the country. Human Rights Watch email communication withGertrude Mbiru, GBV Specialist, UNICEF South Sudan, January 18, 2013. HumanRights Watch interview with Fatuma Ibrahim and Solla Asea, UNICEF, Juba,January 23, 2013.[51]The Ministry of Gender, Child and Social Welfare, “SouthSudan National Gender Policy,” 2012, p. 33.[52]Marcy Hersh, “For South Sudan’s Women, the War hasn’tEnded,” August 5, 2012,http://www.globalpost.com/dispatches/news/regions/africa/south-sudan-women-violence-assault(accessed October 8, 2012); D’Awol, Anyieth ‘“Sibu ana, sibuana” (“leave me, Leave Me”): Survivors of Sexual Violence inSouth Sudan,’ p. 69.[53]Human Rights Watch interview with Lona James Lowilla, executive director,Voices for Change, Juba, September 4, 2012.[54]For comparative analysis see, UNICEF, “The State of the World’sChildren: Adolescence, An Age of Opportunity,” 2011,www.unicef.org/sowc2011/ (accessed May 15, 2012), p. 34; International Centerfor Research on Women (ICRW), “Child Marriage around the World,”2006, http://www.icrw.org/files/images/Child-Marriage-Fact-Sheet-Around-the-World.pdf(accessed September 15, 2012).[55]Orly Stern, ‘“This Is How Marriage Happens Sometimes’: Womenand Marriage in South Sudan,” Friederike Bubenzer, p. 10.[56]Human Rights Watch interview with Ayen C., Bor County, March 15, 2012.[57]Small Arms Survey, “Sudan Human Security Baseline Assessment:Women’s Security and the Law in South Sudan,” p. 4.[58]Human Rights Watch interview with Ageer M., Bor County, March 15, 2012.[59]The study by NPA and others in 2010 and 2011 found that bride wealth has becomean economic undertaking for many families, and that it had gone up 64 percentcompared with 1983, and 44 percent compared with the end of the war in 2005.NPA, “Gender-based Concerns and Protection in South Sudan,” p. 21.[60]Human Rights Watch interview with Pontinanta J., Yambio County, March 7, 2012.[61]Orly Stern, ‘“This Is How Marriage Happens Sometimes’: Womenand Marriage in South Sudan,” Friederike Bubenzer, p. 7.[62]Human Rights Watch interview with Poni W. Juba County, March 20, 2012.[63]Human Rights Watch interview with Yar B., Bor County, March 15, 2012.[64]Human Rights Watch interview with Akuot M., Bor County, March 15, 2012.[65]Human Rights Watch interview with Poni W., Juba County, March 20, 2012.[66]Human Rights Watch interview with Keji L., Juba County, March 20, 2012.[67]Human Rights Watch interview with Keji L., Juba County, March 20, 2012.[68]WHO, “Multi-country Study on Women’s Health and Domestic Violence againstWomen: Initial Results on Prevalence, Health Outcomes and Women’sResponses: Summary Report,” 2005,http://www.who.int/gender/violence/who_multicountry_study/summary_report/summary_report_English2.pdf(accessed February 15, 2012), p. 8. The multi-country study found that in allthe countries studies, except Japan and Ethiopia, girls in this age bracketwere more vulnerable to physical and sexual abuse by a partner, non-partner, orboth, than older women.[69]Robert Jensen and Rebecca Thornton, “Early Female Marriage in theDeveloping World,” Gender and Development, July 2003, vol. 11, no.2, pp. 9-19.[70]IPPF, “Ending Child Marriage,” p. 11; Robert Jensen and RebeccaThornton, “Early Female Marriage in the Developing World,” pp. 9-19.[71]ICRW, “Too Young to Wed: Education & Action Toward EndingChild,” 2005,http://www.icrw.org/files/publications/Too-Young-to-Wed-Education-and-Action-Toward-Ending-Child-Marriage.pdf(accessed June 12, 2012), p. 11. See also, Robert Jensen and Rebecca Thornton,“Early Female Marriage in the Developing World,” Gender andDevelopment, pp. 9-19.[72]Human Rights Watch interview with Anyier D., Bor County, March 15, 2012.[73]Human Rights Watch interview with Atong G., Bor County, March 15, 2012.[74]For some media reports on such cases, see “South Sudan’s HumanRights Commission Condemns Forced Marriages,” Sudan Tribune, March8, 2011, http://www.sudantribune.com/South-Sudan-s-human-rights,38222 (accessedJanuary 31, 2012); Manyang Mayom, “Lakes State: Girl Killed in ForcedMarriage Dispute,” Sudan Tribune, February 11, 2011,http://www.sudantribune.com/Lakes-state-Girl-killed-in-forced,38046 (accessedJanuary 31, 2012); Paan Luel Wël, “International Women's Day:Promotion of our Women Rights vs. Preservation of Our Cultural Heritage,”Sudan News Agency, March 15, 2011,http://www.southsudannewsagency.com/opinion/articles/international-womens-day-promotion-of-our-women-rights-vs-preservation-of-our-cultural-heritage(accessed January 31, 2012).[75]Human Rights Watch interviews with local women’s rights organizations NewSudan Women's Federation and Skills for South Sudan, Juba, April 2012; Statement by High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay, May 11,2012, http://www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=12148&LangID=E (accessed February 12, 2013).[76]Human Rights Watch interview with Samuel Dem, senior inspector, directorate ofalternative education, Ministry of General Education and Instruction, Juba,September 9, 2012. Lakes State is inhabited mainly by the Dinka ethnic group, apastoralist community who value cattle a lot. Dowry for the Dinka is paidmainly in cattle.[77]Human Rights Watch interview with Samuel Dem, senior inspector, directorate ofalternative education, Ministry of General Education and Instruction, Juba,September 9, 2012.[78]Human Rights Watch interview with Agata N., Juba County, March 19, 2012.[79]Human Rights Watch interview with Kolong K., Rokon County, March 22, 2012.[80]Human Rights Watch interview with Aguet N., Bor County, March 15, 2012.[81]Human Rights Watch interview with Alek P., Bor County, March 15, 2012.[82]Human Rights Watch interview with Christina G., Yambio County, March 8, 2012.[83]Human Rights Watch interview with Gloria C., Yambio County, March 7, 2012.[84]Human Rights Watch interview with Ageer M., Bor County, March 15, 2012.[85]Human Rights Watch interview with Margaret B., Yambio County, March 7, 2012.[86]Human Rights Watch interview with Ayen C., Bor County, March 15, 2012.[87]Human Rights Watch interview with Penina W., Yambio County, March 7, 2012.[88]Transitional Constitution, art. 29 (1).[89]Ibid., art. 17 (1d).[90]Human Rights Watch interview with Mary K., Yambio County, March 7, 2012.[91]Human Rights Watch interview with Michael Jalom, director general for educationin WES, Yambio County, March 12, 2012.[92]Ibid.[93]Human Rights Watch interview with Jacob Malual, head teacher at Mamer PrimarySchool in Kohlnyang, Bor County, March 14, 2012.[94]Human Rights Watch interview with Alfred Lodiong, deputy director, Directorateof Gender Equity and Social Change, Ministry of General Education, Juba,September 10, 2012.[95]Human Rights Watch interview with Rebecca Deng, community member, during a focus group discussionwith women in Bor County, March 14, 2012.[96]Human Rights Watch interview with Chief Mandit Ber during a focus group discussion with chiefs andelders, Bor County, March 14, 2012.[97]Human Rights Watch interview with Atong G., Bor County, March 15, 2012.[98]Human Rights Watch interview with Akur L., Bor County, March 15, 2012.[99]Human Rights Watch interview with Anyier D., Bor County, March 15, 2012.[100]HumanRights Watch interview with Penina W., Yambio County, March 7, 2012.[101]TransitionalConstitution, art. 15.[102]UNICEF Innocenti Digest, “Early Marriage: Child Spouses,” No. 7,March 2001, http://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/digest7e.pdf (accessedApril 20, 2012), p. 4.[103]Article 12 of the Convention on the Right of the Child notes that Statesparties shall assure a child who is capable of forming his or her views theright to freely express those views in accordance with the age and maturity ofthe child. CRC, art. 12. However, there are challenges in determining the age achild should be before he or she can ‘consent’ fully and freely tomarriage and sexual relations, and with full understanding of the implicationsof such a union, including the risks of underage marriage. See, UNICEFInnocenti Digest, “Early Marriage: Child Spouses,” No. 7, March2001, http://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/digest7e.pdf (accessed April20, 2012), pp. 9-11 for a discussion on the difficulty of determining full andfree consent to marriage for different categories of children under the age of18.[104]Human Rights Watch interview with Rosa B., Yambio County, March 9, 2012.[105]Human Rights Watch interview with Penina W., Yambio County, March 7, 2012.[106]According to the World Health organization, reproductive health and rights,“… implies that people are able to have a responsible, satisfyingand safe sex life and that they have the capability to reproduce and thefreedom to decide if, when and how often to do so. Implicit in this are theright of men and women to be informed of and to have access to safe, effective,affordable and acceptable methods of fertility regulation of their choice, andthe right of access to appropriate health care services that will enable womento go safely through pregnancy and childbirth and provide couples with the bestchance of having a healthy infant.”  WHO, “ReproductiveHealth,” undated, http://www.who.int/topics/reproductive_health/en/(accessed October 20, 2012).[107]Poor health remains a significant problem in developing countries. It wasestimated that 287 000 maternal deaths occurred worldwide in 2010. WHO et al.,Trends in Maternal Mortality, 1990-2010,” p. 1.[108]Young mothers are less likely to get prenatal care and oftendo not have enough information about proper nutrition while pregnant to nurturethemselves and babies. Babies born to young mothers run a 30 percentincreased risk of dying during their first year of life.  Babies may havea low birth weight as a consequence of their mother’s poor nutritionalstatus while pregnant, and babies with low birth weight are 5 to 30 times morelikely to die than babies of normal weight. See Population ActionInternational, “How Family Planning Protects the Health of Women andChildren,” May 1, 2006,http://www.populationaction.org/Publications/Fact_Sheets/FS2/How_Family_Planning_Protects_the_Health_of_Women_and_Children.pdf(accessed March 12, 2012), pp. 1-2; Nawal M. Nour. “Health Consequencesof Child Marriage in Africa,” November 2006,http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/12/11/06-0510_article.htm.[109]WHO and UNFPA, “Married Adolescents: No Place of Safety,” 2007,http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2006/9241593776_eng.pdf (accessed October2, 2012), p.22.[110]Save the Children, “State of the World’s Mothers: Children HavingChildren, 2004” May 2004,http://www.ungei.org/resources/files/SaveTheChildren_SOWM_2004_final.pdf(accessed October 10, 2012) p. 14.[111]The organization Save the Children has found that higher levels of educationalso contribute to an increased use of contraception and reduced rate of infantmortality. Save the Children, “Women on the Front Lines of Healthcare:State of the World’s Mothers, 2010,”http://www.savethechildren.org/atf/cf/%7B9def2ebe-10ae-432c-9bd0-df91d2eba74a%7D/SOWM-2010-Women-on-the-Front-Lines-of-Health-Care.pdf(accessed April 11, 2012), p. 32.[112]UNICEF, The State of the World’s Children,” p. 64; UNICEF InnocentiDigest, “Early Marriage: Child Spouses,” No. 7, March 2001,http://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/digest7e.pdf (accessed April 20,2012), p. 16.[113]UNICEF Innocenti Digest, “Early Marriage: Child Spouses,” No. 7,March 2001, http://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/digest7e.pdf (accessedApril 20, 2012), p. 16.[114]Ibid. p. 12.[115]The term obstructed labor indicates a failure to progress due to mechanicalproblems such as a mismatch between the size of the presenting part of thefetus and the mother’s pelvis. Some mal-presentations such as a browpresentation or a shoulder presentation will also cause obstruction.Pathological enlargement of the fetal head and ineffective uterine contractionsmay also obstruct labor. These different causes of difficult labor mayco-exist. J. P. Neilson et al., “Obstructed Labour: Reducing Maternal Deathand Disability during Pregnancy,” British Medical Bulletin, vol. 67(2003), pp. 191-204; Nawal Nour, “An Introduction to MaternalMortality,” Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, vol. 1, no. 2(2008), pp. 77-81; and WHO, “Obstetric Fistula: Guiding Principles forClinical Management and Programme Development,” 2006,http://www.endfistula.org/webdav/site/endfistula/shared/documents/publications/who_obstetric_fistula.pdf(accessed September 15, 2012), p.3.[116]Ibid.[117]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Mergani Abdalla Mohamed, Juba TeachingHospital, March 17, 2012.[118]Human Rights Watch interview with a senior midwife at Yambio state hospital,Yambio County, March 8, 2012.[119]Human Rights Watch interview with Victoria J., Yambio County, March 8, 2012.[120]Human Rights Watch interview with a senior midwife at Yambio state hospital,Yambio County, March 8, 2012.[121]Human Rights Watch interview with Jane F., Yambio County, March 8, 2012.[122]Human Rights Watch interview with Gloria C., Yambio County, March 7, 2012.[123]Human Rights Watch interview with a senior midwife at Yambio state hospital,Yambio County, March 8, 2012.[124]Human Rights Watch interview with Rosa B., Yambio County, March 9, 2012.[125]Human Rights Watch interview with Christina G., Yambio County, March 8, 2012.[126]UNICEF Innocenti Digest, “Early Marriage: Child Spouses,” No. 7,March 2001, http://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/digest7e.pdf (accessedApril 20, 2012), p. 12. As mentioned earlier in the report, girls in SouthSudan are considered ready for marriage when they reach puberty. A significantnumber of girls interviewed by Human Rights Watch were married before the ageof 15. The CRC covers everyone up to age 18 and regards childhood as a processof development – one that does not end with a definitive physicalmaturity marker.[127]Population Council, “Understanding Sex Without consent Among YoungPeople: A Neglected Priority,” Brief no. 7, July 2007,http://www.popcouncil.org/pdfs/TABriefs/PGY_Brief07_NonconsensualSex.pdf(accessed September 12, 2012), p. 3.[128]See Human Rights Watch, “Prison Is Not for Me.”[129]Human Rights Watch met Rachel throughthe South Sudan Human Rights Commission who had tried unsuccessfully to helpher leave the forced marriage.[130]An area outside Juba and the location of South Sudan’s militaryheadquarters, where many soldiers reside.[131]NPA, “Gender-based Violence and Protection Concerns in South Sudan, pp.39-40; Ministry of Gender, Child and Social Welfare, “ComprehensiveCountry Gender Assessment," pp. 9 and 28.[132]Human Rights Watch, “Prison Is Not for Me,” pp. 23-25.[133]Small Arms Survey, “Sudan Human Security Baseline Assessment:Women’s Security and the Law in South Sudan,” p. 3; D’Awol,Anyieth, ‘“Sibu ana, sibu ana” (“Leave Me, LeaveMe”): Survivors of Sexual Violence in South Sudan,’ pp.53–77; NPA, “Gender-based Violence and Protection Concerns in SouthSudan, pp. 39-41; Ministry of Gender, Child and Social Welfare,“Comprehensive Country Gender Assessment,” pp. 65-66.[134]Ministry of Gender, Child and Social Welfare, “Comprehensive CountryGender Assessment,” p. 69.[135]Human Rights Watch interview with Emily Konga, senior inspector for gender inthe Ministry of Gender and Social Development, CES, Juba County, March 20,2012.[136]Ibid.[137]Ibid.[138]Human Rights Watch interview with Angelo Sebit, head of women and juvenilejustice department, Ministry of Justice, Juba, September 6, 2012.[139]Human Rights Watch interview with Martin Mogga, director of child protection,CES Ministry of Gender and Social Development, Juba, September 4, 2012.[140]For protections in the Transitional Constitution and the Penal Code, seeChapter I, p. 10.[141]Child Act, art. 23.[142]Ibid., arts, 6, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 21, 22 and 23.[143]The abuses mentioned include “all forms of physical or mental violence,injury, abuse, negligent treatment, maltreatment or exploitation … sexualabuse, exploitation and harassment including, but not limited torape....” Ibid., art. 36 (3 a and c).[144]Transitional Constitution, art. 15.[145]Article 10 provides that, except in a state of emergency, “no derogationfrom the rights and freedoms enshrined in this Bill shall be made. The Bill ofRights shall be upheld, protected, and applied by the Supreme Court and othercompetent courts.” Article 167(3) states that “courts shall applycustomary law subject to this Constitution and the law”.[146]Child Act, art. 4(4).[147]Code of Civil Procedure Act states in article six,  “Where a suit orother proceeding in a Civil Court raises a question regarding succession,inheritance, legacies, gifts, marriage, divorce, or family relations, the rulefor decision of such question shall be: (a) any custom applicable to theparties concerned; provided that, it is not contrary to justice, equity or goodconscience and has not been by this, or any other enactment, altered orabolished or has not been declared void by the decision of a competent Court;or, (b) the Sharia Law in cases where the parties are Muslims except so far asit has been modified by such custom as is above referred to.”[148]Human Rights Watch interview with Martin Mogga, director of child protection,CES Ministry of Gender and Social Development, Juba, September 4, 2012.[149]South Sudan Human Rights Commission, “2011 Annual Report,” p.32;Child Act, art. 4(4), pp. 2-10.;United Nations Population Fund and DPKConsulting, “Adapting Restorative Justice Principles to Reform CustomaryCourts in Dealing with Gender-based Violence in Southern Sudan,” May2008, http://www.docstoc.com/docs/61181823/ADAPTING-RESTORATIVE-JUSTICE-PRI(accessed February 11, 2013).[150]Currently, both statutory and customary courts impose sentences of terms ofimprisonment together with customary compensation awards. Human Rights Watch, Prisonis not for Me, p. 65.[151]Human Rights Watch, Prison is not for Me, p. 47.[152]The term “elopement” is not in the Penal Code. Chiefs and judges,however, sometimes rely on provisions against kidnapping or abduction as alegal basis for imposing prison sentences. Some elopements may involve a mantaking a woman and having sexual intercourse with her in order to compel herand her family to consent to marriage, or to lower the required dowry. Criminalpunishment may be an appropriate sanction for such acts. However, some“elopements” end in prison sentences, despite two partiesconsenting. See Human Rights Watch, Prison is not for Me, pp. 47 and51-56, for more analysis of the imprisonment of individuals for martial andsexual related offences that do not exist in law. A number of other studieshave documented instances of girls and women being imprisoned for marital andsex related crimes in South Sudan. See for example United States Institute forPeace Studies (USIP) and Rift Valley Institute (RVI), “Local Justice inSouthern Sudan,” 2010,http://www.usip.org/files/resources/PW66%20-%20Local%20Justice%20in%20Southern%20Sudan.pdf(accessed May 26, 2012), p. 60; Haki, “Combatting Gender Based Violencein the Customary Courts of South Sudan,” 2011,http://www.lepnet.org/sites/default/files/upload/og_files/Combatting-GBV-in-South-Sudan_Haki.pdf(accessed May 23, 2012), p. 3; World Vision International and the SouthernSudan Secretariat of Legal and Constitutional Affairs, “A Study ofCustomary law in Contemporary Southern Sudan,” pp. 5 and 60; NPA,“Gender-Based Violence and Protection Concerns in South Sudan,” p.23.[153]Human Rights Watch, Prison is not for Me, p. 54.[154]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with [details withheld], April 20,2012.[155]Ministry of Health et al., “SSHHS,” p. 163.[156]Helen Animashaun, “On the Nation's Birthday, South Sudan's Women MustStand Up for Their Rights,” September 2012,http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/helen-animashaun/south-sudan-birthday_b_1657820.html(accessed November 4, 2012); Mark Tran, “Can South Sudanunder Salva Kiir become a better place to be a woman?,” July 2012,http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/2012/jul/10/south-sudan-salva-kiir-woman(accessed October 31, 2012); Gabriel Mayom, “South Sudan: Women Challenged To Understand Their ConstitutionalRights,” August 2012,http://www.oyetimes.com/news/africa/27375-women-challenged-to-understand-their-constitutional-rights(accessed October 25, 2012).[157]Human Rights Watch interview with Ayen C., Bor County, March 15, 2012.[158]Human Rights Watch interview with Jacob Malual, head teacher at Mamer PrimarySchool in Kohlnyang, Bor County, March 14, 2012.[159]President Salva Kiir independence-day speech, July 9, 2011,http://www.gurtong.net/ECM/Editorial/tabid/124/ctl/ArticleView/mid/519/articleId/5440/President-Kiirs-Independence-Speech-In-Full.aspx(accessed February 19, 2012).Since independence, South Sudan has ratified theGeneva Conventions, the Refugee Convention, the Mine Ban Treaty, and sevenconventions of the International Labour Organization (ILO).[160]The 1978 Vienna Convention on Succession of States in Respect of Treaties,representative of the current status of international law, provides for thecontinuity of obligations in respect of all treaties that were binding on apredecessor state. Vienna Convention on Succession of States in Respect ofTreaties, adopted August 22, 1978, 1946 U.N.T.S. 3, entered into force November6 1996, art. 35. The UN Commission on Human Rights and UN Treaty bodies havealso underlined the continuing nature of human rights treaty obligations onsuccessor states. UN Commission on Human Rights, “Succession of States inrespect of international human rights treaties,” Resolutions 1993/223,1994/16 and 1995/18; UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment 26, Continuityof obligations (Sixty-first session, 1997), Compilation of General Comments andGeneral Recommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, U.N. Doc.CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.8/Rev.1 (1997), p. 173.[161]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December16, 1966, G.A.Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc. A/6316(1966), 999 U.N.T.S.171, entered into force March 23, 1976, ratified by Sudanon March 18, 1986; Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), adoptedNovember 20, 1989, G.A. Res. 44/25,annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167,U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into force September 2, 1990, ratified bySudan on August 3, 1990; International Covenant on Economic, Social andCultural Rights (ICESCR), adopted December16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 49, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 993 U.N.T.S. 3,entered into force January 3, 1976, ratified by Sudan on March 18, 1986;Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), adopted December13, 2006, G.A. Res. 61/106, Annex I, U.N. GAOR, 61st Sess., Supp. (No. 49) at65, U.N. Doc. A/61/49 (2006), entered into force May 3, 2008, ratified by Sudanon April 24, 2009; African [Banjul] Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights,adopted June 27, 1981, OAU Doc.CAB/LEG/67/3 rev. 5, 21 I.L.M. 58 (1982),entered into force October 21, 1986, ratified by Sudan on February 18, 1986;African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child (ACRWC), OAU Doc.CAB/LEG/24.9/49 (1990), November 29, 1999, ratified by Sudan July 30, 2005.[162]See Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties 1969, United Nations, TreatySeries, vol. 1155, p. 331, entered into force on January 27, 1980, art. 18.Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights on The Rights ofWomen in Africa (the Maputo Protocol), adopted July 11, 2003, entered intoforce November 2005, signed by Sudan June 30, 2008.[163]ICCPR, art. 3.[164]CRC, art. 2.[165]The Maputo Protocol in article six calls for States to develop laws thatestablish 18 as the minimum age of marriage; while article 18 of the AfricanCharter requires in article 18 that, “States eliminate everydiscrimination against women and also ensure the protection of the rights ofthe woman and the child as stipulated in international declarations andconventions.”[166]Universal Declaration on Human Rights (UDHR), adopted December 10, 1948, G.A.Res. 217A(III), U.N. Doc. A/810 at 71 (1948), art. 16, ICCPR, art. 23, andICESCR, art. 10 (1).[167]CEDAW, art.16, and Convention on Consent to Marriage, art. 2.[168]General Comment no. 16 of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,which oversees implementation of the ICESCR, sets out States partiesobligations to “ensure that men and women have an equal right to chooseif, whom, and when to marry.”[169]CRC, art. 12.[170]Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 12, The Right of theChild to Be Heard, U.N. Doc.CRC/C/GC/12(2009), para. 2.[171]Ibid.[172]For example see, UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No.4, Adolescent Health and Development in the Context of the Convention on theRights of the Child, (Thirty-third session, 2003), para. 20. There is anevolving consensus in international law that 18 should be the minimum age formarriage.[173]ACRWC, art.21 (2).[174]Maputo Protocol, art.6 (a).[175]CRC, art. 1. In the context of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,“a child means every human being below the age of 18 years unless, underthe law applicable to the child, majority is attained earlier."[176]Convention on Consent to Marriage, art. 3.[177]Maputo Protocol, art. 16 (d).[178]ICESCR, art. 12.[179]CRC, art. 24; CESCR. Also see General Comment No. 14, para. 22.[182]UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR),“Substantive Issues Arising in the Implementation of the InternationalCovenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,” General Comment No.14, The Right to the Highest Attainable Standard of Health, E/C.12/2000/4(2000), para. 14. para. 21.[183]ICESCR, art. 13.[184]CRC, art. 29, African Charter, art. 17, Maputo Protocol, art. 12, ACRWC, art.11.[185]Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 1, The Aims ofEducation (Article 29(1)), (Twenty-sixth session, 2001), Compilation of GeneralComments and General recommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, UNDoc. HRI/gen/1/rev.7, p.294, para. 1 (a).[186]Ibid., para. 2.[187]ICCPR, HRC, General Comment 31, Nature of the general legal obligation onstates parties to the Covenant (hereinafter "General Comment 31"),para. 9, U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.13 (2004); UN Committee Against Torture(CAT), General Comment No. 2: Implementation of Article 2 by States Parties, 24January 2008.CAT/C/GC/2.[188]CRC, art. 19.[189]Ibid., art. 34.[190]Maputo Protocol, arts. 4 (2 and b) and 3 (4).[191]Maputo Protocol, arts. 5 (d) and 4 (2f).[192]Regarding responsibility as to private acts, see ICCPR, HRC, General Comment31, Nature of the general legal obligation on states parties to the Covenant,para. 9, U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.13 (2004); UN Committee Against Torture(CAT), General Comment No. 2: Implementation of Article 2 by States Parties, 24January 2008.CAT/C/GC/2. Regarding the responsibility of states extending toall within their jurisdiction, see ICCPR, art. 2(1).[193]See amongst others, the European Court of Human Rights’ decisions in Kayav. Turkey, judgment of 19 February 1998, Reports of Judgments and Decisions1998-I, p. 324; Jordan v. the United Kingdom, no. 24746/94, judgment of May 4,2001; Finucane v. the United Kingdom, no. 29178/95, judgment of July 1 2003;Isayeva v. Russia, 57950/00, judgment of July 27, 2004; Adali v. Turkey,38187/97, judgment March 31, 2005.[194]Maslova and Nalbandov v Russia Application No. 839/02, judgment of January24, 2008, para 91. See also cases cited by the court in this finding: S.W. v. the United Kingdom, judgment of November 22,1995, Series A no. 335‑B; C.R. v. theUnited Kingdom, judgment of  November 22, 1995, Series Ano. 335‑C; and M.C. v. Bulgaria,no. 39272/98, § 153, ECHR 2003‑XII.Assenov and Others v. Turkey, judgment of October28, 1998, Reports 1998-VIII, p. 3290, § 102,and Labita v. Italy [GC], no. 26772/95, §131, ECHR 2000-IV.[195]United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), “Marrying too Young: End ChildMarriage,” 2012,http://www.unfpa.org/webdav/site/global/shared/documents/publications/2012/MarryingTooYoung.pdf(accessed October 18, 2012), p. 22.[196]Ibid., p. 23.[197]Sub-Saharan Africa countries that have made notable progress in reducing childmarriage levels include Benin, Cameroon, Congo, Ethiopia, Lesotho, Liberia,Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Togo, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, and Zimbabwe.Ibid., p. 24.[198]UNFPA, “Marrying too Young: End Child Marriage,” p. 44.[199]Ibid., p. 26.[200]Ibid., p. 26.[201]The UNFPA report shows that girls living in rural areas of the developing worldtend to marry at twice the rate of their urban counterparts (44 percent and 22percent, respectively). Girls with a primary education are twice as likely tomarry as those with a secondary or higher education. However, those with noeducation are three times more likely.  The rate of child marriage amongthe poorest 20 percent is 54 percent compared to 16 among the richest 20.Ibid., pp. 34 – 35. Also see United Nations Children’s Fund(UNICEF), “Early Marriage, A Harmful Traditional Practice, A StatisticalExploration,” 2005,http://www.unicef.org/publications/files/Early_Marriage_12.lo.pdf (accessedFebruary 20, 2012), pp. 3-4; International Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF),“Ending Child Marriage: A Guide for Global Policy Action,” firstpublished in September 2006, current edition published in November 2007,http://www.unfpa.org/upload/lib_pub_file/662_filename_endchildmarriage.pdf(accessed January 28, 2012), p. 10; Center for Global Investment, “GirlsCount: A Global Investment and Action Agenda,” 2008, http://www.coalitionforadolescentgirls.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/Girls_Count_2009.pdf(accessed May 15, 2012), pp. 42-43.[202]The three current strategic objectives for this globalpartnership include: increased awareness of the harmful impact of childmarriage at the local, national and international levels; expanded policy,financial and other support to end child marriage and to support married girls;and strengthened learning and coordination between organisations working to endchild marriage. See, http://girlsnotbrides.org/.  As of February 2013, thecoalition had around 223 member organizations in over 43 countries across Africa, Europe, South Asia and the US, with three emergingnational chapters in Ethiopia, Tanzania and the US. Girls Not BridesNewsletter, on file with HRW.[203]The report recommends that the Human Rights Council develop amore comprehensive approach to the issue of servile marriage and that Statesenact legislation to prevent the practice, provide support to victims, andlaunch campaigns to raise awareness of its negative impact. Human RightsCouncil, Report of the Special Rapporteur on Contemporary Forms of Slavery,including its Causes and Consequences, A/HRC/21/41, July 10, 2012, http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/RegularSession/Session21/A-HRC-21-41_en.pdf(accessed October 2, 2012).[204]See, http://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/112/s414;http://blog.iwhc.org/2012/07/rep-betty-mccollum-d-mn-and-rep-aaron-schock-r-il-introduce-child-marriage-legislation-in-u-s-house-of-representatives/(accessed July 20, 2012).[205]See, http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/bdquery/z?d112:s.414.[206]Malhotra, A., et al., 2011, “Solutions to End Child Marriage: What theEvidence shows,” 2011,http://www.icrw.org/publications/solutions-end-child-marriage (accessed March15, 2012), pp. 10-20; UNFPA, “Marrying too Young: end Child Marriage,:2012, http://www.unfpa.org/webdav/site/global/shared/documents/publications/2012/MarryingTooYoung.pdf(accessed October 5, 2012); UNICEF, The State of the World’s Children2011,http://www.unicef.org/sowc2011/pdfs/SOWC-2011-Main-Report_EN_02092011.pdf,(accessed January 16, 2012). p.33.Related ContentMarch 7, 2013News ReleaseSouth Sudan: End Widespread Child MarriageGovernment Should Protect and Support Girls Who Refuse Forced MarriageMarch 7, 2013News ReleaseSouth Sudan: End Widespread Child MarriageRegion / CountryAfrica South SudanProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch