“They Say We’re Dirty”: Denying an Education to India’s Marginalized | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload the summary and recommendations in HindiDonate NowVideoDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload the summary and recommendations in HindiApril 22, 2014“They Say We’re Dirty”Denying an Education to India’s MarginalizedAvailable InEnglishहिन्दीVideoA primary school in Sonbhadra district, Uttar Pradesh. The school’s principal told Human Rights Watch that the tribal students are a “big problem.” “Their main aim is to come and eat, not to study,” she said. “Just see how dirty they are.”© 2014 Yogesh Aggarwal/ Human Rights WatchVideo“TheySay We’re Dirty”Denyingan Education to India’s MarginalizedGlossarySummaryFailures inState ResponsesKeyRecommendationsMethodologyI. ProvidingUniversal Access to Education“Educationfor All”Mid-Day MealSchemeConstitutionalRight to EducationChallengesto the Right to Education ActInternationallawII.Exclusion of Children from Marginalized CommunitiesDalits andTribal GroupsVijay andShyam in Pindra, Uttar PradeshNaresh inKamtachak, BiharRajesh inMittenchak, BiharMadhu inPatna, BiharPriya inGaya, BiharPankaj andMeena in Sonbhadra, Uttar PradeshSharda inPatna, BiharMalini inGaya, BiharMuslimsSahir andJaved in Goyala Dairy Slum, DelhiSara inDelhiSalman inDelhiIII.Implementation, Monitoring, and AccountabilityMonitoringMechanismsEnrollmentDoes Not Guarantee AttendanceFailure toIdentify Dropouts and Children at RiskRani andBarkha in Mahbubnagar, Andhra PradeshVeena in Mahbubnagar,Andhra PradeshSeventeenChildren in Pindra, Uttar PradeshAjay inPatna, BiharShaheen inBajardihan, Uttar PradeshSeema inPatna, BiharFailure toProvide Bridge Classes for Migrant ChildrenSamar inVaranasi, Uttar PradeshReema inGurgaon, HaryanaMita inKurnool, Andhra PradeshPoorSupervision by the Education DepartmentCorruptionand Other Malfeasance by School AuthoritiesTheChallenge of Community and School-Level Monitoring SystemsRole of thePanchayat (Local Village Council)IneffectiveGrievance RedressIV. RecommendationsToIndia’s Central Government:To StateGovernments:To ForeignDonors, Aid Agencies, and Concerned Governments:AcknowledgmentsAppendixCivilSociety Guidelines to End Discrimination in EducationGlossaryAnganwadiGovernment-run early childhood care and education center.Anganwadi workers’ duties include providing nutritional supplements topregnant and lactating mothers.BlockAdministrative division of a district.Block Education OfficialOfficial in a state government’s educationdepartment responsible for monitoring at block and village level.Block Resource Centre (BRC)Academic resource center at block level to facilitatetraining for teachers. The coordinators in BRCs provide in-service trainingand on-site support to schools for improvement of school quality.Cluster Resource Centre (CRC)Academic resource center at village level. Thecoordinators in CRCs provide in-service training and on-site support toschools for improvement of school quality. Monthly teacher meetings are heldhere.DalitSo-called “untouchables,” at the bottom of thecaste hierarchy.DistrictAdministrative division of a state.Elementary educationEducation up to grade VIII covered under the Right ofChildren to Free and Compulsory Education Act 2009.Gram PanchayatVillage-level councils.Gram SabhaA cluster of villages governed by a village council.MandalAnother name for block (administrative division of adistrict) in the state of Andhra Pradesh.MusaharA sub-caste among theScheduled Castes. Musahars are among the poorest and the most marginalizedcommunities, and face discrimination not only from people in so-called uppercastes but also from other Dalits.Other Backward ClassesPhrase under Indian law for groups considered to besocially, economically, and educationally marginalized.Primary schoolGrades I to V.Sarva Shiksha AbhiyanGovernment program to provide universal education,supported by numerous international aid agencies.Scheduled CastesCaste groups, also known as Dalits, that are eligible forquotas in education and government jobs.Scheduled TribesPhrase used in Indian law for tribal communities that areeligible for special protections including quotas in education and governmentjobs.Upper primary schoolGrades VI to VIII.SummaryThe teacher always made us sit in a corner of the room, andwould throw keys at us [when she was angry]. We only got food if anything wasleft after other children were served…. [G]radually [we] stopped going toschool.— Shyam, 14, Dalit boy from Uttar Pradesh now workingat a brick kiln, April 2013When you speak with officials about the right to education,they love to talk about plans and circulars. But ask them about implementation—andthey hem and haw. They have nothing.— Sanat Sinha, chief coordinator, Bal Sakha, Patna,July 2013In 2009, India enacted the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory EducationAct, whichprovides for free and compulsory education toall children aged 6 to 14 based on principles of equity and non-discrimination.For a country that six decades ago at independence had staggering poverty andilliteracy levels, this was an overdue but ambitious step to meet its domesticand internationally recognized obligations to its children. It also testifiedto India’s increasing confidence as an emerging economy with one of theyoungest and largest work forces in the world.However, four years after it came into force,the Right to Education Act is yet to be properly implemented. While nearly allprimary school children are enrolled in school, many millions do not actually attendclasses. Often, this is because their caste, ethnicity, economic condition,religion, or gender acts as a barrier to education. Most children withdisabilities are excluded from government schools due to lack of teachers withspecialized training, and inadequate facilities and care.State governments typically ignore theproblem. Detailed plans to monitor and track each child’s progress havenot been implemented by the authorities, be they district or state officials,village committees, school principals, or teachers. According to the UnitedNations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 80 million Indian children drop out ofschool before completing elementary education.In this report, Human Rights Watch examinesthe obstacles preventing certain children from attending school and thegovernment’s failure to take the steps necessary to address the problem.Discrimination remains a major factor affecting access to education for childrenfrom marginalized communities, including Dalits, tribal groups, and Muslims.Already vulnerable because of socio-economic challenges, these children needspecial attention and encouragement to remain in school. Instead, a lack ofproper monitoring leaves such children vulnerable to exclusion, denying themthe right to a child-friendly and equitable environment as set out under theRight to Education Act. Poor monitoring also results in poor retention of atrisk children, many of whom end up pushed into work and early marriage.April 1, 2013, was the three-year deadline toimplement key provisions of the Right to Education Act. The government has madenoteworthy progress in some areas, but did not meet several important targets.While net enrollment in primary schools is now nearly 100 percent, regularattendance and retention continues to be a major challenge. Local rights groupssay that mechanisms still have not been put in place for trackingchildren’s attendance, mapping exclusion, and setting up adequate numberof “bridge” courses so that children who drop out or start schoolat a later age can catch up to their peers in age-appropriate classes.The central government recognizes that exclusion—based on children’s caste,class, gender, and special needs can take many forms and affect access, participation, retention, achievement, andcompletion of elementary education—is therefore, the “single mostimportant challenge in universalising elementary education” and has drafted policies under the Right to Education Act to keep its poorestand most vulnerable in attendance. Although education officials hesitate toadmit the existence of segregation or discrimination in schools, a 2012 studycommissioned by the government’s flagship education program, SarvaShiksha Abhiyan, found exclusionary practices in schools and said there was anurgent need for the authorities to acknowledge and address them.Human Rights Watch conducted research for this report infour states in India, interviewing more than 160 people, including 85 children,to examine continuing obstacles to proper implementation of the Right to Education Act. We did not conduct surveys orundertake statistical analysis, but instead offer a qualitative study; findingsare drawn from interviews with children, parents, and a wide range of educationexperts, rights activists, local authorities, and education officials, as wellas from our analysis of reports and other secondary sources. We undertook theresearch in partnership with local groups who helped us identify children mostat risk of being excluded from school.This report finds that discrimination takesvarious forms, including teachers asking Dalit children to sit separately,making insulting remarks about Muslim and tribal students, and villageauthorities not responding when girls are kept from the classroom. Teachers andother students often address these children using derogatory terms for theircaste, community, tribe, or religion. In some schools, children from vulnerablecommunities are not ever considered for leadership roles such as class monitorbecause of their caste or community. Many are expected to perform unpleasantjobs such as cleaning toilets. Schools in marginalized neighborhoods often havethe poorest infrastructure and least well-trained teachers; many have fewer teachersthan required.In Uttar Pradesh state’s Sonbhadradistrict, for example, students belonging to the Ghasiya tribal community toldHuman Rights Watch that they suffer discrimination at their school fromteachers and fellow students, and that teachers at best pay them littleattention. Many of these children, facing such obstacles, attend school onlysporadically. Some stop going to school altogether.In one school we visited, 58 Ghasiya childrenwere placed in a single grade irrespective of their ages, and were asked to sitseparately from the other students. One of the children told Human RightsWatch:The teacher tells us to sit on the other side. If we sitwith others, she scolds us and asks us to sit separately … The teacherdoesn’t sit with us because she says we ‘are dirty.’ Theother children also call us dirty everyday so sometimes we get angry and hitthem.The school principal told Human Rights Watch that the tribalchildren were a “big problem”:These Ghasiya children come to school late, come when theywant to come, no matter how much we tell them to come on time. Their main aimis to come and eat, not to study. Just see how dirty they are.Many Dalit children who spoke to Human Rights Watchcomplained of prejudice from teaching staff and fellow students. Priya, a Dalitfrom Bihar, told Human Rights Watch: “Other children don’t let ussit with them. Some of the girls say, ‘Yuck, you people are Dom [streetsweepers] – a dirty caste….’ The teachers never say anythingeven when we complain.”Such discriminatory behavior contributes to increasedtruancy. Several children in Priya’s neighborhood admit they attendschool irregularly because they do not like the unwelcome atmosphere. Thechildren stay away, fall behind in classes, and eventually drop out. Aneducation activist in Bihar told Human Rights Watch, “Dalit children aremade to feel inferior in schools and the schools reinforce caste norms. When itcomes to any manual work such as cleaning of classrooms or picking up garbage,it’s always the Dalit children who are asked to do it.”In other locations, we found Muslim children being neglectedby the school system. Twelve-year old Sahir from Delhi told Human Rights Watchthat Muslim children are left out of extra-curricular activities and leadershiproles. “The teachers don’t let us participate in any sports. Classmonitors are always chosen from among Hindu boys and they always complain aboutus Muslim boys.” The lead author of the 2006 Sachar committee report on thestatus of the Muslim community told Human Rights Watch: “There is a systemic bias against Muslims inIndia… which is carried forward in education too.” PredominantlyMuslim areas in some parts of the country suffer from a lack of schools.The situation is worse forgirls. According to government statistics, the dropout rate among adolescentgirls is as high as 64 percent. A significant number of these are girls fromDalit, tribal, and Muslim communities, who leaveschool without completing grade VIII, usually when nearing puberty. Theyare particularly vulnerable to child marriage. Their largely wage earningparents worry about leaving a teenage girl alone at home, and prefer to marrythem early, fearing that unmarried teenage girls face greater risks of sexualabuse. Although the Right to Education Act proposes interventions to keep girlsfrom vulnerable communities in the classroom, those mechanisms have not beeneffectively implemented.Sharda, a Dalit girl, was withdrawn from school by herparents because they were worried about her safety. She was married at age 14against her will. Before her wedding, when she went to school despite herparents’ refusal, she found that her name was no longer in the schoolregister. While some villagers cautioned her father against marrying her atsuch a young age, no local authorities or members of the gram panchayat(village-level council) intervened. “There was no one I could turn to whowould help me,” she told Human Rights Watch.Weak implementation of education policies is pushing childreninto labor markets. Many child workers are children of seasonal migrant laborerswho come from poor, landless, and marginalized communities. By some estimates, aboutsix million children in India accompany their parents when they migrate forwork. As Human Rights Watch research found and other studies have noted, accessto schools remains one of the biggest hurdles for migrant children. Many worksites are distant from schools and when migrant children return to their homes aftermigration season, they are far behind in classes.Ten-year old Reema migrated from Chhattisgarh to Gurgaonwith her parents in 2010 and since then has spent most of her time on various constructionsites. When Human Rights Watch researchers met her, Reema was attending anon-formal education center run by an NGO at the construction site where herfamily is living. But it was a temporary solution; once her family moved, Reemawould be out of school again. Geeta Rawat, a teacher at the NGO-run center,said they tried to enroll all children between 6 and 14 years in a governmentprimary school nearby, but it was a challenge. She said: “Teachers arereluctant to admit these children because they know the children will move awayfrom here after a few months.” The Right to Education Act includes aprovision addressing the needs of migrant children but it remains poorlyimplemented.Failures in State ResponsesThe Indian government recognizes that acombination of factors results in the exclusion of marginalized children fromthe education system. The Right to Education Act defines equity as “not only equal opportunity, but also creation ofconditions in which the disadvantaged sections of the society—children ofSC [Scheduled Caste], ST [Scheduled Tribe], Muslim minority, landlessagricultural workers and children with special needs, etc. can avail of theopportunity.” Its guidelines for implementation of the act recognize thatensuring such children get an adequate education requires not only theavailability of schools within a specified distance of their homes, but also “anunderstanding of the educational needs and predicament of the traditionallyexcluded categories.”Unfortunately, in the schools we examined,this understanding was not being put into practice. Not only do educationauthorities fail to create conditions conducive to attendance by children frommarginalized communities, but schools have little capacity to address thelearning needs of children who enroll in schools at a later age or when theyreturn after dropping out. The new law requires that all children be admittedin age-appropriate classes to help with their retention. To enable this, itprovides for special bridge courses of between three months and two years sothat these children can catch up and integrate better.The schools we visited in rural areas,however, rarely had any capacity for such special training. Instead, schoolsand education officials often denied they had any significant number ofout-of-school children or dropouts to warrant such special classes. One schoolprincipal in Azamgarh district of Uttar Pradesh told Human Rights Watch:If a child comes to us for enrollment in school when he is10 years old and hasn’t even learned the basics, then we put thechild’s age as 6 and enroll him in class I. If we put them in an age-appropriatehigher class and pay special attention to one child, then we can’t teachany other child.Not surprisingly, children who work are less likely to go toschool than those who do not. According to UNICEF, India has the world’slargest number of child workers aged 5 to 14 years—13 million—and alarge majority of them are Dalits, members of Scheduled Tribes, and other minorities.Human Rights Watch found that interventions to bring working children back intoage-appropriate classrooms are largely ineffective. India has both laws andpolicies to address child labor but, by the government’s own admission,monitoring at the state level is mostly nonexistent. Without monitoring,at-risk children are less likely to be identified and steps to address theirsituation are less likely to be initiated.One evident problem is the lack of coordination between thevarious ministries and departments in charge of different aspects of childprotection—such as those dealing with labor, education, tribal welfare,and social justice. For instance, the Labor Department, rather than theEducation Department, runs the bridge schools for children released from childlabor. A senior labor official in eastern Uttar Pradesh expressed frustrationat his department being tasked with handling the education of former childworkers, saying it was not equipped to do so. “When we find large numbersof children in labor and rescue them, we don’t have the capacity totackle [all of the associated issues],” he said. “If we rescue fivechildren, it takes us four days to complete all the procedures and follow up onrehabilitation.”The Right to Education Act envisions localcommunities, and parents in particular, playing a key role in ensuring theact’s provisions are followed and children’s rights are protected.It aims to increase community involvement with schools through school managementcommittees (SMCs), which consist of school administrators, a member of thelocal authority, and parents. But in the districts we visited, the SMCs werelargely non-functioning, and where they had been put into place, were mostlyineffectual. Capacity building, to make these committees useful in endingdiscrimination and ensuring education for all, remains to be accomplished.Ensuring thesuccess of India’s Right to Education Act is an ambitious and worthyproject. There have already been notable gains since the law was enacted in2009. Most obviously, there are a lot more schools and a lot more studentsenrolled in and attending those schools. Numerous impoverished and illiterateparents from marginalized communities told Human Rights Watch that they welcomethe expanded opportunity and would like their children to be educated. At thesame time, many of the parents complained about the lack of proper facilities,discrimination, poor teaching, and poor attendance of teachers. And far toomany children are still dropping out.Until thegovernment creates and enforces protocols to monitor vulnerable children, andensures that schools become inclusive child-friendly places of learning formarginalized children, the project will falter. This monitoring should not berestricted to the occasional inspection of attendance registers. Schoolauthorities have been known to falsify attendance records to evadeaccountability for failure to retain children in the school system, and severalschool officials we spoke with openly admitted to having done so.The Right to Education Actempowers the National Commission for the Protection of Child Rights to monitorthe act’s implementation, but the commission has not been provided withstaff and independent capacity to perform this role effectively. In addition,the commission is under the Ministry of Women and Child Development and has tomonitor the Ministry of Human Resource Development which oversees education.The Ministry of Human Resource Development is also the commission’sfunding body—creating a conflict of interest. Political and bureaucraticinterference are also undermining commissions at the state level. And agrievance redress mechanism, crucial for effective implementation of the act,still does not exist in all states.India as a party to core international human rights treatieshas an obligation to promote and protect the right to education. National andstate governments must ensure compulsory and free primary education for allchildren, remove barriers to education, including for children who work, andend discrimination against minority students. Seeing to it that these standardsare met, through systematic monitoring and accountability mechanisms, iscrucial if India is to meet the educational goals set out in the Right toEducation Act.Key RecommendationsTheIndian government should take steps for the effective implementation ofthe Right to Education Act that focus not simply on enrollment, but on theretention of every child in school at least until age 14. An essentialfirst step is creating and implementing a system to monitor and track allchildren from the time they are enrolled to the time they graduate gradeVIII, and a uniform protocol for identifying children who are out ofschool, have dropped out, or are at risk of dropping out.Thegovernment should develop clear standards for monitoring children at risk ofdropping out, and develop mechanisms to ensure relevant authorities undertakesocial mapping, especially in marginalized communities, engage with minoritycommunities, and intervene to ensure that children who have left school canreturn.Thegovernment should develop clear indicators to improve the detection of andresponse to discrimination in schools. The National Commission forProtection of Child Rights should develop guidelines to addressdiscrimination and other abuses of children, and set out appropriatedisciplinary measures.Thegovernment should instruct the Ministry of Human Resource Development todevelop guidelines and manuals for teachers that set forth good practicesfor social inclusion and equity, such as encouraging children frommarginalized communities to participate in school activities, ensuringmore frequent collaboration between children of different castes, andpromoting innovative activities aimed at inclusion.MethodologyThis report is based on Human Rights Watch field researchprimarily in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, and Andhra Pradesh states in India between October2012 and September 2013. We interviewed nearly 160 people including 85children. These include 35 children in Uttar Pradesh, 16 in Bihar, 15 in AndhraPradesh, 4 in Haryana, and 15 in Delhi. We also interviewed 45 parentsincluding some that participated in group discussions. We spoke with 32 schoolstaff including both teachers and school principals. We also met with officialsat the village, district, state, and national levels. Our research was assistedby child rights organizations, academics, and experts in education.We selected Uttar Pradesh and Bihar states because theirelementary education enrollment and retention rates are among the lowest inIndia; elementary school attendance rates in each are below 60 percent. UttarPradesh, India’s most populous state, also has the highest proportion ofout-of-school girls aged 11 to 14—more than 11 percent in 2012.We looked at the southern state of Andhra Pradesh because ofrecent successful educational initiatives there. While it still has highnumbers of children out of school and engaged in labor (second nationally afterUttar Pradesh), the situation has significantly improved in the last decade. Wealso conducted research in the city of Gurgaon in Haryana state, where there isa construction boom, to examine conditions facing migrant children. To betterunderstand the situation in major cities, we conducted interviews in New Delhi.We did not undertake surveysor a statistical study, but instead base our findings on extensive interviews,supplemented by our analysis of a wide range of published materials. Localgroups were invaluable in helping us identify those children most at risk ofbeing excluded from schools. While we met with well over 100 children,we conducted interviews only with those who were comfortable speaking with useither separately, with their friends, or in the presence of an adult theytrusted, usually a parent or a member of a local organization. Interviews wereconducted in Hindi except in Andhra Pradesh state, where we worked with aTelugu language interpreter.The names of all children have been changed to protect theiridentities. In some cases, names of their villages have also been withheld forthe same purpose.I. Providing Universal Access to EducationWhen India gained independence in 1947, its literacy rate wasonly 14 percent, with female literacy an abysmal 8 percent. Only one child inthree had an opportunity to enroll in primary school.[1]In the ensuing decades, successive governments have focusedresources on education, which has long been viewed as central to addressingIndia’s many other challenges including poor health care, rapidpopulation growth, high mortality rates, slow economic growth, and acutepoverty. This focus is reflected in a current overall national literacy rate of74 percent and a female literacy rate of 65 percent.[2]Primary school enrollment has soared to near 100 percent according togovernment estimates.[3]Attitudes have also changed. Parents in India, whotraditionally wanted their children to begin contributing to the family income,are increasingly enrolling them in school instead. There is also a growingdemand for quality education. The percentage of 6 to 14 year olds enrolled in private schools in rural India, which are seen toprovide education superior to that in most government-run schools, has steadilyincreased, rising from 19 percent in 2006 to 29 percent in 2013.[4] In urban India, the ratio is much higher.In 1951, four years afterindependence, India’s first five-year plan noted that educationalfacilities were “very inadequate” and provided for only 40 percentof children aged 6 to 11 and 10 percent of children aged 11 to 17.[5]By year 2000, the number of primary schools hadincreased more than three times from 210,000in 1951 to 642,000 and the number ofupper primary schools had increased from 13,600 in 1951 to 198,000.[6]“Education for All”To ensure universal access toelementary education, in 2001 the government of India launched its mostambitious program, Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, meaning “Education for All.”[7] The program includes a variety of government initiatives, such as buildingnew schools and additional classrooms, providingtoilets and drinking water, andconducting regular teacher trainings.[8]When the program was startedin 2001, 32 million children were not attending school. By governmentestimates, this number dropped to 2.2 million in 2013.[9] The overall illiteracyrate came down from 35 percent to 26percent between 2001 and 2011.[10]In 2004-05, thecentral government imposed a tax levy of 2percent to mobilize additional funds forthe flagship education program.[11] In 2008-09, an additional 1 percent was added forhigher education.[12] The government alsoreceived funds from several internationaldonors.[13]Mid-Day Meal SchemeTo address chronic childmalnourishment and encourage school enrollment and attendance, the centralgovernment started the Mid-Day Meal scheme in 1995. Under this plan, everychild enrolled in grades I to VIII in a government or government-aided schoolis provided free cooked lunch. Over the last decade, the scheme has beenexpanded to cover several types of schools beyond those run by the government,including recognized and unrecognized madrasas (Muslim religiousschools) supported under the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan.[14]According to the government, the scheme covers about120 million children and forms 32 percent of the total elementary educationbudget for 2013-14 at around $2.2 billion.[15]While the Mid-Day Meal schemeis largely successful in providing one meal a day to poor children, it has hadless success in ensuring that children remain in the classrooms. A 2012 PAISAsurvey by the Accountability Initiative in two districts each of Uttar Pradeshand Bihar states found that only 60percent of enrolled students received mid-day meals on a given day. The surveynoted that the gap was likely a result of irregular attendance. However, italso observed that school-level data on the number of meals served could beinflated. The survey collected student attendance data on the day of the surveyand found that the number of meals served, as recorded in the Mid-Day Mealregister, was actually higher than the number of students who attended schoolthat day.[16]During the eleventh five-yearplan (2007-2012), only 80 percent of the allocated funds were spent.[17]There are huge state-wide variations in utilizationof cooking cost allocations and government-supplied food grains.[18]Constitutional Right to EducationThe Right to Education was added to the Indian Constitutionin 2002 with the passage of the 86th constitutional amendment.[19] TheRight of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act (“Right toEducation Act”) came into force on April 1, 2010.[20]The Right to Education Act provides “a justiciablelegal framework that entitles all children between 6-14 years to an educationof reasonable quality, based on principles of equity andnon-discrimination.”[21] Itprovides for a child-friendly learning environment and is funded through theSarva Shiksha Abhiyan. The estimated budget allocation for the program for2013-14 is approximately US$4.48 billion.[22] Allocationper student at the all-India level under SSA has more than tripled from an averageof US$26 in 2007-08 to US$77 in 2011-12, but the total allocation varies widelyfrom state to state depending on the state’s own contribution toelementary education.[23]The responsibility for providingprimary and secondary education lies with state governments and local authorities.Funding comes from both central and state governments. The relevant localauthority is the panchayat (elected community council) at the villagelevel; the zila parishad (local government body) at the districtlevel; and municipal corporations in cities ortowns. The Right to Education Act relies on school management committees (SMCs)—composedof parents, the head teacher, and a member of the local government—as a decentralized mechanism to improve schooling. Itenvisions active community involvement in the management and supervision ofschools.At the national level, thetask of monitoring and grievance redress falls to an independent statutorybody, the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR), under theMinistry of Women and Child Development. At the state level, the task isentrusted to state commissions for protection of child rights, where they exist.[24]The commissionshave the powers of a civil court.[25]Click to expand ImageA primary school in Gaya district in Bihar state holds some classesand the mid-day meal outdoors because of a lack of classrooms. During themonsoon season it becomes a major problem, says the principal. © 2013 JayshreeBajoria/Human Rights WatchThe Right to Education Act laid down a three-year deadline forall states to meet most of the targets under the law, such as adequateinfrastructure and increased appointment of teachers to meet the prescribedstudent-teacher ratios. While there has been significant progress, most statesmissed the deadline even in meeting basic infrastructural needs such asseparate toilets for boys and girls, access to drinking water, and an adequatenumber of classrooms. According to one report by a collective of educationrights groups, less than 10 percent of India’s government schools in2012-13 were compliant with the Right to Education Act (RTE) in terms ofinfrastructure and teacher availability.[26]The same report concluded that adequateprocesses had not been put in place for tracking children’s attendance,mapping exclusion, and setting up “bridge” courses to enablechildren who drop out or start school at a later age to catch up to their peersand enroll in age-appropriate classes. While net enrollment in primary schoolsis now almost at 100 percent, regular attendance and retention is a majorchallenge, particularly when it comes to the country’s most vulnerableand marginalized communities.Indian education specialists have criticized thegovernment’s failure to allocate adequate financial resources tosuccessfully implement the act.[27] Despitemaking promises to allocate 6 percent of the national income to education asfar back as 1968, successive governments have invested less than 4 percent.[28]Challenges to the Right to Education ActThe Right to Education Act seeks major improvements inIndia’s educational system but it has been mired in controversy since beforeit was enacted. Some education specialists in favor of a common school systembelieve that it fails to provide equitable education to all since it permits privateschools. They contend that it allows “continued discrimination bylegitimizing two distinct parallel streams; inequitable, multi-layer andlow-quality education system for the poor children, and so-called qualityeducation to the elite section through various other means.”[29]At the same time, private institutions have also challengedthe act since it requires that all privateschools reserve 25 percent of their seats for “children belonging toweaker section[s] and disadvantaged group[s]” in the neighborhood.[30]Several private schools said this provision will affect their financialviability, in practice forcing a fee hike upon other students, and filedpetitions contesting the provision. In April 2012, the Supreme Court upheld theconstitutional validity of the act.[31] Mediareports, however, suggest that many private schools around the country havefailed to implement the law.[32]International lawIndia is a party to core international human rights treatiesthat place binding legal obligations on the Indian central and stategovernments. Those with particular relevance to universalization of elementaryeducation are the International Covenant on Economic, Social and CulturalRights (ICESCR),[33] the Conventionon the Rights of the Child (CRC),[34] theInternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),[35]and the Convention on the Elimination of AllForms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).[36]International law provides for the right of everyone toeducation. Primary education shall be “compulsory and available free toall.” Secondary education shall be made generally available andaccessible to all. In addition, for those who have not received or completedtheir primary education, “[f]undamental education shall be encouraged orintensified.”[37]Governments also have an obligation to “[t]ake measures to encourageregular attendance at schools and the reduction of drop-out rates.”[38]International law prohibits discrimination on the basis ofreligion, ethnicity, social origin, or other status.[39]Education should foster development of respect for a child’s“cultural identity, language and values.”[40]According to the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, theinternational expert body that monitors implementation of the ICESCR, prohibitionagainst discrimination “is subject to neither progressive realization northe availability of resources; it applies fully and immediately to all aspectsof education.”[41] Agovernment that fails to provide a significant number of individuals “themost basic forms of education is, prima facie, failing to discharge itsobligations” under the right to education.[42]Upholding the rights of Indian children to education alsomeans promoting and protecting other rights, such as the restrictions on childlabor, and protections for minorities and displaced persons.Communitiesand families that are dependent on child labor are less able to ensure theirchildren get a proper education.[43]The ICESCRrequires governments to protect “children and young persons . . . fromeconomic and social exploitation.”[44]The CRC obliges governments to “recognize theright of the child to be protected from economic exploitation and fromperforming any work that is likely to be hazardous or to interfere with thechild’s education, or to be harmful to the child’s health orphysical, mental, spiritual, moral or social development.”[45]The convention directs states to implement theseprotections through appropriate legislative, administrative, social, andeducational measures.[46]India’s domestic lawsban children under 14 working in hazardous industries and processes. Thegovernment is considering an amendment that will ban children from working inall industries under 14.[47]The UN Declaration on theRights of Indigenous Peoples provides that governments should ensure thatindigenous children have the right to alllevels and forms of state education without discrimination.[48]Governments, inconsultation and cooperation with indigenous peoples, should “takespecific measures to protect indigenous children from economic exploitation andfrom performing any work that is likely…to interfere with thechild’s education.”[49]With respect to internally displaced persons, the UN GuidingPrinciples on Internal Displacement provides that the authorities shall ensurethat displaced children receive education and that educational facilities shallbe made available to them.[50]Ensuring that the rights of India’s children areprotected requires effective monitoring. The UN Child Rights Committee hasstated that governments have an obligation to “monitor the availabilityof and access to quality services that contribute to young children’ssurvival and development.”[51]II. Exclusion of Children from MarginalizedCommunitiesThe Indian government has recognized thatexclusion—based on children’s caste, class, gender, and specialneeds can take many forms and affect access, participation, retention,achievement, and completion of elementary education—is the “singlemost important challenge in universalising elementary education.”[52]The Right to Education Act clearly lays out the responsibility of state andlocal authorities to ensure that poor children and those belonging todisadvantaged groups do not face discrimination or other arbitrary barriers topursuing and completing their education.[53]The government notes the various forms of exclusion of Dalit, tribal, andMuslim children by teachers, peer groups, and government officials.[54]The government also has acknowledged that itis a combination of several factors that result in exclusion and thereforedefines equity as “not only equal opportunity,but also creation of conditions in which the disadvantaged sections of thesociety … can avail of the opportunity.”[55]To ensure inclusion, the government also definesaccess broadly, going beyond merely making a school available within aspecified distance to ensuring schools have “an understanding of theeducational needs and predicament of the traditionally excluded categories”such as Dalits, tribal groups, Muslims, girls, and children with special needs.[56]But rarely are these definitions of equity andaccess applied in schools. Not only do education authorities fail to createconditions conducive to including children from marginalized communities, butthey fail to equip schools with adequate capacity to address the learning needsof these children, who often lack educational support at home, may enroll inschools at a later age, or return to school after a gap.Teachers are also frequently insensitive toissues of social inclusion and equity. Local civil society groups working oneducation have previously reported and our research confirms that some teachersand students address children from marginalized communities using derogatoryterms for their caste, tribe, or religion. These children are also often excludedfrom leadership roles in school such as participation in important schoolfunctions or becoming the class monitor. Henri Tiphagne of Tamil Nadu-based NGOPeople’s Watch, a former state representative for the Right to Education monitoringcell of the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights, said that teachersbehave as part of the caste hierarchy and the children emulate them. He toldHuman Rights Watch, “Right now there’s nothing in the code ofconduct for teachers on discrimination.”[57]Too often, implementing authorities at thestate or district level deny that any form of segregation or discriminationtakes place in schools, instead of properly enforcing the law and holdingteachers accountable.[58]A 2012 qualitative study commissioned by thegovernment’s flagship education program, Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, in sixstates found exclusionary practices in schools and said there was an urgentneed for the authorities to acknowledge and address them.The study noted that regular attendance was a serious issue among children from extremely poor andmarginalized communities, and that when such children fall behind in learningthey are ignored by teachers. The study concluded: “In all six states,teachers preferred to focus on ‘bright’ children who sat in thefront rows. This process resulted in a self-perpetuating mechanism leading toexclusion.”[59]Dalits and Tribal GroupsDespite a constitutional ban on the practice ofuntouchability, caste-based discrimination persists in India.[60]Historically, dominant castes have controlled the affairs of villages andharassment of Dalits is not uncommon. Redress for abuses is difficult becauseof weak enforcement of protection of Dalit rights laws. There have been effortsto empower Dalits, including Dalit women, such as by ensuring their involvementin local decision-making processes through quotas in panchayat elections.However, Dalit leaders often find it difficult to carry out their dutieseffectively because of pressure from dominant castes.[61]Tribal communities are often isolated, limiting their accessto education. Human Rights Watch found that the impact of such isolation isexacerbated by both subtle and overt exclusion practices, largely due to theintersection between economic disadvantage and social marginalization.Under the Right to Education Act,the state government and the relevant localauthority are expected to ensure that no child is segregated or discriminatedagainst in the classroom, during mid-day meals, in the playgrounds, in the useof common drinking water and toilet facilities, and in performing tasks such ascleaning toilets or classrooms.[62]However, such segregation and discriminationcontinue. Satyendra Kumar, Bihar director for New Delhi-based Centre for SocialEquity and Inclusion, told Human Rights Watch:Dalit children continue to be pushed out of the educationsystem because of discriminatory behavior of teachers and institutionalexclusion such as poor investment in schools in Dalit habitations. Dalitchildren are made to feel inferior in schools and the schools reinforce castenorms. When it comes to any manual work such as cleaning of classrooms or pickingup garbage, it’s always the Dalit children who are asked to do it.[63]There are repeated allegations of caste-based discriminationin the Mid-Day Meal scheme.[64] Dalitchildren are sometimes asked to sit separately, and dominant caste children aretold by parents to refuse food cooked by a Dalit.[65]“If you see which children in school bringplates from home, it’s always the Dalit children,” saidKumar. “When we ask teachers whythey are not given plates in school, the teachers say that the other childrenwon’t eat from the plates Dalit children eat from.”[66]Language can be a factor ofexclusion for tribal children who often do not understand the medium ofteaching. A 2012 study found that the “education administration apparatus thatoversees the delivery of educational programmes has been developed and deployedin a mode of assimilation and domination which only reproduces the range ofinequalities and disadvantages that most Adivasis face.”[67]Activists also point toinstitutional exclusion. One way to examine this is to assess the budgetary allocations and utilization of funds. A2013 report by Centre for Social Equity and Inclusion found that despite a dire need to focus on the educational needs ofDalit and tribal children “the Department of School Education andLiteracy seems to be mechanically allocating funds” without properassessment of what these children really need to be able to access education.[68]Schoolsvisited by Human Rights Watch in Dalit neighborhoods often lacked toilets,clean drinking water, or the required teacher-student ratio. In many of theseschools students sat outside or shared space with another grade because of alack of classrooms or teachers.A comparison of dropout ratesshows the scope of the challenge. Elementary school dropout rates for childrenfrom Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribe are 51 percent and 58 percent,respectively, much higher than the 37 percent rate for non-ScheduledCaste/Scheduled Tribe children.[69]A significant number of girlsfrom these communities drop out when they are close to puberty withoutcompleting education through grade VIII. According to government statistics,the dropout rate among adolescent girls is as high as 64 percent.[70] Girls from Dalit, tribal, and Muslimcommunities are particularly vulnerable to child marriage because parents fearexposure to risks of sexual abuse. These are largely wage earning families;parents worry about leaving a post-pubescent girl alone at home, and prefer tomarry them early. The Right to Education Act providesthat there should be no discrimination against children from “disadvantagedgroups” on any grounds, including gender.[71]Vijay and Shyam in Pindra, Uttar PradeshIn 2010, 22 Dalit children of the Musahar community from ahamlet in Pindra stopped going to school after various acts of discriminationand physical violence against them by the principal and teachers. Vijay, 14,told Human Rights Watch he dropped out after being beaten:The teacher didn’t let us go to the toilet. One day,I asked her for permission to go to the toilet but she said, ‘Sit down,go later.’ So I urinated outside the window and she hit me so hard with astick that my hand broke. I went to the hospital to get my hand bandaged. I hadmy hand in bandage for 10 days. Even now when I am working, I feel a lot ofpain.[72]Shyam, 14, told Human Rights Watch that the children wereexcluded, and sometimes beaten:The teacher always made us sit in a corner of the room, andwould throw keys at us [when she was angry]. We only got food if anything wasleft after other children were served. The teacher hit my classmate [Vijay] sohard that she broke his hand. After this incident, gradually all Musaharchildren stopped going to school.[73]Activists from a local nongovernmental organization,People’s Vigilance Committee on Human Rights (PVCHR), found that theprincipal asked the Dalit children to form a separate queue during morningprayers.[74] Insidethe classroom, the teacher asked them to sit separately in a corner,segregating them from other children.[75] Whenthe mid-day meals were served, the Dalit children were served last.[76]Once when a Dalit child asked for food at the beginning of lunchtime, the cookallegedly poured hot khichdi (a rice dish cooked with lentils) over hishand, causing burn injuries.[77]Based on the NGO findings, in 2011, law students in Allahabadfiled a public interest petition in the High Court.[78]After the court ordered the district magistrate to conduct an inquiry, the educationdepartment found charges of discrimination to be true and transferred theschool principal and some teachers out of the district.[79]Meanwhile, all the children were admitted into another primary school nearby in2011. But by then, most of them were scared of going to school and had lostinterest in studies. They attended school irregularly, instead helping out withwork at home or in the fields. Eventually, all of them dropped out.[80]Vijay said they didn’t follow anything being taught inclass and therefore, did not like to go to school:When our studies were interrupted [after dropping out ofthe first school because of discrimination] we grew older and in the newschool, the other children in the class were younger. So we used to feelembarrassed. That’s why we dropped out because everyone would say see heis so old but doesn’t know how to read.[81]Shruti Nagvanshi of PVCHR, the NGO which fought for justicefor these children, said “the end result is that these children are stillout of school.” She added that sadly, nothing had changed: “Neitherthe children nor the society received the message that justice wasserved.”[82]Naresh in Kamtachak, BiharDiscriminatory behavior byteachers and children in a government primary school has led most Dalit childrenfrom Kamtachak village in Bihar’s Patna district to attend schoolirregularly or drop out. Naresh, 12, studies in grade III but often missesschool. He said it is because his clothes are dirty and he is afraid of theteacher’s scolding:I don’t go to school when my clothes are dirty. Ithappens once or twice a week. The teachers say, ‘You wear dirty clothes,go sit in the back.’ The children from Beldar community[83]tell us we don’t bathe and taunt us.[84]Dalit children from the hamlet complain that children fromother castes call them by their caste name in a derogatory manner, and do notmingle with them or include them when they are playing. Naresh says he and otherDalit students have been also forced to massage a senior teacher’s legsand clean the teachers’ toilet:We were asked to massage a teacher’s legs. If werefused, he used to beat us. There was a toilet for teachers, which is the onewe had to clean.[85]The teacher belonged to ahigher caste and only students from the Musahar community were asked to massagehis legs. Naresh’s neighbor Sanjay says he pulled his oldest son out ofthe local government school and put him in a private school because of suchdiscriminatory behavior:The teacher should teach, give knowledge. At this schoolthe children were being asked by the teacher to massage his legs. He beat thechildren. And when I went to complain about all this, the teacher beat themsome more.[86]Sanjay added that the children were not given money for scholarshipor uniforms because they did not have regular attendance. In Bihar, as pergovernment directions, the schools only offer benefits to children with atleast 75 percent attendance in order to encourage proper schooling andretention. But Sanjay says that children did not attend school because of theunfriendly environment there:They don’t learn anything, and are asked to sitseparately, served food last when there is often nothing left. The Kurmi[87]children are asked to sit in front.They chase away the Musahar childrenand feed the higher caste first. They give leftovers to our children.[88]Rajesh in Mittenchak, BiharThe family of Rajesh, 10, migrated to Mittenchak because ofthe discrimination and violence they and other Dalits faced from dominant castevillagers in Sonama village, Bihar. The family sought to escape the harassmentfrom the Yadav community, said Rajesh’s mother: “It is because ofthe fear of the Yadavs, we came here. We don’t have any fear here. There,the Yadavs could enter any Dalit’s house at any time in the night, beatanyone up.”[89]Rajesh said that discrimination faced by Dalits in hisprevious village also extended to the local government school where he wasenrolled in grade III. He told Human Rights Watch:Only the Yadav [dominant caste] children got money forschool uniforms. We didn’t get any. Every day, there were fights betweenthe children of Yadavs and Dalits. Instead of trying to put a stop to thefights, the teacher egged everyone on saying, ‘Let’s see who wins.’The Yadavs used to beat us up. Then they used to go and complain to theirparents and their parents came and scolded us.[90]The move interrupted Rajesh’s schooling and sinceleaving Sonama, he has been out of school. When Human Rights Watch spoke to hismother, she said they had not tried to enroll Rajesh in the local school inMittenchak because they did not have proper documents and assumed he would notbe admitted. Parents frequently do not have information about the Right toEducation Act and fail to take advantage of the benefits guaranteed under thelaw. Often this is because the teachers themselves are unaware of all theprovisions of the act and fail to raise awareness among parents.Madhu in Patna, BiharIn January 2013, Madhu, 10, testified at a public hearingheld by the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights. A Dalit fromthe Musahar community, she told dozens of children and parents how she waschased away from the local government school by the teachers because ofcaste-based bias.[91]In Patna, the Bihar state capital, there is a governmentmiddle school right outside the settlement where Madhu lives. But according toa local activist, until recently nearly 120 children aged 6 to 14, all of themDalit, were out of school. After the public hearing, some of the teachers weresuspended and a new principal was brought in. According to the schoolprincipal, the school now has over 900 children studying in grades I to VIII,of whom about 50 are Dalit.While many Dalit children were enrolled at the time of ourvisit, discrimination persisted. Many of the Dalit children were often absentfrom school, apparently at least in part because of continued discriminatorytreatment. Madhu, enrolled in grade II, was among those who had been attendingirregularly. She said:When I go to school and sit in class, often the otherchildren ask us to go and sit somewhere else. They say, ‘You peopledon’t bathe. You are rag pickers.’ We don’t say anything. Ifthey complain about us, the teacher asks us to shut up. And if we complain, theteacher says nothing.We don’t get plates for mid-day meals. The otherchildren get plates in school. But we have to take plates from home. If we everpick up the plates kept in school, the other children snatch the plates awayfrom us. Those children don’t play with us. I have not gone to school fora month because the children there say ‘Don’t come to school.’[92]Madhu’s mother said the children are targeted because many of them workas rag pickers, a person who earns money scavenging through refuse: “Evenif our children touch other children by accident in school, they ask our childrento move away. When our children go to school they say ‘rag pickers havecome.’”[93]The school principal, Pankaj Kumar, denied there was anydiscrimination in school. But he admitted that Dalit children attendedregularly only when a volunteer from a nongovernmental organization broughtthem himself every day. Kumar said that the school teachers are not comfortablegoing to the Dalit slum to motivate parents to send their children to school:Even if we want to send any staff member to call the childrenor to speak with parents, they don’t want to go into the Musahar slum.They are up in arms if I ask them to go because it’s dirty there and theteachers also look down upon these children.[94]He added that tying benefits such as scholarship money and moneyfor uniforms to attendance is problematic and further demoralizes Dalitchildren:We give money only when children have 75 percentattendance. But if children don’t get money, they don’t come toschool because they get demoralized. We can’t expect children frombackward communities to have 75 percent attendance.[95]Priya in Gaya, BiharPriya, 12, first became conscious of what it means to befrom a Dom community—a Dalit population mostly engaged in work assweepers and garbage collectors—two years ago when her classmates in Gayacity in Bihar used the term disparagingly. She told Human Rights Watch:I never knew about caste or what Dom is. I first came toknow when I was in Class V. All the children used to make fun of me and say, ‘Youare Dom caste, your mother doesn’t give you proper clothes.’One day, I came home and told my father that the otherchildren insult me. He decided to speak to the teacher. He said to her: ‘Dothe Dom have no honor and dignity, are those children the only ones who haveit?’ The teacher asked him not to interfere in the fights among children.So my father threatened to send a written complaint to the educationdepartment. She got scared and pleaded with him to not send a letter or shewould lose her job. He relented, but not much has changed since then. Even nowthe children say such things.[96]Priya, in grade VII when we spoke with her, said thediscrimination continues, and she often feels discouraged from attendingschool:Other children don’t let us sit with them. Some ofthe girls say ‘Yuck, you people are Dom [sweepers]—dirty caste, weare good caste.’ I feel bad. I curse myself that why did God make me Domcaste so that they can mistreat me so? I don’t know why they speak to usin such a way. The teachers never say anything even when we complain.[97]The discrimination and the unwillingness of teachers andother school administrators to combat such behavior contribute to increasedtruancy. Children in Priya’s neighborhood admit they often miss schoolbecause of the unwelcome atmosphere. The children stay away, falling behind inclasses, and eventually drop out altogether.Pankaj and Meena in Sonbhadra, Uttar PradeshEight-year-old Pankaj belongs to the Ghasiya tribe and livesin a small hamlet in Raup village in Sonbhadra district in Uttar Pradesh.Fifty-nine children from the hamlet attend the nearest government primaryschool in Lodhi village.The school attendanceregisters reveal that all the Ghasiya tribe children, except for one girl, havebeen put in the same grade—grade II—irrespective of theirages. The remaining 107 non-tribal children are in age-appropriate classes. Pankaj says there is constant discrimination:The teacher tells us to sit on the other side. If we sitwith others, she scolds us and asks us to sit separately. The children from theother community don’t play with us or talk to us. The teacherdoesn’t sit with us because she says we are dirty. The other childrenalso call us dirty every day, so sometimes we get angry and hit them. We alsosit separately when eating. When we ask for food, the cook says ‘There’sno more for you.’ But when the children from the other community ask, thecook says ‘Come and eat.’ If our plates touch the serving bowl bymistake, the cook gets angry and abuses us. So we keep our plates at a distancewhen food is served.[98]Pankaj explained that they have to fetch water from quite adistance. So if they wait to bathe in the morning before they go to school,they are late for classes and have to bear the brunt of the teachers’anger.The Lodhi school’s principal told Human Rights Watchthat the children from the Scheduled Tribe were a “big problem” forthem:These Ghasiya children come to school late, come when theywant to come, no matter how much we tell them to come on time. Their main aim is to come and eat, not to study. Justsee how dirty they are. They don’t bathe, they don’t wearschool uniform, and they smell. When we ask them why they are so dirty, theysay there is no water. The problems of these children will never get solved.Their parents are uneducated. We can’t mix these children with normalchildren because they are spoiling them too. These children are not able to mixwith others.[99]Click to expand ImageChildren from the Ghasiya tribe say they are called “dirty”and are discriminated against by the teachers and other students at a primaryschool in Sonbhadra district, Uttar Pradesh. All children from the tribe areenrolled in the same grade and sit in the same classroom irrespective of theirages © 2013 Jayshree Bajoria/Human Rights WatchSeveral other children told Human Rights Watch similarstories of discrimination in school, and how it made them feel unwelcome.Meena, 8, said:If we go to drink water, or go to the toilet, andaccidentally touch children from the other community, they yell at us saying‘You dirty Ghasiya, why are you touching us?’ and then go and complainto the teacher. The teacher then scolds us saying ‘Why are you touchingthese children?’ We are made to sit separately in a class and theteachers don’t even teach us. The teacher doesn’t even sit in ourclass, she sits in the other class. The teacher just tells us to write or readwhatever we want.We don’t eat lunch with the other children. If weever go to ask for any more food, the cook shouts at us asking us to go awaysaying ‘You eat so much.’ But when there is food left, the cookcalls the children from the other community and offers it to them. If we evercomplain to the teachers, they warn us that if we go and tell anyone they willcut our names from the school.The boys from the other community always call us names,call us dirty. Even if we bathe and go, the other children call us dirty, andsay we smell. When we tell our parents, they tell us they will go and complainto the teachers but they don’t.[100]When Human Rights Watch researchers returned to thesettlement a year later, they found that the 58 children from Ghasiya tribe whowere in grade II had been promoted to grade III and 22 new students had beenenrolled in grade I. But all the children shared the same classroom, One of theteachers in school explained that the younger children from Ghasiya settlementprefer to sit with their own community. “If we make them sit forcibly, theysit for a while, but after a while they run away.”[101]The unwelcome atmosphere in school is taking a toll on theGhasiya students. Most of them rarely attend school anymore. Meena told HumanRights Watch that all the children from the settlement preferred to attend aprivate school nearby run by a charitable organization for free.If the teachers don't teach then what's the point of goingto school. I won't go to government school. There they don't treat us well. Wewill go to a school where they treat us with love.[102]Sharda in Patna, BiharSharda, a Dalit girl from the Musahar community was pulledout of school in grade V and married because her parents were worried about hersafety. She was 14 years old when she got married in April 2013 and now liveswith her husband and his family in a village in Sampatchak block in Patnadistrict. Before her wedding, when she went to school defying her parents, shefound that her name was no longer in the attendance register.While some villagers cautioned her father against marryingher off at such a young age, no local authorities or members of the grampanchayat intervened. “There was no one I could turn to who would helpme,” she said. Early on after her marriage, her father-in-law agreed tosend her to school to continue her education but soon decided against itbecause he did not want to risk community disapproval.An effective school management committee or village-leveleducation committee could have helped surmount such troubles. But no one fromthe local government or panchayat intervened on Sharda’s behalf.Sharda says she is now restricted to the house:I am not allowed to go anywhere. I want to play but I amnot allowed to. I don’t like to do housework. But even when I am sick Ihave to do all of it. Otherwise my mother-in-law and my sister-in-law yell atme. My mother-in-law says she wants a grandchild within a year. But Idon’t want that problem.[103]Malini in Gaya, BiharMalini, 14, has never been to school, which is the case ofmany other girls belonging to the Dalit Dom community in her slum in Gaya city.“None of the girls go to school from here,” Malini said. Shestarted doing all the housework when she was quite young and looks after heryounger siblings when both her parents are out working. Her brother is thefirst person from the family to go to school. “I sometimes open his booksand wish I could study too,” she said.[104]Her mother says most girls stay at home. They do not evenstep out of the neighborhood except to go to the grocery shop just outside. Sheadds that most families get their daughters married by the time they are around14-15 years of age because, with both parents out to work, it’s not safefor the girls to be home alone. Malini said she has told her mother repeatedlyshe wants to study but her mother says it is pointless because she will bemarried in four months: “I am already engaged. This neighborhood is sounsafe, we can’t stay here once we are 14 or 15, so I have to getmarried.”[105]While the girls stay home, the boys from this neighborhoodare enrolled in the local government school. The authorities have neverintervened to encourage the parents to send their girls to school. Even thoughthere are several government policies and efforts geared toward higherenrollment of girls, Malini’s story illustrates how the lack of effectiveimplementation by local authorities prevents any real change.MuslimsHuman Rights Watch’s research uncovered severalincidents in which Hindu teachers in government schools made derogatory remarksabout Muslim students. Such insults make children feel unwelcome in school. Andteachers responsible for such discrimination do not seem to be held to account.Without an effective grievance redress system, children and parents fromminority or marginalized communities have no recourse. Instead of becominginclusive and equitable places as envisioned under the Right to Education Act,schools end up alienating these children.A 2006 report on the social, economic, and educationalstatus of the Muslim population in India by a high-level committee set up bythe prime minister (commonly referred to as the Sachar Committee report) concludedthat “with regard to school education, the condition of Muslims is one ofgrave concern.”[106]The report said that 25 percent of Muslim children aged 6 to 14 had eithernever attended school or had dropped out. This was higher than any othersocio-religious category although it noted that enrollment rates for Muslimchildren had risen significantly in recent years. It also pointed out that inmany states, there was “a dearth of facilities for teaching Urdu,”the first language of many Muslims.[107]Under India’s eleventh five-year plan (2007-2012), thegovernment undertook a program to modernize madrasas by strengthening theircapacity to teach formal subjects such as mathematics, science, and language. Thegovernment also provides financial assistance for infrastructure development toprivate minority institutions, and for the appointment of Urdu teachers ingovernment schools in localities where more than 25 percent of the populationis Urdu-speaking.[108]However, a 2012 report by Abusaleh Shariff, the lead authorof the 2006 Sachar Committee report, examined education-related data from2004-05 and 2009-10 and concluded that improvements in grades I to X werelowest among Muslims.[109]Shariff found that funds allocated to Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan to address theneeds of educationally backward communities, including children from minoritygroups, “have not been fully and appropriately spent.” He addedthat the benefits from programs for minorities do not reach their targetcommunities because of “organizational biases of the state levelbureaucracy in education departments and in programs for minorities.”[110]“There is a systemic bias against Muslims in India… which is carriedforward in education too,” Shariff told Human Rights Watch.[111]The Sachar Committee report noted how “identity, security and equity related issues overlap andfeed into each other in myriad ways.” Negative stereotypes ofMuslims and the suspicion they face from the majority community affect their motivationand well-being. Recent empirical evidence also belies the popular notion thatMuslim children largely attend madrasas rather than regular schools. Accordingto the Sachar Committee report, only 4 percent of Muslim children aged 7 to 16attend madrasas.[112]Studies show that Muslim children face differing access toeducation throughout the country, and some predominantly Muslim areas lackschools.[113] A 2006study found that some 5,400 villages with over 40 percent Muslim population didnot have a government school.[114]A November 2011 report found that schools and hostels builtusing funds from the Multi-Sectoral Development Plan, meant to address thebackwardness parameters identified in the Sachar Committee report, were mostlybuilt in areas with few minority residents and little enrollment of Muslim children.For instance, only 7 of 66 new primary schools built in 2009-2010 in Darbhanga,Bihar, were actually in minority concentration areas.[115]When Human Rights Watch visited the predominantly Muslimarea of Bajardihan in Varanasi in Uttar Pradesh, parents, civil societyactivists, and even a school principal told us that there were far too few primaryand upper primary schools given the number of children aged 6 to 14 years.[116]In some states where the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya JanataParty (BJP) is in power, it has introduced Hindu religious texts or prayers aspart of the curriculum. In August 2013 the BJP-run government in Madhya Pradeshstate ordered state-funded schools and madrasas to introduce stories from theHindu religious Bhagavad Gita in Hindi, English, and Urdu textbooks, prompting muchoutrage from minority groups.[117]The Sachar Committee report also expressed concernover the “communal” content of school textbooks, and warned that iftexts were derogatory toward certain communities or failed to reflect thecountry’s diversity, they can “alienate children of thosecommunities from the wider society.”[118]Sahir and Javed in Goyala Dairy Slum, DelhiSahir, 12, wishes he could go to another school because ofthe discrimination he suffers as a Muslim in a government school in Qutab Viharin southwest Delhi district, where he studies in grade V. He told Human RightsWatch:We don’t feel like going to school because the teachersalways single us out to beat us. The Hindu boys laugh at us. The teachersdon’t let us participate in any sports. Class monitors are always chosenfrom among Hindu boys and they always complain about us Muslim boys. Theteachers never believe us. They insult us by saying ‘You children come toschool only to eat and to collect [scholarship] money, but you don’t wantto study.’ Whenever they check our workbooks, they make negative commentson our work and throw the workbooks at our faces.[119]Another boy, Javed, from the same school said:The teachers always threaten to cut our names from theschool register. They never say such things to the Hindu boys. The Hindu boysare allowed to go to the toilet but we are not given permission. Whenever theteachers are angry, they call us Mullahs. The Hindu boys also call us Mullahsbecause our fathers have beards. We feel insulted when they refer to us likethis. After the Hindu boys fight with us, they not only get us beaten up by theteachers but also go and complain to their parents who come and hit us.[120]Several other Muslim boys spoke to Human Rights Watch of thediscrimination they face in school. One of them said he was terrified when theteacher caught his brother making paper planes in class and yelled at him,calling him Mullah and threatening to cut him to pieces. Another student said:“We never share water with the Hindu children nor do they share with us.We don’t play with each other, there’s hardly any interactionbetween us.”[121]Sahir said the teachers were not respectful of theirparents:One of our classmate’s [name withheld] father came tosubmit a form. The teacher referred to him as ‘the man with thebeard’ and made fun of him in front of the whole class and laughed hard.All the Hindu children laughed too and we felt terrible. When our parents cometo collect money [for school uniform or scholarship], the teachers speak ill ofus in front of them. Only the Hindu boys are happy in this school.[122]Sara in DelhiSara, 14, regrets that she chose to study Urdu instead ofSanskrit as her second language. When we met her, she was in grade VIII in agovernment upper primary school in Nandnagri in northeast Delhi district whereall girls who chose Urdu sat in the same classroom. She said the teachers discriminatedagainst her class because all the girls were Muslims:There are some teachers who come and abuse us. They saythings like: ‘You Muslim people have no brains, you read the Quran, prayto Allah, but don’t respect knowledge.’ If we complain, the teachersdon’t listen to us.A few months ago, we had a substitute teacher who said thefloods in Uttarakhand happened because Muslims have opened meat shops there.She said that it’s a place of worship for Hindus but Muslims go there andtreat God badly. It’s because of Muslims, she said, the disasterhappened, to pay them for their sins. We felt really bad when she said all thisabout Muslims. The whole time she kept saying Muslims do this, Muslims do that.No one in the class objected because we were afraid of being hit by her.[123]Salman in DelhiSalman, 13, is one of three Muslim boys in his grade VIIclass in the upper primary school at Nandnagri. He told Human Rights Watch thatthe Muslim students are seldom selected to participate in the school’sextracurricular programs:Most children participating in cultural programs are Hindu.I want to participate in cultural programs too. I learned a patriotic song butthe class monitor in charge of deciding who gets to participate refused to takeme in the event and even hit me.Sometimes I don’t like being Muslim. I feel insecurewhen there are Hindu-Muslim fights because most Hindus get together andsurround the Muslims. My mother asks me not to stray too far from home whenthere are communal tensions.[124]Salman’s friend Shahid who studies in grade VI saidthe teachers discriminate between Hindu and Muslim festivals:We also feel like celebrating Muslim festivals. The daybefore Diwali [the Hindu festival of lights], Hindu children burstfirecrackers. But on Shabrat [Muslim festival], when we want to celebrate andburst firecrackers, the teachers scold us and take away the firecrackers, orthrow them away.[125]III. Implementation, Monitoring, and AccountabilityPromising policy initiatives for social development oftenfalter in India due to poor implementation. This has been true of governmentprograms addressing maternal mortality,[126]protection of women and girls, and the rights of Dalits, tribal groups,religious minorities, and other marginalized groups.[127]Programs to improve access to education for children from marginalizedcommunities are no exception.As illustrated in the previous chapter, efforts to endclassroom discrimination by teachers, one important aspect of ensuring theright to education, have fallen short. But a range of factors may detervulnerable children from attending school such as poverty, work inside andoutside the homes, migration, or inability to cope with curriculum. Thegovernment recognizes the challenges faced by children at risk of dropping outor out-of-school children[128] andhas formulated laws and policies to address their needs. However, absence ofrigorous and effective monitoring, accountability, and grievance redressmechanisms can lead to India’s failure to realize the goals set out underthe Right to Education Act especially with respect to children frommarginalized communities.The education act lays down guidelines to prevent some ofthese dangers. However, as explained in this chapter, there are acute problemsin implementation. Under India’s federal structure,while laws such as the Right to Education Act are initiated by thecentral government and enacted by Parliament, their implementation lies withthe state governments and the latter have varying degrees of administrativeability. For instance, Human Rights Watch found greater efforts being made toimplement the act at state and district levels in Andhra Pradesh than in Bihar.Even within Andhra Pradesh, districts differed in their ability to take onmonitoring and implementation. To make its ambitious program to provideuniversal access to education succeed, the Indian government will need to developand enforce protocols to monitor not merely children’s enrollment, but whetherthey remain in school until they have completed their elementary education.The monitoring mechanisms provided under the new law arefailing at all levels: school management committees, school authorities, localvillage councils, or district and state education department officials. Each ofthem is vested with authority and responsibility under the education act, but afailure to uphold their responsibilities, and a lack of accountability, isresulting in the failure to retain every child in the classroom. The governmentwill need to devise proper protocols or guidelines that can help identify childrenwho are at risk of dropping out or have dropped out and put in place mechanismsfor the authorities to intervene in time to facilitate their return to school.While most states have defined on paper when a child should be considered adropout, it is unclear whether there is any understanding among relevantauthorities as to how this should translate into remedial measures to bring achild back to school.“When you speak with officials about the right toeducation, they love to talk about plans and circulars. But ask them aboutimplementation— and they hem and haw. They have nothing,”complained Sanat Sinha, chief coordinator at Patna-based NGO, Bal Sakha.[129]The lack of effective monitoring is reflected in the widedivergence between government data and data from other sources. For instance,according to the Ministry of Human Resources, in 2012, there were about 3million out-of-school children whereas a survey by Educational ConsultantsIndia Limited puts this number at 8.1 million.[130]Lack of coordination among departments of labor, education,social welfare, and the various commissions dealing with Muslims, ScheduledCastes, and Scheduled Tribes hinders effective implementation of the Right toEducation Act. The National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR),in charge of monitoring the implementation of the act, is not functioningeffectively, in part because there is poor coordination between the Ministry ofWomen and Child Development under which it is set up and the Ministry of HumanResource Development that funds it.According to Dhir Jhingran, former national coordinator ofthe Right to Education cell at NCPCR, the commission fails to act as anautonomous body to effectively monitor the act. Jhingran explained: “Wecreate institutions and do not invest in them and weaken them onpurpose.”[131] He linkedthe problems to the commission’s dependency on the government agenciesthey are monitoring: “For example, if we are monitoring MHRD [Ministry ofHuman Resource Development], I should not get funds from MHRD; I should get itfrom elsewhere — like the planning commission or somewhere. Right now,MHRD approves the work plan and we are supposed to monitor that, which is acomplex situation.”[132]Other commission officials also said that a lack of coordination betweenconcerned ministries and departments affects their effectiveness.[133]Weak implementation of education policies combined with poorenforcement of the Child Labor (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986 by thelabor department contributes to the high incidence of child labor.[134]While child labor remains a ubiquitous problem in India,[135]Human Rights Watch also found that children who drop out of school end up inthe work force because parents feel that is more useful than doing nothing. Accordingto UNICEF, India has 13 million child workers aged 5 to 14 years, the largestnumber in the world, and a large majority of them are Dalits or from Scheduled Tribesand other minorities.[136]Click to expand ImageChildren line up for morning assembly at an upper primaryschool in a village in Andhra Pradesh state. The state government has madeefforts to bring out-of-school children, particularly girls, back to theclassroom. 2013 Jayshree Bajoria/Human Rights WatchThe authorities are failing to ensure that children do notwork at the expense of education. Nor is there enough effort to provide specialclasses or bridge courses as envisioned under the Right to Education Act toaddress the learning gaps of drop-outs, migrant children, or children whoattend school irregularly. The labor department’s scheme to deal withchild labor, the National Child Labor Project (NCLP), provides bridge schoolsto educate children who have been released from work and then mainstream theminto the existing education system.[137]However, bridge courses are also part of the Right to Education Act, leading topossible confusion and inefficiency.Children’s rights groups such as Haq: Centre for ChildRights argues that the National Child Labor Project should be scrapped to avoidduplication of efforts.[138] Asenior labor official in eastern Uttar Pradesh agreed that the educationdepartment should handle the running of bridge schools. He added that the labordepartment lacks both financial and human resources to deal with the scale ofthe child labor problem: “When we find large numbers of children in laborand rescue them, we don’t have the capacity to tackle them. If we rescuefive children, it takes us four days to complete all the procedures and followup on rehabilitation.” He added: “Either NCLP schools should bemade residential schools or they should become part of the Right to EducationAct and be run by the education department. We are hardly the best departmentto handle schools.”[139]Monitoring Mechanisms“Comprehensive and integrated ‘Monitoring,Accountability and Grievance Redress’ mechanisms, accessible to allcitizens, are crucial to the fulfillment of this constitutional right,”states the National Advisory Council’s Working Group on Right toEducation Act.[140] Itrecognizes that a robust monitoring and grievance redress system is essentialto empowering the education system to ensure that all children between 6-14years are provided an education.According to Indian law and accompanying rules, monitoringmechanisms are set up at various levels.At the community level, teachers are supposed to holdregular meetings with parents and apprise them of regularity in attendance,learning abilities, progress, and other issues concerning the child.[141]Authorities from the village council or the municipalcorporation or any other local authority that has administrative control overthe school is tasked with maintaining records of all children up to the age of14 years residing in its jurisdiction through household surveys; ensuringadmission of all children, including migrant children; ensuring that no childis discriminated against; and monitoring the functioning of schools in itsjurisdiction.[142]At the district level, officials may occasionally undertakeindependent field visits to monitor school performance. However, the maininformation tool at the district level is the school-based annual informationsystem called District Information System for Education (DISE). DISE datacovers all schools, recognized or unrecognized. Thestate government is also tasked with ensuring admission, attendance, andcompletion of elementary education for every child and with preventingdiscrimination against any child on any grounds.[143]Unfortunately these mechanisms have not been effectively implemented.Enrollment Does Not Guarantee AttendanceThe government has had considerable success in ensuring thatall children are enrolled in primary school. According to the NationalUniversity of Educational Planning and Administration, the percentage of eligiblechildren enrolled (the net enrollment ratio) at the primary level (grades I toV) for the year 2010-11 was 99.89 percent.[144] Datacollected from NGOs also point to high enrollment rates; one survey found that only3.3 percent of children aged 6 to 14 in rural areas were not in school, afigure which included children who were never enrolled and those who haddropped out.[145]The government’s success in ensuring that childrenremain in class and complete elementary education is another matter. Enrollment does not necessarily translate into attendance, and Indialacks an adequate mechanism for monitoring each child’s progressso that the underlying causes of poor attendance can be determined andaddressed. As described in detail below, India even lacks a standard procedurefor identifying out-of-school children, those who have dropped out or are atrisk of dropping out who require intervention by school or relevantauthorities.Poor school attendance often stems from acombination of factors. While most studies point to poverty as asignificant barrier to school attendance, it is important to note that economicdisadvantage typically becomes a major obstruction when coupled with some formof discrimination.Studies show that retention is a concern at everystage—primary, upper primary, and during transition from primary to upperprimary. While nearly all Indian children are enrolled in primary school (thenet enrollment ratio is nearly 100 percent), enrollment drops to 62 percent atupper primary level (grades VI to VIII), according to data from the Department of School Education and Literacy. Andthe drop-off occurs well before upper primary level: only 73 percent ofchildren make it to the end of primary school (grade V).[146]According to government estimates, schools lose 42 percent of their children bygrade VIII.[147] Thismeans over 80 million children drop out before completing elementary education.[148]A significant number of students drop out between primary school and upperprimary school. One estimate puts the figure at 13 percent, but the actualfigure could be much higher.[149]Failure to Identify Dropouts and Children at RiskEffective monitoring of school attendance is seriouslyhindered by lack of clarity among school authorities as to which childrenshould be considered out of school or dropouts so that appropriateinterventions can be devised.[150] Moststates have defined a “dropout” in their rules, but the definitionvaries from state to state. In Andhra Pradesh, for instance, the governmentrules state that an elementary school student absent for more than one month is to be considered out of school.[151] In Karnataka, to sooner identify a child at risk, the definition of “dropout” has changedfrom a child absent from school for 60 days to seven days without taking leaveof absence. In Bihar, several school principals told Human Rights Watchthat the government requires them to remove names of children who are absentcontinuously for three months from school registers.However, there are no clear guidelines on how theauthorities should take remedial action to bring the children who have droppedout back in school. If a student’s name is removed from registers becauseof prolonged absence, there is no clarity about a re-admission.For prompt intervention, the first step is to maintainaccurate attendance records. However, as discussed below some schoolauthorities falsify records to show higher retention of children.[152]Also, there is little consensus even within governmentdepartments on compiling out-of-school data, as Human Rights Watch found in ourinterviews in Uttar Pradesh. According to Paramhans Singh Yadav the basiceducation officer in Varanasi district, in 2012, 400 children were out ofschool or had dropped out in the district.[153] Asurvey commissioned by the labor department, however, found that 2,400 childrenwere working and not going to school.[154] When thislist was submitted to the education department, the latter struck 500 names fromthe list claiming those children were still enrolled. Even assuming the 500were properly struck from the list (and there is reason to doubt that becauseinclusion in an enrollment register alone does not mean children are attendingschool), it still leaves a large disparity between the 1900 out-of-school childrenidentified by the labor department and the 400 claimed by the educationdepartment.Under the Right to Education Act the school managementcommittee (SMC)—composed of parents, the head teacher, and a member ofthe local government—is expected to play a critical role in identifyingdrop-outs and persuading parents to return their children to school.[155]But many schools have yet to even establish these committees. Data collectedfor 2011-2012 found that only 68 percent of schools nationwide had constitutedsuch committees; in Uttar Pradesh, only 56 percent had done so.[156]Annie Namala, who previously chaired the task force onequity and inclusion in the National Advisory Council on Right to Educationsaid that state governments have failed to support or empower the committees tocarry out their responsibilities. “The government has neither thoughtabout how SMCs can be empowered nor has it provided the time, energy, or humanresources to train the people. The decision-making role of the SMC is notemphasized upon at all,” she said.[157] Moststates also lack an effective grievance redress mechanism that can be used by committeemembers.Once a child who has dropped out is identified, the SMC,local authorities, and education department are responsible for bringing thechild back to school.[158] Inmost of the schools we visited, this policy was not being implemented.However, in Mahbubnagar district, which has the highestnumber of out-of-school children in Andhra Pradesh, things were changing. Districtcollector M Girija Shankar has been working to keep a closer check on thestudents’ attendance. He said:As soon as a child is absent for more than five days, thereshould be cognizance of this fact from the level of teacher to the cluster resourceperson,[159]all the way to divisional level. We are sensitizing teachers and headmasters totake this more seriously. We have a long way to go. We are also insisting onthis during SMC training. Early detection of dropout children and immediateefforts to get them back is important. This is a big challenge.[160]More such efforts are needed. Human Rights Watch met severalchildren who had not attended school for months—sometimes as many as sixmonths—and their names remained in the registers. A member of the ChildWelfare Committee in Andhra Pradesh told Human Rights Watch:We see child labor every day, but the mandal education officer[161]gives the district collector a report that all children are in school. The mainchallenge occurs when children are [listed on attendance registers] but theschools are unable to retain them. There’s no follow-up on dropouts. Oncea child’s name is in the school register, it’s never struck off.[162]Rani and Barkha in Mahbubnagar, Andhra PradeshHuman Rights Watch researchers met two 10-year-old children,Rani and Barkha, in Mahbubnagar district in Andhra Pradesh. Both had stoppedgoing to school after completing grade III in 2012 but both were still listedin the school register.Rani, the youngest of six children, stopped going inmid-2012 to take care of her family’s goats. Her mother cooks the mid-daymeal in the government primary school that Rani no longer attends but where sheis still registered. Her classmates said her name is called out every day whenthe teacher is marking attendance for the day. Rani told Human Rights Watch:My mother told me not to go to school. She said ‘Thereis no one to take care of the goats so you take care of them.’ After myparents bought a goat, I dropped out to look after it. Now we have nine goats. Inever liked going to school. I can’t read or write. I told my parents Idon’t want to go to school and they said okay. I couldn’t learndespite studying hard. [163]A look at the class attendance register confirmed Rani’srare attendance since July 2012. There were a few presences amid a long list ofabsences. The class teacher said:We spoke to her mother but she gives us two reasons forRani’s absence: ‘Rani has to take care of the goats,’ andthat ‘It’s the harvesting season for groundnuts.’ Rani comesto school for a few days when we put pressure on her mother but then she stopsagain. Rani is very interested in studying but her parents must have taught herto say she is not interested. Sometimes when Rani comes to school, she cries.We have tried to talk to her many times. If we ask her too many questions, shegoes silent. I think she wants to study but parents pressure her so she is notable to say anything to us.[164]Rani’s mother is employed by the school as a cook, afact which neither school authorities nor SMC members used as leverage toinsist that she send her daughter to school.Barkha, the youngest of four children in a Dalit family,also stopped going to school after completing grade III in 2012. Human RightsWatch found her minding cattle while her mother was harvesting groundnuts.Barkha said:My mother stopped my studies and asked me to look aftercattle. We have goats, sheep, and two cows. I feel like going back to school.My parents are not ready to send me to school but otherwise I would go.Earlier, they had asked me to stop going to school when my elder sister had adaughter and I had to look after her daughter. [But] I like going to school alot.[165]Just like Rani, Barkha remains registered with long stringsof absences marked in the attendance records. Barkha’s father, a farmer,said the school principal had come once and asked to send her to school but heneeds her to take care of the cattle: “I will send her to school once thepaddy [rice] has been planted. One person is needed to take care of the cattle,so we can’t send her to school.”[166]Early and more regular follow-up by the authorities couldhave led to interim solutions such as bridge courses to help bring thesechildren back to school.Click to expand ImageAn eight-year-old boy who dropped out of school a year ago, looks after cattle in Mahbubnagar district of Andhra Pradesh state. Mahbubnagar has the highest number of out-of-school children in the state. © 2013 Jayshree Bajoria/Human Rights WatchVeena in Mahbubnagar, Andhra PradeshWhen we met 11-year-old Veena, she was working in agroundnut field. Veena’s mother passed away when she was an infant. Herolder sister took care of her at the expense of her own schooling.In 2012, after her sister got married and moved into herhusband’s home, Veena’s father insisted that she drop out and find work.She was in grade III. Veena said that for a year she had been a full-timeagricultural worker:I wanted to continue going to school but my father said, ‘Youdon’t have a mother so you have to work.” The headmaster came homeonce and he told my father to send me to school. But my father refused and said,“She needs to work.’ He tried to convince my father but once myfather refused, he went away and never came back. I tried going to school butmy father said I have to learn to work. So I work all day. I have a one-hourlunch break. There are lots of farms nearby so I work in them. I also cook andclean the house.[167]Veena’s father said he would send her to school,however, if he had a little support and someone could cook food. He told HumanRights Watch:A teacher came twice two months after Veena stopped goingto school. The teacher said, ‘If she goes to school, studies well, shewill get a job. So send her to school.’ But I told him if my wife wasaround, I would send her to school. I don’t even know how to cook, so Ineed her at home. Even now I feel I want her to go to school. If there’ssupport, someone can cook food, I will send her to school. What will she do allday after she cooks? So she goes to work in the fields.[168]Veena’s employer had at least two other childrenworking for him on his groundnut farm. He said they were all above 14 years ofage, as required by law, even though the children said otherwise.The Right to Education Act makes elementary education compulsory,and proper implementation with sustained intervention at the community levelcould help ensure that children like Veena are not denied an education.Seventeen Children in Pindra, Uttar PradeshHuman Rights Watch found that 17 children from Dalit familiesfrom the Ajaipur primary school in the Varanasi district of Uttar Pradesh statedropped out after completing grade V in 2012 and now work in the fields or inbrick kilns. None of these children transitioned to upper primary school toattend grades VI to VIII.However, these children did not show up in the child surveysconducted by the education department or the Ministry of Labor and Employment.Nor did neighborhood schools, government authorities, or panchayat members takeany initiative to ensure the children were enrolled in grade VI. The educationofficer in charge of overseeing these hamlets told Human Rights Watch that in2012 only five children were out of school in the area under his supervision andthere were no dropouts. He admitted that it’s possible that the Musaharhamlet in Pindra had fallen through the cracks and had not been included in anychild survey.[169]The school principal at Ajaipur said it was not his duty tofollow up after the children had completed grade V in his school:We don’t bear the responsibility for the children whohave passed out of our school. Our responsibility is restricted to giving themimportant information about which school they can go to for admission. Unlessparents are active and interested, we can’t do anything. Theresponsibility for those children rests with their gram sabhas (a cluster ofvillages governed by a village council).[170]Gram sabhas often do not give priority to matters ofeducation. In many cases, no official takes responsibility for keeping childrenfrom dropping out before completing their elementary education. Instead, likeone of the parents in Pindra told Human Rights Watch, often there is pressurefrom the community and the local officials to maintain silence. Shyam’sfather said:After we complained [of discrimination against our childrenin school], all the officers, police and the village chief came and said‘What are you doing? Stop all of this. Nobody will listen to you’The upper caste people in the village asked us to pay heed to the officials whohad come and cautioned us against speaking out.The officials were putting pressure on us and the police werethreatening us saying that the teacher was right. But I said that it’sfine if the teacher scolds or slaps our children a couple of times. But theyshould not beat up a child so badly as to break his hand. But when thesepowerful people in the village heard, they said, ‘Don’t send yourchildren to school for.’ My child did not get justice. There is onlyinjustice here in place of justice.[171]Ajay in Patna, BiharAjay, 7, is a Dalit from the Musahar community and lives ina slum in Patna city. He is enrolled in a school right outside his settlementbut does not know which grade he is in because he barely attends classes. Ajayis among 50 children from the slum who were enrolled in 2013 after an order bythe National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR).Most children in the community work as rag-pickers. InJanuary 2013, a 10-year-old girl from the slum said during a public hearingthat she suffered discrimination and that the teachers had chased her away fromschool, leading to the NCPCR intervention and order mentioned above. But evenafter the intervention the school made no effort to encourage the children orotherwise ensure that they attend classes. In fact, as noted in Chapter II ofthis report, the school principal Pankaj Kumar said that the teachers oftenrefused even to go to the Musahar settlement to speak to parents about theirchildren’s irregular attendance and motivate them to send their childrento school. He said this was because the teachers considered the settlementdirty and looked down upon these children.[172]Ajay is left to sort through refuse, risking injury andinfection, earning about INR 150 (less than $3) per day. He said:What will I go for school for? What will they teach me? Mymother sends me to pick through the garbage every day. She never asks me go toschool. Yes, I feel like going to school but no one from my community goes sohow can I go alone? Here everyone is a rag-picker. When we pass anyone on theroad, they say, ‘Please don’t touch us, stay away.’ So wealso keep our distance.[173]Ajay’s case is illustrative of how weak implementationof education policies can push more children into labor markets. In this case,better coordination among the NCPCR (which directed the education authoritiesto ensure that children from this settlement were enrolled in school),education authorities (who helped enroll the children and then failed to followup), and the labor department tasked with preventing child labor, could haveensured that these children stayed in school and received an education.Shaheen in Bajardihan, Uttar PradeshThirteen-year-old Shaheen spends most of her day engaged inthe family’s traditional occupation of sari weaving and handiwork. A fewyears ago Shaheen and several child workers from Bajardihan, a largely Muslimarea in Varanasi city in Uttar Pradesh, were admitted to a special school rununder the National Child Labor Project (NCLP). After three years of specialschooling, they were enrolled in a mainstream school in grade VI. Shaheenreceived a stipend of INR 3000 (US$50) when she first enrolled. But that wasthe only time that she went to the government upper primary school. She toldHuman Rights Watch that it was too far and so her family members did not allowher to go to school:I didn’t go even one day to school. My brother saidit’s too far, and asked me not to go. No one came from the school ever tocheck upon me. Other children from the neighborhood who went to the special schoolwith me were also enrolled in that regular upper primary school but they neverattended either.[174]The upper primary school in which Shaheen was enrolled saw aconsiderable influx of children who were part of the National Child LaborProject, but very few have remained on its rolls. When Human Rights Watch wentto the school, most children’s names had been struck off because they hadfailed to show up for exams or even to collect their scholarship or freeuniforms. The principal expressed helplessness:Tell me what am I supposed to do? All these children areabsent. Should I continue their names? They don’t even come for exams.Should I just pass them and continue their names? Most children who came fromNCLP schools have dropped out. We cut their names in June 2012 when theydidn’t come to take their scholarship money of Rs480 [US$8] or appear forexams in the first quarter. But a few children’s names are still there.We also returned the scholarship money to the education department for thechildren who dropped out. We returned 25 children’s scholarship moneythis year.[175]Shaheen says she did not receive any follow-up visit fromthe National Child Labor Project or the labor department, which is responsiblefor the project.Shaheen’s case illustrates a larger problem in India:interventions to address child labor and bring working children back intoage-appropriate classrooms fail because the labor department is poorly staffed,the labor and education departments do not do a good job of coordinating theirefforts, and authorities do not follow up to ensure affected children make itback to school. India has both laws and policies to address child labor but, bythe government’s own admission, state-level monitoring is nonexistent inall but a few states.[176]Click to expand ImageA girl in Uttar Pradesh embroidering saris instead ofattending school. “No one came from the school ever to check upon me,” she told Human Rights Watch.  Without proper monitoring and special lessons to place children into age-appropriate classrooms, many end up joining the work force. © 2013 Jayshree Bajoria/Human Rights WatchSeema in Patna, BiharSeema, 13, finished grade V in a local government school acouple of years ago, but once she attained puberty, she dropped out; mostparents in her Musahar community do not allow girls to study beyond primaryschool and prefer to get them married off early.As Seema put it:My parents tell me they will get me married soon. Idon’t want to marry. I want to study till Class X but my parents nolonger want me to study. Most girls from this hamlet don’t go to school.In our society, the girls are married off at an early age…When I say thatI want to go to school, everyone in the village makes fun of me and says look,‘This donkey wants to go and study.’[177]In India, 47 percent of allwomen aged 20 to 24 are married before the age of 18 despite a lawprohibiting child marriage. This is partly because panchayat officials, localgovernment, and the police fail to enforce the law.[178] Seemaand two of her friends attended an event organized by an NGO where they wereencouraged to continue school, but the girls said they feel helpless:If we report a case against our parents, then everyone willsay ‘You are going against the parents who gave you birth.’ I wantto study. If I were still going to school, only then could I have stopped mymarriage. But now that I am not even going to school, what will I use as anexcuse to stop my wedding?[179]Failure to Provide Bridge Classes for MigrantChildrenUnder the Right to Education Act, children who start schoollater than age six are to be admitted in an age-appropriate class with the helpof special classes or training that can be extended up to a maximum of threeyears. Similarly, children who drop out of school can be brought back into theeducation system with the help of these bridge classes.Children of seasonal migrant workers are particularly atrisk of dropping out. Migrant workers, most of them Dalits, tribals, or membersof other vulnerable communities, travel in search of work to rural or urbanareas both within their home state and to other states. Children usually accompanytheir parents and then fall through the cracks when neither sending norreceiving states intervene to ensure that they are enrolled and remain inschool. Mostly such children end up working alongside their parents.[180]According to the Right to Education Act, it is theresponsibility of local authorities to “ensure admission of children frommigrant families.”[181] Thegovernment’s policy is to provide hostels or seasonal hostels attached toexisting schools in sending states so that children do not have to migrate withtheir parents, and are given necessary care and protection. Alternately, the receiving locality should enroll thesechildren in special training with a view to admitting them in mainstreamschool.[182]Our research suggests that, in practice, access to schoolsremains a huge hurdle for many migrant children.[183]At the sending end, there are not enough seasonal hostels or alternativearrangements to ensure that children can stay back and continue their educationwhen their parents migrate. At the destination end, there is lack of access toschools at work sites. “Distance is a big problem,” saysBhagyalakshi Rao of Mobile Crèches, an NGO providing early childhoodcare for children of migrant workers. “Usually, construction sites arenot close to schools. Parents are reluctant to send children far forschool.”[184]There are many additional challenges: parents often lackpaperwork for children’s admission in schools; children who migrate todistant locations may not understand the local language; schools may not offer speciallessons to help migrant children cope in age-appropriate classes; and teachersmay be reluctant to enroll migrant children fearing they are likely to moveaway and drop out in a few months.The government has largely been unable to create effective monitoringmechanisms to track these children. When migrant children return to their homesafter migration season, the state too often fails to provide them with bridgeclasses that can help them catch up on the studies they have missed during themonths they were away.Narayan Reddy, revenue divisional officer in Gadwal mandalin Mahbubnagar district in Andhra Pradesh, said migrant children typically missthe bulk of the studies in an academic year. One of the biggest deterrents totheir return to schools, he said, is reluctance from teachers. “Mostteachers don’t take the responsibility to help these children with whatthey have missed.”[185]The school management committees (SMCs) or the relevant localgovernment authority is supposed to make arrangements for bridge courses inexisting schools wherever possible. If a school has insufficient space orteachers, separate space and teachers are to be provided.[186]In practice, however, there are not enough teachers even for regular classes,let alone for bridge courses. In March 2013, three years after the Right toEducation Act came into effect, 1.1 million teacher posts remained vacantacross the country.[187] Ateacher in the upper primary school in Venkumpeth village in Mahbubnagar said:There are gaps in learning among children. We don’thave any special classes for students who are lagging behind or who need to becaught up to an age-appropriate class because we don’t have enoughteachers.[188]Even if out-of-schoolchildren who are engaged in labor are identified, teachers in regulargovernment schools are resistant to enrolling them because they tend to beolder children who have never been to school and the teachers lack the capacityto provide them with the special training necessary to admit them inage-appropriate classes. Rajendra Prasad, the former right to educationmonitor, said:Teachers are not willing to enroll older children who havebeen working till now as they have to put in extra efforts to put them in anage-appropriate class. I didn’t see any difference before RTE and afterRTE when it comes to bringing out-of-school children into schools.[189]Samar in Varanasi, Uttar PradeshSamar, 10, migrated with his family to live at a brick kilnfactory in Varanasi district in February 2013. They planned to return to theirvillage once the monsoons began in July. Samar’s family is Dalit, andmigrates for several months every year to different places in search of work.Samar has been accompanying his family for years and usually works alongsidethem.Samar told Human Rights Watch that his main job at the brickkiln was to push a cart to transport dried bricks to the furnace. He said he didnot plan on returning to school when the family returned to their village inJuly: “I won’t go back to school. When I don’t understandanything in class, what’s the point in going to school?”[190]There is no capacity or resources at his school to help migrantchildren. After years of sporadic attendance, Samar can no longer follow thecurriculum. The principal of Samar’s school said children start attendingschool when they return to the village during the monsoons. He admitted theschool did not have the capacity to institute bridge courses to help thesechildren cope with what they had missed in the months they were away. He toldHuman Rights Watch:The biggest problem is that whatever we teach, the next daythe child is absent. Irregular attendance really hinders learning. There are about30 to 40 children in one class. So, either we leave all other students and teachthe one child who has to catch up. If there’s time we can help that childbut there’s no time.[191]Click to expand ImageChildren of migrant workers, like these from Musahar Dalit families at a brick kiln in the Varanasi district of Uttar Pradesh state, miss school for several months a year and often end up as child laborers at work sites. © 2013 Jayshree Bajoria/Human Rights WatchReema in Gurgaon, HaryanaTen-year old Reema came to Gurgaon with her parents, fourbrothers, and two sisters in 2010 from Bilaspur district in Chhattisgarh. Sincethat time, she has lived on several construction sites, traveling back to hervillage every few months.When we met her, Reema was attending a non-formal educationcenter run by the NGO Mobile Crèches at the construction site in Gurgaonwhere her family was living. But the non-formal education center is only atemporary solution because, as soon as her parents move, she will be forced toleave school again. Such non-formal education centers, moreover, are meant toserve as bridge classes to help children integrate better into the formalschool system, not a substitute for schools.Reema told Human Rights Watch she wants to start going toschool:I like to stay in the village. I don’t like to travelall the time. Last time we were in the village, I told my father to get meadmitted in the local school. I went to see the school with my father andreally liked it. I want to go to school to study. I want to study and become adoctor.[192]Geeta Rawat, a teacher at the non-formal education center,says every time she has tried to enroll Reema in a school, she traveled back tothe village. Rawat says they try to enroll all children between 6 and 14 yearsin a government primary school nearby, but it often proves to be a challenge.She said:It’s very difficult to get these children enrolled.Sometimes we get their names enrolled in the school, but then the children goaway and by the time they come back, their names have been cut off. If theparents go by themselves to enroll these children in schools, they will haveeven a more difficult time. Teachers are reluctant to admit these childrenbecause they know the children will move away from here after a few months andso they tell us that, ‘These children will spoil our attendancerecords.’ There is a lot of pressure on the teachers to show highattendance. Otherwise they are told to go door-to-door and check on why thechildren haven’t come to school. Where will they find these migrant kids?Sometimes, we also have language problems such as with thechildren who are from [West] Bengal. Right now, we have more than 50 percentBengali-speaking children. By the time we teach them Hindi to get them ready togo to school, they migrate to some other place.[193]Mita in Kurnool, Andhra PradeshMita, 8, studies in grade IV in the primary school in hervillage in Kurnool district. Her parents migrate every year for two months duringthe school term and she goes with them.Since 2010, the family has been migrating to nearby Gunturdistrict to work on cotton and chili farms. When we met her, Mita said sheplayed the whole day in Guntur while her parents worked, and then had difficultieskeeping up in class when she returned to school after being away for severalmonths:There are no special classes in school to help me cope withwhat I missed in the two months when I am away with my parents. My teacher asksme to take the notes from my friend. If I don’t understand anything, Iask my friend not the teacher. If the teacher asks me questions in class and Ican’t answer, then she hits me on the hand, both on the palm and on theback of my hand.[194]Lack of bridge classes means the likelihood of migrantchildren returning to school grows more remote with every passing year.Poor Supervision by the EducationDepartmentThe state government is the main implementing authority forthe Right to Education Act and the Directorate of School Education, witheducation officials at state, district, and block level, is the mainsupervisory authority. The officials are supposed to inspect schools regularlyto ensure that the act’s provisions are being adhered to.However, there are no clear guidelines on the number ofvisits that officials should make to schools and no clear accountabilityprocesses for ensuring all children are enrolled and continue to attend school.A 2010 report by a committee set up by the nationalDepartment of School Education andLiteracy noted that school supervisionhad grievously suffered in the last few decades due to “insufficiency of staff and administrative neglect.”For the implementation of the RTE, the report recommended “periodic inspection/supervisionof schools to observe the infrastructure and facilities and the administrativeaspects.” [195]Block resource centres and cluster resource centres were setup across the country under the Sarva Shikhsa Abhiyan to improve the quality ofelementary education. Under the RTE, their roles have been revamped. Inaddition to providing academic support to teachers, the block resource staffare now supposed to consult with the school management committees (SMCs),community members, and local authorities in formulating school developmentplans. Cluster resource centre staff are now supposed to make regular schoolvisits and hold meetings with members of the SMCs and other local bodies forschool improvement, support school development plans, and ensure that thespecial training programs are properly designed and implemented forout-of-school children so that they can be admitted to age-appropriate classes.[196]According to District Information System for Education(DISE) data, an average of only 51 percent of schools nationwide were inspectedin 2010-2011. In Uttar Pradesh, this figure was only 28 percent while in AndhraPradesh it was 31 percent. DISE data show that cluster resource centrecoordinators visit 65 percent of schools nationwide; Karnataka had the bestrecord with 92 percent while Uttar Pradesh again featured among the bottomstates with 34 percent.[197]Corruption and Other Malfeasance by SchoolAuthoritiesLack of accountability coupled with pressure to show resultshave led some schools to adopt corrupt practices such as faking attendancerecords.At least three school principals told Human Rights Watchthat they felt they had no choice but to inflate attendance because of pressurefrom education department officials. In several other instances, Human RightsWatch independently found evidence of this practice.A teacher in a primary school in Azamgarh told Human RightsWatch that he faked attendance records to avoid pressure from educationofficials. “If the attendance is less than 80 percent, the educationofficials question us. Where are we going to go to get the children?”[198]The principal of a primary school in a different village inAzamgarh said there were 300 children enrolled in her school but maximumattendance on any given day was only about 120. Many of the children enrolledin the school came from a Scheduled Tribe where parents travel during theharvest season to beg, she said. The children went with the parents andtherefore, were absent for weeks. The principal said there is pressure from theeducation authorities to have at least 70 percent attendance. “We have to[keep children on the attendance register] so we show them to be present for afew days,” she admits.[199]Most teachers interviewed by Human Rights Watch said theyhad no clear understanding on whether they should be cutting children’snames from the register once they qualify as dropouts as per state rules orcontinue their names until the end of academic year. Lack of guidelines alsofoster lack of accountability and corruption among school authorities.The principal of a primary school in Phulwari Sharif blockin Patna district said that while the school removes the names of most childrenabsent for three months, it keeps on the registry children belonging to thevillage’s dominant castes. “I have to maintain their names in theschool register so that they can get all the entitlements such as money foruniforms, scholarship, free books. If I don’t do this, I won’t beable to keep the job.” While children from privileged households receivedall the entitlements even when they do not attend school at all, several Musaharchildren from a nearby hamlet complained that they were cut off from allentitlements as soon as their attendance fell below 75 percent.[200]The same principal also admitted that he charged students money for books andfor admission. “We don’t give the parents a receipt. This is alljust an understanding among us. We have to charge the parents otherwise howwill we pay for electricity, for transportation of books to bring them toschool?”[201]A Dalit woman who had migrated with her family to Mittenchakvillage in Patna district in Bihar to escape the harassment of dominant casteYadavs said the teachers in her son’s school never removed the names of the children who no longer went to school,including girls who had married and moved out of the village. She said, “Theteachers used to visit the homes of such children who were no longer in schooland get signature of their parents to show that they have received scholarshipmoney and pocket it all themselves.”[202]Principals also adopt other practices that violate theprovisions of the education law and lead to problems in retaining children inschool. The principal of the Azamgarh school who admitted faking attendancerecords said her school had no special classes for older children or those whoreturned after having dropped out:If a child comes to us for enrollment in school when he is10 years old and hasn’t even learned the basics, then we put thechild’s age as six and enroll him in class I. Children attend schoolirregularly when we put them in a class lower than what’s appropriate fortheir age. But if we put them in an age-appropriate higher class and payspecial attention to one child, then we can’t teach any other child.[203]If the monitoring mechanisms worked the way they weresupposed to, members of the SMCs and village panchayats, with the help of thecommunity, would map the special needs of children in the community, and theeducation department would provide the resources needed to ensure all childrenare enrolled in and regularly attend age-appropriate classes.The Challenge of Community and School-LevelMonitoring SystemsThe Right to Education Act requires that SMCs have at leastthree-fourth parent-members, with adequate representation of parents ofchildren from disadvantaged communities, and that at least half of the membersbe women.In Bihar, the schools have ad hoc committees in lieu of SMCs.[204]Human Rights Watch met mothers in groups, some of whom were members of these adhoc committees, and found them mostly unaware of their roles andresponsibilities under the law. The mother of a minority group who is member ofsuch a committee in Patna district said she did not know anything about theRight to Education Act and had not been given any training. She said the adviceof the mothers is not really sought by others on the committee: “I attendmeetings. The principal does most of the talking.”The situation is little different in rural Uttar Pradesh orAndhra Pradesh where members of the school committees rarely knew of theirroles and responsibilities. In Uttar Pradesh, Human Rights Watch found thatparents from the Musahar Dalit community often did not know about suchcommittees. Some teachers and education officials blamed the parents.“Until parents are enlightened, school management committees can’tbe active,” one teacher in Varanasi city told Human Rights Watch.[205]The principal of the Lodhi school in Sonbhadra district in Uttar Pradesh wherechildren from Ghasiya tribe were discriminated against (as described in ChapterII), said the school committee did not have any members from Ghasiya tribe“because these parents are not active and will not come for meetings whenasked.” [206]In Mahbubnagar district in Andhra Pradesh, the principal ofa primary school told Human Rights Watch that although a SMC was constituted,they managed to meet only once in three months instead of every month as perthe rules. He added that the committee was ineffective as most parents did notcome to the meetings.[207] MVFoundation’s Rajendra Prasad said the committee members are given only aday-long training, which is grossly inadequate for them to be able to carry outtheir roles meaningfully.[208]Under the Right to Education Act, each SMC is required toformulate a school development plan in order to be eligible for governmentinfrastructure development grants. The school development plan is meant to be acomprehensive plan that focuses on all aspects of the school includingprotection of children’s rights, classroom processes, and inclusiveness.[209]This could be a powerful tool in the hands of the community. But the committeeswill have to be constituted and be given sufficient capacity to help devisesuch plans. For now, they are either missing or being mostly drawn up by theprincipals.[210]Role of the Panchayat (Local Village Council)The local authority such as the gram panchayat at thevillage level is also responsible for monitoring schools and implementing theeducation law. However, gram panchayat members rarely receive training to carryout these responsibilities.[211]Prem Paswan, chief of gram panchayat Bhilwara-Datyapur inSapatchak block in Patna district, told Human Rights Watch that the ad hoccommittees in local schools did not have monthly meetings as required. He saidhe did not have authority to insist that teachers organize such meetings butadded that he also preferred not to put too much pressure on the teachersbecause they were important voters who carried influence with other voters.[212]Usha Devi, village councilchief in in Chati in Patna district, said the “head of the grampanchayat does not pay attention to education and that’s why our childrenhaven’t been able to study.” She said the principal did not alwayscome to school and the school did not open every day. When asked if she, as thehead of the village, had spoken to the principal, she said “No, Ihaven’t spoken to the teacher. Who listens to women?” Usha Devisaid she did not know what the Right to Education Act was or what a schooldevelopment plan was.[213]Caste politics may also prevent gram panchayat presidentsfrom fulfilling their duties to ensure that every child is able to go to schoolin a safe, secure, and friendly environment. In the case of castediscrimination and the beating of Dalit children in the government primaryschool Pindra No. 1 in Uttar Pradesh (detailed in Chapter II above), the grampanchayat president, who had held the post for 12 years, defended the schoolauthorities rather than the rights of the affected children. In writtentestimony to the education department in July 2011, he said “No suchincident took place due to which a child or his family was harmed.” Headded that the newspaper article that reported on the incident of a child beingbeaten badly by a teacher, which resulted in his hand being broken, presentedthe matter in an “unnecessary manner” and gave “unnecessaryimportance” to it.[214] Theeducation department, however, concluded that discrimination had indeedoccurred at the school.[215] Bycontrast, at a village in Kurnool district, Andhra Pradesh, that had highincidence of child labor, a concerted community effort managed to eradicatechild labor and ensure that all children went to school regularly. Members ofthe Hyderabad-based M.V. Foundation engaged in Narsipalli village with farmers,cotton seed organizers, and companies, and in about four years were able tohelp end child labor. Some members of the community told Human Rights Watchthat they visited some model gram panchayats in another district to learn howto keep records of school-going children as well as child labor. “We alsolearned which departments come under the control of the gram panchayat and areaccountable to the panchayat. As a result, we have now formed sub-committeesthat monitor concerns related to health and child rights,” a communitymember said.[216]Ineffective Grievance RedressThe Right to Education Act (RTE) lacks a clear and effectivegrievance redress mechanism. SMCs and local authorities do not have thecapacity to receive and address grievances, and state-level mechanisms, such asthe state commissions for the protection of child rights, where they exist, arenot immediately accessible at the village level.The National Advisory Council’s Working Committee onRTE stated in January 2013: “In most States there continues to be lack ofan operational monitoring, accountability and grievance redress architectureand mechanisms with rules, norms and guidelines specifying how these mechanismswill function.”[217] Thecouncil formed a working group that drafted some guidelines on grievanceredress and recommended that there should be an independent appellate unit atthe district level and independent child rights commissions at the state level.[218]A pending 2011 draft bill would create a nationwidegrievance redress mechanism to ensure timely delivery of all goods and servicesto citizens. If passed, the bill could provide some help to address the absenceof effective grievance mechanisms in education, as well as in other areas.[219]Big questions remain, however, about how the bill will be implemented, how farit will address recommendations drafted by the National Advisory Council onwhat a grievance redress and appeals structure will look like and how it willoperate, and when the bill might be enacted.Some states— such as Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, andHaryana—have already laid down their own grievance redress guidelines.[220]Others like Orissa have set up a toll free helpline. Vandana Prasad, formerhead of the RTE division at the National Commission for Protection of ChildRights, says it is still unclear whether “a single window approach willwork for the entire social sector,” and how independent a grievanceredress body would be.[221]IV. RecommendationsThe government of India has taken a significant step towardensuring that all children receive elementary education by enacting the Rightto Education Act. But without improved monitoring and accountabilitymechanisms, government and school officials will be unable to identify andremedy discrimination and intervene promptly to address the needs ofout-of-school children and those at risk of dropping out. As a result, childrenfrom vulnerable communities will continue to be deprived of their right to education.To India’s Central Government:Take steps for the effectiveimplementation of the Right to Education Act that focus not simply onenrollment, but on the retention of every child in school at least untilage 14. An essential first step is creating and implementing a system tomonitor and track all children from the time they are enrolled to the timethey graduate grade VIII, and a uniform protocol for identifying childrenwho are out of school, have dropped out, or are at risk of dropping out.Develop clear standards formonitoring children at risk of dropping out, and develop mechanisms toensure relevant authorities undertake social mapping, especially inmarginalized communities, engage with minority communities, and interveneto ensure that children who have left school can return.Develop clear indicators to improvethe detection of and response to discrimination in schools. The NationalCommission for Protection of Child Rights should develop guidelines toaddress discrimination and other abuses of children, and set outappropriate disciplinary measures.Direct the Ministry of HumanResource Development to implement the recommendations on endingdiscrimination in schools proposed by the National AdvisoryCouncil’s Working Group on the Right to Education Act on endingdiscrimination in schools. These include developing an “equalityindex” that sets down “monitorable norms and benchmarks toassess the degree of inclusiveness, diversity and equality in schools,”using parameters such as participation, attendance, and classroompractices.Instructthe Ministry of Human Resource Development to develop guidelines andmanuals for teachers that set forth good practices for social inclusionand equity, such as encouraging children from marginalized communities toparticipate in school activities, ensuring more frequent collaborationbetween children of different castes, and promoting innovative activitiesaimed at inclusion.Directthe Ministry of Human Resource Development to ensure that the NationalCouncil for Teacher Education (NCTE) incorporates the recommendations laidout by the National Task Force on Equity and Inclusion in the revisedcurriculum for teacher education. These inputs should be included in theNCTE’s work with various states to develop state teacher educationcurricula.Createmechanisms for regular meetings and sharing of information and ideas amongvarious ministries and departments that are critical to successfulimplementation of the Right to Education Act, including Education, HumanResources, Women and Child Development, Labor, Minority Affairs, TribalAffairs, Social Welfare, and Panchayat Raj.Ratify ILO ConventionNo. 131 on Minimum Age (1973), and set 15 as the minimum age at whichchildren can start regular work.To State Governments:Expand implementation of theRight to Education Act beyond enrollment to mechanisms that ensure theretention of every child in school until age 14, including a system tomonitor and track every child from enrollment through completion of gradeVIII.Train teachers, educationdepartment officials, local authorities, and members of school managementcommittees to better identify and respond to discrimination and exclusionand to develop innovative ways of promoting a more child-friendlyenvironment in school.Encourage teachers to develop methods,such as group activities and interactive learning, that facilitate greaterinteraction among children of different socio-economic and caste backgrounds.Undertake public awarenesscampaigns on the right to education, including the prohibition againstdiscrimination in education, and involve children as appropriate.Establish independentchildren’s rights commissions and encourage them to set up grievanceredress helplines to address violations of the right to education,including discrimination and other abuses of students.Ensure that every school createsa transparent, trained, and effective school management committee inaccordance with the Right to Education Act. Special efforts should be madeto ensure full participation by members of marginalized communities.Implement the recommendations bythe National Advisory Council Working Group on the Right to Education Acton strengthening community-based mechanisms.Encourage parents’participation in regular parent-teacher meetings, including by involvingschool management committee members and panchayat representatives.Provide ways to give children agreater role in reducing discrimination in schools, such as by havingstudent committees with representation from minority communities discussthese issues and make recommendations to school management committees.Work with civil society groups todeploy village-level community mobilizers to encourage parents to sendtheir children to school, particularly where child labor is common.Ensure greater cooperation andcoordination between different departments that look after aspects ofchild protection, such as the education department, labor department, andtribal welfare department. Officials from these departments should meet atleast monthly and share information, including on the challenges theyface, and what kinds of support they need from each other.To Foreign Donors, Aid Agencies, and ConcernedGovernments:Support government initiativesand provide technical assistance to develop better guidelines formonitoring and effective implementation of the Right to Education Act.Provide technical assistance to supportgovernment initiatives to eliminate discrimination against marginalizedcommunities in primary education.Provide technical assistance to helpdevelop curricula and teaching methods that promote a child-friendlyenvironment in school focusing on inclusion and equity.AcknowledgmentsThis report was researched and written by Jayshree Bajoria,researcher in the Asia division at Human Rights Watch. The report was edited byMeenakshi Ganguly, South Asia director. James Ross, legal and policy director,provided legal review, and Joseph Saunders, deputy program director, providedprogrammatic review. Bede Sheppard, deputy director for children’srights, provided additional inputs. Julia Bleckner, associate in the Asiadivision provided editing and production assistance. Kathy Mills, publicationsspecialist, and Fitzroy Hepkins, mail manager, provided production assistance.We would like to thank the many nongovernmentalorganizations and children’s rights activists who assisted our researchand shared their insights and analyses with us. In particular, Human RightsWatch would like to thank: Annie Namala, Jayshree P. Mangubhai, and SatyendraKumar of the Centre for Social Equity and Inclusion; R. Venkat Reddy, RajendraPrasad, J. Bhaskar, and V.V. Rao of M. V. Foundation; Grace Nirmala of Aashray;Lenin Raghuvanshi, Shruti Nagvanshi, Anand Prasad, Mangala, and Gazala Qamar ofthe People’s Vigilance Committee on Human Rights (PVCHR); Sudha Verghese ofNari Gunjan; Pankaj Mehta and Saradindu Bandhopadhyay of Child Rights and You;Sanat Sinha, Mahesh, and Dinesh of Bal Sakha; Parth Shah of the Centre forCivil Society; Dr. Prasad Sirivella of the National Dalit Movement for Justice;Mushtaq Ahmed of the Rural Organization for Social Advancement; Rajesh Choubeyof Sonbhadra Vikas Samiti ; Sandhya of Shikhar Prashikshan Sansthan; RanjeetKumar of the Pratham Council for Vulnerable Children; Sudeshna Sengupta and BhagyalakshiRao of Mobile Crèches; Jalaluddin of Basic Foundation; and Ram KumarVerma of Ahesas.Above all, we thank all of the children and their parentswho shared their painful experiences of exclusion and discrimination with us.We are also grateful to all of the other children, parents, teachers, andvillage council members who took the time to speak with us and shared theirperspectives and views.Appendix[222]Civil Society Guidelines to End Discrimination inEducationThis is the right of every studentin a school. Violation of any of these is a punishable offence.All students must be treatedequal and with dignity and respect irrespective of caste, religion,gender, class, region, race, family occupation, language, or disability.No distinction should be madebetween students on the basis of identity or for any other reason.There should be no name callingon the basis of caste/religion/family occupation. No one should question astudent’s patriotism, suggest violence/terrorism, or refer tochildren by their disability.All students should be allowed todrink water from the same water source. All students should have equalaccess to the toilets.There should be no denial, delay,or limit in providing any benefit arising out of a student’senrolment in the institution.There should be no discriminationor segregation during mid-day meals in schools. All students should beoffered similar utensils to eat in and there should be no discriminationin the manner the food is served, the order in which students are served,and where the students sit while eating. There should be no discriminationin hiring mid-day meal cooks.There should be no physical,mental, or emotional abuse of any student. Teachers should intervene whenthere are fights between students.All students should be givenequal opportunity and encouraged to participate in leadership positionsand all activities in school.All students should have accessto school resources, learning materials, and sports materials.No student should be made toclean any part of the school or fetch things for teachers/principal.Students’ academicperformance should not be subject to ridicule and at no time, connectionsto their caste, religion, gender, family occupation, disability, orpersonal background should be made. Teachers should not refer to children’scaste, gender, religious, family occupation, or disability in any way anddiscourage any such talk among students too.Seating arrangement in classshould not be discriminatory toward any student. It should be devised in away which allows every student a chance to sit in the front at least somedays in a month.Teachers/academic staff shouldencourage all students to ask questions and not scold or humiliate astudent when he/she gives wrong answers. Every student’s notebookshould be corrected.[1]Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India, “Efforts toEradicate Illiteracy in India,” September 2008, http://pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=42161[2]“India’s literacy rate rises to 74%: Census,” Press Trustof India, March 31, 2011, http://www.livemint.com/Politics/UtHyRhLul24cT4TIhgyrQN/India8217s-literacy-rate-rises-to-74-Census.html(accessedJuly 31, 2013).[3]National University of Educational Planning and Administration, “DistrictInformation System for Education statistics for 2011-2012,” http://dise.in/Downloads/Publications/Publications%202011-12/Flash%202011-12.pdf(accessed November 1, 2013), p. 36.[4]ASER Centre, “ASER 2013 (Rural) Findings from the Annual Status ofEducation Report,” 2013,http://img.asercentre.org/docs/Publications/ASER%20Reports/ASER_2013/ASER2013_report%20sections/thenationalpicture.pdf[5]Planning Commission, Government of India, “1st Five-Year plan(1951-1956),” http://planningcommission.nic.in/plans/planrel/fiveyr/1st/1planch33.html[6]Planning Commission, Government of India, “10th Five-Year plan(2002-2007),” http://planningcommission.nic.in/plans/planrel/fiveyr/10th/volume2/v2_ch2_2.pdf[7]Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India, “SarvaShiksha Abhiyan,” undated, http://mhrd.gov.in/schemes(accessed July 20, 2013).[8]Ministry of Human Resource Development and Department of School Educationand Literacy, Government of India, “Report of the Committee onImplementation of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act,2009 and the Resultant Revamp of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan,” April 2010, http://ssa.nic.in/quality-of-education/rte-reporting-by-anil-bodia-committee[9] Ministryof Human Resource Development, Government of India, 18th JointReview Mission: 17th to 24 June, 2013, “Results Framework toMonitor SSA Goals” http://ssa.nic.in/monitoring-documents_old/jrm/18th%20JRM/Result%20Monitoring%20Framework.pdf(accessed April 3, 2014). The joint review conducted by the government and itsdevelopment partners itself expressed concern over the accuracy of the latestnumbers of out-of-school children.[10] KavitaChowdhury, “Only 57 per cent children going to school: RTE Actreport,” Mail Today, April 4, 2011,indiatoday.intoday.in/story/only-57-per-cent-children-going-to-school-rte-act-report/1/134270.html(accessed August 15, 2013).[11]Ministryof Finance, Government of India, “Union Budget 2004-2005,” July 8,2004, http://indiabudget.nic.in/ub2004-05/bh/bh1.pdf (accessed October 28,2013), p. 11.[12]Ministry of Finance, Government of India, “Union Budget 2008-2009,”undated, http://indiabudget.nic.in/ub2008-09/mem/mem1.pdf (accessed October 28,2013), p. 4.[13]The Indian government received approximately US$1.85 billion from theWorld Bank’s International Development Association between 2004 and 2012;US$463 million between 2008 and 2012 from the UK’s Department forInternational Development, see UK Department for International Development,“Universal Elementary Education (Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan II,”December 6, 2012, http://devtracker.dfid.gov.uk/projects/GB-1-114487/ (accessedNovember 6, 2013); and US$264 million from the European Commission between 2000and 2008, see European Commission, “Development and Cooperation,”undated, http://ec.europa.eu/europeaid/where/asia/country-cooperation/india/india_en.htm[14]Department of School Education and Literacy, Ministry of Human ResourceDevelopment, Government of India, “Mid-Day Meal Scheme,” undated, http://mhrd.gov.in/middaymeal[15]Accountability Initiative, “Budget brief for Mid-Day Meal Scheme,2013-2014,” March 2013, http://www.accountabilityindia.in/sites/default/files/mdms_2013-14.pdf; Accountability Initiative is an initiativeof the New Delhi-based think-tank Centre for Policy Research and it tracksgovernment programs. Its flagship project is called PAISA, which develops toolsto collect data on fund flows, expenditures, and implementation processes. Theproject is currently focused on elementary education[16]Accountability Initiative, “PAISA Districts Survey on Mid-Day Meals(2012), Provisional,” June 2013, http://mdm.nic.in/Files/OrderCirculars/PAISA-MDM-Report-June-13.pdfaccessedJuly 9, 2013), p. 15.[17]Ibid.[18]Ibid.[19]The Constitution (86th Amendment) Act, 2002, http://www.azimpremjifoundation.org/pdf/86th_Amendment_to_the_Constitution.pdf[20]The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, No. 35of 2009, http://www.azimpremjifoundation.org/sites/default/files/userfiles/files/RTE-Act.pdf[21]Ministry of Human Resource Development and Department of School Educationand Literacy, Government of India, “Report of the Committee onImplementation of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act,2009 and the Resultant Revamp of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan,” April 2010, http://ssa.nic.in/quality-of-education/rte-reporting-by-anil-bodia-committee[22]Ministry of Finance, Government of India, “Union Budget 2013-14,”2013, http://indiabudget.nic.in/ub2013-14/bh/bh1.pdf[23]Accountability Initiative, “Budget Brief, Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan,Government of India,” 2013-14, http://www.accountabilityindia.in/sites/default/files/ssa_2013-14.pdf(accessed January 21, 2014)[24] Governmentof India, “National Commission for Protection of Child Rights,”undated, http://ncpcr.gov.in/[25]Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, No. 35 of 2009,section 31 http://www.ncpcr.gov.in/Acts/gazette_right_to_education_bill_2009.pdf[26] RTEForum, “Status of Implementation of the Right of Children to Free andCompulsory Education Act, 2009: YearThree(2012-13),” draft report, April 2013, http://www.rteforumindia.org/sites/default/files/RTE%20Forum%20Draft%20Stocktaking%20Report%202013.pdf; RTE Forum is a collective ofnational education networks, teachers’ organizations, and educationistsworking to bring systemic reform in education[27]Ibid.[28]Ibid. The Education Commission, popularly known as the Kothari Commission,recommended in 1966 that education be accorded the highest priority and 6percent of the national income be allocated to it. The government approved thisand stated it in the 1968 National Policy on Education. This was reiterated inthe 1986 and the 1992 national policies on education.[29]Niranjanaradhya V P, “Equitable quality education is every child’sbirthright,” Deccan Herald, March 25, 2009, http://archive.deccanherald.com/Content/Mar252009/panorama20090324126069.asp[30]The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, No. 35of 2009, section 12, http://www.azimpremjifoundation.org/sites/default/files/userfiles/files/RTE-Act.pdf[31]Society for Unaided Private Schools of Rajasthan v. U.O.I. & Anr.,Supreme Court of India, Writ Petition (C) No. 95 of 2010, Judgment, April 12,2012, http://righttoeducation.in/sites/default/files/supremecourt_judgement_RTE_13_April_2012.pdf[32]“Fresh protests over schools without 25% quota under RTE,” Mid-Day,February 13, 2013, http://www.mid-day.com/news/2013/feb/130213-pune-fresh-protests-over-schools-without-25-percent-quota-under-rte.htm; Joint Operation for Social Help,“SC Verdict on Right to Education Act ,” April 19, 2012, http://josh4india.org/sc-verdict-on-rte-an-eye-wash-to-the-community/[33]International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR),G.A. res. 2200A (XXI), 993 U.N.T.S. 3, entered into force January 3, 1976,acceded to by India on April 10, 1979.[34]Convention on the Rights of the Child, G.A. res. 44/25, U.N. Doc.A/44/49, entered into force September 2, 1990, ratified by India on December11, 1992.[35]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), G.A. res.2200A (XXI), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23, 1976, acceded to byIndia on April 10, 1979.[36]Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination againstWomen (CEDAW), G.A. res. 34/180, entered into force September 3, 1981, ratifiedby India on July 9, 1993.[37]ICESR, art. 13(2); CRC, art. 28(1).[38]CRC, art. 28(1)(e).[39]See, e.g. CRC, art. 2.[40]Ibid., art. 29(1)(c).[41]Committee on Economic Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR), General Comment 13,“The right to education (Art. 13),” E/C. 12/1999/10, para. 31.[42]CESCR, General Comment 3, “The nature of states parties obligations (Art.2, para. 1),” 1990, E/1991/23. See also, Committee on the Rights of theChild, General Comment 7, “Implementing Child Rights in earlyChildhood,” 2005, CRC/C/GC/7/Rev.1 (“potential discrimination inaccess to quality services for young children is a particular concern,especially where health, education, welfare and other services are notuniversally available and are provided through a combination of State, privateand charitable organizations”).[43]CESCR, General Comment 13, “The right to education (Art.13),” E/C. 12/1999/10; see also International Labor Organization,Convention No. 182 on the Worst Forms of Child Labor, art. 7(2).[44]ICESCR, arts. 7, 10.[45]CRC, art. 32.[46]Ibid.[47]Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation Act), 1986, No. 61 of 1986 http://labour.nic.in/upload/uploadfiles/files/Divisions/childlabour/ChildLabourAct%20_16_.pdfFor a list of occupations andprocesses prohibited under the Act, see http://labour.nic.in/upload/uploadfiles/files/Divisions/childlabour/THE%20SCHEDULE.pdfTo make this legislation compliant with the Right to Education Act, whichguarantees compulsory education for all children under 14, the Indiangovernment is considering an amendment to the present law. The Child Labour(Prohibition & Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2012 has been placed in theParliament and is presently under examination with a parliamentary standingcommittee.[48]UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, adopted by the UN GeneralAssembly on September 13, 2007, art. 14.[49]Ibid., art. 17.[50]Guiding Principles on InternalDisplacement, U.N.Doc. E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2 (1998), noted in Comm. Hum. Rts. res. 1998/50,principle 23.[51]Child Rights Committee, General Comment 7, “Implementing ChildRights in early Childhood,” 2005, CRC/C/GC/7/Rev.1.[52]Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India, 2011 “SSAFramework for Implementation based on Right to Education Act 2009,” March2011, http://www.upefa.com/upefaweb/admin/myuploads/SSA_Frame_work_%28revised%29_9-6-2011.pdf (accessed August 1, 2013)chapter 3.[53]The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, No. 35of 2009, section 8 (c) and section 9(c). http://www.azimpremjifoundation.org/sites/default/files/userfiles/files/RTE-Act.pdf[54]Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India, 2011“SSA Framework for Implementation based on Right to Education Act2009,” March 2011, http://www.upefa.com/upefaweb/admin/myuploads/SSA_Frame_work_%28revised%29_9-6-2011.pdf(accessed August 1, 2013) chapter 3.[55]Ibid.[56]Ibid.[57]Human Rights Watch interview with Henri Tiphagne, People’s Watch, NewDelhi, August 2013.[58]See Appendix I, Guidelines to End Discrimination in Education, created by localcivil society groups.[59]A Qualitative study commissioned by Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, see Ministry ofHuman Resource Development, Government of India, “Inclusion and Exclusionof Children in the School and in the Classroom in Primary and Upper primaryschools,” September 2012, http://ssa.nic.in/research-studies-document_old/survey-report-on-out-of-school-children/list-of-studies/National%20Synthesis%20Inclusion-Exclusion%20study.pdf/view(accessed October 29, 2013).[60]The Constitution of India has several provisions to safeguard the interests ofScheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Article 14 provides for equality beforethe law; Article 15 prohibits discrimination on the basis of religion, race,caste, sex, or place of birth; Article 16 provides for equal opportunity inpublic employment; Article 17 abolishes untouchability; Article 46 calls forpromotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes,and other weaker sections; Articles 243D, 243T, 330, and 332 reserve seats inlegislative bodies at various levels. India has also enacted several laws toprotect members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. See The ScheduledCastes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, No. 33 of1989 http://idsn.org/fileadmin/user_folder/pdf/New_files/India/SC_ST_PoA_Act.pdf also The Protection of CivilRights Act, 1955, No. 22 of 1955 http://socialjustice.nic.in/pcr-act.phpThe Employment of Manualscavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act, 1993, No. 46 of1993. The latter law forbids the degrading practice of manual scavenging ofhuman excreta, a job mostly done by Dalits.[61]George Mathew, “Panchayats: Hope for Dalit Rights” Livemint,May 1, 2013, http://www.livemint.com/Politics/h3ezCD61bYNu9maggsfkjM/Panchayatshope-for-dalit-rights.html (accessed December15, 2013).[62]Model Rules under the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act,2009, http://www.ncpcr.gov.in/Model_Rules/RTE_Model_Rules.pdf[63]Human Rights Watch phone interview with Satyendra Kumar, Bihar director,Centre for Social Equity and Inclusion, July 29, 2013.[64]For more on the Mid-Day Meal scheme, see Chapter I.[65]Sukhadeo Thorat and Joel lee, “Dalits and the Right to Food –Discrimination and Exclusion in Food-related Government Programmes,”Indian Institute of Dalit Studies, 2006, http://www.dalitstudies.org.in/download/wp/0603.pdf; Akshaya Mukul, “Caste, genderbiases blight mid-day meal scheme in four states,” Times of India,August 4, 2012, http://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2012-08-04/india/33034636_1_upper-caste-dalit-children-mid-day-meals(accessed August 31, 2013).[66] HumanRights Watch phone interview with Satyendra Kumar, Bihar director, Centre forSocial Equity and Inclusion, July 29, 2013.[67]National Institute of Advanced Studies and UNICEF, “The EducationQuestion From the Perspective of Adivasis: Conditions, Policies andStructures,” March 2012, http://eprints.nias.res.in:8081/333/1/R7-2012.pdf(accessed October 29, 2013).[68]Jayshree P. Mangubhai, “25% Is Our Right: Examining SC/ST ExclusionThrough Budgets in School Education,” Centre for Social Equity andInclusion and Swadhikar, 2013, http://www.ncdhr.org.in/resources/publications/daaa-publication/Institutional%20Exclusion%20in%20Education-2.pdf(accessed December 1, 2013).[69]Planning Commission, Government of India, “12th Five-Year plan(2012-2017), Social Sectors, Volume III,” 2013, http://planningcommission.gov.in/plans/planrel/12thplan/pdf/vol_3.pdf[70]Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of India, “Report ofthe Working Group on ChildRights for the 12th Five year Plan (2012-2017),” December 16, 2012,http://www.wcd.nic.in/reportwgdtd01032012.pdf (accessed July 9, 2013).[71]Ministry of Human Resource Development and Department of School Education andLiteracy, Government of India, “Report of the Committee on Implementationof the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 and theResultant Revamp of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan,” April 2010, http://ssa.nic.in/quality-of-education/rte-reporting-by-anil-bodia-committee[72]Human Rights Watch interview with Vijay (pseudonym), Pindra village, Varanasidistrict, Uttar Pradesh, March 20, 2014.[73]Human Rights Watch interview with Shyam (pseudonym), Pindra village, Varanasidistrict, Uttar Pradesh, April 15, 2013.[74]Human Rights Watch interviews with members of People’s VigilanceCommittee on Human Rights, a nongovernmental organization based in Varanasi,Uttar Pradesh, April 15, 2013[75]Human Rights Watch interviews with Musahar children in Pindra village, Varanasidistrict, Uttar Pradesh, April 15, 2013.[76]Human Rights Watch interviews with members of PVCHR and conversations withMusahar children in Pindra village, Varanasi district, Uttar Pradesh, April 15,2013. Also information gathered from clippings in Hindi newspapers Amar Ujala,June 3, 2011; Dainik Jagaran, July 10, 2011. Copies of these are on file atHuman Rights Watch.[77]Ibid.[78]Luv Saggi and others v. State of U.P. and others, Public InterestLitigation (PIL) No. 35961 of 2011.[79]Human Rights Watch procured the documents of the investigation conducted by theeducation department.[80]Human Rights Watch interview with students who had dropped out of school, Pindravillage, Varanasi district, Uttar Pradesh, April 15 2013.[81]Human Rights Watch interview with Vijay (pseudonym), Pindra village, Varanasidistrict, Uttar Pradesh, March 20, 2014.[82]Interview with Shruti Nagvanshi, Founder, People’s Vigilance Committee onHuman Rights, a nongovernmental organization based in Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh,March 19, 2014.[83]Beldar is listed under the Other Backward Class (OBC) category; Beldarsenjoy higher status in the caste hierarchy than Dalits.[84]Human Rights Watch interview with Naresh (pseudonym), Kamtachak village,Patna district, Bihar, July 13, 2013.[85]Ibid.[86]Human Rights Watch interview with Sanjay (pseudonym), Kamtachak village, Patnadistrict, Bihar, July 13, 2013.[87] Kurmiis listed under the Other Backward Class (OBC) category; Kurmis enjoy higherstatus in the caste hierarchy than Dalits.[88]Human Rights Watch interview with Sanjay, Kamtachak village, Patna district,Bihar, July 13, 2013.[89]Human Rights Watch interview with Rajesh’s mother, Mittenchakvillage, Patna district, Bihar, July 12, 2013.[90]Human Rights Watch interview with Rajesh (pseudonym), Mittenchak village, Patnadistrict, Bihar, July 12, 2013.[91]Human Rights Watch interview with Madhu (pseudonym), Musahar slum, Patna city,Bihar, July 16, 2013.[92] Ibid.[93]Human Rights Watch interview with Madhu’s mother, Musahar slum,Patna city, Bihar, July 16, 2013.[94]Human Rights interview with Principal Pankaj Kumar, Kumhrar middleschool, Patna city, Bihar, July 16, 2013.[95] Ibid.[96]Human Rights Watch interview with Priya (pseudonym), Dom community slumnear Gaya railway station, Gaya, Bihar, July 20, 2013.[97]Ibid.[98]Human Rights Watch interview with Pankaj (pseudonym), Sonbhadra district,Uttar Pradesh, April 18, 2013.[99]Human Rights Watch interview with the principal of Lodhi governmentprimary school no.2, Sonbhadra district, Uttar Pradesh, April 18, 2013. Duringthe interview, a senior female teacher was also present.[100]Human Rights Watch interview with Meena (pseudonym), Sonbhadra district,Uttar Pradesh, April 18, 2013.[101]Human Rights Watch interview with a teacher of Lodhi government primary schoolno.2, Sonbhadra district, Uttar Pradesh, March 21, 2014.[102]Human Rights Watch interview with Meena (pseudonym), Sonbhadra district, UttarPradesh, March 21, 2014.[103]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharda (pseudonym), Sampatchak block, Patnadistrict, Bihar, July 12, 2013.[104]Human Rights Watch interview with Malini (pseudonym), Gaya, Bihar, July 18,2013.[105]Ibid.[106]Report by the Prime Minister’s High Level Committee constituted underJustice Rajindar Sachar (Sachar Committee report), “Social, Economic andEducational Status of the Muslim Community in India,” November 2006, http://minorityaffairs.gov.in/sites/upload_files/moma/files/pdfs/sachar_comm.pdf[107]Ibid.[108]Ministry of Minority Affairs, Government of India, “Sachar CommitteeReport and Status of Follow up Action”January 2013, http://minorityaffairs.gov.in/sites/upload_files/moma/files/Status%20of%20Follow%20up%20Action%20as%20on%2031.01.2013.pdf[109]Abusaleh Shariff, “Inclusive Development Paradigm in India: A Post-SacharPerspective,” US-India Policy Institute, March 2012, http://www.usindiapolicy.org/documents/publications/USIPI-Publication-01-Shachar-Web.pdf[110]Abusaleh Shariff, “Six Years After Sachar: Review of SociallyInclusive Policies in India Since 2006,” US-India Policy Institute and Centerfor Research and Debates in Development Policy, January 2013, http://www.usindiapolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/USIPI-Pub-05-SixYearsAfterSachar-Web.pdf[111]Human Rights Watch phone interview with Abusaleh Shariff, August 7, 2013.[112]Government of India, “Sachar Committee Report,” November 2006, http://minorityaffairs.gov.in/sites/upload_files/moma/files/pdfs/sachar_comm.pdf[113]Mohammad Sanjeer Alam, “Education and Exclusion of Muslims,”Council for Social Development, 2013.[114]Sachar Committee Report, November 2006, p. 294[115]Centre for Equity Studies, “Promises to Keep: InvestigatingGovernment’s response to Sachar Committee recommendations,”November 2011, http://www.sacw.net/article2434.html (accessed December 15,2013).[116]Human Rights Watch interviews with civil society activists, Muslim parents, anda government school principal in Bajardihan, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, April 10,2013.[117]Manjari Mishra, “MP govt's order to introduce Gita in madrassas triggersstorm in Muslim community,” Times of India, August 5, 2013, http://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2013-08-05/india/41092226_1_bhagwad-gita-bjp-government-muslim-leader (accessedAugust 6, 2013).[118]Sachar Committee Report, November 2006[119]Human Rights Watch spoke with Sahir (pseudonym) and four other boys as part ofa group discussion, Goyala Dairy Slum, Delhi, October 1, 2013.[120]Human Rights Watch interview with Javed (pseudonym) and four other boys as partof a group discussion, Goyala Dairy Slum, Delhi, October 1, 2013.[121]Human Rights Watch interview with a group of five boys, Goyala Dairy Slum,Delhi, October 1, 2013.[122]Human Rights Watch spoke with Sahir (pseudonym) and four other boys as part ofa group discussion, Goyala Dairy Slum, Delhi, October 1, 2013.[123]Human Rights Watch interview with Sara (pseudonym), G-block Sunder nagri,Delhi, September 10, 2013. Several other girls aged 6-14 participated in thisgroup discussion.[124]Human Rights Watch interview with Salman (pseudonym), G-block Sunder nagri,Delhi, September 10, 2013. Five other boys participated in this groupdiscussion.[125]Ibid.[126]Human Rights Watch, India—No Tally of the Anguish, October 7,2009, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2009/10/08/no-tally-anguish-0[127]See, for example, Human Rights Watch, Hidden Apartheid: CasteDiscrimination Against India’s “Untouchables,” February12, 2007, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2007/02/12/hidden-apartheid-0HumanRights Watch, Broken People: Caste Violence Against India’s“Untouchables,” March 3, 1999, http://www.hrw.org/reports/1999/03/01/broken-people-0National Human Rights Commission, "Report on Preventionof Atrocities against Scheduled Castes," 2004, http://idsn.org/fileadmin/user_folder/pdf/New_files/India/NHRC_India_-_Atrocities_Report_2004.pdf[128]An out-of-school child means one who was never enrolled in school or one whodropped out of school.[129]Human Rights Watch interview with Sanat Sinha, Patna, July 12, 2013.[130]National Advisory Council Working Group on Right to Education, “Summaryof Recommendations,” November 2012, http://nac.nic.in/pdf/rte_proposal.pdf[131]Dhir Jhingran, “Some elements in NCPCR are opposed to the RTE Act,”Governance Now.com, April 13, 2013,http://www.governancenow.com/views/interview/some-elements-ncpcr-are-opposed-rte-act[132]Ibid.[133]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Vandana Prasad, then in charge of theRight to Education cell at the National Commission for Protection of ChildRights, New Delhi, August 30, 2013.[134]The inter-agency report for the Hague Global Child Labor Conference in 2010noted that child labor is both a cause and a consequence of the slow progresstowards universal basic education. Children engaged in labor are more likely todrop out, complete fewer years in school, and achieve lower test scores. At thesame time, weak implementation of education policies can push more childreninto labor markets. “Joining Forces Against Child Labor, Inter-AgencyReport for the Hague Global Child Labor Conference,” May 2010, http://www.un.org/ar/events/childlabourday/pdf/Hague_Report.pdf (accessed July 1, 2013). See also Planning Commission, Governmentof India, 12th five-year plan (2012-2017). In India, low rates of attendance—in states such as Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh,and Jharkhand, it is below 60 percent—areoften because children help out at home or in the fields; girls are frequentlyasked to take care of younger siblings or share in housework. Sixty-six percentof child workers are engaged in agriculture and children tend to drop out ofschool to perform such work long before they are 14, starting around the agesof 8 or 10. See, e.g., Planning Commission, Government of India, 12th Five-Yearplan (2012-2017), Social Sectors, Volume III, 2013, http://planningcommission.gov.in/plans/planrel/12thplan/pdf/vol_3.pdf (accessed July 1, 2013).Child labor largelyhas an inverse relationship with children’s ability to go to school.“Child labor restricts the right of children to access and benefit fromeducation and denies the fundamental opportunity to attend school,” notesthe working group for social inclusion of vulnerable groups like child labor,bonded and migrant labor in the 12th five-year plan. See Planning Commission,Government of India, “Working group for social inclusion of vulnerablegroups like child labor and bonded and migrant labor in the 12th five year plan(2012-2017).” Government figures from the NationalSample Survey Organisation estimated India’s child workforce in2009-10 to be 4.9 million.[135]India has 13 million child workers aged 5 to 14 years, the world’slargest population of such workers. UNICEF, “Special: Fighting ChildLabour,” August 22, 2013, http://www.unicef.org/india/reallives_8279.htm(accessed August 7, 2013).[136]Ibid.[137]As part of NCLP, the Ministry of Labor and Employment hires independentagencies to conduct surveys and the labor department conducts inspections toidentify children working in hazardous occupations and processes. Childrenbetween 9 and 14 are supposed to be withdrawn from their workplaces andenrolled in special schools. Subsequently, they are to be mainstreamed informal education or self-employment within a period of six months to threeyears of their enrollment in the special schools. To ensure children do notreturn to the workforce, the authorities are supposed to follow up with thechildren for the next few years. See Ministry of Labor and Employment,Government of India, The Policy of the Government on the issue of Child Labor, http://labour.nic.in/upload/uploadfiles/files/Divisions/childlabour/PolicyofGovernmenontheissueofChildLabour.pdf[138]Haq: Centre for Child Rights, “Budget 2013-14 and Children: A FirstGlance,” http://www.haqcrc.org/sites/default/files/Budget%20for%20Children%20Analysis%202013-14_0.pdf (accessed December 13, 2013).[139]Human Rights Watch interview with senior official in the labor department (namewithheld), Uttar Pradesh, April 20, 2013.[140]Working Group on RTE, National Advisory Council, Government of India, “Monitoring,Accountability and Grievance Redress Mechanisms for The Right to Education,”January 2013, http://nac.nic.in/press_releases/rte_gr_reco.pdf[141]The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, No. 35 of2009, section 24(e), http://www.ncpcr.gov.in/Acts/gazette_right_to_education_bill_2009.pdf[142]The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, No. 35 of2009, section 9, http://www.ncpcr.gov.in/Acts/gazette_right_to_education_bill_2009.pdf[143]The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, No. 35 of2009, section 8, http://www.ncpcr.gov.in/Acts/gazette_right_to_education_bill_2009.pdf[144]National University of Educational Planning and Administration, “ElementaryEducation in India: Progress Toward UEE,” District Information System forEducation, 2013, http://www.dise.in/Downloads/Publications/Publications%202011-12/Flash%202011-12.pdf[145]ASER Centre, “Enrollment and Learning Report Card From the Annual Statusof Education Report 2013,” 2013, http://img.asercentre.org/docs/Publications/ASER%20Reports/ASER_2013/4-pagers/enrollmentandlearning_english.pdf[146]Department of School Education and Literacy, Ministry of Human ResourceDevelopment,Government ofIndia, and National University of Educational Planning and Administration, “ElementaryEducation in India,” 2012, http://www.dise.in/Downloads/Publications/Publications%202010-11/Flash%20Statistics-2010-11.pdf(accessed August 5, 2013).[147]PlanningCommission, Government of India, “12th Five-Year plan (2012-2017), SocialSectors, Volume III,” 2013, http://planningcommission.gov.in/plans/planrel/12thplan/pdf/vol_3.pdf[148]UNICEF, “Time to Take Stock, Time to Discuss RTE,” undated, http://www.unicef.org/india/reallives_8138.htm[149]“Out of school children and dropout a national emergency: UNICEF,” TheHindu, April 13, 2013, http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/out-of-school-children-and-dropout-a-national-emergency-unicef/article4611287.ece[150]Human Rights Watch interviews with school principals and teachers in AndhraPradesh, Bihar, and Uttar Pradesh. Most expressed a lack of clarity on thedefinition of a dropout.[151]The Andhra Pradesh Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Rulesm,2010, https://dl.dropbox.com/u/67891215/AP%20RTE%20Rules.pdf[152]See section on “Corruption and Other Malfeasance by SchoolAuthorities” in this chapter.[153]Human Rights Watch interview with Paramhans Singh Yadav, Basic EducationOfficer, Department of education, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, April 20, 2013.[154]Human Rights Watch interview with a senior labor official (namewithheld), Uttar Pradesh, April 20, 2013.[155]Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Rules, 2010, Section 6(d),http://mhrd.gov.in/sites/upload_files/mhrd/files/RTI1.pdf.[156]District Information System for Education, Status of Elementary Educationin Uttar Pradesh, http://www.dise.in/Downloads/Use%20of%20Dise%20Data/Status%20of%20Elementary%20Education%20in%20Uttar%20Pradesh.pdf[157]Human Rights Watch interviews with Annie Namala, New Delhi, August 16, 2013,and February 13, 2014. Namala is executive director of New Delhi-based NGO,Center for Social Equity and Inclusion and previously chaired the task force onequity and inclusion in the National Advisory Council on Right to Education,Ministry of Human Resource Development.[158]Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India, 2011 SSA Frameworkfor Implementation based on Right to Education Act 2009, Chapters 2 and 7, http://www.upefa.com/upefaweb/admin/myuploads/SSA_Frame_work_%28revised%29_9-6-2011.pdf[159]The cluster resource person is the education department official tasked withvisiting schools and providing on-site academic support to teachers.[160]Human Rights Watch interview with District Collector and Magistrate M.Girija Shankar, Mahbubnagar district, Andhra Pradesh, January 24, 2013.[161]The mandal education officer is the education department official responsiblefor supervision of schools at village and mandal/block levels.[162]Human Rights Watch interview with a member of the Child Welfare Committee,Andhra Pradesh, January 24, 2013.[163]Human Rights Watch interview with Rani (pseudonym), Mahbubnagar district,Andhra Pradesh, Jan 23, 2012.[164]Human Rights Watch interview with Rani’s class teacher, Mahbubnagardistrict, Andhra Pradesh, January 23, 2012.[165]Human Rights Watch interview with Barkha (pseudonym), Mahbubnagar district,Andhra Pradesh, January 23, 2013.[166]Human Rights Watch interview with Barkha’s father, Mahbubnagardistrict, Andhra Pradesh, January 23, 2013.[167]Human Rights watch interview with Veena (pseudonym), Mahbubnagar district,Andhra Pradesh, January 22, 2013.[168]Human Rights Watch interview with Veena’s father, Mahbubnagar district,Andhra Pradesh, January 22, 2013.[169]Human Rights Watch interview with education officer-in-charge of Pindravillage, Varanasi district, Uttar Pradesh, April 15, 2013.[170]Human Rights Watch interview with principal, Ajaipur primary school,Pindra, Varanasi district, Uttar Pradesh, April 15, 2013.[171]Human Rights Watch interview with Shyam’s (pseudonym) father, Pindra,Varanasi district, Uttar Pradesh, March 20, 2014.[172]Human Rights interview with Principal Pankaj Kumar, Kumhrar middle school,Patna city, Bihar, July 16, 2013.[173]Human Rights Watch interview with Ajay (pseudonym), Patna city, Bihar,July 16, 2013.[174]Human Rights Watch interview with Shaheen (pseudonym), Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh,April 10, 2013.[175]Human Rights Watch interview with principal of Sundarpur upper primary school,Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, April 10, 2013.[176]Ministry of Labor and Employment, India, Amended MoLE TaskForce Draft report,February 2013, http://labour.nic.in/upload/uploadfiles/files/Divisions/childlabour/Amended%20MoLE%20Task%20Force%20Draft%20report%20%283%2920912%281%29.pdfAn evaluation of the functioning of the NCLPduring the 10th five-year plan (2002-2007), commissioned by the Ministry ofLabor and Employment, found significant gaps in implementation. Criticalcomponents of the NCLP include child labor surveys, public awareness campaigns,and coordination with other government departments such as health, women andchild development, and rural development to ensure that children and theirfamilies have access to development schemes and services. The evaluation studyfound that the “actual implementation of these components have beenabysmally poor, barring a few exceptions.” Rehabilitation of Child Laborin India, Lessons Learnt from the Evaluation of NCLPs, V. V. Giri NationalLabor Institute, 2010, http://labour.nic.in/upload/uploadfiles/files/Divisions/childlabour/50484185b20f2NCLP_Book_Final_Published_2011_.pdf[177]Human Rights Watch interview with Seema (pseudonym), Sampatchak block, Patnadistrict, Bihar, July 13, 2013.[178]National Family Health Survey III, 2005-2006, http://www.rchiips.org/nfhs/a_subject_report_gender_for_website.pdfThe Indiangovernment has failed to stop this practice despite numerous efforts, includingpassing the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006, No. 6 of 2007, http://www.childlineindia.org.in/CP-CR-Downloads/Child%20Marriage%20Act%202006.pdf.[179]Human Rights Watch interview with Seema (pseudonym), Sampatchak block, Patnadistrict, Bihar, July 13, 2013..[180]According to the National Council for Rural Labour, there are about 10 millionseasonal migrants in rural areas alone. Informal estimates put this number atabout 30 million. Conservative estimates put the number of children aged 6 to 14years accompanying their parents at about 20 percent of the adult seasonal migrantpopulation, or some 6 million. Smita, “Distress Seasonal Migration andits Impact on Children’s education,” Consortium for Research onEducational Access, Transitions and Equity, Funded by DFID, May 2008, http://www.childmigration.net/files/create_08.pdfIt is well accepted by the governmentthat child migrants form a large part of the workforce in several major sectorssuch as construction, brick kilns, small industries, domestic work, and farmwork. National Advisory Council Working Group on Education, Ensuring the Rightto Education of Excluded Children, 2012, http://www.rtemaharashtra.org/downloads/excludedrep.pdf[181]The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, No. 35 of2009, section 9(k), http://www.azimpremjifoundation.org/sites/default/files/userfiles/files/RTE-Act.pdf[182]India’s 12th five-year plan recommended that child laborsurveys should specifically gather information on migration of children. Itsaid residential schools should be opened in all metropolitan areas and megacities and also in every district. It recommended that enrollment in theseschools be open throughout the year given the irregular flow of migrants, and thatthe scheme be implemented as part of the National Child Labor Project put inplace to combat child labor. Planning Commission, Government of India, Workinggroup for social inclusion of vulnerable group like child labor and bonded andmigrant labor in the 12th five-year plan (2012-2017), http://planningcommission.nic.in/aboutus/committee/wrkgrp12/wg_vulnerable_groups.pdf[183]National Commission for Protection of Child Rights, “Monitoring theRights of Vulnerable Migrant Children with Trafficking Point of View,”Approach Paper, 2013,http://www.ncpcr.gov.in/Monitoring%20the%20Rights%20of%20Migrant%20Children.pdf(accessed March 19, 2014).[184]Human Rights Watch interview with Bhagyalakshmi Rao of Mobile Creches, NewDelhi, May 13, 2013.[185]Human Rights Watch interview with Narayan Reddy, Gadwal, Mahbubnagar district,Andhra Pradesh, January 25, 2013.[186]Planning Commission, Government of India, Working group for social inclusion ofvulnerable group like child labor and bonded and migrant labor in the 12thfive-year plan (2012-2017), http://planningcommission.nic.in/aboutus/committee/wrkgrp12/wg_vulnerable_groups.pdf[187]Anubhuti Vishnoi, “A few RTE hits, many misses by states,” IndianExpress, March 27, 2013,http://www.indianexpress.com/news/a-few-rte-hits-many-misses-by-states/1093785/0(accessed June 25, 2013).[188]Human Rights Watch interview with teacher (name withheld), Venkumpeth village,Gadwal mandal, Mahbubnagar district, Andhra Pradesh, Jan 22, 2013.[189]Human Rights Watch interview with Rajendra Prasad, senior coordinator, M VFoundation, Hyderabad, January 21, 2013.[190]Human Rights Watch interview with Samar (pseudonym) at a brick kiln in Pindrablock, Varanasi district, Uttar Pradesh, April 9, 2013.[191]Human Rights Watch interview with principal, government primary school inPindra block, Varanasi district, Uttar Pradesh, April 9, 2013.[192]Human Rights Watch interview with Reema (pseudonym), Mobile Creches center,construction site in Gurgaon, Haryana, May 28, 2013.[193]Human Rights Watch interview with Geeta Rawat, teacher at Mobile Crechescenter, construction site in Gurgaon, Haryana, May 28, 2013.[194]Human Rights Watch interview with Mita (pseudonym), Yemmiganur mandal, Kurnooldistrict, January 28, 2013.[195]Ministry of Human Resource Development and Department of School Education andLiteracy, Government of India, Report of the Committee on Implementation of theRight of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 and the ResultantRevamp of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, April 2010, http://ssa.nic.in/quality-of-education/rte-reporting-by-anil-bodia-committee(accessed July 1, 2013).[196]Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India, 2011 SSA Frameworkfor Implementation based on Right to Education Act 2009, Chapter 4, http://www.upefa.com/upefaweb/admin/myuploads/SSA_Frame_work_%28revised%29_9-6-2011.pdf[197]District Information System for Education, “Elementary Education inIndia, Analytical Tables 2011-12,” http://www.dise.in/Downloads/Publications/Publications%202011-12/Analytical%20Tables%202011-12.pdf[198]Human Rights Watch interview with a teacher (name withheld), Azamgarh, UttarPradesh, April 16, 2013.[199]Human Rights Watch interview with a principal, Barigaon village, Azamgarhdistrict, Uttar Pradesh, April 16, 2013.[200]Human Rights Watch interview with children, Bishenpur Pakri village, PhulwariSharif block, Patna district, Bihar, July 15, 2013.[201]Interview with principal of a primary school, Phulwari Sharif block, Patnadistrict, Bihar, July 15, 2013.[202]Human Rights Watch interview with Rajesh’s mother, Mittenchak village,Patna district, Bihar, July 12, 2013.[203]Human Rights Watch interview with a principal, Barigaon village, Azamgarhdistrict, Uttar Pradesh, April 16, 2013.[204]Bihar Elementary School Education Committee Act, 2011, No. 12 of 2o11, http://www.taxandlawdirectory.com/content/bihar-elementary-school-education-committee-act-2011comprise six toseven members that include the elected ward member of the gram panchayat (localauthority), the principal or head teacher, and the mothers of children who arethe best academic performers from a few chosen grades. Each mother represents adifferent caste category: general category, scheduled caste, extremely backwardclass, backward class, and Scheduled Tribe (in gram panchayats in whichScheduled Tribes constitute 5 percent or more of the population). The wardmember acts as chairperson while one mother among the members is elected as secretary.[205]Human Rights Watch interview with a teacher from government primary school,Varanasi city, Uttar Pradesh, April 10, 2013.[206]Human Rights Watch interview with principal of Lodhi school no. 2, Sonbhadradistrict, Uttar Pradesh, April 18, 2013.[207]Human Rights Watch interview with principal of a government primary school,Mahbubnagar district, Andhra Pradesh, January 22, 2013.[208]Human Rights Watch interview with Rajendra Prasad, senior coordinator, M VFoundation, Hyderabad, January 21, 2013.[209]Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India, 2011 “SSAFramework for Implementation based on Right to Education Act 2009,”Chapter 9.[210]A study conducted by the Centre for Child and the Law at the National LawSchool in Bangalore to assess the implementation of the RTE at the panchayatlevel found serious gaps. The study looked at Bannikuppe panchayat comprising 26villages/habitations in Ramanagar District in rural Karnataka. It found thatrequisitions made by SMCs to the panchayat received very little or noattention. It recommended that school development plans be created through thedemocratic processes of SMCs and that SMCs have complete freedom to identifythe needs of the school, with the government stepping in to fulfil therequirements. This would enable the SMCs to promote holistic development plansas specified in the Education Act. Dr. VP Niranjanaradhya and Abhinav Jha, “Rightof Children to Free and Compulsory Education ACT –Miles to Go…ACase Study of a Gram Panchayat,” Centre for Child and the Law, NationalLaw School of India University, Bangalore, April 2013, http://www.nls.ac.in/ccl/cclmedia/ER/miles.pdf(accessed April 11, 2014).[211]The Centre for Child and the Law study found that panchayat members received noinformation about the Right to Education Act or its rules, and had no ideaabout its structure or operation. The study also noted that teachers were nottrained in the Right to Education Act, no senior person from the central or stategovernment ever came to monitor the implementation of the RTE, the panchayatreceived no grant specifically to carry out the provisions of the act, and thatmonitoring of schools did not take place because of a tacit understandingbetween teachers and the cluster resource persons who monitor the school. DrNiranjanaradhya V P and Abhinav Jha, “Right of Children to Free andCompulsory Education ACT –Miles to Go…A Case Study of a GramPanchayat,” Centre for Child and the Law, National Law School of IndiaUniversity, Bangalore, April 2013, http://www.nls.ac.in/ccl/cclmedia/ER/miles.pdf(accessed April 11, 2014).[212]HumanRights Watch interview with gram panchayat chief Prem Paswan, Sampatchak block,Patna district, July 13, 2013.[213]Human Rights Watch discussion with community members in a village in panchayatChati, Patna district, July 14, 2013.[214]Signed testimony dated July 7, 2011; copy on file at Human Rights Watch.[215]Human Rights Watch interviews with members of People’s VigilanceCommittee on Human Rights (a nongovernmental organization based in Varanasi,Uttar Pradesh), April 15, 2013; Education Department documents related to theinvestigation including signed testimony of the village chief, writtentestimonies of children, and notices from the district basic education officer.Copies of which are on file at Human Rights Watch.[216]Human Rights Watch community discussion, Narsipalli, Uyallawada block, Kurnooldistrict, Andhra Pradesh, January 29, 2013.[217]NationalAdvisory Council, Working Group on Right to Education, “Monitoring,Accountability and Grievance Redress Mechanisms for The Right toEducation,” January 2013, http://nac.nic.in/press_releases/rte_gr_reco.pdf[218]Ibid.[219]The Right of Citizens for Time Bound Delivery of Goods and Services andRedressal of their Grievances Bill, 2011http://www.prsindia.org/billtrack/the-right-of-citizens-for-time-bound-delivery-of-goods-and-services-and-redressal-of-their-grievances-bill-2011-2125/(accessed December 15, 2013). The bill was introduced in Lok Sabha in December2011. It was then referred to the Department Related Standing Committee onPersonnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice (Chairperson: Mr. ShantaramNaik). The committee’s report was submitted on August 30, 2012.[220]RTE Forum, “Status of Implementation of the Right of Children to Free andCompulsory Education Act, 2009: YearThree(2012-13),” draft report, April 2013, http://www.rteforumindia.org/sites/default/files/RTE%20Forum%20Draft%20Stocktaking%20Report%202013.pdf(accessed October 29, 2013).[221]Human Rights Watch interview with Vandana Prasad, former head of the RTEmonitoring cell at the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights,Delhi, August 30, 2013.[222]These guidelines were prepared by Human Rights Watch as part of a civil societyconsultation in collaboration with Centre for Social Equity and Inclusion andNational Campaign for Dalit Human Rights, New Delhi, December 19, 2013.Related ContentApril 22, 2014News ReleaseIndia: Marginalized Children Denied EducationUse Monitoring, Redress Mechanisms to Keep Pupils in SchoolApril 22, 2014News ReleaseIndia: Marginalized Children Denied EducationRegion / CountryAsia IndiaProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch