United States: A World Leader In Executing Juveniles, Human Rights Watch Report, March 1995United States: A World Leader In Executing JuvenilesHuman Rights Watch Report, March 1995Related MaterialMore on The Death Penalty in the U.S.A.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONSHuman Rights Watch opposes the impositionof the death penalty on all criminal offenders in all circumstances becauseof its inherent cruelty. In addition, Human Rights Watch is concerned thatthe death penalty is most often carried out in a discriminatory manneron racial, ethnic, religious or political grounds. Furthermore, the inherentfallibility of all criminal justice systems assures that even when fulldue process of law is respected, innocent persons are sometimes executed.Because an execution is an irrevocable violation of the right to life,such miscarriages of justice can never be corrected.Human Rights Watch strongly opposes theimposition of the death penalty on offenders whose crimes were committedwhen they were below the age of eighteen. The United States is a worldleader in executing juvenile offenders.1Few other countries on which the Human Rights Watch Children's Rights Projecthas information can match its record. Nine juvenile offenders have beenexecuted in the United States since the death penalty was reinstated in1976, and executions of juvenile offenders are on the rise - four of thenine were executed during the last six months of 1993. In addition, morejuvenile offenders sit on death row in the United States than in any othercountry.2In most countries, execution of juvenileoffenders is increasingly rare. More than seventy countries which retainthe death penalty by law have abolished it for offenders under eighteenyears of age. In 112 nations, the execution of minors is prohibited bytreaty or legislation.3However, nine countries have carried out such executions in the last fifteenyears, including: Bangladesh (one execution)4,Barbados (one)5,Iran (an unknown number)6,Iraq (although the total number is unknown, at least thirteen childrenwere executedbetween November and December 1987)7,Nigeria (one)8,Pakistan (four)9,Saudi Arabia (one)10,Yemen (one)11,and the U.S.A. (nine).12The United States continues to executejuveniles in clear contravention of international agreements and standardsprohibiting such executions. These international standards recognize thatthe death penalty, "with its uniquely cruel and irreversible character,is a wholly inappropriate penalty for individuals who have not attainedfull physical or emotional maturity at the time of their actions."13Recommendations:Human Rights Watch recommends that:· The United States abolish thedeath penalty in federal and state laws;· responsible authorities, stateand federal, commute all death sentences now outstanding;· as a step toward abolition, theUnited States enact legislation to end the death penalty for persons whocommitted the crimes for which they were convicted when they were undereighteen years of age; and prosecutors, state and federal, refrain fromseeking the death penalty in juvenile offender cases;· the United States rescind itsreservation to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rightsregarding capital punishment for juvenile offenders; and· the United States ratify the UnitedNations Convention on the Rights of the Child without reservation to theprohibition of the imposition of death sentences for persons under eighteenyears of age at the time of their offense.INTERNATIONAL AND NATIONALLEGAL STANDARDSInternational LawInternational agreements and standardson the death penalty unequivocally prohibit the use of death sentencesfor offenders who were under eighteen years of age at the time of the offensefor which they were convicted. Several international and regional humanrights instruments contain clear dictates against the use of the deathpenalty for juvenile offenders, including: the International Covenant onCivil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the American Convention on Human Rights(ACHR), the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), and the U.N.Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice of 1986(also known as the "Beijing Rules"). In addition, the U.N. Economic andSocial Council adopted a series of safeguards in 1984 guaranteeing therights of those facing the death penalty and ruling out the death penaltyfor those under eighteen years of age at the time of the offense. In 1989,the U.N. Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection ofMinorities adopted Resolution 1989/3 which urged countries still applyingthe death penalty to juvenile offenders to take legislative and administrativesteps to end this practice.The ICCPR states in article 6(5) that "thesentence of death shall not be imposed for crimes committed by personsbelow eighteen years of age." Similarly, the American Convention on HumanRights, article 4(5), orders that "capital punishment shall not be imposedupon persons who, at the time the crime was committed, were under 18 yearsof age." The U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child, adopted in November1989, provides at article 37(a) that "[n]either capital punishment norlife imprisonment without possibility of release shall be imposed for offensescommitted by persons below 18 years of age." Article 17(2) of the BeijingRules states: "Capital punishment shall not be imposed for any crime committedby juveniles." Number three of the safeguards adopted on May 25, 1984 bythe U.N. Economic and Social Council reads as follows: "Persons below 18years of age at the time of the commission of the crime shall not be sentencedto death."14The death penalty standards of the treatieslisted above are binding upon signatory countries and are widely adheredto in practice. Moreover, at least seventy-two countries have domesticlegislation that prohibits the execution of persons for crimes committedwhen they were below eighteen years of age.15United States LawIn 1988, the Supreme Court held that offenderswhose crimes were committed before the age of sixteen may not be executedpursuant to a capital punishment statute that specifies no minimum age.16The Court's rationale for this decision was based upon the premise thatthe Eighth Amendment (prohibiting cruel and unusual punishment) requires"special care and deliberation in decisions that may lead to the impositionof [the death penalty]."17The Court explained that in enacting a statute authorizing capital punishmentfor murder without setting any minimum age, and in separately providingthat juvenile defendants may be treated as adults in some circumstances:[t]here is a considerable risk that theOklahoma legislature either did not realize that its actions would havethe effect of rendering 15-year-old defendants death eligible or did notgive the question the serious consideration that would have been reflectedin the explicit choice of a some minimum age for death eligibility.18The Court concluded that because the availableevidence suggests a national consensus forbidding the imposition of capitalpunishment for crimes committed before the age of sixteen, petitioner andothers whose crimes were committed before that age "may not be executedunder the authority of a capital punishment statute that specifies no minimumage at which the commission of a capital crime can lead to the offender'sexecution."19This ruling by the Supreme Court standsas good law today. Currently, no state which has a minimum age limit inits death penalty statute permits executions for crimes committed whilebelow the age of sixteen.20However, the Court has not decided whether a death penalty statute permittingthe execution of juveniles under sixteen years of age would be per se unconstitutional.21Thus, there is no ruling to prevent a state from legislating in the futureto introduce a minimum age of fifteen or below in its capital punishmentstatute.In 1989, the Supreme Court held that theEighth Amendment prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment doesnot prohibit the use of the death penalty for crimes committed at age sixteenor seventeen.22The majority opinion stressed that in determining what constitutes a violationof the Eighth Amendment - namely, conduct that violates "evolving standardsof decency"23- the Court looked only to U.S. standards of decency (as indicated by federaland state laws) and not to the sentencing practices of other countriesthat do not impose the death penalty for juvenile offenders. 24The dissent, however, argued that one objective indicator of contemporarystandards of decency is the fact that "within the world community, theimposition of the death penalty for juvenile crimes appears to be overwhelminglydisapproved."25This Supreme Court ruling also remains good law.Arguments that the death penalty for juvenilesis unconstitutional have focused primarily on the Eighth Amendment's prohibitionof cruel and unusual punishment. In Supreme Court cases regarding the useof the death penalty on adults, arguments have been made that executionsviolate additional constitutional guarantees of equal protection and substantivedue process. The Supreme Court has rejected both arguments.26To date, the Supreme Court has not heard arguments on these constitutionalissues in juvenile death penalty cases.The Equal Protection Clause of the FourteenthAmendment to the United States Constitution provides that "[n]o state shall. . . deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection ofthe laws."27This clause has been interpreted to mean that classes of people may betreated differently, but that the difference in treatment must be rationallyrelated to a legitimate government interest.28In Wilkins v. Missouri, the American Society for Adolescent Psychiatryargued unsuccessfully in an amicus brief that the practice of separatingsixteen- and seventeen-year-olds from other minors and subjecting themto execution violates the Equal Protection Clause by failing to bear arational relationship to a legitimate governmentinterest.29The Supreme Court has determined that deterrence and retribution are legitimatepurposes for imposing capital punishment;30the brief argued, however, that sixteen- and seventeen-year-olds, likeother minors, lack the maturity and experience to be as blameworthy asadult offenders, and that their adolescent sense of indestructibility makesthem poor candidates for deterrence.31Substantive due process, according to theSupreme Court, requires the Court to determine whether a practice so "shocksthe conscience" as to be violative of guarantees implicit in the Constitution.32For example, the Court, in Rochin v. California, found that forcibleextraction of the contents of a suspect's stomach in order to obtain evidenceviolates due process because such conduct "shocks the conscience" and offends"a sense of justice."33Though the Supreme Court has rejected the argument that executions of adultsby current methods are so painful and degrading as to "shock the conscience"and violate due process,34the use of current execution methods on juvenile offenders has yet to bechallenged before the Supreme Court as violative of substantive due process.Legal scholars have argued the validity of this constitutional challengein articles and commentaries.35Thirty-eight states and the federal governmenthave statutes providing the death penalty for certain forms of murder.Fourteen of these jurisdictions (34 percent) have expressly chosen eighteenas the minimum age at the time of the crime for death penalty eligibilityin their statutes.36Four states (11 percent) have chosen age seventeen as the minimum.37The remaining twenty-one death penalty jurisdictions use sixteen as theminimum age, either through a statute (nine states)38or through a court ruling (twelve states).39Thirteen American jurisdictions do not have the death penalty at all: Alaska,District of Columbia, Hawaii,Iowa, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota,North Dakota, Rhode Island, Vermont, West Virginia, and Wisconsin.40The imposition of this most severe punishmenton juvenile offenders contrasts with U.S. laws in several other areas thatrecognize that minors are not fully mature, and therefore are less ableto exercise good judgment and restraint. In all states, the minimum agefor voting or sitting on a jury is eighteen. In forty-nine states, theage of majority is at least eighteen. Most states impose several otherrestrictions on those under eighteen; including, for example, the rightto purchase alcohol and gamble, and to marry without parental consent.Such age-based classifications "reveal much about how our society regardsjuveniles as a class, and about societal beliefs regarding adolescent levelsof responsibility."41Moreover, these civil laws indicate that society views those under eighteenas needing special treatment and protection, and recognizes their lesserresponsibility. This recognition should be reflected in the criminal lawas well, and supports the argument for abolishing the death penalty forjuvenile offenders. As the Supreme Court recognized in Eddings v. Oklahoma:[Y]outh is more than a chronological fact.It is a time and condition of life when a person may be most susceptibleto influence and to psychological damage. Our history is replete with lawsand judicial recognition that minors, especially in their early years,generally are less mature and responsible than adults. Particularly duringthe formative years of childhood and adolescence, minors often lack theexperience, perspective and judgment expected of adults. Even the normalsixteen year old customarily lacks the maturity of an adult.42United States Compliance With InternationalLawThe United States government signed boththe ICCPR and the American Convention on Human Rights in 1977 and ratifiedthe ICCPR in September 1992. The U.S. made reservations, however, to article6 of the ICCPR, which states that death shall not be imposed upon thosewho were under eighteen years of age at the time of their crimes. The U.S.reservation to the Covenant reserves the prerogative to use capital punishmentto the extent that it is permitted under the U.S. Constitution.43The U.S. is the only country that has entered a formal reservation concerningthe execution of juveniles. Moreover, the following countries are on recordopposing this U.S. reservation as undermining the purpose of the covenant:Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,Spain and Sweden.44The U.S. signed the Convention on the Rights of the Child on February 16,1995. However, this convention has not yet beensent to the Senate for ratification.President Bush refused to sign the convention during his years in office.He stated the reason behind his refusal as follows: "it [the convention]is contrary to some state laws, because it prohibits certain criminal punishment,including the death penalty, for children under age eighteen."45Though the United States has not ratifiedthe American Convention on Human Rights or the Convention on the Rightsof the Child and has not enacted implementing legislation for the ICCPR,46it is still bound as a signatory not to act in a manner that would defeatthe purpose of the treaties.47International legal scholars have argued that this prohibits the U.S. fromcommitting acts which would themselves contradict the object or purposeof the treaty - i.e., that the U.S. is bound not to impose the death penaltyon juvenile offenders.48The United States is also bound by customaryinternational law, which is derived from the general acceptance by countriesof established practices which are followed out of a sense of legal obligation.Such law is binding on all nations, without the necessity of their expressconsent. The virtually universal ban on the death penalty for juveniles,it can be argued, qualifies as a norm of customary international law.49Thus, the United States continues to violate customary international laweach time it executes a child offender. This is especially ironic sincethe U.S. speaks strongly about the need for international respect for humandignity and human rights and is "commonly acknowledged to be a principal[state] ancestor of the contemporary idea of rights."50The United States has faced strong internationalcondemnation for its continued execution of juvenile offenders. The Inter-AmericanCommission on Human Rights decided on March 27, 1987 that the U.S. Governmenthad violated provisions of the American Convention on Human Rights andthe American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man by permittingthe execution of two persons, Terry Roach andDalton Prejean, convictedof crimes committed before they were eighteen years of age.51The Commission found the U.S. to have violated human rights standards applicablein the inter-American system, even though the U.S. had not ratified theAmerican Convention on Human Rights. The Commission held that the ruleprohibiting execution of juvenile offenders had acquired the authorityof jus cogens,52a norm of international law from which no derogation is permitted.53Moreover, these two violations attractedinternational protests against the United States. On January 9, 1986, theSecretary General of the Organization of American States cabled GovernorDick Riley of South Carolina urging him to stay the execution of TerryRoach. He appealed to the governor to "follow the current tendency of almostall the countries of this hemisphere" and stay the execution for "humanitarianreasons." Then-Secretary General of the U.N., Javier Perez de Cuellar,also appealed to the governor to grant clemency to Roach.54The impending execution of Dalton Prejean in Louisiana similarly resultedin worldwide protests in 1990. Amnesty International, the European Parliament,and the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) all urged Louisiana GovernorBuddy Roemer to set aside the execution. Over one thousand letters appealingfor clemency, many from overseas, flooded the governor's office in theweek prior to the execution.55CHARACTERISTICS OF JUVENILEOFFENDERS CONDEMNED TO DEATHStatistical OverviewNine executions have been imposed on offenderswhose crimes were committed as juveniles in the last twenty-one years,representing 4 percent of total executions since 1973.56Periods on death row awaiting executions in recent years have ranged fromsix to sixteen years; no juvenile offenders have been executedwhile stillunder eighteen in the United States.57Moreover, all executed juvenile offenders since 1973 were at least seventeenyears of age when their crime was committed. The last individual executedfor a crime committed at an age younger than seventeen was Leonard Shockley,who was sixteen at the time of the crime and who was executed in Marylandon April 10, 1959.58According to Bureau of Justice statistics,a total of 137 juvenile death sentences have been handed down since 1973,representing 2.5 percent of total death penalty sentences imposed on alloffenders.59Only forty-one (30 percent) of these sentences remain currently in force.Nine (7 percent) resulted in execution and eighty-seven (64 percent) werereversed on appeal.60Two-thirds of the 137 juvenile death sentences were imposed on individualswho were seventeen years old at the time of their offenses; the other one-thirdwere imposed on individuals who were sixteen or fifteen years old at thetime of their crimes. Of the nine executions of juvenile offenders thathave been carried out since 1973, five executed offenders were white, threewere African-American, and one was Latino.61Only ten states have imposed more thanfive such sentences, and almost all offenders sentenced to death have beenmale.62Texas and Florida lead all other states in this area. Between January 1973and October 1994, Texas imposed twenty-eight sentences on juvenile offenders,and Florida imposed eighteen such sentences. Mississippi, the state withthe third highest rate of death sentences for juveniles, imposed nine deathsentences during this time.63Most recently, in September 1994, two seventeen-year-old Houstonteenagerswere sentenced to death for their roles in the gang rapes and murders oftwo teen-age girls in June 1993. The jury took less than fifteen minutesto hand down the sentence for one of the juveniles.64Characteristics of Juvenile OffendersExecuted or on Death RowEvidence suggests that many juvenile offenderson death row suffered from inadequate judicial proceedings and legal representation.In many cases, the defendant's youth was not presented as a mitigatingfactor at the sentencing phase of the trial or was rejected by the trialcourt. This contradicts a Supreme Court ruling that "the chronologicalage of a minor is itself a relevant mitigating factor of great weight."65It also is contrary to a Supreme Court ruling in Lockett v. Ohiothat the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments require the sentencing judgeor jury to consider any circumstances that might be presented in mitigationbefore choosing between a life or death sentence.66In other cases, trial courts rejected evidence of the defendant's deprivedor abused background as irrelevant at the sentencing hearing, also in violationof Lockett v. Ohio.67Evidence suggests that a large majorityof juvenile offenders sitting on death row or already executed sufferedfrom acutely deprived backgrounds:68were seriously physically and/or sexually abused; regularly abused drugsor alcohol from an early age; have parents with histories of alcoholism,drug abuse, and mental illness; suffer from mental illness or brain damage;or are of below-average intelligence or mentally retarded. However, inmany of these cases, the juries which heard their cases were not informedof this background information and, thus, were not able to consider thejuvenile's mental capacity or background as mitigating factors againsta possible death sentence. Furthermore, in many cases the defendant's youngage at the time of the crime was not mentioned or fully considered as amitigating circumstance at the sentencing hearing.69A study of juvenile offenders on death row, conducted in 1986 and 1987by a team of psychiatrists and neurologists, concluded that juveniles whohave committed capital offenses are "uniquely vulnerable" and lack thematurity or insight to recognize the importance of psychiatric or neurologicalsymptoms to their defense.70Therefore, they are dependent on family testimony for assistance in preparingtheir defense, though their families most often are unable to provide thesupport and aid these adolescents need.Mitigating factors of youth, a troubledbackground and mental and emotional disabilities are inordinately importantin the cases of juveniles accused of capital crimes. Because they havenot yet reached maturity, these juveniles have not had the opportunityto develop their personalities and overcome the cruelties and sufferingof their childhoods.71This exacerbates the general tendency of children to be less capable ofcontrolling their emotions, less mature in their judgment and sense ofresponsibility, less capable of seeing the consequences of their actionsand more vulnerable to influences by others.72Thus, psychiatrists have found that "homicidal adolescents" cannot andshould not be considered as responsible as adults for their offenses.73Furthermore, the Supreme Court has recognized that "youth crime as suchis not exclusively the offender's fault; offenses by the young also representa failure of family, school, and the social system, which share responsibilityfor the development of America's youth."74That the mitigating factors of youth and reduced responsibility in generalare not always presented before the courts, and even if presented, oftendo not prevail, illustrates the arbitrary nature of the process. In capitalcases, this arbitrariness has unique and irreparable consequences.Amnesty International has prepared a summaryof findings in twenty-three juvenile death penalty cases from sentencingreports, appeals filed, court judgments, clemency petitions, and psychiatrictestimony.75Their findings demonstrate the mitigating circumstances present in mostjuvenile death penalty cases - circumstances that often were not recognizedor considered at trial or during sentencing.In at least fourteen cases, Amnesty Internationalfound evidence of mental illness or brain damage. In six cases, prisonershad long histories of psychiatric illness or mental disorders dating fromearly childhood. Though all fourteen defendants were found competent tostand trial, there was evidence in many cases that the psychiatric evaluationswere inadequate. Eleven prisoners had an intelligence quotient below 90.Four of the juveniles fell within a borderline mentally retarded range,and one was significantly mentally retarded. Two were illiterate at thetime of trial.Furthermore, most of the juveniles wererepresented by court-appointed attorneys or public defenders who spentlittle time preparing these cases for trial. In nine cases, the lawyershandling the appeals found important mitigating evidence that had not beengiven at trial or at the sentencing hearing. Information on the defendant'smental illness, mental retardation, or abusive childhood often was notpresented because the trial lawyer had failed to conduct an adequate investigationinto the juvenile's background or psychiatric history. In several cases,lawyers failed to get adequate pre-trial psychiatric evaluations despitea juvenile's history of mental disorder. Some lawyers blamed this failureon a lack of funds.76Case HistoriesAn in-depth look at several death penaltycases highlights the level of mitigating circumstances present in juvenileoffender cases. Even more disturbing is the fact that most of these mitigatingfactors are not considered at trials or sentencing hearings.David Blue: Blue, an African-Americanmale, is on death row in Mississippi; he was sentenced on April 12, 1993.77Blue was seventeen years old at the time he committed the crime of robberyand murder in June of 1992.78Blue's co-defendants, all older than he, pleaded to lesser charges andtestified against Blue. Their testimony was uncorroborated. All chargesagainst these co-defendants have since been dropped.79Blue grew up in extreme poverty: his familycontained twenty-one people who lived in a small house with no beds. Hewas determined to be mentally retarded at age four by mental health officials.80Joseph John Cannon: Cannon, a whitemale, remains on death row in Texas.81He was seventeen years old at the time he committed the robbery and murderfor which he was convicted.82In 1989, Cannon's lawyers requested a stay of execution on the groundsof insanity and incompetency to be executed. Cannon's jury was told hewas illiterate and only seventeen years old at the time of his crime; however,they were not informed of his extensive psychiatric problems. Tests beforeand after Cannon's trial show him to be disturbed and immature for hisage.83He has been on anti-depressants for most of his life, and he has an IQof 79 (borderline mentally retarded).84Cannon has a history of injury and abuse.At age four he was hit by a truck and suffered a fractured skull, brokenleg, and perforated lungs. He was in the hospital for eleven months. Whenreleased, Cannon was placed in an orphanage by his mother. The head injuryleft him hyperactive and suffering from a speech impediment that preventedhim from speaking clearly until age six.85Cannon was expelled from school in the first grade because of learningdisabilities and received no other formal education. Before he was tenyears old he began to sniff glue, solvent and gasoline. At age ten he wasdiagnosed with organic braindamage resulting from this solvent abuse. Healso was "diagnosed as schizophrenic and treated in mental and psychiatrichospitals from an early age."86Amnesty International's report on the Cannoncase presents further evidence of Cannon's tortured upbringing:Cannon was severely sexually abused byhis stepfather (his mother's fourth husband) when he was seven and eight;and was regularly sexually assaulted by his grandfather between the agesof 10 and 17. In one of his many psychiatric interviews Cannon told a doctorthat he could not remember anything good that ever happened to him. Hesuffered from severe depression and has been treated with anti-depressantdrugs for most of his life. He attempted suicide at the age of 15 by drinkinginsect spray.87Though Cannon suffered from severe depressionand a history of psychiatric disorders, attempts to have him committedto a state mental institution failed because of the long waiting listsat such institutions.88At the time of his crime, Cannon was high on marijuana, unidentified pills,and whiskey.Cannon has reportedly adapted well to thestructure of prison life: he has not suffered any behavioral problems,has learned to read and write, and is taking Bible classes by correspondence.89Ron Chris Foster: Foster, an African-Americanmale, was convicted of capital murder during the course of a 1989 armedrobbery and was sentenced to death in January of 1991.90At the time of his crime, Foster was seventeen years old.91Foster was convicted by a predominantlywhite jury (nine white jurors and three black jurors). The trial recordindicates that the state used six of its ten peremptory challenges to removeblack males from the jury.92Foster's co-defendant, who was indicted with Foster for capital murder,testified against Foster at trial in exchange for the right to plead guiltyto being an accessory after the fact,93a crime that carries a maximum sentence of five years in Mississippi.94Notably, the prosecution withheld its end of the pleabargain until Foster'sco-defendant completed his testimony against Foster.95This co-defendant testimony was uncorroborated.96Foster was raised in poverty by illiterateparents. During the trial, the district attorney made fun of Foster's fatherfor being illiterate.97Foster is mentally disabled; he suffered two significant head injuriesat the age of twelve and dropped out of school in the eighth grade. Moreover,medical reports detail that Foster has a below-average IQ.98William Holley: Holley, a whitemale, remains on death row in Mississippi for a crime he committed on July12, 1992 at age seventeen.99Holley was sentenced to death on March 3, 1993 for robbery and murder.100Holley grew up in a single-parent family.His mother was very young when he was born, and he was raised part of thetime by his grandparents. None of Holley's relatives attended his trial.101Holley had a history of suicide attempts back to his early childhood, thoughhis lawyers failed to bring this fact, or his young age, to the jury'sattention at the sentencing hearing. Furthermore, at the time of the crime,Holley had just moved to Mississippi from Chicago; he had been living inMississippi for under a year. Holley's two co-defendants, both of whompled to lesser charges and one of whom testified against him, were long-timelocal residents.102Levi James Jackson: Levi James Jackson,a white male, was sentenced to death on January 26, 1994 in Pima County,Arizona. Jackson was sixteen years old at the time he committed the car-jackingand murder for which he was convicted.103Jackson grew up in a troubled home anda "dysfunctional family" -- Jackson's family history was "traumatic, disruptiveand marked by abandonment."104His father was totally immersed in a religious cult;his mother neglectedand abused him, telling Jackson he was an unwanted and unplanned-for child,beating him physically, and emotionally abandoning him at an early age.105When Jackson was seven or eight years old, his mother left the family andhis father married his mother's sister.106Jackson lived with his father and former aunt, though he still saw hismother occasionally. It was at this time that Jackson began getting intotrouble. He had several minor brushes with the law and a few stints injuvenile court.107Jackson was in trouble in school -- often fighting with other students.108However, Jackson's probation officer spoke well of him and stated thatwhen Jackson was serving probation, his behavior improved as a result ofthe structure in his life and the attention and feedback he was receiving.109Jackson moved out of his father's houseat age sixteen and started living with two older men. It is believed, thoughnot substantiated, that Jackson was prostituting himself to cover his rentand living expenses, since he was not working at the time.110These two older men were with Jackson at the time of his crime and tookpart in the car-jacking. One man turned state's witness and received alighter sentence; the other has also been sentenced to death.111Evidence given at trial established that Jackson was prodded by these twomen to commit murder. Both encouraged Jackson to shoot the victim, tauntinghim that he "didn't have the heart" to kill.112Jackson is believed to suffer from braindamage, though no complete mental evaluation has been run on him to date.His trial lawyer failed to present any of the above evidence at trial,including Jackson's troubled background and young age.113Frederick Lashley: Frederick Lashley,an African-American, was executed by the state of Missouri on July 28,1993. Lashley was seventeen years old at the time of his crime which qualifiedhim as an "adult" in the eyes of Missouri law.114Lashley was high on phencyclidine ("PCP") when he killed his cousin, whowasalso his foster mother, in the course of robbing her of fifteen dollarsand her car. This cousin had reared Lashley from the time he was two yearsold, until a few weeks before the killing.115Lashley was abandoned by his natural motherand beaten by his natural father as an infant and young child. He starteddrinking heavily when he was ten and had been suicidal from an early age,requiring psychiatric care. At the time of the murder, Lashley was livingon the streets. Lashley's case was his trial lawyer's first capital murdertrial, and this lawyer admits he had not received any training in deathpenalty litigation at the time of Lashley's case.116Dalton Prejean: The state of Louisianaexecuted Dalton Prejean by electrocution in May 1990 for the murder ofa police officer.117He was seventeen years old at the time of the crime. Although an African-Americanmale,118Prejean was tried by an all-white jury; the judge changed the trial locationto a predominantly white area and the prosecutor excluded all four prospectiveblack jurors from the jury panel.119Prejean's youth was not mentioned as apossible mitigating factor at his sentencing hearing. The jury was notinformed of his state of extreme intoxication at the time of his crime,nor were they informed of his history of childhood neglect and abuse, mentalillness and brain damage.120One member of Prejean's jury made an appeal for clemency shortly beforePrejean's execution, claiming she would have voted against death and fortreatment if she had known of this mitigating evidence: "I would, if Ihad another opportunity, vote against the death penalty in favor of institutionalization.I am entering my plea for a stay of execution and a reassessment of penalty."121This was significant, because under Louisiana's law, a jury's vote fordeath must be unanimous. If a single juror votes against the death penalty,the sentence must be life without parole.Amnesty International's report on Prejean'scase illustrates the psychiatric disorders from which he suffered duringchildhood and at the time of his crime. Amnesty reports:Dalton Prejean was found to be borderlinementally retarded with a full-scale IQ of 71. Tests performed in 1984 indicatedthat Prejean also suffered from organic brain damage which impaired hisability to control his impulses when under stress.122Prejean was confined to various institutionsin Louisiana between 1972 and 1976.123He was diagnosed as suffering from schizophrenia and depression. In 1974,when Prejean was fourteen, doctors conducted another psychiatric evaluationof Prejean and recommended "a lengthy confinement [in a mental hospital],followed by transfer to permanent facilities."124Despite their finding that Prejean was "a definite danger to himself andothers," he was released from this institution without supervision in 1976,though doctors cautioned that Prejean must have "adequate supervision"in "a fairly stable environment."125Within seven months, Prejean killed the police officer.126Heath Wilkins: A state of Missouricourt sentenced Heath Wilkins, a white male, to death on June 27, 1986,for fatally stabbing a woman during the robbery of a liquor store.127The court accepted Wilkins' plea of guilty and his waiver of his rightto counsel and to a jury trial, even though there was evidence regardingWilkins' mental health that suggested he was not competent to make thesedecisions. Moreover, Wilkins was only sixteen years old at the time ofhis offense.128At present, he is still on death row in Missouri.129According to the state-appointed psychiatristwho prepared an evaluation on Wilkins at the request of the Missouri SupremeCourt, Wilkins had a very negative upbringing:Mr. Wilkins . . . was raised in a ratherpoor socioeconomic environment [and] reportedly had an extremely chaoticupbringing during his childhood. He was physically abused by his mother;sometimes the beatings would last for two hours. . . . Mr. Wilkins' motherworked at night and slept during the day; thus the children were left aloneat night by themselves.130According to the Missouri Capital PunishmentResource Center:Wilkins was subjected to severe emotionaland physical abuse as a child. Confined to his room for long periods oftime, he was given drugs as a small child and was beaten frequently andseverely by his mother for minor infractions. Before the age of ten, Wilkinshad attempted suicide and had attempted to poison his mother. At the ageof ten, Wilkins was admitted to a mental health center; the diagnosis indicatedsevere depression with homicidaland suicidal ideation and possible childhoodpsychosis. . . . [The] recommendation [of the center was for] intensivepsychotherapy.131Instead, at age eleven, Wilkins was transferredto the Butterfield Youth Farm. He lived there for the next three years.At age fourteen, Wilkins was transferred to a psychiatric facility forchildren where the staff predicted that a major psychotic breakdown wasimminent.132Six months later, however, Wilkins wasreleased from the hospital "against the recommendation of treating physicians."133Wilkins was shuffled between foster homes and his mother's home; eventually,he ended up living on the street with a group of runaway children. Wilkinsused drugs and alcohol almost continuously. Often he went without any sleepor food for days, and he began to steal for money.134On the day of his crime, Wilkins had consumed a large quantity of alcoholand had taken the drug lysergic acid diethylamide ("LSD").135Wilkins' present attorney has developedconsiderable evidence to prove Wilkins was incompetent to plead guiltyand to waive his rights to an attorney and a jury trial.136In addition, a state-appointed forensic psychiatrist diagnosed Wilkinsafter his trial and concluded that he had a "conduct disorder, undersocialized-aggressivetype" with a borderline personality disorder that made him aggressive andself-destructive when faced with stressful situations.137Wilkins' natural father was committed to a mental institution in Arkansaswhen Wilkins was a boy. Wilkins' brother was diagnosed to be sufferingfrom schizophrenia and was admitted to a mental hospital at a young age.138PROFESSIONAL AND LEGAL VIEWSA significant body of professional opinionin the United States has rejected the use of capital punishment in juvenileoffender cases. In 1983, the American Bar Association's House of Delegatesadopted a resolution opposing in principle the use of capital punishmentfor anyone convicted of an offensecommitted while under eighteen yearsof age.139The association stressed that "justifications" for the use of capital punishmenton adults "lose much of their persuasiveness when applied to an adolescent'scase."140For example, retribution or "legal vengeance" against children for theircrimes "seems quite beyond justification."141Also, according to the association, capital punishment does not act asa deterrent for children: "[T]hreatening a child with death does not havethe same impact as threatening an adult with death."142The resolution concludes: "[S]uch irreversible giving up upon a personeven before they emerge from childhood is squarely in opposition to thefundamental premises of juvenile justice and comparable socio-legal systems."143In 1988, the National Council of Juvenileand Family Court Judges passed a resolution opposing the death penaltyfor offenses committed while under eighteen years of age. As early as 1962,the Model Penal Code drafted by the American Law Institute contained arecommendation that the death penalty not be used for persons whose crimeswere committed when they were under eighteen. And, in 1971, the NationalCommission on Reform of Federal Criminal Laws stated its position thateighteen should be the minimum age at the time of the offense for the deathpenalty.144A number of professional and religiousorganizations have opposed the death penalty for minors in amicus curiaebriefs to the Supreme Court. For example, in Stanford v. Kentucky,briefs against the imposition of the death penalty were filed by the ChildWelfare League of America, the National Parents and Teachers Association("PTA"), the National Council on Crime and Delinquency, the American Societyfor Adolescent Psychiatry, and the American Orthopsychiatric Association.In Thompson v. Oklahoma, briefs were filed on behalf of the petitionerby: the American Bar Association, the American Law Institute, Amnesty International,the International Human Rights Law Group, the National Legal Aid and DefenderAssociation, the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, andthe American Society for Adolescent Psychiatry. The Child Welfare Leagueof America filed briefs on behalf of Thompson in their own name with theNational PTA, the National Council on Crime and Delinquency, the Children'sDefense Fund, the National Black Child Development Institute, the NationalYouth Advocate Program, and the American Youth Work Center.In addition, lawyers, judges, and otherlegal professionals recognize that death row conditions in the United Statesare especially harsh and very different from conditions in the generalprison population.145Unlike inmates in the general prison population, death row inmates in moststates do not have access to prison work, vocational or training programs,or educational classes. Death row residents typicallyexperience a lackof exercise, poor diet, small quarters, social isolation, strained familyrelations, and infrequent family visits. Death row inmates spend a greatmajority of time in their cells.146The solitude and lack of programmed activities is especially hard on thejuvenile inmates. Though rehabilitation is considered "inapplicable," juvenileoffenders often spend years in such conditions before having their sentencesreduced to life-sentences on appeal.147Thus, they could have benefitted from rehabilitation earlier on in theirprison sentences. The Federal District Court of Louisiana has held that"[c]onfinement for long periods of time without the opportunity for regularoutdoor exercise does, as a matter of law, constitute cruel and unusualpunishment in violation of the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution."148Similarly, the 9th Circuit has held that a prisoner's complaint concerninginadequate exercise is a valid eighth amendment claim.149* * *This report was written by Shannon Hill,a consultant to the Human Rights Watch Children's Rights Project, and editedby Lois Whitman, director of the Project, and Michael McClintock, deputyprogram director of Human Rights Watch.Human Rights Watch Children's RightsProjectHuman Rights Watch is a nongovernmentalorganization established in 1978 to monitor and promote the observanceof internationally recognized human rights in Africa, the Americas, Asia,the Middle East and among the signatories of the Helsinki accords. It issupported by contributions from private individuals and foundations worldwide.It accepts no government funds, directly or indirectly. Kenneth Roth isthe executive director; Cynthia Brown is the program director; Holly J.Burkhalter is the advocacy director; Gara LaMarche is the associate director:Juan E. Méndez is general counsel; Susan Osnos is the communicationsdirector; and Derrick Wong is the finance and administration director.Robert L. Bernstein is the chair of the board and Adrian W. DeWind is vicechair. Its Children's Rights Project was established in 1994 to monitorand promote the human rights of children around the world. Lois Whitmanis the director and Michelle India Baird is counsel.1The phrase "juvenile offender" is used in this report to indicate individualswhose crimes were committed when they were below the age of eighteen.2Amnesty International, United States of America: The Death Penalty andJuvenile Offenders (New York: Amnesty International, 1991), p. 2. Thisreport was updated as of July 1994. Amnesty International, United Statesof America: The Death Penalty and Juvenile Offenders, Updates As of July1994 (New York: Amnesty International, 1994). See also, MichaelSpillane, "The Execution of Juvenile Offenders: Constitutional and InternationalLaw Objections," University of Missouri-Kansas City Law Review,vol. 60, Fall 1991, p. 113.3United Nations, Member States and Their Positions on the Death Penaltyfor Crimes Committed by Persons Below 18 Years of Age (New York: UnitedNations, 1994).4One execution of a minor was reported in Bangladesh in 1986. U.N., MemberStates. This was in direct violation of Bangladesh's treaty obligationsunder the Convention on the Rights of the Child. U.N., Member States.5Barbados has since raised the minimum age for executions to eighteen years.U.N., Member States.6According to the International Children's Rights Monitor, threegirls ages fourteen, fifteen, and sixteen were accused of "sympathies withthe opposition" and executed at Shiraz in mid-1983 after one and a halfyears in prison. The youngest children on whom death sentences have beencarried out in Iran in the last ten years, about whom we have information,were only eleven years old - a girl in Isfahan and a boy in Fasa. InternationalChildren's Rights Monitor, vol. 11, no. 1(1984), p.7. These judicially-orderedexecutions violate Iran's treaty obligations under the ICCPR and the Conventionon the Rights of the Child, as well as its own national legislation, whichprohibits the execution of minors. U.N., Member States.7U.N., Member States. These executions violate Iraq's obligationsunder the ICCPR, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and its ownnational laws which do not permit the execution of minors. U.N., MemberStates.8Amnesty International reports that the sentencing of juveniles to deathin Nigeria has occurred since 1990, though the specific number of juvenilessentenced and/or executed is unknown. Amnesty International also reportsthat at least one execution of a juvenile was carried out in Nigeria between1980 and 1987. Amnesty International, Death Penalty and Juvenile Offenders,p. ii. Nigeria's execution of a person below eighteen years of age violatesthe ICCPR and the Convention on the Rights of the Child, both of whichNigeria has signed and agreed to follow. Furthermore, Nigeria's laws permitthe execution of persons seventeen years and older, which is an expresscontradiction of both of these international treaties. U.N., MemberStates.9These four executions have been carried out since December 1985. U.N.,Member States. They are in direct violation of the Convention onthe Rights of the Child, which Pakistan has ratified. Furthermore, Pakistan'snational laws are in contradiction with these treaties because they expresslypermit the execution of persons who have reached puberty. U.N., MemberStates.10U.N., Member States. This execution took place in 1992 and was indirect conflict with Saudi Arabia's domestic law which prohibits the executionsof minors. U.N., Member States. Saudi Arabia has not ratified anyinternational instruments prohibiting the executions of juvenile offenders.11U.N., Member States. The most recent judicially-ordered executionof a child in Yemen was in 1993. The offender was thirteen years old atthe time of his execution. The execution was in violation of the U.N. Conventionon the Rights of the Child, which Yemen ratified in 1991, and the ICCPR,which Yemen also has ratified. Human Rights Watch/Middle East, "Yemen:Human Rights in Yemen During and After the 1994 War," A Human RightsWatch Short Report, vol. 6, no. 1, October 1994, p.29.12NAACP Legal Defense Fund, Death Row, U.S.A. (New York: NAACP LDF,1994). There may be additional executions of which we are unaware.13Amnesty International, Death Penalty and Juvenile Offenders, p.1.14U.N. ECOSOC Council, Resolution 1984/50 (May 25, 1984).15U.N., Member States.16Thompson v. Oklahoma, 487 U.S. 815 (1988).17Ibid., p. 854.18Ibid., p. 857.19Ibid., pp. 857-58.20Victor Streib, The Juvenile Death Penalty Today: Present Death Row InmatesUnder Juvenile Death Sentences and Death Sentences and Executions for JuvenileCrimes, January 1, 1973 to October 15, 1994 (Cleveland: Cleveland MarshallCollege of Law, October 1994), p. 4.21Thompson v. Oklahoma, p. 817.22Stanford v. Kentucky, 492 U.S. 361, 380 (1989).23The Supreme Court has emphasized that in determining what constitutes "crueland unusual punishment" under the Eighth Amendment the Court "must drawits [the Eighth Amendment's] meaning from the evolving standards of decencythat mark the progress of a maturing society." Rhodes v. Chapman,452 U.S. 337 (1981). In Rhodes v. Chapman, the Supreme Court appliedthe Eighth Amendment to a challenged prison condition for the first time.Ibid., pp. 344-45.24Stanford v. Kentucky, p. 369.25Ibid., p. 390.26The Supreme Court rejected the equal protection argument that the deathpenalty violates the Fourteenth Amendment because racial considerationsinfluenced decisions of federal courts to sentence convicted persons todeath. McCleskey v. Kemp, 479 U.S. 806 (1987).Attempts to have current methods of executionbanned as too "shocking to the conscience" and thus violative of substantivedue process have also failed. See Glass v. Louisiana, 471 U.S. 1080(1985); Louisiana ex rel. Francis v. Resweber, 329 U.S. 459 (1947);Gray v. Lucas, 710 F.2d 1048 (5th Cir.), cert. denied, 463 U.S.1237 (1983).27U.S. Constitution amendment XIV, s. 1.28Laurence H. Tribe, American Constitutional Law (2d ed. 1988), p.1440.29Amicus Brief for the American Society for Adolescent Psychiatry and theAmerican Orthopsychiatric Association, Wilkins v. Missouri, 492U.S. 361 (1989). As cited in Michael J. Spillane, "The Execution of JuvenileOffenders: Constitutional and International Law Objections," Universityof Missouri-Kansas City Law Review, vol. 60, Fall 1991, p. 113.30Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 183 (1976).31Adolescent Psychiatry Brief, pp. 21-22.32Rochin v. California, 342 U.S. 165, 172 (1952).33Ibid., p. 172.34See footnote 28 above.35Michael Spillane, Execution of Juvenile Offenders, p. 113.36The fourteen jurisdictions are: California, Colorado, Connecticut, Illinois,Kansas, Maryland, Nebraska, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Ohio, Oregon,Tennessee, and the Federal Government.37Georgia, New Hampshire, North Carolina, and Texas.38Alabama, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, Nevada, Oklahoma,and Wyoming.39Arizona, Arkansas, Delaware, Florida, Idaho, Montana, Pennsylvania, SouthCarolina, South Dakota, Utah, Virginia, and Washington.40Streib, Juvenile Death Penalty Today, p. 5.41Justice Brennan writing for the dissent in Stanford v. Kentucky,p. 2988.42Eddings v. Oklahoma, 455 U.S. 104 (1982).43The reservation is as follows: "The United States reserves the right, subjectto its Constitutional constraints, to impose capital punishment on anyperson (other than a pregnant woman) duly convicted under existing or futurelaws permitting the imposition of capital punishment, including such punishmentfor crimes committed by persons below eighteen years of age." Reservation(2), U.S. Reservations, Understandings, and Declarations to the ICCPR(October 5, 1992).44United Nations, "Reservations, Declarations, Notifications and ObjectionsRelating to the ICCPR and the Optional Protocols Thereto" (New York: UnitedNations, 1994), ICCPR/C/2/Rev.4, pp. 40, 49-57.45Timothy J. McNulty, "U.S. Out in Cold, Won't Sign Pact on Children," ChicagoTribune, September 30, 1990, p. 4.46The United States deposited its instrument of ratification in 1992, butCongress has yet to enact implementing legislation for the ICCPR. One reservationthe U.S. made when it ratified the ICCPR was to state that the treaty isnot self-executing in this country. To be incorporated as part of domesticlaw, the United States Congress must first adopt enacting domestic legislation.47Under Article 18 of the Vienna Convention of the Law of Treatises, a countryis obliged to refrain from acts which would defeat the object and purposeof a treaty when it has signed the treaty, subject to ratification. U.N.Doc. A/CONF. 39/27 (1969). Though the U.S. is not party to the Vienna Convention,it is still bound to follow its guidelines because the Convention is regardedas being "declaratory of existing international law," and thus binds evennon-parties. Henkin, Pugh, Schachter, and Smit, International Law387 (2d ed. 1987).48Julian Nicholls, "Too Young To Die: International Law and the Impositionof the Juvenile Death Penalty in the United States," Emory InternationalLaw Review, vol. 5, Fall 1991, pp. 617-22.49Ibid., p. 620.50Louis Henkin, The Age of Rights (New York: Columbia University Press,1990), p. 65.51Donald T. Fox, "Inter-American Commission on Human Rights Finds UnitedStates in Violation," American Journal of International Law, vol.82, July 1988, p. 601. The Commission held that these executions violatedArticle I of the American Declaration of the Rights of Man, which states:"Every human being has the right to life...." The Commission also concludedthat the United States has violated Article II of the American Conventionof Human Rights (right to equality before the law) by failing to preemptactions of its constituent states regarding the right to life and thusallowing "a pattern of legislative arbitrariness." Fox, "United Statesin Violation," p. 602.52"Jus cogens" is a norm of customary international law that is "acceptedand recognized by the international community of states as a whole as anorm from which no derogation is permitted...." Vienna Convention on theLaw of Treaties, art. 53, U.N. Doc. A/CONF. 39/27 (1969). Jus cogens isan even higher standard of law than "ordinary" customary law since absolutelyno derogation is permitted.53Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, Res. 3/87, Case No. 9647, OAS/Serv.L./VII.71,Doc. 9 (1987), as cited in Fox, "United States in Violation," p. 601.54Nicholls, "Too Young To Die," p. 619.55Wire Dispatches and Staff Reports, "Top of the News, Nation," WashingtonTimes, May 21, 1990, p. A2. See also, E.J. Dionne Jr., "CapitalPunishment Gaining Favor as Public Seeks Retribution," Washington Post,May 17, 1990, p. A12.56Streib, Juvenile Death Penalty Today, p. 3.57Ibid.58Ibid.59Ibid., p. 6.60Ibid.61Streib, Juvenile Death Penalty Today, p. 3. The discrimination issuesarising in cases involving juveniles are beyond the scope of this paper.However, it is worth noting that of the forty-one juvenile offenders currentlyon death row, nearly two-thirds are minority offenders. Nineteen are African-American(46 percent) and eight are Latino (20 percent). Streib, Juvenile DeathPenalty Today, p. 10.Considerable work has been done concerningdiscriminatory factors in death penalty sentencing and the execution ofthe death penalty in the United States. A 1990 General Accounting Office("GAO") report found that in 82 percent of studies conducted to investigateracial disparities in capital cases, the race of the victim was found toinfluence sentencing. One such study noted that the killer of a white victimwas three times more likely to be sentenced to death than the killer ofa black victim. Moreover, 73 percent of the federal death penalty prosecutionshave been sought against African-American defendants. Half of the remaining27 percent of federal prosecutions have been against Latino defendants.Human Rights Watch and American Civil Liberties Union, Human RightsViolations in the United States (New York: Human Rights Watch, 1993),pp. 135-36.62United States Department of Justice, Sourcebook of Criminal JusticeStatistics 1992, p. 673, Table 6.132 (1993); and United States Departmentof Justice, Capital Punishment 1992, p. 1 (1993). Note, these statisticshave been updated to October 15, 1994 in Streib, Juvenile Death PenaltyToday.63Streib, Juvenile Death Penalty Today, p. 8.64Special to the New York Times, "Death Row for 5th Youth in Two Killings;Families of Victims Happy at Verdicts," New York Times, September25, 1994, p. A36.65Eddings v. Oklahoma, p. 104.66Lockett v. Ohio, 438 U.S. 586 (1978).67Hegwood v. State of Florida, 575 So.2d 170, 173 (1991).68See, e.g., Lawrence Vanore, "The Decency of Capital Punishment forMinors: Contemporary Standards and the Dignity of Juveniles," IndianaLaw Journal, vol. 61, Fall 1986, p. 757.; Amnesty International, DeathPenalty and Juvenile Offenders; and Dorothy Otnow Lewis, M.D., JonathanH. Pincus, M.D., Barbara Bard, Ph.D, Ellis Richardson, Ph.D., Leslie Prichep,Ph.D, Marilyn Feldman, M.A. and Catherine Yeager, M.A., "Neuropsychiatric,Psychoeducational, and Family Characteristics of 14 Juveniles Condemnedto Death in the United States," American Journal of Psychiatry,vol. 145, May 1988.69Amnesty International, Death Penalty and Juvenile Offenders, p.6.70Lewis et al., "14 Juveniles Condemned to Death," p. 584.71Thompson v. Oklahoma, pp. 834-35.72The Supreme Court recognizes this general tendency in several cases, includingBellotti v. Baird, 443, U.S. 622 (1979) and Eddings v. Oklahoma,455 U.S. 104 (1982).73Lewis et al., "Characteristics of 14 Juveniles Condemned to Death," pp.588-89.74Eddings v. Oklahoma, p. 115, n. 11.75Amnesty International, Death Penalty and Juvenile Offenders, pp.4-7.76Ibid., p. 5.77Streib, Juvenile Death Penalty Today, pp. 15, 17.78Ibid.79Human Rights Watch/Children's Rights Project telephone interview with theMississippi Capital Defense Resource Center, November 1994.80Ibid.81Streib, Juvenile Death Penalty Today, p. 13.82Ibid., p. 18.83Amnesty International, Death Penalty and Juvenile Offenders, p.18.84Ibid., p. 19.85Ibid.86Ibid.87Ibid., pp. 19-20.88Ibid., p. 20.89Ibid., p. 19.90Foster v. State of Mississippi, 639 So.2d 1263 (1994).91Streib, Juvenile Death Penalty Today, p. 17.92Foster v. State of Mississippi, p. 1279.93Ibid., p. 1284.94HRW/Children's Rights Project telephone interview with the MississippiCapital Defense Resource Center, November 1994.95Foster v. State of Mississippi, p. 1285.96HRW/Children's Rights Project telephone interview with the MississippiCapital Defense Resource Center, November 15, 1994.97Ibid.98Foster v. State of Mississippi, p. 1303.99Streib, Juvenile Death Penalty Today, p. 15.100Ibid., p. 17.101HRW/Children's Rights Project telephone interview with the MississippiCapital Defense Resource Center, November 15, 1994.102Ibid.103Gabrielle Fimbres, "Trial As Adult Ordered In Killing Here," The TusconCitizen, February 19, 1993.104Sentencing Report for Levi James Jackson, No. CR-40896, Superior Courtof Arizona for the County of Pima, Tuscon, Arizona, January 26, 1994, p.24.105HRW/Children's Rights Project telephone interview with the Arizona CapitalRepresentation Project, October 19, 1994; and Sentencing Report, p. 24.106Sentencing Report, p. 25.107Ibid.108Maria Elena Lopez, "Teen Could Get Death for Slaying, Carjacking," TheTuscon Citizen, January 26, 1994. See also, Maria Elena Lopez,"Slain Woman's Family Grateful Killer Got Death Sentence," The TusconCitizen, January 27, 1994.109HRW/Children's Rights Project telephone interview with Arizona CapitalRepresentation Project, January 21, 1995.110Ibid.111Heather Newman, "Teen's Role in Killing Disputed," The Tuscon Citizen,September 25, 1993.112Mary Bustamante, "Pal: Teen Killed on a Dare," The Tuscon Citizen,January 20, 1994.113HRW/Children's Rights Project telephone interview with Arizona CapitalRepresentation Project, January 21, 1995.114Streib, Juvenile Death Penalty Today, p. 13.115HRW/Children's Rights Project telephone interview with the Missouri CapitalPunishment Resource Center, September 14, 1994.116Ibid.117Streib, Juvenile Death Penalty Today, p. 12.118Ibid.119State of Louisiana v. Prejean, 379 So.2d 240, 247 (1979).120Amnesty International, Death Penalty and Juvenile Offenders, p.35.121Ibid., p. 37.122Ibid., p. 36.123State of Louisiana v. Prejean, p. 248.124Ibid.125Ibid.126Ibid.127Streib, Juvenile Death Penalty Today, p. 17,128HRW/Children's Rights Project telephone interview with the Missouri CapitalPunishment Resource Center, September 14, 1994.129Streib, Juvenile Death Penalty Today, p. 14.130Wilkins v. Missouri, 109 S.Ct 2969, 2992 (1989).131HRW/Children's Rights Project telephone interview with the MississippiCapital Punishment Resource Center, September 14, 1994.132Ibid.133Ibid.134Wilkins v. Missouri, p. 2992.135HRW/Children's Rights Project telephone interview with the Missouri CapitalPunishment Resource Center, September 14, 1994.136Ibid.137Wilkins v. Missouri, P. 2992.138Ibid.139American Bar Association, Criminal Justice Section, Report with Recommendationsto the House of Delegates, Report No. 117A (August 1983).140Ibid., p. 991.141Ibid., p. 990.142Ibid.143Ibid.144Amnesty International, Death Penalty and Juvenile Offenders, p.74.145See Robert Johnson, Condemned to Die: Life Under Sentence ofDeath (New York: Elsevier, 1981).146Barbara Ward, "Competency for Execution: Problems in Law and Psychiatry,"Florida State University Law Review, vol. 14, Spring 1986, pp. 35,38.147Amnesty International, Death Penalty and Juvenile Offenders, p.71.148Sinclair v. Henderson, 331 F.Supp. 1123, 1131 (1971).149Franklin v. State of Oregon, 662 F.2d. 1337, 1346 (9th Circuit 1981).See also, Spain v. Procunier, 600 F.2d. 189, 199 (9th Circuit1979).Vol. 7, No. 2   March 1995