Tobacco’s Hidden Children : Hazardous Child Labor in United States Tobacco Farming | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload the summary: photo featureDownload the appendicesDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload the summary: photo featureDownload the appendicesMay 13, 2014Tobacco’s Hidden ChildrenHazardous Child Labor in United States Tobacco FarmingA 15-year-old girl works on a tobacco farm in North Carolina. July 2013.© 2013 Human Rights WatchMapClick to expand ImageSummaryThe hardest of all the crops we’ve worked in istobacco. You get tired. It takes the energy out of you. You get sick, but thenyou have to go right back to the tobacco the next day.—Dario A., 16-year-old tobacco worker in Kentucky,September 2013I would barely eat anything because I wouldn’t gethungry. …Sometimes I felt like I needed to throw up. …I felt like Iwas going to faint. I would stop and just hold myself up with the tobaccoplant.—ElenaG., 13-year-old tobacco worker in North Carolina, May 2013Children working on tobacco farms in the United States are exposedto nicotine, toxic pesticides, and other dangers. Child tobacco workers often labor50 or 60 hours a week in extreme heat, use dangerous tools and machinery, liftheavy loads, and climb into the rafters of barns several stories tall, riskingserious injuries and falls. The tobacco grown on US farms is purchased by thelargest tobacco companies in the world.Ninety percent of tobacco grown in the US is cultivated infour states: North Carolina, Kentucky, Tennessee, and Virginia. Between May andOctober 2013, Human Rights Watch interviewed 141 child tobacco workers, ages 7to 17, who worked in these states in 2012 or 2013. Nearly three-quarters of thechildren interviewed by Human Rights Watch reported the sudden onset of serioussymptoms—including nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, headaches,dizziness, skin rashes, difficulty breathing, and irritation to their eyes andmouths—while working in fields of tobacco plants and in barns with driedtobacco leaves and tobacco dust. Many of these symptoms are consistent withacute nicotine poisoning.Based on our findings set out in this report, Human RightsWatch believes that no child under age 18 should be permitted to perform workin which they come into direct contact with tobacco in any form, includingplants of any size or dried tobacco leaves, due to the inherent health risksposed by nicotine and the pesticides applied to the crop. The US government, USCongress, and tobacco manufacturing and tobacco leaf supply companies shouldall take urgent steps to progressively remove children from such tasks intobacco farming.In the US, it is illegal for children under 18 to buycigarettes or other tobacco products. However, US law fails to recognize therisks to children of working in tobacco farming. It also does not provide thesame protections to children working in agriculture as it does to childrenworking in all other sectors. In agriculture, children as young as 12 canlegally work for hire for unlimited hours outside of school on a tobacco farmof any size with parental permission, and employers may hire children younger than 12 to work on small farms with written parental consent. Outside of agriculture, theemployment of children under 14 is prohibited, and even 14 and 15-year-olds canonly work in certain jobs for a limited number of hours each day.Tobacco farmed in the US enters the supply chains of atleast eight major manufacturers of tobacco products who either purchase tobaccothrough direct contracts with tobacco growers or through tobacco leaf supplycompanies. These include Altria Group, British American Tobacco, China NationalTobacco, Imperial Tobacco Group, Japan Tobacco Group, Lorillard, Philip MorrisInternational, and Reynolds American. Some of these companies manufacture themost popular brands of cigarettes sold in the US, including Marlboro, Newport,Camel, and Pall Mall. All companies that purchase tobacco in theUS directly or indirectly have responsibilities to ensure protection ofchildren from hazardous labor, including on tobacco farms, in their supplychains in the US and globally.Child tobacco workers interviewed by Human Rights Watch forthis report typically described beginning to work on tobacco farms at age 13,often together with their parents and older siblings. Only very few worked onfamily farms. The children we interviewed were mostly the sons and daughters ofHispanic immigrants, though they themselves were frequently US citizens. Regardlessof employment or immigration status, the children described working in tobaccoto help support their families’ basic needs or to buy essential itemssuch as clothing, shoes, and school supplies. For example, 15-year-old Grace S.told Human Rights Watch why she decided to start working in tobacco farming inNorth Carolina: “I just wanted to help out my mom, help her with themoney.”Most children interviewed by Human Rights Watch wereseasonal workers who resided in states where tobacco was grown and worked onfarms near their homes or in neighboring areas, primarily or exclusively duringthe summer months when tobacco is cultivated. We also spoke to several childrenwho migrated to and within the United States by themselves or with theirfamilies to work in tobacco and other crops. There is no comprehensive estimateof the number of child farmworkers in the US.Tobacco is a labor-intensive crop, and the childreninterviewed described participating in a range of tasks, including: plantingseedlings, weeding, “topping” tobacco to remove flowers, removingnuisance leaves (called “suckers”), applying pesticides, harvestingtobacco leaves by hand or with machines, cutting tobacco plants with“tobacco knives” and loading them onto wooden sticks with sharpmetal points, lifting sticks with several tobacco plants, hanging up and takingdown sticks with tobacco plants in curing barns, and stripping and sortingdried tobacco leaves.Health and Safety Risks inTobacco FarmingChildren interviewed by Human Rights Watch in North Carolina,Kentucky, Tennessee, and Virginia frequently described feeling seriously,acutely sick, while working in tobacco farming. For example, Carla P., 16,works for hire on tobacco farms in Kentucky with her parents and her youngersister. She told Human Rights Watch she got sick while pulling the tops offtobacco plants: “I didn’t feel well, but I still kept working. Istarted throwing up. I was throwing up for like 10 minutes, just what I ate. Itook a break for a few hours, and then I went back to work.” Emilio R., a16-year-old seasonal worker in eastern North Carolina, who plans to study to bean engineer, said he had headaches that sometimes lasted up to two days whileworking in tobacco: “With the headaches, it was hard to do anything atall. I didn’t want to move my head.”Many of the symptoms reported by child tobacco workers areconsistent with acute nicotine poisoning, known as Green Tobacco Sickness, anoccupational health risk specific to tobacco farming that occurs when workersabsorb nicotine through their skin while having prolonged contact with tobaccoplants. Public health research has found dizziness, headaches, nausea, andvomiting are the most common symptoms of acute nicotine poisoning. Though thelong-term effects of nicotine absorption through the skin are unknown, publichealth research on smoking indicates that nicotine exposure during adolescencemay have long-term adverse consequences for brain development. Public healthresearch indicates that non-smoking adult tobacco workers have similar levelsof nicotine in their bodies as smokers in the general population.In addition, many children told Human Rights Watch that theysaw tractors spraying pesticides in the fields in which they were working or inadjacent fields. They often described being able to smell or feel the chemicalspray as it drifted over them, and reported burning eyes, burning noses, itchyskin, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, shortness of breath, redness and swelling oftheir mouths, and headache after coming into contact with pesticides. YanamariaW., 14, who worked on tobacco farms in central Kentucky in 2013 with herparents and 13-year-old brother, told Human Rights Watch, “I was in thefield when they started spraying…. I can stand the heat for a long time,but when they spray, then I start to feel woozy and tired. Sometimes it looks likeeverything is spinning.”While pesticide exposure is harmful for farmworkers of allages, children are uniquely vulnerable to the adverse effects of toxicexposures as their bodies are still developing, and they consume more water andfood, and breathe more air, pound for pound, than adults. Tobacco productioninvolves application of a range of chemicals at different stages in the growthprocess, and several pesticides commonly used during tobacco farming are knownneurotoxins. According to public health experts and research, long-term andchronic health effects of pesticide exposure include respiratory problems,cancer, neurologic deficits, and reproductive health problems.Children also said that they used sharp tools, operatedheavy machinery, and climbed to significant heights in barns while working ontobacco farms. Several children reported sustaining injuries, including cutsand puncture wounds, from working with tools. For example, Andrew N., 16,described an accident he had while harvesting tobacco in Tennessee two yearsearlier: “My first day, I cut myself [on the leg] with the hatchet.… I probably hit a vein or something because it wouldn’t stopbleeding and I had to go to the hospital. They stitched it. … My foot wasall covered in blood.”Many children described straining their backs and taxingtheir muscles while lifting heavy loads and performing repetitive motions,including working bent over at the waist, twisting their wrists to top tobaccoplants, crawling on hands and knees, or reaching above their heads for extendedperiods of time. Bridget F., 15, injured her back in 2013 while lifting sticksof harvested tobacco up to other workers in a barn in northeastern Kentucky:“I’m short, so I had to reach up, and I was reaching up and thetobacco plant bent over, and I went to catch it, and I twisted my back thewrong way.” According to public health research, the impacts ofrepetitive strain injuries may be long-lasting and result in chronic pain andarthritis.Federal data on fatal occupational injuries indicate thatagriculture is the most dangerous industry open to young workers. In 2012,two-thirds of children under the age of 18 who died from occupational injurieswere agricultural workers, and there were more than 1,800 nonfatal injuries tochildren under 18 working on US farms.Nearly all children interviewed by Human Rights Watch saidthat their employers did not provide health education, safety training, orpersonal protective equipment to help them minimize their exposure to nicotinefrom tobacco leaves or pesticides sprayed in the fields and on the plants. Childrentypically used gloves, which they or their parents bought, and large black plasticgarbage bags, which they brought from home, to wear as protection from wettobacco leaves and rain. The experience of Fabiana H., a 14-year-old tobaccoworker in North Carolina, was typical among the children interviewed by HumanRights Watch:I wore plastic bags because our clothes got wet in themorning. … They put holes in the bags so our hands could go through them.It kept some of my clothes dry, but I still got wet. …Then the sun comesout and you feel suffocated in the bags. You want to take them off.Several children reported working in bare feet or socks whenthe mud in the fields was deep and they lacked appropriate footwear.Some children reported that, despite long days workingoutside in the heat, employers did not provide them with drinking water, andmost said that they had limited or no access to toilets, hand-washingfacilities, and shade. Working long hours in high temperatures can placechildren at risk of heat stroke and dehydration, particularly if they do not drinkenough water, do not have access to shade, and are wearing extra clothes toprotect themselves from sunburn and exposure to nicotine and pesticides.Excessively Long Hours, WageProblemsMost children interviewed by Human Rights Watch describedworking long hours, typically between 10 and 12 hours per day, and sometimes upto 16 hours. Most employers allowed children two or three breaks per day, whilesome children told Human Rights Watch that employers did not allow workers totake regular breaks, even when children felt sick or were working in high heat.Martin S., 18, told Human Rights Watch that his employer on a Kentucky farmwhere he worked in 2012 did not give them regular breaks during the work day:“We start at 6 a.m. and we leave at 6 p.m. …We only get one five-minutebreak each day. And a half hour for lunch. Sometimes less.” Many childrentold Human Rights Watch that some employers pressured them to work as quicklyas possible. Some said that they chose to work long hours or up to six or sevendays a week in order to maximize their earnings. In other cases employersdemanded excessive working hours, particularly during the peak growing andharvest periods of the season.Children described utter exhaustion after working long hourson tobacco farms. Elan T., 15, and Madeline T., 16, worked together on atobacco farm after migrating to North Carolina from Mexico with their motherand younger brother. They explained the fatigue they felt after working for 12or 13 hours in tobacco fields: “Just exhaustion. You feel like you haveno strength, like you can’t eat. I felt that way when we worked so much.Sometimes our arms and legs would ache.” Patrick W., 9, described similarfeelings after working long hours with his father, a hired tobacco worker, inTennessee in 2013. “I feel really exhausted,” he said. “Icome in [to the house], I get my [clean] clothes, I take a shower, and thenit’s usually dark, so I go to sleep.”Most children reported earning the federal minimum wage of$7.25 per hour for their work on tobacco farms, though some children were paida fixed rate during certain parts of the season based on the quantity oftobacco they harvested or hung in barns. Some children reported problems withwages including earning less than minimum wage for hourly work, deductions bythe contractor or grower for drinking water or for reasons that were notexplained to them, or because of what they believed was inaccurate recording ofhours by labor contractors.Impacts on EducationMost children interviewed by Human Rights Watch attendedschool full time and worked in tobacco farming only during the summer months,after school, and on weekends. However, a few children who had migrated to theUnited States for work and had not settled in a specific community told HumanRights Watch that they did not enroll in school at all or enrolled in schoolbut missed several months in order to perform agricultural work, including intobacco farming. Some children stated that they occasionally missed school to workin times of financial hardship for their families.International Standards on ChildLaborIn recognition of the potential benefits of some forms ofwork, international law does not prohibit children from working. The InternationalLabour Organization’s (ILO) Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention, whichthe US has ratified, obligates countries to prohibit certain types of work forchildren under age 18 as a matter of urgency, including work that is likely tojeopardize children’s physical or mental health, safety or morals (alsoknown as hazardous labor). The ILO leaves it up to governments to determinewhich occupations are hazardous to children’s health. Several countries,including major tobacco producing countries such as Brazil and India, prohibitchildren under 18 from performing work in tobacco farming. Based on our fieldresearch, interviews with health professionals, and analysis of the publichealth literature, Human Rights Watch has concluded that no child under age 18should be permitted to perform any tasks in which they will come into directcontact with tobacco plants of any size or dried tobacco leaves, due to thehealth risks posed by nicotine, the pesticides applied to the crop, and theparticular health risks to children whose bodies and brains are stilldeveloping.The ILO Worst Forms of Child Labor Recommendation statesthat certain types of work in an unhealthy environment may be appropriate forchildren ages 16 and older “on the condition that the health, safety andmorals of the children concerned are fully protected, and that the childrenhave received adequate specific instruction or vocational training in therelevant branch of activity.” Because exposure to tobacco in any form isunsafe, Human Rights Watch has determined, based on our field investigationsand other research, that as a practical matter there is no way for childrenunder 18 to work safely on US tobacco farms when they have direct contact withtobacco plants of any size or dried tobacco leaves, even if wearing protectiveequipment. Though protective equipment may help mitigate exposure to nicotineand pesticide residues, rain suits and watertight gloves would not completely eliminateabsorption of toxins through the skin and would greatly increasechildren’s risk of suffering heat-related illnesses. Such problemsdocumented by Human Rights Watch in the US seem likely to extend to tobaccofarms outside the United States.Child Labor and US LawUS laws and policies fail to account for the unique hazardsto children’s health and safety posed by coming into direct contact with tobaccoplants of any size and dried tobacco leaves. The Fair Labor Standards Act(FLSA) prohibits children under the age of 16 from engaging in agriculturalwork that the US Secretary of Labor has identified as hazardous. However, the USDepartment of Labor’s (DOL) regulations on hazardous occupations do notinclude any restrictions for any children over age 12 to perform work thatexposes them to contact with tobacco plants and tobacco leaves.In addition, US law regulating all child work in agriculturefails to adequately protect children in a sector determined by the ILO to beone of the most dangerous sectors open to children for work. US law permitschildren to work in agriculture at younger ages, for longer hours, and in morehazardous conditions than children working in all other sectors.Under US law, there is no minimum age for a child to beginworking on a small farm with parental permission. At age 12, a child can workfor any number of hours outside of school on a farm of any size with parentalpermission, and at age 14, a child can work on any farm without parentalpermission. In other sectors, in contrast, employment of children under age 14is prohibited, and children ages 14 and 15 may work only in certain jobs andfor limited hours outside of school. For example, a child working in a fastfood restaurant may only work 18 hours a week when school is in session, whilechildren working in agriculture may work 50 or more hours per week with norestrictions on how early or late they work, as long as it is not during schoolhours.At age 16, children working in agriculture can work in jobsdeemed to be particularly hazardous, including operating certain heavymachinery or working at heights. However, all other working children must be 18to perform hazardous work. For example, in agriculture, children under 16 canwork at heights of up to 20 feet (over one story) without any fall protection,and 16 and 17-year-olds can work at any height without protection. By contrast,in construction, employers must ensure fall protections for any work takingplace over six feet (two meters).Tobacco Product Manufacturers andTobacco Leaf CompaniesAlthough the US government has the primaryresponsibility to respect, protect, and fulfill human rights underinternational law, private entities, including businesses, also haveinternationally recognized responsibilities regarding human rights, includingworkers’ rights and children’s rights. All businesses shouldhave policies and procedures in place to ensure human rights are respected andnot abused, to undertake adequate due diligence to identify and effectivelymitigate human rights problems, and to adequately respond in cases whereproblems arise.In preparation of this report, Human Rights Watch sought toengage 10 companies that source tobacco from the states we visited. Eight ofthose companies manufacture tobacco products (Altria Group, British AmericanTobacco, China National Tobacco, Imperial Tobacco Group, Japan Tobacco Group,Lorillard, Philip Morris International, and Reynolds American), and two areleaf merchant companies (Alliance One International and Universal Corporation).Human Rights Watch sought to understand these companies’ policiesconcerning child labor and other labor rights in their supply chains, as wellas mechanisms for implementing and monitoring these policies. Over the courseof several months before the release of this report, Human Rights Watch sentletters to each of these companies detailing the preliminary findings of ourresearch and recommendations and requesting meetings with company officials.Nine companies responded to Human Rights Watch and statedthat they took steps to prohibit child labor in their supply chains. Only ChinaNational Tobacco did not respond to Human Rights Watch’s letter orrepeated attempts to secure a meeting with company executives.All of the tobacco manufacturing companies andleaf supply merchants that replied to Human Rights Watch expressed concernsabout child labor in their supply chain. Only a few of the companies haveexplicit child labor policies in place. The approaches to child labor inthe supply chain varied from company to company, as detailed below. HumanRights Watch correspondence with these companies is included in an appendix tothis report, available on the Human Rights Watch website.Of the companies approached by Human Rights Watch, Philip MorrisInternational (PMI) has developed the most detailed and protective set ofpolicies and procedures, including training and policy guidance on child laborand other labor issues which it is implementing in its global supply chain. PMIhas also developed specific lists of hazardous tasks that children under 18 areprohibited from doing on tobacco farms, which include most tasks in whichchildren come into prolonged contact with mature tobacco leaves, among otherhazardous work.Several companies stated that in their US operations theyrequired tobacco growers with whom they contract to comply with US law,including laws on child labor, which, as noted above, do not afford sufficientprotections for children. These companies stated that their policies for tobaccopurchasing in countries outside of the US were consistent with internationallaw, including with regard to a minimum age of 15 for entry into work under theILO Minimum Age Convention, with the exception of certain light work, and aprohibition on hazardous work for children under 18, unless national lawsafford greater protections. However, most companies did not specify the tasksthat they consider to constitute hazardous work. Under these standards,children working in tobacco farming can remain vulnerable to serious healthhazards and risks associated with contact with tobacco plants and tobaccoleaves. A number of companies stated that they had undertaken internal and thirdparty monitoring of their supply chains to examine labor conditions, includingthe use of child labor, as defined within the scope of their existing policies.Recognition of Children’sVulnerability and the Need for Decisive ActionFor the last decade, several members of the US Congress haverepeatedly introduced draft legislation that would apply the same protectionsto children working in agriculture that already protect children working in allother industries. However, Congress has yet to enact legislation amending theFair Labor Standards Act to better protect child farmworkers, and federalagencies have not made necessary regulatory changes to address the specificrisks tobacco farming poses to children. In 2012, DOL withdrew proposedregulations that would have updated the decades-old list of hazardousoccupations prohibited for children under age 16 working in agriculture. Theseregulations, had they been implemented, would have prohibited children underage 16 from working in tobacco. At this writing, the US EnvironmentalProtection Agency (EPA) is accepting comments on long-awaited changes to theWorker Protection Standard, a set of safety regulations related to occupationalpesticide exposure. It remains to be seen whether the revised regulations willinclude better protections for child workers.US laws and policies governing child labor in tobacco areinconsistent with or in violation of international conventions on the rights ofchildren. The US government should acknowledge the particular health and safetyrisks posed to children exposed to tobacco plants and tobacco leaves, and takeimmediate action to end all hazardous child labor among children under age 18on tobacco farms. It should also ensure that laws regulating child laborguarantee that the protections afforded to children working in other sectors,including those concerning working hours, work with sharp objects, machinery,heavy loads, and the like, apply to children working in agriculture as well.Companies should create child labor policiesor amend existing policies to state explicitly that all work in which children comeinto contact with all tobacco plants and tobacco leaves is hazardous andprohibited for children under 18. Each company should establish effectiveinternal and third-party monitoring of this policy and other relevant laborpolicies. Given that the international tobacco leaf purchasing markets,including that of the US, often involve third-party suppliers or multiplecompany contracts with individual growers, members of the industry should seekto formulate industry-wide policies prohibiting hazardous child labor ontobacco farms as well as effective monitoring mechanisms. Companies should alsosupport efforts to provide viable alternatives to working in tobacco farming,including programs to provide children in tobacco communities with educationand vocational training.MethodologyThis report is based on interviews with 141 children ages 7to 17 who said they had worked in tobacco farming in the United States in 2012or 2013. During multiple field research trips between May and October 2013,Human Rights Watch interviewed 80 children in North Carolina, 46 in Kentucky,12 in Tennessee, and 3 in Virginia. Eight children worked for less than a fullweek on tobacco farms. A few of the very youngest children—4 out of141—worked with their parents sporadically and without pay. The medianage of the children we interviewed was 15; the median age at which they beganworking in tobacco was 13. All personal accounts reported here, unlessotherwise noted, reflect experiences children had while they were working ontobacco farms in 2012 or 2013.Children interviewed were identified with the assistance ofindividuals and organizations providing legal, health, educational, and socialservices to farmworkers, farm labor contractors, and through outreach by HumanRights Watch researchers in farmworker communities.In addition, Human Rights Watch interviewed three youngpeople ages 18 to 21 who had worked in tobacco as children, and seven parentsof child tobacco workers. Human Rights Watch researchers also conductedinterviews with 36 experts, including representatives of farmworkerorganizations, lawyers, social services providers, healthcare providers, andacademic researchers in tobacco-growing regions in the US. In total, 187 peoplewere interviewed for this report.To supplement formal interviews, researchers spoke with morethan 50 outreach workers, educators, doctors, lawyers, tobacco growers, farmlabor contractors, and representatives of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs)across the US in person and on the telephone. We also spoke with more than 60adult tobacco workers in the course of our research.Two Human Rights Watch researchers, one of whom is fluent inSpanish, conducted the interviews. Interviews were conducted in English orSpanish, at the interviewee’s preference. Most interviews were conductedindividually, though some children were interviewed in small groups of two tofive participants. No interviews were conducted in the presence ofworkers’ employers, such as farm labor contractors or tobacco growers.Interviews took place in a variety of settings includinghomes, worksites, schools, restaurants and other public spaces, outdoors aspart of outreach in farmworker communities, and at religious institutions.Whenever possible, researchers held interviews in private. In a few cases,interviewees preferred to have a family member or another person present.Interviews were semi-structured and addressed conditions for children workingin US tobacco farming, including health, safety, wages, hours, training, andeducation.All children and parents interviewed were informed of thepurpose of the interview, its voluntary nature, and the ways in which theinformation would be collected and used. For interviews taking place duringmealtimes, Human Rights Watch provided food to interviewees. Human Rights Watchdid not provide anyone with compensation in exchange for an interview.Individuals were informed that they could end the interview at any time ordecline to answer any questions without any negative consequences. Participantsprovided oral informed consent to participate and were assured anonymity. Allnames of children and parents interviewed have been changed to protect theirprivacy, confidentiality, and safety. Some individuals approached declined tobe interviewed.Human Rights Watch also analyzed relevant laws and policiesand conducted a review of secondary sources. Detailed state-by-state analysisof applicable labor laws, the enforcement of such laws, litigation, and recentand pending legislative projects in North Carolina, Kentucky, Virginia, andTennessee was undertaken with pro bono assistance from a law firm based in NewYork City.Human Rights Watch researchers obtained relevant US federalstatistics and other information through public record requests to the NationalInstitute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) within the US Centers forDisease Control and Prevention (CDC), the US Department of Labor (DOL), the USDepartment of Agriculture (USDA), and the US Environmental Protection Agency(EPA).Between December 2013 and March 2014, Human Rights Watchsent letters to eight companies that manufacture tobacco products (AltriaGroup, British American Tobacco, China National Tobacco, Imperial Tobacco Group,Japan Tobacco Group, Lorillard, Philip Morris International, and ReynoldsAmerican) and two leaf merchant companies (Alliance One and UniversalCorporation) detailing the preliminary findings of our research and requestingmeetings with company officials. Nine companies responded in writing. Theresults of this correspondence are detailed in the relevant sections of thisreport, and copies of the correspondence can be found in the appendix,available on the Human Rights Watch website. In addition, company officialsfrom several companies met or spoke by phone with Human Rights Watch in 2014.In this report, “child” and “children”are used to refer to anyone under the age of 18, consistent with usage underinternational law.The term “child labor”, consistent withInternational Labor Organization standards, is used to refer to work performedby children below the minimum age of employment or children under age 18engaged in hazardous work.The term “migrant worker” can have variousmeanings and many farmworkers in the US were, at least at some point in theirlives, international migrants. In this report the term “migrant” isused for workers who travel within the US for agricultural work, asdistinguished from “seasonal” workers, defined in this report assettled workers based in one place.I. Tobacco Farming in the UnitedStatesTobacco ProductionTobacco has been cultivated in the United States forcenturies, and commercial tobacco production has been a central part of the NorthAmerican agricultural economy since the 1600s.[1] According to the Foodand Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, in 2012, the US was the fourthlargest producer of unmanufactured tobacco, behind China, Brazil, and India.[2]The total value of tobacco leaf production in the US in 2012 was approximatelyUS$1.5 billion.[3]Tobacco is grown in at least 10 US states, but NorthCarolina, Kentucky, Virginia, and Tennessee account for almost 90 percent ofdomestic tobacco production. Roughly 50 percent of all US-produced tobacco isgrown in North Carolina, 25 percent in Kentucky, and 7 percent in each of Virginiaand Tennessee.[4]In 2007, the last year for which there is relevant data, there were 8,113tobacco farms in Kentucky, 2,622 farms in North Carolina, 1,610 farms inTennessee, and 895 farms in Virginia.[5]Structure of the Tobacco EconomyTobacco growers contract with different types of buyers throughagreements to produce specific amounts of tobacco at set prices. Contractsoften include specific provisions about the type and quality of tobaccoproduced, and standards for production.[6]Many growers contract directly with manufacturers of cigarettes and othertobacco products.[7]Growers also enter into contracts with leaf tobacco merchant companies, whichdo not manufacture tobacco products, but buy, process, pack, and shipunmanufactured tobacco to commercial product manufacturers.[8] Some growersalso have contracts with cooperative organizations in states that werepreviously involved in administering now-obsolete federal price supportprograms, such as the US Tobacco Cooperative. These organizations process andsell tobacco to cigarette manufacturers, and some also produce consumer tobaccoproducts for US markets.[9]Changes in US Policy and Impactson Farms and LaborIn 2004, the Fair and Equitable Tobacco Reform Act endedlongstanding federal tobacco quota and price support programs designed to controlsupply and guarantee a minimum price for US tobacco.[10] Thelaw also established the Tobacco Transition Payment Program (TTPP), known asthe “tobacco buy-out,” to help tobacco quota holders and producerstransition to the free market by providing annual payments for 10 years(2005-2014).[11]The TTPP contributed to contractions in US tobacco farming and productionpreviously underway. By the late 1990s, demand for US tobacco had declinedsharply in domestic and foreign markets due to strong competition frominternational tobacco producers and declines in US consumption of tobaccoproducts.[12]From 1997 to 2007, the number of US farms producing tobacco decreased by 83percent,[13]with volume down by 57 percent from 1997 to 2012.[14]Following the tobacco buyout, many small farmers lefttobacco and transitioned to alternative crops, while larger farms expanded andconsolidated operations.[15]According to a 2010 study by the Center for Tobacco Grower Research, aTennessee-based organization researching tobacco production, economics, andmarkets, following the tobacco buyout, average acreage per tobacco farm in theUS tripled.[16]The study found that as farm size increased, so did the reliance on hired farmlabor relative to unpaid family labor.[17]Tobacco Types, Farming, andCuringThere are several varieties of tobacco grown in the UnitedStates, distinguished and defined by both the characteristics of the leaves andthe manner in which they are harvested and cured.[18] Themost common types of tobacco produced in the US are flue-cured and burleytobacco. Tobacco is a labor-intensive crop, and even with the use oflabor-saving technologies for some production, flue-cured tobacco requiresapproximately 100 hours of labor per acre, and burley tobacco requires 150 to200 hours of labor per acre.[19]The tobacco season generally begins in February or Marchwith cultivation of tobacco seedlings in greenhouses or plant beds. Farmers andworkers plant seeds in trays and tend to them for nearly twomonths—watering, fertilizing, and “clipping” the plantsseveral times, often with mowers suspended over the plants, to keep themuniform in size. In April or May, the seedlings are transplanted into fields.During planting, workers sit facing backwards on a tractor-pulled “transplanter”or “setter.” As the tractor moves through the field, workers loadseedlings into slots in a rotating wheel, and the wheel inserts each seedlinginto a small hole in the ground. Other workers walk behind the setter tostraighten and adjust the plants by hand to ensure proper planting.As the tobacco plants grow, workers dig up weeds with sharphoes and uproot and reposition plants where two tobacco stalks have taken root.By June or July, workers begin “topping” (breaking off largeflowers that sprout at the tops of tobacco plants) and removing“suckers” (nuisance leaves that reduce the yield and quality oftobacco). This process is done entirely by hand and helps to produce larger andmore robust tobacco plants. Farmers and workers apply pesticides and growth regulatorsto tobacco plants at various points in the season (see below for detailedinformation on pesticides used in tobacco farming). After workers have finishedtopping, tobacco plants are left to mature in fields until they are ready to beharvested and dried in a process called “curing.”Flue-Cured TobaccoFlue-cured tobacco is a broad leaf type of tobacco grown inNorth Carolina and other parts of the southeastern US. In 2012, nearly 80percent of US flue-cured tobacco was grown in North Carolina.[20] Flue-curedtobacco is harvested by removing the leaves in a process called“priming,” which involves a series of separate harvests beginningwith the lowest leaves and moving up the stalk. The harvest is done primarilyby machine, though some workers harvest leaves by hand by pulling tobaccoleaves off of the stalks and gathering them under their arms before loadingthem into trucks to be transported to barns for curing.Workers then place harvested leaves into racks or cages andload them into heated curing barns. Leaves are left in curing barns for one totwo weeks, with heat and ventilation carefully controlled, until leaves aredried and ready to be sorted and packed into bales. Workers help to sort leavesand place them in cages where they are compressed into bales with heavymachines called “balers.” The flue-cured tobacco crop is typicallyharvested and cured from mid-July to early October.Burley TobaccoBurley tobacco is a variety of tobacco grown in Kentucky,Tennessee, and other states in the Appalachian US. In 2012, Kentucky produced74 percent of the US burley tobacco crop.[21] Burley tobacco isharvested by the stalk, and the harvest is done primarily by hand in adifficult, labor-intensive process. Workers cut each tobacco plant at the baseof the stalk with a small axe or hatchet (often called a “tobaccoknife”) and then slide them onto wooden sticks equipped with sharp spikesat the end. Workers place six tobacco plants on each stick and leave the sticksin the field to dry for one or two days. Workers then load the sticks of harvested tobacco plants onto flatbed wagons to be transported tobarns for curing.Burley tobacco is dried in open-air barns, without any addedheat, in a process called air-curing. To arrange the tobacco for curing, workersclimb into the rafters of barns, forming several tiers or levels, and passsticks of harvested burley tobacco upward to hang it in the barns to dry.Harvested burley tobacco plants dry in curing barns (or sometimes in makeshiftfield curing structures) for four to eight weeks, when workers take the sticksof tobacco down from the barns and “strip” the leaves off of thestalks by hand. Workers sort and grade tobacco manually, based on the physicalqualities of the leaves (e.g. stalk position, color). The tobacco is thenpackaged into bales for market. The burley tobacco crop is harvested and curedlater typically from mid-August to early December.II. Child Tobacco Workers in theUnited StatesThe National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH)estimates that hundreds of thousands of children under age 18 work in USagriculture each year, but there is no comprehensive estimate of the number ofchild farmworkers in the US. In 2012, farm operators reported directly hiring130,232 children under age 18 to work on crop and livestock farms, and anadditional 388,084 children worked on the farms on which they resided.[22]However, these figures significantly underrepresent the total number ofchildren working in agriculture as they exclude children hired by farm laborcontractors or employed informally.[23]The total number of children who work on tobacco farms each year is alsounknown.[24]Child Tobacco WorkersThe children interviewed by Human Rights Watch for thisreport were overwhelmingly of Hispanic ethnicity. Many children we interviewedwere US citizens, consistent with the findings of a 2013 pilot study of NorthCarolina child farmworkers in which 78 percent were US citizens.[25]Other children we interviewed were born outside of the United States and hadmigrated from other countries with their families, or in some instances, bythemselves. Regardless of the immigration status of children, the parents ofmost children interviewed for this report were living in the US without authorization.Child tobacco workers interviewed by Human Rights Watch described working in adiversity of circumstances. The vast majority worked for hire, employed byofficial or unofficial farm labor contractors, labor subcontractors, or tobaccogrowers. A small number of children that we interviewed worked on farms ownedby family members. Most of the children who stated that they worked on familyfarms also worked for hire on farms owned by other tobacco growers.Most children interviewed by Human Rights Watch resided instates where tobacco was grown and worked on farms near their homes. Thesechildren overwhelmingly attend public school full time in their communities, oftenworking primarily, or exclusively, during the summer months. The median age atwhich children we interviewed began working in tobacco was 13. Some of thesechildren worked together with their parents and siblings; others worked withouttheir parents, sometimes with crews composed almost entirely of children. Manyseasonal child farmworkers in North Carolina told Human Rights Watch that theyworked in tobacco as well as other crops including, variously, sweet potatoes,blueberries, cucumbers, and watermelons.Human Rights Watch also interviewed 16 child migrant workerswho move within the United States to work in different agricultural crops,including tobacco. Some of these children said that they travel with theirfamilies and attend schools in different states, working only during thesummers, after school, and on weekends. Other migrant children stated that theywork year round and do not attend school, as described below.Several children interviewed who had migrated withoutauthorization to the US with their families reported that they had applied foror received deferred action through a federal program designed to provide temporaryreprieve from deportation and employment authorization to individuals under age30 who migrated to the US as children, attended school, have continuouslyresided in the US for a minimum of five years, and met several othereligibility criteria.[26]Human Rights Watch has argued that “deferred action for childhoodarrivals,” by considering a person’s positive attachments to thecountry of residence in deportation decisions, represents a rational, ifincremental, shift in US immigration policy.[27] Human Rights Watch hascalled on the US government to enact more permanent and comprehensiveimmigration reforms.[28]Why Children WorkNearly all of the children interviewed by Human RightsWatch, whether seasonal or migrant, citizens or unauthorized, reported thatthey worked in tobacco to provide for themselves and their families. TheNational Agricultural Workers Survey, a random survey of crop workers in theUS, indicates that farmworkers are overwhelmingly poor: in 2008-2009, the medianannual income among US crop workers was $18,750.[29]A 2008 report from the US Department of Agriculture found poverty amongfarmworkers is more than double that of all wage and salary employees in theUnited States.[30]Most children interviewed by Human Rights Watch for this report started workingin tobacco farming, and in some cases in other crops as well, to earn money fortheir basic needs: clothes, shoes, school supplies. Parents of child workers saidthat their children’s minimum wage earnings helped to supplement meagerfamily incomes.Economic NeedGabriella G., 42, is a mother of six, and five of herchildren have worked in tobacco fields in North Carolina. She moved to NorthCarolina after leaving an abusive partner and is now a single mother. Whenasked why her children started working in tobacco, she said, “What I earnis not sufficient for my family. My children have to work to buy schoolsupplies, clothes, the things you have to pay for at school.”[31]Her daughter Natalie G., 18, started working in tobacco at age 12. She toldHuman Rights Watch why she started working: “I saw what my mom was goingthrough, how tired she was, and we wanted to help. … There was motivationto work because my mom was working and we were alone without her. And seeing mymom come beaten down, sunburned, tired. We were raised not to leave someonebehind.”[32]Natalie’s younger sister, Elena G., also started working in tobacco atage 12. She told Human Rights Watch how she used her earnings: “I wouldgive my mom more than half of my check for the bills. And then I would help herbuy food. And whatever I had left, I’d buy my little brother something. Iwanted to buy clothes, but I didn’t really have the chance to.”[33]Other children described similar reasons for working in tobacco.Raul D., a 13-year-old worker in eastern North Carolina, told Human RightsWatch, “I work so that I have money to buy clothes for school and schoolsupplies, you know, like crayons and stuff. I’ve already bought mybackpack for next year.”[34]Adriana F., 14, works for hire on tobacco farms in Kentucky with her parentsand her four brothers. When asked how she used her earnings, she told HumanRights Watch, “I use the money for school supplies and to go on fieldtrips.” Jerardo S., 11, told Human Rights Watch he started working ontobacco farms in Kentucky to save for his college education, saying, “Itold my mom I would save it for the college or university where I want togo.”[35]Lack of Other OpportunitiesIn addition to economic need, children, particularly thoseliving in the US without authorization, reported working in tobacco becausethey lacked other employment and summer educational opportunities in theirrural communities. Blanca A., like many farmworker children, was born in Mexicoand works without authorization, even though she has lived in the United Statesfor many years. “Most of my friends have jobs in the new sports shop, atMcDonald’s or Bojangles, in the mall selling stuff,” she told HumanRights Watch. “But usually for those jobs they ask for [your] socialsecurity [number].”[36]Claudio G., a 16-year-old unauthorized worker in North Carolina, told HumanRights Watch, “Tobacco is the only job we [unauthorized children] haveduring the summer.”[37]Other children said that they were too young to be hired towork other jobs. Alan F., a 15-year-old worker in eastern North Carolina whohopes to attend college after graduating from high school, told Human RightsWatch that he would continue working in tobacco until he was older.“There’s plenty of jobs, but I mean, I ain’t got theage,” he said. “If I was older, I’d want to be a mechanic orwork in construction or something like that.”[38]Of the nine children interviewed by Human Rights Watch whoworked on tobacco farms owned by family members, most had other careeraspirations. For example, 15-year-old Bradley S., who started working ontobacco farms owned by his father and grandfather in eastern Kentucky at 8,told Human Rights Watch, “When I grow up, I want to be anengineer.”[39]III. Health and SafetyNearly three-quarters of children interviewed by HumanRights Watch in North Carolina, Kentucky, Tennessee, and Virginia, 97 out of133, reported feeling sick—with nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite,headaches, dizziness, skin rashes, difficulty breathing, and irritation totheir eyes and mouths—while working in fields with tobacco plants and inbarns with dried tobacco leaves and tobacco dust.[40] Many reportedbeing exposed to pesticides and to extreme temperatures and unrelenting heatwhile working in tobacco fields. Some stated that they used sharp tools and cutthemselves, or operated heavy machinery and climbed to significant heights, riskingserious injury. Many children described straining their backs and taxing theirmuscles while lifting heavy loads and performing repetitive motions, includingworking bent over at the waist, twisting their wrists to top tobacco plants,crawling on hands and knees, or reaching above their heads for extended periodsof time.Nearly all children interviewed by Human Rights Watch saidthat their employers did not provide health education, safety training, or personalprotective equipment to help them minimize their exposure to nicotine from tobaccoleaves or pesticides sprayed in the fields and on the plants. Some childrenreported that, despite long days working outside in the heat, employers did notprovide them with drinking water, and most said that they had limited or noaccess to toilets, hand-washing facilities, and shade.Based on our field research, interviews with healthprofessionals, and analysis of public health literature, Human Rights Watch hasconcluded that no child under age 18 should be permitted to perform any tasks inwhich they will come into direct contact with tobacco plants of any size or driedtobacco leaves, due to the health risks posed by nicotine, the pesticidesapplied to the crop, and the particular health risks to children whose bodiesand brains are still developing. Thoughprotective equipment may help mitigate exposure to nicotine and pesticideresidues, rain suits and watertight gloves would not completely eliminateabsorption of toxins through the skin and would greatly increasechildren’s risk of suffering heat-related illnesses. As a result, HumanRights Watch has determined that there is no practical way for children to worksafely in the US when handling or coming into contact with tobacco in any form.Sickness while WorkingMore than two out of three children interviewed by HumanRights Watch said that they had felt suddenly, acutely ill while working in fieldsof tobacco plants and performing such jobs as topping, pulling off suckers,weeding, straightening plants, harvesting tobacco, and while working in curingbarns. Children interviewed by Human Rights Watch described working, especiallyin wet conditions—during or after rainfall or in the morning with a heavydew on the tobacco leaves—and becoming severely nauseous, dizzy orlightheaded. Some children said that they also vomited while working. Otherchildren said they suffered severe headaches, and after a day’s work withtobacco, felt a sustained loss of appetite and energy, or had difficultysleeping.Nausea, Vomiting, and Loss of AppetiteChildren in all four states described nausea, vomiting, andloss of appetite while working on tobacco farms. For example, Elena G., a13-year-old seasonal worker living in eastern North Carolina, spent both the2012 and 2013 summers working in tobacco with her mother. She told Human RightsWatch how she felt while topping tobacco:I felt very tired. … I would barely eat anythingbecause I wouldn’t get hungry…We would get our lunch break and Iwould barely eat, I would just drink. …Sometimes I felt like I needed tothrow up. I never did. It had come up my throat, but it went back down.…I felt like I was going to faint. I would stop and just hold myself upwith the tobacco plant.[41]Elena’s mother, Gabriella G. described herdaughter’s condition: “Sometimes I saw that she couldn’t bearit. She was going to faint. She had headaches, nausea. Watching her was sohard. She’s skinny now, but imagine: she was even skinnier then [when shewas working]. She was losing weight.”[42]Yolanda F., a 16-year-old seasonal worker in eastern NorthCarolina, started working on tobacco farms in 2013 with two of her friendsduring their summer break from school. She described how she felt during herfirst days on the job: “My first day I felt dizzy. I felt like I wasgoing to throw up, but I didn’t. I just started seeing differentcolors….I didn’t last through lunch that day.”[43]Child tobacco workers in Kentucky, Tennessee, and Virginiaoften experienced nausea and vomiting while cutting stalks of burley tobaccoduring the harvest. For example, Danielle S., 16, told Human Rights Watch thatshe has been working for hire with her parents and brother on tobacco farmsoutside of Lexington, Kentucky for several years during the summers, afterschool, and on weekends. Danielle said that she got sick while harvestingtobacco in 2013: “It happens when you’re out in the sun. You wantto throw up. And you drink water because you’re so thirsty, but the watermakes you feel worse. You throw up right there when you’re cutting, butyou just keep cutting.”[44]Her brother, age 15, described feeling sick while working in tobacco at ayounger age: “A couple of years ago, I was throwing up in the field. Itook medicine, and then I went back to work.”[45]Ten-year-old Marta W. and her brother Patrick W., 9, workedtogether with their father in 2013 on tobacco farms in Tennessee, about 60miles northeast of Nashville. Several different tobacco growers hire theirfather to harvest tobacco plants and hang them on sticks to dry in barns.Because he is paid a fixed rate for each stick of tobacco plants he harvestsand hangs in a barn, Marta and Patrick work with him to increase his earnings.Patrick told Human Rights Watch about his experience harvesting burley tobaccoin 2013: “I’ve gotten sick. We started cutting [tobacco plants],and I had to go home. I kept on coughing [heaving], and I had to eat crackersand drink some Gatorade…. I threw up a little bit. It took two or threehours before I felt better.” Marta, also describing working in 2013,added, “I felt sick when I went, but I didn’t actually throw upbecause I stayed out of the barn. I felt kind of nauseous. My head feltbad.”[46]Jaime V., 18, said that he felt nauseated while working in the curing barns. Hetold Human Rights Watch, “I worked all the way at the top of the barn,too. It’s just hot up there. The air is humid and the smell [of tobacco]fills your nose and mouth, and you get sick.”[47]Headaches, Dizziness, and LightheadednessChildren told Human Rights Watch that they suffered fromheadaches, dizziness, and lightheadedness while working on tobacco farms.Emilio R., a 16-year-old seasonal worker who hopes to study to be an engineer, saidthat in addition to topping and pulling suckers off tobacco plants, heharvested flue-cured tobacco leaves by hand on farms in eastern North Carolinain 2012. He described that process: “We grab the [tobacco] leaves, putthem under our arm until we have a bundle, then throw them in the truck.”[48]Emilio also said he had headaches that sometimes lasted up to two days duringthe 2012 season: “With the headaches, it was hard to do anything at all.I didn’t want to move my head.”[49] His 17-year-old sister,Jocelyn, also harvested tobacco leaves by hand, and she also said she hadheadaches while working: “I would get headaches sometimes all day. Ithink it was from the smell of the tobacco. I really didn’t likeit.”[50]Miguel T., 12, a seasonal worker in eastern North Carolina, saidthat in July 2013 during his first month working in tobacco fields, he got aheadache while topping tobacco: “I got a headache before. It washorrible. It felt like there was something in my head trying to eat it.”[51]Cameron M., 18, and his brother Leonardo M., 15, migrated tocentral Kentucky from Guatemala with their father in the winter of 2013. Theyworked together for several months on tobacco farms, stripping dried tobacco leavesoff of sticks after they had cured in barns. Both boys reported headaches anddizziness while stripping dried tobacco leaves off of sticks. Leonardo M. toldHuman Rights Watch, “I felt like I was spinning in circles, and my headached. I felt awful.”[52]Pablo E., a 17-year-old worker in Kentucky described dizziness as “asymptom of the work.”[53]Jacob S., a 14-year-old tobacco worker in Virginia, described similar symptoms:“I get a little bit queasy, and I get lightheaded and dizzy. Sometimes Ifeel like I might pass out. It just feels like I want to fall over.”[54]SleeplessnessSome children described recurrent sleeplessness. Jaime V.,18, started working in tobacco in Tennessee when he was 14 after migrating tothe United States with his cousin. At first, he did not enroll in school,instead working full-time for a contractor doing agricultural work. Describinghis first summer working in tobacco four years ago, he told Human Rights Watch,“I got sick. I couldn’t sleep at night. I felt dizzy.”[55]Luciano P., 18, worked on tobacco farms in Kentucky: “When I got sick,when I tried to go to sleep, I couldn’t go to sleep. I was feeling tired,but I couldn’t sleep. Sometimes you throw up. I had headaches.”[56]Acute Nicotine Poisoning and Exposure to Nicotine amongChildrenTaken together, the symptoms reported to Human Rights Watchby child tobacco workers in North Carolina, Kentucky, Tennessee, and Virginiaare consistent with acute nicotine poisoning, known as Green Tobacco Sickness, anoccupational health risk specific to tobacco farming. Green Tobacco Sicknessoccurs when workers absorb nicotine through their skin while having prolongedcontact with tobacco plants.[57]Researchers have documented dizziness, headaches, nausea, and vomiting as themost common symptoms of acute nicotine poisoning.[58]In some cases, these symptoms may be linked to or exacerbated by pesticideexposure or working in conditions of high heat and high humidity withoutsufficient rest, shade, and hydration.[59]Acute nicotine poisoning generally lasts between a few hoursand a few days,[60]and although it is rarely life-threatening, severe cases may result indehydration which requires emergency treatment.[61]Children are particularly vulnerable to nicotine poisoning because of theirsize, and because they are less likely than adults to have developed atolerance to nicotine.[62]The long-term effects of nicotine absorption through the skin have not beenstudied,[63]although the long-term effects of consuming tobacco products containingnicotine has been well documented.Working in wet, humid conditions increases the risk ofpoisoning as nicotine dissolves in the moisture on the leaf and is more readilyabsorbed through the skin. A public health study conducted in North Carolinacollected dew samples from tobacco plants on four farms and found nicotine inall samples, ranging from 33 to 84 micrograms per milliliter of dew.[64]The researchers estimated that on humid days, farmworkers could be exposed to600 milliliters or more of dew, containing between 20 and 50 milligrams ofnicotine.[65]However, the percentage of nicotine in dew that is absorbed through the skin isnot known. A 2007 review of public health studies found that non-smoking adulttobacco workers have similar levels of nicotine in their bodies as smokers inthe general population, althoughindividual variation would be expected based upon the useof personal protective equipment, season and contact with tobacco, andabrasions on the skin, as well as other factors.[66]Working in excessive heat and engaging in heavy physical activity, which aretypical for workers, including child workers, engaged in tobacco farming in theUnited States, also increase the risk of nicotine poisoning as the increase insurface blood flow to help reduce body temperature facilitates nicotineabsorption.[67]Though public health research has most often looked atnicotine poisoning among adult workers handling mature tobacco leaves, nicotineis present in tobacco plants and leaves in any form. According to Dr. ThomasArcury, director of the Center for Worker Health at Wake Forest School ofMedicine, “Nicotine is part of the plant. The tobacco plant, by itsnature, contains nicotine from the time it’s a seedling to theend.”[68] As aresult, added Arcury, any task that requires the handling of tobacco in anyform may expose workers to nicotine.[69]Nicotine may affect human health in distinct ways dependingon how it enters the body—whether absorbed through the skin, inhaled, oringested.[70] Thoughthe long-term effects of nicotine absorption through the skin are unknown,public health research on smoking indicates that nicotine exposure duringchildhood may have long-lasting consequences. According to the US SurgeonGeneral’s most recent report, “The evidence is suggestive thatnicotine exposure during adolescence, a critical window for brain development,may have lasting adverse consequences for brain development.”[71]Skin Conditions, Respiratory Illness, and Eye and Mouth IrritationChildren interviewed by Human Rights Watch reported skinconditions, difficulty breathing, sneezing, and eye, nose, mouth, and throatirritation while working on tobacco farms.Skin ConditionsSome children reported itchy or burning skin or skin rasheswhile working in tobacco farming, particularly while topping and suckering.Children often noted that their skin irritations were worse when they wereworking in wet clothing or without gloves, particularly if working in thoseconditions for extended periods of time.Diego T. and Rafa B., both 16, who worked together ontobacco farms in eastern North Carolina in the summer of 2013, told HumanRights Watch that they suffered from skin problems while working in tobacco.Diego said, “Your skin gets irritated. It burns, sometimes when you getwet, you get rashes. Like when you cut the flower, and touch your skin, itstings and burns.”[72]Rafa had a similar observation: “When … you wipe your face, itburns. Or if you scratch yourself.”[73] Joshua D., 13, alsoworked in eastern North Carolina in 2013: “You can’t wipe your facewhen you’re working because it burns. It feels like fire ants on yourforehead.”[74]Some children also reported skin rashes. “I’vehad red bumps all over my arm,” said Sally G., 16, who worked in NorthCarolina for the first time in the summer of 2013. “They are veryitchy…. I used to roll up my sleeves when it got hot but then I startedto get bumps on my arms.”[75]Jocelyn R., a 17-year-old worker who worked in tobacco in North Carolina in2012, said: “I’d get a rash on my hands [while topping tobacco], itwould last until the next day. It was itchy.”[76] EstevanO., 15, worked in tobacco in the 2012 season said, “I’d haveitching hands and feet. It’s wet. Your socks and gloves get wet. Yourskin starts itching and cracking. The cracking would really hurt.”[77]Public health research has shown a high prevalence of skinconditions among farmworkers.[78]A 2007 study of tobacco workers found that they may be particularly susceptibleto skin conditions as both the tobacco leaf itself and pesticides used intobacco cultivation have been identified as possible causes of contactdermatitis, an inflammatory skin disease.[79] Human Rights Watchcould not determine the exact cause of the skin irritations or rashes reportedby child tobacco workers.Respiratory Symptoms and Allergic ReactionsSome children interviewed by Human Rights Watch said thatthey experienced respiratory and allergic symptoms while topping and harvestingtobacco in fields, or hanging tobacco to dry in curing barns.For example, Erica P., age 16, described topping tobacco inEastern North Carolina in July 2013: “There is no air in the rows.It’s really hard to breathe.”[80] Alberto H., 16, whoplays on his high school’s soccer team in southeastern Kentucky, toldHuman Rights Watch that he has trouble breathing while hanging tobacco in barns:“When you’re at the top of the barn, you can’t breathe upthere.… It’s probably because [there is] a bunch of dust andit’s hard to breathe, and I have asthma. I always bring myinhaler.”[81] DarioA., also a 16-year-old worker in Kentucky, said, “The hardest part of thejob is climbing up high in the barn. It’s hard to breathe up there.”[82]Some child tobacco workers also reported respiratory andallergic symptoms while working with dried tobacco. Sixteen-year-old Timothy Y.works for his parents, grandparents, and neighbors on tobacco farms inKentucky. He told Human Rights Watch, “I don’t like to do thestripping because it messes with my allergies and makes it hard tobreathe.”[83]Joaquin F., 16, started stripping tobacco in barns at age 12 in Kentucky andcontinued to work for hire after school and on weekends until he got a job atlocal restaurant at age 16. Describing the work he did in curing barns in 2012,he told Human Rights Watch, “When I was stripping, all the dust from thetobacco would get to my lungs and get stuck in my nose. You just feelsick.”[84]A 2011 study on the prevalence of respiratory and allergicsymptoms among non-smoking farmworkers in eastern North Carolina found nearlyone-quarter reported wheezing at times, with elevated odds of wheezing forindividuals working in tobacco production.[85] Public health researchamong adult workers has also shown that workers exposed to tobacco dust duringcuring and baling showed significantly lower lung function than unexposedworkers.[86]Eye and Mouth IrritationSome child tobacco workers told Human Rights Watch thatliquid from wet tobacco plants would splash into their eyes or mouths whilethey were working in the fields, causing pain, itching, or other irritation. Childrenoften described working in fields where tobacco plants reached above theirheads, and they may have been particularly vulnerable to these effects due totheir small size relative to the plants. Sally G., a 16-year-old seasonaltobacco worker described topping tobacco plants taller than her in wet fieldsin eastern North Carolina during the summer of 2013: “I’ve felt thespray on my face. It splashes from the plants. … It really hurts when itgets in your eyes. They tell us to try to keep our faces covered up. … Waterfrom the flowers gets on your face, and when it’s mixed with thepesticide, it burns.”[87]Estevan O., 15, told Human Rights Watch that he startedworking on tobacco farms in North Carolina at age 11 because, “My familyneeded me to.” He described working in wet tobacco fields during the 2012season: “The water on the leaves would splash in my eyes [when I wastopping]. My eyes would get irritated. I’d have to take my contacts outand wear glasses.”[88]While describing his work harvesting tobacco in Tennessee in 2013, Patrick W.,9, said, “Sometimes if it gets to your eyes, it will sting a little bit,like burn.”[89]Several children interviewed in Kentucky said pieces oftobacco leaves would fall into their eyes or mouth while lifting sticks withtobacco plants to be hung in barns causing irritation, pain, and a sour tastein their mouths. Andrea D., 16, works for hire for a tobacco grower in centralKentucky together with her mother. She lifts sticks of harvested tobacco toother workers who hang the sticks in the rafters of curing barns. Whiledescribing her work in the barns in 2012, she said, “It gets all overyou. It gets all in your mouth and in your nose. It’s just sour. Theleaves and the dust get in your nose, and it itches. And it gets in your ears.You have a bitter taste in your mouth. It goes away the next day, but then youdo it again, and it comes back.”[90] Henry F., a17-year-old tobacco worker in Kentucky, told Human Rights Watch that liftingsticks of tobacco irritated his eyes while he was working in 2012: “Ifyou’re at the bottom you have to lift it up. And when you lift it up thetobacco goes in your mouth and eyes. And when it goes in your eyes, it makesyour eyes reddish and pinkish.”[91]Exposure to PesticidesJust over half of the children interviewed by Human RightsWatch—63 out of 120—reported that they saw tractors sprayingpesticides in the fields in which they were working or in fields adjacent tothe ones in which they were working.[92]These children often reported being able to smell or feel the chemical spray asit drifted towards them. A few children stated that they applied pesticides totobacco plants with a handheld sprayer and backpack, or operated tractors thatwere spraying pesticides on tobacco fields.[93] Children also reportedexperiencing a range of symptoms after coming into contact with pesticideswhile working in tobacco farming, including burning eyes, burning nose, itchyskin, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, shortness of breath, redness and swelling ofthe mouth, and headaches. Exposure to pesticides can have serious short-termand long-term health effects.Exposure to Pesticides Sprayed by TractorsMany children interviewed by Human Rights Watch describedbeing exposed to pesticides, most often through drift, when a pesticide appliedin one area spreads to adjoining areas through wind.[94] Manystated that they felt drift from tractors spraying in adjacent fields; in a fewcases they said that tractors sprayed pesticides in the fields in which theywere working.For example, Jocelyn R., 17, started working on tobaccofarms in eastern North Carolina at 14, along with her younger brother.Describing an incident that occurred during the summer of 2012, she told HumanRights Watch:Once they sprayed where we were working. We were cuttingthe flower and the spray was right next to us in the part of the fields we hadjust finished working in. I couldn’t breathe. I started sneezing a lot.The chemicals would come over to us. The farmer when he was spraying would getahead of us and it would come back over us. No one ever told us about thechemicals.[95]Cameron M., an 18-year-old worker in Kentucky, described seeinga tractor spraying in the tobacco field in which he was working: “Onetime I saw a tractor spraying chemicals on the field. It made the workersupset. There was a strong smell. We all covered our mouths and noses.”[96]Children also reported being taken to work in fields thathad been sprayed very recently with pesticides. “I went back into a fieldafter they sprayed it, like right after they sprayed it,” said16-year-old Andrew N., a 10th grade student in Tennessee who workswith a crew of tobacco workers led by his stepfather. He described the incidentto Human Rights Watch,I didn’t know…I did notice it because the spraywas all over the plant, the yellow stuff was all over it, and my shirt wasgetting all the yellow liquid on it. We didn’t want to work anymore. Andfinally the boss guy came, and he told us he had sprayed down, so we left. Thesmell was pretty strong. I really wouldn’t know how to explain it, but itwas a strong smell.[97]Similarly, Emilio R., 16, told Human Rights Watch that hereentered a tobacco field in North Carolina minutes after the grower hadapplied pesticides. “We were working in one field and finished half ofthe field and then the farmer decided to spray [pesticides using atractor],” he said. “It [the drift] was about to catch up to us andso we stepped out of the field. We waited a few minutes and went backin.”[98]Immediate Health Effects of Pesticide ExposureChildren interviewed by Human Rights Watch said theyexperienced a range of symptoms after coming into contact with pesticide sprayincluding burning eyes, burning noses, itchy skin, nausea, vomiting, dizziness,shortness of breath, redness and swelling of their mouths, and headaches. Forexample, 17-year-old Lucia A., interviewed by Human Rights Watch on the day ofher junior prom in a small North Carolina town, said:One time I got a lot of splotches on my leg. … I wasaround 15. It was bad. It got red. … It was like a rash. It starteditching. I kept telling my mom. She kept telling [the contractor] maybe weshouldn’t work in this field. And he said, “No, it’s ok, it isn’tsupposed to harm us.” And then I saw other workers start walking out,saying “I can’t work like this.” … I showed [thecontractor the rash on] my legs, and then he said, “Let’s move to adifferent field.”[99]Jimena C., 15, spends her summers living with her godmotherso that she can work on tobacco farms in a county about 30 miles from herhometown in North Carolina. She told Human Rights Watch that she got very illat age 14 after working in a field sprayed with pesticides only a few hoursearlier: “I got so sick one time after they sprayed. It was just a fewhours after they sprayed and we went in. I got really dizzy. And I saw black. Isat down and threw up several times.”[100] Marta W., 10, feltill after a tractor sprayed pesticides while she and her younger brother werehelping their father, a hired farmworker, on a tobacco farm in northernTennessee in the summer of 2013. “They were like spraying it to make itgrow bigger the time we went,” she said. “It was in the same fieldas us. It was on the other side of the field. The smell was very nasty. I feltnauseous after that.”[101]Yanamaria W., 14, who started working on tobacco farms in2012, spent two summers working for a farm labor contractor in central Kentuckytogether with her parents and 13-year-old brother. Yanamaria told Human RightsWatch about being exposed to pesticides sprayed from a tractor in the summer of2013. “I was in the field when they started spraying,” she said.“I can stand the heat for a long time, but when they spray, then I startto feel woozy and tired. Sometimes it looks like everything is spinning. Youcan’t focus on your task.”[102]Nicholas V., an 8th grader, told Human RightsWatch that he works for hire in tobacco fields in North Carolina with hismother during his summer break. He described a pesticide drift from spraying inan adjacent field while he was working in 2012:We were working in one field and the field next to us gotsprayed with a tractor. The liquid is in the air and it fell on us, too. Thatstuff really bothered us. I got some in my eyes. They got itchy. I got reallyannoyed and asked to get out. I had to sit out for two hours. My eyes werereally itchy. Really bad. … It was really windy that day.[103]Yael A., a 17-year-old seasonal worker in North Carolina, said,“When they spray, the smell is very strong. And it causes a terriblesmell, a really bad smell, and sometimes you feel itchy, tingly, in your mouthand your nose. It itches. Your mouth gets red and puffy.”[104]Marissa G., 14, first worked on tobacco farms in NorthCarolina in the 2013 season, together with her older sister. She said thatworking in tobacco triggered her asthma symptoms, particularly when she wasexposed to pesticides: “The spray affects my asthma. When I smell it, itmakes me nauseous, short of breath, even if I’m not really doinganything.”[105]Children Applying PesticidesFive children interviewed by Human Rights Watch said thatthey applied pesticides to tobacco plants with a handheld sprayer and backpack,or operated tractors that were spraying pesticides on tobacco fields. ChristianV., age 13, explained that he uses a backpack sprayer to apply pesticides tohis family’s tobacco fields in Tennessee: “We spray it withchemicals for worms and so it can help it grow. I use a backpack. There’slike a cap on the top, and you twist it open and put water in it and all thechemicals, then you throw it on your back and you walk and you get this thingand you squirt it on top of the plants.”[106] TheoD., 16, described how he felt one day in the summer of 2013 after using abackpack sprayer to apply an insecticide to tobacco fields on a Virginia farmwhere he worked: “I got home and felt dizzy and started puking, but Itook a cold shower and got over it.[107]Hazards of PesticidesPesticides enter the human body when they are inhaled,ingested, or absorbed through the skin. According to a review of public healthstudies of farmworkers, pesticide exposure is associated with acute healthproblems including nausea, dizziness, vomiting, headaches, abdominal pain, andskin and eye problems.[108]Exposure to large doses of pesticides can have severe health effects includingspontaneous abortion and birth deformities, loss of consciousness, coma, anddeath.[109]Long-term and chronic health effects of pesticide exposure include respiratoryproblems, cancer, depression, neurologic deficits, and reproductive healthproblems.[110]Children are uniquely vulnerable to the adverse effects of toxic exposures astheir brains and bodies are still developing, and they consume more water andfood, and breathe more air, pound for pound, than adults.[111]The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) estimates that10,000 to 20,000 physician-diagnosed pesticide poisonings occur eachyear among US agricultural workers.[112]One public health study found that 64 percent of acute occupationalpesticide-related illnesses reported by children occurred among childrenworking in agriculture, and this number represents only a small fraction ofactual pesticide poisonings as many cases are never reported.[113]The EPA has established federal regulations called the WorkerProtection Standard, which require labeling of pesticides, notification ofworkers about pesticide application, safe application of pesticides, access toemergency medical assistance, and the provision of decontamination supplies,pesticide safety training and safety posters, and personal protectiveequipment.[114]The EPA’s Worker Protection Standard does not specify a minimum age forchildren to mix and apply pesticides, but regulations set by the US Departmentof Labor (DOL) under the Fair Labor Standards Act prohibit children under 16from handling pesticides belonging to the two most toxic categories, asdetermined by the EPA.[115]In addition, the EPA sets restricted entry intervals (REIs) specifying theamount of time after pesticide application that workers should not enter thefields without wearing protective equipment.[116] REIs vary dependingon the toxicity of the pesticide, the type of crop, and the method ofapplication, and may last from a few hours to a few days.[117]However, public health studies have shown that, even if workers are kept out ofthe area for the legally required time period, pesticides are still present inthe fields at lower levels.[118]Furthermore, federal regulations make no special considerations for children,and the EPA determines restricted entry intervals using a 154-pound(70-kilogram) adult body as a model.[119]In February 2014, the EPA proposed changes to the agriculturalWorker Protection Standard. Among other protections, the proposed changes wouldrequire more frequent training for workers and pesticide handlers, mandateposting of warning signs after applications of certain pesticides, andestablish a minimum age of 16 for all pesticide handlers.[120]Pesticide Use in Tobacco ProductionTobacco production in the United States involves applicationof a range of chemicals at different stages in the growth process includingchemical fertilizers, pesticides, and growth regulators (growth inhibitors andripening agents).[121]Several pesticides commonly used during tobacco farming belong to two chemicalclasses, organophosphates and carbamates, both of which are neurotoxins.[122]The US Government Accountability Office explains that pesticides in theseclasses, “act on the nervous system to prevent the normal flow of nerveimpulses to muscles that control both voluntary movement, such as walking, andinvoluntary movement, such as breathing and heart beat.”[123]While pesticides are applied to many crops cultivated in theUnited States, tobacco workers may be at especially high risk for pesticideexposure given the nature of work. Child tobacco workers interviewed by HumanRights Watch reported topping and harvesting tobacco in fields where they weresurrounded by tall plants and had extensive contact with leaves that may havebeen treated with pesticides. Jobs where workers directly handlepesticide-treated plants can increase exposure, particularly in the absence ofeffective protective gear and hand-washing.[124]Relatively few studies have examined pesticide exposurespecifically in tobacco workers.[125]Following a request for data from Human Rights Watch, the National Institutefor Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) indicated that there are nocomprehensive federal statistics on the incidence of pesticide poisoning amongtobacco farmworkers specifically.[126]Public health research in eastern North Carolina found high levels ofbiomarkers for pesticides in the bodies of adult farmworkers who had“worked extensively in tobacco.”[127]Extreme HeatAll children interviewed by Human Rights Watch for thisreport stated that they often worked in high temperatures and high humiditytypical for the summer months in North Carolina, Kentucky, Tennessee, andVirginia. Average high temperatures in July and August in many of the countieswhere children reported working range from 88 to 92 degrees Fahrenheit (31 to 33Centigrade), often with high humidity.[128] Manychildren said that they felt faint or dizzy or suffered from headaches whenworking in very high temperatures. Many stated that they were expected to workwithout additional breaks in such conditions.Yael A., 17, has been working for hire on tobacco farms inNorth Carolina since she was 14. “You feel like you can’t breathewhen it’s really hot,” she said.[129] Andrea D., a16-year-old seasonal worker, told Human Rights Watch about her experienceworking on a tobacco farm in Kentucky during the summer months: “When thesun is really beating hot, really hot, I would get like dizzy. I had to stop aminute. Especially when we’re taking out the weeds because that’sin the middle of June, and it’s hot. I never passed out, but I feltdizzy.”[130]Timothy S., age 13, has worked for hire with his father on tobacco farms inKentucky since he was 12: “It was really hard to focus on work whenit’s really hot. You’re just thinking about ‘When are wegoing to be done?’… The plants are about my size. It’s hotwhen you’re in the rows. I felt like my skin was burning.”[131]Joseph T., an 18-year-old tobacco worker, described anincident in 2011 when he was working in a tobacco field in eastern NorthCarolina. He said:It was in the hundreds, like 102 or 103 [degreesFahrenheit]. … I forgot my hat. It was towards the end of the day. Like 3p.m. … I could just feel like I was about to pass out. Your legs feelwobbly. You feel like you have to push yourself, you have to breathe reallyhard…I was about to faint, I felt like I needed water. I was seeing allcolors.[132]Working long hours in high temperatures can place childrenat risk of heat stroke and dehydration, particularly if there is not enough drinkingwater and they are wearing extra clothes to protect from sunburn and exposureto nicotine and pesticides. Children are more susceptible than adults to heatillness.[133]Work with Dangerous Tools,Machinery, and at HeightsSome children interviewed by Human Rights Watch stated thatthey used axes or hatchets to cut burley tobacco during the harvest, sharp spikesto spear burley tobacco plants, and hoes to remove weeds from tobacco fields.Some children said that they sustained cuts and puncture wounds from workingwith these sharp tools. A few said they operated or worked in close proximityto dangerous machinery, including mowers used to trim tobacco plants, tractorsused to harvest tobacco leaves, and balers used to compress leaves into bales.In Kentucky, Human Rights Watch interviewed a few children who drove tractorswhile working on tobacco farms. Some reported injuries related to operating orbeing near heavy machinery. Human Rights Watch also interviewed children who saidthat they regularly climbed into the rafters of barns several stories tall tohang sticks of harvested burley tobacco to dry.Sharp ToolsSeveral children reported cutting themselves with“tobacco knives,” as the axes used to chop down stalks of burleytobacco are known. Andrew N., 16, described an accident he had while harvestingtobacco in Tennessee in 2011: “My first day, I cut myself with thehatchet [on the leg]. It wasn’t bad. I probably hit a vein or somethingbecause it wouldn’t stop bleeding and I had to go to the hospital. Theystitched it. I only had to get two stitches… [M]y shoe was just soaked inblood.”[134]Lucio F., 10, helps his parents and four older siblings while they work forhire on tobacco farms in Kentucky. Lucio reported cutting himself with atobacco knife during the burley tobacco harvest in 2013: “I got hurt oncewhen I got the axe, and I got cut somewhere on my feet. I was swinging at theplant and I missed and hit my leg.”[135]Children told Human Rights Watch that they had“spiked” or “speared” their hands or other body partson sharp spikes while placing cut burley tobacco plants on long sticks thathold the plants for curing. Omar B., 15, works for several tobacco growers inTennessee along with a few friends. Like many children who harvest burleytobacco, he described placing a sharp spike on the end of a wooden stick;piercing the stalks of the tobacco plants with the spike; sliding six plantsonto each stick, and repeating the process down multiple rows of tobaccoplants. Omar told Human Rights Watch that he punctured his lip in 2013 whenremoving the spike from one wooden stick to transfer it to the next stick:“That’s the most dangerous part of it….I spiked my lippulling [the spike] off the stick once. I came back with it, and it stabbed mein the lip. It just went through.”[136]Adriana F., 14, and her brother Jeremiah F., 15, both said thatthey had spiked their hands while working in the burley tobacco harvest inKentucky in 2012. Adriana spiked her hand while working in the rain:Last year, I was in the field, and I was trying to cut, andI picked up the plant and it was wet. And I slid because it was raining and itwas wet, and the spike went into my hand. My Dad put a bandage on it to stopthe blood and keep out the infection.[137]Her brother described a similar incident:I got a little cut once. I missed the spike when I wasputting the tobacco plant on the stick, and I cut my hand. It bled a little.The tobacco was sticking to it. But when you put water it stings because thetobacco goes in there.[138]Theo D., 16, who plays football for his high school team,cut his finger in a similar manner while harvesting tobacco in Virginia in2012: “I speared myself like once…I was holding the spear, and Imissed, and it went into my finger.”[139]Children also described using hoes and machetes to removeweeds from tobacco fields. Nicholas V., a 14-year-old worker in eastern NorthCarolina, worked for hire in the 2012 season: “We used machetes to takedown weeds. It was really tough though. We had to swing it hard. It was toohard to take out the weeds otherwise. They told me to be very cautious. I wore[my own] soccer shin guards to protect myself.”[140]Andrea D., 16, has worked for a tobacco grower in Kentucky with her parents andher siblings since she was 6. She told Human Rights Watch that she cut herselfwith a hoe while removing weeds from a tobacco field in 2013: “When I wasusing the hoe, I cut myself on my leg with the blade of the hoe. I didn’tneed to go to the hospital. I just kept working. I was bleeding, but I was inthe middle of the field and I couldn’t do anything.”[141]Federal regulations fail to protect children from working thesharp tools used in tobacco farming. DOL’s hazardous occupations orders lackany restrictions on the use of knives, hoes, and other sharp hand tools forchildren working in agriculture. The regulations prohibit children under 16 fromoperating power-driven circular, band, or chain saws, but in all otherindustries children must be at least 18 to use these saws.[142]Heavy MachineryA few children said they operated or worked in closeproximity to dangerous machinery, including mowers used to trim tobacco plants,tractors used to harvest tobacco leaves, and balers used to compress leavesinto bales. In Kentucky, Human Rights Watch interviewed a few children whodrove tractors while working in tobacco. Some children said that they sustainedinjuries while operating or working near heavy machinery.At age 17, Isaac S., who migrated to the US to work with hisbrother on a tobacco farm, sustained a serious injury while working with amower used to trim tobacco seedlings before they were planted in the ground.The mower was rigged out of a typical push lawnmower suspended in the air froma metal stand. Workers were expected to push trays of seedlings on rollersunder the machine while the machine was running in order to trim the plants.Isaac described the accident: “[M]y hand got stuck [in the mower], and itcut off two of my fingers…I was pushing the plant, but I don’t knowhow the wheel slipped. It went really fast, and I couldn’t stop it, andit took my two fingers…I wasn’t crying or anything. I just held myhand. I was pressing really hard because there was blood coming out.”[143]Isaac explained that his employer had told him to continue working during lightrain, which he believed contributed to his accident: “We were trying towait out the rain, and the boss didn’t like it that we were not working.So he told us to hurry up and get working. So we were working in the rain whenI got hurt.”[144]Isaac underwent surgery immediately after the accident, butdoctors were unable to reattach the severed fingers. He still struggles withpain in his hand and his fingers, and he is unable to perform many tasksrequired for agricultural work. He said, “I don’t work comfortably.In my hand, I don’t have strength. Only in [the lower] half of the hand Ihave strength.”[145]In the state where Isaac worked, employers are not required to provide seasonalor migrant farmworkers with workers’ compensation insurance.[146]Isaac said his employer offered him $100 in compensation to cover his medicalbills and account for lost wages due to his accident.[147]Emilio R., 16, started working on tobacco farms in NorthCarolina at age 13 during his summer breaks from school. He told Human RightsWatch that he was injured when his leg got trapped in a baler while he was packingdried tobacco leaves into boxes in North Carolina in 2012:At the compressing machines, we’d be stepping on theleaves inside the box. One time my leg was stuck, and I couldn’t move.Someone yelled “Stop!” to stop the compressing machine to come downon me. I wasn’t all the way in the box, but my leg was stuck. The machinehit my leg and it hurt me. The supervisor was operating the machine. He had toldme to clear out, but I didn’t hear him because the machine is loud.[148]Carla P., 16, works for hire with her parents and heryounger sister on tobacco farms in Kentucky. She told Human Rights Watch thatshe fell off of a tractor-pulled, moving wagon while hauling sticks of wettobacco plants in 2012: “I fell once. I was on a wagon, and I was takingthe tobacco off so they could put it in a little room so they could strip itoff. It was really wet, and I fell onto rocks. That was when I was 15. I landedon my back. I got a bruise and a migraine. I didn’t go to thedoctor.”[149]Federal regulations do not adequately protect childfarmworkers from dangerous machinery. Children under 16 are prohibited fromoperating or assisting to operate some machines, but the list of machines thatare off-limits to children under 16 is not comprehensive. At age 16, childrenworking in agriculture can legally drive tractors of over 20 horsepowertake-off and operate heavy machinery such as forklifts and certain mowing andbaling machines.[150]Working at Dangerous HeightsHuman Rights Watch interviewed child workers who climbedinto the rafters of barns to hang sticks with several stalks of harvestedburley tobacco to dry, and to remove sticks of dried tobacco. They describedclimbing to heights in barns that were at least two stories high using laddersor by climbing the rafters. Crews of child and adult workers would form severaltiers to pass sticks of tobacco upward or downward. While engaging in thiswork, children straddled planks that were sometimes positioned two or threefeet apart and often found it difficult to balance.Pablo E., 17, migrated to Kentucky from Guatemala by himselfin December 2012. He described his experience removing sticks of dried tobaccofrom curing barns in central Kentucky in the winter of 2013: “I had toclimb up and down in the barn. It was cold. When you’re at the top, youhave your legs open and you’re standing on two wooden planks. You take astick out of the roof and pass it down.”[151] Similarly,Calvin R., 17, migrated to Kentucky from Mexico alone at age 13 to work with acrew of agricultural workers. Calvin is the youngest worker in the group, andhis crew migrates between several states in the US, working in different crops.Describing his work on tobacco farms near Lexington, Kentucky in 2013, he toldHuman Rights Watch, “It’s hard to keep your balance whenyou’re up high in the barn and the tobacco is heavy.”[152]Jaime V., 18, described a similar experience working in curing barns inTennessee in 2013: “When you’re in the middle of the barn, you haveto open your feet. And there are two planks, and you have to grab the sticksfrom below and pass them up.”[153]Human Rights Watch did not speak with any children who hadfallen while working at heights in barns. However, several children told HumanRights Watch that they had seen family members or other workers fall. Marta W.,a 10-year-old worker in Tennessee, described seeing another worker fall whileshe herself was standing in the rafters of a barn in 2013: “It’shard to balance. You have to stand on these stakes. And one of these guys, hefell and hurt his back the time I went. So then my dad got me down [from therafters].”[154]Agustin F., 15, travels to Kentucky from Florida every year to work for hire ontobacco farms. He started working in tobacco together with his father at age10. He told Human Rights Watch, “In the barn, I go way up high. …Sometimes people fall. Last year my father fell…. I’ve neverfallen. I always check the barn to make sure the rails are good. Other peopledon’t check the rails before they go up.”[155]Human Rights Watch researchers saw a beam collapse in a barnin northern Kentucky shortly after a crew of workers had finished hanging awagon load of tobacco. The crew had moved to the other side of the barn beforethe beam fell, so no one was injured, but workers had been standing on plankssupported by the beam less than an hour before the collapse.The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) requiresemployers in many industries to provide fall protection measures for workerssuch as guard rails and safety training. For example, OSHA requires employersto provide fall protection in shipyards when workers are expected to work atheights of five feet, and on construction sites when workers are at heights ofsix feet.[156] Agriculturaloperations are excluded from OSHA’s fall protection standards.[157]The hazardous occupations orders established by DOL prohibit child farmworkersunder the age of 16 from working at heights of over 20 feet, but they can workwithout any fall protection at heights less than 20 feet, which neverthelessincludes heights of over one story. Children over 16 are allowed to work at anyheight without any protections.[158]Injuries among Child Farmworkers in the USFederal data on fatal occupational injuries indicate thatagriculture is the most dangerous industry open to young workers. According to DOL,agriculture has the highest fatal occupational injury rate of any industry. In2012, 28 children under the age of 18 died from occupational injuries;two-thirds were agricultural workers. Of 19 occupational fatalities of childrenunder the age of 16, nearly three-quarters were in agriculture.[159]Child occupational deaths in agriculture were most often caused by drivingtrucks and farm vehicles or operating farm machinery.[160] Inaddition to the 28 fatal injuries, there were more than 1,800 nonfatal injuriesto children under 18 working on US farms in 2012.[161]According to the National Institute for Occupational Safetyand Health (NIOSH), the factors putting children at high risk for work-relatedinjuries include: “biologic and psychosocial contributors…such asinadequate fit, strength, and cognitive abilities” to perform certaintasks,[162]rapidly growing “organ and musculoskeletal systems, which may make themmore likely to be harmed by exposure to hazardous substances or to developcumulative trauma disorders,” and less experience, training, andknowledge about how to work safely, what their rights are, and what they arenot legally allowed to do.[163]Repetitive Motions and LiftingHeavy LoadsRepetitive MotionsChildren interviewed by Human Rights Watch describedperforming prolonged repetitive motions for extended periods of time, includingworking bent over at the waist, twisting their wrists to top tobacco plants,reaching above their heads, and crawling on hands and knees to remove weeds oruproot one tobacco plant where two had grown together. Children reported musclesoreness, aches, and pain in their backs, shoulders, arms, hands, and fingersafter engaging in repetitive motions.Andrea D., 16, started helping her father, a hired worker,sort dried tobacco leaves and plant seedlings on a tobacco farm in Kentucky atage 6. Now in 11th grade and aspiring to be a doctor, she continuesto work for the same grower after school, on weekends, and over the summerperforming a range of tobacco farming tasks. She described to Human RightsWatch her work hoeing during the 2013 summer and the impact on her body.“After the plant got a foot tall we would take the weeds out with a hoe.It was backbreaking,” Andrea D. said. “All day, from 8 a.m. to 6p.m., you’re hunched over trying to get all the fields in. At the end ofthe day, I had bruises on my thumbs and fingers. I was sore in myshoulders…when you’re hunched over all the time—whenyou’re planting or hoeing or cutting— it hurts the most…Plusyour fingers, when you’re gripping the hoe, they stay curled in, likestuck in place. Your fingers stay like that for a while.”[164]Fabiana H., 14, reported back pain while weeding in tobaccofields in eastern North Carolina in 2012: “To me, the hardest part wasgoing down to pull the things [weeds] around the tobacco. You have to bend overall the time. And then when you finish doing a whole row and when you stand upyour back is hurting really bad.”[165]Children also described the difficulty of reaching up to toptobacco plants that had grown tall, and some children experienced soreness fromextending their arms upward repeatedly. For example, 12-year-old Manuel W.worked with his parents and five siblings on tobacco farms in central Kentuckyin 2013. He said, “Some [tobacco plants] are taller than six feet tall,and it’s hard to reach them. Your shoulders and your neck get reallytired. It hurts every time you rest your head.”[166]Ian F., 12, and Lazaro S., 15, who worked on different farmsin Kentucky, each described the soreness they experienced while cutting burleytobacco during the 2013 harvest. Ian F. works on tobacco farms about 35 mileseast of Lexington, Kentucky. He said, “My ribs were hurting. Andsometimes your back hurts. Your ribs hurt from when you bend down. You getreally tired. You get sore. You have to reach over and hold the leaves, andthen swing the knife underneath, and you get sore in your ribs and yourback.”[167]According to Lazaro S., “The hardest part is cutting. You have a stickand it has a spear on the end. And you have to cut the tobacco and put it onthe stick. You get tired from the sun, and you’re bent over all day. Youfeel sore the next day, but you still have to go back and work again.”[168]Gregory T., 9, and his sister Jackie T., 7, go to tobaccofields with their mother, a hired farmworker in Tennessee. They play in thefields, and they help their mother work, particularly during the burley tobaccoharvest when she is paid a piece rate of about 22 cents for each stick oftobacco plants she harvests and hangs in a barn. Describing his work in thesummer of 2013, Gregory told Human Rights Watch, “Cutting [tobaccoplants] is the hardest because there’s a big, giant row and you have togo all the way down the row, and come all the way back.” Jackie added,“You have to take the axe and swing it all the way back. It hurts my armsand right here,” she said, pointing to her shoulders.[169]Lifting Heavy LoadsHuman Rights Watch interviewed child workers in Kentucky,Tennessee, and Virginia who reported loading heavy sticks of harvested tobaccoplants onto flatbed wagons to be transported to barns for curing. Children in thesethree states also told Human Rights Watch that they lifted heavy sticks oftobacco plants over their heads to other child or adult workers who would hangthe sticks in the rafters of barns for curing. Many children reported fatigueand soreness as a result of lifting heavy loads.Patrick W., 9, helps his father, a hired tobacco worker,harvest burley tobacco for several growers in northern Tennessee. Patrick saidthat in 2013, he struggled to lift sticks of cut tobacco onto the truck fortransporting: “Since I’m a kid, I have to focus on picking it up,because it’s really heavy, and I can only pick up like one at a time. Itry to do it really fast. And we just have to work really hard andconcentrate.”[170]Emily D., 14, had a similar experience loading burley tobacco onto wagons inVirginia in 2013: “The hardest part is when you lift it up. You put it onyour shoulder, and you lift it up, and put it on the tractor. You get tired.And you get sore.”[171]Bridget F., 15, works for hire on tobacco farms with hermother, who is the crew leader, and her siblings. Bridget injured her back in2013 while lifting sticks of harvested burley tobacco up to other workers in abarn in northeastern Kentucky: “I’m short, so I had to reach up,and I was reaching up and the tobacco plant bent over, and I went to catch it,and I twisted my back the wrong way. … I went to the doctor, and thedoctor said just to ice it.”[172]Similarly, Ricardo M., 14, who works on tobacco farms in Kentucky with hismother, told Human Rights Watch about his experience working in 2012:“Lifting [the tobacco] is the hardest part because the barn is so tall,so you have to lift the tobacco really high, and the tobacco is really heavybecause the plants are big. My arms were hurting….When the plants are wet,they are even heavier, and it’s harder to carry them and liftthem.”[173]Musculoskeletal disorders are usually caused by “anaccumulation of microtrauma” without sufficient time to recover.[174]According to DOL, musculoskeletal disorders account for nearly one in fournonfatal agricultural occupational illnesses and injuries in the United Statesamong adult and child farmworkers.[175]A 2009 review of studies related to musculoskeletal disorders among farmworkersin the eastern United States found that farmworkers were most affected in theneck, shoulders, and upper extremities.[176] Public healthresearch among farmworkers has found that although treating repetitive motioninjuries typically requires rest, as well as anti-inflammatories, splinting,physical therapy, and rehabilitation, farmworkers are under pressure to keepworking at the same rate and often lack access to medical care.[177]NIOSH has found that children are especially vulnerable to repetitive motioninjuries because their bodies are still developing.[178] Accordingto public health studies of farmers and farmworkers, the impacts of repetitivestrain injuries may be long-lasting and result in long-term health consequencesincluding chronic pain and arthritis.[179]Lack of Personal ProtectiveEquipmentVery few of the children interviewed by Human Rights Watch forthis report were given any kind of personal protective equipment by theiremployers to protect them from nicotine poisoning or pesticide exposure.Instead, they or their parents brought their own, often make-shift, protectivesupplies. Though protectiveequipment may help to limit exposure to nicotine and pesticide residues, rainsuits and watertight gloves cannot completely eliminate exposure to nicotinefrom tobacco plants and also significantly increase children’s risk ofsuffering heat-related illnesses.[180]Garbage Bags as Protective EquipmentWithout access to proper water resistant rain gear, manychildren interviewed by Human Rights Watch covered themselves with blackplastic garbage bags while they were topping, pulling suckers, and weedingtobacco plants. Children said that the plastic garbage bags provided someprotection from their clothes becoming soaked by water on the tobacco plantsfrom heavy dew or after rain. They said that although the garbage bags offeredsome protection over the core of their bodies, their arms and legs remainedexposed to wet tobacco leaves. Some children also stated that the plastic bagscaused them to sweat and overheat and so did not wear anything to protect themfrom wet tobacco or pesticides.Fabiana H., 14, who works in tobacco farming during hersummer break from school, told Human Rights Watch: “I wore plastic bagsbecause our clothes got wet in the morning. I wore them on the bottom and onthe top. They put holes in the bags so our hands could go through them. It keptsome of my clothes dry, but I still got wet. It was wet, and then the sun comesout and you feel suffocated in the bags. You want to take them off.”[181]Nicholas V., 14, described his work on tobacco farms in North Carolina duringthe summer of 2012: “I would wear a big trash bag to cover my clothes.The plants are wet and it gets on your clothes. We put holes in the bag for ourhead and our arms. It protects the chest, but the plastic is black so it getsreally hot.”[182]Some children said they chose not to wear plastic garbagebags because doing so made them overheat, and others described feelinguncomfortable working in the bags. For some of them, this meant working in wetclothing, putting them at particular risk of nicotine poisoning. Santiago H., a16-year-old seasonal worker in eastern North Carolina, started working intobacco at age 11. He described working in wet clothing to Human Rights Watch:“In the mornings you have to find the tobacco, and it’s all wet.Your whole body starts itching because you’re all wet….Your clothesget wet and you just have to wait for the sun to dry you.”[183]Similarly, Adriana F., a 14-year-old who hopes to be a bilingual nurse someday,said she started working after school and on the weekends with her parents andher four brothers on tobacco farms in Kentucky in 2013: “It’spretty wet. My clothes get wet. Sometimes I feel like I already took a shower,I’m so soaked.”[184]Absence of GlovesMost children interviewed by Human Rights Watch reportedwearing latex or cloth gloves some or most of the time while working in tobaccofields. In most cases, children or their parents bought the gloves. Latexgloves are water resistant, which may help to limit absorption of nicotine throughthe hands. However, children told Human Rights Watch that, in their experience,latex gloves ripped easily when they topped tobacco plants. They said thatcloth work gloves quickly get soaked when working with wet tobacco plants.Some children told Human Rights Watch that employers toldthem not to wear gloves. Others stated that the gloves available were too largefor their hands or it was difficult for them to perform the work at the pacerequired while wearing gloves, so they worked without them. The absence ofgloves resulted in additional direct exposure to tobacco plants, including wettobacco plants. Many children said that tobacco plants left a sticky residue ontheir hands, described in detail below. Some also stated that they sufferedfrom blisters and other wounds when they did not wear gloves. Santiago H., a16-year-old seasonal worker in eastern North Carolina, described his handsafter topping and harvesting tobacco in the 2012 season: “I get reallybad cuts and blisters on my hands. My hands just start peeling off.”[185]Yanamaria W., who speaks English, Spanish, and a Mayan language calledQ’anjob’al, and is studying French and Chinese as an 8thgrader, described harvesting burley tobacco in Kentucky in 2013 without gloves:“Cutting [tobacco plants] makes sores on our fingers. The handle is madeout of wood and you get blisters. They don’t provide gloves or anything.We just use our hands.”[186]Lack of Appropriate FootwearSome children interviewed by Human Rights Watch alsodescribed working without shoes when the mud in tobacco fields was deep becausethe shoes that they owned impeded their work in difficult conditions, andemployers did not provide footwear. Without appropriate protective footwear,children worked barefoot or in socks while working in fields with thick mud,sharp rocks, broken glass, exposed roots, and other hazards. Human Rights Watchobserved nearly a dozen children working barefoot or in socks in tobacco fieldsin North Carolina in July 2013.Human Rights Watch interviewed 12-year-old Miguel T. whilehe topped tobacco plants in a field in North Carolina in July 2013 wearing onlysocks on his feet. Heavy rains had left the field wet, and he did not haveboots that could withstand the thick mud. He explained that working in thickmud with his own shoes made him tired and sore because of the extra physicalburden. “The hardest part is walking [in the mud],” he said.“My feet start to hurt when I walk. And when I sit down and then I gethome and start to walk, my legs start killing me.”[187] RaulD., a 13-year-old worker in North Carolina, said, “I would go barefootwhen it was really muddy. … It was squishy, like a Slip and Slide[waterslide].”[188]According to experts on pesticide exposure, appropriatepersonal protective equipment to limit pesticide exposure for farmworkers inmost fieldwork situations is “work clothing that covers the head, body,arms, legs, and feet; that is a hat, a long-sleeve shirt that is closed aroundthe neck, long pants, socks, and closed shoes.”[189] However,tobacco workers may be at risk for nicotine poisoning even when wearing thisattire if water from tobacco plants saturates clothing.[190] A2001 study on Green Tobacco Sickness among adult farmworkers found that workerswho worked in wet clothing for more than 25 percent of the workday reportedtwice the incidence of Green Tobacco Sickness as compared to workers who spentless time working in wet clothing.[191]According to Dr. Thomas Arcury of Wake Forest School of Medicine, protectiveequipment such as rain suits and watertight gloves can reduce a worker’scontact with wet tobacco, but may increase the risk of heat stress and heatillness.[192]Human RightsWatch has concluded the use of personal protective equipment is impractical andinsufficient to eliminate the health risks to children of working with tobaccoplants or dried tobacco leaves in the US, and may present other unacceptablehealth risks. This may also be the case in other countries.Lack of Health Education andSafety TrainingLack of Information about Nicotine PoisoningFew children interviewed by Human Rights Watch said thatthey received information from their employers or anyone else about acute nicotinepoisoning and how to prevent it. Most did not understand that absorption ofnicotine through the skin could have been the cause of many of their symptoms.They also did not know when they were at greatest risk of nicotine poisoning orhow to protect themselves while working. For example, 17-year-old Jocelyn R., whoworked on tobacco farms in eastern North Carolina in 2012, told Human RightsWatch, “All I know about tobacco is that I heard that there is a sicknessfrom it.”[193]Based on their experiences, some children identified thattheir symptoms, which they referred to in Spanish as entabacarse,[194]were linked to working in wet conditions. For example, 18-year-old EmmanuelP., who has worked in tobacco in eastern North Carolina since he was 15, toldHuman Rights Watch, “The hardest part is when you’re working and itstarts raining. You get wet, and when you’re working and sweating andyour clothes are wet, you get sick.”[195] Jaime V., an18-year-old tobacco worker in Tennessee, also understood that wet conditionswere linked to his symptoms. Describing his work on tobacco farms in 2013, he said,“We had to work in the rain. They didn’t want us to stop working.It’s like everything is wet. And because everything is wet, your clothesget soaked and you get sick. That’s what causes the nausea, thevomiting.”[196]Lack of Information about Risks of Pesticide ExposureThe vast majority of children interviewed by Human RightsWatch said their employers had not provided them with any education or trainingon pesticide safety. Violet R., 19, started working on tobacco farms in easternNorth Carolina at age 12. “They didn’t tell us anything about thechemicals,” she said. “We’d be working and the grower wouldspray the fields next to our field….They didn’t move us away.”[197]Eighteen-year-old Natalie G., who also started working on tobacco farms inNorth Carolina at age 12, and continued working in the 2012 and 2013 summers, hada similar observation: “I never got any training or materials aboutpesticides.”[198]In rare cases, children interviewed by Human Rights Watchsaid their employers had told them that pesticides presented health risks, butdid not teach the children how to protect themselves from exposure. Eli B., 15,said that his mother was hospitalized after being exposed to pesticides whileworking in tobacco in North Carolina: “Last year, my mom, she got reallysick one time in tobacco because they sprayed that pesticide. She got reallydizzy and had to go to the hospital.”[199] Eli saidthat the contractor who employed him told him about pesticides: “Thecontractor said, ‘You have to be careful. The job is not easy. They spraypesticides, poison, it might make you dizzy or make you want to throwup.’” However, the contractor did not specify any precautions Elishould take to minimize exposure to pesticides. Eli said, “No, [thecontractor] just said, ‘Be careful.’ That’s all.”[200]Alberto H., 16, told Human Rights Watch that he drove anall-terrain vehicle with a sprayer attached to the back through tobacco fieldsin Kentucky while working in 2013. Even though he was given appropriateprotective clothing including gloves, plastic safety glasses, and a mask, hissafety training was minimal, and he appeared not to remember clearly theinstructions. He said, “They just told me not to get it on me, be carefulwith it. Always spray… I think they said, against the wind? Like towardwhere the wind was blowing. Yeah, where the wind was blowing.”[201]Pesticide training for child workers is especially importantbecause, as one public health study found, “Young people are generallyless experienced and assertivethan adults, and thus they may notquestion assignments thatplace them at risk for pesticideexposure.”[202]Inadequate Access to Water, Sanitation,and ShadeMany children interviewed by Human Rights Watch said thattheir employers did not provide drinking water for workers, and most childrenstated that employers did not provide handwashing facilities or toilets forworkers. Many reported that they did not have a place to shelter in shadeduring the workday.Problems with Drinking WaterMost children interviewed by Human Rights Watch stated thatthe labor contractor or tobacco grower for whom they worked provided them withwater. Alicia K., 15, is a 9th grade student and a seasonal tobaccoworker in eastern North Carolina. She described a situation that was commonamong children interviewed by Human Rights Watch: “He [the contractor]gave us lots of water breaks. The contractor had a cooler with water and soda.My mom also carried a cooler with water.”[203]However, some children told Human Rights Watch that thewater provided by employers was not clean or drinkable. Nicholas V., a14-year-old worker in North Carolina said, “The manager brought water tothe fields, but it tasted strongly of chemicals. I brought my own, orwe’d go to the gas station nearby.”[204]Natalie G. also described problems with the water provided by her employer inNorth Carolina: “They would give us water. It was in a big round orangecooler. But it didn’t really taste right, and when we opened the top wesaw that there were leaves and dirt in it. We never drank that water.”[205]Some children said their employers did not provide enoughwater to last throughout the workday; placed water so far from where they wereworking that it was inaccessible to them; or didn’t allow them to takebreaks to drink water. Katrina T., 15, Diego T., 16, and Rafa B., 16, workedtogether on a tobacco farm in eastern North Carolina in the summer of 2013.They told Human Rights Watch that typically a cooler of water was left on theback of a pick-up truck in the field, often quite far from where they worked,and when it ran out, their employer often would neglect to refill it.“They don’t bring it down the row [of tobaccoplants]….Sometimes they just leave it there and the water runs out, andthey leave it empty until the next day,” Rafa said.[206] EzraB., a 15-year-old worker in eastern North Carolina, said, “There waswater, but the rows [of tobacco plants] were long, so if you had to go back toget some water and go all the way back down your row, by the time you did itpeople were finished [topping their rows] and it was time to move on.”[207]Other children interviewed by Human Rights Watch said thattheir employers did not provide water at all. In these cases, children broughttheir own water or went without. Claudio G., 16, started working in tobacco in easternNorth Carolina at age 14. He told Human Rights Watch that one of his formeremployers didn’t provide drinking water for workers at all. Describingwhat it was like to work in high heat without water available in 2012, he said,“It was 100 something [degrees] that day. I was working with grownpeople, and I was the only young one. I was 14. It was so hot. The mandidn’t bring us water. I was dehydrated, and I didn’t want to work.I felt like I was going to pass out.”[208] Henry F., 17, workedfor hire for several tobacco growers in the 2013 season near the town where helives in Kentucky. When asked about his access to water at work, he said,“Some farmers bring it [water]. Some farmers they just leave you to work,and it depends on what you bring. It’s up to you if you want to bringwater or not.”[209]Lack of Sanitary FacilitiesVery few children interviewed by Human Rights Watch reportedhaving access to a bathroom or portable toilet. Most children said that theywould relieve themselves in wooded areas, if there were any near the worksite,or refrain from relieving themselves at all during the day, including bydeclining to drink liquids. Some told Human Rights Watch that a contractor orgrower would drive them to a nearby gas station, store, or other publicfacility, or allow them to walk to a public facility or to the grower’shome if it was located near the worksite, where they could use a bathroom.Lucia A., 17, has been working on tobacco farms in NorthCarolina since age 12. She told Human Rights Watch that she rarely had accessto a bathroom while working in tobacco in the 2012 season: “If you haveto go, there’s the woods. …First time I was out in the field, Itold my mom I have to go pee. And my mom was like, ‘You have to go in thewoods.’ But I was scared. I didn’t want to. My mom said, ‘Youcan’t go all day like that.’ I said, ‘What if a snake comesout?’”[210]Sally G., 16, who lives in North Carolina and worked for the first time in thesummer of 2013, told Human Rights Watch, “There is no bathroom. Eitheryou hold it or ask to go to a gas station or restaurant. If not we just do whatthe other ladies do, just go to the woods.” Her sister Marissa, 14, said,“I’d rather just hold it.” Sally agreed: “Yeah, I holdit.”[211]Margarita S., a 16-year-old worker in North Carolina,described her access to toilets when she worked on tobacco farms in 2012:“We’d stop at a gas station to let us use the bathroom. I never sawa ‘porta potty.’ You’d have to just get yourself somewhere togo to the bathroom. To the trees, or just try to get away from the othersworking, have someone else help cover you up.”[212] Whenasked if there was a bathroom at his worksite when he worked on tobacco farmsin 2012 in Kentucky, 14-year-old Ricardo M. said, “No. You just have towait it out. Or go out in the woods.”[213]Lack of Hand-washing Facilitiesand Tobacco Residue on HandsMost children interviewed by Human Rights Watch stated thatthey did not have access to hand-washing facilities. Many children reportedrinsing their hands with drinking water provided by their employers, but theywere rarely given soap. Without access to hand-washing, children said that theywere not able to wash off dirt, pesticide residues, or residues from thetobacco leaves, including before eating lunch or snacks. Some children saidthat they were permitted to wash their hands at a gas station, store, or otherpublic facility, and a few said their parents would bring their own soap andwater to the tobacco fields to allow them to wash their hands before lunch.The experience of Blanca A., a 14-year-old worker in easternNorth Carolina, was typical among the children interviewed by Human RightsWatch for this report. “They had a cooler full of water, and people wouldget cups full of water and pour it over my hands for me,” she said. “Butthere was no soap.” [214]Luciano P., 18, started working on tobacco farms near Lexington, Kentucky atage 15 and worked each season. “On the barn [at one farm], they have awater pump,” he said. “We use that to wash our hands. There’sno soap, just clean water.”[215]Many children told Human Rights Watch that tobacco plantsleft a sticky residue on their hands that they could see, feel, and taste wheneating. They observed the residue on their hands whether or not they woregloves, though they described it as more severe if they worked without gloves.Nine-year-old Gregory T., who goes to work to help his mother harvest burleytobacco on farms in Tennessee, told Human Rights Watch how his hands felt afterworking in the 2013 summer: “The plants are sticky. They feel like bubblegum. It’s more and more sticky. When I put my hands together, theystick.”[216]Many described eating with unclean hands during their breaksand at lunch. Katie P., an 11th grader and a member of the FutureBusiness Leaders of America, told Human Rights Watch about her experienceworking on a tobacco farm in North Carolina in 2013 where she did not haveaccess to hand-washing: “Since the tobacco is like really sour tasting,all that bad taste goes to your mouth, like when you are eating, like duringbreak. And there’s no place to wash your hands or anything.”[217]Carla P., 16, and her younger sister, Lisandra P., 14, have worked for hiretogether with their parents on tobacco farms in Kentucky for several years. Thesisters told Human Rights Watch that one of the tobacco growers for whom theyworked in 2013 gave them water to rinse their hands, but no soap. Carla said thattobacco plants left a residue on her hands that she could taste:“It’ll be hard to eat after you’re done working because itwill taste sour and yucky.”[218]Lisandra observed the same effect: “It’s dirty. Your hands areblack. If you make something [prepare food] after you’ve touched tobacco,it tastes sour.”[219]Lack of ShadeMany children interviewed by Human Rights Watch stated thatthey did not have the opportunity to shelter in shade during the workday. Somereported that the only shade available was inside vehicles used to transportthe workers to the worksite, or in wooded areas when the worksite happened tobe located near one. For example, Emilio R., a 16-year-old worker in NorthCarolina, said, “The heat is the hardest thing. It was hot. I couldmanage everything but the heat was just unbearable. We’d try to work hardto rush to get out of the row to have some shade…. You’re mostly inthe middle of the field where there’s really no cover.”[220]Raul D., a 13-year-old worker in North Carolina said, “Some days my skingets red and it feels like it’s burning on the inside. The worst thing? Theheat from being out in the sun with no shade all day: that is really the worstthing.”[221]Health Consequences of Inadequate Access to Water,Sanitation, and ShadeThe Occupational Safety and Health Administration’s (OSHA)Field Sanitation Standard requires agricultural employers with at least 10employees to provide sufficient and accessible drinking water, hand-washingfacilities, and toilets.[222]According to OSHA:Farmworkers may suffer heat stroke and heat exhaustion froman insufficient intake of potable water, urinary tract infections due to urineretention from inadequate availability of toilets, agrichemical poisoningresulting from lack of hand-washing facilities, and infectious and othercommunicable diseases from microbial and parasitic exposures.[223]A review of public health literature found that limitedaccess to toilets and strict work environments where workers are not given timeto take breaks contribute to chronic urine retention, increasing the risk ofurinary tract infections.[224]In addition, public health studies have shown that washing with soap and watercan reduce both pesticide and nicotine residues on the hands of tobacco workersby 96 percent.[225]Sun exposure is associated with several types of skincancer, and research suggests that sunburn and sun exposure in childhood andadolescence can increase the risk of melanoma, the most serious form of skincancer, later in life. Agricultural workers are particularly susceptible due tochronic, prolonged time in the sun and other occupational hazards of farm work.[226]IV. Hours, Wages, and EducationMost children interviewed by Human Rights Watch for thisreport described working long hours, typically between 50 and 60 hours perweek. Many children said they felt pressure to work quickly. While mostemployers allowed children two or three breaks per day, some children were notallowed to take regular breaks, even when they felt sick or were working inhigh heat. Children described utter exhaustion after working long hours ontobacco farms.Most children earned the federal minimum wage of $7.25 perhour for their work on tobacco farms, though some children working in burleytobacco were paid a fixed rate during certain parts of the season based on thequantity of tobacco they harvested or hung in barns. Some children reportedproblems with wages including earning less than minimum wage for hourly work,deductions by the contractor or grower for drinking water or for reasons thatwere not explained to them, or because of what they believed was inaccuraterecording of hours by labor contractors.Most children interviewed by Human Rights Watch attendedschool full time and worked in tobacco farming only during the summer months,after school, and on weekends. A few children who had migrated to the UnitedStates for work and had not settled in a specific community said that they didnot enroll in school at all or enrolled in school but missed several months inorder to perform agricultural work, including in tobacco farming.Excessive Working Hoursand Lack of Sufficient BreaksMost children interviewed by Human Rights Watch describedworking long hours, typically between 10 and 12 hours per day, and sometimes upto 16 hours. Most said they worked 50 to 60 hours a week. Most employersallowed them two or three breaks per day, including one 10 to 15 minute breakin the morning and one in the afternoon, as well as a 30 to 60 minute lunchbreak in the middle of the day. However, some children told Human Rights Watchthat employers did not allow children to take meaningful regular breaks duringthe work day or breaks even when children felt sick or in high heat. Manychildren said that some employers pressured them to work as quickly aspossible.Most children interviewed by Human Rights Watch worked fivedays per week; some worked fewer, and some reported working six or seven daysper week during particularly labor intensive periods of the tobacco farmingseason. In some cases, children’s hours exceeded 70 hours per week.Some children in each of the four states where Human RightsWatch did research stated that they sometimes worked long hours, more than 5days per week, or without breaks in order to increase their earnings. However,most children described having little control over their hours day-to-day.Sometimes the labor contractor or grower expected them to work past dark orstart work in early morning hours. If worksites were located far fromchildren’s homes, they left home very early and came home late. Childrentold Human Rights Watch that sometimes they worked shorter days because theemployer determined that the work had been completed or because the employerallowed workers to stop, in some cases due to heavy rain or high heat.US federal law permits children to work in agriculture for unlimitedhours, outside of school hours. In non-agricultural jobs, 14 and 15-year-oldscannot work before 7 a.m. or after 7 p.m., except during the summer when theycan work until 9 p.m.; and may not work more than 3 hours on a school day, 18hours in a school week, 8 hours on a non-school day, and 40 hours in non-schoolweek.[227]Working Long HoursMost children interviewed by Human Rights Watch for thisreport stated that they often started work at 6 or 7 a.m. and worked throughthe evening. Fourteen-year-old Marissa M., who worked in tobacco farming forthe first time in 2013, described a typical work schedule among the childreninterviewed by Human Rights Watch: “We leave [for work] at 6 a.m., start[working] at 7 a.m., get out at 6 p.m.”[228] Somechildren in Kentucky reported working very late in the evening, either workinguntil dark at the height of summer when the sun sets late in the day, orworking after dark in tobacco curing barns during the fall and winter months.Danielle S., 16, and Lazaro S., 15, who work for hire withtheir parents on tobacco farms in central Kentucky, told Human Rights Watchthat they would sometimes work until 11 p.m. when they were stripping curedtobacco leaves off of sticks in barns. Danielle said, “We go early in themorning, depending on the tobacco. If it rains, we don’t go. Ifit’s good weather, we go early, like 7 a.m., and we’ll work until 7at night. When we’re stripping [in barns], we come home really late atnight, like 11 at night…Sometimes we finish late.”[229]Bridget F., 15, said her crew in Kentucky would return to work in the eveningafter a break in the middle of the afternoon: “We’d go to work at 6a.m. and work until 3 [p.m.] and then we’d take a break, go home andstuff, and then we’d go back at 5 [p.m.] and work until 9 [p.m.]. It wasreally tiring.”[230]Lack of Sufficient Breaks and Pressure to Work FastMartin S., 18, told Human Rights Watch that the laborcontractor on a Kentucky farm where he worked in 2012 did not give them regularbreaks during the work day. “We start at 6 a.m. and we leave at 6 p.m.,”he said. “We only get one five-minute break each day. And a half hour forlunch. Sometimes less.”[231]Blanca A., a 14-year-old farmworker in North Carolina, told Human Rights Watchthat the labor contractor who employed her in 2012 pressured workers to endtheir breaks early: “He [the contractor] always had a machete. He wasmean…. He’d yell at us to hurry up and go back in the fields whenwe were taking breaks. He would make us go out [back to work in the field] whenwe were on breaks. He’d get frustrated at us and start screaming. He wasso strict.”[232]Other children told Human Rights Watch about experienceswith labor contractors who did not allow the children to rest when they feltsick and threatened to cut their pay. Elena G., 13, works on tobacco farms in easternNorth Carolina with her mother and her older sisters. Describing her experienceduring her first summer working on tobacco farms in 2012, she told Human RightsWatch, “I would tell the boss [labor contractor] that I needed to stopfor a minute, and he was like, ‘Either you work, or you get out, andI’m not going to pay you for the time that you’re out of thefield.’ And then I would keep going, but my mom and other workers wouldhelp me, but [the contractor] would get mad, saying we [each] need to do ourown row [of tobacco plants]….The hardest part was cutting the suckers andkeeping up with all the workers. All the workers were older. [We] were theyoungest ones. They had more experience, so they could go faster.”[233]Elena’s older sister, 18-year-old Natalie G., toldHuman Rights Watch that she would hide herself in a row of tobacco plants toget a few minutes of extra rest when she felt sick. She described one instancein 2012: “I got really, really tired working. My mom would say,‘Hide. Sit down for a few minutes to rest, but then you’ve got toget back to work.’ My knees would be hurting, but the labor contractorwould keep hurrying me up. He would wait for everyone at the end of the row andthen say, ‘You’re slacking, hurry up!’”[234]Jorge P., a 16-year-old worker in eastern Tennessee, said, “It was a hardjob. We had to be like super fast. They [the labor contractors] didn’twant you to quit for a second. They wanted you to keep working. Even though itwas raining, they didn’t want us to stop.”[235]Joseph T., told Human Rights Watch that he started working on tobacco farms in2011, when he was 16. He described how he felt while trying to keep up withadult workers on tobacco farms in North Carolina in 2012: “It’slike you’re walking and everybody else is running. Like that.”[236]Children in Kentucky and Tennessee told Human Rights Watchthat being paid based on the volume of tobacco they harvested contributed tothe pressure to work quickly. For example, 18-year-old Jaime V., an 11thgrade student, started working in tobacco in Tennessee at age 14. Describinghis experience working in tobacco in 2012, he told Human Rights Watch,“The tobacco is the hardest, because you have to work fast. Ifyou’re not fast, you don’t make money because it’s contract[piece rate] work. It’s 22 or maybe 27 cents per stick. You have to workvery, very fast to make any money.”[237] Yanamaria W., a14-year-old girl who works on tobacco farms with her parents and her youngerbrother, had a similar observation about working for a piece rate in Kentuckyin 2013: “The hardest part is the cutting. It’s harder becauseyou’re paid by a contract [a piece rate], not by the hour, so if you wantto get more money, you have to work faster.”[238]Pressure to work fast may put children at additional risk ofinjury. As cited above, in one case documented by Human Rights Watch, pressureby a tobacco grower on 17-year-old Isaac may have contributed to his loss oftwo fingers in an accident involving a mower.[239]Lack of Rest DaysSome children told Human Rights Watch that they worked up tosix or seven days a week. Claudio G., 16, said that he worked seven days perweek in tobacco in North Carolina during the most labor-intensive part of theseason: “We worked every day, Monday to Sunday. The farmer was behind onhis crop, so we had to work seven days. It was tough because we didn’tget any breaks, and when you’re working every day, you can’t enjoythe weekend.”[240]Andrea D., 16, started working for a tobacco grower in Kentucky together withher parents at age 6. She told Human Rights Watch that during the summermonths, she and her family often worked for many days straight without taking aday off during labor-intensive parts of the growing season. “In the summerwe work every day, every day until we finish [the work]. From 8 in the morning until6 [p.m.].”[241]Traveling Long Distances for WorkChildren interviewed for this report in North Carolina toldHuman Rights Watch that they often worked on farms located far from theirhomes, based on where the labor contractor needed workers on any given day. Onsuch days, children would wake very early in order to reach the work locationby early morning. For example, Eliceo F., 15, said, “Me and my brotherwould wake up around 3 a.m. because the job was pretty far and we’d getthere at 6 a.m. and start working…. We’d get there and work, takeour break, like 35 minutes for lunch. Then we’d start working again untilwe were done. Usually I’d fall asleep [in the car] on the way back[home]. I was tired.”[242]Exhaustion after Long Work HoursElan T., 15, and Madeline T., 16, worked together on atobacco farm after migrating to North Carolina from Mexico with their motherand younger brother. Madeline described the fatigue they felt after working for12 or 13 hours in tobacco fields: “Just exhaustion. You feel like youhave no strength, like you can’t eat. I felt that way when we worked somuch. Sometimes our arms and legs would ache.”[243]Patrick W., 9, described similar feelings after working long hours with hisfather, a hired tobacco worker, in Tennessee in 2013. “I feel reallyexhausted,” he said. “I come in [to the house], I get my [clean]clothes, I take a shower, and then it’s usually dark, so I go tosleep.”[244]Bridget F., a 15-year-old tobacco worker in Kentucky, toldHuman Rights Watch about her work on tobacco farms in 2013: “It’sreally hard. The long hours and it’s really hot. And when you’redone, you’re really tired. You just want to go to sleep.”[245]Sixteen-year-old Dario A., who worked on tobacco farms in Kentucky in 2013, said,“The hardest of all the crops we’ve worked in is tobacco. You gettired. It takes the energy out of you. You get sick, but then you have to goright back to the tobacco the next day.”[246]WagesNearly all of the children interviewed for this reportstated that they were working on tobacco farms for hire. Of the nine childrenHuman Rights Watch interviewed who worked on their family farms, four alsoworked for hire on farms owned by other tobacco growers. Only a few of the veryyoungest children worked with their parents sporadically and without pay. Amongchildren working for hire, about half of the children interviewed were employedby a labor contractor or a labor subcontractor at some point in 2012 or 2013,although many of them also worked directly for tobacco growers.Most children said that employers paid them hourly wages fortheir work. Those paid an hourly wage stated that they typically received wagesweekly, although some reported being paid every two weeks or daily. Otherchildren, primarily those working in burley tobacco in Kentucky, Tennessee, andVirginia, stated that they received a fixed rate of payment for the quantity oftobacco they harvested or hung in barns (“piece rate wages”). Whenchildren reported earning piece rate wages, they were paid “by thestick,” meaning their wages were determined by the number of tobaccoplants they cut and placed on wooden sticks, or by the number of sticks oftobacco plants they hung in curing barns.Most children stated that they received wages directly fortheir work; some said that employers added children’s wages to aparent’s form of payment. Some said that they were paid directly bygrowers, often by check. Others were paid by labor contractors who receivedlump sum payments from growers. When children were paid by contractors, theywere most often paid in cash. A few of the youngest children told Human RightsWatch that they received a small allowance from their parents for working withthem in the tobacco fields. Some recorded the hours they worked or quantity oftobacco they harvested independently and reported their work to theiremployers. Other children stated that employers, either the labor contractor orgrower, kept a record of their work and determined their wages at the end ofthe week.While most children reported earning at least US federalminimum wage, some earned less. Some reported problems with wages includingdeductions by the contractor or grower for drinking water or for reasons thatwere not explained to them, or because of what they believed was inaccuraterecording of hours by labor contractors.Payment of Less Than Minimum WageMost children interviewed by Human Rights Watch reportedearning the federal minimum wage of $7.25 per hour for their work on tobaccofarms. For a child working approximately 50 to 55 hours per week at minimumwage, earnings amounted to between $350 and $450 per week. Children interviewedby Human Rights Watch in North Carolina reported earning higher wages intobacco relative to other crops. For example, Blanca A., 14, works for hire ontobacco farms in eastern North Carolina with her mother and her older sister.She said, “I really don’t work in anything else [besides tobacco].Tobacco gets paid better than cucumber.”[247]While some children earned more than minimum wage, somechildren received less than the minimum for hourly work. For example, NatalieG., an 18-year-old worker in North Carolina who volunteers at a local communitygarden, told Human Rights Watch that a labor contractor paid her significantlyless than minimum wage for hourly work in 2012: “He tried to pay us lessthan we worked. He actually ended up paying us about $6.50 per hour. Forexample, I worked [for three 11-hour days] and earned $240, but didn’tget [paid] that full amount.”[248]Martin S., 18, migrated to Kentucky from Mexico by himself in 2011 to join hismother who was already living in the US, and started working for a laborcontractor on tobacco farms when he arrived in Kentucky. He told Human RightsWatch that his crew was paid less than minimum wage in 2012: “All theworkers in our group were paid $7 per hour, and they were all paid cash.”[249]Similarly, Isaac S., age 18, told Human Rights Watch that a tobacco grower toldhim and others in his work crew that they would receive the federal minimumwage of $7.25 per hour for their work on a tobacco farm, but the grower paidthem only $6 per hour in cash. “He [the grower] paid us less than we werepromised,” he said.[250]Another child interviewed by Human Rights Watch reported earning just $40 forsix days of work planting tobacco in Kentucky.[251]With some exceptions, agricultural workers are entitled tominimum wage. These exceptions include workers on small farms and some piece-rateworkers, including certain local hand harvest laborers and non-local childrenages 16 and under who are working alongside their parents.[252]Where workers are entitled to minimum wage, agricultural employers may payeither an hourly rate or a piece-rate, but those who pay on piece-rate must bylaw ensure that the earnings for all hours worked in a week are sufficient tobring the average hourly wage up to minimum wage, unless they fall under one ofthe previously mentioned exceptions.[253]All agricultural workers are deprived of overtime payprotections under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). Most other workers, bycontrast, are required to be paid one-and-a-half times their regular rate ofpay for each hour worked in excess of 40 hours per week.[254] Inaddition, agricultural workers are also excluded from the protections of theNational Labor Relations Act and do not have the right to organize andcollectively bargain with their employers, except in cases in which states (suchas California) enact state laws protect their right to organize.[255]Piece Rate WagesChildren working in Kentucky, Tennessee, and Virginia toldHuman Rights Watch that they earned piece rate wages during the burley tobaccoharvest. Workers described cutting down tobacco plants full of leaves andsliding the plants onto wooden sticks designed to be hung in barns for curingtobacco leaves. Each stick held six tobacco plants, and workers were paid afixed rate based on the number of sticks of tobacco plants they completed in aday. Some workers were also paid piece rate wages for the number of sticks fullof tobacco plants that they hung in curing barns in a day. Children in Kentuckyreported earning between 12 cents and 16 cents per completed stick forharvesting tobacco plants. Children in Tennessee reported earning between 22cents and 55 cents per stick for harvesting tobacco plants and hanging thesticks in curing barns. The daily earnings of children interviewed by HumanRights Watch varied considerably under this system depending on thechild’s pace of work and the fixed rate offered by employers. Somechildren reported completing 250 sticks per day, and earning between $50 and$60 for a full day of work, while others reported completing more than 800sticks per day, and earning over $100 for a full day of work. Some childreninterviewed by Human Rights Watch in these states reported earning piece ratewages for performing certain tasks and hourly wages for other tasks.Henry F., a 17-year-old worker in Kentucky, the oldest ofsix siblings, plays on his high school soccer team, and has been working intobacco farming since he was 13. He told Human Rights Watch that he was paid apiece rate for his work cutting burley tobacco plants during the harvest and anhourly rate to hang sticks of harvested tobacco in curing barns in 2013.Explaining this system of work and payment, he said, “You put a stick inthe ground, put the spear on top of it, and cut six plants of tobacco and putthem on the stick. And you do that until you finish a row. And you write downhow much you did in a book, to keep count of how many you got. You get paid 14cents a stick.”[256]Some children in Tennessee told Human Rights Watch that their wage includedpayment for both cutting tobacco plants and hanging them in barns. Jaime V.told Human Rights Watch: “We got paid 22 cents for a stick. That was forthe cutting and the hanging.”[257]Public health studies among farmworkers have found thatpiece rate payment adds additional pressure on workers to work as quickly aspossible and avoid taking breaks, sometimes even at the expense of drinkingwater or cooling down when overheated.[258] Agustin F., a15-year-old worker, migrates to Kentucky from Florida each year to work ontobacco farms. He described the pressure he put on himself to work fast, saying,“When I’m cutting, I earn $200. [It] depends on how much I work. Wemake about 14 cents per stick. [It] depends on how much you cut. You can earn$100 or $125, $135 in a day. If you can stand it, you keep working. I workuntil I can’t stand it.”[259]Unscrupulous Wage PracticesSome children reported problems with wages includingdeductions by the contractor or grower for drinking water; for reasons thatwere not explained to them; or because of what they believed was inaccuraterecording of hours by contractors. For example, Eli B., 15, lived alone for twomonths in North Carolina while his mother migrated to another state for work.Eli started working on tobacco farms at age 11, and he told Human Rights Watchthat in his first season, his employer—a labor contractor—routinelypaid him less than he was owed for the time he had worked. “They wouldsteal your money, the contractors,” he said. “I wrote down my hoursI worked, and summed it up, but when he would pay me that day, it didn’tcome out as I had it down. It was my first year. I didn’t know how thingsworked out.” Eli said that he never complained to his employer about hispay: “No, I never asked him. I asked him how much I got paid an hour,that’s all.”[260]Jaime V., an 18-year-old worker in Tennessee, also reportedinaccurate recording of hours by his labor contractor several years ago:“Sometimes my check would be short by 7 or 10 hours. We got paid everytwo weeks. But sometimes the hours didn’t turn out right. I would talk tothe contractor about it, but he’d say, ‘I don’t know.’He didn’t do anything about it.”[261] Estevan O., 15, toldHuman Rights Watch that an employer he worked for in North Carolina in 2012docked his pay allegedly because he made mistakes in his work: “Thecontractor kept track of hours. Sometimes they would complain and take twohours off because we supposedly didn’t do the job right, but we went andfixed it anyway. They didn’t warn us about this penalty.”[262]Children also reported deductions from their pay for carrides to the work sites, water, or reasons they did not understand. MargaritaS., a 16-year-old worker in North Carolina who plans to attend college andstudy to be a teacher’s assistant, told Human Rights Watch aboutdeductions from her wages in 2012: “Ten dollars was taken out of everycheck. I’d pay $10 per day for a ride. Sometimes $15. I also had to payfor water, Gatorade, soda that they would have there [where we worked].”[263]Marissa G., 14, told Human Rights Watch that she started working on tobaccofarms in North Carolina so that she could buy her own clothes and schoolsupplies. She said that she did not receive any pay for a day she workedtopping tobacco in 2013: “I got $130, but for one day I worked the laborcontractor didn’t pay me. He said ‘The boss man didn’t giveeveryone pay for last Friday.’ I don’t know why. He promised to payme next week.”[264]Under federal law, agricultural employers must provide workers with wagestatements explaining any deductions from their wages. Workers must give employerspermission to make deductions for transportation, food, and some otherexpenses.[265]EducationThe vast majority of children interviewed by Human RightsWatch attended school full-time and worked in tobacco farming, and in somecases in other agricultural crops as well, only during the summer months, afterschool, and on weekends. However, some children who had migrated withoutauthorization to the United States for work and had not settled in a specificcommunity told Human Rights Watch that they did not enroll in school at all orenrolled in school but missed several months in order to perform agriculturalwork, including in tobacco farming. Some children stated that they occasionallymissed school in order to work in times of financial hardship for theirfamilies.Calvin R. migrated to the United States by himself at age13, leaving his family behind in Mexico. He never enrolled in school. Instead,he joined a migrant crew that travels between several states to work indifferent crops. He told Human Rights Watch he started working in tobacco in2012 at age 16: “We come to Kentucky every year from other states. Wework in Washington in the apples, and in Tennessee there’s a packingplant where we work. We came to Kentucky … at the beginning of August. Weusually come here around the same time every year to work in tobacco.”[266]When asked about his plans for the future, Calvin said, “If tomorrow orthe next day brings an opportunity to study, I would like that. … [I]f inthe future, I could accomplish my dreams, I would feel good and proud of myself… And one of my most important dreams is to continue studying.”[267]Jason H., 17, told Human Rights Watch that he migrated aloneto the United States from Mexico in 2012. Each year he travels to NorthCarolina from Florida in March to work in tobacco and other crops. He works allyear long, and does not attend school. “The work is like a wheel,”he said. “It’s never going to be finished.”[268]Other migrant children told Human Rights Watch that theymissed several months of school to work in tobacco farming. For example,Guillermo S., 18, and Victor R., 15, are cousins working in differentagricultural crops in different states, including on tobacco farms in NorthCarolina. Their parents live in Mexico. Guillermo told Human Rights Watch,“We just got here to North Carolina from Florida in June. We’llstay here six months, until November. Then we’ll go to Floridaagain.”[269]When asked about his status in school, Victor told Human Rights Watch, “Igo to school in Florida, but not here,” indicating that he missed atleast three months of school in 2013.[270]Several children reported to Human Rights Watch that theyhad skipped a few days of school in recent years to work in tobacco farming.These children said they worked instead of going to school to help theirparents in times of financial hardship or when a family member was injured andunable to work. Yanamaria W., a 14-year-old worker in Kentucky, told HumanRights Watch, “I’ve skipped school to go to work. Our house [rent payment]takes up like $600 a month, and my parents don’t get [earn] much whenthey’re doing [sorting] the [tobacco] leaves.”[271]Adriana F., 14, who works on tobacco farms in Kentucky withher parents and her four brothers, told Human Rights Watch that she had misseda few days of school in 2012 and 2013 to work in tobacco farming. “Imissed school to go work when my Dad popped a bone in his back and he needed meto help him,” she said.[272]Her 17-year-old brother, Henry F., said that he occasionally skipped school in2012 and 2013 to earn money to help his family: “I’ve missed schoolto work. I chose it myself. My parents always told me to go to school. But Ialways choose my family over everything else.”[273]In addition, some children reported working long hours afterschool that interfered with their ability to keep up with schoolwork. LucianoP., is 18 and in 10th grade at a Kentucky high school. He moved tothe United States at age 11, attended school for several years, but dropped outof school at 15 to work for most of the year on tobacco farms. “I used togo to school when I was little, but I was working in tobacco,” he said. “Twoyears ago, when I was 15, 16, I stopped going to school. I would just work yearround.” He re-enrolled in school at 17, and now he is struggling to makeup for the missed years: “Now I started going to school and they put mein 10th grade, and I’m in a program at school that will helpme catch up. It’s a lot of work.”[274] He saidthat since he re-enrolled he works only after school: “Once I startedschool when I was 17, I never missed school to go to work. They say in school,every day counts.”[275]The right to education is a fundamental right belonging toall children, regardless of immigration status, and is protected under both USlaw and international human rights law.[276]V. International Legal StandardsIn recognition of the potential benefits of some forms ofwork and of the realities that require many children to enter the workforce tosupport their own or their families’ basic needs, international law doesnot prohibit children from all work. However, international treaties addressthe particular circumstances under which children under 18 may work and definestandards to protect children from exploitation and other harmful consequencesof child labor.Based on the findings documented in this report andapplicable international law, Human Rights Watch considers the employment ofchildren in the United States in tobacco farming tasks which expose them todirect contact with tobacco plants to be in violation of international lawprohibiting children under the age of 18 from engaging in harmful or hazardouswork. US and state laws and practices concerning children’s participationin agricultural work are inconsistent with or violate international conventionsprotecting the rights of children.ILOConvention on the Worst Forms of Child LaborILO Convention No. 182 Concerning the Prohibition andImmediate Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor (Worst Forms of ChildLabor Convention), ratified by the United States in 1999, prohibits slavery orslave-like practices, child pornography and prostitution, illicit activities,including drug trafficking, as well as the employment of children under the ageof 18 in “work which, by its nature or the circumstances in which it iscarried out, is likely to harm the health, safety or morals of children”(also known as hazardous work).[277]As a state party to the Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention, the UnitedStates is obligated to take immediate and effective steps to ascertain whatforms and conditions of child labor in agriculture violate the convention andthen eliminate them.[278]The Convention obliges member states to take immediate action to preventchildren from engaging in the worst forms of child labor; to provide directassistance for the removal of children already engaged in the worst forms ofchild labor; and to identify and reach out to children at risk.[279]Although the ILO does not have a specific list of occupations that constitute hazardouswork, agriculture is considered one of the three most dangerous sectors inwhich children work, along with construction and mining.[280]Far from acknowledging the dangers of agricultural work tochildren and taking these appropriate steps, the United States by law permitschildren to engage in such labor, including on tobacco farms, with fewerrestrictions than children working in other industries. The ILO’sCommittee of Experts has observed that section 213 of the US Fair LaborStandards Act “authorizes children aged 16 and above to undertake, in theagricultural sector, occupations declared to be hazardous or detrimental totheir health or well-being by the Secretary of Labor.”[281] Inits 2012 and 2014 reports,[282]the Committee noted with serious concern the withdrawal of proposed regulations(explained in detail below), “which would have increased the paritybetween agricultural and non-agricultural child labour prohibitions byprohibiting some tasks associated with agricultural work to children under 18 andstrengthening the protection provided to children under 16 years workingin agriculture,” and strongly urged the US government to take measures toprotect the health and safety of children working in agriculture.[283]The Committee also recommended that the government reintroduce the proposedregulations.[284]Hazardous Child Labor in Tobacco FarmingBased on the findings documented in this report as appliedto the Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention and ILO Recommendation No. 190Concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of theWorst Forms of Child Labor (Worst Forms of Child Labor Recommendation),[285]Human Rights Watch considers any exposure to tobacco plants in tobaccocultivation, harvesting, and curing to be hazardous child labor because of thehealth risks to children associated with exposure to nicotine, pesticides, andtobacco dust. While there may be some light work on tobacco farms that issuitable for children, particularly in the early stages of tobacco production,Human Rights Watch believes most aspects of tobacco farming in the UnitedStates constitute hazardous child labor under ILO definitions.The Worst Forms of Child Labor Recommendation providesguidance to countries on determining what types of work constitute harmful orhazardous work. The recommendation states that in defining the “worstforms of child labor,” consideration should be given, as a minimum, to:(a) work which exposes children to physical, emotional orsexual abuse;(b) work underground, under water, at dangerous heights orin confined spaces;(c) work with dangerous machinery, equipment and tools, orwhich involves the manual handling or transport of heavy loads;(d) work in an unhealthy environment which may, forexample, expose children to hazardous substances, agents or processes, or totemperatures, noise levels, or vibrations damaging to their health;(e) work under particularly difficult conditions such aswork for long hours or during the night or work which does not allow for thepossibility of returning home each day.[286]Each state party to the Worst Forms of Child LaborConvention is expected to use this guidance to identify specific tasks andoccupations that it considers hazardous for children.Hazardous Child Labor in the USHuman Rights Watch research found that childrenparticipating in the cultivation, harvesting, and curing of tobacco in the USroutinely face the risks outlined in subparagraphs (c) through (e), includingwork at dangerous heights; work with dangerous machinery, equipment and tools;work that involves the manual handling or transport of heavy loads; work in anunhealthy environment where they are exposed to hazardous substances (includingnicotine and pesticides) and extreme temperatures; and work for long hours. Mostnotably, Human Rights Watch believes that any exposure to tobacco plants ordried tobacco constitutes hazardous work under subparagraph (d) due to thehealth risks to children.The Worst Forms of Child Labor Recommendation states thatcertain types of work in an unhealthy environment (outlined in subparagraph (d)above) may be permitted for children ages 16 and above “on the conditionthat the health, safety and morals of the children concerned are fullyprotected, and that the children have received adequate specific instruction orvocational training in the relevant branch of activity.”[287]Human Rights Watch has determined, based on our findings, that under theconditions present in farms in the US, there is no way to make exposure totobacco plants or dried tobacco leaves safe for children under 18.The ILO Office provides technical assistance to governmentsin the implementation of the Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention, but inHuman Rights Watch’s view, does not provide adequate guidance regardingthe hazardous nature of tobacco work for children. In a discussion with HumanRights Watch, an ILO expert stated that the ILO does not believe that personalprotective equipment (PPE) is sufficient to protect children working in tobaccocultivation, harvesting and curing.[288]According to Benjamin Smith, ILO senior officer for Corporate SocialResponsibility, “PPE generally does not render hazardous work safe enoughfor children of legal age to be employed. Evidence from ILO projectsunderscores the fact that, for persons under 18, PPEs give a false sense ofsecurity and are not consistently worn because they are generally too large,too expensive, and too uncomfortable.”[289]Recognizing the risks to children of work in tobaccofarming, the US Department of Labor (DOL) proposed regulations in 2011 thatwould have prohibited all children under 16 (the minimum age for hazardous workin agriculture in the US) from “all work in the tobacco production andcuring, including, but not limited to such activities as planting, cultivating,topping, harvesting, baling, barning, and curing.”[290]However, the regulations were withdrawn in 2012 in response to pressure fromagricultural groups.[291] Asnoted above, the ILO Committee of Experts strongly urged the US government toreconsider withdrawal of the proposed regulations.[292]Hazardous Child Labor in Tobacco Farming outside the USSuch problems documented by Human Rights Watch in the US seemlikely to extend to tobacco farms outside the United States. A resolution froma February 2003 ILO tripartite meeting on the future of employment in thetobacco sector, has encouraged all parties engaged in implementing the WorstForms of Child Labor Convention and the Minimum Age Convention[293] toadopt “concrete measures to eliminate child labour in the tobaccochain.” The resolution called on the ILO director general to continue topromote the conventions and to assist in their application specifically in thetobacco sector.[294]These efforts should include providing governments with effective guidanceregarding the hazards of tobacco work, and encouraging countries to review andupdate their hazardous work lists under the Worst Forms of Child LaborConvention accordingly.A number of countries have prohibited all children fromworking in tobacco farming, including Brazil and India, the top two globalproducers of leaf tobacco after China.[295] Brazil prohibitschildren under the age of 18 from “planting, with the exception ofclearing, levelling soil and weeding; at harvest, processing or industrializationof tobacco.”[296]India prohibits children under 18 from working with tobacco, including“handling tobacco in any form.”[297] Malawi, the sixthleading producer of tobacco worldwide, prohibits children from working in alltasks on commercial tobacco farms, and from certain tasks on all farms: “TobaccoSector: i) topping and suckering activities or handling tobacco leaves in theharvesting process; ii) handling or grading tobacco leaves in damp conditionsor conditions of poor lighting or ventilation; iii) any other work involvingtobacco in commercial tobacco estates and farms.”[298]Other countries, including Russia,[299] Kazakhstan,[300]Uganda,[301]also prohibit children under 18 from performing many tasks that expose them totobacco plants.The Eliminating Child Labour in Tobacco Growing (ECLT)Foundation, a Geneva-based “partnership of tobacco farmers andcompanies dedicated to protecting children from child labour wherever tobaccois grown,”[302]recommends that the following activities be prohibited for children under 18 yearsof age, in line with ILO conventions 138 and 182:applying fertilizers;handling and spraying pesticides;using tools which are sharp or too heavy forthe child;using equipment that a child cannot commandsafely;topping and suckering by hand or by knife toremove early flowers;harvesting, carrying leaf to curing sheds;working in curing barns;packing, grading and tying tobacco leavesinto crate or bales for transport to market, storage.[303]According to ECLT Foundation ExecutiveDirector Sonia Velasquez, ECLT also believes that not all activities in tobaccogrowing are hazardous or prohibited for children and recommends that farmers providedecent work for youth of legally working age, whenever allowed by the nationallaws.[304]Seven of the ten companies approached by Human Rights Watchfor this project serve on the board of the ECLT Foundation.[305]Convention on the Rights of the ChildThe United States has signed but not ratified the Conventionon the Rights of the Child (CRC),[306]but as a signatory is obliged to refrain from acts that would defeat thetreaty’s object and purpose.[307]The CRC sets out the minimum protections to which children—defined aspersons under age 18—are entitled. Article 32 of the CRC providesspecifically that children have a right “to be protected from economicexploitation and from performing any work that is likely to be hazardous or tointerfere with the child's education, or to be harmful to the child's health orphysical, mental, spiritual, moral or social development.” Governmentsmust take appropriate legislative, administrative, social and educationalmeasures in this regard.[308]Convention on the Elimination of RacialDiscriminationThe International Convention on theElimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD),ratified by the United States in 1994, defines prohibiteddiscrimination as any race-based distinction, exclusion, restriction orpreference that has “the purpose or effect” of curtailing humanrights and fundamental freedoms.[309] TheCommittee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, which monitors statecompliance with the ICERD, has interpreted the convention to prohibit laws or policies that have “an unjustifiable disparateimpact” on racial and ethnic minorities.[310]The burden of weaker US labor law protectionsfor agricultural workers, as compared to non-agricultural workers, fallsoverwhelming on Hispanic American citizens and immigrants. Most hiredagricultural workers in the United States are Hispanic.[311]As a result, the inadequate labor protections for agricultural workers have adisparate impact on Hispanic American citizens and non-citizen immigrants,amounting to discrimination under international law.[312]In 2008, the committee noted with concern that,“workers belonging to racial, ethnic and national minorities, inparticular women and undocumented migrant workers, continue…to bedisproportionately represented in occupations characterised by long workinghours, low wages, and unsafe or dangerous conditions of work.”[313]The committee has called upon the US government “to take all appropriatemeasures” to review existing laws policies to “ensure the effectiveprotection against any form of racial discrimination and any unjustifiablydisparate impact.”[314]TheRight to the Highest Attainable Standard of HealthThe right of children to the highest attainable standard ofhealth is found in international instruments, including the UniversalDeclaration of Human Rights, International Covenant on Economic Social andCultural Rights (ICESCR) and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.[315]The ICESCR, signed by the United States in 1995 but not ratified, obligatesgovernments to take the steps necessary for the “prevention, treatmentand control of… occupational and other diseases,”[316]and recognizes “the right of everyone to the enjoyment of just andfavorable conditions of work” including “safe and healthy workingconditions.”[317]Governments have the obligation to improve “all aspects of environmentaland industrial hygiene,” for example, through preventive measures toavoid occupational accidents and diseases, and the prevention and reduction ofthe population’s exposure to harmful substances such as harmful chemicals“that directly or indirectly impact upon human health.”[318]Corporate ResponsibilityAlthough the United States government has theprimary responsibility to respect, protect, and fulfill human rights underinternational law, private entities also have responsibilities regarding humanrights, as recognized by international law and other norms.[319]These include, at a minimum, the responsibility to respect all human rights,but also include additional responsibilities of protection in relation tocertain issues, such as children’s rights. The broad consensus thatbusinesses have human rights responsibilities is also reflected in variousstandards and initiatives, as discussed below. Consistentwith their responsibilities to respect human rights, all businesses should haveadequate policies and procedures in place to prevent and respond to humanrights abuses associated with their activities or in their supply chain.Children’s RightsWith respect to business responsibilitiesregarding children’s rights, the UN Committee on the Rights of the Childhas identified that “duties and responsibilitiesto respect the rights of children extend in practice beyond the State andState-controlled services and institutions and apply to private actors andbusiness enterprises,” and that “all businesses must meet theirresponsibilities regarding children’s rights and States must ensure theydo so.”[320]The Committee also notes that “voluntaryactions of corporate responsibility by business enterprises, such as socialinvestments, advocacy and public policy engagement, voluntary codes of conduct,philanthropy and other collective actions, can advance children’srights,” but that these actions “are not a substitute for Stateaction and regulation of businesses … or for businesses to comply withtheir responsibilities to respect children’s rights.”[321]The committee has paid particular attention to “contexts where the impact of business activities and operations onchildren’s rights is most significant,” including where “businesses operate abroad in areaswhere there is insufficient State protection for children’srights.”[322]The Children’s Rightsand Business Principles, developed by UNICEF, the UN Global Compact, and Savethe Children and launched in March 2012, identify acomprehensive range of actions that all business should take to prevent andaddress adverse impacts connected with their activities and relationships, andmaximize positive business impacts on children’s lives. One of theprinciples is to contribute to the elimination of child labor in all businessactivities and business relationships. To accomplish this, businesses areencouraged not only to adopt child labor policies and due diligence procedures,but also to work with governments, social partners and others to promoteeducation and sustainable solutions to the root causes of child labor,including through programs to support youth employment, skills development, andjob training opportunities for young workers.[323]International Business and Human Rights InitiativesThe basic principle that businesses of allsizes have a responsibility to respect human rights, including workers’rights, has achieved wide international recognition. The Organization forEconomic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Guidelines for MultinationalEnterprises, UN Human Rights Council resolutions on business and human rights,UN Global Compact, various multi-stakeholder initiatives in different sectors,and many companies’ own codes of behavior draw from principles ofinternational human rights law and core labor standards in offering guidance tobusinesses on how to uphold their human rights responsibilities.For example, the “Protect, Respect andRemedy” framework and the “Guiding Principles on Business and HumanRights,” which were developed by the then-UN Special Representative onBusiness and Human Rights, John Ruggie, and endorsed by the UN Human RightsCouncil in 2008 and 2011, respectively, reflect the expectation that businessesshould respect human rights, avoid complicity in abuses, and adequately remedythem if they occur. They specify that businesses must exercise due diligence toidentify, prevent, mitigate, and account for the impact of their activities onhuman rights.[324]More detail concerning expectations for companies within the Ruggie frameworkare discussed below, in Responsibilities of Companies Purchasing Tobacco inthe United States.The OECD sets out norms for responsible socialbehavior by multinational firms, incorporating the concept of due diligence andthe content of ILO core labor standards. The guidelines call on enterprises to“respect human rights, which means they should avoid infringing on thehuman rights of others and should address adverse human rights impacts withwhich they are involved,” including by carrying out “human rightsdue diligence” and working to remedy adverse human rights impacts theyhave caused or to which they have contributed.Regarding workers’ rights, theseguidelines state that enterprises should contribute to the effective abolition of child labor and take adequatesteps to ensure occupational health and safety in their operations.[325]VI. Obligationsof the US Government to Protect Child FarmworkersThe US government and the states have an obligation toprotect children from dangerous and exploitative work. However, legal loopholesin federal and state labor laws leave child farmworkers without manyprotections afforded to all other working children. Federal labor law allowsfarmworker children to work longer hours, at younger ages, and in morehazardous conditions than all other working children. State laws in NorthCarolina, Kentucky, Tennessee and Virginia—the four states where HumanRights Watch did research for this report—do little to provide additionalprotections for child farmworkers. The double standard for child agriculturalworkers reflects a larger disparity in how farmworkers are treated under USlaw. Analysis of federal and state labor laws reveals glaring discrepancies inthe treatment of agricultural workers as compared to workers in all otherindustries.Protection for Child Farmworkersunder US LawChild Labor Laws and Wage and Hour LawsFederal LawsThe Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), enacted in 1938, is thefederal law that sets standards for minimum wage, overtime pay, recordkeeping,and the employment of children.[326]Agricultural employers are exempt from many provisions of the law, leavingadult and child farmworkers without many fundamental protections that areprovided to workers in other industries. For example, all farmworkers areexempt from overtime pay provisions,[327] and farmworkers onsmall farms are exempt from minimum wage requirements.[328]Farmworkers are also excluded from the federal law that guarantees employeesthe right to engage in collective bargaining and prohibits employers frominterfering with freedom of association.[329]The child labor provisions of the FLSA treat agriculturalwork differently from work in other industries, providing child farmworkerswith less protection than all other working children. For example, outside ofagriculture, the employment of children younger than 14 is prohibited;[330]14 and 15-year-olds may not work before 7 a.m. or after 7 p.m. (9 p.m. in thesummer);[331]and the standard minimum age for work is 16. However, in agriculture there isno minimum age at which employers may hire children to work unlimited hoursoutside of school, day or night, provided the work takes place on a small farmwith written parental consent.[332] Inagriculture, any employer, regardless of the size of the farm, may hirechildren ages 12 and 13 to work unlimited hours outside of school, providedthey have written parental consent or work on a farm where a parent isemployed.[333] 16.In agriculture, employers may hire children ages 14 and up to work unlimitedhours outside of school. There is no parental consent requirement.[334]Under the FLSA, children working in US agriculture are alsopermitted to engage in tasks deemed “particularly hazardous” atyounger ages than other working children. In nonagricultural occupations, theminimum age for particularly hazardous work is 18, including for childrenworking in a parent’s business. In agriculture, 16 and 17-year-olds hiredto work on farms are permitted to work in particularly hazardous occupations.[335]For example, using a power-driven circular saw or band saw is allowed forchildren starting at age 16 in agriculture; whereas in other industries, theminimum age for using such saws is 18 years. Children who work on a farm ownedor operated by their parents can do particularly hazardous work at any age, nomatter how young.[336]The disparate treatment of child agricultural workers is particularlytroublesome in light of federal data indicating agriculture is the mostdangerous industry open to young workers.[337]State LawsStates have the power to provide stronger labor protectionsthan federal law, particularly for young workers. However, the four stateswhere Human Rights Watch conducted research fail to provide any additionalprotections to child farmworkers. There is no general child labor law in NorthCarolina. Child labor laws in Kentucky and Tennessee specifically exemptagricultural workers,[338]and Virginia’s child labor law is no more protective than federal law.[339]Laws governing wages and hours in North Carolina, Kentucky, and Virginia do notapply to agricultural workers,[340]and Tennessee does not have state-level wage laws.Health and Safety Laws and RegulationsHazardous Occupations OrdersUnder the FLSA, the US Department of Labor (DOL) is chargedwith determining what jobs are hazardous and therefore prohibited for childrenunder certain minimum ages, known as the hazardous occupations orders.[341]The list of occupations deemed particularly hazardous for children working inagriculture is decades-old and inadequate.[342] In particular, thelist leaves off hazardous tasks associated with tobacco production and curing.The list of non-agricultural hazardous occupations was updated in 2010.[343]In 2011, DOL proposed amendments to child labor regulationsto update the list of hazardous occupations in agriculture prohibited forchildren under age 16, based on recommendations made by the National Institutefor Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). Among other restrictions,[344]the new rules would have prohibited all children under 16 from “all workin the tobacco production and curing, including, but not limited to suchactivities as planting, cultivating, topping, harvesting, baling, barning, andcuring.”[345] Theproposed regulations would not have applied to children working on family farms.DOL withdrew the proposed amendments to the rules in 2012 in response toopposition from some groups representing agricultural interests.[346]DOL has not reintroduced the amendments.Pesticide RegulationsDespite the greater vulnerability of children to the harmfuleffects of pesticide exposure, federal pesticide regulations fail to providechildren with special consideration. The US Environmental Protection Agency(EPA), which oversees the registration, distribution, sale, anduse of pesticides, issues the Worker Protection Standard, a federalregulation intended to “reduce the risks of illness or injury resultingfrom…occupational exposures to pesticides.”[347] TheWorker Protection Standard sets no minimum age for mixing or applyingpesticides, although regulations set by DOL under the FLSA prohibit childrenunder 16 from handling the most toxic pesticides.[348]Federal regulations also establish restricted-entryintervals (REIs), the period of time after a pesticide's application duringwhich workers should not be in the treated areas without protective equipment.[349]However, restricted-entry intervals are set using a 154-pound adult male as amodel—they are not adapted for children. A 2003 study of children withacute occupational pesticide-related poisoning found that 26 percent of illchildren in agriculture were exposed despite compliance with restricted-entryinterval requirements, suggesting, according to the authors, “that longerintervals may be requiredto protect youths.”[350] TheWorker Protection Standard and the REI regulations are formulated withadults—and only adults—in mind.A process to revise the Worker Protection Standard has beenongoing for more than a decade, and in 2013, the EPA announced that it wouldpropose revisions to the rule in 2014. The new regulations will likely set aminimum age for workers to mix and apply pesticides.[351]Occupational Safety and Health Laws andRegulationsFew federal occupational safety and health regulationsprotect child farmworkers. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration(OSHA) within DOL is charged with establishing and enforcing standards to promotesafe and healthy working conditions for all workers. Federal safety and healthregulations include “general industry standards,”[352] mostof which are exempt for agricultural workers,[353] and“agriculture standards.”[354] Standards foragriculture include the Field Sanitation Standard, which requires agriculturalemployers to provide adequate drinking water, hand-washing facilities, andtoilets[355];tractor regulations; and rules for safety with agricultural equipment. Eventhese limited protections do not apply to workers on small farms; the USCongress annually limits the application of the Occupational Safety and HealthAct by exempting from all enforcement activity any farm that employs 10 orfewer employees and has not had an active temporary labor camp within the last12 months.[356]OSHA can rely on its so-called “general duty clause”where standards for agriculture are insufficient.[357] Thegeneral duty clause is a requirement in the Occupational Safety and Health Act thateach employer must provide each employee a job and a place to work “freefrom recognized hazards that are causing or are likely to cause death orserious physical harm to his employees.”[358]State Laws and RegulationsIndividual states may develop and operate their ownoccupational safety and health programs, known as State Occupational Safety andHealth Plans, which must be approved by federal OSHA. Once in place, theysupplant (with limited exceptions) direct federal OSHA enforcement in thatstate. Under federal law, states must adopt standards that are “at leastas effective” as federal standards,[359] and according toOSHA, most states adopt standards identical to those in place at the federallevel.[360]All four states covered in this report operate State Plans, but none have lawsor regulations on occupational health and safety that provide greaterprotections for agricultural or child workers than federal standards.Enforcement of Existing LawsEnforcement of Child Labor Lawsand Wage and Hour LawsFederal EnforcementThe Wage and Hour Division of DOL is charged with enforcingthe Fair Labor Standards Act and the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural WorkerProtection Act. Wage and Hour investigators are stationed across the US and areauthorized to conduct investigations and determine compliance with child laborand the other provisions of the FLSA. As noted above, the weak protections forchild farmworkers in federal labor laws enable most employers to hire childworkers legally.In 2010, Human Rights Watch documented poor enforcement ofchild labor laws in agriculture by the Wage and Hour Division.[361]Since 2010, the division has hired additional investigators and addedmultilingual investigators and at the end of 2013, had 1,040 investigators(compared to 894 in April 2010).[362]In 2013, DOL conducted 201 investigations of agricultural employers under theFair Labor Standards Act, and 1,227 cases under the Migrant and Seasonal AgriculturalWorker Protection Act, spending a total of 94,059 hours on agriculturalinvestigations. In 2013, DOL found a total of 36 cases of child laborviolations involving 62 children in agriculture, 5 percent of all child laborcases that year.[363]The “hot goods” provision isanother enforcement tool. The provision prohibits the shipment in interstatecommerce of any goods produced in violation of minimum wage, overtime, or childlabor requirements.[364] Itcan be extremely effective, particularly in agriculture, in that it allows theWage and Hour Division to seek temporary restraining orders preventing themovement of tainted goods, incentivizing companies, growers, and other affectedbusinesses to cooperate with the division. Such cooperation has includedfuture compliance agreements and arrangements for ongoing monitoring. Thoughuse of the “hot goods” provision increased in 2013, it remains anexceptional law enforcement tool: the division invoked the provision only oncein 2012 and five times in 2013.[365]Enforcement of Health and Safety Laws and RegulationsThe enforcement of health and safety laws and regulationsconcerning farmworkers is piecemeal. DOL’s Wage and Hour Division isresponsible for enforcing violations of the hazardous occupations orders acrossall industries. The Wage and Hour Division also enforces OSHA’s FieldSanitation Standard, but only in states where OSHA has jurisdiction; stateagencies are responsible for enforcement of the Field Sanitation Standard whenstates have adopted State Occupational Safety and Health Plans.[366]In all four states where Human Rights Watch conducted research, state agenciesare responsible for enforcement of the standard. The EPA delegates enforcementof the Worker Protection Standard to state agencies. The EPA reportedconducting 3,552 agricultural inspections in 2012 to investigate compliancewith the Worker Protection Standard,[367] and found 1,218violations of the rule, most often related to posting and trainingrequirements.[368]VII.Responsibilities of Businesses Purchasing Tobacco in the United StatesThe US is one of the top producers of unmanufactured tobaccoin the world, behind China, Brazil, and India.[369] Approximately5.8 trillion cigarettes are consumed around the world annually.[370]China is by far the largest market, accounting for nearly one-third of globalconsumption, but it is almost exclusively operated by a state monopoly, ChinaNational Tobacco. Excluding China, two-thirds of world industry volume incigarettes and other tobacco products is produced by four major global tobaccocompanies: Philip Morris International (PMI), British American Tobacco (BAT),Japan Tobacco Group (JT), and Imperial Tobacco Group.[371] Inthe United States, the largest manufacturing companies are Philip Morris USA(PM USA, a subsidiary of Altria Group), Reynolds American, and Lorillard.All of these companies publicly report that they do not owntobacco farms but purchase tobacco directly from tobacco growers or from leafsuppliers from many countries around the world, including the United States. Inaddition, the world’s largest leaf merchant companies, Alliance One andUniversal Corporation, which, among other business operations, supply leaftobacco to these and other tobacco manufacturers around the world, alsopurchase tobacco leaf from growers in the US.Some of these companies have a stated policy concerningchild labor. All of the companies formally acknowledge certain standards foundin International Labour Organization conventions. However, several companiesappeared to apply standards, including a standardized industry program known asthe US Tobacco Good Agricultural Practices Program, in their US operations thatonly require compliance with US law, while requiring adherence to ILO standards,including concerning child labor, in operations outside the US. As noted above,US child labor law falls well below international standards and fails toadequately protect children.From the information supplied to Human Rights Watch, Philip MorrisInternational has developed the most detailed and protective set of policiesand procedures, including training and policy guidance on child labor and otherlabor issues which it is implementing in its global supply chain. PMI has alsodeveloped specific and expansive lists of hazardous tasks that children under18 are prohibited from doing on tobacco farms, which include most tasks inwhich children come into prolonged contact with mature tobacco leaves, amongother hazardous work.Japan Tobacco Group stated that it is actively developingits child labor policies, including through cooperation with ILO experts onchild labor, although it allows children older than 15 to perform a range oftasks in tobacco farming, including hazardous tasks, if children receive propertraining and safety equipment, and its Agricultural Labor Policy defers tonational law in the event of differences in the policy and national laws.Alliance One also developed a child labor policy and measurable standards forits implementation based on ILO principles, but in the information provided toHuman Rights Watch, did not specify whether it considers certain tasks hazardousbeyond those established in national laws.The information shared by Imperial Tobacco Group with HumanRights Watch also did not specify how the company interprets or implementsinternational child labor standards in practice in the US or their globalsupply chains. BAT provided to Human Rights Watch more detail on how itinterprets international child labor standards, but only specified a smallrange of tasks that it considers hazardous.From the information made available to Human Rights Watch,Altria Group does not have a separate child labor policy but requires entitiesin its supply chain to maintain compliance with international minimum agestandards, and expects growers and suppliers in the US to refrain fromemploying children under 18 in hazardous occupations as defined under US law.R.J. Reynolds Tobacco, responsible for leaf purchasing for all ReynoldsAmerican manufacturing subsidiaries, also does not have a specific child laborpolicy. Reynolds American states that it requires that growers with whom the companydirectly contracts respect national laws, but according to information sharedwith Human Rights Watch, apparently does not have similar expectations forother suppliers in the supply chain.[372]Lorillard does not contract directly with any farms in the USand relies on its suppliers, Alliance One and Universal, to have policies andprocedures in place concerning child labor. Lorillard does not directly monitorthe treatment of workers in its supply chain.[373]Universal does not have a stated child labor policy, but told Human RightsWatch that it “agreed with” ILO standards on minimum age and theworst forms of child labor and commits itself to the relevant policiesestablished by companies that purchase tobacco from it.[374]It is important to note that company policies generallyprohibiting “child labor” do not prohibit all work by childrenunder age 18. As noted above, under international standards, the term childlabor refers to work done by children below the minimum age of employment orunder hazardous conditions. An effective child labor policy should specify indetail what types of work are considered hazardous and therefore prohibited. Noneof the companies identified in this report have policies that explicitlyprohibit children under 18 from all work in which they have direct contact withtobacco in any form, as Human Rights Watch recommends, based on our researchfindings and international standards.As notedabove, the UN Guiding Principles on Responsible Business details basic stepscompanies should take to respect human rights including to avoid causing orcontributing to adverse human rights impacts through their own activities andto seek to prevent or mitigate adverse human rights impacts that are directlylinked to their operations, products, or services by their businessrelationships, and mitigating abuses if they occur.[375]“Business relationships” are understood to include relationshipswith business partners, entities in its value chain, and any entity directlylinked to its business operations, products, or services.To achieveeffective due diligence in the supply chain, companies should have a policycommitment to meet their responsibility to respect human rights; effectiveprocesses to identify, prevent, mitigate, and account for how they addresstheir impacts on human rights; and processes to remediate any adverse humanrights impacts a company causes or to which it contributes. The GuidingPrinciples also state that for businesses to gauge actual or potential humanrights risks in their own activities or through their business relationships,businesses should draw on internal and independent external human rightsexpertise and involve meaningful consultation with potentially affected groupsand other relevant stakeholders.[376]Response to Human Rights WatchWhen preparing this report, Human Rights Watch sent lettersto the 10 companies listed above, asking questions about their child laborpolicies, worker protection policies, as well as procedures for monitoring forchild labor and human rights abuses in the company’s supply chain,including both on farms with which they directly contract as well as in otherparts of their supply chain, for example when purchasing through leaf merchantcompanies. Human Rights Watch also requested meetings with each of thecompanies. Subsequently, Human Rights Watch sent additional letters in Marchand April 2014. All of the letters sent by Human Rights Watch can be found asan appendix to this report available on the Human Rights Watch website.[377]Nine companies responded to Human Rights Watch’s initialletters. Copies of those responses can be found in the appendix. Relevantinformation from each company’s response to Human Rights Watch and fromthe company’s website is also included below. The company responsesvaried widely, with some providing extensive detail on their policies andpractices and others focusing exclusively on training and contractualexpectations to ensure compliance with US law. China National Tobacco did notrespond to the letter and did not return calls or emails from Human RightsWatch.In addition, Human Rights Watch met with or spoke by phonewith executives from each of the companies except China National Tobacco, whodid not respond to Human Rights Watch’s requests for a meeting, and Lorillardand Imperial Tobacco Group, who declined to meet with Human Rights Watch.[378]Companies’ Child Labor PoliciesMost, although not all, of the tobacco manufacturing andleaf merchant companies whom Human Rights Watch contacted for this report had childlabor policies in place, as detailed below.Altria GroupAltria Group, headquartered in Richmond, Virginia, is theparent company of three US tobacco companies, including Philip Morris USA, thelargest cigarette company in the US, which “has approximately half of theU.S. cigarette market share,” and manufactures brands such as Marlboro,Basic, L&M, Parliament, and Virginia Slims.[379]Altria Client Services (ACLS), writing on behalf of PM USA and other AltriaGroup tobacco companies, told Human Rights Watch that it contracts directlywith US tobacco growers and buys tobacco from tobacco suppliers who source bothdomestically and internationally, and that “a significant majority”of ACLS tobacco is sourced in the US.[380]Concerning child labor, ACLS told Human Rights Watch thatits grower and supplier contracts require US tobacco growers to refrain fromemploying anyone under 18 in hazardous occupations as defined by the USSecretary of Labor’s list of hazardous occupations, which legally applyto all children under 16, and include driving a vehicle transportingpassengers, riding on a tractor as a passenger, and handling or applyingcategory I (the most toxic) agricultural chemicals.[381]Outside of the US, Altria Group requires growers and suppliers to “complywith the minimum age requirements prescribed by applicable laws or theInternational Labour Conventions, whichever is higher.”[382]In letters and a meeting with Human Rights Watch, ACLS alsoshared information on other relevant policies and procedures, including its GoodAgricultural Practices (GAP) program in the US as well as its participation inthe US Tobacco GAP program, described below. ACLS also provided information toHuman Rights Watch on its monitoring of its child labor and other policies inthe US and internationally, noting that it had conducted assessments of alldirect-contracted growers in the US in 2011 to 2013.[383]In response to the recommendations concerning child laboroutlined in this report, Altria Group stated that it believed the recommendationis “counter to current farming practices in the US” and “atodds with certain communities where family farming is a way of life.” AltriaGroup committed to work through the Farm Labor Practices Groupmulti-stakeholder initiative in North Carolina regarding child labor as well aseducation and training for growers, farm labor contractors, and workers, and toenhance its monitoring of farms “to better quantify child labor andrelevant circumstances on our contracted farms.”[384]British American TobaccoBAT is a leading global tobacco company with products soldin around 180 markets.[385]BAT products account for 13 percent of the global cigarette market, and an evengreater percentage of the global market outside of China.[386] BAThas more than 200 cigarette brands in its portfolio, including Pall Mall,the third largest cigarette brand in the world.[387] BATowns a 42 percent stake in the US tobacco manufacturing company ReynoldsAmerican.[388]BAT stated that about 2.5 percent of its global leaf purchases are sourced fromthe US through third-party leaf suppliers, including Reynolds American.[389]In a January 2014 letter to Human Rights Watch, BAT statedthat it does not employ children in any of its direct operations and that it“aims to apply its commitment” to protecting children from laborexploitation in its global supply chain, drawing on guidance from the ILO’sMinimum Age Convention and Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention.[390]BAT’s Child Labor Policy states that the company will “comply withall relevant and applicable local and international labour regulations,treaties, conventions and principles relating to the protection, welfare andhealth & safety of children.”[391] BAT also states that“the welfare and health & safety of children are paramount at alltimes,” that farm work should not conflict with or impedechildren’s proper educational development including school attendance,and that “[no] farm activity that could be considered to put children atrisk is undertaken by children.” Work activities BAT considers unacceptablefor children include long hours and “activity that could put children atrisk,” including driving tractors and lifting heavy loads, and BATrequires “all pesticides and other dangerous material need to be out ofreach of children.”[392]In its letter to Human Rights Watch BAT did not specifyother tasks or work that BAT considers hazardous for children in the UnitedStates or other countries.[393]Concerning all workers, including child workers, and exposure to nicotine,BAT’s website states:There are a number of steps we recommend tobacco workerstake to reduce the risk of contracting GTS. These include: Avoiding handlingwet tobacco by waiting for the rain (or dew) to dry from the leaf. Quicklychanging out of wet clothes saturated with moisture originating from greentobacco leaves. Wearing Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) to avoid directskin contact with tobacco during harvesting. We recommend clothing such asgloves, trousers and shirts/aprons made from impermeable cloth, although in hotweather this can increase the risk of heat stress. The success of this measurelargely depends on the farmers’ willingness to use PPE.[394]Regarding expectations for and monitoring of its suppliers,BAT relies on a program called the Social Responsibility in Tobacco Production(SRTP) program, adopted by a number of tobacco manufacturers (see ImperialTobacco Group, below), which sets minimum performance levels for contractedleaf growers on agricultural practices as well as labor, child labor,occupational health, and other issues.[395] Concerning childlabor, since 2012 the SRTP program has included the statement: “formal reference is given to the treatment ofchild labour in the context of ILO conventions 138 and 182.”[396]BAT requires all of its suppliers, including in the US, toact in accordance with the SRTP program and educate farmers and workers on theprogram and monitor progress.[397]Under the program, suppliers carry out self-assessments and a monitoring group conductsassessments of suppliers’ reports.[398] BAT states that the2013 SRTP child labor score for the company’s US suppliers was 98percent.[399]Imperial Tobacco GroupAccording to its website, the UK-based Imperial Tobacco Group operates in morethan 160 countries worldwide and manufactures cigarette brands that “areamong the most popular in the world,” including Davidoff and Gauloises.[400] The company also states it is “the global leader in fine cuttobacco and papers” and has exclusive rights to sell all luxury Cubancigars.[401] Imperial Tobacco Group’s 2013 annual report recorded a 5.8percent global market share.[402]Imperial Tobacco Group does not have a separate child laborpolicy but stated in a January 2014 letter to Human Rights Watch that thecompany and its subsidiaries do not employ children and that it works withsuppliers to encourage their “compliance with international standards onchild labor.” This includes: freedom for children from any work thatsubjects a child to economic exploitation, is hazardous, interferes with thechild’s education, or is harmful to a child’s health or physical,mental or social development.[403] It isnot clear from the information available to Human Rights Watch how ImperialTobacco Group applies these definitions to actual working conditions in itssupply chain, including which types of work Imperial Tobacco Group considersharmful or hazardous.Imperial Tobacco Group stated that it had not receivedreports of child labor concerning its suppliers, but that “given theglobal incidence of child labour in agricultural supply chains, we understandthat it is an issue that we must address.”[404] ImperialTobacco Group participates in the Social Responsibility in Tobacco Production(SRTP or SRiTP) program, described above, which applies to all of its globalsuppliers, and also gives guidance to and measures suppliers on adherence toILO Minimum Age and Worst Forms of Child Labor Conventions. ImperialTobacco Group monitors suppliers’ self-assessments and adherence to the SRiTPprogram’s standards.[405]Imperial Tobacco Group reported that less than 5 percent ofthe tobacco used in its products is purchased in the United States throughinternational leaf merchants. Imperial Tobacco Group representatives declinedto meet with Human Rights Watch.[406]Japan Tobacco GroupJapan Tobacco Group (JT) described itself as “aleading global tobacco company, with operations in over 70 countries, and anestimated 15 percent global market share, outside of China.”[407]Its leading brands include Winston, Camel, Mevius(formerly Mild Seven), and Benson & Hedges.JT’sbusinesses include a Japanese domestic tobacco business and Japan TobaccoInternational (JTI), headquartered in Geneva.[408]JTI’s Agricultural Labor Policy (ALP), which appliesto all of its direct-contracted growers, includes “child labor elimination,”and states that children “shall not carry out activities such as cropharvesting or other activities related to physically handling green leaftobacco, carrying heavy loads, or those involving handling or application ofcrop protection agents.”[409] The policyallows children ages 16 and above to carry out such tasks, where national lawpermits it, but requires the “health, safety, and moral of the childrento be fully protected, including [by] comprehensive specific training.”[410]Concerning nicotine poisoning, JTI requires growers to make workers aware ofthe risks of GTS and apply reasonable measures to limit its risk, in line withJTI guidance supplied to growers. The ALP specifies that in case of a conflictbetween the ALP and local legislation, local legislation will prevail.[411]In a February 2014 letter to Human Rights Watch, JT statedthat JTI’s contracts with US tobacco growers specify that the“Producer undertakes not to use, at any time and for any purpose, anykind of child labor and/or forced labor [as defined by the applicablelegislation and ILO conventions] for the growing, harvesting, curing,classifying, and baling of […] tobacco.”[412]JTI will monitor the implementation of the ALP through a KnowYour Grower (KYG) program, which it has begun rolling out in differentcountries, with a plan for implementation throughout its supply chain, includingthe US, by 2018.[413] JTItold Human Rights Watch the company has not implemented the ALP with leafsupply companies and other intermediaries in its supply chain, but will do soafter the implementation of KYG.[414]JTI also participates in the US Tobacco Good AgriculturalPractices program, and engages in the North Carolina Farm Labor Practices Group(both described below) in the US. JTI stated that it partners with the ILO andother international organizations “to address the fundamental causes ofchild labor.”[415]In response to Human Rights Watch’s recommendationsoutlined in this report, JTI indicated that it believes “many activitiescan be safely carried out on a [tobacco] farm by young people between 16 and18,” and stated that JTI would seek to determine themselves the risksassociated with different tobacco farming activities. JTI also committed to“continue the community support” in the areas where they purchasetobacco in the US.[416]LorillardThe Lorillard Tobacco Company, a subsidiary of Lorillard, isthe oldest continuously manufacturing tobacco company in the United States andthe third-largest tobacco manufacturer in the country. The Greensboro, North Carolina-basedcompany manufactures several well-known brands, including Newport, the topselling menthol and second largest selling cigarette in the US.[417]Based on the information available to Human Rights Watch,Lorillard does not appear to have a separate child labor policy, but haspolicies concerning compliance with national child labor laws.[418] In aJanuary 2014 letter to Human Rights Watch, Lorillard stated that it relies“on the implementation of policies and procedures and monitoring by ourtobacco suppliers to ensure that there are no child labor lawviolations.” Lorillard contracts with Alliance One and Universal for thepurchase of tobacco leaf in the US.[419]Lorillard stated that, in response to the December 2013letter from Human Rights Watch, it approached Alliance One and Universal andrequested those companies to abide by their own stated child labor and socialresponsibility policies and to “support efforts to improve workplaceconditions for farm workers.”[420]Lorillard also stated that because it does not contract directly with tobaccogrowers, it does “not directly monitor the treatment of laborers ontobacco farms” but that it reviews its “supplier policies on childlabor and other compliance on a regular basis and inquire as to any issuesidentified.”[421]The January 2014 letter to Human Rights Watch also statedthat Lorillard “had not received any reports of child labor or otherlabor violations.”[422]Lorillard declined to provide information about the volume of tobacco purchasesin the United States. Lorillard also declined to meet with Human Rights Watch, citingthe company’s “indirect relationship with the tobacco farms.”[423]Philip Morris InternationalPhilip Morris International (PMI), a United States-basedtobacco company with operations based in Lausanne, Switzerland,[424]describes itself as “the leading international tobacco company”with an estimated 16 percent share of the total cigarette market outsideof the United States.[425] PMIowns seven of the world’s top 15 cigarette brands, including Marlboro,the world’s leading brand and sells its productsin over 180 markets.[426] According to PMI, the company contracts with more than3,000 tobacco growers in the United States, supplying approximately 10 percentof PMI’s global leaf purchases.[427]Of the companies contacted by Human Rights Watch for thisreport, Philip Morris International has the most detailed child labor policyand articulated meaningful progress to develop and implement policies andprocedures to address child labor in its supply chain.[428]PMI’s detailed and specific child labor policy, a component of itsAgricultural Labor Policy (ALP), prohibits work for children under 15, or theminimum age set by a country’s laws, whichever is higher, with theexception of light work on family farms. PMI also prohibits children under 18from engagement in hazardous work.[429]PMI listed the hazardous activities that children of any ageshould not perform, including: driving vehicles, using sharp tools in movement,…, handling and applying pesticides and fertilizers, carrying heavyloads, working at heights, working long hours that interfere with health andwell-being, working in extreme temperatures, working at night, harvesting,topping and pulling suckers off of tobacco plants.[430]In a February 2014 meeting with Human Rights Watch, PMI officials gaveseveral examples of tasks that the company did not consider hazardous forchildren, including weeding, handling seedlings, watering seedbeds, andselecting tobacco leaf after plants have dried.[431]PMI has developed detailed guidance materials, trainingmaterials and programs, and internal and external monitoring proceduresspecific to each market in which it works to facilitate implementation of theALP, including the child labor policy in its global supply chain.[432]PMI also engaged Verite, a non-profit organization, to provide PMI with“experience, advice and hands-on support in the creation, implementationand monitoring of the ALP Program.”[433]In early 2012, PMI incorporated its ALP Code standards incontractual arrangements with all growers in the United States and conductedtraining sessions to cover all of its contracted farms. PMI reported to HumanRights Watch that it severed ties with 20 growers who stated that they couldnot comply with the ALP standards on child labor.[434] PMInoted that its ALP code “maintains generally stricter standards thandefined in US federal law, both in terms of the types of activities deemedhazardous and the age limits for performing such activities.”[435]With regard to training and implementation of the ALPworldwide, since 2001, “over 3,700 PMI employees (and our suppliers) andnearly 500,000 tobacco growers in more than 30 countries have been trained onALP principles and standards” for the farms where PMI sources tobacco.[436]PMI also undertook to identify priority issues on farms and to“systematically address issues and measure [the] progress on a long-termbasis.”[437]Children involved in hazardous work falls under the company’s“prompt action” category.[438]In a February 2014 written response to Human Rights Watch,PMI provided extensive detail about implementation of other aspects of the ALPin the US and globally.[439]PMI also shared with Human Rights Watch details about its monitoring ofgrowers’ adherence to the ALP in the US and globally, including plans tosystematically monitor 100 percent of its farms in the US by 2015.[440]PMI participates in the multi-stakeholder Farm Labor Practices Group and statedthat it has assumed leadership roles in subgroups created to address specificissues.[441]In response to Human Rights Watch’s findings andrecommendations, PMI stated that it would broaden its internal monitoringeffort to visit all contracted farms in the US, in addition to the third-partyassessment during the 2014 peak season. PMI also stated that it did not agreewith Human Rights Watch’s recommendation to extend restrictions onchildren working to all stages of the tobacco crop. PMI stated that it wouldwelcome “a strengthening of the US regulatory framework to align it with[PMI] and ILO’s international standards, and would support a sector-wideapproach” to child labor in tobacco farming. PMI also describedinitiatives underway in the US, including a higher education scholarshipprogram for children of farmworkers in 2015, and a summer school for migrantfarm children.[442]Reynolds AmericanReynolds American (RAI) is the parent company of R.J.Reynolds Tobacco Company (R.J. Reynolds), the second-largest US tobacco company,and Santa Fe Natural Tobacco Company, producer of Natural American Spiritcigarettes, among other companies.[443]Reynolds’ products include two of the best-selling cigarettes in the US: Cameland Pall Mall.[444]As noted above, BAT holds a 42 percent stake in Reynolds American.R.J. Reynolds, which purchases tobacco leaf on behalf of allReynolds American tobacco product manufacturing subsidiaries, does not have a specificchild labor policy that it implements throughout the supply chain, but statedto Human Rights Watch that it addresses child labor through its expectationsthat the growers with whom it contracts directly comply with national law. Itarticulates these expectations through the contracts with growers and providestraining and educational resources to growers and workers on health, safety,and other issues to help them operate in “a safe and legally compliantmanner.”[445] R.J.Reynolds did not articulate to Human Rights Watch any policies concerning childlabor or worker protections expectations for non-contract farms supplyingtobacco to the company through intermediaries, namely leaf merchant companies.Both the R.J. Reynolds letter to Human Rights Watch and theReynolds American website indicate that the businesses distance themselves fromthe labor practices in their tobacco supply chain, stating: “Because farmworkers are not our employees, we have no control over their recruitment, theirhiring, or the terms and conditions of their employment,”[446]and “Because farm workers are not our employees, we have no directcontrol over their sourcing, their training, their pay rates, or their housingand access to human services.”[447]Instead, the company said it focuses on ensuring that its suppliers “havethe training and resources they need to do the right thing” for workersin the supply chain.[448]The company’s website also states that it seeks to “Support andrespect the protection of internationally proclaimed human rights.”[449]According to its letter to Human Rights Watch and itswebsite, R.J. Reynolds hired a third party group to audit the growerscontracting with the company in North Carolina in 2011 and 2012. According tothe auditor’s report, auditors assessed 408 growers and interviewed 922workers (about 22 percent of the workforce).[450] R.J. Reynoldssummarized the audit as “encouraging in the areas of worker treatment andsafety, but revealed that further work is needed in the area ofrecord-keeping.”[451]Concerning child labor the audit found three instances of children under 18 workingfor hire.[452]Farm Labor Organizing Committee and Reynolds AmericanIn 2007, the Farm Labor Organizing Committee (FLOC), afarmworker union based in North Carolina, began calling on Reynolds Americanand R.J. Reynolds to meet with farmworker representatives concerning occupationalhealth and safety hazards, unsafe housing, wage problems, and other humanrights concerns for tobacco workers in the state. FLOC has also urged thecompanies to guarantee freedom of association and collective bargaining fortobacco workers in their supply chain. For many years, the company declinedFLOC’s requests to meet, arguing in an open letter published on theirwebsite that they were not “the appropriate party to negotiate anycollective bargaining agreement with FLOC.”[453]At a 2011 shareholder meeting, following publication of ajoint report by FLOC and Oxfam America on human rights abuses on tobacco farmsin North Carolina,[454]R.J. Reynolds announced it would monitor working conditions on tobacco farmsfrom which it sourced tobacco, and participate in the multi-stakeholder FarmLabor Practices Group. In 2012, after another year of public campaigning,Reynolds management agreed to meet directly with FLOC. Negotiations betweenReynolds and FLOC are ongoing.[455]TobaccoLeaf Merchant CompaniesAlliance One InternationalAlliance One Internationaldescribes itself as “a leading independent leaf tobacco merchant servingthe world's largest cigarette manufacturers.” According to its website,Alliance One selects, purchases, processes, packs, stores, and ships leaftobacco, buying tobacco in more than 45 countries.[456]Alliance One reported that in 2013 it contracted with1,074 growers in the United States, including 446 in Tennessee, 397 in NorthCarolina, 226 in Kentucky, and 5 in Virginia. For the 2013 fiscal year, PMI,JTI, Imperial Tobacco Group, and China National Tobacco each accounted for morethan 10 percent of Alliance One revenues. In 2013, Alliance One deliveredapproximately 19 percent of its tobacco sales to customers in the UnitedStates.[457]In a March 2014 letter toHuman Rights Watch, Alliance One stated that its child labor policy, acomponent of its agricultural labor policy, is based on ILO principles. Thepolicy states that there shall be “no employment or recruitment of childlabor,” that no child under 18 is involved in hazardous work, and that 15is the minimum age for work, unless national law sets a higher standard. Children13 to 15 may be involved in light work on a family farm. The company did notspecify whether it defines specific tasks hazardous beyond those established innational laws.[458]In its contracts with growers in the US, however, AllianceOne requires that growers do not use child labor and that the grower andsubcontractors “will at all times be in strict compliance with allFederal and State laws, statutes, regulations and standard[s] regarding childlabor.”[459]Globally, Alliance One statesthat its child labor principles and expectations are communicated directly toits contracted farmers, generally by the company’s Field Technicians andAgronomy Area Managers, based on country-specific communication plans. AllianceOne also relies on farm visits, farmer meetings, media, brochures,collaboration with NGOS, industry organizations, and governments to communicateits child labor expectations.[460]In addition, Alliance One states that “globallyField Technicians are trained to look for evidence of child labor use duringeach farm visit and to remind farmers of the importance of not allowing thispractice.” Alliance One reported that its personnel visit approximately10-12 farms in the United States per week during the growing season.”[461]In its detailed written response to Human RightsWatch, Alliance One did not describe any third party independent monitoring ofits child labor policy or other policies.[462]Alliance One’s letter to Human Rights Watchprovided details on other aspects of its Agricultural Labor Policy and itsimplementation.[463]Universal CorporationAccording to UniversalCorporation’s website, the company is the world’s leading leaftobacco merchant and processor, based on volume, conducting business in morethan 30 countries. Universal's business includes selecting, buying, shipping,processing, packing, storing, and financing of leaf tobacco for sale to, or forthe account of, manufacturers of tobacco products.[464]Universal states that the company handled between 25and 35 percent of the flue-cured and burley tobacco produced in North America,mainly from the US, in the 2013 fiscal year.[465]Universal Corporation reports that globally its fivelargest customers are PMI, Imperial Tobacco Group, China National Tobacco, BAT,and JTI. In the aggregate, these customers accounted for more than 60 percentof Universal’s consolidated revenues for each of the past three fiscalyears.[466]Universal does not have achild labor policy, but told Human Rights Watch that it commits itself to therelevant policies established by companies that purchase tobacco from it.[467]In a March 2014 letter to Human Rights Watch,Universal stated that it has “agreed with the fundamental positionscontained in the International Labor Organization’s Convention 138 onminimum age and Convention 182 on the worst forms of child labor.”[468]Universal acknowledged that its approach presentschallenges as many regions around the world “have conflicting laws aboutminimum age or the definitions of ‘child labor’ and‘hazardous work’ (or there are no laws at all).”[469]Universal states that in itscontracts with tobacco growers in the US it “expressly forbids ourgrowers to employ workers under the applicable minimum legal age for thespecific work performed.”[470]Universal also noted, as have some other tobaccomanufacturing companies whom Human Rights Watch contacted in conjunction withthis report, that it has limited agronomy personnel for support, training, andmonitoring of its contracted growers in the US and that universities’ agriculturalextension services fulfill these functions.[471]Universal reported that outside of the US, itsagronomy services include programs on “elimination of child labor.”[472]Universal also told HumanRights Watch that it helped develop the US Tobacco GAP Program, described below,which requires tobacco growers’ compliance with US federal and state lawsand that it participates in the Farm Labor Practices Group.Industry-Wide MultilateralInitiativesUS Tobacco Good Agricultural Practices ProgramTobacco product manufacturers, leaf merchants, growers,government agencies, universities, and agricultural organizations have togetherdeveloped an industry-wide set of standards for tobacco production in theUnited States, called the US Tobacco Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) Program.The US Tobacco GAP is defined as “agricultural practices which produce aquality crop while protecting, sustaining or enhancing the environment withregard to soil, water, air, animal and plant life as well as protecting andensuring the rights of farm laborers.”[473] One of the goals ofthe US Tobacco GAP was to reduce the burden on growers, who typically contractwith multiple buyers, to meet different companies’ agricultural practiceand record keeping requirements. A handbook published in 2012 containsguidelines to growers for crop management, environmental management, and labormanagement, and has been endorsed by many of the companies approached by HumanRights Watch.[474]The US Tobacco GAP approach to labor emphasizesgrowers’ obligations under US law, and requires growers to provide“a safe work environment,” recognize workers’ rights tofreedom of association, meet minimum standards for housing, and train workerson health and safety hazards, including nicotine poisoning.[475]Regarding child labor, the GAP Program handbook requires growers to:“Follow all relevant contractual and legal requirements concerning theregulations on child labor,” and advises growers to review federal andstate laws governing the employment of children under 18 in agriculture.[476]A number of companies noted to Human RightsWatch that starting in 2013, third party auditors will be used to evaluategrower compliance with US GAP on an annual basis.[477]Multi-Stakeholder InitiativeSince April 2012, three large tobacco product manufacturers beganparticipating in a North Carolina-based multi-stakeholder initiative, calledthe Farm Labor Practices Group (FLPG).[478] Thegroup now includes several leading tobacco manufacturers and leaf merchants—AltriaGroup, Philip Morris International, Reynolds American, Japan TobaccoInternational, Alliance One, and Universal—along with tobacco growerrepresentatives, FLOC, the Interfaith Center on Corporate Responsibility (ICCR),and US Department of Labor representatives.Many of the companies specifically mentioned theirparticipation in the FLPG in their written responses to and in meetings withHuman Rights Watch. The aim of the group, which has met several times since itsinception, is, according to Altria Group, “to help both farmers andfarmworkers better understand and comply with applicable labor laws andregulations, and to foster improved farm labor practices, where needed.”[479]According to Universal, “Significant issues identified by the FLPG todate include the use of disreputable labor contractors, the protection ofundocumented migrant labor, and housing conditions for farm laborers” andthat the FLPG “had not identified child labor as a significant problem inU.S. tobacco farming relative to other issues being discussed.”[480]There are sub-groups assigned to specific topics such as public policy,training and education, and grievance procedures.[481] Atthe invitation of some members of the group, Human Rights Watch staff gave apresentation to the group on April 10, 2014 concerning the findings and recommendationsof this report. Following the presentation, FLPG members agreed to form aworking group on child labor.Eliminating Child Labour in Tobacco Growing FoundationSeven of the ten companies contacted for our report aremembers of the Eliminating Child Labour in Tobacco Growing Foundation (ECLTFoundation), a Geneva-based organization devoted to preventing child labor intobacco agriculture. The organization’s US$6.4 million budget is funded throughcontributions primarily from tobacco and tobacco leaf companies that sit on thefoundation’s board.[482] Thefoundation carries out projects in tobacco-growing countries, includingKyrgyzstan, Tanzania, Malawi, Mozambique, and Uganda, (and had projects inZambia and the Philippines in the recent past), to withdraw children fromtobacco farmwork, improve access to education, and strengthen economiclivelihoods in tobacco-producing communities. ECLT Foundation initiatives toprovide children with alternatives to tobacco work include model farm schoolsin Tanzania, after-school education programs income-generation projects, andoccupational safety and health advocacy in Malawi, holiday camps for childrenof tobacco workers in Kyrgyzstan, and scholarship programs in Uganda.[483]The Foundation does not carry out any projects in the United States.VIII. RecommendationsTo the US CongressRegarding Child LaborEnact legislation prohibiting children under age 18 fromengaging in hazardous work on tobacco farms in the United States,including any work in which children come into contact with tobacco plantsof any size or with dried tobacco leaves.Amend the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) to:apply the same age and hourrequirements to children working in agriculture as already apply to allother working children: prohibit the employment of children under age 13;limit the number of hours that children ages 14 and 15 can legally workto three hours per day on a school day and 18 hours per week during aschool week; eight hours per day on a non-school day and 40 hours perweek when school is not in session; and prohibit before-school work bychildren ages 15 and younger;raise the minimum age forparticularly hazardous work in agriculture from 16 to 18, in line withexisting standards in all other industries;incorporate the EnvironmentalProtection Agency’s Worker Protection Standard, 40 C.F.R. Part 170,into the child labor regulations, thereby protecting children working inagriculture not only from pesticides with acute effects (such as nausea,skin rashes, and dizziness), but also from those with chronic orlong-term effects (such as cancer and interference with sexualreproduction); require agricultural employersto report work-related deaths, serious injuries, and serious illnesses tothe US Department of Labor in order to collect and publish betterstatistics than are currently available about such incidents; andrequire the US Department ofLabor to submit to Congress an annual report on work-related deaths, injuries,and illnesses of children working in agriculture, including an evaluationof the data that highlights, among other things, safety and healthhazards and the extent and nature of child labor violations.Provide sufficient support to programs, such as thoseadministered by the Department of Education’s Office of MigrantEducation, to remove barriers to the school enrollment, attendance, andachievement of child farmworkers and ensure that child farmworkers haveaccess to and benefit from the same appropriate public education,including public preschool education, provided to other children.Regarding Labor RightsRepeal the sections of the FairLabor Standards Act that exempt all agricultural workers from overtime payprovisions.Repeal the sections of the FairLabor Standards Act that exempt certain agricultural employers from payingworkers the federal minimum wage.Eliminate the exclusion offarmworkers from the National Labor Relations Act and acknowledge that,like all other workers, they have the right to collective bargaining.Halt the yearly approval of aspecial provision in the US Department of Labor appropriations act thatexempts almost all farms with 10 or fewer employees from the jurisdictionof the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA).To the President of the UnitedStatesIssue an executive order or takeother regulatory action to prohibit hazardous child labor on tobacco farmsin the US, including any tasks where children have contact with tobaccoplants of any size or with dried tobacco leaves.Urge the US Department of Laborto revise the list of agricultural jobs deemed to be “particularlyhazardous” for children to include the handling and application ofpesticides; work at dangerous heights; work with dangerous machinery,equipment, and tools; work which involves the manual handling or transportof heavy loads; work in extreme temperatures; and other dangerous tasks;as well as any tasks where children have contact with tobacco plants ofany size or with dried tobacco leaves.Submit to the US Senate forratification the Convention on the Rights of the Child and ILO ConventionNo. 138 on the Minimum Age of Employment.To the US SenateUpon submission by the president,ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Child and ILO Convention No.138 on the Minimum Age of Employment.To the US Department of LaborRegarding Child LaborRevise the list of agriculturaljobs deemed to be “particularly hazardous” for children toinclude the handling and application of pesticides; work at dangerousheights; work with dangerous machinery, equipment, and tools; work whichinvolves the manual handling or transport of heavy loads; work in extremetemperatures; and other dangerous tasks; as well as any tasks wherechildren have contact with tobacco plants of any size or with driedtobacco leaves.Vigorously investigate childlabor and minimum wage violations in agriculture, the most dangerousindustry in the US in which children are allowed to work. Investigationsshould include planned and unannounced inspections, including at the timeof year, time of day, and locations where children are most likely to beworking.Appropriately use the Fair LaborStandards Act's “hot goods” provision, which prohibits theinterstate movement of goods produced in violation of child labor orminimum wage laws, where the traditional course of citations andrelatively insignificant civil monetary penalties would have littledeterrent effect.Request the National AgriculturalWorkers Survey (NAWS) to expand its surveys to collect information aboutchild workers under, as well as over, age 14. Explore methods of countingworking children that do not rely on reports from growers and adultfarmworkers, who may underreport the numbers of working children. Striveto develop statistics disaggregated by crop as well as other factors.Regarding Labor RightsVigorously enforce OSHA’sField Sanitation Standard, which requires employers to provide workerswith drinking water, toilets, and handwashing facilities.Continue and acceleratemonitoring of “State Plans” and require that all US statesenforcing OSHA-approved plans do so effectively, including by frequentunannounced inspections.To the US Environmental Protection AgencyRegarding Child LaborAmend the Worker ProtectionStandard to impose a minimum age of 18 for all pesticide handlers.Revise the restricted-entryintervals (REIs), which prohibit entry into an area treated by pesticidesfor a specified period of time following the application of the chemicals.Distinguish between adults and children, and impose more stringent REIsfor children. Incorporate an additional safety margin on top of whatis determined necessary to ensure short and long-term safety, and takeinto account the combined effect of both occupational and non-occupationalexposures.Regarding Labor RightsClosely monitor states’enforcement of the Worker Protection Standard and related pesticideregulations to ensure that such enforcement is vigorous and meaningful.Further expand the program toeducate workers regarding the Worker Protection Standard, and ensure thatmaterials used are culturally, age, and language appropriate.Ensure that state agenciesresponsible for enforcement of EPA regulations are staffed by a sufficientnumber of trained, multilingual compliance officers.To All Tobacco-Producing USStatesEnact legislation prohibitingchildren under age 18 from engaging in hazardous work on tobacco farms,including any work in which children come into contact with tobacco plantsof any size or with dried tobacco leaves.Vigorously enforce OSHA’sField Sanitation Standard, which requires employers to provide workerswith drinking water, toilets, and handwashing facilities.Amend workers’ compensationlaws to ensure coverage for farmworkers equal to that of other workers.To Tobacco Product Manufacturers andTobacco Leaf Merchant CompaniesRegarding Child LaborAdopt and implement policies globallyprohibiting the use of child labor anywhere in the supply chain. Thepolicy should specify that hazardous work for children under 18 isprohibited, including any work in which children come into direct contactwith tobacco plants of any size and dried tobacco leaves. Consistent withILO conventions, the policy should also prohibit work by children underthe age of 15, except for light work by children ages 13 to 15, or theminimum age provided by the country’s laws, whichever affordsgreater protection. The policy should specify that it is in effectthroughout the supply chain in all countries irrespective of local laws thatafford lesser protections.Strive to phase out the use ofchild labor in the supply chain by establishing clear timeframes.Ensure that all contracts withgrowers and suppliers include specific language prohibiting the use ofchildren in hazardous work under 18, including any work in which childrencome into contact with tobacco leaves of any size and dried tobaccoleaves. Establish and carry out penalties for those in the supply chainwho violate the no-child labor policy. The penalties should besufficiently severe and consistently implemented so as to have adissuasive effect. Discontinue contracts with farms that repeatedlyviolate the policy prohibiting child labor.Provide training to agronomists,suppliers, growers, workers, and others on the hazards to children ofworking in tobacco. Utilize outside experts on child labor to conductthese trainings where appropriate.Establish a regular and rigorousinternal monitoring process in all countries in the supply chain.Ensure that monitoring is notlimited to “self-reporting” by suppliers or subsidiaries, butincludes regular announced and unannounced inspections by monitors whoare qualified, experienced, and trained specifically in child labor andlabor rights.Ensure an adequate number ofmonitors to conduct regular monitoring of all suppliers in all countries.Monitors should be sufficiently independent from the leaf productioncomponent of business operations and from local suppliers.Ensure that monitoring is carriedout in periods in the tobacco season when children are most likely towork.Dedicate sufficient financialand staff resources to carry out effective monitoring.Engage qualified third-partymonitoring for child labor in supply chains in all countries.Ensure an adequate number ofmonitors to conduct regular monitoring of all suppliers in all countries.Ensure that monitoring iscarried out in periods in the tobacco season when children are mostlikely to work.Make the results of third-partymonitoring public.Engage a third-party organizationto develop a no-child labor policy as outlined above, including thestructures for its effective implementation.Develop or enhance collaborationwith local stakeholders, including organized labor, to eliminate childlabor on tobacco farms, including by:Working with federal and localgovernment officials, including the Office of Migrant Education, toensure access to education for farmworker children. Implementing, with meaningfulinput and participation from farmworker children, their families, andlocal stakeholders, free summer programs each year for both migrant andlocal children, as an alternative to working in tobacco farming. Programsshould provide age-appropriate educational, recreational, and leadershipdevelopment opportunities to children under 18. Collaborating with localstakeholders to identify other summer employment opportunities forchildren as alternatives to working on tobacco farms. Where possible, cooperating withthe ILO’s International Programme on the Elimination of ChildLabour (IPEC), UNICEF, nongovernmental organizations, and othersundertaking efforts to prevent child labor, including through theprovision of alternatives to working in tobacco farming.Establishing a scholarship fundto provide young farmworkers with economic support to pursue highereducation. The scholarship application should account for the uniquecircumstances of farmworker children’s educational paths. Investing in rural health infrastructure to ensure tobaccoworkers and their children have access to health services. Collaborating with land-grant universities and extensionservices to enhance agricultural education in tobacco-growingcommunities, and to provide farmworker families with access to land for small-scaleagricultural enterprise.Regarding Labor RightsAdopt or revise comprehensiveagricultural labor policies to protect the health, safety, and humanrights of workers employed on tobacco farms, regardless of the size of thefarm and ensure rigorous monitoring of the implementation of thosepolicies. Policies should include, at a minimum, the following provisions:Signed, enforceable employmentcontracts with all workers in a language that the worker understands.A guarantee of no less than thefederal minimum hourly wage for all workers. A prohibition on tobaccosuppliers procuring labor from unregistered farm labor contractors orsubcontractors. A requirement that tobacco suppliers closely monitor farmlabor contractors to ensure that they do not violate workers’rights.A prohibition on tobaccosuppliers providing lump sum payments to farm labor contractors orsubcontractors for workers’ wage, and a requirement that growersprovide wages directly to workers. Limits on working hours forworkers; a guarantee of at least one day off per week.Provision of potable water insufficient quantities for all workers every day.Provision of adequate sanitaryfacilities, including toilets and handwashing facilities, to all workers.Provision of appropriatepersonal protective equipment including gloves and rain suits to limitexposure to nicotine and pesticides. Strict enforcement of safetyprocedures for use and handling of all toxic substances, such aspesticides, including the provision of protective clothing and strictobservance of restricted entry intervals determined by the USEnvironmental Protection Agency.Strict prohibition on sprayingof pesticides from tractors in fields where workers are present or infields adjacent to where workers are located and at risk of exposure topesticides via drift. Education for workers on healthand safety hazards in tobacco farming, including nicotine poisoning, in alanguage that workers understand. Such education should be mandatory forevery worker and not carried out at the discretion of the grower. Guarantees of the rights tofreedom of association and to collectively bargain for all workersemployed by tobacco leaf suppliers. Establishment of a meaningfuland effective complaint mechanism whereby workers are able to submitcomplaints about any concerns about labor or other violations withoutfear of repercussions for doing so. Every worker should be informed aboutthe availability of the complaint mechanism and the means for submittingcomplaints. Establishment of a complaint mechanism should not be seen asa replacement to guaranteeing the right of workers to collectivelybargain.Provide training to agronomists,suppliers, growers, workers, and others on policies to protect the health,safety, and human rights of workers. Utilize outside experts to conductthese trainings where appropriate.Ensure qualified, experienced,internal and independent third-party monitoring of implementation of allof the above-stated agricultural labor policies. Make the results ofthird-party monitoring public.Ensure that workers are able tosubmit complaints and speak with monitors, including third party monitors,without fear of repercussions from the manufacturing company, itssubsidiaries or suppliers.Immediately investigate in a fairand transparent manner all reports of abuse reported by monitors,agronomists, third parties, workers, or others.Regarding Industry-Wide Multilateral InitiativesDevelop an internationalindustry-wide standard to prohibit hazardous work for children under 18 ontobacco farms, including any work in which children come into contact withtobacco plants of any size and dried tobacco leaves; establish minimum agerequirements consistent with ILO conventions.Amend the US Tobacco GoodAgricultural Practices (GAP) labor management guidelines to specify thathazardous work for children under 18 is prohibited, including any work inwhich children come into contact with tobacco plants of any size and driedtobacco leaves. Consistent with ILO conventions, the standard should also prohibitwork by children under the age of 15, except for light work by childrenages 13 to 15. This standard should be a contractual requirement for allUS tobacco growers.Engage meaningfully inmulti-stakeholder initiatives, including with a view to support tobaccoindustry efforts to promote the elimination of child labor in the tobaccosupply chain, effective monitoring of these policies, and initiatives tosupport alternative employment, education, and recreational opportunitiesfor children in tobacco-growing communities.Increase financial support tonongovernmental organizations working to eliminate hazardous child laborin tobacco farming.Establish a pooled fund tosupport programs that provide alternatives to child labor in US tobaccofarming.To Agricultural EmployersDo not hire children under age 18to engage in hazardous work on tobacco farms, including any work wherebychildren have contact with tobacco plants of any size or dried tobaccoleaves.Do not hire any children underage 15 to perform any work on tobacco farms that is not light work, posingno health hazards. Do not hire children under age 13 for any tasks ontobacco farms, and ensure that children ages 13 to 15 engage only in lightwork does not threaten their health and safety, or hinder their education.Ensure that farm laborcontractors do not hire children under age 18 to engage in hazardous workon tobacco farms and abide by minimum age restrictions specified above.Carefully supervise farm labor contractors and regularly visit fields toverify that no children are working in hazardous labor.Respect agricultural labor policies designedto protect the health, safety, freedom of association, and other human rightsof workers, as detailed above.To the International LabourOrganization OfficeConduct research and collect new data onchild labor in tobacco farming.Hold technical workshops and provideeducational resources for ILO members regarding the health and safety risks tochildren working in tobacco, and ways to eliminate child labor in tobacco.Provide updated and effective guidanceregarding the hazards of tobacco work to states determining the types of workthat constitutes the worst forms of child labor under ILO Convention No. 182 onthe Worst Forms of Child Labor.Encourage governments to review and updatetheir hazardous work lists under Convention No. 182, taking into accountevidence concerning the hazards of tobacco work.AcknowledgmentsThis report was researchedand written by Margaret Wurth, researcher in the Children’s RightsDivision, and Jane Buchanan, associate director of the Children’s RightsDivision, at Human Rights Watch. The report was edited by Jo Becker, advocacydirector of the Children’s Rights Division; James Ross, legal and policydirector; and Babatunde Olugboji, deputy program director. Joe Amon, directorof the Health and Human Rights Division; Zama Coursen-Neff, director of theChildren’s Rights Division; Arvind Ganesan, director of Business andHuman Rights Division; and Grace Meng, US program researcher, also reviewed andcommented on the report.Production assistance wasprovided by Beneva Davies, associate in theChildren’s Rights Division; Fitzroy Hepkins, administrative manager; and KathyMills, publications specialist.Human Rights Watch isparticularly grateful to NC FIELD; the Farm Labor Organizing Committee (FLOC); RickiRoer, attorney at Wilson Elser Moskowitz Edelman & Dicker LLP; and lawyersat Chadbourne and Parke, LLP, for invaluable assistance with our research.We also thank the Associationof Farmworker Opportunity Programs (AFOP); Central Virginia Legal Aid Society;Centro Latino of Shelbyville, Kentucky; Child Labor Coalition; EpiscopalFarmworker Ministry; Interfaith Center on Corporate Responsibility; KentuckyCommission on Human Rights; Legal AID of North Carolina Farmworker Project; NCFarmworkers Project; North Carolina Community Health Center Association; NorthCarolina Justice Center; Southern Migrant Legal Services; Student Action withFarmworkers; Toxic Free North Carolina; Workers’ Dignity Project, andmany others who did not wish to be named.Most of all, we thank the children and parents whogenerously shared their stories with us.[1]For a history of tobacco farming in the US, see e.g. Eric Burns, TheSmoke of the Gods: A Social History of Tobacco (Philadelphia: TempleUniversity Press, 2007).[2]Food and Agriculture Organization of the UnitedNations, Statistics Division (FAOSTAT), “Production, Countries byCommodity, Tobacco, Unmanufactured, 2012,” August2013, http://faostat.fao.org/site/339/default.aspx (accessed March 18, 2014).[3] US Department of Agriculture (USDA),National Agricultural Statistics Service, Crop Values 2012 Summary, February2013, p. 40,http://usda01.library.cornell.edu/usda/current/CropValuSu/CropValuSu-02-15-2013.pdf(accessed January 6, 2014).[4] USDA, National Agricultural StatisticsService, Crop Production 2012 Summary, January 2013, p. 51,http://usda01.library.cornell.edu/usda/current/CropProdSu/CropProdSu-01-11-2013.pdf(accessed November 13, 2013).[5] 2007 is the most recent year for which agricultural census data areavailable. USDA, 2007 Census of Agriculture,“Table 26. Field Crops: 2007 and 2002,” 2009, Volume 1, Chapter 2:State Level Data, p. 486,http://www.agcensus.usda.gov/Publications/2007/Full_Report/Volume_1,_Chapter_2_US_State_Level/usv1.pdf(accessed January 6, 2014).[6]Internal Revenue Service (IRS), “Chapter Ten: Tobacco,” in FarmersAudit Techniques Guide (ATG), May 2011, p. 6, http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-utl/farmers_atg_chapter_10.pdf(accessed November 15, 2013). See also, Center forTobacco Grower Research, “2012 Tobacco Survey: Summary of Current TobaccoGrowers by Type,” 2012, p. 7, http://tobaccogrowerresearch.com/surveys/2012/2012CurrentGrowers_Final_Revised.pdf(accessed November 18, 2013).[7] Ibid, pp. 5-6.[8]Alliance One, “CorporateProfile,” 2006, http://www.aointl.com/au/ (accessed November 18, 2013);Universal Corporation, “About Us: Company Profile,” 2012,http://www.universalcorp.com/AboutUs/AboutUs-Profile.asp (accessed November 18,2013).[9]Seee.g. US Tobacco Cooperative, “Who We Are: Company Profile,”undated, http://www.ustobaccofarmer.com/coprofile.htm (accessed November 18, 2013).[10]Fair and Equitable Tobacco Reform Act of 2004, H. R. 4033, 108thCongress, 2003–2004.[11] USDA, Farm Service Agency, “Tobacco Transition PaymentProgram,” January 30, 2013,http://www.fsa.usda.gov/FSA/webapp?area=home&subject=toba&topic=landing(accessed January 6, 2014).[12]GeorgeS. Serletis & James J. Fetzer, US International Trade Commission,“Modeling the Impact of the US Tobacco Quota Buyout,” pp. 2-6,http://www.usitc.gov/publications/332/working_papers/ec200806a.pdf (accessedNovember 15, 2013).[13] In 2007, the most recent year for which agricultural census dataare available, there were 16,234 tobacco farms in the United States, ascompared to 93,530 in 1997. USDA, 2007 Census ofAgriculture, “Table 1. Historical Highlights: 2007 and Earlier CensusYears,” 2009, p. 8,http://www.agcensus.usda.gov/Publications/2007/Full_Report/Volume_1,_Chapter_2_US_State_Level/usv1.pdf(accessed November 14, 2013).[14]USDA, National Agricultural Statistics Service, Crop Production 2012Summary, January 2013, p. 51,http://usda01.library.cornell.edu/usda/current/CropProdSu/CropProdSu-01-11-2013.pdf(accessed January 6, 2014); USDA, National Agricultural StatisticsService, Crop Production 1998 Summary, January 1999, p. 54,http://usda01.library.cornell.edu/usda/nass/CropProdSu//1990s/1999/CropProdSu-01-12-1999.pdf(accessed January 6, 2014).[15] IRS, “Chapter Ten:Tobacco,” in Farmers AuditTechniques Guide (ATG), May 2011, p.3, http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-utl/farmers_atg_chapter_10.pdf (accessedNovember 15, 2013).[16]Forburley and flue-cured tobacco farms. Center for Tobacco Grower Research,“Relative Importance of Hired Labor in U.S. Tobacco Farms,” 2010,p. 1, http://tobaccogrowerresearch.com/TobGrow/RelativeImportanceHiredLabor.pdf(accessed January 6, 2014).[17]Ibid.[18]For more information on tobacco and tobacco growing see: Center forTobacco Grower Research, “Who Grows America’s Tobacco,”undated, http://tobaccogrowerresearch.com/tobacco.html; International TobaccoGrowers’ Association (ITGA), “Tobacco Types,”http://www.tobaccoleaf.org/conteudos/default.asp?ID=18&IDP=5&P=5; NorthCarolina Cooperative Extension Service, Flue-Cured Tobacco Guide (Raleigh:North Carolina Cooperative Extension Service, 2013),http://tobacco.ces.ncsu.edu/2013/04/2013-flue-cured-guide/; University ofTennessee Institute of Agriculture and University of Kentucky College ofAgriculture, 2013-2014 Kentucky & Tennessee Tobacco Production Guide(Lexington: University of Kentucky Cooperative Extension, 2013),http://www.uky.edu/Ag/Tobacco/ (all accessed November 13, 2013).[19]Centerfor Tobacco Grower Research, “Relative Importance of Hired Labor in U.S.Tobacco Farms,” 2010,http://tobaccogrowerresearch.com/TobGrow/RelativeImportanceHiredLabor.pdf(accessed November 18, 2013).[20] USDA, National Agricultural Statistics Service, Crop Production 2012Summary, January 2013, p. 53,http://usda01.library.cornell.edu/usda/current/CropProdSu/CropProdSu-01-11-2013.pdf(accessed November 13, 2013).[21] USDA, National Agricultural Statistics Service, Crop Production 2012Summary, January 2013, p. 53,http://usda01.library.cornell.edu/usda/current/CropProdSu/CropProdSu-01-11-2013.pdf(accessed November 13, 2013).[22] Email from Kitty Hendricks, Research Health Scientist, Division ofSafety Research, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), to Human Rights Watch,December 31, 2013.[23]Human Rights Watch telephone conversation with Kitty Hendricks,Research Health Scientist, Division of Safety Research, NIOSH, February 7,2014.[24]Whiledifferent federal agencies collect information on different segments of thefarmworker population, there is no one agency that can estimate the totalfarmworker population for a specific crop. Federal estimates of the number ofchildren employed on tobacco farms do not meet reporting requirements of theUSDA and NIOSH. Human Rights Watch telephone conversation with Kitty Hendricks,Research Health Scientist, Division of Safety Research, NIOSH, November 22,2013. The National Agricultural Workers Survey (NAWS) is “anemployment-based, random survey of the demographic, employment, and healthcharacteristics of the US crop labor force” performed under contract tothe US Department of Labor. The design of the survey is such that it cannotgenerate statistics about the number of farm workers on tobacco farms. Emailfrom Egan Reich, US Department of Labor, to Human Rights Watch, November 20,2013.[25] ThomasA. Arcury and G. Rodriguez, “Safety and Injury Characteristics of Youth Farmworkers in NorthCarolina.” Presentation at North CarolinaFarmworker Institute, Chapel Hill, NorthCarolina, April 10, 2014.[26] US Department of Homeland Security, “Deferred Action forChildhood Arrivals,” undated,http://www.dhs.gov/deferred-action-childhood-arrivals (accessed January 14,2014).[27]“US: New Deportation Policy Recognizes Ties to US,”Human Rights Watch news release, June 15, 2012,http://www.hrw.org/news/2012/06/15/us-new-deportation-policy-recognizes-ties-us(accessed February 3, 2014).[28]Human Rights Watch, “Within Reach: A Roadmap for USImmigration Reform that Respects the Rights of All People,” February2013, https://www.hrw.org/roadmap-to-immigration-reform (accessed March 3,2014).[29]Email from Egan Reich, US Department of Labor, to Human Rights Watch, May 6, 2014. Citing 2008-2009 data from “The National AgriculturalWorkers Survey: Public Access Data,”http://www.doleta.gov/agworker/naws.cfm (accessed May 6, 2014).[30]William Kandel, USDA Economic Research Service, “Profile of HiredFarmworkers, A 2008 Update,” EconomicResearch Report no. 60, July2008, p. iv, http://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/err-economic-research-report/err60.aspx#.U2kJEFVdV8E(accessed May 6, 2014).[31]Human Rights Watch interview with Gabriella G., 42, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[32]Human Rights Watch interview with Natalie G., 18, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[33]Human Rights Watch interview with Elena G., 13, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[34]Human Rights Watch interview with Raul D., 13, Wayne County, NorthCarolina, July 21, 2013.[35]Human Rights Watch interview with Jerardo S., 11, Boyle County,Kentucky, September 6, 2013.[36]Human Rights Watch interview with Blanca A., 14, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[37]Human Rights Watch interview with Claudio G., 16, Duplin County,North Carolina, July 27, 2013.[38] Human Rights Watch interview with Alan F., 15, Greene County, NorthCarolina, May 18, 2013.[39]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Bradley S., 15, August6, 2013.[40]Eight childreninterviewed by Human Rights Watch for this report were not asked about symptomsof nicotine poisoning.[41]HumanRights Watch interview with Elena G., 13, Lenoir County, North Carolina, May18, 2013.[42]HumanRights Watch interview with Gabriella G., 42, Lenoir County, North Carolina,May 18, 2013.[43]HumanRights Watch interview with Yolanda F., 16, Greene County, North Carolina, July3, 2013.[44]HumanRights Watch interview with Danielle S., 16, ClarkCounty, Kentucky, September 4, 2013.[45]HumanRights Watch interview with Lazaro S., 15, ClarkCounty, Kentucky, September 4, 2013.[46]Human Rights Watch interview with Marta W., 10, and Patrick W., 9, MaconCounty, Tennessee, October 22, 2013.[47]HumanRights Watch interview with Jaime V., 18, Hamblen County, Tennessee, October24, 2013.[48]Human Rights Watch interview with Emilio R., 16, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[49] Ibid.[50]Human Rights Watch interview with Jocelyn R., 17, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[51]Human Rights Watch interview with Miguel T., 12, Wayne County,North Carolina, July 2, 2013.[52]Human Rights Watch interviews with Cameron M., 18, and Leonardo M.,15, Monroe County, Kentucky, September 2, 2013.[53]Human Rights Watch interview with Pablo E., 17, Green County, Kentucky,September 2, 2013.[54]Human Rights Watch interview with Jacob S., 14, Scott County,Virginia, October 25, 2013.[55]Human Rights Watch interview with Jaime V., 18, Hamblen County,Tennessee, October 24, 2013.[56] Human Rights Watch interview with Luciano P., 18, FayetteCounty, Kentucky, September 4, 2013.[57]See, e.g., Thomas A. Arcury, Sara A. Quandt, and John S. Preisser,“Predictors of Incidence and Prevalence of Green Tobacco Sickness AmongLatino Farmworkers in North Carolina, USA,” Journal of Epidemiology andCommunity Health, vol. 55 (2001), p. 818; Thomas A. Arcury, Sara A. Quandt, etal., “The Incidence of Green Tobacco Sickness Among LatinoFarmworkers,” Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, vol.43, no. 7 (2001), pp. 601-602.; Thomas A. Arcury, Sara A. Quandt, et al.,“High levels of transdermal nicotine exposure produce green tobaccosickness in Latino farmworkers,” Nicotine & Tobacco Research,vol. 5 (2003), p. 315.[58] Ibid.[59]HumanRights Watch interview with Dr. Thomas Arcury, director of the Center forWorker Health at Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina,May 20, 2013.[60]Thomas A. Arcury, Sara A. Quandt, et al,, “High levels oftransdermal nicotine exposure produce green tobacco sickness in Latino farmworkers,”Nicotine & Tobacco Research, vol. 5 (2003) p. 315.[61]Thomas A. Arcury, Sara A. Quandt, et al., “The Incidence ofGreen Tobacco Sickness Among Latino Farmworkers,” Journal ofOccupational and Environmental Medicine, vol. 43, no. 7 (2001), p. 602.[62]RobertH. McKnight and Henry A. Spiller, “Green Tobacco Sickness in Children andAdolescents,” Public Health Reports, vol. 120 (November-December2005), p. 604.[63] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Dr. Thomas Arcury, director of the Center for Worker Health at Wake Forest School ofMedicine, February 24, 2014. See also, Thomas A.Arcury and Sara A. Quandt, “Health and Social Impacts of TobaccoProduction,” Journal of Agromedicine, vol. 11, no. 3-4 (2006), p.75.[64] Anadditional two samples collected by wringing moisture from the wet shirts oftwo workers shortly after they began harvesting foundnicotine in concentrations of 58 and 98 micrograms per milliliter. Stephen H. Gehlbach, Wilton A. Williams, and J.I. Freeman, “NicotineAbsorption by Workers Harvesting Green Tobacco,” Lancet, vol. 305,no. 7905 (1975), pp. 478-80.[65]StephenH. Gehlbach, Wilton A. Williams, and J.I. Freeman, “Nicotine Absorptionby Workers Harvesting Green Tobacco,” Lancet, vol. 305, no. 7905(1975), pp. 478-80[66]Natalie M. Schmitt, Jochen Schmitt, Dimitris J. Kouimintzis, andWilhelm Kirch, “Health Risks in Tobacco Farm Workers—A Review ofthe Literature,” Journal of Public Health vol. 15, (2007), p. 255.[67]Robert H. McKnight and Henry A. Spiller, “Green TobaccoSickness in Children and Adolescents,” Public Health Reports, vol.120 (November-December 2005), p. 604.[68] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Dr. Thomas Arcury, director of the Centerfor Worker Health at Wake Forest School of Medicine, February 24, 2014. The USDepartment of Labor (DOL) has commented on the risksto children of participating in many stages of tobacco production, includingplanting seedlings. In 2011, DOL proposed a regulation to prohibit all childrenunder 16 (the minimum age for hazardous work in agriculture in the US) from“all work in the tobacco production and curing, including, but notlimited to such activities as planting, cultivating, topping, harvesting,baling, barning, and curing.” However, the regulations were withdrawn in2012 in response to pressure from agricultural groups. DOL, Wage and Hour Division, “29 CFR Parts 570 and 579: Noticeof Proposed Rulemaking and Request for Comments: Child Labor Regulations,Orders and Statements of Interpretation; Child Labor Violations—CivilMoney Penalties: Employment in Tobacco Production and Curing” in FederalRegister, vol. 76, no. 171 (September 2, 2011) pp. 54864-54865,http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2011-09-02/pdf/2011-21924.pdf (accessed March26, 2014). US Department of Labor, Wage andHour Division, “Child Labor Regulations, Orders and Statements ofInterpretation; Child Labor Violations—Civil Money Penalties. Withdrawalof Proposed Rule,” Federal Register vol. 77, no. 103, May 29, 2012,https://webapps.dol.gov/federalregister/PdfDisplay.aspx?DocId=26108 (accessedJanuary 22, 2014). For a description of the opposition to the proposedregulations, see e.g. Gabriel Thompson, “Why Are Children Working inAmerican Tobacco Fields?,” The Nation, November 12, 2013, http://www.thenation.com/article/177136/why-are-children-working-american-tobacco-fields(accessed April 29, 2014).[69] Ibid.[70] Ibid; Thomas A. Arcury, Sara A. Quandt, et al,, “High levels oftransdermal nicotine exposure produce green tobacco sickness in Latinofarmworkers,” Nicotine & Tobacco Research, vol. 5 (2003), p. 320.[71]US Departmentof Health and Human Services, Office of the Surgeon General, The HealthConsequences ofSmoking —50 Years of Progress:A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: US Department of Health and HumanServices, 2014, p. 126, http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/50-years-of-progress/50-years-of-progress-by-section.html(accessed March 4, 2014).[72]Human Rights Watch group interview with Katrina T., 15, Diego T., 16, andRafa B,. 16, Greene County, North Carolina, July 3, 2013.[73] Ibid.[74]Human Rights Watch interview with Joshua D., 13, Wayne County,North Carolina, July 2, 2013.[75]Human Rights Watch interview with Sally G., 16, and Marissa G., 14,Wayne County, North Carolina, July 21, 2013.[76]Human Rights Watch interview with Jocelyn R., 17, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[77]HumanRights Watch interview with Estevan O., 15, Lenoir County, North Carolina, May19, 2013.[78]Seee.g. Thomas A. Arcury et al., “Diagnosed Skin Diseases among MigrantFarmworkers in North Carolina: Prevalence and Risk Factors,” Journalof Agricultural Safety and Health, vol. 13, no. 4 (2007) pp. 407-418 whichfound a 57 percent prevalence of inflammatory skin disease, and a 74 percentprevalence of infectious skin disease in a sample of 304 farmworkers in easternNorth Carolina. See also, John J. May, “Occupational Injury and Illnessin Farmworkers in the Eastern United States,” Latino Farmworkers inthe Eastern United States: Health, Safety, and Justice, Thomas A. Arcuryand Sara A. Quandt, eds. (New York: Spring, 2009), pp. 80-81.[79]NinaF. Abraham, Steven R. Feldman, et al., “Contact Dermatitis in TobaccoFarmworkers,” Contact Dermatitis, vol. 57 (2007), pp. 40-43. Seealso, Thomas A. Arcury, Quirina M. Vallejos, Mark R. Schulz, Steven R. Feldman,Alan B. Fleischer Jr., Amit Verma, and Sara A. Quandt, “Green TobaccoSickness and Skin Integrity Among Migrant Latino Farmworkers,” AmericanJournal of Industrial Medicine, vol. 51(2008), p. 198.[80] HumanRights Watch group interview with five child tobacco workers, 15-17, LenoirCounty, North Carolina, July 23, 2013.[81]Human Rights Watch interview with Alberto H., 16,Doug S., 17, and Damian W., 17, WayneCounty, Kentucky,September 3, 2013.[82]HumanRights Watch interview with Dario A., 16, Clark County, Kentucky, September 4,2013.[83] HumanRights Watch interview with Timothy Y., 16, Barren County, Kentucky, September 3, 2013.[84] Human Rights Watch interview with Joaquin F., 16, MarionCounty, Kentucky, September 6, 2013.[85]MariaC. Mirabelli, Jane A. Hoppin, Arjun B. Chatterjee, et al., “JobActivities and Respiratory Symptoms among Farmworkers in North Carolina,”Archives of Environmental and Occupational Health, vol. 66, no. 3 (2011),pp. 178, 180.[86]E.E. Osim, C.T. Musabayane, and J.Mufunda, “Lung Function of Zimbabwean Farm Workers Exposed to Flue Curingand Stacking of Tobacco Leaves, South African Medical Journal, vol. 88,no. 9 (1998), pp. 1127-1131; S.K. Ghosh, J.R. Parikh, V.N. Gokani, M.N. Rao, S.K.Kashyap, and S.K. Chatterjee, “Studies on Occupational Health Problems inAgricultural Tobacco Workers,” Occupational Medicine, vol. 30, no.3 (1980), pp. 113-117.[87]HumanRights Watch interview with Sally G., 16, and Marissa G., 14, Wayne County,North Carolina, July 21, 2013.[88]HumanRights Watch interview with Estevan O., 15, Lenoir County, North Carolina, May19, 2013.[89]HumanRights Watch interview with Marta W., 10, and Patrick W., 9, Macon County,Tennessee, October 22, 2013.[90] Human Rights Watch interview with Andrea D., 16, ShelbyCounty, Kentucky, August 7, 2013.[91]HumanRights Watch interview with Henry F., 17, Montgomery County, Kentucky,September 6, 2013.[92]Twenty-one children interviewed by Human Rights Watch for thisreport were not asked about exposure to pesticides.[93]Most chemicals involved in tobacco productionin the US are applied by tractor-pulled sprayers, though handheld and back-packsprayers are sometimes used for application. Thomas A.Arcury and Sara A. Quandt, “Health and Social Impacts of TobaccoProduction,” Journal of Agromedicine, vol. 11, no. 3-4 (2006), p.75.[94] For detailed description of the risks associated with pesticide drift,see: Thomas A. Arcury and Sara A. Quandt, “Pesticide Exposure amongFarmworkers and Their Families,” Latino Farmworkers in the EasternUnited States: Health, Safety, and Justice, Thomas A. Arcury and Sara A.Quandt, eds. (New York: 2009), p. 109.[95]HumanRights Watch interview with Jocelyn R., 17, Lenoir County, North Carolina, May18, 2013.[96]Human Rights Watch interviews with Cameron M., 18, Monroe County,Kentucky, September 2, 2013.[97]Human Rights Watch interview with Andrew N., 16, Macon County,Tennessee, October 22, 2013.[98]Human Rights Watch interview with Emilio R., 16, Lenoir County, NorthCarolina, May 18, 2013.[99]HumanRights Watch interview with Lucia A., 17, Lenoir County, North Carolina, May18, 2013.[100] HumanRights Watch group interview with five child tobacco workers, 15-17, LenoirCounty, North Carolina, July 23, 2013.[101]HumanRights Watch interview with Marta W., 10, and Patrick W., 9, Macon County,Tennessee, October 22, 2013.[102]Human Rights Watch interview with Yanamaria W., 14, Warren County,Kentucky, September 2, 2013.[103]Human Rights Watch interview with Nicholas V., 14, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[104]HumanRights Watch interview with Yael A., 17, Greene County, North Carolina, July 3,2013.[105]HumanRights Watch interview with Sally G., 16, and Marissa G., 14, Wayne County,North Carolina, July 21, 2013.[106] HumanRights Watch interview with Christian V., 13, HawkinsCounty, Tennessee, October 24, 2013.[107]Human Rights Watch interview with Theo D., 16, Scott County,Virginia, October 25, 2013.[108]LindaA. McCauley, W. Kent Anger, Matthew Keifer, Rick Langley, Mark G. Robson, andDiane Rohlman, “Studying Health Outcomes in Farmworker Populations Exposed toPesticides,”Environmental Health Perspectives, vol. 114, no. 6 (2006), p. 953.[109]Thomas A. Arcury and Sara A. Quandt,“Pesticide Exposure among Farmworkers and Their Families,” LatinoFarmworkers in the Eastern United States: Health, Safety, and Justice,Thomas A. Arcury and Sara A. Quandt, eds. (New York: Spring, 2009), p. 106.[110] LindaA. McCauley, W. Kent Anger, Matthew Keifer, Rick Langley, Mark G. Robson, andDiane Rohlman, “Studying Health Outcomes inFarmworker Populations Exposed to Pesticides.”[111]Catherine Karr, “Children's EnvironmentalHealth in Agricultural Settings,” Journal of Agromedicine, vol.17, no. 2, (2012), p. 128.[112] Thisestimate is based on the US Environmental Protection Agency’s 1992 regulatory impact analysis for the Worker Protection Standard(40 C.F.R sec. 170). An updated impact analysis will be released in 2014. Emailfrom Emily Selia, Environmental Health Scientist, Office of Pesticide Programs,US Environmental Protection Agency(EPA), to HumanRights Watch, February 5, 2014.[113]Calvert et al, “AcutePesticide-Related Illnesses Among Working Youths, 1988–1999,” AmericanJournal of Public Health, p. 609.[114] Title40, Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) sec. 170.[115]29 C.F.R. sec. 570.71. Pesticides are assigned atoxicity category of I to IV, with Category I the most toxic. Under regulationsset by the US Department of Labor, children under age 16 are prohibited fromhandling Category I and II pesticides.[116] 40 C.F.R. sec.156.208.[117] EPA,“Restrictions after Pesticide Applications under the Current WPS,”February 20, 2014, http://www.epa.gov/oppfead1/safety/workers/restrictions-after-application.html(accessed March 13, 2014).[118]Thomas A. Arcury and Sara A. Quandt,“Pesticide Exposure among Farmworkers and Their Families,” LatinoFarmworkers in the Eastern United States: Health, Safety, and Justice,Thomas A. Arcury and Sara A. Quandt, eds. (New York: Spring, 2009), p. 108.[119]US General Accounting Office, Pesticides: Improvements Needed toEnsure the Safety of Farmworkers and Their Children, GAO/RCED-00-40, March2000, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/rc00040.pdf (accessed February 3, 2014).[120] EPA,“Proposed Agricultural Worker Protection Standard: EPA Needs YourInput,” February 21, 2014, http://www.epa.gov/oppfead1/safety/workers/proposed/index.html(accessed March 13, 2014).[121]Thomas A. Arcury and Sara A. Quandt, “Health and Social Impacts ofTobacco Production,” Journal of Agromedicine, vol. 11, no. 3-4(2006), p. 75; Natacha Lecours, Guilherme E. G. Almeida, Jumanne M. Abdallah,Thomas E. Novotny, “Environmental Health Impacts of Tobacco Farming: AReview of the Literature,” Tobacco Control, vol. 21 (2012), p.192.[122] HumanRights Watch interview with Dr. Thomas Arcury, Director of the Center forWorker Health at Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina,May 20, 2013. According to the EPA, pesticides in these classes affect the nervous system by disrupting theenzyme that regulates acetylcholine, a neurotransmitter. EPA, Office of Pesticide Programs,“Types of Pesticides,” May 2012,http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/about/types.htm (accessed January 31, 2014).[123]United States Government Accountability Office, “Pesticides on Tobacco:Federal Activities to Assess Risks and Monitor Residues,” GAO-03-485,March 2003, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d03485.pdf (accessed November 21,2013).[124]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Dr. Thomas Arcury, director of the Centerfor Worker Health at Wake Forest School of Medicine, February 24, 2014.[125]For areview of studies on pesticide exposure in tobacco workers, see Thomas A.Arcury and Sara A. Quandt, “Health and Social Impacts of TobaccoProduction,” Journal of Agromedicine, vol. 11, no. 3-4 (2006), pp.74-76. Studies of organophosphate and carbamate exposure in agriculturalworkers in Kenya found 26 percent of tobacco workers showed evidence ofpesticide poisoning, and study of Malaysian tobacco workers found one-third ofworkers showed symptoms of organophosphate pesticide exposure.[126]Email from Dr. Geoffrey Calvert, Team Leader,Epidemiology 1 Surveillance Team, Division of Surveillance, Hazard Evaluationsand Field Studies, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health to HumanRights Watch, November 27, 2013.[127]Thomas A. Arcury, Joseph G. Grzywacz, et al., “Repeated PesticideExposure among North Carolina Migrant and Seasonal Farmworkers,” AmericanJournal of Industrial Medicine, vol. 53, no. 8 (2010), pp. 6-9.[128] Foraverage monthly temperatures in counties in the US, see http://www.weather.com/(accessed March 14, 2014).[129]Human Rights Watch interview with Yael A., 17, Greene County, NorthCarolina, July 3, 2013.[130] Human Rights Watch interview with Andrea D., 16, Shelby County, Kentucky, August 7, 2013.[131] Human Rights Watch interview with Timothy S., 13, ShelbyCounty, Kentucky, August 7, 2013.[132]Human Rights Watch interview with Joseph T., 18, Wayne County,North Carolina, July 2, 2013.[133]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Dr. Thomas Arcury, director of the Centerfor Worker Health at Wake Forest School of Medicine, February 24, 2014. Seealso, Jeffrey R. Bytomski and Deborah L. Squire, “Heat Illness inChildren,” Current Sports Medicine Reports, vol. 2, no. 6 (2007),p. 320 (noting that children are more susceptible than adults to heat illnessbecause of “greater surface area to body mass ratio, lower rate ofsweating, and slower rate of acclimatization”).[134]HumanRights Watch interview with Andrew N., 16, Macon County, Tennessee, October 22,2013.[135]HumanRights Watch interview with Lucio F., 12, Montgomery County, Kentucky,September 6, 2013.[136]HumanRights Watch interview with Omar B., 15, Macon County, Tennessee, October 22,2013.[137]Human Rights Watch interview with Adriana F., 14, Montgomery County,Kentucky, September 3, 2013.[138]HumanRights Watch interview with Jeremiah F., 15, Montgomery County, Kentucky,September 3, 2013.[139]HumanRights Watch interview with Theo D., 16,Scott County, Virginia, October 25, 2013.[140]HumanRights Watch interview with Nicholas V., 14, Lenoir County, North Carolina, May18, 2013.[141] HumanRights Watch interview with Andrea D., 16, Shelby County, Kentucky, August 7, 2013.[142] 29C.F.R. sec. 570.71(a)(3)(iv). For regulations on theuse of power-driven saws in non-agricultural occupations, see 29 C.F.R. sec.570.65(a).[143]Human Rights Watch interview with Isaac S., 18, 2013 (location andexact date withheld).[144] Ibid.[145] Ibid.[146]For a state-by-state comparison ofworkers’ compensation coverage for agricultural workers, see FarmworkerJustice, “State Workers' Compensation Coverage for AgriculturalWorkers,” 2009,http://www.farmworkerjustice.org/sites/default/files/documents/6.3.a.1State_Workers_Comp_Information_for_Health_Centers_11-09.pdf(accessed March 7, 2014).[147]HumanRights Watch interview with Isaac S., 18, 2013 (location and exact datewithheld).[148]HumanRights Watch interview with Emilio R., 16, Lenoir County, North Carolina, May18, 2013.[149]Human Rights Watch interview with Carla P., 16, Boyle County,Kentucky, September 6, 2013.[150] 29C.F.R. sec, 570.71(a)(1-3).[151]HumanRights Watch interview with Pablo E., 17, Green County, Kentucky, September 2,2013.[152] HumanRights Watch interview with Calvin R., 17, Scott County, Kentucky, September 4, 2013.[153]HumanRights Watch interview with Jaime V., 18, Hamblen County, Tennessee, October24, 2013.[154]Human Rights Watch interview with Marta W., age 10, and Patrick W.,age 9, Macon County, Tennessee, October 22, 2013.[155]HumanRights Watch interview with Agustin F., age 15, Boyle County, Kentucky,September 6, 2013.[156]Occupational Safety and Health Administration, “Fall Protection,”undated, https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/fallprotection/ (accessed March 7, 2014).[157]29C.F.R. sec. 1928.21(a).[158] 29C.F.R. sec. 570.71(a)(6).[159]Email from Sean Smith, Bureau of Labor Statistics, US Department ofLabor, to Human Rights Watch, October 23, 2013 (citing 2012 data); Bureau ofLabor Statistics, US Department of Labor, National Census of Fatal OccupationalInjuries in 2012 (Preliminary Results),http://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/cfoi.pdf (accessed December 13, 2013).[160]Emailfrom Stephen Pegula, Economist, Bureau of Labor Statistics to Human RightsWatch (citing 2011 and 2012 data), January 22, 2014.[161] Theseestimates youth hired by farm operators and workinghousehold youth. Email from Kitty Hendricks, Research Health Scientist,Division of Safety Research, NIOSH, to Human Rights Watch (citing 2012 data),December 31, 2013[162]National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH),Young Worker Safety and Health, November 13, 2013,http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/youth/ (accessed December 16, 2013).[163]NIOSH,“NIOSH Alert: Preventing Deaths, Injuries and Illnesses of YoungWorkers,” no. 2003-128, July 2003, pp. 1-2,http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2003-128/pdfs/2003128.PDF (accessed December 16,2013).[164] Human Rights Watch interview with Andrea D., 16, ShelbyCounty, Kentucky, August 7, 2013.[165]Human Rights Watch interview with Fabiana H., 14, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013[166]Human Rights Watch interview with Manuel W., 12, Warren County,Kentucky, September 2, 2013.[167]HumanRights Watch interview with Ian S., 12, Montgomery County, Kentucky, September6, 2013.[168]HumanRights Watch interview with Lazaro S., 15, ClarkCounty, Kentucky, September 4, 2013.[169]HumanRights Watch interview with Gregory T., 9, and Jackie T., 7, Macon County,Tennessee, October 22, 2013.[170]HumanRights Watch interview with Marta W., 10, and Patrick W., 9, Macon County,Tennessee, October 22, 2013.[171]Human Rights Watch interview with Emily D., 14, Scott County,Virginia, October 25, 2013.[172]HumanRights Watch interview with Bridget F., 15, Harrison County, Kentucky,September 5, 2013.[173] Human Rights Watch interview with Ricardo M., 14, ShelbyCounty, Kentucky, August 7, 2013.[174]May,“Occupational Injury and Illness in Farmworkers in the Eastern UnitedStates,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern United States, Arcuryand Quandt, eds., p. 78.[175]Emailfrom Shane Stephens, Economist, Bureau of Labor Statistics, US Department ofLabor to Human Rights Watch, December 13, 2013. Data on nonfatal injuries andillnesses involving days away from work in the crop production industry for2012 on file with Human Rights Watch.[176]May, “Occupational Injury and Illness in Farmworkers in theEastern United States,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern UnitedStates, Arcury and Quandt, eds., p. 78.[177] Ibid.[178]National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH),“NIOSH Alert: Preventing Deaths, Injuries and Illnesses of YoungWorkers,” no. 2003-128, July 2003, pp. 1-2,http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2003-128/pdfs/2003128.PDF (accessed December 16,2013).[179]Kermit G. Davis and Susan E. Kotowski, “Understanding the Ergonomic Riskfor Musculoskeletal Disorders in the United States Agricultural Sector,” AmericanJournal of Industrial Medicine, vol. 50 (2007), pp. 501-511.[180]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Dr. Thomas Arcury, director of the Centerfor Worker Health at Wake Forest School of Medicine, February 24, 2014.[181]Human Rights Watch interview with Fabiana H., 14, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[182]Human Rights Watch interview with Nicholas V., 14, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[183]HumanRights Watch interview with Santiago H., 16, Lenoir County, North Carolina, May18, 2013.[184]HumanRights Watch interview with Adriana F., 14, Montgomery County, Kentucky,September 3, 2013.[185]Human Rights Watch interview with Santiago H., 16, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[186]HumanRights Watch interview with Yanamaria W., 14, Warren County, Kentucky,September 2, 2013.[187]Human Rights Watch interview with Miguel T., 12, Wayne County,North Carolina, July 2, 2013.[188]Human Rights Watch interview with Raul D., 13, Wayne County, NorthCarolina, July 21, 2013.[189]Thomas A. Arcury and Sara A. Quandt,“Pesticide Exposure among Farmworkers and Their Families,” LatinoFarmworkers in the Eastern United States: Health, Safety, and Justice,Thomas A. Arcury and Sara A. Quandt, eds. (New York: Spring, 2009), p. 119.[190]Thomas A. Arcury, Quirina M. Vallejos, et al., “Green Tobacco Sicknessand Skin Integrity Among Migrant Latino Farmworkers,” American Journalof Industrial Medicine, vol. 51(2008), p. 201.[191]Thomas A. Arcury, Sara A. Quandt, et al., “The Incidence ofGreen Tobacco Sickness Among Latino Farmworkers,” Journal ofOccupational and Environmental Medicine, vol. 43, no. 7 (2001), p. 606.[192]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Dr. Thomas Arcury, director of the Centerfor Worker Health at Wake Forest School of Medicine, February 24, 2014. Seealso,Thomas A. Arcury, Sara A. Quandt, et al.,“A Clinic-Based, Case-Control Comparison of Green Tobacco Sickness amongMinority Farmworkers: Clues for Prevention,” Southern Medical Journal,vol. 95, no. 9 (2002), p. 1010, and Natalie M. Schmitt, Jochen Schmitt, et al.,“Health Risks in Tobacco Farm Workers—A Review of theLiterature,” Journal of Public Health vol. 15, (2007), p. 258.[193]HumanRights Watch interview with Jocelyn R., 17, Lenoir County, North Carolina, May18, 2013.[194]Entabacarse can be loosely translated as “to become overcome by tobacco,”and was commonly used by the children interviewed for this report to refer totobacco workers getting sick while working.[195] HumanRights Watch interview with Emmanuel P., 18, Wayne County, North Carolina, July 2, 2013.[196]HumanRights Watch interview with Jaime V., 18, Hamblen County, Tennessee, October24, 2013.[197]HumanRights Watch interview with Violet R., 19, Lenoir County, North Carolina, May19, 2013.[198]HumanRights Watch interview with Natalie G., 18, Lenoir County, North Carolina, May18, 2013.[199] HumanRights Watch interview with Eli B., 15, Greene County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[200] Ibid.[201]Human Rights Watch interview withAlberto H., 16, Doug S., 17, and Damian W., 17,Wayne County,Kentucky, September 3, 2013.[202]Geoffrey M. Calvert et al., “Acute Pesticide-RelatedIllnesses Among Working Youths, 1988–1999,” American Journal ofPublic Health, vol. 93, no. 4 (April 2003), p. 608.[203]Human Rights Watch interview with Alicia K., 15, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 15, 2013.[204]HumanRights Watch interview with Nicholas V., 14, Lenoir County, North Carolina, May18, 2013.[205]Human Rights Watch interview with Natalie G., 18, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[206]Human Rights Watch group interview withKatrina T., 15, Diego T., 16, and RafaB.,16, Greene County, North Carolina, July 3, 2013.[207]HumanRights Watch interview with Ezra B., 15, Lenoir County, North Carolina, May 19,2013.[208]HumanRights Watch interview with Claudio G., 16, Duplin County, North Carolina, July27, 2013.[209]Human Rights Watch interview with Henry F., 17, Montgomery County,Kentucky, September 6, 2013.[210]Human Rights Watch interview with Lucia A., 17, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[211]HumanRights Watch interview with Sally G., 16, and Marissa G., 14, Wayne County,North Carolina, July 21, 2013.[212]Human Rights Watch interview with Margarita S., 16, Wayne County,North Carolina, July 21, 2013.[213] Human Rights Watch interview with Ricardo M., 14, ShelbyCounty, Kentucky, August 7, 2013.[214]Human Rights Watch interview with Blanca A., 14, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[215] HumanRights Watch interview with Luciano P., 18, Fayette County, Kentucky, September 4, 2013.[216]Human Rights Watch interview with Gregory T., 9, and Jackie T., 7, MaconCounty, Tennessee, October 22, 2013.[217]Human Rights Watch interview with Katie P., 15, Greene County, NorthCarolina, July 24, 2013.[218]HumanRights Watch interview with Carla P., 16, Boyle County, Kentucky, September 6,2013.[219]Human Rights Watch interview with Lisandra P., 14, Boyle County,Kentucky, September 6, 2013.[220]Human Rights Watch interview with Emilio R., 16, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[221]HumanRights Watch interview with Raul D., 13, Wayne County, North Carolina, July 21,2013.[222]OSHA’s 1987 Field Sanitation Standard, which is enforced by DOL’sWage and Hour Division, requires agricultural employers to provide workerswith: (1) Cool and potable drinking water in sufficient amounts, dispensed bysingle-use drinking cups or by fountains and readily accessible to all; and (2)One toilet and a handwashing facility for each 20 employees, located within aquarter-mile walk. A farm that employs10 or fewer employees and has not had an active temporary labor campwithin the last 12 months isexempted from OSHA enforcement. Congress exempts small farms fromenforcement of OSHA standards by attaching riders to annual appropriationbills. OSHA Field Sanitation Standard (1987), 52 Fed. Reg. 16050 (May 1, 1987),29 C.F.R. sec. 1928.110.[223]US Department of Labor (DOL), Occupational Health and SafetyAdministration (OSHA), “Agricultural Operations: Hazards andControls,” undated,https://www.osha.gov/dsg/topics/agriculturaloperations/hazards_controls.html,(accessed December 11, 2013).[224]Eric Hensen and Martin Donohoe, “Health Issues of Migrant andSeasonal Farmworkers,” Journal of Health Care for the Poor andUnderserved, vol. 14, no. 2 (2003), p. 157.[225]Brian D. Curwin, Misty J. Heina, Wayne T.Sandersona, Marcia Nishiokab, and Wayne Buhler, “Acephate Exposure andDecontamination on Tobacco Harvesters’ Hands,” Journal ofExposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology, vol. 13 (2003) pp.203–210; Brian D. Curwin, Misty J. Heina, Wayne T. Sandersona, MarciaNishiokab, and Wayne Buhler, “Nicotine Exposure and Decontamination onTobacco Harvesters’ Hands,” Annals of Occupational Hygiene,vol. 49, no. 5 (2005) pp. 407–413.[226]Catherine Karr, “Children'sEnvironmental Health in Agricultural Settings,” Journal ofAgromedicine, vol. 17, no. 2, (2012), p. 133.[227]29 C.F.R. sec. 570.35.[228]HumanRights Watch interview with Sally G., 16, and Marissa G., 14, Wayne County,North Carolina, July 21, 2013[229]HumanRights Watch interview with Danielle S., 16, Clark County, Kentucky, September4, 2013.[230]HumanRights Watch interview with Bridget F., 15, Harrison County, Kentucky,September 5, 2013.[231] Human Rights Watch interview with Martin S., 18, ShelbyCounty, Kentucky, August 7, 2013.[232]Human Rights Watch interview with Blanca A., 14, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[233]Human Rights Watch interview with Elena G., 13, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[234]Human Rights Watch interview with Natalie G., 18, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[235]HumanRights Watch interview with Jorge P., 16, Hamblen County, Tennessee, October24, 2013.[236]Human Rights Watch interview with Joseph T., 18, Wayne County,North Carolina, July 2, 2013.[237]HumanRights Watch interview with Jaime V., 18, Hamblen County, Tennessee, October24, 2013.[238]HumanRights Watch interview with Yanamaria W., 14, Warren County, Kentucky,September 2, 2013.[239]Human Rights Watch interview with Isaac S., 18, 2013 (location andexact date withheld).[240]HumanRights Watch interview with Claudio G., 16, Duplin County, North Carolina, July27, 2013.[241] Human Rights Watch interview with Andrea D., 16, ShelbyCounty, Kentucky, August 7, 2013.[242]Human Rights Watch interview with Elicio F., 15, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 19, 2013.[243] Human Rights Watch interview with Elan T., 15, and Madeline T., 16,Lenoir County, North Carolina, May 19, 2013.[244]Human Rights Watch interview with Marta W., 10, and Patrick W., 9, MaconCounty, Tennessee, October 22, 2013.[245]Human Rights Watch interview with Bridget F., 15, Harrison County,Kentucky, September 5, 2013.[246]Human Rights Watch interview with Dario A., 16, Clark County,Kentucky, September 4, 2013.[247]HumanRights Watch interview with Blanca A., 14, Lenoir County, North Carolina, May18, 2013.[248]Human Rights Watch interview with Natalie G., 18, Lenoir County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[249] Human Rights Watch interview with Martin S., 18, ShelbyCounty, Kentucky, August 7, 2013.[250]Human Rights Watch interview with Isaac S., 18, 2013 (location andexact date withheld).[251] Human Rights watch interview with Adelina B., 14, ShelbyCounty, Kentucky, August 7, 2013.[252]Employers are exempt from minimum wage requirements if a farm did not utilizemore than 500 “man days” of agricultural labor in any calendarquarter of the preceding calendar year, with a “man day” defined asany day during which an employee performs agricultural work for at least one hour.Employees are not entitled to minimum wage if: they are immediate familymembers of their employer; they are principally engaged in the production oflivestock; they are local hand harvest laborers who commute daily from theirpermanent residence, are paid on a piece rate basis in traditionallypiece-rated occupations, and worked in agriculture less than 13 weeks duringthe preceding calendar year; or they are non-local children 16 years or youngerwho are hand harvesters, paid on a piece rate in traditionally piece-ratedoccupations, employed on the same farm as their parent, and are paid the samepiece rate as those over 16. 29 C.F.R. sec. 780.300. In addition, employers maypay youth under age 20 a lower minimum wage during the first 90 consecutive calendardays after their initial employment.[253] 29U.S.C. sec. 207(g).[254]29 U.S.C. sec. 213(b)(12).[255]29U.S.C. sec. 152. As a result, agricultural workers can be fired for joining alabor union or engaging in collective action against an employer.[256]HumanRights Watch interview with Henry F., 17, Montgomery County, Kentucky,September 6, 2013.[257]Human Rights Watch interview with Jaime V., 18, Hamblen County,Tennessee, October 24, 2013.[258]See,for example, John J. May, “Occupational Injury and Illness in Farmworkersin the Eastern United States,” Latino Farmworkers in the Eastern UnitedStates: Health, Safety, and Justice, Thomas A. Arcury and Sara A. Quandt, eds.(New York: Springer, 2009), p. 72.[259]Human Rights Watch interview with Agustin F., 15, Boyle County,Kentucky, September 6, 2013.[260] HumanRights Watch interview with Eli B., 15, Greene County,North Carolina, May 18, 2013.[261]HumanRights Watch interview with Jaime V., 18, Hamblen County, Tennessee, October24, 2013.[262]HumanRights Watch interview with Estevan O., 15, Lenoir County, North Carolina, May19, 2013.[263]Human Rights Watch interview with Margarita S., 16, Wayne County,North Carolina, July 21, 2013.[264]HumanRights Watch interview with Sally G., 16, and Marissa G., 14, Wayne County,North Carolina, July 21, 2013.[265]Migrant & Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act, 29 C.F.R. sec. 500.80.[266] Human Rights Watch interview with Calvin R., 17, ScottCounty, Kentucky, September 4, 2013.[267] HumanRights Watch interview with Calvin R., 17, Crittenden County, Kentucky,September 25, 2013.[268]HumanRights Watch interview with Jason H., 17, Greene County, North Carolina, July28, 2013.[269]Human Rights Watch interview with Guillermo S., 18, and Victor R.,15, Wilson County, North Carolina, July 28, 2013.[270] Ibid.[271]Human Rights Watch interview with Yanamaria W., 14, Warren County,Kentucky, September 2, 2013.[272]HumanRights Watch interview with Adriana F., 14, Montgomery County, Kentucky,September 3, 2013.[273]Human Rights Watch interview with Henry F., 17, Montgomery County,Kentucky, September 6, 2013.[274] HumanRights Watch interview with Luciano P., 18, Fayette County, Kentucky, September 4, 2013.[275] Ibid.[276]The US Supreme Court inPlyler v. Doe, 457 U.S. 202, 221-222 (1982) found that there is no“right” to education under the US Constitution, but that denyingpublic education to children living in the US without authorization violatesthe Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment (“The inestimable tollof [educational] deprivation on the social, economic, intellectual, andpsychological wellbeing of the individual, and the obstacle it poses toindividual achievement, make it most difficult to reconcile the cost or theprinciple of a status-based denial of basic education with the framework ofequality embodied in the Equal Protection Clause.”).For the right to education underinternational law, see, for example, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, G.A. res. 217A(III), U.N. Doc A/810 at 71 (1948) art. 26(1)(”Everyone has the right to education.… Elementary education shallbe compulsory.”).[277]International Labor Organization Convention Concerning theProhibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms ofChild Labor (Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention), adopted June 17, 1999, 38ILM 1207 (entered into force November 19, 2000), ratified by the United Stateson December 2, 1999, art. 3.[278]Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention, arts. 1, 4, 6, and 7.[279]Ibid.,art. 7.[280]ILO-IPEC, “Child Labour by Sector: Agriculture,”undated, http://www.ilo.org/ipec/areas/Agriculture/lang--en/index.htm (accessedJanuary 17, 2014).[281]ILO Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions andRecommendations (CEAR), “Observation: Worst Forms of Child LabourConvention, 1999 (No. 182) - United States (Ratification: 1999),” adopted2012, published 102nd ILC session (2013),http://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=1000:13100:0::NO:13100:P13100_COMMENT_ID:3057769:NO(accessed January 17, 2014).[282]ILO Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions andRecommendations, “General Report and Observations concerning ParticularCountries,” (articles 19, 22 and 35 of the Constitution), Report III(Part 1A), 2014, pp. 265-266,http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_norm/---relconf/documents/meetingdocument/wcms_235054.pdf(accessed February 10, 2014).[283]ILO Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions andRecommendations (CEAR), “Observation: Worst Forms of Child LabourConvention, 1999 (No. 182) - United States (Ratification: 1999),” adopted2012, published 102nd ILC session (2013),http://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=1000:13100:0::NO:13100:P13100_COMMENT_ID:3057769:NO(accessed January 17, 2014).[284] Ibid.[285]International Labor Organization Recommendation No. 190 Concerningthe Prohibition and Immediate Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor,adopted June 17, 1999.[286] Ibid, para. 3.[287] Ibid, para. 4.[288] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Benjamin Smith, SeniorOfficer for Corporate Social Responsibility, ILO-IPEC(International Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour), February 12,2013.[289] Emailfrom Benjamin Smith, Senior Officer for Corporate Social Responsibility,ILO-IPEC to Human Rights Watch, March 27, 2014.[290]USDepartment of Labor, Wage and Hour Division, “29 CFR Parts 570 and 579:Notice of Proposed Rulemaking and Request for Comments: Child LaborRegulations, Orders and Statements of Interpretation; Child LaborViolations—Civil Money Penalties: Employment in Tobacco Production andCuring” in Federal Register, vol. 76, no. 171 (September 2, 2011) pp.54864-54865, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2011-09-02/pdf/2011-21924.pdf(accessed March 26, 2014).[291] USDepartment of Labor, Wage and Hour Division, “Child Labor Regulations,Orders and Statements of Interpretation; Child Labor Violations—CivilMoney Penalties. Withdrawal of Proposed Rule,” Federal Register vol. 77,no. 103, May 29, 2012,https://webapps.dol.gov/federalregister/PdfDisplay.aspx?DocId=26108 (accessedJanuary 22, 2014). For a description of the opposition to the proposedregulations, see e.g. Gabriel Thompson, “Why Are Children Working inAmerican Tobacco Fields?,” The Nation, November 12, 2013, http://www.thenation.com/article/177136/why-are-children-working-american-tobacco-fields(accessed April 29, 2014).[292] ILOCommittee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations(CEAR), “Observation: Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (No.182) - United States (Ratification: 1999),” adopted 2012, published 102ndILC session (2013),http://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=1000:13100:0::NO:13100:P13100_COMMENT_ID:3057769:NO(accessed January 17, 2014); ILO Committee of Expertson the Application of Conventions and Recommendations, “General Reportand Observations concerning Particular Countries,” (articles 19, 22 and35 of the Constitution), Report III (Part 1A), 2014, pp. 265-266,http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_norm/---relconf/documents/meetingdocument/wcms_235054.pdf(accessed February 10, 2014).[293]Minimum Age for Admission and Employment (Minimum Age Convention),adopted June 26, 1973, 1015 U.N.T.S. 297, entered into force June 19, 1976. TheUnited States has not ratified the ILO Minimum Age Convention.[294]Tripartitemeetings bring together a cross-section of government, employer and workerrepresentatives from countries that are prominent or have a strong interest ina given sector. ILO Tripartite Meeting on the Future of Employment in theTobacco Sector, “Resolution Concerning Child Labour in the Tobacco Sector,”February 24-28, 2003,http://www2.ilo.org/public/english/dialogue/sector/techmeet/tmets03/tmets-res-10.pdf(accessed February 11, 2010).[295]Food and Agriculture Organization ofthe United Nations, Statistics Division (FAOSTAT), “Production, Countriesby Commodity, Tobacco, Unmanufactured, 2012,” August 2013,http://faostat.fao.org/site/339/default.aspx (accessed March 18, 2014).[296]Government of Brazil, Inspectorate Labour Order No. 20/2001, amended by OrderNo. 4/2002. On file with Human Rights Watch. Available at ILO-IPEC,Legislation and Policy Response database (LEPORD),http://cl-legal-info.itcilo.org (accessed May 6, 2014). See also, Government ofBrazil, “Decree No. 6.841 of June12, 2008 regulating Articles 3(d) and 4of Convention No. 182 of the International Labour Organization (ILO) concerningthe prohibition and immediate action for the elimination of the worst forms ofchild labour, as provided by Legislative Decree No. 178, of 14 December 1999,and promulgated by Decree No. 3.597 of 12 September 2000,and other provisions,“ cited in “Child Labor on Tobacco Becomes a Training Subject inPrudentopolis,” Sinditabaco, September 6, 2012, http://sinditabaco.com.br/en/child-labor-on-tobacco-becomes-a-training-subject-in-prudentopolis/(accessed May 6, 2014).[297]Government of India, Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act,1986, The Schedule, Part B: Processes, para 48,http://clc.gov.in/Acts/shtm/chla.php (accessed March 18, 2014).[298]Employment Act (CAP . 55:22) Employment (Prohibition of HazardousWork for Children) Order, 2012The Malawi Gazette Supplement, February 17, 2012,(Regulations, Rules etc., (No.1A),http://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/natlex_browse.details?p_lang=en&p_country=MWI&p_classification=04&p_origin=SUBJECT(accessed March 18, 2014). The Order states hazardous work shall not beprohibited for children between the ages of 16 and 18 where the “healthand safety of that person is fully protected, and …the person hasreceived adequate training in performing the activities.”[299]UnderRussian law, children under 18 are prohibited from being employed in“harvesting, transportation and initial processing tobacco.” Degreeof the Russian Federation, February 25, 2000, No. 163 (as amended June 20,2011), “Confirming the List of Heavy Work and Work with Hazardous orDangerous Conditions, in which it is Prohibited to Employ Persons Under 18Years Old.”[ПостановлениеПравительстваРФ от 25.02.2000 N 163 (ред.от 20.06.2011) ["Обутвержденииперечнятяжелыхработ и работс вредными илиопаснымиусловиями труда,привыполнениикоторыхзапрещаетсяприменениетруда лицмоложевосемнадцатилет"], item 1971.[300]Orderof the Ministry of Labor and Social Protection of the Republic of Kazakhstan,No. 185-P, July 31, 2007, On Confirming the List of Professions in Which It IsProhibited to Hire Workers Under the Age of Eighteen Years Old, andEstablishing the Norms For Hauling and Moving of Heavy Loads for Workers Underthe Age of Eighteen.[301]According toinformation received at the ILO, “The worst forms of child labour inUganda include: Children engaged incommercial agriculture, namely in sugar andtea plantations, tobacco and rice farms.” ILO-IPEC, Legislation andPolicy Response database (LEPORD), http://cl-legal-info.itcilo.org (accessedMarch 21, 2014). The Government of Uganda’sGuidelines for Labour Inspectors On the Identification of Hazardous ChildLabour states that children ages 15-17 are prohibited from the“harvesting and marketing of tobacco.” On file with Human RightsWatch.[302]Eliminating Child Labour in Tobacco GrowingFoundation, “About Us,” ECLT Foundation website, 2013,http://www.eclt.org/site/about-us/ (accessed March 18, 2014).[303]Emailfrom Sonia Velazquez, executive director, Eliminating Child Labour in TobaccoGrowing Foundation to Human Rights Watch, March 20, 2014.[304]Email from Sonia Velazquez, executive director, Eliminating ChildLabour in Tobacco Growing Foundation to Human Rights Watch, March 20, 2014.[305] BritishAmerican Tobacco, Altria Group, Alliance One, Imperial Tobacco Group, Japan Tobacco/JapanTobacco International, Philip Morris International, and Universal. ECLT Foundation, “Board Members,”http://www.eclt.org/site/about-us/how-we-are-governed/board-members/ (accessedMarch 21, 2014).[306]Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, G.A.Res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989),entered into force September 2, 1990, The US signed theCRC on February 16, 1995.[307]Vienna Convention on the Law ofTreaties, concluded May 23, 1969, 1155 U.N.T.S. 331, entered into force January27, 1980, art. 18.[308]CRC,art. 32.[309] International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of RacialDiscrimination (ICERD), 660 U.N.T.S. 195, entered into force January 4, 1969 (prohibiting unlawful discrimination “based on race,colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin”), art. 1(1). TheICERD was ratified by the US on October 21, 1994.[310] Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, GeneralComment No. 14, para. 2. In its concluding observations on the implementationof the ICERD in the US in 2001, the Committee stated: “While noting the numerous laws, institutions and measures designedto eradicate racial discrimination affecting the equal enjoyment of economic,social and cultural rights, the Committee is concerned about persistent [racialand ethnic] disparities in the enjoyment of, in particular, the right toadequate housing, equal opportunities for education and employment, and accessto public and private health care.” A/56/18/380-407,August 14, 2001, 398.[311] Accordingto 2008-2009 survey data from the National Agricultural Workers Survey (NAWS),76 percent of all US crop workers are Hispanic. Email fromEgan Reich, US Department of Labor, to Human Rights Watch, May 6, 2014. Citing 2008-2009data from “The National Agricultural Workers Survey: Public AccessData,” http://www.doleta.gov/agworker/naws.cfm (accessed May 6, 2014).[312]Human Rights Watch, Fields of Peril: Child Labor in USAgriculture, May 2010, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2010/05/05/fields-peril(accessed February 3, 2014).[313]Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,Consideration of Reports Submitted by State Parties under Article 9 of theConvention: Concluding Observations, United States of America, CERD/C/USA/CO/6,February 2008, para 28.[314]Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,“Concluding Observation of the Committee on the Elimination of RacialDiscrimination: United States of America,” CERD/C/Misc. /56/18, August2001, paras. 380-407, para. 393.[315]Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted December 10, 1948, G.A. Res.217A(III), U.N. Doc. A/810 at 71 (1948), art. 25; International Covenant onEconomic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), adopted December 16, 1966, G.A.Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 49, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966),993 U.N.T.S. 3, entered into force January 3, 1976, signed by the United Stateson October 5, 1977, art. 12; Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC),adopted November 20, 1989, G.A. Res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No 49)at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into force September 2, 1990, signedby the United States on February 16, 1995., art. 24.[316]ICESCR, art. 12.[317] Ibid, art. 7.[318]CESCR, General Comment No. 14, Article 12, The Right to the Highest AttainableStandard of Health, UN Doc. E/C.12/2000/4 (2000), para. 15.[319]The preambles to key human rights treaties recognize that ensuringrespect for human rights is a shared responsibility that extends to“every organ of society,” not only to states. In addition, thepreambles of both the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights andthe International Covenant on Economic Social and Cultural Rights recognizethat “individuals” have human rights responsibilities, a term thatcan incorporate juridical persons (including businesses) as well as naturalpersons.[320] Committee on the Rights of the Child, General comment No. 16(2013) on State obligations regarding the impact of the business sector onchildren’s rights, Adoptedby the Committee at its sixty-second session (14 January – 1 February2013), para. 4.[321]CRC, General Comment No. 16, para. 9.[322] Ibid, para. 11.[323]UNICEF, UN Global Compact and Save the Children, “Children’sRights and Business Principles,” 2012, http://www.unicef.org/csr/css/PRINCIPLES_23_02_12_FINAL_FOR_PRINTER.pdf(accessed March 13, 2014).[324]See UN Human Rights Council, “Mandate of the SpecialRepresentative of the Secretary-General on the issue of human rights andtransnational corporations and other business enterprises,” Resolution8/7,A/HRC/RES/8/7; and “Human rights and transnational corporationsand other business enterprises,” Resolution17/4, A/HRC/17/L.17/Rev.1.[325]OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises (2011 Edition):Recommendations for Responsible Business Conduct in a Global Context, May 25,2011,http://www.oecd.org/document/28/0,3746,en_2649_34889_2397532_1_1_1_1,00.html(accessed July 6, 2012). As described in the document itself, “[t]heGuidelines are recommendations jointly addressed by governments tomultinational enterprises [that] provide principles and standards of goodpractice consistent with applicable laws and internationally recognizedstandards.”[326]29U.S.C. 201, et seq. A separate federal labor law specific to farmworkers, theMigrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act of 1983, setsadditional employment standards for agricultural workers related torecordkeeping, payroll, disclosure of terms of employment. The law alsorequires farm labor contractors to register with the Department of Labor. TheMigrant & Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act, 29 U.S.C. sec. 1801,et seq. 29 C.F.R. sec.500.[327] 29U.S.C. sec. 213(b)(12).[328] 29 U.S.C. sec. 213(a)(6)(A).[329]TheNational Labor Relations Act (NLRA), 29 U.S.C. sec. 152(3).[330]The FLSA allows for very limited exceptions to this, including workdelivering newspapers, acting, and making evergreen wreaths.[331]Children ages 14 and 15 can work in certain limited jobs, such ascashiers, stocking shelves, or washing cars, in retail or food service stores,and in gas stations but only for limited hours: up to 40 hours in a nonschoolweek; up to 18 hours in a school week; up to 8 hours on a nonschool day; and upto 3 hours on a school day.[332]29U.S.C. sec. 213(c)(1)(A). A "small farm" is one which did not employmore than 500 man-days of agricultural labor (or about 7 workers) during anycalendar quarter of the preceding year.[333]29 U.S.C. sec. 213(c)(1)(B).[334]29U.S.C. sec. 213(c)(1)(C).[335]29 U.S.C. sec. 213(c)(2).[336]Compare 29 C.F.R. 570.71(a)(3)(iv) (power saws in agriculture) with570.65(a)(i) (power saws in all other industries).[337]SeeSection IV of this report for federal data on fatal and non-fatal occupationalinjuries in agriculture in 2012.[338]Ky. Rev. Stat. sec 339.210 (West) (“As used in KRS 339.220 to339.450 ‘gainful employment’ does not include employment in farmwork or in domestic service in a private home…”). Tenn. Code Ann.sec. 50-5-107(3).[339]Va.Code Ann. secs. 40.1-78 through 40.1-116[340]TheNorth Carolina Wage and Hour Act, N.C. General. Statute. sec. 95-25.14 (a)(2)states, “The provisions of G.S. 95-25.3 (Minimum Wage), G.S. 95-25.4(Overtime), and G.S. 95-25.5 (Youth Employment), and the provisions of G.S.95-25.15(b) (Record Keeping) as they relate to these exemptions, do not applyto . . . [a]ny person employed in agriculture, as defined under the Fair LaborStandards Act.” Ky. Rev. Stat. sec. 337.010 (“As used in KRS337.275 to 337.325, 337.345, and KRS 337.385 to 337.405, unless the contextrequires otherwise: (a) “Employee” is any person employed by orsuffered or permitted to work for an employer, but shall not include: 1. Anyindividual employed in agriculture . . .”). Va. Code Ann. sec. 40.1‑28.9(B)(1)("Employee" includes any individual employed by an employer, exceptthe following… Any person employed as a farm laborer or farmemployee.”)[341]29 C.F.R. sec. 570.2.[342]29C.F.R. sec. 570.71. Children under age 16 may still handle pesticides of lowertoxicity, and children ages 16 and older may work in agriculture without anyage-related restrictions. Notably, a 2003 study of children under age 18 withacute occupational pesticide-related illnesses found that only a few appearedto working in violation of these regulations. Calvert et al., “AcutePesticide-Related Illnesses Among Working Youths, 1988–1999,” AmericanJournal of Public Health, p. 609.[343]US Department of Labor, Wage and Hour Division,“Updating Child Labor Regulations for the 21st Century,”http://www.naeda.com/Portals/0/docs/Government%20Relations/Child%20Labor-Complete.pdf(accessed February 7, 2014).[344]The proposed regulations would have added prohibitions on operatingadditional heavy machinery, working in silos and grain storage facilities, andhandling all pesticides.[345]USDepartment of Labor, Wage and Hour Division, “29 CFR Parts 570 and 579:Notice of Proposed Rulemaking and Request for Comments: Child LaborRegulations, Orders and Statements of Interpretation; Child LaborViolations—Civil Money Penalties: Employment in Tobacco Production andCuring” in Federal Register, vol. 76, no. 171 (September 2, 2011) pp.54864-54865, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2011-09-02/pdf/2011-21924.pdf(accessed March 26, 2014).[346]USDepartment of Labor, Wage and Hour Division, “Child Labor Regulations, Ordersand Statements of Interpretation; Child Labor Violations—Civil MoneyPenalties. Withdrawal of Proposed Rule,” Federal Register vol. 77, no.103, May 29, 2012,https://webapps.dol.gov/federalregister/PdfDisplay.aspx?DocId=26108 (accessedJanuary 22, 2014).[347]40 C.F.R. sec. 170.1. See 40 C.F.R. sec. 170 and followingsections for the entire Worker Protection Standard.[348]29C.F.R. sec. 570.2.[349]See “Restricted-entry statements,” 40 C.F.R. sec.156.208.[350]Calvert et al., “Acute Pesticide-Related Illnesses Among WorkingYouths, 1988–1999,”American Journal of Public Health, p. 609.[351]HumanRights Watch interview with Virginia Ruiz, Director of Occupational andEnvironmental Health, Farmworker Justice, January 27, 2014.[352]29C.F.R. sec. 1910.[353]Among regulations that are exempt for agricultural workers includerules regarding work at heights (such as work on ladders), the use of personalprotective requirement (including reinforced shoes and gloves), and theavailability of medical services and first aid. The seven general industrystandards that do apply to agriculture govern temporary labor camps, storageand handling of anhydrous ammonia, logging operations, slow-moving vehicles,hazard communication, cadmium, and the retention of US Department of Transportationmarkings, placards, and labels. 29 C.F.R. sec. 1928.21(a).[354]29C.F.R. sec. 1928.[355]29C.F.R. sec. 1928.110.[356]Congress exempts small farms from enforcement of OSHA standards by attachingriders to annual appropriation bills.[357] Human Rights Watch interview with Patricia Davidson and MichaelHancock, Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor, Washington, DC, February28, 2014.[358]“Generalduty clause” refers to section 5(a)(1) of the Occupational Safety andHealth Act, which requires employers to “furnish to each of his employeesemployment and a place of employment which are free from recognized hazardsthat are causing or are likely to cause death or serious physical harm to hisemployees.”[359]29U.S.C. sec. 667(c)(2).[360] United States Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and HealthAdministration, “Frequently Asked Questions about State OccupationalSafety and Health Plans,” undated,https://www.osha.gov/dcsp/osp/faq.html#oshaprogram (accessed January 23, 2014).[361]Human Rights Watch, Fields of Peril: Child Labor in USAgriculture, May 2010, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2010/05/05/fields-peril(accessed February 3, 2014).[362]Human Rights Watch interview with Derrick Witherspoon, branchchief, FLSA and Child Labor, Division of Enforcement Policy and Procedures;James Kessler, branch chief, Immigration and Farm Labor, Division ofEnforcement Policy and Procedures; Michael Hancock, assistant administrator forpolicy; Mike Lazzeri director, Division of Enforcement Policy and Procedures,et al., Wage and Hour Division, US Department of Labor, Washington, DC, October23, 2013.[363]Email from Michael Kravitz, director of Communications, Wage andHour Division, US Department of Labor, to Human Rights Watch, December 19,2013. Regarding all child labor cases, the Wage and Hour Division found 704cases of child labor violations in 2013.[364] The “hot goods” provision came into useby the Wage and Hour Division in 1998, although it has been part of the FLSAsince its origination in 1938. The provision as it pertains to child laborreads in part: “No producer, manufacturer, or dealer shall ship ordeliver for shipment in commerce any goods produced in an establishmentsituated in the United States in or about which within thirty days prior to theremoval of such goods there from any oppressive child labor has beenemployed.” 29 U.S.C. sec. 212(a).[365]Emailfrom Michael Kravitz, director of Communications, Wage and Hour Division, USDepartment of Labor, to Human Rights Watch, December 19, 2013.[366]HumanRights Watch interview with Patricia Davidson and Michael Hancock, Wage andHour Division, Department of Labor, Washington, DC, February 28, 2014.[367] USEnvironmental Protection Agency (EPA), “FY2012WPS Inspection and Enforcement Accomplishment Report,” March 21, 2013,http://www.epa.gov/compliance/monitoring/programs/fifra/wps.html (accessedFebruary 3, 2014).[368] EPA, “FY2012 Overview of WPS Violations During anInspection,” March 27, 2013,http://www.epa.gov/compliance/monitoring/programs/fifra/wps.html (accessedFebruary 3, 2014).[369]Food and Agriculture Organization of the UnitedNations, Statistics Division (FAOSTAT), “Production, Countries byCommodity, Tobacco, Unmanufactured, 2012,” August2013, http://faostat.fao.org/site/339/default.aspx (accessed March 18, 2014).[370] JapanTobacco Group (JT), “Annual Report 2013,”March 2013,http://www.jt.com/investors/results/annual_report/pdf/annual2013_E_all.pdf(accessed February 11, 2014).[371] JT, “Annual Report 2013.”[372]Letter from John S. Wilson, III, Vice President, Corporate Sustainability andCommercial Equity, RAI Services Company, to Human Rights Watch, February 28,2014.[373]Letter from Ronald S. Milstein, Executive Vice President, General Counsel, andSecretary, Lorillardto HumanRights Watch,January 21,2014.[374] Letterfrom H. Michal Ligon, Vice President, Universal Leaf Tobacco Company, to HumanRights Watch, March 10, 2014.[375]UNCommission on Human Rights, “Report of the Special Representative of theSecretary-General, Annex, I.A.1,” March 2011, http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/GuidingPrinciplesBusinessHR_EN.pdf(accessed March 10, 2014).[376]Ibid.[377] Allof the letters can be found as an appendix to this report available at https://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/AppendicesFullLR.pdf.[378] HumanRights Watch staff met with executives from Japan Tobacco and Japan TobaccoInternational on February 6, 2014 and with PMI executives and representativesfrom Verite, a labor auditing, research, and consulting organization engaged byPMI to assist in its development and implementation of its labor policy, in aseparate meeting on February 6, 2014. Human Rights Watch spoke by phonewith BAT executives by phone on March 13,2014; met with executives from AltriaGroup on March 14, 2014; spoke by phone with executives from UniversalCorporation on March 24, 2014; spoke by phone withexecutives from Reynolds American on April 3, 2014.[379]Altria Group, “About Altria: At-A-Glance,”http://www.altria.com/About-Altria/At-A-Glance/Pages/default.aspx?src=topnav(accessed February 12, 2014).[380]Letter from Jeannette Hubbard, Vice President,Procurement, Altria Client Services, to Human Rights Watch, February 11, 2014.[381] Ibid.[382] Ibid.[383] Ibid.[384] Letterfrom Jeanette Hubbard, Vice President, Procurement, Altria Client Services,April 30, 2014.[385]British American Tobacco (BAT), “Who We Are,”http://www.bat.com/group/sites/uk__3mnfen.nsf/vwPagesWebLive/DO52ADCY?opendocument&SKN=1http://www.bat.com/group/sites/uk__3mnfen.nsf/vwPagesWebLive/DO52ADCY?opendocument&SKN=1(accessed December 10, 2013).[386]BAT,“Global Tobacco Market,”http://www.bat.com/group/sites/uk__3mnfen.nsf/vwPagesWebLive/DO6Z2EUD?opendocument&SKN=1(accessed December 10, 2013).[387]BAT,“Our Brands,”http://www.bat.com/group/sites/uk__3mnfen.nsf/vwPagesWebLive/DO52ADK2?opendocument&SKN=1(accessed December 10, 2013).[388] ReynoldsAmerican was formed in 2004 by a merger between two UScigarette companies: the Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corporation, previouslyowned by BAT, and R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. BAT,“Our History: Recent Past 1969-Now,”http://www.bat.com/group/sites/uk__3mnfen.nsf/vwPagesWebLive/DO52ADJ8?opendocument&SKN=1(accessed December 10, 2013).[389] Ninety-five percent of the tobacco comes from NorthCarolina, Kentucky, Tennessee, and Virginia. Letterfrom Wheaton.[390]Letter fromKingsley J. Wheaton,Director, Corporate and Regulatory Affairs, British American Tobacco, to HumanRights Watch, January 21, 2014.[391]BAT,“Child Labor Policy,” February 29, 2000,http://www.bat.com/group/sites/uk__3mnfen.nsf/vwPagesWebLive/DO725ECW/$FILE/medMD725KV2.pdf?openelement(accessed December 10, 2013).[392]Letter from Wheaton, and BAT, “Child Labor Policy.”[393]Letter from Wheaton.[394] BAT,“Green Tobacco Sickness,” http://www.bat.com/group/sites/uk__3mnfen.nsf/vwPagesWebLive/DO8SNDPT?opendocument&SKN=1(accessed, March 14, 2014).[395] Letterfrom Wheaton and, BAT, “Social Responsibility inTobacco Programme,” http://www.bat.com/srtp (accessed April 15,2014).[396] “SocialResponsibility in Tobacco Programme.”[397] Letter from Wheaton.[398]BAT,“Social Responsibility in Tobacco Programme.”[399]Letter from Wheaton.[400] ImperialTobacco Group, “Group at a Glance,” http://www.imperial-tobacco.com/index.asp?page=48and “Our Optimized Portfolio,”http://www.imperial-tobacco.com/index.asp?page=33. According to its 2013 AnnualReport, Imperial Tobacco Group includes the wholly-owned Imperial Tobacco Limited, whose principal activity is “manufacture, marketing and sale of tobacco products in theUK” and Imperial Tobacco International Limited, whose principal activityis “export and marketing of tobacco products.” “Annual Reportand Accounts 2013, Supplementary Information,” December 10, 2013,http://www.imperial-tobacco.com/files/financial/reports/ar2013/index.asp?pageid=52(accessed February 2, 2014).[401] ImperialTobacco Group, “Group at a Glance.”[402]Imperial Tobacco Group, “Annual Report andAccounts.”[403] Letterfrom Kristy Mann, Senior CR Engagement Manager, Imperial Tobacco Group, to Human Rights Watch January 22, 2014.[404] Ibid.[405]Letter from Mann, and ImperialTobacco Group, “Leaf Supplier Program,”http://www.imperial-tobacco.com/index.asp?page=728(accessed February 2, 2014).[406]Letter from Mann.[407] JapanTobacco Group (JT), “Annual Report 2013, YearEnded March 2013,” http://www.jt.com/investors/results/annual_report/pdf/annual2013_E_all.pdf(accessed February 3, 2014), p. 4.[408] JTIacquired R.J. Reynolds Nabisco's non-U.S. tobacco operationsin 1999. JT Group, “International TobaccoBusiness,” http://www.jt.com/about/division/tobacco_global/index.html (accessedFebruary 3, 2014).[409] JapanTobacco International (JTI), Agricultural Labor Practices, 2013.[410] Ibid.[411] Ibid.Emphasis added.[412]Letter from Nagata.[413] JTI,Agricultural Labor Practices, letter from Nagata, and Human Rights Watch meeting with Yukiko Seto and Masaki Omori, CSR Division, Japan Tobacco, Inc., March 11, 2014.[414]Meeting with Maarten Bevers, VicePresident, Corporate Affairs & Communications, Global Leaf Japan TobaccoInternational, Yukiko Seto, Senior Manager, Corporate Social ResponsibilityDivision, Japan Tobacco, Ward Anderson, Corporate Affairs & CommunicationsManager, Global Leaf – U.S. Origin, Japan Tobacco International, February 6, 2014.[415]Letter from Nagata.[416] Letterfrom Ryoko Nagata, Senior Vice President, Corporate Social Responsibility,Japan Tobacco Inc, to Human Rights Watch, April 20, 2014.[417] Lorillard, “About Us,” http://www.lorillard.com/about-us/(accessed February 2, 2014).[418]Letter from Ronald S. Milstein, Executive Vice President, General Counsel, andSecretary, Lorillard, January 21, 2014, to Human Rights Watch.[419]Letter from Milstein.[420] Ibid.[421] Ibid. See also, Lorillard, “Supply ChainCompliance,”http://www.lorillard.com/responsibility/california-supply-chains-compliance/(accessed February 2, 2014).[422]Letterfrom Milstein.[423] Ibid.[424] PMI,“Key Facts and Financial Data,”http://www.pmi.com/eng/about_us/company_overview/pages/key_facts_and_financial_data.aspx(accessed February 12, 2014). In January 2008, PMI spun off from AltriaGroup, described above, and became an independent company.PMI, “Company Overview,”http://www.pmi.com/eng/about_us/company_overview/pages/company_overview.aspx(accessed February 12, 2014).[425]Ibid.[426]Otherleading brands include L&M, Chesterfield, Parliament,and Virginia Slims. PMI, “Company Overview.”[427]Letterfrom Jennifer P. Goodale, Annex 1, p. 13.[428] SeePhilip Morris International, Agricultural Labor Practices Progress Report2013,” http://www.pmi.com/eng/media_center/Documents/PMI_Progress_Report_FINAL_not_watermarked_low_res_0328.pdf(accessed April 12,2014).[429] PhilipMorris International (PMI), “Agricultural Labor Practices Code,”“http://www.pmi.com/eng/media_center/company_statements/documents/alp_code.pdf(accessed February 12, 2014).In 2011, PMI launched the new AgriculturalLabor Practices Codeto“promote fair and safe labor practices on all farms that grow the tobaccowe buy.” Letter from Jennifer P. Goodale, VicePresident, Contributions and External Labor Policies, Philip MorrisInternational, to Human Rights Watch, February 4, 2014[430]Letter from Goodale, Annex 1, p. 1.[431]Human Rights Watch meeting with Jennifer Goodale, vice president, Contributions and ExternalLabor Policies, PMI; Miguel Coleta, director of ExternalLabor Policies, PMI; Brandie Davis, director of Corporate Affairs, PMI; RobinJaffin, director of Supplier Programs, Verite, and Jacqui McDonald, Verite, NewYork City, February 6, 2014.[432] PMI,“Agricultural Labor Policy,” and “Agricultural LaborPractices (ALP) Progress Report,” September2012, http://www.pmi.com/eng/media_center/company_statements/documents/pmi_alp_progress_report_2012.pdf(accessed February 3, 2014).[433]Letterfrom Goodale.[434] Ibid,Annex 1, p. 2.[435]Ibid,Annex 1, p. 1.[436]Letterfrom Goodale.[437] Ibid.[438]Letter from Goodale, Annex 1, p. 3.[439]Letter from Goodale, Annex 1.[440]Letterfrom Goodale.[441] Ibid.[442] Letterfrom Jennifer P. Goodale, VicePresident, Contributions and External Labor Policies, Philip MorrisInternational, to Human Rights Watch, April 24, 2014.[443]Reynolds American, Homepage, http://www.reynoldsamerican.com/index (accessedFebruary 5, 2014). Reynolds Americanwas created in 2003 when R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Holdingsand British American Tobacco (BAT) signedan agreement to combine the assets and operations of their respective UStobacco businesses. Reynolds American,“Frequently Asked Questions.” http://www.reynoldsamerican.com/faq.cfm(accessed February 5, 2014).[444]Reynolds American, Homepage, and “Frequently Asked Questions.”[445]Letter from John S. Wilson, III, Vice President, Corporate Sustainability andCommercial Equity, RAI Services Company, to Human Rights Watch, February 28,2014.[446] Ibid.[447]Reynolds American, “Supplier Responsibility,”http://www.reynoldsamerican.com/supplier-responsibility.cfm?plank=SupplierResponsibility3(February 5, 2014).[448] Ibid.[449]Reynolds American,“Statementon our Efforts to Support Human Rights,”http://www.reynoldsamerican.com/vision.cfm (accessed February 5, 2014).[450]Letter from Wilson,and “Worker Welfare: Summaryreport of relevant findings from UL’s Good Agricultural PracticesAssessment of North Carolina growers under contract to RAI OperatingCompanies,” 2013,http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/RAI/2763862223x0x661401/bb0693d7-a280-4599-a450-b9b73e920ed1/RAI_Summary_Report_2011-2012_Final_2May13.pdf(accessed February 5, 2014).[451]Reynolds American, “Supplier Responsibility.”[452]Two caseswere in compliance with US law; the third case was not compliant, due to theabsence of written parental consent, but farm management corrected the issue.“Worker Welfare: Summary report of relevant findings from UL’s GoodAgricultural Practices Assessment of North Carolina growers under contract toRAI Operating Companies.”[453]ReynoldsAmerican, “An Open Letter from the Board of Directors and Leadership Teamof Reynolds American Inc.,” undated,http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/RAI/2941276456x0x279938/72d29a9b-b75a-42e7-aee2-ff3eb6beb239/279938.pdf(accessed February 5, 2014).[454]FarmLabor Organizing Committee (FLOC) and Oxfam America, A State of Fear: HumanRights Abusesin North Carolina’s TobaccoIndustry, May 2011,http://www.oxfamamerica.org/explore/research-publications/a-state-of-fear-human-rights-abuses-in-north-carolinas-tobacco-industry/(accessed February 5, 2014).[455] HumanRights Watch interview with Justin Flores, director ofPrograms, Farm Labor Organizing Committee, Dudley, North Carolina, May 21,2013.[456]Alliance One,“Company Overview,”http://www.aointl.com/ and “Frequently Asked Questions,”http://www.aointl.com/au/faqs.asp (both accessed February 5, 2014).[457] AllianceOne, “United States Security and Exchange Commission Form10-K: Annual Report Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities ExchangeAct of 1934 for the Fiscal Year Ending March 31, 2013,” http://www.aointl.com/10k.pdf(accessed February 5, 2014).[458]Letter from J. Pieter Sikkel, President and Chief Executive Officer, AllianceOne, to Human Rights Watch, March 7, 2014.[459] Ibid.[460] Ibid.[461] Ibid.[462] Ibid.[463] Ibid.[464]Universal, “Homepage,” http://www.universalcorp.com/ (accessedFebruary 5, 2014).[465]Universal, “United States Security and Exchange Commission Form 10-K: Annual Report Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of theSecurities Exchange Act of 1934 for the Fiscal Year Ending March 31, 2013,” http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/UVV/2937694838x0x673528/44420C4B-2651-4D50-8EB2-84BC114144D5/UVV2013_Annual_Report.pdf(accessed February 5, 2014).[466] Forthe fiscal year ended March 31, 2013, PMI and Imperial Tobacco Group, and theiraffiliates, accounted for 10 percent or more of Universal’s revenues,while the other three customers each accounted for between 8 and 10 percent ofrevenues.Universal Corporation, “US SEC Form 10-K for the Fiscal Year Ending March 31, 2013.”[467]Letter from H. Michal Ligon, Vice President, UniversalLeaf Tobacco Company, to Human Rights Watch, March 10, 2014, p. 3.[468] Ibid.[469] Ibid.[470] Ibid.,p. 5.[471] Ibid.,p. 5.[472]Universal, “US SEC Form 10-K for the Fiscal YearEnding March 31, 2013.”[473] USTobacco GAP Program Handbook, https://gapconnections-public.sharepoint.com/GAPC%20Book/Guidelines.pdf(accessed February 13, 2014),, p. 1.[474] TheUS Tobacco GAP Program was endorsed by: Alliance One International, American Snuff Co., Burley Stabilization Corporation, Hail andCotton, John Middleton Company, Japan Tobacco International Leaf Services (US), Lorillard Tobacco Company, Philip MorrisInternational, Philip Morris USA, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Santa FeNatural Tobacco Co., United Tobacco Company, Universal Corporation, USSmokeless Tobacco Company, and US Tobacco Cooperative.[475]US Tobacco GAP Program Handbook, pp. 15-21.[476] Ibid,pp. 16-17.[477] Forexample, letter from Ligon, p. 5.[478] Theoriginal companies involved were Altria Group, Philip MorrisInternational, and Reynolds American.[479]Letter from Hubbard.[480] Letterfrom Ligon, p. 6.[481]R.J.Reynolds, “Farm Labor Issues,” http://www.rjrt.com/laborissues.aspx(accessed February 11, 2014).[482]Theboard includes 17 organizations, including tobacco and tobacco leaf companies,tobacco growers’ associations, and unions. The International LabourOrganization and Save the Children are advisors to the board.[483]HumanRights Watch meeting with Sonia Velázquez, executive director; NicholasMcCoy, senior policy and advocacy officer; and Innocent Mugwagwa, seniorprogramme manager,ECLT Foundation, Geneva,Switzerland, March 14, 2014.Related ContentMay 14, 2014News ReleaseUS: Child Workers in Danger on Tobacco FarmsGovernment, Companies Should Provide ProtectionMay 14, 2014News ReleaseUS: Child Workers in Danger on Tobacco FarmsRegion / CountryUnited States US Poverty and Economic InequalityProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch