The Rest of Their Lives: Life without Parole for Child Offenders in the United States | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload this reportDownload the updated executive summary to this reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload this reportDownload the updated executive summary to this reportOctober 11, 2005The Rest of Their LivesLife without Parole for Child Offenders in the United StatesThe United States is one of the few countries where a crime committed by a juvenile regularly results in a life sentence without any possibility of parole. This 167-page report documents state and national trends in this type of sentencing and analyzes the race, history and crimes of the young offenders and is a joint project with Amnesty International.I. SummaryI'm a former cop. I'm atrue believer in law and order. But my son was a child when this happened. Hewasn't thinking like an adult, and he wasn't an adult  . . . how is it that thelaw can treat him as if he is one?-Frank C., father of youth offender sentenced to lifewithout parole, October 22, 2004Children can and do commit terrible crimes. When they do,they should be held accountable, but in a manner that reflects their specialcapacity for rehabilitation. However, in the United States the punishment is alltoo often no different from that given to adults.In civil matters, state and federal laws recognize theimmaturity and irresponsibility of children. For example, they typicallyestablish eighteen as the minimum age to get married without parental consent,to vote, to sign contracts, or to serve on a jury. Yet in forty-two states and underfederal law, the commission of a serious crime by children under eighteen-indeedin some states children as young as ten-transforms them instantly into adultsfor criminal justice purposes. Childrenwho are too young to buycigarettes legally, boys who may not have started to get facial hair, kids whostill have stuffed animals on their beds, are tried as adults, and if convicted,receive adult prison sentences, including life without parole (LWOP).This report is the first ever national analysis of lifewithout parole sentences for children. Human Rights Watch and AmnestyInternational have discovered that there are currently at least 2,225 peopleincarcerated in the United States who have been sentenced to spend the rest oftheir lives in prison for crimes they committed as children. In the United States, departments of corrections do not maintain publicly accessible and accuratestatistics about child offenders incarcerated in adult prisons, and there is nonational depository of these data. Therefore, we were able to collect data onindividuals sentenced to life without parole for crimes they committed aschildren only by requesting that it be specially produced for us by eachstate's corrections department.The public may believe that children who receive lifewithout parole sentences are "super-predators" with long records of viciouscrimes. In fact, an estimated 59 percent received the sentence for theirfirst-ever criminal conviction. Sixteen percent were between thirteen andfifteen years old at the time they committed their crimes. While the vastmajority were convicted of murder, an estimated 26 percent were convicted offelony murder in which the teen participated in a robbery or burglary duringwhich a co-participant committed murder, without the knowledge or intent of theteen. Racial disparities are marked. Nationwide, the estimated rate at whichblack youth receive life without parole sentences (6.6 per 10,000) is ten timesgreater than the rate for white youth (0.6 per 10,000).Our research shows significant differences among the statesin the use of life without parole sentences for children. For example, Virginia, Louisiana, and Michigan have rates that are three to seven-and-a-half timeshigher than the national average of 1.77 per 100,000 children nationwide. Atthe other end of the spectrum, New Jersey and Utah permit life without parolefor children but have no child offenders currently serving the sentence. Alaska, Kansas, Kentucky, Maine, New Mexico, New York, West Virginia, and the District of Columbia all prohibit the sentence for youth offenders. In May of 2005, Texas changed its law to allow individuals found guilty of a capital felony (includingthose below the age of eighteen) to be sentenced to life without parole. However,we could not definitively interpret this legislation, nor could we include datafrom Texas in this report, because the law went into effect on September 1,2005, meaning it had not yet been applied or interpreted by the courts of Texas when this report went to press.Before 1980, life without parole was rarely imposed onchildren. The number of child offenders who received the sentence each yearbegan to increase in the late 1980s, reaching 50 in 1989. It peaked in 1996 at152 and then began to drop off; in 2003, 54 child offenders entered prison withthe sentence. But states have by no means abandoned the use of life withoutparole for child offenders: the estimated rate at which the sentence is imposedon children nationwide remains at least three times higher today than it wasfifteen years ago. In fact, the proportion of youth offenders convicted ofmurder who receive life without parole has been increasing, suggesting atendency among states to punish them with increasing severity. For example, in 1990there were 2,234 youth convicted of murder in the United States, 2.9 percent ofwhom were sentenced to life without parole. Ten years later, in 2000, thenumber of youth murderers had dropped to 1,006, but 9.1 percent were sentencedto life without parole.In addition, in eleven out of the seventeen years between1985 and 2001, youth convicted of murder in the United States were morelikely to enter prison with a life without parole sentence than adult murderoffenders. Even when we consider murder offenders sentenced to either lifewithout parole or death sentences, in four of those seventeen years, youth weremore likely than adults to receive one of those two most punitivesentences.Such harsh treatment for youth offenders cannot be squaredwith the most fundamental tenets of human rights law. International standardsrecognize that children, a particularly vulnerable group, are entitled tospecial care and protection because they are still developing physically,mentally, and emotionally. States are required to offer a range of alternativesto institutionalization. The imprisonment of a child should always be a measureof last resort, focused on the child's rehabilitation, and for the shortest suitableperiod of time. While incarceration may be proper for youth convicted of veryserious crimes such as murder, this report argues that a sentence of lifewithout the possibility of parole is never appropriate for youth offenders.The dramatic increase in the imposition of life withoutparole sentences on child offenders in the United States is, at least in part,a consequence of widespread changes in U.S. criminal justice policies thatgathered momentum in the last decades of the twentieth century. Responding toincreases in crime and realizing the political advantages of promoting toughlaw and order policies, state and federal legislators steadily increased thelength of prison sentences for different crimes and expanded the types ofoffenders facing prison sentences. They also promoted adult trials for childoffenders by lowering the minimum age for criminal court jurisdiction,authorizing automatic transfers from juvenile to adult courts, and increasingthe authority of prosecutors to file charges against children directly incriminal court rather than proceeding in the juvenile justice system. The United States thus abandoned its commitment to a juvenile justice system and the youthrehabilitation principles embedded in it."Adult time for adult crime" may be a catchy phrase, but itreflects a poor understanding of criminal justice principles. If the punishmentis to fit the crime, both the nature of the offense and the culpability ormoral responsibility of the offender must be taken into account. As the U.S.Supreme Court has repeatedly recognized, the blameworthiness of children cannotbe equated with that of adults, even when they commit the same crime. Mostrecently, in Roper v. Simmons in 2005, the Court ruled that theexecution of child offenders was unconstitutional, finding that juveniles are"categorically less culpable" than adult criminals. The ruling noted thatjuveniles lack the "well-formed" identities of adults, are susceptible to"immature and irresponsible behavior," and vulnerable to "negative influencesand outside pressures." Neuroscientists have recently identified anatomicalbases for these differences between juveniles and adults, establishing thebehavioral significance of the less developed brains of children.Life without parole sentences for child offenders-meaning thereis no possibility of release during the prisoner's lifetime-effectively rejectthe well-established principle of criminal justice that children are lessculpable than adults for crimes they commit. As the father of a teen offenderserving life without parole pointed out to us: "I'm a former cop. I'm a truebeliever in law and order. But my son was a child when this happened. He wasn'tthinking like an adult, and he wasn't an adult . . . how is it that the law cantreat him as if he is one?"[1]The anguish and anger of a victim's family and friends may well be the samewhether a murder is committed by a child or an adult. But justice requires asentence commensurate with both the nature of the crime and the culpability ofthe offender.ThreeYoung Child OffendersFrom left to right, Tina B. was fifteenin this photo and sixteen when she committed her crime; Billy L. was thirteenin this photo and fourteen when he committed his crime; Justin I. was fourteenin this photo and fifteen when he committed his crime.All photographs: © 2005 Private.Click to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageFor supporters of life without parole sentences, theimmaturity of child offenders is not a good enough reason to abolish thesentence. They argue that the punishment also serves to deter future crime. Butdoes youth deterrence actually happen? Research has failed to show that thethreat of adult punishment deters adolescents from crime. This is notsurprising, given the well-documented limited abilities of children, includingteenagers, to anticipate the consequences of their actions and rationallyassess their options. Few adolescents are likely to be able to grasp the truesignificance of a life sentence. One twenty-nine-year-old woman serving lifewithout parole told a researcher for this report that when she was sentenced,at the age of sixteen:I didn't understand "life without" . . . [that] to have"life without," you were locked down forever. You know it really dawned on mewhen [after several years in prison, a journalist] came and . . . he asked me,"Do you realize that you're gonna be in prison for the rest of your life?" AndI said, "Do you really think that?" You know. . . and I was like, "For the restof my life? Do you think that God will leave me in prison for the rest of mylife?"[2]Virtually all countries in the world reject the punishmentof life without parole for child offenders. At least 132 countries reject lifewithout parole for child offenders in domestic law or practice. And allcountries except the United States and Somalia have ratified the Convention onthe Rights of the Child, which explicitly forbids "life imprisonment withoutpossibility of release" for "offenses committed by persons below eighteen yearsof age." Of the 154 countries for which Human Rights Watch was able to obtaindata, only three currently have people serving life without parole for crimesthey committed as children, and it appears that those four countries combined haveonly about a dozen such cases.Sentencing children as adults means they may well enterprison while they are still under eighteen. One third of the youth offendersnow serving life without parole entered prison while they were still children,in violation of international human rights standards that prohibit theincarceration of children with adults. But regardless of the precise age atwhich they entered prison, all have faced the same conditions as the olderadults with whom they live: gangs, sexual predators, extortion, and violence.They also confront special hardships inherent in their sentence. Although itmay take time to fully register in a child's mind, the sentence sends anunequivocal message to children that they are banished from society forever.Youth are told that they will die in prison and are left to wrestle with theanger and emotional turmoil of coming to grips with that fact. They are deniededucational, vocational, and other programs to develop their minds and skillsbecause access to those programs is typically restricted to prisoners who willsomeday be released, and for whom rehabilitation therefore remains a goal. Notsurprisingly, child offenders sentenced to life without parole believe that U.S. society has thrown them away. As one young man told a researcher for this report,"Seems like. . .since we're sentenced to life in prison, society says, 'Well,we locked them up, they are disposed of, removed.'"[3]U.S. federal and state governments have the responsibilityof ensuring community safety. But government is also responsible for ensuringthat justice is served when a person is tried, convicted, and sentenced. Theterrible crimes committed by children can ruin lives, causing injury and deathto the victims and grief to their families and friends. Sentencing must reflectthe seriousness of the crime, but it also must acknowledge that culpability canbe substantially diminished by reason of the youth and immaturity of theperpetrator. Child offenders should be given the possibility of freedom oneday, when they have matured and demonstrated their remorse and capacity forrehabilitation.Note: In keeping with international human rights standards,throughout this report we use the terms "child" and "children" to refer topersons under the age of eighteen. Unless otherwise indicated, all referencesto youth, adolescents, minors, and juveniles also refer to persons under theage of eighteen.II.RecommendationsTo the President of the United StatesØPropose and urge Congress to enact legislation abolishing thesentence of life without parole for children convicted of federal crimes.ØSubmit the Convention on the Rights of the Child to the U.S.Senate for its consent to ratification without reservation.To the United States CongressØAbolish the sentence of life without parole for childrenconvicted of federal crimes. Enable current child offenders serving life withoutparole to have their cases reviewed by a court for reassessment and re-sentencingto a sentence with the possibility of parole.ØConsent (in the Senate) to ratification of the Convention on theRights of the Child without reservation.ØIncrease funding to states that eliminate life without parolesentences for child offenders in order to ensure state prisons can increaserehabilitative programs focused on helping such offenders to qualify forparole.ØAmend Part D of the Juvenile Justice and DelinquencyPrevention Act to require the Office of Juvenile Justice and DelinquencyPrevention to serve as a central depository, analyst, and disseminator ofnational data on children tried and sentenced as adults.To the Attorney General ofthe UnitedStatesØSuspend the sentence of life without parole for child offenderspending its abolition.To United States AttorneysØIn accordance with the instruction to U.S. government attorneys,contained in the U.S. Attorneys' Manual, to consider factors such asproportionality and whether a conviction will achieve rehabilitation, do notbring charges against a youth offender that would result in a life withoutparole sentence when there are other charges that could be suitably brought.To State and Federal JudgesØExercise any available discretion to not impose the life withoutparole sentence on child offenders since it constitutes a violation ofinternational human rights law. If the sentence is mandated by statute,evaluate whether, as applied to the defendant on trial, it would constitutecruel and unusual punishment in violation of the Eighth Amendment to the U.S.Constitution.To State GovernorsØPropose and urge the enactment of state legislation thateliminates the sentence of life without parole for any crime committed by aperson under the age of eighteen.ØUntil the sentence of life without parole for children isabolished, review the clemency applications of all child offenders sentenced tolife without parole and commute their sentences to termsof years or give clemency. In reviewing clemency applications, take intoaccount the international legal prohibition against life without parole forpersons under the age of eighteen.ØDevelop and publish annual statistics on youth in the adultcriminal justice system, including: demographic information (age, race, sex),data on children tried in criminal court, the manner by which each childreached criminal court (e.g., transfer, direct file), the nature of the crimesalleged, existence of prior adult record, and if convicted, the precisesentence received.To State LegislatorsØEnact legislation that abolishes the sentence of life withoutparole for any offense committed by a child. Such legislation should include aretroactivity provision enabling current child offenders serving life withoutparole to have their cases reviewed by a court for re-assessment andre-sentencing to a sentence with the possibility of parole.ØStrictly limit the practice of trying children in the adult criminalcourts. There should be a presumption in favor of adjudicating children's casesin the juvenile justice system. The transfer of children's cases to thecriminal court should be strictly limited to those cases in which a balancingbetween the severity of a child offender's crime, his or her age, and his orher best interests clearly points to a need for transfer, and only if accusedchild offenders transferred to the criminal court can be provided with the careand safeguards, such as not to be compelled to give testimony or to confessguilt, to which they are entitled under international law.ØRepeal or modify existing transfer provisions that automaticallyrequire all children charged with certain offenses to be tried as adults. Thedecision to transfer a case to the criminal courts should be subject tojudicial discretion and should never be mandatory.ØEnact legislation that eliminates the prosecutorial option offiling cases against child offenders directly in adult criminal court. Allcases against child offenders, regardless of their alleged crime, should bebrought first in a juvenile court. Enact legislation that provides criminalcourt judges with the discretion to send child offenders to juvenile detentionfacilities until they are at least twenty-one, before being sent to adult prison.Ensure that offenders over the age of eighteen who remain in juvenile detentionfacilities are housed separately from those below the age of eighteen.ØIncrease funding, training, and administrative support forjuvenile public defender programs.ToState ProsecutorsØPending the abolition of the sentence of life without parole forchild offenders, cease seeking sentences of life without parole for childoffenders.ØInstead of filing charges against child offenders directly incriminal court, refer all child offenders to juvenile court.ØBefore any determination to transfer a case to the criminalcourts is made, request and participate in, as an officer of the court, a fulland fair assessment of each child offender's competency to stand trial as anadult.To State Criminal and Juvenile Court JudgesØBefore a child is tried before a criminal court, automaticallyraise the issue of achilddefendant's competency to stand trial as an adult.ØEnsure that transfer hearings for child offenders in juvenile courtare meaningful and are limited to cases in which a balancing between theseverity of the child offender's crime, age, and best interests clearly pointsto a need for transfer. The hearing must weigh several factors, including at aminimum: the nature and seriousness of the offense, the age and history of thechild, and his or her amenability to treatment. The court's decision should bewritten and should explain all evidence relied upon and reasons for ruling foror against transfer to adult criminal court. If appealed, transfer decisionsshould be subject to review by a higher tribunal.To Defense AttorneysØEnsure that child defendants, as well as their parents orguardians, understand all procedures, defense strategies, and the seriousnessof the charges, including possible sentences, so they can fully exercise theirrights as clients to participate in their legal defense.ØVigorously defend the interests of child defendants duringcompetency and transfer hearings, as well as during other aspects of thecriminal process.ØAssist child offenders in the filing of clemency applications.ToState and Federal Officials Who Fund and Administer CorrectionsProgramsØChild offenders serving life without parole should have access toall prison programs offered-educational, vocational, occupational, and otherrehabilitative programs-regardless of the length of their sentence.ØChild offenders under the age of eighteen should not be held withadults; other decisions about where to hold youth offenders should take intoaccount their mental and physical maturity and should be reviewed on a regularbasis.ØProvide mental health and social services to assist youthoffenders in adjusting to prison conditions as well as in coping with thelength of their sentences.Click to expand ImageCase Study:Peter A.Peter A. was agefifteen both in this photo and when he committed his crime.© 2005 Private.At the time of hiscrime, Peter A.[4] was afifteen-year-old sophomore in high school, living at home in Chicago, Illinois with his mother, her fiancé, and his younger brother. He was seven years old whenhis parents divorced, and he was then raised by his mother, who supported thefamily through welfare and other public assistance.[5]According to Peter, he was not particularly interested in school, although heenjoyed and did well in his earth science class, which involved a lot of "labwork with my hands."[6]His probation officer reported him to be an "average student."[7]Peter spent much ofhis time with his older brother, who had his own apartment. Peter said: "[Mybrother] tried to keep me out of trouble . . . my sophomore year-homecoming-hesaid, 'there's gonna be trouble, they're gonna be shooting at the school. Youcan't go.' . . . and they were shooting at the school, he was right. He wouldn'tlet me go to house parties or nothing. He was trying to keep me out of trouble,but at the same time, he had me along." Peter's older brother was involved indrug dealing, mostly cocaine. Peter said he would sometimes act as a courierfor his brother, delivering drugs to customers. He also learned how to stealcars at an early age and had a juvenile adjudication for possession of a stolenvehicle when he was thirteen. He was placed on one year of probation andcompleted it to the satisfaction of his probation officer. He had no priorrecord of violent crime and no prior felony convictions.[8]He experimented with both alcohol and marijuana, but says he stopped using anydrugs or alcohol when he was placed on probation.Following a theftof "drugs and money" from his brother's apartment, Peter said that he went withan eighteen-year-old to steal a van to help to get the stolen goods back. Petersays he acted on his brother's instructions, and hehas always admittedhis involvement in stealing the van. Peter says he sat in the back seat of thestolen van with another young man, age twenty-one, and the eighteen-year-olddriver, both of whom had guns. They drove to the home of the men they were toldhad robbed Peter's brother. No one sat in the front passenger's seat, because"there was glass on the seat" from the window Peter had broken during thetheft.According to Peter,when the three arrived at the victims' home, Peter stayed in the stolen vanwhile the other two went inside. Peter heard shots, and a few seconds later oneof the co-defendants came running out of the house, without having recoveredthe drugs or money. The two sped away from the home, leaving the other youngman behind. Peter said that he learned on return to his brother's apartment thattwo people had been shot to death in the botched robbery. A few days later, hefound out that one of the victims was a close high school friend of his, ayoung man who had no involvement in the original robbery of Peter's brother.This friend, as Peter put it, was "completely innocent . . . just in the wrongplace at the wrong time." Peter was arrested approximately one week after thecrime, after his two co-defendants were already in custody.Peter wasquestioned for a total of eight hours at the police station, without his motheror an attorney present. During this time, he readily admitted to his role instealing the van.[9] His admission,"which the assistant State's Attorney wrote down, did not state whetherdefendant intended to kill the victims."[10]Peter explained, "Although I was present at the scene, I never shot or killedanyone." There was no physical evidence indicating that Peter had entered thevictims' home, and one of his co-defendants was proven at trial to have beenthe triggerman in the crime, for which he was convicted. Peter was convicted offelony murder (two counts), which carries a mandatory sentence of life withoutparole. He was held accountable for the double murder because it was proved hehad stolen the van used to drive to the victims' house.The judge inPeter's case found that Peter, without a father at home, had fallen under theinfluence of his older brother. The judge called Peter "a bright lad" with"rehabilitative potential" and stated that he had qualms about sentencing Peterto life without parole. In his decision, he wrote: "[T]hat is the sentence thatI am mandated by law to impose. If I had my discretion, I would impose anothersentence, but that is mandated by law."[11]Peter's defense attorney told a researcher for this report that one of theother perpetrators of the crime "was subsequentlyacquitted. So, nowyou have a fifteen-year-old who was waiting outside with a stolen car doinglife without parole and a murderer on the streets."[12]Peter, who has already spent nearly half his life behind bars, was twenty-nineyears old when he was interviewed for this report in 2005. In prison, hasobtained his G.E.D. and completed a correspondence paralegal course, from whichhe graduated with very good grades.[13]He works as a law clerk in the prison law library and has received onedisciplinary ticket in the past six years of his incarceration for possessingan extra pillow and extra cereal in his cell.[14]III. Background:Youth on TrialJuvenileJustice Trends in the United StatesTwo hundred years ago, when the United States was still inits infancy as a nation, child offenders aged fifteen and over were charged andtried in adult criminal courts.[15]As the nineteenth century progressed, children's welfare advocates argued that children'spotential for rehabilitation should influence the response to their criminalbehavior. By 1899, many states considered it counter-productive to incarceratechildren along with adult convicts and began to establish reform houses forchild offenders. In addition, reformers advocated establishing a separatesystem of justice for children, which removed them from adult criminal courtsand instead employed "open-ended, informal, and highly flexible policies torehabilitate" youth offenders.[16]Illinois created the first juvenile court in the United States in 1899.[17] By1925, all but two states had followed suit.[18]Until the 1970s, children accused of criminal conduct werealmost exclusively brought before juvenile courts. A child could be transferredto stand trial in adult criminal court only if the juvenile court decided thatsuch a transfer served the best interests of the child and of the public. Atthe request of the prosecutor or at the initiative of the juvenile court judge,the court would hold an adversarial hearing to determine whether the caseshould be transferred to adult criminal court. The transfer would not beapproved unless the juvenile court determined that the adult court was bestequipped to adjudicate the case and appropriately address the needs of societyand of the offender.[19]Starting in the mid-1980s, the United States experienced asteep and troubling increase in violent crime, including violent crime byadolescents.[20]In the ten years prior to 1986, the number of homicides committed with guns byoffenders aged fourteen to seventeen remained around 965 homicides per year.The number then began a steady rise, peaking in 1994 at 3,337 homicides. Youthhomicides then began to drop; by 2002, the number of youth homicides with gunswas lower than in 1976.[21]Before it became apparent that dramatic increases in youthviolent crime were a short-lived problem, the nation was consumed by anxietythat bordered on panic. In 1996, Princeton University professor John DiIuliocoined the term "super-predator," warning that in the United States, "by the year 2010, there will be 270,000 more juvenile super-predators on the streetsthan there were in 1990."[22]Politicians and pundits throughout the country told Americans to "brace"themselves "for the coming generation of 'super-predators.'"[23] Publicconfidence in the juvenile justice system began to wane as concern about youthcrime grew. States embraced harsher criminal justice policies for children justas they did for adults, without stopping to ascertain whether or not they wouldprove effective. Racial disparities grew more pronounced as criminal sentencingbecame more punitive.Figure 1, below, presents the relative percentages of blackand white youth admitted to adult prisons in the United States, showing thatfrom the early 1980s until the mid-1990s, the relative percentage of blackyouth offenders admitted to prison grew steeply, while declining for whites.During this same period, however, the rates at which both black and white youthwere arrested for serious crimes such as murder increased.[24]Startingin the mid-1990s, the admissions of black youth to adult prison began todecline, although it remained higher than the percentages from the early 1980s.Figure 1Click to expand ImageSource: Data from the National Corrections ReportingProgram (NCRP). The NCRP is sponsored by the Bureau of Justice Statistics(BJS), U.S. Department of Justice, and evolved from the need to consolidatedata on corrections at the national level. Its objective is to provide aconsistent and comprehensive description of prisoners entering and leaving thecustody or supervision of state and federal authorities. NCRP data downloadsare available online at: http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/NACJD/NCRP/,accessed on September 6, 2005. Note that races other than white and black madeup anywhere from 1.1 percent (in 1983) to 7.7 percent (in 1989) of the totalprison admissions in any given year. Also, due to overlapping Census 2000 definitionsbetween race (black or white) and ethnicity (Hispanic or non-Hispanic), Hispanicsare often (though not always) included in black or white race counts and classifications.AdultTrial of ChildrenLegislatures seized upon a simple formula: youth who commit"adult" crimes (e.g., murder, robbery, drug dealing) should be tried likeadults. By 1997, all states but three (Nebraska, New York, and Vermont) hadchanged their laws to make it easier and more likely that child offenders wouldstand trial and be sentenced in adult criminal courts.[25] Threemechanisms have been used to increase the adult trial of juvenile offenders:Withdrawal of Juvenile Jurisdiction:Legislation precludes juvenile court jurisdiction in certain cases,typically depending on the age of the child and the nature of the offense.For example, in some states, juvenile courts do not have jurisdiction overa child accused of first degree murder; such crimes may only be tried inadult criminal court.[26]Discretion to Direct File: Legislationgives prosecutors the discretion to file charges against child offendersaccused of serious crimes in adult criminal court rather than beginning injuvenile courts. If they have this option, prosecutors typically choose toproceed with the prosecution of children as adults.[27]Lowering the Age for Adult Court Jurisdiction: Legislation simply lowers the age at which offenders aresubject to adult trials. As of 2005, all states and the federal government have thecapacity to try certain youth as adults in criminal court. As Table 1 (below)reveals, these provisions vary from state to state, based on offense and agecriteria.Table 1: Minimum Age for Adult Prosecution and for Lifewithout Parole Sentencing by StateStateLowest age at offense for which adultprosecution is possibleMinimum age at offense for LWOP sentencingStateLowest age at offense for which adultprosecution is possibleMinimum age at offense for LWOP sentencingAlabama1416Montana1212Alaska0No LWOPNebraska00Arizona014Nevada88Arkansas1414New Hampshire1313California1416New Jersey1414Colorado1212New Mexico15No LWOPConnecticut1414New York13No <18 LWOPDelaware00North Carolina1313District of Columbia0No <18 LWOPNorth Dakota1414Florida00Ohio1414Georgia1213Oklahoma713Hawaii00Oregon0No <18 LWOPIdaho1414Pennsylvania00Illinois1313Rhode Island00Indiana016South Carolina00Iowa1414South Dakota010Kansas10No LWOPTennessee00Kentucky14No <18 LWOPTexas14No LWOPLouisiana1415Utah1414Maine0No LWOPVermont1010Maryland00Virginia1414Massachusetts1414Washington015Michigan00West Virginia0No LWOPMinnesota1414Wisconsin010Mississippi1313Wyoming1313Missouri1212Federal1515Source: National Center for Juvenile Justice,State Juvenile Justice Profiles, available online at: http://www.ncjj.org/stateprofiles, accessed onJune 6, 2005; Second Chances: Juveniles Serving Life without Parole inMichigan Prisons (American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) of Michigan, 2004),p.3, available online at: www.aclumich.org/pubs/juvenilelifers.pdf,accessed on September 13, 2005; Juvenile Offenders and Victims: 1999National Report, p. 106; and state statutory research.Click to expand ImageIn addition,in ten states youth may only receive a life without parole sentence if they areone or several years older than the minimum age for adult prosecution. In otherwords, minors may be prosecuted as adults in Alabama from the age of fourteen,but they may only be sentenced to life without parole if they were sixteen orolder at the time of the offense. By contrast, in Colorado children as young astwelve are eligible both for trial as adults and for the life without parolesentence.Click to expand ImageInmost states that provide prosecutors the discretion to file cases in adultcourt, there is no judicial supervision or public accountability for theirdecisions, and prosecutors are not required to submit in writing the reasonsfor the direct charge in criminal court. However, at least six states and thefederal government do attempt to limit prosecutorial discretion in some way.[28]Transfer hearings would at least offer the possibility of ajudicial examination in juvenile court of the justification for sending a childoffender to be tried in criminal court.[29] These hearings are becomingincreasingly rare.The available data indicate the proportion ofchildren who have had a transfer hearing before being tried in criminal courthas been steadily declining. In 1996, approximately 36 percent of childoffenders in adult court had a prior transfer hearing in juvenile court; by2000 the percentage had fallen to an estimated 13 percent.[30]Moreover, U.S. juvenile court transfer hearings do not meetthe international law standard that children accused of crimes should be dealtwith, whenever appropriate, outside the realm of judicial proceedings in acriminal court.[31]U.S. transfer hearings often also give short shrift to the duty "to ensurethat children [accused of crimes] are dealt with in a manner appropriate totheir well-being and proportionate both to their circumstances and the offense."[32]Transfers routinely occur even in cases that appear not to merit the morepunitive treatment that often results from trial and conviction in a criminalcourt.When children are tried in criminal courts, little or noaccommodation is made to take into account their youth. Whether eleven orseventeen, the child offender must participate in all the same pre-trial andtrial procedures and confront all the same decisions that adult defendants do. Contraryto popular belief, it is the child and not his or her parent or guardian whomust decide what to tell the police and defense attorneys, whether or not tofollow attorney instructions, whether to testify, whether to give informationto the prosecution, and whether to go to trial or accept a plea bargain.Although common sense would suggest that many children aresimply too young to undertake such weighty legal responsibilities, it is rarefor courts to consider whether children lack the competence to stand trialbecause of their age.[33]To shed light on thechallenges children tried as adults face in court,the MacArthur Foundation Research Network on Adolescent Development andJuvenile Justice, whose members include leading legal and scientificprofessionals as well as academic experts, has been conducting a long termstudy of children's trial competency. The study has examined a broad range offactors, including children's understanding of basic elements in the judicialprocess and of their rights as defendants, their ability to put facts togetherand draw logical conclusions, and their ability to make decisions independentof pressure from authority figures.[34]The research indicates that many young adolescents, particularly those fifteenand under, are not developmentally and intellectually mature enough to belegally "competent" to stand trial.[35]Any criminal defendant can make bad decisions. However,child offenders contacted for this report described a variety of errors injudgment in their dealings with police and during their adult criminal trialsthat may have been related to their youth. We found some child offenders who:Waived their constitutional rights and madeconfessions, including confessions they later said were false: Forexample, Gary C. from Menard, Illinois said that he falsely confessed to amurder that occurred when he was fourteen years old. The policeinterrogated him for several hours in the company of his mother. But afterhis mother left the room, the interrogation continued. Gary said he was"alone" and "scared" and ultimately told the police what they wanted tohear. When he left out details or failed to make statements that fit withthe version of the crime already developed by the police, he said thatthey helped him along, saying things such as: "[Y]ou used the ladder toget in, right?" Afterwards, no one double checked the statement. Gary said he did not know what would happen once he confessed, but he had no idea he couldbe sentenced to life without parole.[36]Did not recognize bad advice from defense attorneys:Thomas M. is serving life without parole for a felony murder committed in Colorado when he was fifteen years old. Before trial, Thomas's trial attorney, EydieElkins, convinced him to write a letter of remorse.[37]Elkins went to the same church as the victim's family and delivered theletter to her pastor, who gave it to his congregant, the victim's mother,who then turned it over to the prosecutor. Although the letter was not adirect confession, it was the primary piece of evidence used to convictThomas of the felony murder, in which a young man was shot and killedduring a botched robbery.Were hampered by low levels of education, includingilliteracy: Clifford S., who was convicted for a murder committed whenhe was sixteen years old, is serving life without parole in Arkansas. Clifford was illiterate. When he was interviewed for this report, he said thatwhen he was being questioned about the crime, a detective said he couldtake a polygraph test if he signed a form. Clifford said that thedetective "wrote stuff down on this piece of paper you know . . . You know,I can't read and write." Clifford continued, "When he got that piece ofpaper, you know and I signed my name on it, he stepped out and told thepolice that I confessed to the crime. And I heard it and I was like, 'No Ididn't!'" When asked if the detective told him what the paper said,Clifford answered: "No ma'am. When I went to trial, they told him to readit and that was when I first heard what he wrote. . . . And he said incourt that he wrote it. Only thing I did was sign my name on it."[38]Did not understand what was at stake during theirtrials: An Illinois defense attorney who represented a youth sentencedto life without parole said: "[My] client understood the proceedings. I'vebeen a defense attorney for many years and he was a smart kid, he prettymuch got what was going on. But it was still very difficult for him tocomprehend where he might end up, to really grapple with the sentence andunderstand how important it was to work with me. It's the same as a bunchof young soldiers going off to battle when they've never met or had anyonedie before."[39]The trial of children as adults often fails to providechildren with the special safeguards and care to which they are entitled underinternational law. Juvenile justice advocates in the United States widelyrecognize that decisions to send youth to adult court are often arbitrary andunfair and pay scant attention to the goal of rehabilitation. Once in the adultsystem, adolescents are deprived of the wide variety of rehabilitativesentencing options that they might be eligible to receive in the juvenile courtsystem-sentencing options that are designed to give them the tools they need toturn their lives around and become law-abiding members of society. In Florida, for example, children transferred to adult court were shown to be a third morelikely to re-offend than those sent to the juvenile system for the same crimeand with similar prior records.[40]In2000, Florida had more children in adult state prisons than any other state,yet Florida's violent juvenile crime rate was 54 percent higher than thenational average.[41]Click to expand ImageCase Study:Samantha L.SamanthaL. was age seventeen both in this photo and when she committed her crime.© 2005Private.Samantha L. hadalready spent nineteen years behind bars when she was interviewed for thisreport. Samantha said that her parents divorced when she was two years old andthat her father "was an alcoholic" who had "raped my mom and my sister."[42]At seventeen, Samantha was unemployed and had a baby son. She had been chargedas a juvenile with assault, two burglaries, and auto theft.Samantha said shespent most of her time with her older sister, and they often dated older men.One of these men, Rick, involved her in selling marijuana. She sold marijuanato an undercover policeman and was arrested and sent to a juvenile center as aresult. When Samantha was released from the juvenile center, she re-started herrelationship with Rick and moved in with him.One night, Ricktalked about wanting to leave town and asked if Samantha knew of anybody whowould lend her money. She suggested her closest friend's grandfather, whosehouse she sometimes cleaned to earn money. They drove to his house, andSamantha and Rick went in to ask for the money. Her friend's grandfatherreminded her that she still owed him a housecleaning because of some money hehad already paid her, so she decided not to ask for the money. She told Rickshe wanted to leave, but he said he wanted to stay to talk to "grandpa" somemore. Samantha says she went outside and waited in the truck for Rick. "Rickdidn't come out and I knew if I went in itwould take himlonger to leave, so I honked the horn. Rick didn't come out so I started thetruck thinking he would hear it and come out. He didn't. I pulled around to thefront of the house and Rick came out. He got into the truck and started yelling'I killed him!' I thought he was just making it up . . . because Rick didn'thave any blood on him, I really thought he was lying . . . Rick drove the truckback to the man we had borrowed it from."Samantha and Rickwere arrested later that night. Samantha told a researcher for this report thatshe was not questioned by the police about the details of the crime, because immediatelyafter her arrest Rick took full responsibility for the crime. Subsequently,however, he accused Samantha of the murder, claiming he had initially liedabout his role in the crime, because he thought Samantha was pregnant with hischild. Samantha wrote that Rick fabricated this explanation for his changedstory in order to justify his altered theory of defense. She continued, "I wasnever pregnant by him, and my only son was seven months old at the time of thecrime." Evidence introduced at Rick's trial appeared to corroborate Samantha'sdescription of events.Samantha wassentenced to life without parole for aiding and abetting first degree murder. Rickwas sentenced to life without parole for first degree murder.[43]Samanthatold a researcher for this report, "I know I did something wrong, but not aswrong as Rick because I wasn't there, in the house. I wasn't there during allof that. Rick admitted [when he was first questioned by the police] I wasn'tthere, he told them I didn't make those decisions. . . . I didn't even hold theknife. But, I know it doesn't matter to them."IV. Sentencing of Youth to Lifewithout ParoleOnce children are prosecuted as adults, they become subjectto the same prison sentences that can be imposed on adults, including in forty-twostates, the sentence of life without parole. Only Kentucky, New York, Oregon, and the District of Columbia specifically exclude anyone under the age of eighteenwho is tried as an adult from life without parole sentencing. In twenty-sevenof the forty-two states in which youth can be sentenced to life without parole,the sentence is mandatory for anyone, child or adult, found guilty of certainenumerated crimes.[44]Age,Crime, and GenderAs of 2004, there were at least 2,225 youth offendersserving life without parole in U.S prisons.[45] Because of the absence of anynational database tracking the sentencing of youth to life without parole (orindeed any data tracking the presence of child offenders in adult prisons),Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International compiled this figure from dataobtained directly from individual state departments of corrections and othersources. This figure includes youth offenders from forty of the forty-twostates in which youth offenders may be sentenced to life without parole andfrom the federal bureau of prisons (see Appendix B for methods).We have data on age at offense for 1,291 of the childoffenders sentenced to life without parole. As shown in Table 2, the youngestchildren (six in total) were thirteen years old at the time of offense, and theaverage age was sixteen. Sixteen percent were imprisoned for crimes committedwhen they were fifteen or younger. Applying this proportion to the total numberof youth offenders serving life without parole suggests that some 354 youthoffenders nationwide currently face a lifetime behind bars for crimes theycommitted before their sixteenth birthdays.Table 2: Age of Child Offenders Sentenced to Life withoutParoleat Time of OffenseAge at OffensePercentage of Child Offenders13.00-13.99 years0.5 percent14.00-14.99 years2.2 percent15.00-15.99 years13.3 percent16.00-16.99 years32.0 percent17.00-17.99 years52.2 percentTotal:100.2 percent (due to rounding)Source: Data provided from thirty-eight statecorrectional departments and additional other sources for the states of Alabama andVirginia.Life without parole is imposed for a variety of crimes, asshown in Table 3.[46]However, it is most often imposed on child offenders who have been convicted ofcrimes of homicide, as shown in Figure 2.Table 3: Crime CategoriesGeneral CategoryIncludes (in this report)HomicideMurder, homicide, felony murder, felony homicide,homicide by child abuse, manslaughter, and capital felony (including all degreesof each).Other Violent CrimesAssault, attempted murder, battery, carjacking,robbery, use of firearm, use of other weapons (including all degrees ofeach).KidnappingKidnapping (including all degrees of each).Sex CrimesSexual battery, rape, and child molestation (includingall degrees of each).Property CrimesBurglary and grand larceny (including all degrees ofeach).Other Crime Categories Used by State Departments ofCorrectionsCriminal liability for another person (used only in Connecticut to label two incoming prisoners), compact prisoner (category used to label oneincoming prisoner in Iowa), oth-part-2 (category used to label one incomingprisoner in Pennsylvania).Source: see Table 2, above.Figure 2Click to expand ImageSource: see Table 2, above.Almost 93 percent of the youth sentenced to life withoutparole were convicted of homicide. It is a misconception, however, that thesentence is reserved only for the most calculated and heinous of murderers. Asalready emphasized, it is often imposed, for example, on children convicted offelony murder-that is, on teens who participated in a felony such as robberyduring which another participant in the crime killed someone without the childoffender having intended the murder to occur and sometimes without even knowingthe other participant was armed. In the cases examined by Human Rights Watchand Amnesty International, many of these felony murder crimes were robberiesthat went awry, often involving a group of offenders, at least one of whom wasan adult. Unfortunately, data are not available to enable us to determine thenationwide number of child offenders convicted of felony murder who are servinglife without parole.However, we do know that 26 percent, or 45 of the 172 youthoffenders across the nation who self-reported to us on this question, weresentenced to life without parole for felony murder.[47] We also knowthat 33 percent of the 24 youth offenders investigated in depth by Human RightsWatch in 2005 in Colorado are serving life without parole for felony murderoffenses;[48]and that nearly half of the 146 youth surveyed by the American Civil LibertiesUnion in Michigan in 2004 were sentenced to life without parole for felonymurder or for "aiding and abetting" a murder in which another person pulled thetrigger.[49]In terms of gender, all but a tiny fraction (2.6 percent) ofthe child offenders serving life without parole are male.[50] This is notsurprising considering both the marked differences in violent juvenile crimerates (especially homicide offenses) by gender[51] and that boys are much morelikely to be transferred to adult court than girls.[52] Although theirtotal numbers were very small, the girls in the sample were more likely to havebeen convicted of homicide. Eight percent more female than male youth offendersserving life without parole were convicted of homicide.[53] The actualdiscrepancy may be even greater, since crime data on 18 percent of the femaleoffenders is not available.The specter of "super predators" created much of thenational furor over youth violence. Politicians and the public thought theircommunities were (or would be) besieged by vicious teenagers with long recordsof crime. Yet few of the child offenders sentenced to life without parole fitthis super predator profile. Our research suggests that 59 percent of youthoffenders received a life without parole sentence for their first-evercriminal conviction of any sort. These youth had neither an adult criminalrecord nor a juvenile adjudication.[54]The other 39 percent had prior criminal records that ranged from convictions asadults for serious crimes such as robbery, to juvenile offenses such as gettinginto fights with other teenagers.[55]Click to expand ImageCase Study: Stacey T.StaceyT. was age thirteen in this photo and committed his crime at age fourteen.©2005 PrivateStaceyT. was about to enter the tenth grade at a Pennsylvania high school, under amagnet program for students who excelled in school, at the time of his crime.He lived at home with his mother, a single parent. When Stacey T. was fourteenyears old, he was arrested for the murder of Alexander Porter, a young man whowas his girlfriend's brother. Stacey was convicted of second-degree murder(felony murder in Pennsylvania) and sentenced to life without parole. He had nojuvenile record, and this crime was his first. Stacey was charged directly inadult court; he never had a juvenile transfer hearing.Courtdocuments and an interview with Stacey's attorney for this report indicate thatStacey T. agreed to participate with two adults (Henry Daniels, who wasStacey's cousin, and Kevin Pelzer) in a robbery of Alexander Porter, who wasassumed to be wealthy, because it was "common knowledge" that his family wasinvolved in drug dealing.[56]The plan involved coercing Porter to give over the keys to his apartment sothat the two adults (Daniels and Pelzer) could rob it.Thecourt's decision in the case of Stacey's cousin establishes that the threeperpetrators: "[S]et up a purported drug transaction with Porter, in order tolure him to a meeting, whereupon they bound and gagged him, confiscated hiskeys, and stuffed him in the trunk of his car. One of the conspirators[Stacey], a 'friend' of Porter's, allowed himself to be tied up in front ofPorter. . . . He was 'released' after Porter was locked in the trunk, thentaken home so thatPorterwould later believe that he had been murdered. The remaining conspirators drovePorter's car, with Porter in the trunk, to the garage of one of the individualsand parked it there."[57]Staceyexplained that Daniels and Pelzer pretended to murder him in order to coerce Porterto give over the keys or face the same fate. In Pelzer's appeal, the courtdescribed what Pelzer and Daniels did in the twenty-four hours after Staceyleft the scene: "Twice during the next twenty-four hours while Porter was keptin the car trunk, the kidnappers used Porter's car on excursions. . . . First,they used the vehicle to get to Porter's parents' apartment to commitburglaries. . . . [Pelzer] and Daniels went home, slept for a few hours, thentook Porter to a park, shot him four times in the neck and back with a .25caliber handgun, and left him by the roadside where his body was discovered thefollowing day. . . . While Porter was being bound, [Stacey] was led outside,supposedly to be punished, but actually to be released."[58][According to Pelzer] "[M]e and [Daniels] got into the boy's car, the blackshiny one to drive [Stacey] home. I drove the car. We dropped [Stacey] off andreturned to my house."[59]Inshort, while Stacey T. had agreed to participate in a robbery scheme, he wasnot present for the murder of Porter, nor was there evidence presented at trialthat suggested he knew Daniels and Pelzer were going to murder Porter. Indeed,it would appear that the murder itself was never planned as part of the scheme.Stacey was convicted of second degree murder-Pennsylvania's equivalent of afelony murder conviction in other states, and which has put him behind bars forthe rest of his life.Staceywrote: "Convinced that I could make some money, I agreed with my cousin to robthis guy of his keys so that [my cousin] and his friend could rob the guy's andhis father's apartment. . . . but I had no idea that this guy would end updead. . . . Yes, I made a mistake. I associated with the wrong crowd. I engagedin committing a crime with them. However, is it fair that I spend the rest ofmy life in prison for a crime which was committed by someone else without myknowledge or without me being present? I feel sorry for the life which was lostin my case. I feel a deep sense of empathy for his family and what they mustcontinue to endure in terms of pain. But this tragedy was never supposed tohappen. I don't absolve myself of all guilt. I, out of naiveness, out ofinfluence, out of the ignorance of knowing the consequences, agreed to do acrime: a robbery."[60]HistoricalTrends in Sentencing to Life without ParoleAs shown in Figure 3, from 1962 until 1981, an average oftwo youth offenders in the United States entered prison each year with lifewithout parole sentences. Beginning in 1982, the number began to rise markedly,peaking at 152 youth in 1996. Although the number has declined since 1996, ithas never returned to the much lower figures from the 1960s to mid-1980s.While the absolute number of youth sentenced to life withoutparole has decreasedsince 1996, the nationwide proportion of youthsentenced to life without parole for murder has increased relative tothe total number of youth arrested for or reliably implicated in murdersnationwide ("known murder offenders").[61]Figure 3Click to expand ImageSource: Data provided from thirty-eight statecorrectional departments and additional other sources for the states of Alabama andVirginia.Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International have comparedthe number of known murder offenders (including all degrees of murder andfelony murder) who were below the age of eighteen for each year from 1980through 2000, with the number of child offenders who entered prison duringthose same years with a life without parole sentence. As shown in Table 4, theproportion of youth murder offenders who entered prison with life withoutparole sentences constituted an ever growing proportion of the number of knownyouth murder offenders. For example, the percentage going to prison with lifewithout parole in 2000 was three times greater than the percentage in 1990. Thedata thus suggest an increasing punitiveness toward youth murder offenders.Table 4: Youth Murder Offenders and Youth Offenders Sentencedto Life without ParoleYearYouth Murder OffendersYouth Murder Offenders Entering Prisonwith LWOPPercentage of Youth Murder OffendersEntering Prison with LWOP19801,46020.14%19811,41050.35%19821,235100.81%19831,100333.00%1984968202.07%19851,125322.84%19861,334322.40%19871,348322.37%19881,622593.64%19891,805502.77%19902,234642.86%19912,457662.69%19922,470843.40%19932,776732.63%19942,8191164.11%19952,3381185.05%19962,0211527.52%19971,7091438.37%19981,4071248.81%19991,16813311.39%20001,006919.05%Source: H. Snyder, T. Finnegan, Y. Wan, and W.Kang, "Easy Access to the FBI's Supplementary Homicide Reports: 1980 –2000," 2002, available online at: http://ojjdp.ncjrs.org/ojstatbb/ezashr/ ,accessed on September 14, 2005 (using data from the Federal Bureau ofInvestigation, Supplementary Homicide Reports 1980-2000 [machine-readable datafiles]). Data on dates of entry to prison contained in data provided by thirty-eightstate correctional departments and additional other sources for the states of Alabama andVirginia.Comparing the imposition of life without parole sentences onchildren and adults convicted of murder casts additional light on theincreasing punitiveness toward child offenders. As shown in Figure 4, in elevenout of the seventeen years between 1985 and 2001, youth convicted of murderwere more likely to enter prison with a life without parole sentencethan adult murder offenders.[62]Even when death sentences are included, as shown in Figure 5, in one quarter ofthe same seventeen years, child murder offenders were more likely to receiveeither the death penalty or life without parole than adults. In theremaining years, adults were only slightly more likely to enter prison with eitherlife without parole or death sentences (between 1.3 and 0.1 percentage points)-aremarkable finding given that during most of the years studied, large numbersof states had abolished the juvenile death penalty. On its face, this datasuggests that states have often been more punitive towards children who commitmurder than adults. At the very least, it suggests age has not been much of amitigating factor in the sentencing of youth convicted of murder.Figure 4Click to expand ImageSource: The data arefrom the National Corrections Reporting Program, which is sponsored by theBureau of Justice Stastics. NCRP data downloads are available online at: http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/NACJD/NCRP/,accessed on September 6, 2005.Figure 5Click to expand ImageSource: see Figure 4, above.StateVariation in the Use of Life without ParoleThere is wide variation among the states in the number ofyouth offenders serving life without parole sentences, as shown in Table 5,below.New Jersey, Utah, and Vermont all have laws allowing lifewithout parole for child offenders, but as of the end of 2003, none of them hadany youth offenders serving the sentence. For this report, the federal bureauof prisons reported that they had zero youth offenders serving life withoutparole. However, we have since located at least one inmate, Jose A., who wasfifteen at the time of his crime and is serving life without parole in thefederal system.[63]Table 5: Total Youth Serving Life without Parole by StateStateYouth LWOP TotalStateYouth LWOP TotalAlabama15Montana1Arizona30Nebraska21Arkansas46Nevada16California180New Hampshire3Colorado46New Jersey0Connecticut10North Carolina44Delaware7North Dakota1Federal1Ohio1Florida273Oklahoma49Georgia8Pennsylvania332Hawaii4Rhode Island2Idahodata missingSouth Carolina26Illinois103South Dakota9Indiana2Tennessee4Iowa67Utah0Louisiana317Vermont0Maryland13Virginia48Massachusetts60Washington23Michigan306Wisconsin16Minnesota2Wyoming6Mississippi17Missouri116Nationwide2225Source: Data providedby thirty-eight state correctional departments and additional other sources forthe states of Alabama and Virginia.In Figure 6, below, we present the rates at which statesimpose the sentence relative to state youth populations. The range in the ratesis extraordinary: Virginia has the highest rate, 132.90 per 100,000 youth age fourteento seventeen, a rate that is 886 times larger than Ohio's lowest rate of 0.15.The national rate is 14.20.Figure 6Click to expand ImageSource: Data provided by thirty-eight statecorrectional departments and additional other sources for the states of Alabama andVirginia. Population data were obtained from Population Division, U.S. CensusBureau, "Table 2: Annual Estimates of the Population: April 1, 2000 to July 1,2003," released in September 2004, available online at: http://www.census.gov/popest/states/asrh/SC-EST2003-02.html,accessed on September 6, 2005.The differences in the state rates of life without parolefor youth do not correlate directly to differences in rates of violent crime byyouth. As shown in Figure 7, there are states with high rates of youth violencebut low rates of youth with life without parole sentencing such as Delaware, Illinois, and Maryland; and there are states with the reverse: high rates ofyouth with the sentence and lower rates of youth crime, such as Virginia, Pennsylvania, and Michigan. Virginia's rate of youth crime is 34 percent lowerthan Ohio's crime rate, yet, as noted above, Virginia uses life without parolesentences for youth at a rate that is 866 times greater than Ohio's. Missouri, on the other hand, has both relatively high rates of youth crime and high ratesof sentencing youth to life without parole.Figure 7Click to expand ImageSource: sentencing ratedata provided by thirty-eight statecorrectional departments and additional other sources for the states of Alabama andVirginia. Arrest rate data from Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), "Crimein the United States, 1997," Uniform Crime Reports (UCR), availableonline at: http://www.fbi.gov/ucr/97cius.htm, accessed onSeptember 14, 2005. Population data from the Bureau of Census, "Estimates ofthe population of states: 1997". Although many states had crime index dataavailable for subsequent years, the data from 1997 provided rates for thelargest number of states, with reporting coverage ranging from 33 to 100percent of counties. No 1997 data were available for Florida, New Hampshire,and Vermont.State criminal justice policies and practices clearly play alarge role in the different rates of life without parole sentences for youth.One of those policy choices is that of making life without parole a mandatorysentence for certain crimes, regardless of whether it is committed by an adultor a youth. As shown in Table 6, the eight states with the highest rates ofsentencing youth to life without parole all make the sentence mandatory uponconviction for certain crimes. The five states with the lowest rates ofsentencing youth to life without parole (other than those that do not imposethe sentence on youth at all) make the sentence discretionary. In these states,in which the judge retains the ability to weigh individual characteristics ofdefendants, the much lower rates of sentencing suggests judges' assessmentsthat life without parole is not an appropriate sentence for youth offenders.Table 6: Mandatory or Discretionary Life without Paroleby StateStateMandatory LWOPRate* of Youth LWOPStateMandatory LWOPRate* of Youth LWOPVirginiaMandatory Death (16 +) or LWOP13.29CaliforniaDiscretionary0.92LouisianaMandatory Death (16 +) or LWOP10.96WashingtonMandatory LWOP0.66MichiganMandatory LWOP5.29HawaiiDiscretionary0.61PennsylvaniaMandatory Death (16 +) or lifesentence (no parole for life sentence)4.93AlabamaMandatory LWOP0.59IowaMandatory LWOP3.82ConnecticutMandatory LWOP0.56MissouriMandatory LWOP3.51WisconsinMandatory LWOP0.49FloridaMandatory Death (16 +) or LWOP3.33MarylandMandatory LWOP0.44ArkansasMandatory LWOP2.92New HampshireMandatory LWOP0.43OklahomaDiscretionary2.32Rhode IslandMandatory LWOP0.37NebraskaMandatory LWOP1.96North DakotaDiscretionary0.24ColoradoMandatory LWOP1.87GeorgiaMandatory Death (16 +) or LWOP0.17MassachusettsMandatory LWOP1.85MontanaDiscretionary0.17South DakotaMandatory LWOP1.80TennesseeDiscretionary0.13WyomingDiscretionary1.79MinnesotaMandatory LWOP0.07DelawareMandatory LWOP1.63IndianaDiscretionary0.06NevadaDiscretionary1.53OhioDiscretionary0.02IllinoisMandatory LWOP1.45New JerseyDiscretionary0.00South CarolinaMandatory Death (16 +) or LWOP ifprosecutor specifically requests either1.15UtahDiscretionary0.00North CarolinaMandatory LWOP1.06VermontDiscretionary0.00ArizonaMandatory Death (16 +) or LWOP1.03IdahoMandatory Death (16 +) or "fixedlife sentence"no dataMississippiDiscretionary0.95*Rate per every 10,000 youth aged 14-17 instate population as of the 2000 Census.Source: Sentencing statutes of forty-onestates. For state totals, data provided by thirty-eight state correctionaldepartments and additional other sources for the states of Alabama and Virginia.RaceNo examination of criminal justice in the United States is complete without a discussion of race. Therefore, we collected data on the totalnumber of youth offenders in each racial group serving life without parole. Ourdata reveal that blacks constitute 60 percent of the youth offenders servinglife without parole nationwide and whites constitute 29 percent.[64] Inaddition, the data show that black youth nationwide are serving life withoutparole sentences at a rate that is ten times higher than white youth (the ratefor black youth is 6.6 as compared with .6 for white youth). Neither the datawe compiled nor other available sources answer the key question: are childrenfrom racial minorities sentenced to life without parole more frequently thanwhite children convicted of similar crimes and with similar criminal histories?[65]As with the national totals given above, the percentage ofminority youth serving life without parole are often very different from thepercentage of white youth serving the sentence in a particular state. Again,while the differences are dramatic, we do not know the crime rates, criminalhistories, or other race-neutral factors that would allow us to drawconclusions about racial disparities in the sentencing policies of states.However, research studies have found that minority youths receive harshertreatment than similarly situated white youths at every stage of the criminaljustice system, from the point of arrest to sentencing.[66] For example,Amnesty International's research indicates that one reason for theover-representation of black and other minority children in the criminaljustice system is racial discrimination by law enforcement and justiceauthorities.[67]In addition, in a study of youth in Florida's juvenile justice systemresearchers found:[W]hen juvenile offenders were alike in terms of age,gender, seriousness of the offense which promoted the current referral, andseriousness of their prior records, the probability of receiving the harshestdisposition available at each of several processing stages was higher for minorityyouth than for white youth.[68]Table 7 presents, by state, the raciallydisaggregated rates of youth sentenced to life without parole per 10,000 youthaged fourteen through seventeen.[69]Table 7: Rate of Youth Offenders Serving Life without Paroleby Race and StateStateYouth LWOP Rate*White LWOP RateBlack LWOP RateHispanic LWOP RateBlack / White RatioAlabama0.60.21.30.05.6Arizona1.00.35.21.418.1Arkansas2.91.29.50.07.6California0.90.24.40.922.5Colorado1.90.610.72.716.7Connecticut0.60.12.60.919.6Delaware1.60.35.70.017.5Florida3.31.49.80.66.9Georgia0.20.10.40.05.4Hawaii0.6n/an/an/an/aIdahono datan/an/an/an/aIllinois1.40.45.70.915.7Indiana0.10.10.00.0n/aIowa3.82.440.612.216.8Louisiana11.04.221.70.05.2Maryland0.40.11.20.010.6Massachusetts1.80.98.82.69.7Michigan5.31.923.12.612.4Minnesota0.10.040.00.0n/aMississippi0.90.71.30.01.7Missouri3.51.814.50.07.9Montana0.20.00.06.1n/aNebraska2.01.018.60.018.1Nevada1.51.14.60.84.3New Hampshire0.40.30.06.80.0New Jersey0.00.00.00.00.0North Carolina1.10.23.00.014.6North Dakota0.20.00.016.6n/aOhio0.00.00.10.0n/aOklahoma2.31.212.62.110.3Pennsylvania4.91.326.413.220.9Rhode Island0.40.02.41.6n/aSouth Carolina1.20.61.90.03.2South Dakota1.81.40.00.0n/aTennessee0.10.10.30.03.8Utah0.00.00.00.00.0Vermont0.00.00.00.00.0Virginia13.3n/an/an/an/aWashington0.70.53.00.05.7Wisconsin0.50.23.70.017.6Wyoming1.80.90.08.0n/aNat'l Average1.80.66.61.110.3*Rate per every 10,000 youth aged fourteen toseventeen in state population as of the 2000 CensusSource: Data providedby thirty-eight state correctional departments and additional other sources forthe states of Alabama and Virginia. Population data were obtained from the U.S.Census Bureau, State Population Data Sets, available online at: http://www.census.gov/popest/states/asrh/files/SC-EST2003-race6-AL_MO.csvand http://www.census.gov/popest/states/asrh/files/SC-EST2003-race6-MT_WY.csv,accessed on March 4, 2005. Calculations are based on Census 2000 data.In every single state, the ratefor black youth sentenced to life without parole exceeds that of white youth.The highest black rate in an individual state-40.5 (in Iowa)-is just under ninetimes greater than the highest white rate of 4.2 (in Louisiana). The highestHispanic rate of 16.6 (in North Dakota) is 3.6 times greater than Louisiana's rate for whites.Table 7 also indicates that there is a sizeable spreadbetween the highest and lowest rates within racial groups, but the differentialfor black youth is by far the greatest. For black youth, the life withoutparole rates range from 40.6 in Iowa to .3 in Tennessee. For Hispanics, thehighest rate is 16.6 in North Dakota, and the lowest is .6 in Florida. Finally,for white youth, the range is much smaller, from 4.2 in Louisiana to .04 in Minnesota.In Figure 8, we have ordered the states according to thesize of the ratio of their black rates of youth offenders sentenced to lifewithout parole compared to white rates.Figure 8Click to expand ImageSource: See Table 7, above.The highest black/white ratio is that of California: blackyouth in that state are 22.5 times more likely to be serving a sentence of lifewithout parole than white youth. Mississippi's black to white ratio is thelowest in the nation-blacks are only 1.7 times more likely to be serving thesentence than whites. Our inability to draw conclusions about racialdisparities in sentencing from this data highlights the need for states, thefederal government, and independent experts to compile disaggregated data onthis issue.Click to expand ImageCase Study: EmilyF.Emily F.was age fourteen in this photo and age fifteen when she committed her crime.© 2005Private.Emily F. wasreportedly violently raped when she was twelve years old. She was placed by hermother in a group home in Iowa, where she was treated for depression. Emily,who committed her crime in 1994 when she was fifteen years old, believes hercrime is linked to her use of Prozac, a medication that is used totreat depression"by increasing the amount of serotonin, a natural substance in the brain thathelps maintain mental balance."[70]According to Emily,she told her doctor three times prior to her crime that she was having violenthallucinations that she feared were triggered by the Prozac. Emily's motheralso told the doctor that she herself had to be taken off of Prozac because ofnegative side effects.[71]Five days after that meeting, Emily was arrested for murdering her aunt, awoman that she "had no reason to harm and had spent every summer and mostweekends with since [she] was three years old."[72]At Emily's trial,contradictory evidence was introduced about whether her crime was premeditatedor an impulsive reaction to her medication. One resident of the group homealleged that Emily told her of a plan to kill her aunt andto take her money,and mentioned this plan several times in the days and hours leading up to thecrime. This same resident "noticed defendant appeared more and more volatileand upset" near to the day of the crime.[73]However, Emily'spsychiatrist testified that she "did not know the difference between right andwrong and was incapable of understanding the nature of her acts on October 25because she was in a psychotic state."[74]Hestated that just prior to the murder, Emily "experienced an 'affective storm'which totally overwhelmed all other operations of her brain, leaving her in adangerous limbic psychotic state before murdering [her aunt]."[75]However, the state's psychiatrist, Dr. Taylor, disputed any claim of insanityand "noted the various medications defendant was then receiving, includingProzac, would not have had any adverse consequences for her."[76]Dr.Taylor also noted that the defendant was receiving Thorazine at the time of themurder, which he said had the effect of making one less inclined to beaggressive.V. The Difference between Youth and AdultsIt is axiomatic that children are in the process of growingup, both physically and mentally. Their forming identities make young offendersexcellent candidates for rehabilitation-they are far more able than adults tolearn new skills, find new values, and re-embark on a better, law-abiding life.Justice is best served when these rehabilitative principles, at the core ofhuman rights standards, are at the heart of any punishments imposed on childoffenders. Sentences must take into account both the gravity of the crime aswell as the culpability or blameworthiness of the offender. The question of culpabilityis what separates children from adults. While children can commit acts asviolent and deadly as those adults commit, their blameworthiness is differentby virtue of their immaturity. Their punishment should acknowledge thatsubstantial difference.Children may know right from wrong: proponents of adultsentences for children correctly point out that most children, even a six-year-old,can parrot the phrase that it is "wrong" to kill, albeit often without any realunderstanding of what killing means or why it is wrong. But by virtue of theirimmaturity, children have less developed capacities than adults to controltheir impulses, to use reason to guide their behavior, and to think about theconsequences of their conduct. They are, in short, still "growing up." Asentence of life without parole negates that reality, treating child offendersas though their characters are already irrevocably set.TheDifference According to PsychologyPsychological research confirms what every parent knows:children, including teenagers, act more irrationally and immaturely thanadults. According to many psychologists, adolescents are less able than adultsto perceive and understand the long-term consequences of their acts, to thinkautonomously instead of bending to peer pressure or the influence of olderfriends and acquaintances, and to control their emotions and act rationallyinstead of impulsively. All of these tendencies affect a child's ability tomake reasoned decisions.Psychologists have long attributed the differences betweenadults and children to either cognitive or psychosocial differences. Cognitivetheories suggest that children simply think differently than adults, whilepsychosocial explanations propose that children lack social and emotionalcapabilities that are better developed in adults.[77]Research has established that adolescent thinking ispresent-oriented and tends to either ignore or discount future outcomes andimplications.[78]At least one researcher has found that teenagers typically have a very shorttime-horizon, looking only a few days into the future when making decisions.[79]Another study concluded that only 25 percent of tenth graders (whose averageage is sixteen), compared to 42 percent of twelfth graders (whose average ageis eighteen), considered the long-term consequences of important decisions.[80] Tothe extent that adolescents do consider the implications of their acts, theyemphasize short-term consequences, perceiving and weighing longer-termconsequences to a lesser degree.[81]Psychological research also consistently demonstrates thatchildren have a greater tendency than adults to make decisions based onemotions, such as anger or fear, rather than logic and reason.[82] Studiesfurther confirm that stressful situations only heighten the risk that emotion,rather than rational thought, will guide the choices childrenClick to expand Imagemake.[83] Inthe most emotionally taxing circumstances, children are less able to usewhatever high-level reasoning skills they may possess, meaning that even matureyoung people will often revert to more child-like and impulsive decision-makingprocesses under extreme pressure.[84]Gregory C., who was fifteen when he shot and killed a policeofficer who had pulled him over for speeding in a stolen car, described hisstate of mind at the time:Click to expand ImageAkid just does something-whether it's an accident or intentional. I meanpersonally, me, I was fifteen years old . . . I didn't know what I was doing. Iwas still a kid. . . . Kids do a lot of stupid things . . . The person I waswhen I was fifteen, I really didn't have any morals, I didn't even know who Iwas at that time. I hate to admit it, but I was real ignorant.[85]TheDifference According to NeuroscienceNeuroscientists using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) tostudy the brain are now providing a physiological explanation for the featuresof adolescence that developmental psychologists-as well as parents and teachers-haveidentified for years.[86]These MRI studies reveal that children have physiologically less-developedmeans of controlling themselves.Neuroscientists have produced MRI images of the anatomy andfunction of the brain at different ages and while an individual performs arange of tasks.[87]They have uncovered striking differences between the brains of adolescents andthose of adults. Much of this scientific research into the biologicaldistinctions between adults and children reveals that these differences occuralong an age continuum-they do not magically disappear at a given age-and therate at which the adolescent brain acquires adult capabilities differs fromindividual to individual. Nevertheless, researchers have identified broadpatterns of change in adolescents that begin with puberty and continue intoyoung adulthood.A key difference between adolescent and adult brainsconcerns the frontal lobe. The frontal lobe of teenagers is composed ofdifferent quantities and types of cell matter and has different neural featuresthan the adult brain. Researchers have linked the frontal lobe (especially apart of the frontal lobe called the prefrontal cortex) to "regulatingaggression, long-range planning, mental flexibility, abstract thinking, thecapacity to hold in mind related pieces of information, and perhaps moraljudgment."[88]In children, the frontal lobe has not developed sufficiently to perform thesefunctions. Throughout puberty, the frontal lobe undergoes substantial transformationsthat increase the individual's ability to undertake decision-making thatprojects into the future and to weigh rationally the consequences of aparticular course of action.[89]These cell and neural developments in the brain provide ananatomical basis for concluding that youth up to age eighteen are, on average,less responsible for criminal acts than adults. As Daniel Weinberger, directorof the Clinical Brain Disorders Laboratory at the National Institutes of Healthexplains, the developed frontal lobe, including its prefrontal cortex, "allowsus to act on the basis of reason. It can preclude an overwhelming tendency foraction. . . . It also allows us to consciously control our tendency to haveimpulsive behavior."[90]Addressing youth violence, Weinberger explains:I doubt that most school shooters intended to kill, inthe adult sense of permanently ending a life and paying the consequences forthe rest of their lives. Such intention would require a mature prefrontalcortex, which could anticipate the future and rationally appreciate cause andeffect . . . The [juvenile] brain does not have the biological machinery toinhibit impulses in the service of long-term planning.[91]In addition, because their frontal lobe functions poorly,adolescents tend to use a part of the brain called the amygdala during theirdecision-making.[92]The amygdala is a locus for impulsive and aggressive behavior, and itsdominance over the undeveloped frontal lobe makes adolescents "more prone toreact with gut instincts."[93]In adult brains, the frontal lobe offers a check on the emotions and impulsesoriginating from the amygdala.[94]Reflecting on the dominance of the amygdala, Deborah Yurgelun-Todd of the Harvard Medical School concluded:[A]dolescents are more prone to react with gut instinctwhen they process emotions but as they mature into early adulthood, they areable to temper their instinctive gut reaction response with rational, reasonedresponses . . . Adult brains use the frontal lobe to rationalize or apply brakesto emotional responses. Adolescent brains are just beginning to develop thatability.[95]Click to expand ImageCase Study:Alexis V.AlexisV. was age fourteen both in this photo and when she committed her crime.© 2005Private.Alexis V., a womanof mixed race imprisoned in Iowa, committed her crime when she was fourteenyears old. She wrote: "My mother had me when she was eighteen years old, mygrandparents didn't like me because I was black. I was an abused child. . . . Iwas abusedphysically andemotionally. My parents were both alcoholics. It was very hard for me growingup."[96]When her mother wasinterviewed for this report, she said that Alexis was: "[O]ne of those kidsthat always had to have attention. She was diagnosed with ADHD[attention-deficit / hyperactivity disorder]. But up until sixth grade she wasan honor roll student. . . . I was drinking a lot at the time and I was in thestreets quite a bit. She was one of those kids that wanted to do the pianolessons and baseball and all that-but we didn't have the money. I drank up allthe money . . . Well, she figured out a way to get those lessons. She told theteacher, "If I kept your car up could you give me lessons for free?"[97]Alexis explainedthat she decided to "run away because I was getting beat by my mom and socialservices got involved but they didn't do anything." From the age of twelve, shelived in "shelters, foster homes, detention, and group homes." A researcher forthis report interviewed Mike Dryden, who was Alexis' residential youth counselorin the first group home she lived in. Dryden said that he and his wife foundAlexis to be:"Intelligent,extremely intelligent. She was very outgoing, strong personality, pleasant tobe around. Now, there was an anger and a temper there that was just below thesurface . . . But I would never have believed that she would take someone'slife. When one of the other counselors told me what happened . . . it wasabsolute shock, my first thought was that she was picked up for someone else'scrime. I could maybe see her breaking into a house and taking credit cards,when she was on the run and scared. But hurting someone else? Never. A fewmonths before it happened, when she graduated from Forest Ridge, my wife and Itook her out special to Pizza Hut. I remember I let her take my two-year-olddaughter Danielle to use the bathroom alone. That was how much I trusted[Alexis]. I stilltrust her; my wifeand I say that if she ever gets out of prison she can come and live with us fora while until she gets her feet on the ground."[98]Alexis's behaviorworsened between the ages of twelve and fourteen. The prosecutor in Alexis'scase recalled that she had delinquency charges during this period.[99]Alexis's motherdescribed the change in her daughter's behavior after she turned twelve in thefollowing way: "[S]he just changed. She stopped going to school. . . . Shewould get into fights, she was defiant, she had violent episodes. But thenagain, now I've got an eight-year-old and a sixteen-year-old, and they bothhave violent episodes. They call getting angry and yelling and all thatviolent, so I get violent too."[100]Alexis wrote, "Iran away from the last group home I was in when I was fourteen and that's whenall this trouble happened."[101]Courtdocuments indicate that after running away, Alexis entered the home of a womanunder the pretense of needing to use the phone, and she was later found to havetaken and used the woman's car and credit cards. The sixty-six-year-old womanwas found dead from multiple stab wounds. Other physical evidence, such asbloodstains and fingerprints, linked Alexis to the crime.[102]BothAlexis and her mother maintain that there were other individuals involved inthe crime, but no one else was ever charged. Her mother says that the victim inthe crime "was a very well known librarian in that town. She sounds like shewas just a wonderful woman."[103]Alexis wastransferred from juvenile court in order to stand trial as an adult in Iowa. At the conclusion of her trial, she was sentenced to life without parole for firstdegree murder. Today, Alexis's mother says, "[Alexis] is a mature adult now. Mydaughter–it's like she sacrificed herself to wake me up. . . . Well I lost her.She gets jealous when she hears about what I do now with the other kids, butshe's happy for them too."[104]VI. Lifewithout Parole in Adult Prison"Doing time" is difficult for any prisoner. Prisons aretense, cheerless, and often degrading places in which all inmates struggle tomaintain their equilibrium despite violence, exploitation, lack of privacy,stringent limitations on family and community contacts, and a paucity ofopportunities for meaningful education, work, or other productive activities.But "doing time" is particularly challenging for those whocome to prison as adolescents or very young adults. They often lack thephysical and mental coping mechanisms that older adult prisoners use tomaintain their mental health and self-respect. Not only are teens ill-equippedto handle prison, it is also an unlikely place for them to gain the lifeexperiences and education necessary for healthy mental and physicaldevelopment. Penitentiaries in the United States are not designed to furtherrehabilitation, and youth offenders sentenced to life without parole are oftenbarred from participating in the few programs that do exist. And youthoffenders serving life without parole face an additional and daunting challenge-theymust come to terms with the fact that they will live in prison for the rest oftheir lives.We havedata on age at admission for 420 of the 2,225 youth offenders currently servinglife without parole in the United States. As illustrated in Table 8, theaverage age at admission to prison was eighteen years old; the youngest enteredprison at age fourteen and the oldest was twenty-six years old. Nevertheless,29 percent, or just under one-third of all the offenders studied, were admittedto adult penitentiaries while they were still children.[105]Table 8Age at AdmissionNumber of Offenders14.00-14.99 years115.00-15.99 years516.00-16.99 years3117.00-17.99 years8618.00-18.99 years13819.00-19.99 years111Age at AdmissionNumber of Offenders20.00-20.99 years3121.00-21.99 years722.00-22.99 years723.00-23.99 years124.00-24.99 years025.00-25.99 years126.00-26.99 years1Total:420 child offendersSource: Data providedby thirty-eight state correctional departments and additional other sources forthe states of Alabama and Virginia.Adjusting to Life in Adult PrisonNo one, offenders included, expects prison to be a pleasantplace. Upon incarceration, all inmates must face the taxing psychological andphysical challenge of adjusting to prison, and some fail or just barely passthe test. Prisoners soon learn that their psychological and physical survivaldepends on emotional control, heightened guardedness, resistance to or modelingof violence and aggression, and an ability to negotiate the deceptive behaviorsof others.[106]As one youth offender said, "[M]y life in prison has been like living in hell.It's like living and dying at the same time, and with my sentence the miserynever ends. Life in prison is no life at all. It is a mere existence."[107]There is a considerable incongruity between the physical ormental immaturity of young prisoners and the kinds of experiences and peopleprison forces them to confront. Starting in the 1960s, sociologists andpsychologists found that the negative psychological effects of imprisonmentincrease as incarceration continues, but begin to reverse as prisoners near thetime of release.[108]Offenders serving life without parole know that they will never leave prison,meaning that for some, the negative effects of imprisonment can be expected toincrease and indeed, may never lessen.Youth offenders interviewed and corresponded with for thisreport recalled experiencing a wide range of emotions while adjusting toprison. They reported initial feelings of fear, anger, loneliness, orhopelessness. Some youth offenders contemplated or even attempted suicide.Those who had been in prison for ten years or less were still in the midst ofthe adjustment process.The Reality of the SentenceOnce in prison, child offenders must come to grips with thereality of a life-long prison sentence. For example, Jacob O., who wasseventeen at the time of his offense of aggravated first degree murder,explained his understanding of his sentence, "In all reality it was not untilabout the age of twenty-two that I truly understood [the sentence]. I did notknow that this would mean that my whole life was going to be gone. If I wouldhave known at the time what it all meant I would have tried to take the plea."[109]When he was interviewed for this report, Thomas M. said abouthis trial:[It] was very emotional and I broke out crying incourt. I don't know if I fully understood but I kinda understood when they justsaid, "guilty, guilty, guilty" and "life" y' know? As time went on, I'm reallystarting to realize how serious it is. I was young, I wasn't really tooeducated. When I got locked up, I was in the eighth grade. All my education hascome through the years of being incarcerated.[110]Matthew C. told a researcher for this report:I don't think it really sunk in until I'd been inprison for a while and had some time to look over my case and then I realized,"man they're trying to keep me here." You know what I mean? It kinda sunk in.[111]Case Study: Dean F.DeanF. was fifteen years old at the time of his crime. He comes from a financiallysecure family and was living at home in Missouri with his mother and brother.He is incarcerated in Iowa, because his crime occurred in that state. He hadprior juvenile charges of property damage, truancy, and felony tampering forstealing a car, and he had been held back in school for one year.[112]Atthe time of his interview for this report, Dean said he spent most of his timereading history, philosophy, and law in his cell. When asked about his lifewhen he was fifteen, he explained, "I lived with my mom, my parents aredivorced and my dad is a university professor in Texas. I was a normalteenager. I had skipped school some and stole a car once before, but nothingviolent. Never anything violent."[113]Atthe time of the crime, he said: "[I and] three friends decided to run away fromhome. We decided to take a car and I brought along a hunting gun. We crossedinto Iowa and then we started having car trouble. Eventually, we decided weshould try to steal another car so we could keep going, and so we pulled over alady [using flashing lights that Dean's friend's father-a postal worker-had ontop of his car] and we were going to ask her to give us her car and scare herusing the gun. Everything went O.K., but then it looked like she wasn't goingto give us her car, so I walked back to our car. I wasn't even there when myfriend started freaking out and shot her and then stabbed her over and over."Thevictim, a thirty-two-year-old woman, had been shot once in the face and stabbedthirty-three times while sitting in her car. Press accounts of Dean'sco-defendants' trials explained that evidence was introduced placing two twinbrothers (Derek S. and Burt S.) at the car. Derek was alleged to have grabbedthe gun from his brother Burt, who had shot the victim. Burt then stabbed herrepeatedly with a knife.[114]Burt ultimately confessed to shooting and stabbing the victim.[115]AtDean's trial, the prosecutor emphasized the fact that the gun used in thekilling was Dean's, and he also introduced testimony that Dean instructed Burtto shoot the driver of the car, a claim that Dean denied when he wasinterviewed for this report.[116]Someof the statements made by Dean and his codefendants during police questioningprior to their arrests were suppressed by the trial court, and the state filedan interlocutory appeal. In reversing the trial court's decision tosuppressthe boys' statements, the state appeals court examined the trial record andsummarized the evidence relating to Dean's role in the crime:"[Dean]knowingly participated in the robbery by driving the Blazer and chasing down[the victim]. The jury heard testimony all four defendants knew about the gunwhich belonged to [Dean]. All four knew it was loaded and it would be used tothreaten the person they stopped. Under this theory, if the jury believed [Dean]did not know a murder would occur, the killing is the different crime. Thestabbing and shooting occurred because [the victim] did not cooperate with herattackers. This was in furtherance of the robbery, the offense in which [Dean]knowingly participated. A murder is a reasonably foreseeable crime when using agun to threaten robbery victims. The defendants actually used the gun, and whenthat was insufficient to carry out the plan, Burt S. stabbed [the victim] todeath. We find these facts are sufficient to support the jury's verdict underthe theory of joint criminal conduct."[117]Dean'sco-defendant, Burt S., was ultimately convicted for the crime of first degreemurder. Dean was convicted for "aiding and abetting" first degree murder andsentenced to life without parole.Theprosecutor in Dean's case conceded at trial that Dean was not standing near thecar when the brutal murder took place.[118]In a subsequent interview for this report, a researcher asked the prosecutorwhy he sought a life without parole sentence for Dean, who was so young and whowas clearly not the "triggerman." The prosecutor said unequivocally that heremains convinced that life without parole was the correct sentence for Dean.[119]Fearand AngerIn Iowa, a former inmate, who spent six years in prison witha young woman serving life without parole, recalled that when her friend firstcame to prison at age seventeen: "She had such an anger problem. You justwonder where someone's boiling point is, you know?"[120]Fear and anger can often lead to violent, disruptivebehavior among inmates. In a study of children serving a variety of sentencesin adult prisons throughout the United States, the U.S. Department of Justicefound that correctional staff characterized youthful offenders as "morevolatile and more difficult to deal with" than adults.[121] Of course,young inmates often use violence to protect themselves from harm as much asthey use violence to express their anger. Whatever their motivations, offendersmay attack other inmates or guards. A male offender, who was fourteen at thetime of his crime and fifteen when he entered prison, told a researcher forthis report about his feelings and violent behavior:Even when I went to [prison] I was telling everybody,"I don't need, I don't want nobody." [Friends and family] were just writing tome and I said, "Don't write me. Don't . . . I might never get outta prison. IfI do, I don't know when it's gonna be." I didn't wanna deal with nobody. Mymentality was just bad, you know?Because you know I couldn't deal with it, I couldn'tdeal with doing all that time, having that time, being so young, I couldn'tdeal with it. And it caused me a lotta problems when I first came to thepenitentiary because I had the mentality, "I have a life sentence. I don't careabout nothing, I got a life sentence, why should I care about anything?" Sothere wasn't nothing I wouldn't do. Wasn't no fight I would back down from.Even with the officers . . . so that caused a lot of problems. [I] fought onofficers, [I was] stabbing officers with knives . . . You know, fought oninmates, 'cause of that mentality, 'cause of having that time . . . I haven't[killed] but I've beat on inmates. . . . Yeah, I used locks, knives, pipes,lead pipes, you know?[122]When he was interviewed for this report, a treatmentdirector at Mitchellville prison in Iowa said that teenagers with life withoutparole sentences "tend to go through the grief cycle twice."[123] He continued:The first time it has to do with the simple fact ofentering adult prison, so they pass through shock, anger, depression, and thenacceptance. But for the lifers, they go through all four stages again-oftenseveral years later or whenever the reality of their sentence finally sinks in.. . . The child offenders [with life sentences] are used to acting out andgetting kicked out of programs. We have to discipline them often when theyfirst arrive.[124]Since youth offenders tend to be more unruly and violentthan older inmates, they are often placed in long-term isolation orsuper-maximum security confinement, which correctional officials across thecountry use to punish and minimize disruptive behavior. In Colorado alone, outof twenty-four child offenders serving life without parole who were interviewedor corresponded with for this report, thirteen inmates, or just over 50percent, had spent time in Colorado's supermaximum prison, Colorado StatePenitentiary (CSP). Dennis Burbank, an administrative officer at CSP, offeredan explanation for why youth offenders serving life without parole often end upconfined in long-term isolation:One [factor] is age-when you come in at a young agewith life without, there's not a whole lot of light at the end of the tunnel.Also, it's kind of a guy thing: the young ones come in with a lot of fear,anxiety, paranoia, and they want to make a name for themselves-so they have atendency to act out. And if they are part of a gang, they are almost requiredto act out . . . any of the young guys, they see it as a feather in their capto work themselves to CSP . . . and they don't think about the repercussions. .. .They say [to themselves] "I've got to impress everyone with what a bad-ass Iam."[125]Jackson W., who entered prison at age seventeen, told aresearcher for this report that his violent defensive behavior in prison hadlanded him in long-term isolation in Arkansas:Click to expand ImageIf you are over here, you are with people who doing twoyears. And if you have life, they don't want me doing nothing to the personwith two years, so they keep me confined [in isolation] until I show a certaintype of mentality. And I don't got that mentality. My mentality is . . . Irefuse to walk around with a cane, or with my eye knocked out, or my teethknocked out … by not protecting [my]self.[126]Click to expand ImageMembership in a "security threat group" (prison gang) isalso a cause for transfer to isolation in many states.[127] Ethan W.committed his crime at age seventeen and entered prison at age nineteen. Heexplained to a researcher for this report:You got me in a place where I'm surrounded by nothingbut gangs, so the only way not to be a victim of one of those gangs is to jointhem. But when you become a member, you're a part of a security threat group,so now they say "we're gonna keep you in a room alone for the rest of your life."[128]Life in long-term isolation usually involves segregatinginmates for twenty-three or more hours a day in their cells. Offenderscontacted for this report described the devastating loneliness of spendingtheir days alone, without any human contact, except for when a guard passesthem a food tray through a slot in the door, or when guards touch their wristswhen handcuffing them through the same slot, before taking them to the exerciseroom or for a shower once a week.Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International havesystematically documented and advocated against the human rights violationsinherent in the incarceration of individuals in super-maximum security prisonsthroughout the United States.[129]Prolonged periods of isolation can be devastating for anyone, but especially foryoung offenders.[130]Few of the offenders contacted for this report entered super maximum securityisolation while they were still children; however, long periods in isolationraise human rights concerns for all prisoners, irrespective of age. Accordingto the U.N. Human Rights Committee, the international body that monitorscompliance with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,"prolonged solitary confinement of the detained or imprisoned person may amountto" torture or other cruel, inhuman, or degrading punishment.[131] Moreover, theEuropean Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or DegradingTreatment or Punishment, an expert prison-monitoring body elected by theCommittee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, "pays particular attention toprisoners held, for whatever reason . . . under conditions akin to solitaryconfinement."[132]Long-term isolation can have lasting negative effects oninmates. Troy L. came to prison at age sixteen after committing first degreemurder at the age of fifteen. He spent "something like 300 days in an isolationcell" when he was awaiting trial and had been transferred to isolation severaltimes since for "different reasons."[133] Troy said he had spentso much time in isolation that he was unable to feel comfortable relating toand living around other people, especially now that he was housed in thegeneral population barracks:If you just see what these barracks are like, they gotus piled in there like some cockroaches. And I've spent so much time over theyears . . . in just cells and lockdown for different reasons. And it's hard forme to deal with just having so many people around. So much-I can't think-youknow what I mean?[134]Isolation, Loneliness, and HopelessnessEveryone in prison experiences isolation and loneliness. Itis a direct function of being cut off from family, friends, and the rest ofsociety. One young man who came to prison at age fifteen, and who is now twentyyears old, wrote: "Every day I grow inside. But I have no room to grow in here. . . It's lonely. Your surrounded by 1,500 people and it's still so lonely."[135]However, psychologists suggest that some prisoners,"especially those serving very long sentences [use] withdrawal and self-imposedisolation . . . as a defensive reaction to the anticipated loss of . . . outsidesocial support."[136]Using isolation as a defense takes its toll on prisoners who may experience"protracted depression, apathy and the development of a profound sense ofhopelessness."[137]Most prisoners, particularly those serving long sentences,lose social support and family connections. The difference for youth offendersserving life without parole is that they are likely to be much more dependenton family relationships than older inmates and may suffer these losses at anearlier age, causing them to endure their loss longer than other inmates.Addison R. was convicted of attempted murder, armed robbery,and criminal sexual conduct. He entered prison at age fifteen and wrote at agethirty-five, "Since being in here I've lost my whole family. I don't know wherethey are or if they're dead or alive. I've been on my own in here since I was akid fifteen years old. Twenty years done went by."[138]Jeffrey B. was fifteen years old when he entered prison witha life without parole sentence for the murder and sexual assault of a seven-year-oldboy. He wrote in 2004, "I don't hear from my family. They cut me off when mymother past away in 1982. That was my last visit. My last phone call was in1991, when my sister hang up on me."[139]John E. committed second degree murder and was sentenced toprison in Pennsylvania when he was seventeen. He was forty-six when he wrote:Click to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageIwould like to be able to live again and see all those things I miss from beinglock up because the world has grown up so fast and I mess out on it. Mysituation for the last twenty some years has been very hard on me because Ihave seen most of my family members pass away on me . . . just last year I lostmy mother, so what is left for me and my situation but hope someday I walk outof here without being carry out in a body bag? I was seventeen then, now I'mforty-six.[140]Click to expand ImageSomestate prison policies aggravate the inherent isolation of imprisonment. In thestate of Colorado, "a person may only be approved to visit an offender if therewas an established relationship prior to the offender's incarceration."[141]Inmates must provide documentary proof of such a relationship.One inmate serving life without parole in Colorado, EthanW., who was twenty-five when he was interviewed for this report and nineteenwhen he entered prison for a crime committed at age seventeen, had lived injuvenile group homes for years before coming to prison. He explained that thelast documentary proof he had to show he had a relationship with someone otherthan his family members was a grade school yearbook. He said:So that means the only people that I can show them Iknew when I was twelve, from some photo when I was in school, those are theonly people that I can know for the rest of my life? I mean what am I supposedto do? I don't understand it? I mean … what am I supposed to hope for exceptfor dying tomorrow maybe?[142]Several youth offenders, both male and female, spoke aboutneeding to "wear a mask, twenty-four / seven" in adult prison, which naturallyled to their isolation and loneliness.[143] Psychologists have observedthat some prisoners "learn to find safety in social invisibility by becoming asinconspicuous and disconnected from others as possible. These prisoners retreatdeeply into themselves, trust virtually no one, and adjust to prison stress byleading isolated 'lives of quiet desperation.'"[144] Whether theyenter prison as teenagers or young adults, child offenders serving life withoutparole must face the possibility that their loneliness and hopelessness maycontinue until they die.Brandon S. was seventeen when he was arrested and convictedof first degree murder. He entered prison at age eighteen. Brandon wrote: "I'mvery depressed because life without parole is the reality I face every day, allday. I'm paranoid about people in general. I trust no one and I honestlybelieve there is no good person on the face of the earth."[145]Perhaps it is not surprising that the psychological strainof a sentence that will only end in death causes youth offenders to contemplatesuicide. There are several factors associated with suicide in prison that areexacerbated by both the youth of the prisoner and the length of the lifewithout parole sentence including:[L]oss of outside relationships, conflicts within thefacility, victimization, further legal problems, physical and emotionalbreakdown . . . When the inmate cannot effectively cope with these stressors,the result can be varying degrees of suicidal behavior-from ideation tocontemplation, attempt, or completion.[146]A young male prisoner, who committed his crime of felonymurder when he was seventeen and came to prison at age nineteen, told aresearcher for this report:I started doing drugs [when I first came to prison]. Imean I always smoked weed [marijuana], but then I started doing like heroin andstuff. Sometimes I try to escape. I went to mental health one time and they putme on a pain killer. I told them I was starting to have suicidal thoughts . . .and they said that was normal and just go back to my cell. I cut my wrist[shows his wrist with multiple scars to a researcher] . . . Well, I thoughtthat drugs helped me to escape. But then reality is still here when I wake up.[147]Richard I., who was fourteen at the time of his crime andentered prison at age sixteen, had suicidal thoughts for many years and wouldcut his arms frequently. He said to a researcher for this report:When I went to prison, I was around all the-up allnight-all the violence. I was like, "man I gotta get out of this-how am I gonnaget out of this prison?" I can't do no life sentence here at that age. And so Ithought of that [killing himself]. Gotta end it, gotta end it. . . . .I've got somany cuts on me . . . Razor blades. They give us disposable razors, you pop itout.[148]Ethan W. who entered prison at age nineteen, described hopeas the only thing preventing him from committing suicide:The only reason I don't kill myself is 'cause there'sstill hope. I mean at least if you got a dog that you know is never going toget adopted, that's never going to live free again, I mean they kill it. Theyput it to sleep. That's more humane than keeping him in this cage the nexttwenty years, making him live with his own shit and his own piss. I came inhere at seventeen years old and what are they going to do, keep me for sixty orseventy years? I mean c'mon now . . . that's a long time![149]Incarceration alongside AdultsSome child offenders interviewed or corresponded with forthis report recalled that while they were still children-that is, age seventeenor younger-they were housed with adults in jail or prison. This findingcoincides with a national survey conducted by the U.S. Department of Justice,which found that only 13 percent of institutions surveyed in the single year of1997 maintained separate units for child offenders.[150] This samestudy also cautioned that "the presence of separate housing for youthfuloffenders does not necessarily mean that all youthful offenders were housed inthese separate facilities."[151]Click to expand ImageRichard I.was fourteen at the time of his crime and was jailed in Arkansas at that sameage, though he soon turned fifteen. When interviewed for this report, he spokeabout the county jail where he was held. He called the jail "a dungeon." Hecontinued:Click to expand ImageThey had roaches. They had brokenwindows, it was terrible . . . I was there about eleven months, so I probablyhad anywhere from thirty to forty people come through and stay in there withme. So I had pretty much a lot of "cellies." I always had one and they wasalways adults.[152]He told a researcher for thisreport how much he dreaded Friday and Saturday nights when the police wouldarrest adult "drunks" and "throw them in jail." Richard said:Some would be hollering, some would be violent . . . somewould be telling their life story, some would be cussing. You know, I wasfifteen then in county jail and to have to work with alcoholics is kinda hard.I would just try to get them to go to sleep. I would just try to read a book,put my face in a book, and . . . give them a cigarette or something.[153]Clifford S. was seventeen years old when he was put in an Arkansas county jail with adults: "I was with them older guys . . . And you know you'rearound older guys, prisoners, you know, killers, you know what I'm saying?Looking at you crazy . . . I was [thinking] I gotta get out. It's like a livinghell, you know? It's hell. It's rough in there."[154]Scott J. told a researcher for this report about beingjailed at age seventeen in Arapahoe County, Colorado. He said:They put me in a mental ward where they put all thewackos. . . . They put me in a cell with these two [adult males]. And Iremember I woke up one time and this big . . . guy was like looking over at me,calling me "mom" and telling me to stop hitting him . . . and then the other guylike whooped his ass . . . [T]he toilet was like right here [gesturing to thespace directly in front of him] and it smelled like piss all the time.[155]Non-binding standards of the American CorrectionalAssociation (ACA) support placing youth offenders, including youths who aretransferred or sentenced to adult prison, in separate juvenile facilities.[156]The ACA also recommends keeping children in pre-trial detention out of sightand sound of adults, in accordance with federal "sight and sound" requirements.[157]International human rights standards are more definitive and clear: childrenshould not be held with adults and should be separated further according tosex, age, and conviction status, meaning that children convicted of a criminaloffense should not be held with children awaiting trial.[158]Accessto Education and Vocational ProgramsRegardless of whether they entered prison at fourteen ortwenty, young offenders are incarcerated during the years when education andskill development are most crucial. Until they turn eighteen, most childoffenders imprisoned in the U.S. are able to take courses preparing them forthe General Educational Development (GED) exam or a high school diploma. Instates such as Pennsylvania and Arkansas, obtaining the GED or diploma ismandatory for prisoners under the age of eighteen. In other states, such as California and Colorado, inmates can choose whether or not to take the test.In the course of doing research for this report, wediscovered two offenders who had entered prison prior to their eighteenthbirthdays but had not passed their GED exams and were functionally illiterate.One, who entered prison at age seventeen, explained how he managed to answer ashort letter sent to him by a researcher for this report:I was in the [prison] building like I am now, and I letthis guy, [a] charity dude, he can read and write you know? He read it [theletter]. He figured it out . . . He read the questions and [wrote theresponses] . . . I did my best, you know?[159]Among the youth contacted for this report, this young manwas an exception. Most of the child offenders contacted who had entered prisonbefore age eighteen were literate and had obtained their GED diploma. Forexample, Stacey T. was fourteen at the time of his crime, fifteen when heentered prison in Pennsylvania, and sixteen when he passed his GED exam. Ironically,he explained to a researcher for this report, "[A]lthough I graduated, I wastoo young to receive my diploma, I had to wait two years until I turnedeighteen years old to receive it in the mail."[160]Warren P., who came to prison at age fifteen, said:I was in the GED class when I first came to prison,when I was fifteen I nearly maxed out [completed] the pre-GED [courses] and Iwas told I was too young to take my GED [exam]. I had to be sixteen. But I hadlife in prison with adults. I got my GED soon after turning sixteen.[161]Once a youth offender has obtained his GED or itsequivalency or has passed his eighteenth birthday, he faces an uphill battle toobtain additional educational opportunities in prison. All of the offenderscontacted for this report were incarcerated in prisons with further educationand vocational training programs, but only a few managed to gain access tothese programs.One who was able to do so, Gerard C., came to prison at ageeighteen. He wrote:Click to expand ImageI have received my GED . . . I completed college coursehours . . . through Arkansas State University. I maintained a 4.0 G.P.A. and mycourses were geared toward Sociology and Psychology . . . Then they saidclasses would be paid for [only] if you were within five years of parole. I didnot fit those criteria; therefore, I had to discontinue taking classes.[162]Click to expand ImageGerard's college studies stopped abruptly because of acutback in the nationwide "Pell Grant" program, which once included funding forprisoners' post-secondary education.[163] Today, the federal governmentprovides funding only for "incarcerated youth under the age of twenty-five andwithin five years of release to acquire functional literacy, life, and jobskills through the pursuit of a postsecondary education."[164] Bydefinition, youth serving life without parole will never be within five yearsof parole and are therefore disqualified from this program. Post-secondaryeducation is only available to youth offenders serving life without parole ifsomeone can pay the course fees, which tend to be beyond the means of mostoffenders' families.Cleveland B. entered prison at the age of seventeen aftercommitting his offense at age sixteen. He explained:I have received my GED. I also have graduated aneighteen-month program for behavior modification. It took twenty-eight months.I can do nothing else because the state offers nothing else for lifewithout-ers, but I am working on college courses in criminal justice through[a] correspondence course which I pay for with the help of my family.[165]As noted, these young prisoners were in the minority. Mostchild offenders who have been sentenced to life without parole are deniedaccess to further education or vocational programs for a very simple reason:the state and the federal government do not expect them ever to leave prisonand so reserve the already underfunded programs for those who will.Joe L., who was seventeen at the time of his offense andnineteen when he came to prison, explained to a researcher for this report thathis prison did not "offer me anything else [other than the GED] because of thelength of my time."[166]Darby B., who entered prison at age sixteen, wrote: "I'm not allowed toparticipate in counseling because of the amount of time I'm doing. . . . Mostprograms [have] been eliminated by the state. I spend most of my time doingnothing."[167]When asked about educational opportunities in the Alabama prison he was heldin, Holman C., who entered prison at age twenty, wrote: "None. Can't go toschool with LWOP. I was told I had to pay for trades [vocational classes]."[168]Click to expand ImageCindy J., whowas fourteen at the time of her crime and sixteen when she entered prison,wrote: "My institution doesn't allow LWOP inmates to attend vocationaltraining."[169]Angela B. came to prison at age nineteen and wanted to take a collegecorrespondence program. However, she wrote, "[S]ince I am serving LWOP, I'm noteligible. I guess they think since I am going to die in prison anyway, whyeducate us?"[170]Click to expand ImageCorrectionalauthorities in a number of states told a researcher for this report on therecord that inmates serving life without parole sentences were at the "bottomof the list" for getting access to vocational training.[171] Officialscited their state's need "to put our resources where the inmates who are goinghome can access them first."[172]Others also mentioned the cut-backs in federal funding described above. Mostofficials were complacent about these policies; however one did admit to aresearcher, "it's kind of hard to see them with all that potential just sithere for the rest of their lives."[173]Susan McNaughton, press secretary for the Pennsylvania Departmentof Corrections, told a researcher, "Those going home have a better chance ofgetting into a [vocational] program."[174] However, she said that youthoffenders with life without parole are not "sitting around doing nothing,"because the "prison industries program" is a "good one for them."[175]But Pennsylvania's own policy states "inmate employment coordinators use theinmate's treatment level, treatment plan, custody level, and length of timeremaining on his or her sentence to determine eligibility for referral to theprogram."[176]By definition, offenders sentenced to life without parole will have the longestamount of time remaining on their sentence.Darryl T.'s sentence of life without parole prevented himfrom accessing the college education that a court psychologist recommendedduring his trial because of Darryl's "high mentality."[177] Darryl, whocame to prison in California at age eighteen, wrote:LWOPs cannot participate in many rehabilitative,educational, vocational training or other assignments available to other inmateswith parole dates . . . The supposed rationality is that LWOPs are beyondsalvagability and would just be taking a spot away from someone who willactually return to society someday.[178]Click to expand ImageDarryl's explanation was confirmed by Margot Bach, PublicInformation Officer with the California Department of Corrections. She told aresearcher for this report, "Those with the longer sentences are not going toget the same programming as someone who is closer to leaving prison. It's aquestion of resources."[179]International human rights standards state that children inprison must be provided with basic primary and secondary education and evenvocational or college-level opportunities.[180] Even those child offenders whoenter prison after reaching age eighteen are entitled to further education.According to the U.N. Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners(which applies to adult prisoners):Provision shall be made for the further education ofall prisoners capable of profiting thereby, including religious instruction inthe countries where this is possible. The education of illiterates and youngprisoners shall be compulsory and special attention shall be paid to it by theadministration . . . [and] [r]ecreational and cultural activities shall beprovided in all institutions for the benefit of the mental and physical healthof prisoners.[181]Case Study: Trey J.Trey J. was seventeen years old when he was convicted offelony murder for the underlying crime of robbery. He attributed his crime tohis need for money to support his drug habit. When he was interviewed for thisreport, he explained that he and another boy had, "developed a 'con scheme' toget some money from another juvenile under the pretext of selling him a gun."[182] He said that he accidentally squeezed the trigger duringthe transaction, killing the victim.Trey wrote about his life at the time of his crime,emphasizing, as he did in a later interview, the role of his drug abuse: "Mylife situation at the time of my crime was not great but not awful either. Iwas more messed up than my situation. My family was clearly dysfunctionalthough. I was a heavy drug and alcohol abuser and had been for a few yearsprior to this crime. I was not in school as I was expelled a number of timesand after I turned seventeen truancy courts no longer had legal involvement inmy school situation. I really was a mess, I had several convictions of minorcharges in my teen years concerning fights and drug and alcohol abuse, etc. . .. I was just out of touch with reality and didn't know how good I had it andhow I could have really done something with my life in light of the advantagesand opportunities I had."[183]ViolenceViolence is endemic in U.S. prisons.[184] It affects all inmates, whetherteenagers or adults. But child offenders who enter adult prison while they arestill below the age of eighteen are "five times more likely to be sexuallyassaulted, twice as likely to be beaten by staff and fifty percent more likelyto be attacked with a weapon than minors in juvenile facilities."[185]These chilling statistics testify to the inability ofcorrectional authorities to provide safe correctional environments for allprisoners-an inability that is itself a reflection of prison overcrowding,staff shortages, and inadequate prison programming. Regardless, all inmates,whatever their age, have the right to be free from threats to their physicalsafety. Both U.S. constitutional law and international human rights law requireauthorities to provide safe and humane conditions of confinement.[186] Despite these norms,not one of the offenders contacted for this report had managed to avoidviolence in prison.AssaultClick to expand ImageAlmost allyouth offenders contacted for this report suffered physical violence at thehands of other inmates. They rarely reported the assaults because of the harmit would do to their reputations in prison, and because they assumedcorrectional authorities would do little to rectify the problem. For example,Michael S. was seventeen when he entered prison. He wrote:Click to expand ImageOnseveral occasions I have been physically assaulted. I reported the firstassault, but from that point forward I deduced that it was best to remainsilent as I cannot afford to be labeled [an informant] in my currentcircumstances.[187]Sometimes guards are allegedly to blame for assaults onyoung inmates. Joe L., who was nineteen when he entered prison, told aresearcher for this report that "a few times" he was "slammed pretty hard bythe guards here."[188]Another young man who was fourteen at the time of his offense and eighteen whenhe entered prison said, "I was having problems from other inmates that wereviolent to me and the staff wouldn't move me, they left me there on purpose tobe abused by the other inmates."[189]Every youth offender described getting involved in fights inorder to defend him or herself. Gregory C., who entered prison at the age ofsixteen, was typical. He said, "I've been in fights with prisoners on manyoccasions. Luckily, I received nothing more than a few black eyes, fat lips,chipped tooth and swollen knuckles."[190]Others had more serious injuries, requiring hospitalization.Jackson W., who entered prison at age seventeen, said that he was hospitalizedin prison in Arkansas because, "I got stabbed a couple times . . . I got myhead busted by locks. That's a small weapon, but they still hurt."[191]Andrew H., who was sixteen at the time of his crime of murder and enteredprison that same year, explained that he was hospitalized after being "stabbedin the left shoulder helping a guy that I knew when others tried to rape him."[192]Patricia L. was sixteen years old when she was sentenced tolife without parole. She entered prison at age twenty. Patricia wrote:Click to expand ImagePeople here who are in and out prey on the young anduse us for things. It's scary to wake up every morning and not know what willhappen (get beat up or tested) . . . I've gotten beaten up by women who justdon't like me for whatever their reasons.[193]Click to expand ImageSome facilities are infamous for violence. Several of theyoung male offenders interviewed for this report had been confined in VarnerUnit, a prison dedicated to housing youth offenders convicted of seriousviolent crimes. Before Arkansas stopped sending all such offenders to Varner,inmates and guards nicknamed it the "Gladiator School." The practice of sendingall youth offenders to Varner Unit has since ended.Richard I. began serving his prison sentence at age sixteen.His story was typical of those inmates who had spent time in Varner. He told aresearcher for this report what life there was like:I got to Varner on a Thursday night, and they . . . said"tomorrow is Friday. . .that's fight night." Friday come around . . . all thesefellows, black dudes, got together with ski masks, made up ski masks, go downthere and go find a white dude and jump on him. I didn't get jumped on thefirst weekend, it was like the second weekend when I got into a fight. I guessit was my turn.[194]Richard claimed his injuries were not severe-just cuts andbruises-as a result of the fight. However, he said that at Varner:I've seen people . . . they'd set the edge of hisblanket on fire. Or I've seen people get wooden locker boxes dropped onthemselves. Seen people, they put locks in their socks and hit people whilethey're sleeping. I've seen people get jumped on while they sleeping . . . Seenstabbings. Seen a person get killed.[195]Sexual Abuse and RapeAs Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International havereported elsewhere, female inmates are particularly vulnerable to violent orotherwise coercive sexual relationships with corrections personnel. Abusing thepower imbalance inherent in their positions, male corrections employeessometimes allegedly engage in abusive "sexual contact with female prisonersabsent the use or threat of force or any material exchange."[196] However, theyalso at times use force or bribery to obtain sex from inmates. The practice ofassigning of male staff to guard women in prisons and jails in the United States is itself contrary to international standards.[197]Carolyn K. entered prison with a life without parolesentence at age seventeen. She wrote, "[O]ne official put me in a situation tohave sex with him and I did."[198]Cheryl J., who began serving her life without parole sentence at age eighteen,described being approached by a male guard for a sexual relationship. WhenCheryl was interviewed for this report, she said, "[H]e wanted to have sex butI was scared you know? I might get pregnant, you know, so that's why I didn't.I liked him . . . but I was young [then]."[199] She also spoke in generalabout how common sexual contacts with male guards were:A lot of them [female inmates] do favors for theguards. The ones who work at sally port [a security gate between a prison'sinterior and public areas]. To get tobacco, they give guards head . . . it'sbeginning to be more male guards instead of female guards [here] and they'retaking advantage of it. They think all females wanna be touched and watched bythem but that's not true![200]Cheryl also complained about having to expose her naked bodyto male guards during showers and about offensive pat searches. She said:We have a lot of male officers here, and we have toexpose ourselves to them and I don't think its right, the way the shower hassee-through curtains and then we have a shower with no curtains. And we're toldto get in it and the mans just be in there, they come in and count. And we'renaked, and if you cover up or try to hide, that's a disciplinary . . . I don'tknow what they be thinking but they be staring. They don't stop looking or tryto play it off. They just looking you know. And it's just bad. . . .They pat us down, but they pat us down sounprofessional! They supposed to put their hands out but they go over yourbreasts like this [she squeezes her breasts]. And [they] come all the way up yourlegs. I mean so many womans have complained about it here. [But they told them]"They're only doing their job, they got womans at home, they don't want ya'llinmates." But that's not true! You've had several inmates get pregnant byguards here, so what do you mean?[201]One young male offender in Arkansas, who was sixteen at thetime of his crime and had just entered prison at age nineteen when he wasinterviewed for this report, alleged that guards in his prison had sex withinmates for money. He told a researcher that in order to have sex with a guard,"You gotta have money though, like fifty to one hundred bucks . . . it's notreally sex, it's just kinda masturbation . . . it's both female and male guardsthat do it."[202]Human Rights Watch has previously documented the extensiveincidence of rape in U.S. prisons.[203]It was unsurprising that almost every young male offender raised the problem ofrape.Brian B. wrote about what happened soon after he enteredprison in Pennsylvania at the age of seventeen with a life without parolesentence:Sheriffs took me to the Western Penitentiary. They liedto the warden telling him I were eighteen, which I had not yet become. I werehoused in an open poorly supervised unit, and that evening a group of largeadult men rushed into my cell, holding me down they began pulling my clothesoff while another took a syringe over to a spoon that another inmate wereholding a lighter under. He drew up whatever was in the spoon. I were then injectedwith whatever it were. And then raped. Once found by the officers I were takento a holding area, cleaned up, and placed on a van to another prison at around 3:00 am.[204]Almost every male inmate we interviewed described havingbeen approached by other prisoners for sexual favors, or having to fight toprotect themselves from rape. Rape is a particular risk for child offenders,because they come to prison so young. Warren P. wrote that when he first cameto prison, at the age of fifteen:I was the target of covert sexual predators. Adultswould pretend to be your best friend to get close to you, then they would tryyou . . . Officers would be hard on me more so than the adults for they believethat the younger inmates need rougher treatment.[205]Tyler Y., who came to prison at age eighteen for a crimecommitted at age sixteen, wrote:[W]hen I first when to jail / prison, when I was young,it was disorienting and scary, like a fish thrown in water not knowing how toswim. Everyone seemed big and dangerous and threatening, I was challenged andintimidated a lot. Canines [sexual predators] stalked me, and at all times Iexpected to be attacked.[206]Eric R., who came to prison at age sixteen, wrote:When I first came to prison attempts were made to lure meinto out of the way places so that I could be sexually assaulted, fortunately Iwas so scared and wary that I managed to avoid being victimized. I was verysmall when I came to prison.[207]Luke J., who came to prison at age nineteen, but admittedthat he had always been "real skinny" and always looked younger than his age,said, "When I first came into prison [a] dude told me that he was gonna make mehis 'bitch' and he beat me up real bad."[208]Trent H. entered prison at age fifteen. He told a researcherfor this report,You know I've seen a lot of that. Dudes get turned out.I've seen dudes get raped, where they get choked out and raped. Seen wheredudes get knives pulled on them and get raped. I've seen them do it willinglytoo. You know, I've seen them do it for food, and commissary. Yeah I've seen alot of it. Like you and me sitting here right now bearing witness to it.Personally.[209]The problem of sexual violence lessens as child offendersgrow older in prison. Addison R., who entered prison at age sixteen and wroteto a researcher for this report at age thirty-six, explained:I've gotten older, a little bit more mature, a littlebit bigger in physical size, and the older prisoners have stopped preying on mefor sex. . . . [Before] I've had to stab other prisoners for preying on me forsex.[210]Occasionally, prison authorities recognize the problems ayouth offender is having and take corrective measures. Jeffrey W., who enteredprison at age seventeen, wrote:Click to expand ImageClick to expand ImageAtthe beginning, the focus was on surviving . . . Naturally, I was the target ofsexual predators and had to fight off a couple rape attempts. . . . These werehardened, streetwise convicts who had been in prison 10, 15, 20, 30 years and Iwas a naïve 18 year old who knew nothing about prison life. … Because of therape attempts on me … state prison officials [said] I should have beenclassified as needing protection. I was soon sent to the state's protectionunit . . . I stayed there for seven years until I was returned to the generalpopulation-older, wiser, and capable of surviving general population.[211]Sexual abuse and rape constitute serious human rightsviolations whenever and wherever they occur. The fact that youth offenders'particular susceptibility to sexual abuse and rape is well-known heightens theresponsibility of adult prison authorities across the country to take actionstargeting young prisoners to prevent its occurrence.[212] Yet, HumanRights Watch has found elsewhere that "rape occurs in U.S. prisons because correctional officials, to a surprising extent, do little to stop it fromoccurring."[213]Apart from those officials who may be guilty of these acts themselves, this ismostly because correctional authorities tend to deny that the problem exists intheir facilities, or they actively avoid knowledge about rape and sexual abusein order to evade liability in prisoner lawsuits, which require proof that theprison official had actual knowledge of a substantial risk and that he or shedisregarded it.[214]At the same time, prisoners' attitudes and fears can makepreventing sexual abuse and rape a challenge. As noted above, some youthoffenders are unwilling to report rape because of the debilitating effect itcan have on their reputations in prison. Moreover, youth offenders interviewed forthis report felt unable to ask for a placement in protective custody, sinceother inmates would view that as a sign of being an informant for correctionalofficials, or as an implicit admission that a youth offender was unable toprotect himself. Youth offenders believed that such harmful implications forprisoners' reputations put them at greater risk of violence once they werereleased from protective custody. Finally, protective custody itself oftenmeans being housed in units whose conditions are similar to those of isolation(discussed above): twenty-three hours per day in a cell, restricted privileges,and no educational or vocational opportunities-making protective custody anunappealing solution for many inmates.Potential for RehabilitationThe paradigm of prison as a place for rehabilitation lostpublic support and political currency decades ago in the United States.[215]Most prisons pay nominal attention at best to improving inmates' skills andlives, regardless of their sentences. Concern about promoting successfulre-entry is gaining currency and recognition as an effective means ofpreventing recidivism but has yet to make a meaningful impact on the nature ofmost prison programs.Prospects for rehabilitation are even worse for individualsserving life without parole. The sentence itself contains an unmistakablemessage that is never lost on offenders serving it. As one young woman put it: "Ifeel like they threw the key away on me."[216]By sentencing children to life without parole, society tellsthem unequivocally that their lives are worthless, they are beyond repair orredemption, and any effort they may make to improve themselves is essentiallyfutile. There is also inherent cruelty in denying a child any possibility ofrehabilitation or reform. Child offenders serving the sentence receive thesemessages much earlier in their lives than adult offenders with the samesentence.As noted above, not only is the message of the life withoutparole sentence resoundingly clear to offenders, it offers correctionalauthorities a means to allocate the increasingly scarce rehabilitativeresources at their disposal. U.S. society has instructed its correctionalsystems to invest in those who may rejoin society someday, and to disengagefrom those who never will.As a result, some child offenders serving life withoutparole remain poorly educated, even illiterate. They frequently are angry andviolent. They may use drugs and join prison gangs. Many are also unable orunwilling to come to terms with their crimes or exhibit any signs of remorse.Also working against their rehabilitation is the truncation of child offenders'development. Despite most offenders' physical and chronological maturity whenthey were interviewed for this report, many felt and even behaved as if theywere still children. Time and again, inmates would describe feeling "stuck" atthe age they were when they entered prison. For example, Samantha L. came toprison at age seventeen and was interviewed for this report twenty years later,when she was thirty-seven. She said:You know what's the worst part of being young and beingin prison? It's like you never get to the place where other people are at. It'slike you're always looking for guidance, you can't trust other people, and evenas you get old, you still feel like you are seventeen. I mean sometimes I seemyself in the mirror and I see that my body, my skin, is getting older butinside I feel like I'm still seventeen.[217]Nevertheless, there are many youth offenders serving lifewithout parole who withstand these negative forces and work hard torehabilitate themselves. One common sign of this drive towards rehabilitationis their unwavering desire to learn new things, however basic.Click to expand ImageCharles L. came to prison at agenineteen. He spoke with obvious pride about what he was learning on "hoe squad"in the Arkansas Department of Corrections:Click to expand ImageIain't ever had no job. But now I'm on hoe squad. Know how to plant everything.Cantaloupe, squash, onions, green beans, cabbage, broccoli, tomatoes, peas,sweet potatoes . . . everything they grow, eggplant . . . they grow everything.There's a lot I know since I been here.[218]Click to expand ImageClick to expand ImageOther offenders serving life without parole dream of playing apositive, redeeming role in society at some hypothetical point in the future.Nelson H. came to prison at age eighteen for murdering an elderly woman, and hewas twenty-seven when he was interviewed for this report. Nelson spokeconstantly and in great detail about his passion to become a "search andrescue" worker. He studied books on rescue techniques, physical conditioning,and first aid. He also trained and tested himself against the standards appliedin rescue workers exams. He wanted to fight forest fires, or rescue peoplecaught in other natural disasters because he believed that if he could save atleast one life that would somehow compensate for the one he took.[219]Other offenders held similar hopesof redemption. Troy L., who was fifteen when he murdered his abusive father,was interviewed for this report at age twenty-four in June 2004. He wrote in asubsequent letter:I would be ever grateful, in fact, for the chance tospend my life now for some good reason. I would go to the most dangerous partsof Afghanistan or Israel, or jump on the first manned mission to Mars . . ..[I]f the state were to offer me some opportunity to end my life doing somegood, rather than a slow-wasting plague to the world, it would be a great mercyto me.[220]Some offenders manage to avoid drugs and alcohol in prison,a relevant accomplishment when substance abuse was a factor in their earliercriminal behavior. Thomas M., who was fifteen at the time of his offense andwas interviewed in prison at age twenty, told a researcher for this report:My dad is an alcoholic and he used to beat my mom realbad, and me. I remember one Christmas my dad got so drunk he threw my momthrough the Christmas tree and it fell out the window. It can't get much worsethan that . . . At that time [of the crime] I thought I was cool, getting high,cruising around on the streets with my so-called friends. Since I've been inprison, I've had plenty of opportunities to smoke cigarettes, do drugs,homemade liquor. But mark my words, I'll never smoke or drink or do drugswhether I spend the rest of my life in prison, or whether I am free. All I wantis a chance. I've come a long way as far as who I am and what I want in life. .. . I've really changed.[221]Bradley W. was sixteen years old when he committed firstdegree murder and when he entered prison. He wrote:Now, having just turned thirty-two I am struck by therealization that I have literally spent half my life in prison. Please make nomistake, there is not a question in my mind, I do deserve to be in prison. Ikilled a man . . . I have very heavy regrets. But in a twist of irony, I alsofeel grateful for the opportunities I've had which have enabled me to become avastly better person than I believe I ever could have been absent myincarceration.[222]Case Study: Timothy C.Timothy C., now thirty-three years old, is serving asentence of life without parole in Iowa. According to Marty Marsh, his prisonpsychologist (who informed Human Rights Watch that his client had asked him tocommunicate with us about Timothy's case), Timothy has said he was raped by hisfather from the age of five.[223] After several years of this sexual abuse, Timothy saidthat his mother brought him to live with her and her boyfriend, who soon beganto violently beat Timothy in fits of anger.When Timothy wasfifteen, his father re-married and his new stepmother was very warm to him andinvited him to return to live with her and his father. Timothy said he wasafraid that the sexual abuse would begin again, but he was desperate to fleehis mother's boyfriend's violent rages; he also longed to have a stable homeenvironment as well as his own bedroom, neither of which he had ever hadbefore.Timothydecided to return to his father's home, where his stepmother became the onlyadult in his life to show a nurturing interest in him. For the first fewmonths, Timothy lived for the first time in a stable family environment and,also for the first time, he had his own bedroom. However, Timothy said that hisfather soon began sexually abusing him again. His stepmother did nothing toprevent the abuse, and according to the psychologist, after about a year and ahalf, she also began abusing Timothy, allegedly masturbating him forcibly andteasing him about the size of his penis. According to Marsh, this abuse andfinal breach of Timothy's trust were emotionally and mentally devastating,leading to a severe psychological crisis. Timothy eventually murdered hisstepmother and set fire to the house he shared with her and his father.[224]Accordingto Marsh, Timothy did not disclose any history of physical and sexual abuseduring his trial and only began speaking about it in 2001-fourteen years afterthe crime occurred. Since then, Timothy has confronted his father about theabuse through correspondence. His father's only response was to call the prisonto ask the correctional staff about whether his son was contemplating bringingcriminal charges against him.[225]Marshbelieves that Timothy's history of abuse, his ability to confront his traumaand to work on maintaining his psychological health, and his educational andsocial rehabilitation in prison make Timothy "the one individual [he] ha[s]worked with-out of some eight hundred cases in prison-who is most deserving ofa second chance."[226]VII. Life without Parole under U.S. LawState and Federal LawThe Eighth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution prohibitscruel and unusual punishment,[227]which includes sentences that are grossly disproportionate to the offense.[228]Although it has never ruled on the constitutionality of life without parole forchildren, the U.S. Supreme Court has often highlighted the inherent differencesbetween youth and adults in the criminal law context. The Court has determinedthat youth offenders lack the "well-formed" identities of adults and are "immature[e]and irresponsib[le]," and "vulnerable or susceptible to . . . outsidepressures."[229]In its 2005 decision to eliminate the juvenile deathpenalty, the Court enumerated "three general differences between juvenilesunder nineteen and adults."[230]First, "any parent knows" and "scientific and sociological studies . . . tendto confirm . . . [that youth possess a] lack of maturity . . . anunderdeveloped sense of responsibility . . . [they take] impetuous andill-considered actions and decisions . . . [and they are] comparative[ly]immatur[e] and irresponsibl[e]."[231]Second, the Court found that youth are more susceptible to negative influencesand peer pressure. Third, the Court stated that a youth's character is not aswell-formed as that of an adult, meaning he or she can and probably willchange. The Court concluded that it would be "misguided to equate the failingsof a minor with those of an adult, for a greater possibility exists that aminor's character deficiencies will be reformed."[232]Even before this landmark decision, the Supreme Court hasgenerally held that "less culpability should attach to a crime committed by ajuvenile than to a comparable crime committed by an adult."[233] Similarly,due to children's lesser capacities for rational thought, the Supreme Court hasrepeatedly limited children's abilities to make autonomous decisions aboutother aspects of their lives.[234]Some state courts have found life without paroleunconstitutional when applied to child offenders. For example, wheninterpreting both the U.S. and Nevada constitutions, the Nevada Supreme Courtheld that life without parole constituted a severe "cruel and unusual"punishment for a fourteen-year-old convicted of murder. The Court pointed tothe "undeniably lesser culpability of children for their bad actions, theircapacity for growth, and society's special obligation to children."[235]The Court continued:To adjudicate a thirteen-year-old to be foreverirredeemable and to subject a child of this age to hopeless, lifelongpunishment and segregation is not a usual or acceptable response to childhoodcriminality, even when the criminality amounts to murder. . . . As said,hopelessness or near hopelessness is the hallmark of [this] punishment. It isquestionable as to whether a thirteen-year-old can even imagine or comprehendwhat it means to be imprisoned for sixty years or more. It is questionablewhether a sentence of virtually hopeless lifetime incarceration for thisseventh grader "measurably contributes" to the social purposes that areintended to be served by this next-to-maximum penalty.[236]Two decades earlier, the Supreme Court of Kentuckydetermined that the sentencing of two fourteen-year-olds convicted of rape tolife without parole violated the Kentucky state constitution and "shocks theconscience of society today and is intolerable to fundamental fairness."[237]Other state Supreme Courts, like those of Indiana and Illinois, have allowed for the possibility of parole in certain cases involving childrenwho have been effectively sentenced to life in prison. The Supreme Court ofIndiana has repeatedly found excessively long prison sentences, such as 120years, disproportionate for children. At the same time, the court has merelyreduced such sentences to time spans equivalent to a child's natural life, suchas sixty or eighty years. In one case, a trial court judge refused to considerage as a mitigating factor and sentenced a fifteen-year-old convicted ofmurder, rape, robbery, and auto theft, among other crimes, to 199 years inprison.[238]The Indiana Supreme Court disagreed and reduced the sentence to ninety-sevenyears because, it concluded, even for the most heinous crimes, age is a"significant mitigating circumstance."[239] Under Indiana law, anindividual would first become eligible for parole after serving twenty years ofa ninety-seven year sentence.[240]The Supreme Court of Illinois, which has not abolished lifewithout parole for youth offenders, has imposed long sentences but allowed forthe possibility of parole for certain children convicted of felony murder. In2002, the Court affirmed a lower court judge's decision to reduce afifteen-year-old's mandatory sentence of life without the possibility of paroleto a sentence of fifty years, because the youth acted only as a "lookout"accomplice to the murder of two rival gang members. The sentencing judge founda life sentence without the possibility of parole for a child who was a merelookout "unconscionable,"[241]due in part to the "greater rehabilitative potential" of children.[242]Under Illinois law, the youth will be eligible for parole after serving hisfifty-year sentence.[243]Some state legislatures are also deciding that life withoutparole is a disproportionate sentence for youth offenders. In Kansas, forexample, when legislators passed a bill substituting life without parole forthe death penalty, they included a provision that exempted child offenders fromeither sentence.[244]In 2005, Colorado lawmakers considered eliminating life without parole andother particularly long sentences for youth offenders, giving judges the abilityto periodically re-examine a youth offender's progress in prison. Theseprovisions did not pass the Colorado legislature.[245] In Florida in 2005, several state legislators introduced a bill to ensure parole for somechildren sixteen years old and younger sentenced to life. Florida's bill didnot pass the state Senate's Committee on Criminal Justice.[246]Several federal and state courts have determined that it isconstitutionally permissible to sentence youth to life without parole. The U.S.Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit found that it was not cruel andunusual to sentence a fifteen-year-old first offender convicted of felonymurder (in which his co-defendant killed the victim) to life without parole.[247]Stating that it had no room to substitute its judgment for that of thelegislature in the state of Washington, the court stated that the defendant'syouth had "no obvious bearing on" whether his sentence was disproportionate.[248]The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, whilestating that "a sentence of natural life in prison . . . is exceptionallysevere when the defendant is a minor and suffers from deficits ofunderstanding," nevertheless found that the sentence was not"unconstitutionally severe," when a judge determines that the sentence is proportionateto the crime.[249]Many state supreme courts throughout the United States have upheld life without parole sentences for children.[250] In North Carolina, a disturbed and disabled thirteen-year-old with severe neurologicalproblems was convicted of burglarizing an apartment and raping its occupantafter harassing her for weeks. The trial court sentenced him to life withoutparole.[251]The North Carolina Supreme Court expressed its support for the legislature's"reasonable" response to rising youth crime rates, listed states that transferchildren to adult criminal court at particularly young ages, and ultimatelyrefused to adopt any "penological theory" that children should be "treatedinstead of punished."[252]Swayed most by its estimation that the crime committed in the case was "not thetype attributable to or characteristic of a 'child'" and was due no "specialconsideration[ ],"[253]the court upheld the sentence of life imprisonment without parole.In South Carolina, the state's "Two-Strikes Law" sends peoplewho commit two serious offenses to life in prison without the possibility ofparole.[254]A sixteen-year-old sentenced to life without parole under this law for burglaryin the first degree and grand larceny had previously been tried in adult courtfor armed robbery, committed when he was fifteen. The South Carolina SupremeCourt held that the life without parole sentence did not unconstitutionallyviolate contemporary standards of decency, because a "growing minority ofstates" impose the sentence on children, and "modern society apparentlycondones" such harsh punishment.[255]MandatorySentencesWhile judges in the United States have ruled both for andagainst the constitutionality of the sentence, they have been more consistentin their opposition to mandatory life without parole for childoffenders. For example, one judge sentencing a fifteen-year-old offender tolife without parole stated in his order that it was "the sentence that I ammandated by law to impose. If I had my discretion, I would impose anothersentence, but that is mandated by law."[256] Mandatory sentencing schemeseliminate statutory provisions allowing a judge to exercise discretion becauseof a child offender's age, background, the legal interpretations of factsestablished at trial, or any other factor provided for by statute that mightmake another sentence more appropriate. In essence, they substitute thelegislature's generalized judgments about an entire category of youth offendersfor the informed and individualized decisions once possible in a particularcase.The judge who sentenced fifteen-year-old Henry L. to lifewithout parole for first degree murder reflected on his own lack of discretionand queried whether the legislature that developed the mandatory sentencingscheme understood the gravity of what it had put in place:[T]he sentence that I must impose is mandated by law. Idon't have any choice in the matter. I'm not at all comfortable with this case,not because the Defendant didn't receive a fair trial. I think that he did. . ..One is always tempted in a case like this to search forsome way to lessen the severity of the law because of the fact that theDefendant is only fifteen years old. The Motion for New Trial presented acertain amount of temptation to ignore the law and do something to fit thecircumstances. I have a sworn duty to follow the law, and think in the long runthe performance of the duty to follow the law is in the best interests of notonly this community but the whole state.. . . It's obvious to me that we can't, as a society,say that fifteen-year-old children should be held to the same standards asadults. Our law provides this. I think the law is wrong.[257]Some judges find sentencing child offenders to life withoutparole especially troubling because it rejects the possibility of a child'srehabilitation. In a case involving a child offender facing life withoutparole, the Supreme Court of Nevada said, "We may possibly have in the childbefore us the beginning of an irremediably dangerous adult human being, but wecertainly cannot know that fact with any degree of certainty now."[258]In Michigan, a trial court judge refused to impose life without parole onNathaniel Abraham, who was convicted of murder committed when he was elevenyears old. The judge emphasized the impossibility of deciding in the presentwhether a child offender might reform him or herself in the future: "Don't askthe Judge to look into a crystal ball today and predict five years down theroad . . . Don't predict today, at sentencing, whether the child will or willnot be rehabilitated, but keep the options open."[259]Even some prosecutors question the mandatory sentencing ofchildren to life without parole. Florida State Attorney Harry Shorsteinprosecuted fourteen-year-old Joshua Phillips for killing his eight-year-oldfemale neighbor in 1998. Shorstein has said he would not have objected tohaving a less stringent sentencing option for judges to consider in the case ofyouth offenders. In Phillips's case, the judge had only one mandatorysentencing option-life without parole.[260] Shorstein said, "I opposemandatory sentences and the Legislature's tying the hands of judges andprosecutors." He continued, "No matter how tough you are on crime, you can'tsay a fourteen-year-old is the same as an eighteen-year-old."[261]Case Study: Jose A.JoseA. was fifteen at the time of his crime and is serving life without parole inthe federal prison system. He was prosecuted for murder under federalracketeering laws for conspiring with three other individuals, all of whom werealleged to be members of the Latin Kings gang in Yonkers, New York. The U.S.Attorney's motion to transfer his trial to adult court was granted after ahearing, in which the court was required to weigh factors such as the seriousnessof Jose's offense, his maturity, and his potential for rehabilitation.Jose'sformer defense attorney, Paul Rinaldo told a researcher for this report aboutthe transfer hearing: "He didn't have a chance to stay in juvenile court. Theprosecutor focused on the fact that [Jose] was a gang member and emphasized thenature of the crime, that it wasn't done out of passion, that it was plannedand the victim had been tracked down . . . The victim also was not a gangmember. There was no convincing the court to pay attention to [Jose's] actualrole in the crime."[262]Josewrote about his role: "I was alleged to have participated in the murder byacting as a lookout. At my trial, various co-conspirators testified that I rodemy bicycle around the block and was to look for police while another personcommitted the murder."[263]Contemporaneous press accounts, his defense attorney, and testimony at trialall substantiate Jose's role in the crime as a lookout.[264] Attrial, witnesses testified that Jose had been in the gang as a "Pee Wee LatinKing" (for children) for no more than two or three months prior to the murder.They explained that Jose was fifteen years old at the time and that his "jobwas to ride his bicycle around the block as a lookout."[265]One of Jose's co-conspirators entered into a plea agreement in which hereceived a fifty-year sentence and admitted to shooting the victim as areprisal.[266]At his sentencing hearing, Jose's attorney asked the judge to consider asentence other than life without parole. The judge found that she was "requiredby law to sentence . . . to the mandatory minimum term of life imprisonment andthat I do not have the discretion to depart."[267]Jose'sattorney said: "This trial was one of the worst. Right up until the very end, Ireally thought we had a chance. The prosecutor had three other perpetrators toconvict, including the triggerman! And, I mean, [Jose] was such a minor player.While the other gang members had clearly planned things out and tracked thevictim a few times prior to the murder, the evidence showed that [Jose] wasbrought in only that night . . . And his role was so stupid . . . I evenbrought a map into the courtroom to show the jury how crazy it was to have himride away from point A, the victim's house, and then expect him to hustle onback, pedaling like mad, to say he saw a cop around the corner!     . . . Josebroke down when he heard the jury give their verdict. He knew what was coming.It's a horrible memory."[268]VIII. Just Sentences for Youth: International Human Rights LawConviction for even a very serious crime does not extinguisha youth offender's claim to just treatment at the hands of government, nor doesit free a government to ignore fundamental rights when determining punishment.Nevertheless, by permitting the imposition of life imprisonment without paroleon child offenders, forty-two U.S. states and the federal government threatenchildren's basic rights. International human rights law flatly prohibits lifewithout parole for those who commit their crimes before the age of eighteen, aprohibition that is recognized and respected by almost every country in theworld. State public officials, no less than federal, are required to followinternational human rights law when imposing criminal sentences.International Human Rights LawThe international prohibition against life without parolesentences for children (as well as the death penalty) is one of the crucialhuman rights protections for youth who have broken the law. Children have manyof the same fundamental rights as adults-e.g., the right not to be tortured andthe right to a fair trial. They also have additional rights not affordedadults. Even before the drafting of the major human rights treaties in thesecond half of the twentieth century, states acknowledged special rights ofchildren that reflect their unique vulnerabilities and needs and theconcomitant responsibility of governments to protect them. The United States also played an early leadership role in establishing a separate system ofcriminal justice for youth. The state of Illinois was the first government inthe world to decide that children accused of crimes should be tried in ajuvenile court that was structured differently from the regular criminalcourts.[269]In November 1959, the United Nations General Assemblyadopted the Declaration on the Rights of the Child, which recognized that "thechild, by reason of his physical and mental immaturity, needs specialsafeguards and care, including appropriate legal protection, before as well asafter birth."[270]The United States was one of the seventy-eight members of the U.N. GeneralAssembly, which voted unanimously to adopt the Declaration. Since that time,the world's governments, including the United States, have further elaboratedthe rights of children accused of crimes.The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights(ICCPR), to which the United States became a party in 1992, specificallyacknowledges the need for special treatment of children in the criminal justicesystem and emphasizes the importance of their rehabilitation.[271] Article 10(3)requires the separation of child offenders from adults and the provision oftreatment appropriate to their age and legal status. Article 14(4), which wasco-sponsored by the United States,[272]mandates that criminal procedures for children charged with crimes "takeaccount of the age and the desirability of promoting their rehabilitation."[273]The ICCPR requires states to respond to the offenses children commit byfocusing on positive measures and education rather than punishment.[274]There are several ways in which the United States is failing to uphold its obligations under the ICCPR. First, criminal laws allowingchildren to be tried and sentenced as adults violate the specific requirementcontained in Article 14(4) that criminal procedures take account of the age ofchildren.[275]As discussed above in Chapter III, many states allow prosecutors to chargechildren directly in adult court, without any consideration of the particularneeds of the child. Other states require children to undergo a hearing injuvenile court before transfer to adult court, yet these hearings may be littlemore than a rubber stamp of prosecutorial decisions to seek adult sentences.Moreover, when children are tried in adult courts, they are treated as adultsrather than being given age-specific accommodations. Most importantly for thesubject of this report, children are given sentences equivalent to those ofadult offenders. Thus, for example, if life without parole is a mandatorysentence for first degree murder, it is mandatory whether the offender wasfourteen or forty-five at the time of the crime.Second, the sentence of life without parole for childrenalso contradicts the explicit requirement in Article 14(4) of the ICCPR thatimprisonment should promote rehabilitation. The sentence reflects adetermination that there is nothing that can be done to render the child a fitmember of society. It is a sentence of permanent banishment-not an expressionof faith that hard work and time can promote positive change. Indeed, thesentence tells child offenders that U.S. society rejects out of hand any hopethey may have to atone for their crimes and improve their lives.Both the ICCPR and the Convention against Torture and Other,Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment prohibit "cruel, inhuman ordegrading treatment or punishment."[276]Excessive punishment becomes cruel, inhuman, or degrading if its severity orlength is greatly disproportionate to the crime or to the culpability of the offender.The prohibition on cruel, inhuman or degrading punishments is complemented bythe positive requirements of article 10 of the ICCPR, which stipulates: "Allpersons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with humanity and with respectfor the inherent dignity of the human person."[277] For treatmentto be humane, it must be appropriate to age and legal status.[278] Thevulnerability and immaturity of juvenile offenders renders them moresusceptible to cruel, inhuman, or degrading punishments, which will in turnhave a much more profound impact on the body and mind of a developing childthan an adult.Applying the prohibition on "cruel and unusual punishment"in U.S. law, the Nevada Supreme Court concluded that life without parole is a crueland unusual sentence for a child offender. The Court stated, in part:We do not question the right of society to someretribution against a child murderer, but given the undeniably lesserculpability of children for their bad actions, their capacity for growth andsociety's special obligation to children, almost anyone will be prompted to askwhether Naovarath deserves the degree of retribution represented by thehopelessness of a life sentence without possibility of parole, even for thecrime of murder. We conclude that as "just deserts," for killing his sexualassailant, life without possibility of parole is excessive punishment for thisthirteen-year-old boy.[279]Imprisonment is the most coercive non-capital punishmentlawfully imposed by criminal justice systems. Putting a person behind bars isso common in the United States, however, that public officials and the publicat large seem to have lost sight of just how serious a punishment it is.It is precisely because imprisonment is such an inherentlysevere sanction that governmental decisions to impose it are subject to humanrights constraints. The ICCPR recognizes that all persons deprived of theirliberty shall be treated with humanity and with respect for the inherentdignity of the human person.[280]Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International agree with the propositionadvanced over thirty years ago at a U.N.-sponsored conference on human rightsthat punishments "prescribed by law and applied in fact should be humane andproportionate to the gravity of the offence."[281] We believethat the best reading of three interrelated human rights principles make lifewithout parole sentences for child offenders per se disproportionate: theinherent dignity of the individual, the prohibition on inhuman or degradingpunishment, and the right to liberty. All are affirmed in internationalinstruments which the United States has signed or ratified, including theUniversal Declaration of Human Rights, the ICCPR and the Convention againstTorture.When the United States ratified the ICCPR, it attached alimiting reservation that stipulates:That the policy and practice of the United States are generally in compliance with and supportive of the Covenant's provisions regardingtreatment of juveniles in the criminal justice system. Nevertheless, the United States reserves the right, in exceptional circumstances, to treat juvenilesas adults, notwithstanding paragraphs 2 (b) and 3 of article 10 and paragraph 4of article 14.[282]The history of this reservation indicates that it wasintended to permit-on an exceptional basis-the trial of children as adults andthe incarceration of children and adults in the same prison facilities. The United States, as a co-sponsor of Article 14, was keenly aware of the breadth and scope ofits language. There is nothing in its reservation to suggest that the United States sought to reserve the right to sentence children as harshly as adults whocommit similar crimes.On the contrary, the reservation's plain language anddrafting history show that the United States sought to reserve the ability in"exceptional circumstance" to try children in adult courts and to require someof them to serve their sentences in adult prison. According to the UnitedStates Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, the reservation was includedbecause, at times, juveniles were not separated from adults in prison due totheir criminal backgrounds or the nature of their offenses.[283] In otherwords, the reservation is not about the length or severity of sentences,only about the need to sometimes try children as adults and incarcerate them inadult prisons.The Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) explicitlyaddresses the contradiction between the particular rights and needs of childrenand life without parole sentences.[284]Underpinning several of the treaty's provisions is the fundamental recognitionof the child's potential for rehabilitation. Recognizing the unacceptability ofsentences that negate the potential of children to make changes for the betterover time, the CRC flatly prohibits sentencing children to life sentenceswithout parole or to the death penalty.[285] Article 37(a) states:Neither capital punishment nor life imprisonmentwithout possibility of release shall be imposed for offences committed bypersons below eighteen years of age.[286]The CRC also requires that a State's decision to incarceratea child "shall be used only as a measure of last resort and for the shortestappropriate period of time."[287]A child who has committed a crime is to be treated in a manner that takes intoaccount "the child's age and the desirability of promoting the child'sreintegration and the child's assuming a constructive role in society."[288]States are to use a variety of measures to address the situation of children inconflict with the law, including "care, guidance and supervision orders;counseling; probation; foster care; education and vocational trainingprogrammes and other alternatives to institutional care."[289]The treaty also anticipates the need for regular and accessible procedures inwhich a child can "challenge the legality of the deprivation of his or herliberty."[290]Punishing a youth offender with the longest prison sentence possible, offeringno hope of rejoining society, little motivation for rehabilitation, and scantopportunities for learning, violates each of these provisions.The CRC has been accepted all but universally: as of 2005,192 out of a total of 194 countries are parties. Notably, none of the stateparties to the treaty has registered a reservation to the CRC's prohibition onlife imprisonment without release for children.[291] The United States and Somalia[292]are the only two countries in the world that have not ratified the CRC,although both have signed it.[293]As a signatory to the CRC, the United States may not take actions that woulddefeat the convention's object and purpose.[294]The U.S. government has proclaimed its commitment to theCRC's principles.[295]When Ambassador Madeline Albright, as the U.S. Permanent Representative to theU.N., signed the CRC on behalf of the United States in 1995, she declared:The convention is a comprehensive statement ofinternational concern about the importance of improving the lives of the mostvulnerable among us, our children. Its purpose is to increase awareness withthe intention of ending the many abuses committed against children around theworld. . . . United States participation in the Convention reflects the deepand long-standing commitment of the American people.[296]The United States has reaffirmed this commitment onsubsequent occasions. For example, in 1999 Ambassador Betty King, U.S. Representative on the U.N. Economic and Social Council stated:Although the United States has not ratified theConvention on the Rights of the Child, our actions to protect and defendchildren both at home and abroad clearly demonstrate our commitment to thewelfare of children. The international community can remain assured that we, asa nation, stand ready to assist in any way we can to enhance and protect thehuman rights of children wherever they may be.[297]Click to expand ImageCase Study: Troy L.TroyL. was fifteen both in this photo and when he committed his crime.© 2005Private.Troy L. grew upwith his family in Arkansas. Troy did not have a juvenile record but had beenkicked out of one high school for selling marijuana. He explained to aresearcher for this report that he used drugs such as marijuana and "crystalmeth." After Troy was suspended from the alternative school he was attending,his mother sent him to live with his father, who was an engineer in a nuclearpower plant, so that Troy could attend another high school. Troy said that hisfather was physically and mentally abusive. He would not provide details aboutthe abuse he had suffered at the hands of his father, explaining to aresearcher for this report that he had promised his mother and sister that hewould not to do so.When asked what hisnew school had been like, Troy, who is now twenty-three years old, said: "I wasdoing a lot of drugs. I was real rebellious. I mean, like I said, I hadproblems going on at home and I'd take that to school and bring problems withme. And I didn't do good at school. Ironically, though, I sort of liked it-Iliked being around the people and . . . I just didn't, you know teachers didn'tlike me."[298]Troywas fifteen when he murdered his father and was sentenced to life withoutparole. He told a researcher for this report what his life was like at thetime: "[M]e and my dad hadn't gotten along real good since they got divorcedand well we probably had never gotten along real good. We had a sort of abusive. . . he was kinda abusive, but I was too . . . I mean I see now that Iprobably should've just left. It just, it seemed like me and him were just atwar with each other. I mean, I really felt like he hated me at the time. Idon't know how to explain that. It wasn't right, though, I see that now . . . Ithink now . . . if he was still alive I would like to meet him, you know givehim a chance to, I don't know . . . And you know he was abusive, but like Isaid there've been a lot of parents who've been abusive . . . You can't haveevery kid that's abused killing their parents-it just ain't gonna work. And Irealize that now."An investigator inthe case said that a friend had brought Troy a jacket a few minutes before themurder, "because it had some shotgun shells in it,"[299]which the prosecution introduced as evidence of premeditation. However,according to Troy, he and his father had "fought heatedly" that night. He claimed: "[T]he decision tokill him, as much as it was made, was made while we fought, the feeling I guessbeing that I had to end this."[300]He said, "[I] had been so angry and emotional at the time of the murder that Ihad been incapable of realizing the consequences of what I was doing, that Iwould not have a father anymore."[301]The Supreme Courtof Arkansas examined the case and found that the murder was pre-meditated,because "a sheriff's deputy testified that a person had to make a consciouseffort to pump the shotgun to fire it," and Troy's sister testified "that hehad talked about killing their father for six months to a year."[302]The Court also found that Troy shot his father three times, with two differentkinds of ammunition, meaning he had to actually reload, not just pump the gun. Thesame court record indicated that Troy confessed to shooting his father becausehe was "mad at him."[303]After he wasinterviewed for this report, Troy wrote to explain that despite the fact thathe murdered his father, he has the support of his sister and mother. He wrote,"I have a surprising number of friends and family who have kindly offered thatI may stay with them if I am released, despite the state's fearful appraisal ofme. . . . In spite of the insane thing that I did, I don't know of a singleentity, aside from the state . . . who wish for me to stay here. . . . I wantto be able to show my appreciation and make amends to people I've hurt . . . Isap time, joy and money from anyone I come into contact with . . . I would morethan anything like to be rid of this curse that, by afflicting me, afflictseveryone I care about."[304]In sharp contrast to the United States' expressed intentionto protect the human rights of children, federal law as well as the laws of forty-twoindividual states in the U.S. permit the sentence of life without parole forchild offenders. Indeed, as of this writing, the U.S. Congress wascontemplating a new federal law that would increase the number of crimes forwhich a youth might receive life without parole.[305] Since 1989,no U.S. state that permits the sentence for child offenders has taken anysignificant stepsto reduce or eliminate it.Federal and state governments' policy of imposing lifewithout parole sentences on youth offenders violates U.S. constitutional law,which requires both individual states and the federal government to upholdhuman rights treaties made under the authority of the United States. The U.S. Constitution states:[A]ll treaties made, or which shall be made, under theauthority of the United States shall be the Supreme Law of the Land; and theJudges in every State shall be bound thereby, anything in the Constitutionor Law of any State to the contrary notwithstanding.[306]Upholding this constitutional principle, the U.S. SupremeCourt has stated, "[I]nternational law is part of our law, and must beascertained and administered by the courts of justice of the appropriatejurisdiction. . ."[307]Treaties of the United States have been held to be binding on statesindependent of the will and power of state legislatures.[308] Human rightstreaties, like other treaty obligations of the U.S. government, are similarlybinding on state governments.[309]Apart from treaty obligations, international human rights principles are also"instructive" in determining appropriate punishments.[310] Therefore,not only should state officials adhere to the prohibition against lifeimprisonment without parole for youth offenders, but the federal government hasan obligation to support those states, including through federal funding, thatmay choose to eliminate the sentence in the future.Practicesof Other CountriesThe domestic laws and practice of governments worldwideprovide a clear measure of global adherence to the CRC's prohibition of thelife without parole sentences for children.[311] Out of 154 other countries forwhich Human Rights Watch was able to obtain data,[312] only threecurrently have people serving life without parole for crimes they committed aschildren, and none of those four have more than a handful of cases. The paucityof countries that sentence children to life without parole is not due to theiruse of even harsher punishments (such as the death penalty) for childoffenders. In fact, between 1990 and 2004, only eight countries (including the United States) have reportedly imposed the juvenile death penalty.[313]For example, not one of the original fifteen member statesof the European Union allows children to be sentenced to life without parole.[314]On the African continent, thirty-one countries prohibit life without parole forchildren in their penal laws.[315]Six other African countries have decided that the sentence cannot be imposed onchild offenders under sixteen.[316]In three additional African countries, the sentence is technically possible,but it is not used in practice.[317]Kenya and Tanzania are the only two countries in Africa where representatives of inter-governmental or non-governmental organizationsreported that the sentence is still being imposed on offenders below the age ofeighteen. But even these countries are working on improving their practices. Kenya is currently undergoing an extensive constitutional and law reform process, which mayeliminate the sentence. In Tanzania, apparently the only recent life withoutparole sentence for a youth is that of a seventeen-year-old convicted in ahighly controversial rape case. His conviction is currently under appeal.[318]Throughout the world, about fourteen countries have lawsallowing for a life sentence to be imposed on youth offenders, although it isnot clear in all of these cases whether life means life, or whether paroleremains a possibility.[319]  O Outside of the United States, we have foundonly about a dozen child offenders serving such a sentence in three countries. South Africa reportedly has four child offenders serving life without parole sentences,[320] Tanzania has one,[321]and to our knowledge, there are between four and seven youth offenderssentenced to life in prison in Israel as of 2005.[322] Inaddition, youth can technically receive the sentence under the penal laws of Antigua and Barbuda,Australia, Brunei, Dominica, Kenya, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Solomon Islands, andSri Lanka, but it seems that the sentence is rarely if ever used. Finally, inBurkina Faso and Cuba, the sentence seems to be technically possible forindividuals above the age of sixteen, but we know of no instances in which ithas been used.[323]Curiously, thirteen of the countries that allow for the sentence can tracetheir historical ties to the United Kingdom and the English common lawtradition of sentencing "for the duration of Her Majesty's pleasure." Yet thesource of this tradition, the United Kingdom, abolished the possibility of alife without parole sentence for youth offenders after a seminal decision bythe European Court of Human Rights in 1996.[324]Global consensus against the sentence has becomeincreasingly cohesive and firm. In April 2004, the Commission on Human Rightsadopted a resolution "urg[ing] States to ensure that under their legislationand practice neither capital punishment nor life imprisonment without thepossibility of release shall be imposed for offences committed by persons beloweighteen years of age."[325]The international rejection of life without parole (as wellas the death penalty) for child offenders is so overwhelming that it may haveattained the status of customary international law. Once a rule of customaryinternational law is established, that rule becomes binding even on states thathave not formally agreed to it.[326]Under domestic U.S. law, customary international law is binding on thegovernment of the United States.[327]Establishing a rule of customary international law requirestwo elements: first, widespread and consistent governmental practice andsecond, a sense of legal obligation, or opinio juris accompanying thepractice.[328]The International Court of Justice has said that "a very widespread andrepresentative participation in [a] convention might suffice of itself" toevidence the attainment of customary international law, provided it includedparticipation from "States whose interests were specially affected."[329]Asthe previous discussion of widespread adherence to the CRC and consistentworldwide refusal to impose the sentence on children indicates, both of theseelements exist.[330]The United States, which historically was a leader in promoting juvenilejustice reforms, now finds itself far behind the practice of the rest of theworld.The global rarity of life without parole for youth offendersmay also be due to the ineffectiveness of the sentence. Harsh juvenilesentences such as life without parole do not appear to offer a deterrent effectto lower the prevalence of homicide offenses among youth. The prevalence ofjuvenile homicide in a particular country is due to a myriad of factors thatare difficult to identify and even more challenging to compare acrossinternational boundaries. It is nevertheless the case that the harsh penaltiesfor youth offenders in the U.S., such as life without parole sentences, havenot given the United States significantly lower rates of youth crime. During1999, 10 percent of all homicide offenders in the United States were below theage of eighteen, which means the United States had the third highest percentagein a comparison with twenty-eight European countries in 1999.[331] Ten yearsearlier, in 1989, children made up 11 percent of all homicide offenders in the United States. If harsh sentencing were the answer to deterring serious and violentjuvenile crime, the United States should be among the countries with the lowestpercentages of youth murderers, rather than having seen its total number ofyouth homicide offenders drop by just 1 percent.Click to expand ImageCaseStudy: Kevin C.KevinC. was age sixteen in this photo and age seventeen when he committed his crime.© 2005Private.KevinC. grew up in a financially secure family in Colorado, and was seventeen at thetime of his crime. He told a researcher for this report: "There were noproblems at home. I lived with my dad, my parents were divorced . . . eventhough my parents are divorced, they get along."[332] Kevin had been arrested once before and charged as ajuvenile for vandalism to a car.[333] According to his mother, he completed his communityservice satisfactorily. Kevin's father told a researcher for this report whathis son was like at the time of the crime, "I have the feeling he was goinginto the drugs and all that, he was a kid. But I always checked his car, therewere never any weapons in there or drug stuff. . . . To kill somebody, to hurtsomebody, especially a girl? No way."[334]Hismother said: "He had dyed his hair blonde and just re-painted his bathroom. Hewas working hard at his job and he loved snowboarding and skiing. He kept acollection of beer cans from around the world. His father and I used to bringhim back empty cans from Israel and other places we traveled. He kept the canslined up on his bedroom window, like any teenage boy would. . . . They usedthat against him in court!"[335]According to policeinvestigations, Kevin was involved in the shooting of two Native Americangirls, one of whom subsequently died.[336] Kevin told aresearcher for this report that he and two friends were driving around town onenight. They were interested in buying some drugs and needed some money. He tolda researcher, "I just went along for the ride." They eventually stopped twoNative American girls who had just been given $2,000 "coming of age" money bytheir tribe.[337]Kevin explained that a "situation" broke out. Some shots were fired. He said,"I never touched a weapon. I never handled a weapon . . . one girl ended upbeing murdered and the other was injured severely." After his arrest, Kevin'shands tested negative for gunshot residue.[338] Kevin wasconvicted of felony murder and sentenced to life without parole. Kevin'sco-defendant was convicted of first-degree murder and was also sentenced tolife without parole.[339]IX. Conclusion: Life withoutParole and the Purposes of Criminal PunishmentCriminal punishment in the United States can serve fourgoals: rehabilitation, retribution, deterrence, and incapacitation. Theeffectiveness of any punishment-whether life in prison or a week in jail-shouldbe measured against the yardstick of these four goals and should accord withthe widely accepted corollary that no punishment should be more severe thannecessary to achieve these stated goals. Sentencing children to life withoutparole fails to measure up on all counts.Recognizing that all human rights derive from the inherentdignity of the human being, international human rights law requires that theessential aim of all penal systems must be to allow, encourage, and facilitaterehabilitation.[340]The United States, after a few decades of ignoring this goal, is moving back torecognizing it as crucial to community safety.[341] However, lifewithout parole not only does not further this goal, it negates it. The sentencesends an unequivocal message to youth offenders that they are banished from thecommunity forever, no matter how they change or grow.Reflecting on his prosecution of Lionel Tate, believed to bethe youngest child offender ever to be sentenced in the U.S. to lifeimprisonment without the possibility of parole, prosecutor Ken Padowitz said:"What I think we should have in a civilized society for a twelve-year-old who isconvicted of a heinous and horrible crime, such as the one here, is some hopeof rehabilitation, to be able to come out into the community as a productivemember of society."[342]Life without parole discourages youth offenders fromattempting to reform themselves in prison. But rehabilitation is also stymiedby the special hardships inherent in the life without parole sentence. Youthwrestle with the anger and emotional turmoil of coming to grips with theknowledge they will die in prison. They are denied educational, vocational, andother programs to develop their minds and skills, because correctionalauthorities reserve these under-funded programs for prisoners who will somedaybe released. Not surprisingly, child offenders sentenced to life without parolebelieve that U.S. society has thrown them, and respect for human dignity, away.When the focus is on rehabilitation, legislators do not facea choice between being "soft on crime" or supporting life without parole foryouth offenders. They can save taxpayer dollars, protect community safety, andsave youth. As Steve Geller, a Florida state senator who sponsored a bill toprovide youth offenders with access to parole, notes, "At least [children] havea chance for redemption . . . They're kids, they have to have punishment andthey have to have rehabilitation. But we don't need to ruin their livesforever."[343]Nevertheless, proponents of harsh sentencing argue that theseverity of children's crimes warrants the most punitive sentences possible.Texas Senator Edward Lucio, who authored a bill allowing child offenders toreceive life without parole sentences, said:With the law as it is right now . . . young persons whocommit these crimes are guaranteed to be eligible for parole when they reach myage. With the law as it is right now, these offenders who pose a grave risk tothe safety of us all can now walk the streets of our communities again . . . Lifewithout parole is the only option in a capital case that provides certainty forthe families of victims . . . there are no concerns about parole hearings orearly release-it is final, definitive and certain![344]Other proponents of life without parole believe the sentenceis necessary in order to ensure that society mete out the worst punishment forthe worst offenses. They look solely to the crime to determine retribution,ignoring the age and culpability of the offender.Retribution is not, however, simple vengeance. Punishmentserves a retributive purpose when it gives the offender his or her "just deserts"[345]-inother words, when the punishment fits the crime. As the Supreme Court hasstated, "The heart of the retribution rationale is that a criminal sentencemust be directly related to the personal culpability of the criminal offender."[346]In order to achieve this goal of proportionality, both the nature of theoffense and the culpability of the offender must be taken into account.Children can commit the same acts as adults, but by virtueof their immaturity, they cannot be as blameworthy or as culpable. They do nothave adults' developed abilities to think, to weigh consequences, to make sounddecisions, to control their impulses, and to resist group pressures; theirbrains are anatomically different, still evolving into the brains of adults.These characteristics of children have long caused people to question whetheryouth offenders should ever be sentenced to life without parole. As the SupremeCourt stated in Roper, the differences between youth and adults "rendersuspect any conclusion that a juvenile falls among the worst offenders."[347]Deterrence of future crime is also ill-served by lifewithout parole sentences. Supporters of the life without parole sentence claimthat children who pause to consider the consequences before committing homicidewill be deterred best if they face harsh sentences, such as life in prisonwithout parole. But research has failed to show that the threat of anyadult punishment deters adolescents from crime, given their limited abilitiesto think rationally or beyond the short-term.[348] Deterrence isalso unlikely given that adolescents cannot really grasp the true significanceof the sentence.With regard to the fourth purpose of criminal punishment,that of incapacitation, it clearly makes a direct contribution to public safetyto the extent an incarcerated person cannot commit additional crimes in thecommunity. But the need to protect public safety and to incapacitate aparticular offender ends once he or she has been rehabilitated. There is nobasis for believing that all or even many of the children who receive lifewithout parole sentences would otherwise have engaged in a life of crime. Ourresearch indicates that many child offenders received life without parole fortheir first offense. There is little in their histories to warrant theassumption that they would not grow up and be rehabilitated if they were spareda lifetime in prison. And even if incapacitation did have a measurable impacton rates of youth violence, this is not an argument for condemning a childoffender to life without parole. A fifteen-year-old offender will clearly be avery different person by the time he or she has become a mature adult. Incapacitationas a justification for life without parole sentences falters, because childoffenders have the potential to be rehabilitated and become productive membersof society.TeenOffenders Now in Their 50s, 40s, and 30sFrom left to right: Paul T. was seventeenat the time of his crime and is pictured below his booking photos at agefifty-three; Daniel B. (rear left), now forty-five, was fifteen in thisphoto and at the time of his crime; Henry L., now thirty-seven, wasfourteen in this photo and fifteen at the time of his crime.All photographs: © 2005 Private.Click to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageSome proponents of harsh sentences for children believe suchsentences have contributed to the marked decline in violent youth crimenationwide after 1994. Others, however, have noted that where juvenile justicesystems have implemented regimes tending more towards rehabilitation thanpunishment, the fall in youth violence has been even more pronounced. In the District of Columbia, a concerted program of replacing locked detention with community-basedalternatives brought real results, as compared with a more punitive policyadopted by the nearby state of Maryland. Under its reform program, the District of Columbia sharply reduced its juvenile detention rate (by 71 percent).During this same period, Maryland slightly increased its juveniledetention rate by 3 percent. Comparing the two different policies towardsjuvenile crime, D.C.'s violent juvenile crime rate declined by 55 percent-more thanthree times Maryland's 15 percent decline in its violent juvenile crime rate.[349]When an individual of any age can be held responsible forhis or her actions, failure to bring them to account would deny justice to thevictims. However, any criminal action against a child offender should includeall internationally accepted safeguards for bringing children to trial. Theselaws and guidelines recognize the special needs and vulnerabilities of childrenand place an emphasis on rehabilitation and the reintegration of the child intosociety, rather than on punishment alone. Child offenders must have anopportunity to evidence rehabilitation and gain parole. Giving youth offendersthat second chance would align U.S. sentencing practices with the rest of theworld and better protect the rights of its children.The United States has long acknowledged the differencesbetween the maturity of children and adults by requiring that children reach agiven age before they may legally engage in certain activities. These laws usechronological age to set a bright line-no one under eighteen, for example, mayvote, no matter how intelligent, responsible, and mature. The use of age as amarker reflects widely shared understandings about when, as a group, childrenshould be deemed mature enough to engage in adult activities. It also reflectsthe inherent difficulty of determining for any given young person whether he orshe is developmentally akin to a young adult, or still a child.When grave sentences are at issue-such as life withoutparole-the use of a legislatively-established age line reflects the judgmentthat the differences "are too marked and well understood to risk allowing ayouth [to be treated as an adult] despite insufficient culpability."[350]The risk is especially high if the crime at issue is violent or particularlybrutal. Leaving a sentence determination entirely in the hands of the jurycarries the "unacceptable likelihood" that "the brutality or cold-bloodednature of any particular crime would overpower mitigating arguments based onyouth as a matter of course, even where the juvenile offender's objectiveimmaturity, vulnerability, and lack of true depravity should require a sentenceless severe."[351]Even the simple fact of youth, irrespective of the brutality of the crime, mayunfairly influence decisions by the jury, as illustrated by the fact that incertain recent years, children who committed murder in the United States were more likely to be given life without parole sentences than adults.Eighteen is a fair and practical age to set as the linebetween childhood and adulthood for purposes of criminal sentencing. Althoughfrom a biological standpoint, key parts of the brain (including the prefrontalcortex) have not fully reached maturity by that age, most youth of eighteen arewell into the process of acquiring the full capacities of adulthood. There isnational as well as international consensus that it is fair to hold an eighteenyear old as accountable as an adult.[352]As several Supreme Court justices have noted:Eighteen is the dividing line that society hasgenerally drawn, the point at which it is thought reasonable to assume thatpersons have an ability to make, and a duty to bear responsibility for theirjudgments. Insofar as age 18 is a necessarily arbitrary social choice as apoint at which to acknowledge a person's maturity and responsibility, given thedifferent developmental rates of individuals, it is in fact a conservativeestimate of the dividing line between adolescence and adulthood.[353]Sentences for offenders who are children-a group societyrecognizes as uniquely vulnerable and in need of protection in many realms oflife-should acknowledge the profound differences between childhood andadulthood. Eighteen should demarcate the age at which offenders may receive theharshest forms of criminal punishment society can impose.U.S. federal and state governments have the responsibilityof protecting public safety, and they use the criminal justice system to do so.Children can and should be held accountable for their crimes. But thegovernment is also responsible for ensuring that justice is in fact served whena person is tried, convicted, and sentenced. Sentences passed on childoffenders must reflect the gravity of the crimes they have committed, whileacknowledging that they do not possess the maturity and judgment necessary tojustify a punishment that brands them permanently irredeemable. Children have aspecial capacity for transformation. The denial of that possibility should notbe part of a juvenile justice system based on human rights principles andstandards.Appendix A: Note on Research MethodsFor this report, Human Rights Watchinterviewed and corresponded with 335 individuals serving life without parolefor crimes they committed as children, and Amnesty International interviewedand corresponded with 40 such individuals. In addition to in-person interviewsand correspondence with prisoners, we interviewed parents or other closerelatives and spoke with the attorneys for all of the youth offenders weinterviewed who had pending appeals.Prisoners were contacted through an advertisement in thenewsletter Prison Legal News or through a direct mailing. We alsoreceived suggestions for interviewees from social workers, defense attorneys,and family members. Both organizations sought out and have included here pressaccounts or court documents that shed additional light on a prisoner's story.However, we have not sought to verify each of the specific allegations made andrecognize that some may be embellished or altered in the telling. Nevertheless,the letters and interviews are eloquent testimony to the prisoners' senses oftheir experiences. Where prisoners' letters are quoted, we have left in placespelling and grammatical errors. As is consistent with our practice whenreporting on prison conditions, we use pseudonyms for offenders to protectagainst the possibility of intimidation or retaliation.With the much-appreciated assistance of the law firm ofO'Melveny and Myers, LLP, Amnesty International conducted detailed researchinto the laws and standards in the United States applicable to life withoutparole sentencing, the psychological and neurological differences between youthand adults, and collected and analyzed sentencing records for one of thereport's case studies.Human Rights Watch interviewed judges, defense attorneys,prosecutors, social workers, psychologists, prison authorities, and prisoneducational specialists in Arkansas, Colorado, California, Florida, Iowa,Illinois, Louisiana, New Jersey, Massachusetts, and Pennsylvania. For aninternational perspective, Human Rights Watch interviewed criminal defensesolicitors in the United Kingdom and visited a juvenile facility there.Finally, Amnesty International, USA and Human Rights Watchare pleased to announce that the issue of life without parole sentencing foryouth in the United States will be a focus of campaigning and advocacy workthroughout the country, including by Amnesty International's regional chaptersand student groups.Appendix B: Note on Statistical MethodsWhen commencing our research for this report, Human RightsWatch discovered that, while the U.S. Department of Justice uses FBI crimestatistics to compile data on juvenile crime, and the U.S. Office of JuvenileJustice and Delinquency Prevention compiles data on children in the juvenilejustice system, there are no data compiled on child offenders in the adultsystem. Most states tend to "lose" the fact that an offender was a child at thetime of his or her crime once he or she is admitted to adult prison.Consequently, publicly available state reports on incarcerated populationsoften give the impression that there are no youth offenders in adult prison (oronly track individuals by age at admission) and do not offer information abouta particular inmate's age at the time of his or her offense.We find it striking that legislators who passed the lawsallowing children to be sentenced to life without parole, governors, state correctionalauthorities, judges and lawyers, to say nothing of the general public, have hadno access to statistical information about the child offenders sentenced tolife without parole in their states. Therefore, two primary recommendations ofthis report are that all state departments of corrections keep accuratestatistics about child offenders in adult prisons, including the numbers ofindividuals sentenced to life without parole for crimes they committed aschildren, and that the federal government establish and maintain a centraldepository for this data.Prior to the collaboration with Amnesty International, HumanRights Watch began conducting statistical research with the hope that theNational Corrections Reporting Program (NCRP) would provide the nationwide datawe sought on child offenders sentenced to life without parole. The NCRP'sobjective is to provide a consistent and comprehensive description of prisonersentering and leaving state and federal custody. To accomplish this goal, annualdata are gathered from official state prison records on topics such as race,sex, and age of inmates; length of time in jail; length of time in prison; andtype of offense committed. The data are collected from the state prison systemsof most of the United States, as well as the Federal Prison System, theCalifornia Youth Authority, and the District of Columbia.Unfortunately, the NCRP was not a comprehensive source forthe data we sought for at least two reasons. First, the NCRP data revealedyouth offenders serving life without parole in only the following states: Alabama,Colorado, Georgia, Kentucky (data from 1980s before eradication of the sentencefor juveniles), Maine (data from 1980s before eradication of the sentence),Massachusetts, Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire,New Jersey, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon (data from 1990s before eradicationof the sentence for juveniles), Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee,Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, Wyoming. Whereas we knew that offenderswere serving the sentence in additional states, e.g., Florida. Second, thenumber of youth serving life without parole according to NCRP data differedfrom the numbers we had gathered directly from some states, e.g., Michigan. Although these two flaws caused us to reject the NCRP data as a source for ournational count of youth serving life without parole, we decided to use the availabledata as a sample, which we analyzed for information we did not request fromstate departments of corrections, such as the rates of imposition of the lifewithout parole sentence on adult and child murder offenders.We have nobasis for believing that the data available in the NCRP is skewed in anyparticular way that would cause such analyses to be inaccurate.In late 2003, Human Rights Watch began gathering datadirectly from the federal government and the departments of corrections in the forty-onestates that sentenced children to life without parole at the time of ourresearch. (As noted previously, Texas changed its laws to allow for thesentence in May of 2005.) Our first step was to send letters to all fiftystates asking them to send us data on children who committed crimes thatresulted in life without parole or very long sentences (i.e., life sentencesplus a term of years-"life plus years").[354] In the interest ofclarity, we eventually eliminated these long sentence data from our analysis.Therefore, this report only analyzes data relating to children serving theexact sentence of life without parole in the United States (with the exceptionof Pennsylvania).Many state departments of corrections do not keep records onan inmate's age at the time he or she committed an offense but only record anindividual's age at the time of admission to prison. For those states thatclaimed they had no data on inmates' ages at offense, we chose to use an agecut-off of nineteen years old at the date of admission as a way to capture allinmates that likely committed their crimes before the age of eighteen. We choseto use nineteen because we assumed that between one and two years could passbetween a seventeen-year-old's commission of a crime and his or her arrest,trial, possible subsequent trials (as a result of a hung jury or a mistrial),sentencing, and ultimate admission to prison.[355]Many states were prompt and very helpful in their responses.Human Rights Watch received data from thirty-five states and the federalgovernment. Although we requested data through the end of 2002, most statessimply counted the number of youth offenders serving life without parole instate custody on the date at which they ran the query; therefore, some statedatasets include information through mid-2004. From the federal government, Vermont, New Jersey, and Utah, we received responses indicating that, although life withoutparole is possible in those states, no one is currently serving the sentencefor an under-eighteen crime. However, after we received the response from thefederal government, we were contacted by one youth offender, who was fifteen atthe time of his crime and is serving life without parole in the federal systemfor his role as a lookout in a conspiracy to commit murder.[356]Alabama, Idaho, Louisiana, and Virginia informed HumanRights Watch that they were unable to gather statistics for us because ofstaffing limitations and prohibitive costs. We obtained data for these statesthrough other measures, with the exception of Idaho, for which we have nofigures. Human Rights Watch noted that it had received fifteen letters frominmates in Alabama who claimed they were serving life without parole for crimescommitted before they turned eighteen. Since Alabama has an on-line inmatelocator service, we were able to confirm the sentences and basic biologicalcharacteristics of these individuals through cross-checking on-line. Althoughwe therefore cite Alabama as having fifteen child offenders serving lifewithout parole, that figure may well be an undercount. We used a statisticalextract from the reports made by the state of Virginia to the NationalCorrections Reporting Program between the years 1983and 2000 to gather a roughnumber of individuals serving the sentence in that state. Amnesty Internationalobtained data directly from the Louisiana Department of Corrections with theassistance of Clive Stafford Smith and the Louisiana Crisis Assistance Center.Finally, Human Rights Watch did not receive replies from thestate departments of corrections in Michigan and Illinois. Follow-up phonecalls and letters were sent throughout the spring and summer of 2004, to no avail.However, Deborah Labelle, director, and Anna Phillips, research coordinator, ofthe American Civil Liberties Union Juvenile Life without Parole Initiative inMichigan, had already received data from the Michigan and Illinois departmentsof corrections in response to requests they had submitted earlier, followingcriteria very similar to those used by Human Rights Watch. They shared the datathey had obtained with us for the purposes of this report.Appendix C: Sample Letter Soliciting Data from State CorrectionalDepartmentDecember 4, 2003Mr. / Ms. ___________Pennsylvania Department of CorrectionsBox 598Camp Hill, PA 17001-0598Dear __________________:We are writing to ask your assistance with the developmentof statistical data on youthful offenders in Pennsylvania who are servingprison sentences of life without parole or life plus years. We are trying toacquire data from each state on the number of such offenders as part of anational study Human Rights Watch is undertaking on the sentencing ofjuveniles.We are making this request directly to you becauseunfortunately, there is no reliable national database containing theinformation we seek. While the National Corrections Reporting Program (NCRP)contains information on state prison admissions and sentences, our analysis ofthe NCRP data reveals substantial differences with the figures we have obtaineddirectly from several state correction departments. We are concerned there maybe similar problems for other states as well. To ensure the most accurate datapossible, we have therefore decided to ask each state to provide us with theinformation we seek.We would be very grateful if you could provide us with thefollowing information about offenders who were admitted to the PennsylvaniaDepartment of Corrections for each year between 1983 and 2002:1. The number of offenders who were under the age of 18 atthe time of offense (or arrest) or who were 19 or under at time of admissionand who were admitted with sentences of life without parole, and for each suchoffender:a. Genderb. Racec. Date of birthd. Age at admission (or age at time of arrest)e. Offense for which convictedf. County of offense or residenceg. Current facility in which confined2. The number of offenders who were under the age of 18 atthe time of offense (or arrest) or who were 19 or under at time of admissionand who were admitted with sentences of life plus years, and for each suchoffender:a. Genderb. Racec. Date of birthd. Age at admission (or age at time of arrest)e. Offense for which convictedf. County of offense or residenceg. Current facility in which confined3. If your privacy rules permit, we would also like to begiven the name and department of corrections identification number for each ofthese offenders.We hope developing this data will not be burdensome for you.If you can only provide partial statistics, we would be grateful nonetheless.We think it extremely important for the country to have a solid statisticalbasis for understanding juvenile sentencing and incarceration and we know of noother way to develop an accurate database than to ask each state department ofcorrections to provide it to us.If you have any questions about our request, please do nothesitate to contact me, Alison Parker, at [phone/email]. In the meantime, letme thank you in advance for your attention to this request.Sincerely,Alison Parker, Esq.Senior ResearcherAppendix D: State Population Data TableStateYouth LWOP TotalPopulation 14-17LWOP/Total PopulationYouth LWOP Rate per 100,000Alabama152558860.01%5.86Arizona302903120.01%10.33Arkansas461574660.03%29.21California18019603960.01%9.18Colorado462453520.02%18.75Connecticut101792650.01%5.58Delaware7429250.02%16.31Federal1Not applicableNot applicableNot applicableFlorida2738194400.03%33.32Georgia84689910.00%1.71Hawaii4657630.01%6.08Idahodata missing87361data missingdata missingIllinois1037122740.01%14.46Indiana23528500.00%0.57Iowa671752340.04%38.23Louisiana3172893370.11%109.56Maryland132949140.00%4.41Massachusetts603244670.02%18.49Michigan3065787830.05%52.87Minnesota23024620.00%0.66Mississippi171792460.01%9.48Missouri1163302350.04%35.13Montana1584460.00%1.71Nebraska211072850.02%19.57Nevada161042670.02%15.35New Hampshire3705630.00%4.25New Jersey04416870.00%0.00North Carolina444169380.01%10.55North Dakota1410440.00%2.44Ohio16545840.00%0.15Oklahoma492111170.02%23.21Pennsylvania3326738050.05%49.27Rhode Island2542680.00%3.69South Carolina262260070.01%11.50South Dakota9500360.02%17.99Tennessee43110470.00%1.29Utah01630010.00%0.00Vermont03828830.00%0.00Virginia48361060.13%132.94Washington233460400.01%6.65Wisconsin163260790.00%4.91Wyoming6335610.02%17.88Nationwide2225128217230.02%17.35Source: Data providedto Human Rights Watch from thirty-eight state correctional departments andadditional other sources for the states of Alabama and Virginia.The Hawaii and Virginia data do not include race information. Population data were obtainedfrom the U.S. Census Bureau, State Population Data Sets, available online at:http://www.census.gov/popest/states/asrh/files/SC-EST2003-race6-AL_MO.csv andhttp://www.census.gov/popest/states/asrh/files/SC-EST2003-race6-MT_WY.csv,accessed on March 4, 2005. Calculations are based on Census 2000 data, usingpopulations between the ages of fourteen and seventeen.Appendix E: Letters from Five Youth Offenders ServingLife without Parole Sentences in the United StatesSee the five letterson the following thirty-two pages.[1]Human Rights Watch telephoneinterview with Frank C., Colorado, October 22, 2004.[2] Human Rights Watch interview with Cheryl J.,McPherson Unit, Newport, Arkansas, June 24, 2004 (pseudonym). Throughoutthis report, as indicated, prisoners' names have been concealed through the useof pseudonyms in order to protect their security and privacy. Everyoneinterviewed for this report was age eighteen or older at the time of theinterview.[3]HumanRights Watch interview with Javier M., Colorado State Penitentiary, Cañon City,Colorado, July 26, 2004 (pseudonym).[4]Throughout this report, case studies are interspersed to give readers a senseof the actual backgrounds and experiences of youth offenders sentenced to lifewithout parole. The case studies are not intended as illustrations of theissues being addressed in particular chapters.[5] Circuit Court of Cook County, "Adult ProbationDepartment Pre-Sentencing Investigative Report," July 13, 1994 (on file withHuman Rights Watch) ("Pre-Sentencing Investigative Report").[6] Human Rights Watch interview with Peter A.,Stateville Correctional Institution, Joliet, Illinois, April 20, 2005(pseudonym) (unless otherwise noted, all statements attributed to Peter A. inthis case study were obtained during this interview).[7] "Pre-Sentencing Investigative Report."[8] Ibid.[9]Illinois v. Allen, Order Upon Denial ofRehearing, Hon. Thomas Dwyer, May 14, 1997 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[10] Ibid.[11]Sentencing order of Judge Dennis Dernback, October 23, 2001 (on file with HumanRights Watch) (The statute requires a life without parole sentence for anindividual found guilty of first degree murder of more than one victimirrespective of the defendant's age, including under a theory ofaccountability. See Illinois Compiled Statute (ILCS) 5/5-8-1).[12] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with DennisDoherty, November 22, 2004.[13] "Pre-Sentencing Investigative Report"; Letter fromJames W. Fry, President, Blackstone Paralegal Studies, Inc., November 13, 2001(on file with Human Rights Watch).[14] Letter from Peter A. to Human Rights Watch,Stateville Correctional Institution, Joliet, Illinois, March 18, 2004 (pseudonym)(on file with Human Rights Watch).[15]Althoughthe criminal justice system was harsh, compassionate societal attitudes towardchild offenders tempered the outcomes-prosecutors frequently decided not toprosecute accused children, and juries often refused to convict them when adraconian sentence would result. See Randall G. Shelden and Michelle Hussong,"Juvenile Crime, Adult Adjudication, and the Death Penalty: Draconian PoliciesRevisited," Justice Policy Journal, vol. 1, no. 2 (Spring 2003).[16] Barry C. Feld, "The Juvenile Court Meets thePrinciple of the Offense: Legislative Changes in Juvenile Waiver Statutes," CriminalLaw & Criminology, vol. 78, no. 471 (1987), p. 474.[17] Anthony M. Platt, The Child Savers: The Inventionof Delinquency, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1977), p.3-4, 138.[18] See Howard N. Snyder and Melissa Sickmund, JuvenileOffenders and Victims: 1999 National Report (U.S. Department of Justice,Office of Justice Programs, Office of Juvenile Justice and DelinquencyPrevention, September 1999), p. 86, available online at:http://www.ncjrs.org/html/ojjdp/nationalreport99/toc.html,accessed on September 13, 2005 (Juvenile Offenders and Victims: 1999National Report).[19]In Kent v. U.S., 383 U.S.541, 566-67 (1996), the Supreme Court articulated the eight factors juvenilecourts were to weigh in transfer hearings: "1) The seriousness of the allegedoffense to the community and whether the protection of the community requireswaiver; 2) Whether the alleged offense was committed in an aggressive, violent,premeditated or willful manner; 3) Whether the alleged offense was againstpersons or against property, greater weight being given to offenses againstpersons especially if personal injury resulted; 4) The prosecutive merit of thecomplaint, i.e., whether there is evidence upon which a Grand Jury may beexpected to return an indictment to be determined by consultation with theUnited States Attorney; 5) Thedesirability of trial and disposition of the entireoffense in one court when the juvenile's associates in the alleged offense areadults who will be charged with a crime in the U.S. District Court for theDistrict of Columbia; 6) The sophistication and maturity of the juvenile asdetermined by consideration of his home, environmental situation, emotionalattitude and pattern of living; 7) The record and previous history of thejuvenile, including previous contacts with the Youth Aid Division, other lawenforcement agencies, juvenile courts and other jurisdictions, prior periods ofprobation to this Court, or prior commitments to juvenile institutions; and 8)The prospects for adequate protection of the public and the likelihood ofreasonable rehabilitation of the juvenile (if he is found to have committed thealleged offense) by the use of procedures, services and facilities currentlyavailable to the Juvenile Court."[20]The National Center for JuvenileJustice, "Juvenile Arrest Rates by Offense, Sex, and Race (1980-2002)," August1, 2004, available online at: http://ojjdp.ncjrs.org/ojstatbb/crime/excel/JAR_20040801.xls,accessed on: July 2, 2005.[21] James Alan Fox, "Homicide Trends in the United States: 2000 Update" (U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics,January 2003), available online at: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/htus00.pdf,accessed on September 13, 2005. See also Franklin E. Zimring, American YouthViolence (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999).[22] John DiIulio, How to Stop the Coming Crime Wave(New York: Manhattan Institute, 1996), p. 1.[23] House Committee on Economic and EducationalOpportunities, Subcommittee on Early Childhood, Youth and Families, Hearingsof the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act, Serial no. 104-68,104th Congress, 2nd session., 1996, p. 90 ("Statement of Rep. BillMcCollum, chairman, Subcommittee on Crime, House Judiciary Committee").[24] See HowardN. Snyder, Juvenile Arrests 2003 (Juvenile Justice Bulletin, Office ofJuvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, August 2005), p. 9, availableonline at: http://www.ncjrs.gov/html/ojjdp/209735/contents.html,accessed on September 13, 2005.[25]Juvenile Offenders and Victims: 1999 NationalReport, p. 89.[26] The following states have automatic transferprovisions: Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Mississippi, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, New York, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, South Dakota, Utah, Vermont, Washington, and Wisconsin. See Patrick Griffin, et al., Trying Juveniles as Adults in Criminal Court: An Analysis of StateTransfer Provisions (U.S. Department of Justice, Office of JusticePrograms, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, December 1998)p. 1, available online at: http://ojjdp.ncjrs.org/pubs/tryingjuvasadult/toc.html,accessed on September 13, 2005 (Trying Juveniles as Adults in CriminalCourt).[27] The following jurisdictions give prosecutorsdiscretion to file directly in adult court: Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado,District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan,Montana, Nebraska, Oklahoma, Vermont, Virginia, and Wyoming. See TryingJuveniles as Adults in Criminal Court, p. 1.[28] See Trying Juveniles as Adults in Criminal Court,p. 1. For example, before exercising direct file authority to prosecutejuveniles as adults in Nebraska and Wyoming, prosecutors are required to giveconsideration to the same kinds of enumerated "factors" that are ordinarilyweighed by juvenile courts making waiver determinations. Ibid. The federalgovernment requires all cases filed against juveniles to proceed through ahearing to determine whether prosecution should continue in criminal court, inwhich several factors are weighed and written findings are entered into therecord before prosecution may proceed. See 18 U.S.C. 403, Sec. 5032. Florida weighs the scales in favor of trying juveniles in adult court: in specifiedage or offense categories, prosecutors must either attempt an adult prosecutionor provide the juvenile court with written reasons for failing to do so.See Trying Juveniles as Adults inCriminal Court, p.1.[29] The United States is party to the InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), which states in article 14 thatgovernments should establish procedures that take "account of [children's] ageand the desirability of promoting their rehabilitation." See ICCPR, 999U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23, 1976, ratified by the United States on September 8, 1992, article 14(3)(g). If more U.S. states insisted upontransfer hearings weighing several factors before a child could be charged inadult court, U.S. obligations under the ICCPR would be better upheld.[30] In 1996, state prosecutors tried 27,000 childoffenders in adult court, of whom 9,760 had been transferred from juvenilecourt.Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prosecutors in State Courts,available online at: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#P,accessed on July 1, 2005 (Prosecutors in State Courts).In 2000,we estimate 55,000 child offenders were tried in adult court, of whom anestimated 7,100 had been transferred from juvenile court. These estimates arecalculated from data contained in the following reports: Trying Juveniles asAdults in Criminal Court; Prosecutors in State Courts; and A. Stahl,H. Snyder, T. Finnegan, Easy Access to Juvenile Court Statistics: 1985-2000 (Pittsburgh:National Center for Juvenile Justice (producer); Washington, D.C.: Office ofJuvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention (distributor), 2002), availableonline at: http://www.ojjdp.ncjrs.org/ojstatbb/ezajcs,accessed on July 1, 2005.[31] Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), Art.40(3)(b).[32] CRC, Art. 40(4).[33] A competent defendant is one who has a basicunderstanding of the roles of her own and opposing attorneys; comprehends thefunctions of the judge and jury; is able to consult with her attorney in ameaningful way; and can weigh the consequences of the decisions she has tomake, such as whether or not to accept a plea. See, e.g.,, Dusky v. UnitedStates, 362 U.S. 402 (1960).[34] Phase I of the MacArthur study occurred between 1997and 2002 and involved an examination of 927 children aged eleven to seventeenwho were compared with a group of 466 young adults aged eighteen totwenty-four. Half of the children and half of the young adults were in jail orjuvenile detention centers when they were tested, and half were not. The studyused two main instruments to measure competency. The first, the MacCAT-CA,measures responses along three subscales: understanding, reasoning, andrecognition of the relevance of information. The second instrument, MacJEN,measures responses to vignettes that present legal scenarios and choices.MacJEN also has three subscales: risk appraisal, future orientation, andresistance to peer influence. The study controlled for characteristics of therespondents such as social class and intelligence. SeeThomasGrisso, Laurence Steinberg, Jennifer Woolard, Elizabeth Cauffman, ElizabethScott, Sandra Graham, Fran Lexcen, N. Dickon Reppucci, Robert Schwartz,"Juveniles' Competence to Stand Trial," Law and Human Behavior, vol. 27 (2003)("Juveniles' Competence to Stand Trial").[35]"Juveniles'Competence to Stand Trial."[36] American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) Michigan Lifewithout Parole Project interview with Gary C., Tamms Supermax CorrectionalFacility, Tamms, Illinois, September 21, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[37] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Mr. TomCarberry, October 25, 2004. Carberry is Thomas' appeals attorney. According toCarberry, Elkins allowed "her faith" to affect her professional judgment. HumanRights Watch also interviewed Thomas M., Colorado State Penitentiary, Cañon City,Colorado, July 27, 2004 (pseudonym) (Human Rights Watch interview with ThomasM.).[38] Human Rights Watch interview with Clifford S.,Maximum Security Unit, Tucker, Arkansas, June 22, 2004 (pseudonym).[39] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with DennisDoherty, November 22, 2004. In another apparent example of a youth offender notunderstanding what was at stake during his trial, Donald Lambert, who wasfifteen at the time of his crime, decided to forgo a trial and plead guilty tofirst degree murder, resulting in a life without parole sentence, after aconference with his attorney that lasted "somewhere between five and twentyminutes." See Lambert v. Blodgett, 393 F.3d 943 (9th Cir.Mar. 2, 2004).[40] Bishop,Donna M. et al. "The Transfer of Juveniles to Criminal Court: Does it makea difference?" Crime & Delinquency, vol. 42, no. 2 (April1996).[41] Vincent Shiraldi and Jason Ziedenberg, "The FloridaExperiment: Transferring Power from Judges to Prosecutors," American Bar Association,Criminal Justice Magazine, vol. 15, issue 1 (Spring 2000) ("The FloridaExperiment: Transferring Power from Judges to Prosecutors").[42] Human Rights Watch interview with Samantha L., IowaCorrectional Institute for Women, Mitchellville, Iowa, April 5, 2004(pseudonym) (unless otherwise noted, all statements attributed to Samantha L.in this case study were obtained during this interview).[43]State v.Nebinger, 412 N.W.2d 180 (Iowa Ct. App., 1987) (finding no abuse of discretionby trial court in finding defendant guilty of first degree murder and firstdegree robbery of a seventy-nine-year-old man and showing that Nebingerattempted to argue that Samantha L. was guilty of the crime).[44] These states are: Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Iowa, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, New Hampshire, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota, Virginia, Washington, and Wisconsin.[45] All data discussed in this chapter are on file withHuman Rights Watch. Please see Appendix B for a detailed description ofresearch and statistical methods.[46] Each state department of corrections has its ownmethod for coding the type of crime committed by its prisoners. Some statesbreak homicide crimes down into categories (e.g., first degree murder, seconddegree murder, etc.), and some simply group all homicide crimes into thegeneral category of "murder." Moreover, in many states the category of "firstdegree murder" or "murder" includes both intentional homicide and the felonycrime described in the text as "felony murder." Therefore, a variety of codesor offense terms are used by states to describe the crime for which eachincarcerated individual was convicted. This makes it difficult to determinewhich types or sub-categories of youth crimes tended to result in a lifewithout parole sentence.[47] This sample was derived from a survey of 281 lettersreceived by Human Rights Watch from youth offenders across the United States, 172 of whom gave detailed explanations of their role in the crime. Theseprisoners serving life without parole who wrote to Human Rights Watch were aself-selected group, not a random sample. We did not expressly ask for informationabout the level of culpability of the offender (i.e., whether the individualwas or was not the "triggerperson" in a felony murder crime), and thereforeprisoners were not aware that this was a question we were interested in, so itis possible that we received more correspondence from those individuals whofelt their sentence was disproportionate. In particular, it is possible thatindividuals serving life without parole for felony murder convictions were morelikely to write to Human Rights Watch out of a belief that their sentence wasunfair.[48] "Thrown Away: Children Sentenced to Life withoutParole in Colorado," A Human Rights Watch Report, February 2005,p.18-19.[49]SecondChances: Juveniles Serving Life without Parole in Michigan Prisons (ACLU of Michigan, 2004), p.4, available online at: www.aclumich.org/pubs/juvenilelifers.pdf,accessed on September 13, 2005.[50] This percentage reflects the gender of childoffenders serving life without parole in thirty-nine out of the forty-twostates that impose the sentence. We had no data from Idaho and no data on thegender of youth offenders from Virginia.[51] For example, male youths are about thirteen timesmore likely to be arrested for murder than females. U.S. Department of Justice,Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, "Juvenile Offenders andVictims," National Report Series, December 2001, available online at: http://www.ncjrs.org/html/ojjdp/nrs_bulletin/nrs_2001_12_1/contents.html,accessed on September 13, 2005.[52] Eileen Poe-Yamagata and Jeffrey A. Butts, "FemaleOffenders in the Juvenile Justice System: Statistics Summary" (Office ofJuvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, June 1996), p. 13, availableonline at: http://nicic.org/Library/013515, accessed onSeptember 13, 2005.[53] The gender and crime of its child offenders servinglife without parole in Virginia are not included because the state did notprovide us with that data.[54] This sample was derived from a survey of 281 lettersreceived by Human Rights Watch from youth offenders across the United States, 96 of whom gave detailed explanations of their previous criminal offensehistory. These prisoners serving life without parole who wrote to Human RightsWatch were a self-selected group, not a random sample. We did not expressly askfor information about offenders' previous criminal histories, and thereforeprisoners were not aware that this was a question we were interested in, so itis possible that we received more correspondence from those individuals whofelt their sentence was unfair. In particular, it is possible that individualsserving life without parole for their first criminal offense were more likelyto write to Human Rights Watch because of this sense of receiving an unfairsentence.[55] We are aware of only one offender in our sample whowas previously convicted as an adult of first degree murder before the firstdegree murder crime that led to his sentence of life without parole.[56] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with MitchellStrutin, October 28, 2004. See also Pennsylvania v. Pelzer, 531 Pa. 235(May 29, 1992).[57]Pennsylvania v. Daniels, 531 Pa. 210, 217 (Penn. S. Ct., May 29, 1992).[58]Pennsylvania v. Pelzer, 531 Pa. 235 (May 29, 1992).[59] Ibid.[60] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Stacey T., Chester, Pennsylvania, May 20, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[61] The number of known murder offenders is the bestproxy for the number of youth convicted of murder, because specific data formurder convictions of youth offenders does not exist. "Known murder offenders"is a term used by criminal justice professionals and includes not only allindividuals arrested for murders (including all degrees of murder and felonymurder) but also individuals identified by witnesses or reliably identified asperpetrators but not arrested (usually because the offender was killed). Formore information on the methods by which known offenders are classified, see "EasyAccess to the FBI's Supplementary Homicide Reports: 1980-2000," U.S. Departmentof Justice, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, availableonline at: http://ojjdp.ncjrs.org/ojstatbb/ezashr/asp/methods.asp,accessed on July 22, 2005.[62] There are no published data that identify the numberof adults receiving life without parole sentences in the United States. We used as a proxy the number of adult offenders entering prison with life withoutparole sentences for murder convictions. The proxy should be extremely close tothe actual number, since only death or some other extraordinary developmentwould prevent someone sentenced to life without parole from actually enteringprison.[63] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Jose A., UnitedStates Penitentiary Allenwood, White Deer, Pennsylvania, March 9, 2004 (on filewith Human Rights Watch).[64] Native Americans constitute .8 percent, and AsianAmericans are .9 percent of the total number of youth offenders serving lifewithout parole sentences. Note that the 2000 Census used separate categoriesfor race (White, Black, American Indian, Hawaiian, and Asian) and ethnicity(Hispanic or Latino and non-Hispanic or Latino). Therefore, all people whoidentified themselves as Hispanic, regardless of their race identification arecounted in the Hispanic populations. Those people who identified themselves asWhite-Hispanic are also counted in the White population; those people whoidentified themselves as Black-Hispanic are also counted in the Blackpopulation; and so on.[65] After combing existing datasets on crime rates, HumanRights Watch spoke with Tom Zelenock, the project leader of the NationalArchive of Criminal Justice Data project at the University of Michigan's Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research. He stated thatUniform Crime Reports (UCR) Data provide state break-downs of overall race ofoffenders and state break-downs of age of offenders, but UCR data does notprovide a state break-down of the race of offenders of (or below) a particularage. This is a widely acknowledged shortcoming in the data. Zelenock said he issure people have tried to extract juvenile race data and have "done itincorrectly," because it is just not possible from data currently collected inthe United States. Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Tom Zelenock, onMarch 24, 2005.[66] See., e.g., Eileen Poe-Yamagata and Michael A. Jones,And Justice for Some (Building Blocks for Youth Initiative for theNational Council on Crime and Delinquency, 2000), available online at: http://www.buildingblocksforyouth.org/justiceforsome/jfs.html,accessed on September 14, 2005 (finding that youth of color are overrepresentedand receive disparate treatment at every stage of the juvenile justice system);Mike Males and Dan Macallair, The Color of Justice: An Analysis of JuvenileAdult Court Transfers in California (Justice Policy Institute, BuildingBlocks for Youth Initiative, Feb. 2000), available online at: http://www.buildingblocksforyouth.org/colorofjustice/coj.html,accessed on September 14, 2004 (The Color of Justice)  (showing thatyouth of color are 8.3 times more likely than white youth to be sentenced by anadult court to imprisonment in a California Youth Authority facility); JolantaJuszkiewicz, Youth Crime/Adult Time: Is Justice Served? (Pretrial Services Resource Center, Building Blocks for Youth Initiative, Oct. 2000)available online at: http://www.buildingblocksforyouth.org/ycat/ycat.html,accessed on September 14, 2005 (showing over-representation and disparatetreatment of youth of color in the adult system and questioning the fairness ofprosecuting youth as adults).[67] "Betraying the Young: Children in the U.S. JusticeSystem" (Amnesty International, November 20, 1998), available online at: http://web.amnesty.org/library/Index/engAMR510601998,accessed on September 14, 2005.[68] Donna Bishop and Charles Frazier, A study of raceand juvenile processing in Florida, a report submitted to the Florida SupremeCourt Racial and Ethnic Bias Study Commission, 1990 (cited in he Colorof Justice).[69] Inboth Table 7 and Figure 7, we included only those states that had at least onechild offender of each race in the rate comparisons.[70] U.S. National Library of Medicine and U.S. Institutesof Health, "Fluoxetine, brand names Prozac, Sarafem," MedlinePlus DrugInformation, available online at: http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/druginfo/medmaster/a689006.html,accessed on April 15, 2005.[71] In October 2004, the U.S. Food and DrugAdministration (FDA) asked antidepressant manufacturers to include warningsabout possible side effects, specifically suicidal tendencies in childrentaking these medications. In a press statement, the FDA stated: "Pediatricpatients being treated with antidepressants for any indication should beclosely observed for clinical worsening, as well as agitation, irritability,suicidality, and unusual changes in behavior, especially during the initial fewmonths of a course of drug therapy, or at times of dose changes, either increasesor decreases." See FDA Public Health Advisory, "Suicidality in Children andAdolescents Being Treated With Antidepressant Medications," October 15, 2004,available online at: http://www.fda.gov/cder/drug/antidepressants/SSRIPHA200410.htm,accessed on September 15, 2005.[72] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Emily F., IowaCorrectional Institute for Women, Mitchellville, Iowa, March 13, 2004(pseudonym) (on file with Human Rights Watch). Human Rights Watch was alsocontacted by a young man serving a life without parole sentence in Alabama and his mother, both of whom link his criminal offense to the fact that he was onan antidepressant medication at the time.[73]Iowa v. Fetters, 562 N.W.2d 770 (Iowa Ct. App. Feb. 26 1997).[74]Ibid.[75]Ibid.[76]Ibid.[77] See, e.g., Elizabeth Cauffman and Laurence Steinberg,"(Im)maturity of Judgment in Adolescence: Why Adolescents May Be Less CulpableThan Adults," Behavioral Science and Law, vol. 18, (2000), p. 742-43.[78] See, e.g., William Gardner and Janna Herman,"Adolescent's AIDS Risk Taking: A Rational Choice Perspective," Adolescentsin the AIDS Epidemic, William Gardner, et al., eds., (San Francisco: JosseyBass, 1990), p. 17, 25-26 ("Adolescent's AIDS Risk Taking"); Marty Beyer,"Recognizing the Child in the Delinquent," Kentucky Child Rights Journal,vol. 7 (Summer 1999), p. 16-17.[79]See Meghan M. Deerin, "The Teen Brain Theory,"Chicago Tribune, August 12, 2001, p. C1 (citing Russell Barkley,professor of psychiatry and neurology at the University of MassachusettsMedical School).[80] Catherine C. Lewis, "How Adolescents ApproachDecisions: Changes over Grades Seven to Twelve and Policy Implications," ChildDevelopment, vol. 52 (1981) p. 538, 541-42 (noting that subjects in gradesseven and eight considered future consequences only 11 percent of the time)("How Adolescents Approach Decisions").[81] See "Adolescent's AIDS Risk Taking" (concluding thatadolescents often focus only on short-term implications of their actions, whileignoring long-term negative consequences); Barbara Kaban and Ann E. Tobey,"When Police Question Children: Are Protections Adequate?" Juvenile CenterChild and Courts, vol. 1 (1999), p. 151, 155 (concluding that "researchsupports the notion that adolescents' failure to consider long-termconsequences may compromise youthful decision making. A failure to considerconsequences may be due to a lack of understanding of the consequences as wellas a failure to consider them."); Marty Beyer, "Immaturity, Culpability &Competency in Juveniles: A Study of 17 Cases," Summary of Criminal Justice,vol.15, no. 27 (2000) ("Immaturity, Culpability & Competency inJuveniles"); "How Adolescents Approach Decisions," p. 541 (reporting results ofan empirical study of juvenile decision-making which found that only 11 percentof seventh-eighth graders, 25 percent of tenth graders, and 48 percent oftwelfth graders considered long-term consequences when making significantmedical decisions).[82] See Thomas Grisso, "What We Know About Youth'sCapacities," Youth on Trial: A Developmental Perspective on Juvenile Justice,Thomas Grisso and Robert G. Schwartz, eds. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000), p. 267-69 (reviewing literature on effects of emotion on children'scognitive capacities).[83]See e.g., Kim Taylor-Thompson, "States of Mind/States of Development," StanfordLaw and Policy Review, vol. 14 (2003), p. 155, fn. 107-108 (reviewingresearch on effects of stress on juvenile decision-making) ("States ofMind/States of Development").[84]"Immaturity, Culpability & Competency in Juveniles," p. 27. See also"States of Mind/States of Development," p. 153.[85]Human Rights Watch interviewwith Gregory C., Colorado State Penitentiary, Cañon City, Colorado, July 2,2004 (pseudonym).[86] See, e.g., Jeffrey Arnett,"Reckless Behavior in Adolescence: A Developmental Perspective," DevelopmentalReview, vol. 12 (1992), p. 339; Charles E. Irwin, Jr., "Adolescence and RiskTaking: How are They Related?" Adolescent Risk Taking , Nancy J. Bell andRobert J. Bell, eds. (Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications, January 1993), p. 7.[87] See, e.g., Jay N. Giedd, etal., "Brain Development During Childhood and Adolescence: A Longitudinal MRIStudy," Nature Neuroscience, vol. 2 (1999), p. 861 (discussing an MRI study ofthe brains of 145 children, images taken up to five times per child over tenyears); Kenneth K. Kwong, et al., "Dynamic Magnetic Resonance Imaging of HumanBrain Activity During Primary Sensory Stimulation," Proceedings of the NationalAcademy of Science, vol. 89 (1992), p. 5675.[88] Bruce Bower, "Teen Brains On Trial: The Science OfNeural Development Tangles With The Juvenile Death Penalty," Science NewsOnline, vol. 165, no. 19 (May 8, 2004), available online at: http://www.sciencenews.org/articles/20040508/bob9.asp,accessed on September 14, 2005.[89] Ibid. See also Elkhonon Goldberg, The ExecutiveBrain: Frontal Lobes and the Civilized Mind (New York: Oxford UniversityPress, 2001), p. 434; Allan L. Reiss, et al., "Brain Development, Gender and IQin Children: A Volumetric Imaging Study," Brain, vol. 119 (1996), p.1768; Elizabeth R. Sowell, et al., "Mapping Continued Brain Growth and Gray MatterDensity Reduction in Dorsal Frontal Cortex: Inverse Relationships DuringPostadolescent Brain Maturation," Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 21(2001), p. 8821.[90]See Daniel R. Weinberger, "A Brain Too YoungFor Good Judgment," The New York Times, March 10, 2001, p. A13.[91]Ibid.[92]See, e.g., Jan Glascher and Ralph Adolphs, "Processingof the Arousal of Subliminal and Supraliminal Emotional Stimuli by the HumanAmygdala," Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 23 (2003), p. 10274.[93] National Juvenile Defender Center, AdolescentBrain Development and Legal Culpability, April 2003 (quoting Dr. DeborahYurgelun-Todd of Harvard Medical School).[94] Gargi Talukder, "Decision-Making is Still a Work inProgress for Teenagers," July 2000, available online at: www.brainconnection.com, accessed on July 22,2005.[95]Ibid.[96] Human Rights Watch interview with Alexis V., IowaCorrectional Facility for Women, Mitchellville, Iowa, April 5, 2004 (pseudonym)(unless otherwise noted, all statements attributed to Alexis V. in this casestudy were obtained during this interview).[97]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Lee AnnVeal, April 29, 2005 (Interview with Lee Ann Veal).[98] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with MikeDryden, former residential youth counselor at Forest Ridge home, Iowa, March 4, 2005.[99] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with ThomasFerguson, November 22, 2004.[100] Interview with Lee Ann Veal.[101]Letter to Human rights Watch fromAlexis V., Iowa correctional Institution for Women, Mitchellville, Iowa, March 29, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[102]SeeIowa v. Veal, 564 N.W.2d 797(Iowa S. Ct. May 21 1997).[103] Interview with Lee Ann Veal.[104] Ibid.[105] The states of Alabama, Illinois, and Louisiana were unable or unwilling to provide us with data on youth offenders' ages atadmission to prison.[106] Craig Haney, "Psychology and the Limits to PrisonPain: Confronting the Coming Crisis in Eighth Amendment Law," Psychology,Public Policy and Law, vol. 3 (December 1997), p. 499 ("Psychology and theLimits to Prison Pain")[107] Letter to Human Rights Watch from male prisoner in Lapeer, Michigan, July 23, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[108] For documentation of increased effects, see, e.g.,Stanton Wheeler, "Socialization in Correctional Communities," AmericanSociological Review, vol. 26 (1961), p. 697; Peter Garabedian, "Social Roleand Processes of Socialization in the Prison Community," Social Problems,vol. 11 (1963), p. 140. For documentation of decreased effects, see, e.g.,Robert Johnson and Hans Toch, "The First Cut is the Deepest: PsychologicalBreakdown and Survival in the Detention Setting," The Pains of Imprisonment(Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications, 1982); "Psychology and the Limits to PrisonPain," p. 499.[109] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Jacob O.,Washington State Penitentiary, Walla Walla, Washington, March 26, 2004(pseudonym) (on file with Human Rights Watch).[110] Human Rights Watch interview with Thomas M.[111] Human Rights Watch interview with Matthew C.,Colorado State Penitentiary, Cañon City, Colorado, July 27, 2004 (pseudonym).[112]Iowa v. Smith, Smith, Privitt, and Speaks,546 N.W.2d 916, 923 (Iowa S.Ct. Apr. 17, 1996).[113] Human Rights Watch interview with Dean F., AnamosaState Penitentiary, Anamosa, Iowa, April 6, 2004 (pseudonym) (unless otherwisenoted, all statements attributed to Dean F. in this case study were obtainedduring this interview).[114] "Teen's Defense to Take the Stage in Hauser MurderTrial," Telegraph Herald, September 23, 1996.[115] "Prosecution Begins Smith Case," Telegraph Herald,June 13, 1996.[116]Iowa v. Speaks, 576 N.W.2d 629 (Iowa Ct. Appeals Jan. 28, 1998).[117]Iowa v. Speaks, 576 N.W.2d 629 (IowaCt. Appeals Jan. 28, 1998).[118] "Prosecution Begins Smith Case," Telegraph Herald,June 13, 1996 (quoting prosecutor Tom Miller, who said Dean went up to thevictim's car, then walked back to the Blazer before the attack began). See alsoIowa v. Privitt, 571 N.W.2d 484 (Iowa S. Ct., Nov. 26, 1997) (One ofDean's co-defendant's trials in which the court establishes that only two ofthe boys were involved in the fatal confrontation at the victim's car).[119] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with TomMiller, November 22, 2004.[120] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with HeatherTaylor, Iowa, October 27, 2004. However, Taylor told Human Rights Watch thatshe believed that her friend (Alexis V., who is featured elsewhere in thisreport) had "really grown up in prison . . . she's such a strong lady, such astrong girl. And she really carries herself well. She's doing real good inthere now." Ibid.[121] Institute on Crime, Justice and Corrections and the NationalCouncil on Crime and Delinquency, Juveniles in Adult Prisons and Jails: ANational Assessment (U.S. Department of Justice, Office of JusticePrograms, Bureau of Justice Assistance, October 2000), p. 63, available onlineat: http://www.ncjrs.org/pdffiles1/bja/182503-1.pdf,accessed on September 14, 2005 (Juveniles in Adult Prisons and Jails).[122] Human Rights Watch interview with Trent H., CumminsUnit, Grady, Arkansas, June 23, 2004 (pseudonym).[123] Human Rights Watch interview with Treatment Directorat Iowa Correctional Institute for Women, Mitchellville, Iowa, April 5, 2004.[124] Ibid.[125] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with DennisBurbank, Administrative Officer III, Colorado State Penitentiary, December 1,2004.[126] Human Rights Watch interview with Jackson W., EastArkansas Regional Unit, Brickeys, Arkansas, June 21, 2004 (pseudonym).[127] See,e.g., Colorado Department of Corrections, Administrative Regulation 600-02(stating at ¶ IV(A)(4) that membership in a "security threat group" is one offive factors that "may be considered in initiating placement in administrativesegregation").[128] Human Rights Watch interview with Ethan W., ColoradoState Penitentiary, Cañon City, Colorado, July 28, 2004 (pseudonym).[129] See, e.g., "Out of Sight: Supermaximum SecurityConfinement in the United States," A Human Rights Watch Report, vol. 12,no. 1(G), February 2000; "Red Onion State Prison: Supermaximum SecurityConfinement in Virginia," A Human Rights Watch Report, vol. 11, no.1(g), May 1999; Human Rights Watch, Cold Storage: Supermaximum SecurityConfinement in Indiana, 1997; Amnesty International "Conditions in H-Unit,Oklahoma State Penitentiary", May 1994; Amnesty International, "Rights ForAll", October 1998, chapter 4, p 73-78; Amnesty International, "Cruel andinhuman treatment in Virginia supermaximum security prisons," May 2001; AmnestyInternational, "Amnesty International condemns housing minors in Wisconsinsupermax prison", July 2001.[130] For adults, U.S. courts have questioned arbitraryplacement into isolation, the length of isolation time imposed, and conditionsin the isolation cell. See Juveniles in Adult Prisons and Jails, p. 25(citing Harris v. Maloughney, 827 F. Supp. 1488 (D. Mont. 1993); McCrayv. Burrell, 516 F.2d 357 (4th Cir. 1975); Lareau v. MacDougal,473 F.2d 974 (2d Cir. 1972)).[131] Human Rights Committee, General Comment 20, Article 7(Forty-fourth session, 1992), Compilation of General Comments and GeneralRecommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, U.N. Doc.HRI\GEN\1\Rev.1 at 30 (1994), para. 6.[132] European Committee for the Prevention of Torture andInhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT), "Second General Reporton the CPT's Activities," Strasbourg, France, April 1992, p. 15.[133]Human Rights Watch interview with Troy L., CumminsUnit, Grady, Arkansas, June 23, 2004 (pseudonym).[134] Ibid.[135] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Warren P., MarionCorrectional Institute, Lowell, Florida, March 2, 2004 (pseudonym) (on filewith Human Rights Watch).[136] "Psychology and the Limits to Prison Pain," p. 499 (citingCreasie Hairston, "Family Ties during Imprisonment: Important to Whom and forWhat?" Journal of Sociology and Social Welfare, vol. 18, (1991), p. 87).[137] "Psychology and the Limits to Prison Pain," p. 499(citing Judith Herman, "Complex PTSD: A Syndrome in Survivors of Prolonged andRepeated Trauma," Journal of Traumatic Stress, vol. 5 (1992), p. 377).[138] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Addison R., OaksCorrectional Facility, Eastlake, Michigan, March 20, 2004 (pseudonym) (on filewith Human Rights Watch).[139] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Jeffrey B., SomersetPrison, Somerset, Pennsylvania, March 10, 2004 (pseudonym) (on file with HumanRights Watch).[140] Letter to Human Rights Watch from John E., StateCorrectional Institution, Dallas, Pennsylvania, March 15, 2004 (pseudonym).[141] Colorado Department of Corrections, "OffenderVisiting Program," available online at: www.doc.state.co.us/visitors/visitors.htm,accessed on October 24, 2004.[142] Human Rights Watch interview with Ethan W., ColoradoState Penitentiary, Cañon City, Colorado, July 28, 2004 (pseudonym) (on filewith Human Rights Watch).[143] See, e.g., elsewhere in this report, Human RightsWatch interview with Luke J., Colorado State Penitentiary, Cañon City, Colorado, July 27, 2004 (pseudonym); and with Alexis V., Iowa Correctional Institute forWomen, Mitchellville, Iowa, April 2004 (pseudonym).[144] "Psychology and the Limits to Prison Pain," p. 499(citing R.J. Sapsford, "Life Sentence Prisoners: Psychological Changes DuringSentence," British Journal of  Criminology vol. 18, no. 128 (1978)).[145] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Brandon S, IoniaMaximum Facility, Ionia, Michigan, March 22, 2004 (pseudonym) (on file withHuman Rights Watch).[146] Lindsay M. Hayes, Prison Suicide: An Overview andGuide to Prevention (National Center on Institutions and Alternatives, June1995) available online at: http://www.nicic.org/pubs/1995/012475.pdf,accessed on September 14, 2005.[147] Human Rights Watch interview with Luke J., ColoradoState Penitentiary, Cañon City, Colorado, July 27, 2004 (pseudonym).[148] Human Rights Watch interview with Richard I., EastArkansas Regional Unit, Brickeys, Arkansas, June 21, 2004 (pseudonym).[149] Human Rights Watch interview with Ethan W., ColoradoState Penitentiary, Cañon City, Colorado, July 28, 2004 (pseudonym).[150]Juveniles in Adult Prisons and Jails, p. 43.[151] Ibid., p. 36 (emphasis in original).[152] Human Rights Watch interview with Richard I., EastArkansas Regional Unit, Brickeys, Arkansas, June 21, 2004 (pseudonym).[153] Ibid.[154] Human Rights Watch interview with Clifford S.,Maximum Security Unit, Tucker, Arkansas, June 24, 2004 (pseudonym).[155] Human Rights Watch interview with Scott J.,Centennial Correctional Facility, Cañon City, Colorado, June 27, 2004(pseudonym). Scott explained that he was jailed with adults for three or fourdays, after which he was transferred to a juvenile detention center in Colorado's Jefferson County.[156] American Correctional Association (ACA), PublicCorrectional Policy on Youthful Offenders Transferred to Adult CriminalJurisdiction, Delegate Assembly, Congress of Correction, Nashville,Tennessee, August 21, 1996 (unanimously ratified), available online at: http://www.aca.org/pastpresentfuture/winter_2004_policiespage1.asp,accessed on September 14, 2005.[157] See Juvenile Justice and Delinquency PreventionAct (JJDPA), 1974. While the ACA references the JJDPA's requirements in itsstandards, the JJDPA does not apply to youth in adult facilities who are beingprosecuted as adults in state court.[158] See Convention on the Rights of the Child, G.A. Res.44/25, U.N. Doc. A/RES/44/25, (entered into force September 2, 1990), Article37b, (stating "every child deprived of liberty shall be separated from adultsunless it is considered in the child's best interest not to do so."). Article13.4 of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration ofJuvenile Justice (the "Beijing Rules"), G.A. Res. 40/33, Annex, 40 U.N. GAORSupp. (No 53) at 207, U.N. Doc. A/40/53 (1985) and Article 26 of the UnitedNations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty (the"UN Rules"), G.A. Res. 45/113, Annex, 45 U.N. GAOR Supp. (no. 49A) at 205, U.N.Doc. A/45/49 (1990) (requiring separation of children from adults in distinctinstitutions or in separate parts of a single institution).[159] Human Rights Watch interview with Clifford S.,Maximum Security Unit, Tucker, Arkansas, June 22, 2004 (pseudonym).[160] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Stacey T., Chester, Pennsylvania, September 8, 2004 (pseudonym) (on file with Human Rights Watch).[161] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Warren P., MarionCorrectional Institute, Lowell, Florida, March 2, 2004 (pseudonym) (on filewith Human Rights Watch).[162] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Gerard C., Tucker, Arkansas, March 15, 2004 (pseudonym) (on file with Human Rights Watch).[163] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with LindaShephard, Programs Officer, Arkansas Department of Corrections, July 18, 2005.[164] See The Higher Education Act, Title VIII, Sec.D, "Grants to States for Workforce and Community Transition Training forIncarcerated Youth".[165] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Cleveland B., Springville,Alabama, March 29, 2004 (pseudonym) (on file with Human Rights Watch).[166] Human Rights Watch interview with Joe L., LimonCorrectional Facility, Limon, Colorado, May 28, 2004 (pseudonym).[167] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Darby B., IoniaMaximum Facility, Ionia, Michigan, March 1, 2004 (pseudonym) (on file withHuman Rights Watch).[168] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Holman C., Springville, Alabama, March 3, 2004 (pseudonym) (on file with Human Rights Watch).[169] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Cindy J., Wetumpka, Alabama, March 17, 2004 (pseudonym) (on file with Human Rights Watch).[170] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Angela B., McCloud, Oklahoma, August 13, 2004 (pseudonym) (on file with Human Rights Watch).[171] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with DinahTyler, spokeswoman, Arkansas Department of Corrections, October 2004; HumanRights Watch interview with treatment director at Iowa Correctional Institutefor Women, Mitchellville, Iowa, April 5, 2004; Human Rights Watch telephoneinterview with Susan McNaughton, press secretary, Pennsylvania Department ofCorrections, October 2004; Human Rights Watch telephone interview with MargotBach, public information officer, California Department of Corrections,November 3, 2004.[172] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Dinah Tyler, Arkansas Department of Corrections Public Information, October 2004.[173] Human Rights Watch interview with treatment directorat Iowa Correctional Institute for Women, Mitchellville, Iowa, April 2004.[174] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with SusanMcNaughton, Pennsylvania Department of Corrections Press Secretary, October2004.[175] Ibid.[176]Pennsylvania Department of Corrections, "Teaching Inmates to Work," March 2005,available online at: http://www.cor.state.pa.us/stats/lib/stats/ci.pdf,accessed on April 1, 2005.[177] "Amenability Determination," Southern ReceptionCenter and Clinic, December 17, 1991 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[178] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Darryl T.,California Correctional Institution, Tehachapi, California, March 20, 2004(pseudonym) (on file with Human Rights Watch).[179] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with MargotBach, Public Information Officer, California Department of Corrections,November 3, 2004.[180] U.N. Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprivedof their Liberty, G.A. Res. 45/113, annex, 45 U.N. GAPR Supp. (no. 49A) at 205,U.N. Doc. A/45/49, (1990), para. 12 (stating "children should be guaranteed thebenefit of meaningful activities and programs which would serve to promote andsustain their health and self-respect, to foster their sense of responsibilityand encourage those attitudes and skills that will assist them in developingtheir potential as members of society").[181] U.N.Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, Adopted August 30, 1955,by the First United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and theTreatment of Offenders, U.N. Doc. A/CONF/611, annex I, E.S.C. res. 663C, 24U.N. ESCOR Supp. (no. 1) at 11, U.N. Doc. E/3048 (1957), amended E.S.C. res.2076, 62 U.N. ESCOR Supp. (no. 1) at 35, U.N. Doc. E/5988 (1977), art. 77(1)and 78.[182] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Trey J., LimonCorrectional Facility, Limon, Colorado, March 1, 2004 (pseudonym) (on file withHuman Rights Watch). Human Rights Watch also interviewed Trey in person on May 28,2004 at Limon Correctional Facility, Limon, Colorado.[183] Ibid.[184] Statistics on sexual violence in U.S. prisons reveal a serious problem with all kinds of violence, especially since sexual violenceis so severely underreported. The U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics reportedthat there were 3.15 allegations of sexual violence per every 1,000 inmates in2004. See Allen J. Beck and Timothy A. Hughes, Sexual Violence Reported byCorrectional Authorities, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Office of JusticePrograms, July 2005, available online at: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov,accessed on August 1, 2005.[185] Martin Forst et al., "Youth in Prisons and TrainingSchools: Perceptions and Consequences of the Treatment-Custody Dichotomy," Juvenile& Family Court, vol. 4 (1989), p. 9. See also Jason Ziedenberg &Vincent Schiraldi, "The Risks Juveniles Face When They Are Incarcerated withAdults" (Justice Policy Institute, July 1997), available online at: http://www.cjcj.org/jpi/risks.html, accessedon April 15, 2005.[186] See ICCPR, art. 7; Convention on the Rights of theChild, art. 37.[187] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Michael S., KinrossCorrectional Facility, Kincheloe, Michigan, March 22, 2004 (pseudonym) (on filewith Human Rights Watch).[188] Human Rights Watch interview with Joe L., LimonCorrectional Facility, Limon, Colorado, May 28, 2004 (pseudonym).[189] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Javier M., ColoradoState Penitentiary, Cañon City, Colorado, March 8, 2004 (pseudonym) (on filewith Human Rights Watch).[190] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Gregory C., ColoradoState Penitentiary, Cañon City, Colorado, March 13, 2004 (pseudonym) (on filewith Human Rights Watch).[191] Human Rights Watch interview with Jackson W., EastArkansas Regional Unit, Brickeys, Arkansas, June 21, 2004 (pseudonym).[192] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Andrew H., Frackville,Pennsylvania, February 17, 2004 (pseudonym) (on file with Human Rights Watch).[193] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Patricia L.,Central California Women's Facility State Prison, Chowchilla, California, July14, 2004 (pseudonym) (on file with Human Rights Watch).[194] Human Rights Watch interview with Richard I., EastArkansas Regional Unit, Brickeys, Arkansas, June 21, 2004 (pseudonym).[195] Ibid.[196] See Amnesty International, "Not Part of My Sentence,Violations of the Human Rights of Women in Custody," March 1999; "Nowhere toHide: Retaliation Against Women in Michigan State Prisons," A Human RightsWatch Report, vol. 10 no. 2(G), September 1998; and Human Rights Watch, AllToo Familiar: Sexual Abuse of Women in U.S. State Prisons (New York: HumanRights Watch, 1996).[197] See Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment ofPrisoners, Rule 53 (female prisoners should be attended and supervised only byfemale officers; male staff such as doctors and teachers may provideprofessional services in female facilities, but should always be accompanied byfemale officers); Principles for the Protection of All Persons Under Any Formof Detention, Principle 5(2) (special measures which are designed solely toprotect the rights and special status of women are not considereddiscriminatory).[198] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Carolyn K., CentralCalifornia Women's Facility State Prison, Chowchilla, California, April 18,2004 (pseudonym) (on file with Human Rights Watch).[199] Human Rights Watch interview with Cheryl J.,McPherson Unit, Newport, Arkansas, June 24, 2004 (pseudonym).[200] Ibid.[201] Ibid.[202] Human Rights Watch interview with Charles L., Varner Unit, Arkansas, June 22, 2004 (pseudonym).[203]Human Rights Watch, No Escape: Male Rape in U.S. Prisons, (New York: Human Rights Watch, April 2001), p. 70.[204] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Brian B., Albion, Pennsylvania, August 28, 2004 (pseudonym) (on file with Human Rights Watch).[205] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Warren P., MarionCorrection Institute, Lowell, Florida, March 2, 2004 (pseudonym) (on file withHuman Rights Watch).[206] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Tyler Y., Sterling, Colorado, March 16, 2004 (pseudonym) (on file with Human Rights Watch).[207] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Eric R., SaginawCorrectional Facility, Freeland, Michigan, March 18, 2004 (pseudonym) (on filewith Human Rights Watch).[208] Human Rights Watch interview with Luke J., ColoradoState Penitentiary, Cañon City, Colorado, July 27, 2004 (pseudonym).[209] Human Rights Watch interview with Trent H., CumminsUnit, Grady, Arkansas, June 22, 2004 (pseudonym).[210] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Addison R., OaksCorrectional Facility, East Lake, Michigan, March 20, 2004 (pseudonym) (on filewith Human Rights Watch).[211] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Jeffrey W., David Wade Correctional Center, Homer, Louisiana, April 26, 2004 (pseudonym) (on file withHuman Rights Watch).[212] See, e.g., ACA, Protective Custody (1982);Lockwood, Prison Sexual Violence (1980); Human Rights Watch, NoEscape (2001), p. 136 (cataloging a number of empirical studies documentingthe incidence and nature of sexual violence in prison).[213] Human Rights Watch, No Escape (2001), p. 143.[214] Ibid., p. 144-6.[215] See, e.g., Michele D. Buisch, "Budget Cuts PresentChallenge to Many State Correctional Agencies," Corrections Today,December 2003; Erin M. Samolis, "Divergent Clockwork Oranges: The JuvenileJustice Systems of the United States and Great Britain," University ofChicago Law School Roundtable, vol. 8 (2001), p. 189; Barry C. Feld,"Juvenile and Criminal Justice Systems' Responses to Youth Violence," Crimeand Justice, vol. 24, (1998), p. 189; "Psychology and the Limits to PrisonPain," p.499.[216] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Cindy J., Wetumpka, Alabama, March 18, 2004 (pseudonym) (on file with Human Rights Watch).[217] Human Rights Watch interview with Samantha L, IowaCorrectional Institute for Women, Mitchellville, Iowa, April 2004 (pseudonym).[218] Human Rights Watch interview with Charles L, Varner Unit, Arkansas, June 22, 2004 (pseudonym).[219] Human Rights Watch interview with Nelson H., BuenaVista Correctional Facility, Buena Vista, Colorado, July 28, 2004 (pseudonym).[220] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Troy L., Grady,Arkansas, undated, received July 2004 (pseudonym) (on file with Human RightsWatch).[221] Human Rights Watch interview with Thomas M.[222] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Bradley W., Norfolk, Massachusetts, September 12, 2004 (pseudonym) (on file with Human Rights Watch).[223]All details of Timothy's childhood abuse were obtainedin a May 2005 Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Marty Marsh,Timothy's psychologist in the Iowa Department of Corrections. Human RightsWatch also interviewed Timothy at Anamosa State Penitentiary, Anamosa, Iowa, on April 6, 2004 (pseudonym). In addition, we obtained Timothy's permission topublish his story, per a letter dated August 29, 2005.[224] Ibid.[225] Ibid.[226] Ibid.[227] U.S. Constitution, Eighth Amendment.[228] See, e.g. Solem v. Helm, 463 U.S. 277 (1983).But see Ewing v. California, 538 U.S. 11 (2003) (rejecting Ewing's claimthat his sentence was grossly disproportionate under the Eighth Amendment andreasoning that California's practice of enhancing sentences under its "threestrikes" law served the state's legitimate goal of deterring and incapacitatingrepeat offenders).[229]Roper v. Simmons, 125 S.Ct. 1183, 1195 (2005).[230] Ibid.[231] Ibid.[232]Roper v. Simmons, 125 S.Ct. 1183, 1196 (2005).[233]Thompsonv. Oklahoma, 487 U.S. 815, 835 (1988).[234] See, e.g., Lorillard Tobacco Co. v. Reilly,533 U.S. 525, 587 (2001) (concluding that children "lack the judgment to makean intelligent decision about whether to smoke") (Kennedy, J., concurring,Souter, J., concurring in part, Stevens, J., concurring in part); Parham v.J.R., 442 U.S. 584 (1979) (concluding that children have no due processrights to notice and a judicial hearing before being committed by their parentsto a mental institution, and explaining that "parents possess what a childlacks in maturity, experience, and capacity for judgment required for making life'sdifficult decisions . . . Most children, even in adolescence, simply are notable to make sound judgments concerning many decisions, including their needfor medical care or treatment." A plurality of the Court cited this languageapprovingly in Troxel v. Granville, 530 U.S. 57, 68 (2000) (pluralityopinion), a case involving visitation rights of grandparents); Belotti v.Baird 443 U.S. 622, 634 (1979) (plurality opinion) (holding that judges mayauthorize abortions for minors without parental consent,since constitutionalrights of children and adults are unequal due to the "peculiar vulnerability ofchildren," and "their inability to make critical decisions in an informed,mature manner..."); Planned Parenthood of Central Missouri v. Danforth,428 U.S. 52, 95 (1976) (Stevens, J., partially concurring and partiallydissenting) (recognizing that "[b]ecause he may not foresee the consequences ofhis decision, a minor may not make an enforceable bargain. He may not lawfullywork or travel where he pleases, or even attend exhibitions of constitutionallyprotected adult motion pictures. Persons below a certain age may not marrywithout parental consent."); Ginsberg v. New York, 390 U.S. 29 (1968)(refusing to strike down a New York statute prohibiting the sale of obscenepublications to those under age seventeen, because "at least in some preciselydelineated areas, a child ... is not possessed of that full capacity forindividual choice which is the presupposition of First Amendment guarantees")(Stewart, J., concurring).[235]Naovarathv. State, 779 P2d 944, 948 (Nev. S.Ct. 1989).[236]Ibid.[237]Workmanv. Kentucky, 429 S.W.2d 374 (Ky. S. Ct. 1968).[238] The Indiana Supreme Court opinion included a footnotestating: "Indiana law provides that a child under the age of sixteen whocommits a murder cannot be sentenced to death or life imprisonment withoutparole." Ind. Code § 35-50-2-3(b) (1998).[239]Trowbrigde v. State, 717 N.E.2d 138, 150 (Ind. 1999) (finding consideration of age consistent with an Indiana statute prohibitinglife in prison without parole sentences for youth under sixteen. SeeInd. Code § 35-50-2-3(b) (2004)).[240] See Ind. Code § 2-13-3 (2004).[241]People v. Miller, 781 N.E.2d 300, 303 (Ill. 2002).[242] Ibid.[243] See 730 ILCS § 5/3-6-3 (1998).[244] John L. Patterson, "Alternative Penalty," Kansas City Star, February 19, 2004, at B1.[245] Jim Hughes, "Parole Fight For Juveniles ChangesCourse," Denver Post, March 4, 2005.[246] See Florida Senate Bill 446 and House Resolution 689.See generally Beth Reinhard, "Parole Denied for Kids Who Get Life," MiamiHerald, April 1, 2004, p. 1A; Mark Hollis, "Panel Opposes SentencingRevisions," South FloridaSun-Sentinel,April 1, 2004,p. 5B.[247]Harris v. Wright, 93 F.3d 581, 585 (9th Cir.1996).[248]Harris v. Wright, 93 F.3d 581, 584-5 (9th Cir. 1996).[249]Rice v. Cooper, 148 F.3d 747, 752 (7th Cir.1998).[250] See e.g.,State v. Pilcher, 655 So. 2d 636, 644 (La. Ct. App. 1995) (holding lifesentence without possibility of parole for fifteen-year-old murderer was not unconstitutionalunder the Eighth Amendment); Swinford v. State, 653 So. 2d 912, 918(Miss. 1995) (upholding trial court's sentence of life imprisonment forfourteen-year-old who aided and abetted murder); State v. Garcia, 1997N.D. 60, 561 (ND 1997) (holding a life sentence without possibility of parolefor a sixteen-year-old did not violate Eighth Amendment) cert. denied, 118 S.Ct. 193 (1997); State v. Massey, 60 Wash. App. 131 (Wash Ct App 1990)(finding no cause to create a distinction between a thirteen-year-old juvenileand an adult who are sentenced to life imprisonment without parole for firstdegree aggravated murder) cert. denied by Massey v. Washington, 499 U.S.960 (1991); State v. Foley, 456 So. 2d 979, 984 (La. 1984) (affirminglife sentence without parole of fifteen-year-old convicted of rape againstassertion it was cruel and unusual punishment); White v. State, 374 So.2d 843, 847 (Miss. 1979) (upholding a sixteen-year-old's sentence of lifeimprisonment without parole for armed robbery against assertion that it wascruel and unusual punishment); People v. Fernandez, 883 P.2d 491, 495(Colo. Ct. App., 1994).[251] The sentence is mandated under N.C. Gen. Stat. §15A-2002.[252]State v. Green, 502 S.E.2d 819. 832 (N.C.1998) (internal quotations omitted).[253]State v. Green, 502 S.E.2d 819. 832 (N.C.1998).[254] S.C. Code Ann. § 17-25-45(C)(1) (2004).[255]State v. Standard, 569 S.E.2d 325, 329 (2002),cert. denied, 537 U.S. 1195 (2003).[256]Sentencing order of Judge Dennis Dernback, October 23, 2001 (on file with HumanRights Watch) (the statute referenced requires a life without parole sentencefor an individual found guilty of first degree murder of more than one victimirrespective of the defendant's age at the time of the offense, including undera theory of accountability, ILCS 5/5-8-1).[257] Honorable David Scott DeWitt (deceased), excerpt fromsentencing transcript in People v. Lashuay, 75th CircuitCourt, Midland County, Michigan, June 25, 1984 (on file with Human RightsWatch).[258]Naovarath v. State, 779 P.2d 944, 947 (Nev. 1989).[259] Michigan state court judge Eugene Arthur Moore, quotedin Marc Mauer, Ryan S. King, and Malcolm C. Young, The Meaning of 'Life:'Long Prison Sentences in Context, (The Sentencing Project, 2004), p. 18,available online at: www.sentencingproject.org,accessed on July 22, 2005.[260] Paul Pinkham, "Court upholds life in prison forteenager," Florida Times-Union, February 7, 2002, p. B-1.[261] Ibid.[262] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with PaulRinaldo, New York, July 15, 2005.[263] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Jose A., UnitedStates Penitentiary Allenwood, White Deer, Pennsylvania, March 9, 2004(pseudonym) (on file with Human Rights Watch).[264] See U.S. v. Rivera, Case No. 00-1831(L)/ 00-1832, 2d Circuit Ct. of Appeals, March 12, 2003; "Four gang members getlife in Yonkers killing," Associated Press, December 14, 2000; Brief forDefendant-Appellant, 2002 WL 32145164 (2d Cir 2003).[265] Brief for Defendant-Appellant, 2002 WL 32145164 (2dCir 2003) (citing to trial record, A-435, p. 1166-1171).[266] See "Man sentenced to 50 years in prison incompliance with plea deal," Associated Press, April 26, 2000.[267] Brief for Defendant-Appellant, 2002 WL 32145164 (2dCir 2003) (citing to trial record, A-742, quoting Southern District of New YorkJudge Colleen McMahon).[268] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with PaulRinaldo, New York, July 15, 2005.[269] Margaret K. Rosenheim, Franklin E. Zimring, David S.Tanenhaus, and Bernardine Dohrn, Eds., A Century of Juvenile Justice, (Chicago:University of Chicago, 2001).[270] General Assembly resolution 1386 (XIV), November 20,1959. Similarly, the American Convention on Human Rights, Series no. 36, p. 1,Organization of American States, Official Record, OEA/Ser.L/V/II.23, signed bythe OAS on November 22, 1969, entered into force July 18, 1978, states inArticle 19 "Every minor child has the right to the measures of protectionrequired by his condition as a minor on the part of his family, society, andthe state."[271] The Human Rights Committee has interpreted theICCPR's provisions on child offenders to apply to all persons under the age ofeighteen. Human Rights Committee, General Comment no. 1, Forty-fourth Session(1992), para. 13, in Compilation of General Comments and GeneralRecommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, HRI/GEN/1/Rev.7, p.155.[272] The United States co-sponsored this provisiontogether with Great Britain and India, and it was adopted unanimously. See MarcBossuyt, Guide to the "Travaux Préparatoires"of the InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political Rights (1987), p. 307.[273] The ICCPR contains three additional provisionsrelated to juvenile justice. Article 6(5) prohibits imposing the death penaltyon persons who committed crimes while under the age of eighteen. Article 10(2),subparagraph b, mandates the separation of accused children from adults and theswift adjudication of their cases. Article 14(1) provides an exception forcases involving children to the general requirement that judgments be madepublic.[274] Manfred Nowak, U.N. Covenant on Civil andPolitical Rights:  CCPR Commentary, (1993), p. 266.[275] Ibid., p. 265.[276] ICCPR, art. 7, Convention against Torture, art. 16.[277] In article 37 of the CRC, the prohibition of bothcapital punishment and life imprisonment without possibility of release areincluded in the sub-section banning cruel, inhuman or degrading punishments.[278] See Human Rights Committee, General Comment 9,Article 10 (Sixteenth session, 1982).[279]Naovarath v. State, 105 Nev. 525, 530-531(Nev. S. Ct. 1989).[280] ICCPR, art. 10(1).[281] "Report on the 1960 Seminar on the Role ofSubstantive Criminal Law in the Protection of Human Rights and the Purpose andLegitimate Limits of Penal Sanctions," organized by the United Nations in Tokyo, Japan, 1960.[282] United Nations Treaty Collection, InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political Rights, United States of America: Reservations,para. 5 (emphasis added).[283] United States, Senate Committee on ForeignRelations Report on the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,31 I.L.M. 645, 651 (1992) ("Although current domestic practice is generally incompliance with these provisions, there are instances in which juveniles arenot separated from adults, for example because of the juvenile's criminalhistory or the nature of the offense. In addition, the military justice systemin the United States does not guarantee special treatment for those under18.").[284] CRC, art. 37(a), G.A. Res. 44/25, U.N. GAOR, 44thSess., Supp. no. 49, at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/736 (1989) (entered into forceSept. 2, 1990), reprinted in 28 I.L.M. 1448, 1470 (emphasis added).[285] The juvenile death penalty is now prohibited in the United States. Roper v. Simmons, 125 S.Ct. 1183, 1199 (2005) (finding the juveniledeath penalty unconstitutional and citing to international standards).[286] CRC, art. 37(a) (emphasis added).[287] CRC, art. 37(b).[288] CRC, art. 40.1.[289] CRC, art. 40.4.[290] CRC, art. 37(d).[291] United Nations Treaty Collection Database, availableonline at: http://untreaty.un.org/, accessed on July 16,2004. Malaysia registered a reservation to art. 37(a) as follows: "TheGovernment of Malaysia . . . declares that the said provisions shall beapplicable only if they are in conformity with the Constitution, national lawsand national policies of the Government of Malaysia." Ibid. The governmentof Myanmar made a broad objection to Article 37, which it later withdrew afterother states protested. Ibid. The government of Singapore has maintained adeclaration regarding Article 37. However, the declaration does not address theprohibition on life imprisonment without parole. Singapore's declaration reads:"The Republic of Singapore considers that articles 19 and 37 of the Conventiondo not prohibit-(a) the application of any prevailing measures prescribed bylaw for maintaining law and order in the Republic of Singapore; (b) measuresand restrictions which are prescribed by law and which are necessary in theinterests of national security, public safety, public order, the protection ofpublic health or the protection of the rights and freedom of others; or (c) thejudicious application of corporal punishment in the best interest of thechild." A number of states have interpreted the declaration as a reservationand objected to it as contrary to the object and purpose of the Convention. SeeUN Treaty Collection Database (Germany: Sept. 4, 1996: Belgium: Sept. 26, 1996;Italy: Oct. 4, 1996; The Netherlands: Nov. 6, 1996; Norway: Nov. 29, 1996;Finland: Nov. 25, 1996; Portugal: Dec. 3, 1996; Sweden: Aug. 1997). In the Roperdecision, the United States Supreme Court took special note of the fact that nostate party to the CRC made a reservation to the prohibition against thejuvenile death penalty contained in Article 37. Roper v. Simmons, 125S.Ct. 1183, 1199 (2005).[292] According to the United Nations' agency for children,UNICEF, Somalia is currently unable to ratify the CRC because it lacks arecognized government. See UNICEF, "Frequently Asked Questions," availableonline at: http://www.unicef.org/crc/faq.htm#009,accessed on July 19, 2004.[293] The United States signed the CRC on February 16, 1995,and Somalia signed on May 2, 2002.[294] See Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, art. 18, concluded May 23, 1969, 1155 U.N.T.S.331 (entered into force Jan. 27, 1980). Although the United States has signedbut not ratified the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, it regards thisconvention as "the authoritative guide to current treaty law andpractice." S. Exec. Doc. L., 92d Cong., 1st sess. (1971), p. 1; TheodorMeron, "The Meaning and Reach of the International Convention on theElimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination," American Journal ofInternational Law, vol. 79 (1985), p.283. The U.S. government has alsoaccepted that it is bound by customary international law not to defeat atreaty's object and purpose. See e.g., "Albright Says U.S. Bound by Nuke Pact;Sends Letters to Nations Despite Senate Vote," Washington Times,(November 2, 1999), p. A1 (describing the Clinton administration's acceptanceof obligations under the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty despite the Senate'sfailure to ratify).[295] U.S. Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia, in hisdissent in the Roper case, implied that adherence to the CRC'sprohibition on sentencing youth to life without parole would be necessary ifthe United States is "truly going to get in line with the internationalcommunity." See Roper v. Simmons, 125 S.Ct. 1183, 1226 (2005) (Scalia,J. dissenting).[296] "Remarks by Ambassador Madeline K. Albright, UnitedStates Permanent Representative to the United Nations on the Occasion of theSigning of the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child," U.S. Press Release,(February 16, 1995).[297] "Statement by Ambassador Betty King, United StatesRepresentative on the Economic and Social Council, to the Plenary of the 54thSession of the General Assembly on the Tenth Anniversary of the Convention onthe Rights of the Child," November 11, 1999, available online at: http://www.un.int/usa/99_112.htm, accessed onJuly 22, 2005.[298] Human Rights Watch interview with Troy L., CumminsUnit, Grady, Arkansas, June 23, 2004 (pseudonym) (unless otherwise noted, allstatements attributed to Troy L. in this case study were obtained during thisinterview).[299]McClure v. Arkansas, 942 S.W.2d 243,(Arkansas, April 7, 1997).[300] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Troy L., undated,received July 2004 (pseudonym) (on file with Human Rights Watch).[301] Ibid.[302] Elizabeth Mcfarland, "High Court Affirms; MurderThought-Out," Arkansas Democrat-Gazette, February 27, 1998.[303] Ibid.[304] Letter to Human Rights Watch from Troy L., undated,received July 2004 (pseudonym) (on file with Human Rights Watch).[305] U.S. House Bill, H.R. 1279, which increased thenumber of crimes subject to mandatory minimum sentences, including life withoutparole, and criminalized several non-violent drug offenses, was passed on May 11,2005. As of this writing, the U.S. Senate was considering its own, lesspunitive version of this bill, S. 155.[306] U.S. Constitution, Article VI, clause 2.[307]ThePaquete-Habana, 175 U.S. 677, 700 (1900). See also Murray v. TheCharming Betsy, 6 U.S. (2 Cranch) 64, 118 (1804) (statutes "can neverbe construed to violate . . . rights . . . further than is warranted by the lawof nations"); Harold Honju Koh, "Is International Law Really State Law?," HarvardLaw Review, vol. 111(1998), p. 1824 (noting that customary internationallaw is federal common law and preempts inconsistent state practices).[308] See Asakura v. City of Seattle, 265 U.S. 332(1924) (holding that a treaty made under the authority of the United Statesstands on the same footing of supremacy as do the provisions of the Constitutionand laws of the United States and "operate[s] of itself without the aid of anylegislation, state or national; and it will be applied and given authoritativeeffect by the courts"). See also Maiorano v. Baltimore & Ohio R. R. Co.,213 U. S. 268, 272, (1888); Baldwin v. Franks, 120 U.S. 678, (1887); HeadMoney Cases, 112 U. S. 580, 598 (1884); Chew Heong v. United States,112 U. S. 536, 540 (1884); Foster v. Neilson, 2 Pet. 253, 314 (1829).[309] Jordan J. Paust, "Self-Executing Treaties," AmericanJournal of International Law, vol. 82 (1988), p. 760 (explaining that whenJohn Jay was Secretary of Foreign Affairs of the Confederation in 1787, hereported to Congress that a treaty "made, ratified and published byCongress, ... immediately [became] binding on the whole nation, and superaddedto the laws of the land"). See also Asakura v. City of Seattle 265 U.S.332, 341 (1924) ("The rule of equality established by [the treaty] cannot berendered nugatory in any part of the United States by municipal ordinances orstate laws. It stands on the same footing of supremacy as do the provisions ofthe Constitution and laws of the United States. It operates of itself withoutthe aid of any legislation, state or national; and it will be applied and givenauthoritative effect by the courts."). Article 50 of the ICCPR provides thatthe provisions of the Covenant "shall exten[d] to all parts of federal Stateswithout any limitations or exceptions." The Human Rights Committee, in itsGeneral Comment 31 on the Nature of the General Legal Obligation on StatesParties to the Covenant, states:The obligations of theCovenant in general and article 2 in particular are binding on every StateParty as a whole. All branches of government (executive, legislative andjudicial), and other public or governmental authorities, at whateverlevel-national, regional or local-are in a position to engage theresponsibility of the State Party. The executive branch that usually representsthe State Party internationally, including before the Committee, may not pointto the fact that an action incompatible with the provisions of the Covenant wascarried out by another branch of government as a means of seeking to relievethe State Party from responsibility for the action and consequentincompatibility. This understanding flows directly from the principle containedin article 27 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, according towhich a State Party "may not invoke the provisions of its internal law as justificationfor its failure to perform a treaty." . . . In this respect, the Committeereminds States Parties with a federal structure of the terms of article 50,according to which the Covenant's provisions "shall extend to all parts offederal states without any limitations or exceptions." Human RightsCommittee, General Comment 31, Nature of the General Legal Obligation on StatesParties to the Covenant, U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.13 (2004), para. 4(emphasis added).[310] See Roper v. Simmons, 125 S.Ct. 1183, 1215(2005) ("Yet at least from the time of the Court's decision in Trop[1958], the Court has referred to the laws of other countries and tointernational authorities as instructive for its interpretation of the EighthAmendment's prohibition of "cruel and unusual punishments."); Atkinsv. Virginia, 536 U.S. 304, 317 (2002); Trop v. Dulles, 356 U.S. 86,102-103 (1958) (plurality opinion) (stating "the civilized nations of the worldare in virtual unanimity" with the court's assessment that the punishment ofstatelessness is contrary to evolving standards of decency).[311] For example, Egypt's 1996 Children's Code, which wasintended to bring national legislation in line with the CRC, includes aprohibition on life imprisonment for juveniles. See Government of Egypt,Children's Code, Art. 111, 112 (1996). Egypt ratified the CRC on Feb. 5, 1990. Mali's 2002 Child Protection Ordinance does not allow sentences above eighteen years to beimposed on persons who commit crimes while under the age of eighteen. SeeOrdonnance N°02-062/P-RM Du 05 Juin 2002 portant code de protection del'enfant,available online at: http://www.justicemali.org/doc107.htm,accessed on July 22, 2005. Mali ratified the CRC on Sep. 20, 1990. Cape Verde's new Constitution of 1992 prohibits life imprisonment or imprisonment of anindefinite duration for anyone. See Constitution of Cape Verde, Art. 31 (1992)("There shall not be, in any circumstances, a penalty depriving of liberty, orsecurity measure of a permanent character or with an unlimited or indefiniteduration."), available online at: http://confinder.richmond.edu/CapeVerde.htm,accessed on July 22, 2005. The Constitution was revised again in 1999, but thislanguage was maintained. Constitution of Cape Verde, Art. 32 (1992), availableonline at: http://www.parlamento.cv/constituicao/const00.htm, accessed on July 22, 2005. Cape Verde acceded to theCRC on June 4, 1992. Sao Tome and Principe's 1990 Constitution prohibits lifeimprisonment of minors. See U.N. Committee on the Rights of the Child, Considerationof Reports Submitted by States Parties Under Article 44 of the Convention: SaoTome and Principe, CRC/C/8/Add.43, para. 63, 369 (March 4, 2003). Sao Tome and Principe acceded to the CRC on May 14, 1991. Eritrea's Transitional Penal Codeprohibits life imprisonment of juveniles. See U.N. Committee on theRights of the Child, Consideration of Reports Submitted by States PartiesUnder Article 44 of the Convention: Eritrea, CRC/C/41/Add.12, para. 74(December 23, 2002). Eritrea ratified the CRC on Aug. 3, 1994. In 2003, Morocco increased the age of majority from sixteen to eighteen in the Penal Code andCriminal Procedure Code, which ensured that the pre-existing prohibition onlife sentences for minors covered all persons who committed crimes while underthe age of eighteen. See U.N. Committee on the Rights of the Child, Considerationof Reports Submitted by States Parties Under Article 44 of the Convention:Morocco, CRC/C/93/Add.3, para. 234-35 (February 12, 2003) (indicating thatsuch revisions were currently pending); U.N. Committee on the Rights of theChild, Summary Record of the 882nd Meeting, CRC/C/SR.882,para. 58 (July 16, 2003); U.N. Committee on the Rights of the Child, ConcludingObservations:  Morocco, CRC/C/15/Add.211, para 3, 72 (July 10, 2003)(confirming that the revisions referred in the text had been passed into law). Morocco ratified the CRC on June 21, 1993. Tunisia adopted act no. 95-93 of November 9,1995, which amended the Criminal Code to automatically reduce life sentences toten years for persons under the age of eighteen. See U.N. Committee on theRights of the Child, Consideration of Reports Submitted by States PartiesUnder Article 44 of the Convention: Tunisia, CRC/C/83/Add.1, para. 25 (Oct.30, 2001). This became Article 43 of the Criminal Code. Ibid.[312] Human Rights Watch researched this question using thefollowing methodology: We examined the reports of 166 countries to the U.N.Committee on the Rights of the Child under Article 37 of that treaty (Article37 prohibits sentencing child offenders to life without parole). Unfortunately,53 countries failed to report to the Committee on their laws or practices underArticle 37. Therefore, we used a variety of additional methods to obtain adefinitive answer. These included inquiries with: the UNICEF Child ProtectionOfficer in the country concerned, criminal defense attorneys, judges, criminaljustice non-governmental organizations, and the press, as well as a review ofarticles covering recent sentencing decisions.[313] These countries and the number of youth offendersexecuted are: Iran (8), Saudi Arabia (1), Nigeria (1), the Democratic Republicof Congo ("DRC") (1), Yemen (1), Pakistan (3), China (1), and the United States (19). See Amnesty International, Children and the Death Penalty,Executions Worldwide Since 1990, AI Index: ACT 50/007/2002, 25 Sept. 2002,p.14; updated to June 6, 2004 by International Justice Project, USJuvenileExecutions Since 1976, March 2004, available online at: http://www.internationaljusticeproject.org/juvStats.cfm,accessed on August 1, 2005.[314] The original fifteen members of the EU are: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom.[315] These countries are Algeria, Angola, Benin, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, Cote d'Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, and Zimbabwe.[316] These countries are Comoros, Congo (Brazzaville),Ethiopia, Ghana, Madagascar, and Senegal. In all of these countries, lifeimprisonment without possibility of release is prohibited for persons under theage of sixteen. In each of these countries, we were unable to determine whetherthe sentence exists for individuals above the age of sixteen.[317] These countries are: Malawi, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone.[318] E-mail correspondence to Human Rights Watch fromErasmina Masawe, Volunteer Attorney, Legal and Human Rights Centre, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, July 21, 2004 and July 30, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[319] For the remaining nine countries out of the 154researched, we were unable to obtain the necessary sources to determine whetheror not the sentence exists in law, and if it does, whether or not it isimposed.[320]South Africa State Party report to the CRC, CRC/C/51/Add.2, May, 22, 1999at 514 (reporting four child offenders serving the sentence). In April 2005,the governmental delegation from South Africa to the Commission on Human Rightsconfirmed in informal meetings with members of the organization Human RightsAdvocates that these four youth offenders were in fact serving life without parolesentences. See e-mail correspondence to Human Rights Watch from Human RightsAdvocates, Berkeley, California, September 7, 2005 (one file with Human RightsWatch). However, as part of the post-apartheid overhaul of the judicial system,juvenile justice procedures are under review, and a Child Justice Bill iscurrently under discussion in parliament. In line with the CRC, the Bill wouldoutlaw life imprisonment for child offenders (see Article 72, available onlineat: http://www.pmg.org.za/bills/020808childjusticebill.htm,accessed on September 15, 2005.). Moreover, in November 2004, in Brandt v S(case 513/03, Supreme Court of Appeal) the South African Supreme Court heldthat minimum sentencing legislation should not apply to juveniles convicted ofserious crimes.[321] See e-mail correspondence to Human Rights Watch fromErasmina Masawe, Volunteer Attorney, Legal and Human Rights Centre, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania (July 21, 2004 and July 30, 2004).[322] See Israel State Party report to theCRC, CRC/C/8/Add.44, 27 February 2002, para. 1372 (stating that lifeimprisonment "has been imposed on three 17-year-olds who stabbed a buspassenger to death as part of the 'initiation rite' of a terrorist organization;and on a youth age 17 and 10 months who strangled his employer to death aftershe commented on his work and delayed payment of his salary for two days").Since February 2002, Human Rights Watch has learned of three additional youthoffenders who were all below age eighteen at the time of their offenses andhave been sentenced to life: Shadi Ghawadreh, Youssef Qandil, and AnasMussallmeh. See email to Human Rights Watch from Research Coordinator,Palestinian Section, Defense for Children International, September 10, 2005 (onfile with Human Rights Watch) (E-mail from Research Coordinator, Defense forChildren International). According to Israeli law, normally individualssentenced to life would be eligible for a sentence commutation to thirty yearsupon a recommendation from the Ministry of Justice. See Huk Shihror Al TnaiMimasar, Hatashsa 2001, Article 29. However, youth offenders sentenced bymilitary courts under the Israeli 1945 Emergency Regulations to lifesentences for political and security crimes do not enjoy this privilege. See HukShihror Al Tnai Mimasar, Hatashsa 2001, Article 31. We have been unable toascertain how many of the seven youth offenders sentenced to life in Israel are political or security prisoners-that is, those who would not be eligible for thethirty year sentence commutation. E-mail from Research Coordinator, Defense forChildren International. See also Israel State Party report tothe CRC, CRC/C/8/Add.44 para. 1372 (noting that no absolute prohibition onlife sentences for youth exists in Israel, and the Supreme Court has thediscretion to review each case on the merits and may impose a life sentence ona youth offender, which, in the views of one Israeli Supreme Court Justice,raises questions on the prohibition on life without parole sentences containedin the Convention on the Rights of the Child).[323] See Burkina Faso State Party reportto the CRC, CRC/C/65/Add.18, February 13, 2002 at 406, 445. Under Cuban law, an individual above age sixteen may be sentenced to "privacionperpetua" (a life without parole sentence); however, under the CubanCodigo Penal, children age seventeen may have their sentences reduced byone-half. Because this provision is discretionary, it appears to be technicallypossible for a youth above sixteen to receive the sentence. See Codigo Penal deCuba, Art. 17.1 ("En el caso de personas de más de 16 años de edad y menos de18, los límites mínimos y máximos de las sanciones pueden ser reducidos hastala mitad, y con respecto a los de 18 a 20, hasta en un tercio.") ("In the caseof persons older than sixteen years of age and younger than eighteen, theminimum and maximum punishments may be reduced by half, and with respect tothose between eighteen and twenty, by one third.") (translated by Human RightsWatch).[324] See Hussain and Prem Singh v. United Kingdom,22 EHRR 1 (1996) (holding that "for the duration of Her Majesty's Pleasure" didnot authorize wholly punitive life-long detention, because it invoked theprotection of Articles 3 and 5(4) of the European Convention of Human Rights,which required changes in the character, personality and mental state of theyoung offender to be considered after a term of years during mandatory andrepeated parole reviews.).[325] Commission on Human Rights, Human Rights in theAdministration of Justice, in particular juvenile justice, E.CN.4/2004/L.66April 15, 2004, para. 11.[326] In the face of this global concurrence, the U.S. government cannot claim that it is free of its customary law obligations by virtue ofbeing a persistent objector. A persistent objector is a state that hasconsistently and expressly protested the rule during the rule's inception anddevelopment and, consequently, can claim the right not to be bound by the rule.John Currie, Public International Law, (2001), p.176; Hugh Thirlway,"The Sources of International Law", in International Law, Malcolm Evans,ed. (2003), p.117. One commentator notes: "The state must, from the rule'sinception, consistently maintain its objection without exception. Even a singlelapse will be fatal to the state's claim of persistent objector status." JohnCurrie, Public International Law (2001) p.164. Once a rule has becomeestablished as customary international law, a persistent objector might not beable to maintain the ability to opt out. Mark Villiger, CustomaryInternational Law and Treaties (1997), p. 35.[327]The Paquete Habana, 175 U.S. 677, 699 (1900).[328] The International Court of Justice (ICJ) hasdescribed the opinio juris requirement as follows: "Not only must theacts concerned amount to a settled practice, but they must also be such, or becarried out in such a way, as to be evidence of a belief that this practice isrendered obligatory by the existence of a rule of law requiring it." InternationalCourt of Justice, Judgment, North Sea Continental Shelf, para. 77 (Feb.20, 1969).[329] International Court of Justice, Judgment, NorthSea Continental Shelf, paras. 73-4 (Feb. 20, 1969) (finding that "althoughthe passage of only a short period of time is not necessarily, or of itself, abar to the formation of a new rule of customary international law on the basisof what was originally a purely conventional rule, an indispensable requirementwould be that within the period in question, short though it might be, State practice,including that of States whose interests are specially affected, should havebeen both extensive and virtually uniform in the sense of the provisioninvoked; and should moreover have occurred in such a way as to show a generalrecognition that a rule of law or legal obligation is involved.").[330] Others have concluded that the prohibition onjuvenile life without parole sentences is a rule of customary internationallaw. See Human Rights Advocates, Submission to the Sixty-First Session of theCommission on Human Rights, The Death Penalty and Life Imprisonment withoutthe Possibility of Release for Youth Offenders who were Under the Age of 18 atthe time of the Offense, Spring 2005, available online at: http://www.humanrightsadvocates.org/images/Juvenile%20Sentences.doc,accessed on August 3, 2005. Several international treaty bodies reiterate theprohibition in their general comments and annual resolutions on a regularbasis. See, e.g., Commission on Human Rights, Human Rights in theAdministration of Justice, in particular juvenile justice, 2004/43; Reporton the Twenty-Fifth session of the Committee on the rights of the Child,September / October 2000, CRC/C/100, p. 130; European Union, Memorandum onthe Death Penalty, available online at: http://www.eurunion.org/legislat/DeathPenalty/eumemorandum.htm,accessed on August 1, 2005) (stating that "The United Nations Convention on theRights of the Child prohibits sentencing minors both to death and also toimprisonment for life without the possibility of release. These are juvenilejustice standards of paramount relevance and the EU urges the USA to ratify the Convention.").[331] The three countries out of the twenty-nine withhigher or equal percentages of youth among their homicide offenders were England and Wales, with 10 percent; Slovenia with 10.2 percent; and Slovakia with 16.3 percent. Amongcountries with lower percentages than the United States, Poland ranked sixthhighest with 8.6 percent, France ranked seventh highest with 8.4 percent;Germany ranked thirteenth highest with 5.8 percent, Scotland rankedtwenty-fifth with 1.5 percent and Cyprus, Ireland, Italy, Switzerland, andNorthern Ireland all had zero homicide offenders below the age of eighteen.SeeCouncil of Europe, European Sourcebook of Crime and Criminal JusticeStatistics, 2003, 2nd ed., Chapter 3, Tables 3.2.1.3, 3.2.1.4, 3.2.2.2, and3.3.1.2, http://www.minjust.nl:8080/b_organ/wodc/publications/ob212_all.pdf,(retrieved March 23, 2005); and Snyder, H., Finnegan, T., Wan, T., and Kang,W., Easy Access to the FBI's Supplementary Homicide Reports: 1989-2000, availableonline at: http://www.ojjdp.ncjrs.org/ojstatbb/ezashr/asp/Off_Display.asp,accessed on August 3, 2005. The European and U.S. data are slightly differentin the following ways: (1) the European data may include juveniles convictedfor intentional homicide (defined as both attempted and completed homicide),whereas the U.S. data only includes completed homicides; and (2) the U.S. dataare for children between the ages of one to seventeen; whereas the Europeandata may be more variable based on each country's youngest possible age thatcould be included in the dataset (for example, Cyprus, France, Greece andSwitzerland could include individuals as young as seven years old). Inaddition, individuals aged eighteen and nineteen could be included in the datafrom Austria. Nevertheless, it is reasonable to assume that the age-spread ofjuvenile homicide offenders in Europe tended toward the fourteen to seventeenrange, making the data fairly comparable to those from the United States.[332] Human Rights Watch interview with Kevin C.,Centennial Correctional Facility, Cañon City, Colorado, July 27, 2004(pseudonym) (unless otherwise noted, all statements attributed to Kevin C. inthis case study were obtained during this interview).[333] Email correspondence with Human Rights Watch fromJudith C., Colorado, May 17, 2005.[334] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Frank C.,Colorado, October 22, 2004.[335] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Judy C., Colorado, October 22, 2004.[336] "Youth on Trial," The Denver Post, November28, 1995.[337] Ibid.[338] Email correspondence with Human Rights Watch fromJudith C., Colorado, May 17, 2005.[339] "Youth on Trial," The Denver Post, November28, 1995.[340] ICCPR, art. 10.3.[341] See footnote 348, below, and surrounding text (citingLisa Feldman, Michael Males, and Vincent Schiraldi, A Tale Of TwoJurisdictions: Youth Crime and Detention Rates in Maryland & the Districtof Columbia, Building Blocks for Youth, April 2001).[342] Dana Canedy, "As Florida Boy Serves Life Term, EvenProsecutor Wonders Why," The New York Times, January 5, 2003, p. 1. Onappeal, Tate won his release from prison and completed one year of house arrestin 2004. A few months later he was charged for allegedly attempting to rob apizza delivery man. See "Tate Held Without Bond in Robbery," Associated Press,May 25, 2005.[343] Erika Bolstad, "Governor: Allow Parole for Kids TriedAs Adults," Miami Herald, March 19, 2004.[344] Senator Edward Lucio, "Life Without Parole BillApproved by Senate Criminal Justice Committee," Press Release, Austin, Texas, March 15, 2005, available online at: http://www.senate.state.tx.us/75r/senate/members/dist27/pr05/p031505b.htm,accessed on September 15, 2005.[345]SeeShepard v. Taylor, 556 F.2d 648, 653 (2d Cir., 1977) (citing UnitedStates v. Kaylor, 491 F.2d 1133 (2d Cir. 1974) (en banc), vacated forreconsideration on other grounds, 418 U.S. 909 (1974); United States v.Waters, 141 U.S. App. D.C. 289 (1970)).[346]Tison v.Arizona, 481 U.S. 137, 149 (1987).[347]Roper v. Simmons, 125 S.Ct. 1183, 1195 (2005).[348]See SimonSinger and David McDowall, "Criminalizing Delinquency: The Deterrent Effects ofthe New York Juvenile Offender Law," Law and Society Review, vol. 22(1988) p. 529.[349]Lisa Feldman, Michael Males, and VincentSchiraldi, A Tale Of Two Jurisdictions: Youth Crime and Detention Rates inMaryland & the District of Columbia, Building Blocks for Youth, April 2001,available online at: http://www.buildingblocksforyouth.org/dcmd/dcmd.html,accessed on September 15, 2005.[350]Roper v. Simmons, 125 S.Ct. 1183, 1197 (2005).[351] Ibid.[352] "The Florida Experiment: Transferring Power fromJudges to Prosecutors," p. 3.[353]In re Stanford, 537 U.S. 968, 970-71 (2002)(Justices Stevens, Souter, Ginsberg, and Breyer, dissenting) (quoting Stanfordv. Kentucky,492 U.S. 361, 394-96 (1989) (Brennan, J., dissenting).[354] See AppendixC for an example of the letters sent to state departments of corrections.[355] For example, an individual who was 17.9 at the timeof his or her crime could spend as little as 13 months in the arrest tosentencing stage before entering prison. An individual who was 17.0 at the timeof his or her crime could spend as much as two years in the arrest tosentencing stage before entering prison. The problem with using age nineteen atadmission as the cut-off for our analysis, however, are those cases of eighteenor nineteen-year-old offenders sentenced to life without parole who may beincluded in the dataset. It is also possible that someone who committed theircrime at 17.0 entered prison after he or she turned twenty, in whichcase he or she would not have been included in the dataset. After conductingsampling analyses in a few key states however, we determined that nineteen wasthe most accurate age cut-off we could choose.[356] See Letter to Human Rights Watch from Jose A., UnitedStates Penitentiary Allenwood, White Deer, Pennsylvania; February 11, 2003(pseudonym) (on file with Human Rights Watch); "Man sentenced to 50 years inprison in compliance with plea deal," Associated Press, April 26, 2000; "Fourgang members get life in Yonkers killing," Associated Press, December 14, 2000.Region / CountryUnited States Criminal Justice Racial DiscriminationProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch