Lonely Servitude: Child Domestic Labor in Morocco | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload the summary and recommendations in FrenchDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload the summary and recommendations in FrenchNovember 15, 2012Lonely ServitudeChild Domestic Labor in MoroccoAvailable InEnglishالعربيةLonely ServitudeChild Domestic Labor in MoroccoSummaryUnder-AgeEmploymentDeceptiveIntermediariesAbusive andExploitative Working ConditionsProgressMore ActionNeededKeyRecommendationsTo theMoroccan GovernmentMethodologyI. ChildDomestic Work in MoroccoCharacteristicsof Child Domestic Workers: Age, Origin, and SchoolingReasons forWorkingRecruitmentinto Domestic WorkThe Role ofIntermediariesOtherRecruitmentII. The Lifeof a Child Domestic WorkerLong Hoursand Lack of RestWageExploitationVerbal andPhysical ViolenceSexualViolence and HarassmentFoodDeprivation and Living ConditionsIsolationLack ofAccess to EducationLack ofProtection and Pressure to Keep WorkingPositiveExperiencesThe FutureIII. LegalFrameworkMoroccan LawInternationalLawIV. MoroccanGovernment Efforts to Address  Child Domestic LaborEducationEnforcementof the Prohibition on Child LaborAssistancePublicEducation, Training, and Support to NGOsCriminalProsecutionV. Responseby Other ActorsNon-GovernmentalOrganizationsInternationalOrganizations: The ILO and UNICEFConclusionRecommendationsTo theMoroccan GovernmentToMorocco’s ParliamentTo theMinistry of Employment and Professional TrainingTo theMinistry of Solidarity, Women, Family, and Social DevelopmentTo theMinistry of JusticeTo theMinistry of National Education, Higher Education, Staff Development, andScientific ResearchToInternational Donors, including the United States, France, and BelgiumTo theInternational Labour Organization and United Nations Children’s Fund(UNICEF)AcknowledgementsAppendix IAppendix IISummaryLatifa L. was 12 years old when she began working as adomestic worker in Casablanca, Morocco’s largest city. She said she was“really scared,” but a recruiter reassured her that her futureemployers “would be very kind” and would pay her well.It turned out to be an empty promise.Once in Casablanca—a five-hour bus journey fromhome—Latifa discovered that she was the only domestic worker for a familywith four children. She said she toiled without a break from six in the morninguntil midnight, and was charged with cooking, laundry, cleaning floors, washingdishes, and caring for the children, including a two-year-old girl. She had nodays off and was only allowed to eat twice daily—at 7 a.m. and atmidnight after her work was done—she said. Latifa also said her employerfrequently berated her and sometimes beat her, sometimes with a shoe when shebroke something or when one of the children cried.At first she did not tell her parents about the abusesbecause she felt obliged to help them financially, she told Human Rights Watch.But eventually she had enough. “I don’t mind working,” shesaid, “but to be beaten and not to have enough food, this is the hardestpart of it.” In early 2012 she went to a public phone and asked herfather if she could return home. He agreed, and with assistance from anongovernmental organization (NGO), Latifa was able to return to school.*****In Morocco, thousands of children—predominantly girlsand some as young as eight—work in private homes as domestic workers.Known as petites bonnes, they typically come from poor, rural areashoping for a better life in the city and the opportunity to help their familyfinancially. Instead, they often encounter physical and verbal violence,isolation, and seven-day-a-week labor that begins at dawn and continues untillate at night. They are poorly paid and almost none attend school.In 2005, Human Rights Watch issued a report “Insidethe Home, Outside the Law: Abuse of Child Domestic Workers in Morocco.”In 2001, tens of thousands of girls under the age of 15—some 13,500 inthe greater Casablanca area and up to 86,000 nationwide according to thegovernment and an independent research organization—worked as domesticworkers in violation of Moroccan and international law that prohibit employingchildren under 15.  The report documented domestic work by girls as youngas five years old, some of whom worked for as little as US4¢ an hour, for100 or more hours per week, without rest breaks or days off. The girls we interviewedsaid that their employers frequently beat and verbally abused them, denied themeducation, and sometimes refused them adequate food or medical care.This report follows up on our previous work by assessingwhat progress has been made in eliminating child domestic labor in Moroccosince 2005, and what challenges remain. Although no nationwide surveys similarto the 2001 studies are currently available, our 2012 research—includinginterviews with 20 former child domestic workers in Casablanca and rural sendingareas, as well as interviews with nongovernmental organizations, governmentofficials, and other stakeholders—suggests that the number of childrenworking as domestic workers has dropped since 2005, and that fewer girls areworking at very young ages. Public education campaigns by the government, NGOs,and United Nations (UN) agencies, together with increased media attention, haveraised public awareness regarding child domestic labor and the risks that girlsface. “When I first went to Morocco 10 years ago, no one wanted to talkabout the issue,” an International Labour Organization (ILO) officialsaid. “Now, child domestic labor is no longer a taboo subject.”Government efforts to increase school enrollment have shown notable success andhelped reduce the number of children engaged in child labor.But while the numbers of child domestic workers havedeclined, many children—overwhelmingly girls—still enter domesticwork at much younger ages than the 15-year-old minimum age limit. Lawsprohibiting the employment of children under 15 are still not effectivelyenforced, and, according to the girls we interviewed, working conditions forthose entering domestic work are often abusive and exploitative. Domesticworkers generally —children and adults alike—are still excludedfrom Morocco’s Labor Code, and as a result do not enjoy the rightsafforded to other workers, including a minimum wage or limit to their hours ofwork. Some girls from poor, rural areas are lured into domestic work bydeceptive intermediaries and feel pressure to help support their family,particularly, girls said, if a parent has become ill, disabled, or lacksregular income.As a result, child domestic labor in Morocco remains aserious problem. Further efforts are needed to enforce the country’slegal prohibition against employing children under 15, protect girls who arelegally old enough to work, and end the abuse and exploitation of youngMoroccan girls in private homes.Under-Age EmploymentMoroccan and international law prohibit employing childrenunder the age of 15. The Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), whichMorocco ratified in 1993, prohibits economic exploitation and employingchildren in work that is likely to be hazardous, interfere with theireducation, or harm their health or development. The ILO Convention No 182 onthe Worst Forms of Child Labor, which Morocco ratified in 2001, states thatchildren under 18 may not be employed in work that is likely to harm theirhealth, safety, or morals. Prohibited labor includes work that exposes them tophysical, psychological, or sexual abuse; forces them to work for long hours orduring the night; or unreasonably confines them to employers’ premises.Despite this, girls who enter domestic work in Morocco aresometimes much younger than 15. A 2010 survey of domestic workers under 15 from299 sending families by Institution Nationale de Solidarité avec lesFemmes en Détresse (INSAF), the Casablanca-based NGO that works toprevent child domestic labor and to assist former child domestic workers, foundthat 38 percent of the girls were between the ages of 8 and 12. Of the 20former child domestic workers whom Human Rights Watch interviewed for thisreport, 15 had started work at ages 9, 10, or 11. All but four had beenemployed as domestic workers during some period between 2005 and 2012, theperiod of our inquiry. The youngest had begun working when she was eight yearsold.Deceptive IntermediariesIntermediaries—as inLatifa’s case—often approach girls’ families as recruiters, typicallypromising good working conditions and kind employers. Prospective employerstypically pay intermediaries 200-500 Moroccan dirhams (US$22-57) for finding adomestic worker. As a result, intermediaries have a financial incentive notonly to recruit domestic workers, but also to convince them to change employersperiodically so they can collect additional fees.The girls we interviewed said that intermediaries often toldthem little in advance about their working conditions or job responsibilities,which often include cooking and preparing meals, dishwashing, doing laundry,washing floors and carpets, shopping for the family, caring for young children,walking older children to and from school, preparing their lunches, and servingguests. Younger girls may initially not be expected to cook, but typically takeon such responsibilities as they get older. Girls as young as eight said thatthey were expected to carry out most of the household responsibilities forfamilies of up to eight members.Abusive and Exploitative Working ConditionsChild domestic workers may work long hours for very lowwages. On average, the girls Human Rights Watch interviewed earned 545 dirhamsper month (approximately $61), far below the minimum monthly wage of 2,333dirhams  (approximately $261) for Morocco’s industrial sector. Whilesome girls earned as much as 750 dirhams per month ($84), one said she earnedonly 100 dirhams ($11), and several did not even know their wages, which aretypically negotiated between the parents and the intermediary or prospectiveemployer. In almost every case, the girl received no money directly; her wageswere paid directly to her father or another family member.In addition to the wages paid to a girl’s family,employers typically provide domestic workers with food and accommodation. Althoughit is difficult to estimate the monetary value of these “in-kind”payments, the evidence gathered for this report suggest that their value doesnot make up the gap between a typical domestic worker’s cash salary andthe prevailing minimum wage. Some child domestic workers said they had privaterooms, but others slept in their employer’s living room, in the kitchen,or in a closet, sometimes on a blanket on the floor. Some ate with theiremployer’s family and received adequate food, while others—likeSamira who said she was only given olive oil and bread, or Latifa who said shewas only allowed to eat early in the morning and once late at night after shefinished her work—often went hungry.For some child domestic workers, the work day begins earlyin the morning and does not end until late at night. Although Morocco’sLabor Code sets a limit of 44 hours per week for most workers, the code doesnot address domestic workers, and therefore sets no limit for domestic work.Some interviewees had free afternoons or evenings, but others began working at6 a.m. and continued until nearly midnight, with few breaks. One describedpressure to work continuously, saying, “The woman [employer]wouldn’t let me sit. Even if I was finished with my tasks … if shesaw me sitting, she would shout at me.” Of the twenty former childdomestic workers interviewed, only eight said their employer gave them a weeklyday of rest.  The others said they worked seven days a week, sometimes forup to two years.Eleven of the twenty girls interviewed said their employersbeat them, and fourteen of the twenty described verbal abuse. One girl whobegan working when she was nine years old said: “[My employer] used everybad word she could think of…. When I didn’t do something as shewanted, she started shouting at me and took me into a room and started beatingme. This happened several times a week.” Girls said their employers beatthem with their hands, belts, wooden sticks, shoes, and plastic pipes.The privacy of the home makes child domestic workersuniquely vulnerable to sexual harassment or rape by male household members.Aziza S. said she was only 12 when her employer’s 22-year-old son triedto rape her. Amal K. also told us she experienced sexual violence by the son ofher employer when she was 14. “The eldest son came into my room and didthings to me,” she said. “He told me not to tell anyone…. Iwas afraid he would hurt me if I told.”Domestic work severely limits a child’s ability tocontinue her education. Of the twenty former child domestic workersinterviewed, only two said they had completed the third grade before beginningwork. None were allowed to attend school while employed: Souad B., for example,said her employer had refused her request to attend school without giving areason. A 2010 study by INSAF found that 21 percent of child domesticworkers were still in school and worked during school holidays, but that 49percent had dropped out of school to work and 30 percent had never attended atall.Child domestic workers we interviewed said they experiencedextreme isolation. Most worked in an unfamiliar city, far from family andfriends. Some girls speak Tamazight, the Berberlanguage spoken by many people in central Morocco, and cannot easilycommunicate in Arabic, the language spoken by the majority of Moroccans. Manyinterviewees said they were not allowed outside their employer’s home andhad limited contact with their families while employed. Some said they were allowedto call their families but that their employers monitored their phoneconversations so that they could not speak freely.Few of the 20 former child domestic workers interviewed hadany idea where they could turn for help if they experienced violence,ill-treatment, or exploitation. None said they had approached police directlyor knew of a government entity that could offer them assistance. Without moneyand unfamiliar with their surroundings, they could not return home alone. Manydescribed pressure to continue working even under abusive conditions to provideincome for their families.Some eventually appealed to their families for permission toreturn home. Only two of the girls whom Human Rights Watch interviewed activelysought help outside their own family. One was Aziza S., who said she ran to alocal bus stop after her employer’s son tried to rape her. She asked abus driver for help, and he took her to a local police station. In anothercase, a girl who had been beaten by her employer with a belt confided in alocal hairdresser, who referred her to a local NGO for help.ProgressAccording to government statistics, Morocco has madesignificant progress in recent years in reducing overall rates of child laborand increasing the number of children who attend school. The number of childrenengaged in all forms of child labor dropped from 517,000 in 1999 to 123,000 in2011, according to government surveys. The number of children working asdomestic workers also appears to have declined, although no recent data isavailable to establish exact numbers. At the same time, the number of childrencompleting primary school increased—from 62 to 85 percent between 2002and 2010.Government efforts to increase school enrollment and providefinancial support for poor families that may feel pressure to send theirchildren to work have boosted efforts to reduce child labor. One importantinitiative has been a cash allowance program that gives 60-140 dirhams ($7-16)to the families as a monthly stipend for each child attending school. Accordingto the Ministry of Education, the program benefited 690,000 students in poorrural areas from 2011 to 2012, and an independent assessment found that it cutdrop-out rates among recipients by 68 percent over three years. The governmenthas also provided book bags and other supplies to more than 4 million primaryage students and expanded cafeteria meals by 32 percent from 2008 to 2012.In five cities, the government has set up Child ProtectionUnits to assist children who are victims of violence or mistreatment, which mayinclude child domestic workers who have fled abusive employers. The Ministry ofEmployment and Professional Development has established a central Child LaborUnit and child labor focal points at 43 inspectorates, and, together with ILOand UNICEF, has trained labor inspectors and other government officials toenforce child labor laws. In 2010, a government decree expanded the types oflabor that are considered hazardous and thus prohibited for children under 18.The decree prohibits some tasks relevant to child domestic workers, but doesnot specifically prohibit children from performing domestic work.Since 2006, the governmenthas also been developing a draft law on domestic work that would for the first time,formalize the sector and establish key rights (such as a weekly day of rest andannual leave) for domestic workers. The draft law would reinforce the existinglegal prohibition on domestic work by children under 15 and require theauthorization of a parent or guardian for the employment of children betweenthe ages of 15 and 18. The proposed law requires written contracts for alldomestic workers to be filed with the labor inspection office. In May, Ministerof Employment and Professional Development Addelouehed Souhail told HumanRights Watch that adopting the law was a government priority in 2012. At thetime of writing, however, the law had not yet been presented to parliament.Moroccan NGOs have also conducted public education campaignsto discourage child domestic labor, including outreach to families in sendingcommunities, and have created programs to assist girls who are employed belowthe legal age or victim to abuse or exploitation. NGOs also credit nationalmedia with helping to decrease child domestic labor by paying greater attentionto the issue in recent years.More Action NeededDespite these positive steps,existing mechanisms to assist vulnerable children or address child labor arenot sufficient to address the unique characteristics of child domestic labor.Labor inspectors, for example, may not access private households to identifychild domestic workers. Furthermore, according to government-suppliedinformation inspectors have imposed no fines against employers of childdomestic workers. Child Protection Units, intended to assist children who arevictim to violence or mistreatment, only operate in five cities. Child domesticworkers we interviewed said they were unaware of services that the units might provide,and even the most active unit, in Casablanca, has only assisted a small numberof child domestic workers. Criminal prosecutions against employers responsiblefor physical abuse of child domestic workers are still rare, although in 2012 awoman was sentenced to 10 years in prison for the death of a 10-year-olddomestic worker after severe beatings.The government should establish more effective mechanisms toidentify and remove girls who are employed below the minimum age or who areabove the minimum age but victim to violence or exploitation. Continued publiceducation is needed to inform both sending families and potential employersabout the law and the risks of child domestic labor. According to INSAF’s2010 study, for example, 76 percent of families in sending areas still were unawareof laws prohibiting the employment of children under age 15.National legislation to regulate domestic work is needed toensure that domestic workers of all ages—including girls above theminimum age of employment—enjoy basic labor rights and decent workingconditions. The government should amend proposed domestic worker law to complywith the 2011 ILO Convention 189 on Decent Work for Domestic Workers andadopt it quickly.Human Rights Watch urges Morocco’s government to adoptadditional measures to effectively eliminate child domestic labor, taking intoaccount the particular isolation and vulnerability of girls employed asdomestic workers. These should include special mechanisms to identify girlssubject to illegal, abusive, and exploitative child domestic labor, investigatethese cases, and provide appropriate assistance, including shelter, familyreunification, re-entry into school, and when appropriate, sanctions orcriminal prosecution of employers.Without such action, young girls will continue to be luredinto exploitation and physical abuse in private homes, foregoing their right toan education, family contact, and the opportunity to develop to their fullestpotential.Key RecommendationsTo the Moroccan GovernmentStrictlyenforce 15 as the minimum age for all employment;Continue andexpand public awareness campaigns regarding child domestic labor andrelevant laws;Create aneffective system to identify and remove child domestic workers who areillegally employed or subject to abuse, provide them with medicaland psychosocial assistance, and facilitate their entry into school;Amend theproposed domestic worker law to ensure compliance with the 2011 ILO Convention 189on Decent Work for Domestic Workers, and present the law to Parliamentfor adoption;Ensure thatall children under the age of 15 enjoy their right to a free andcompulsory basic education, and expand initiatives which are designed toincrease school enrollment among girls who are vulnerable to childdomestic labor;Prosecuteindividuals under the Moroccan Criminal Code who are responsible forviolence or other criminal offenses against child domestic workers.Detailed recommendations can be found at the end of thisreport.MethodologyThis report is based on research conducted between April2012 and August 2012, including two field visits to Morocco in April and Mayand in July of 2012.  We conducted interviews in Casablanca, Rabat,Marrakech, and the Imintanoute region of Chichaoua province, speaking with formerchild domestic workers, government officials, lawyers, teachers, andrepresentatives of NGOs, UNICEF, and the International Labor Organization.We interviewed 20 former child domestic workers who rangedin age from 12 to 25 at the time of interview, and who began working asdomestic workers between the ages of 8 and 15.  All but 4 of the 20 werestill under the age of 18 at the time of the interview. They had worked in atotal of 35 households for periods ranging from 1 week to 2.5 years.  Allbut four had been employed as a domestic worker during some period between 2005and 2012, the period of our inquiry. Those whose employment was prior to 2005(with a few exceptions, as noted) are not quoted in this report.We interviewed seven formerchild domestic workers in Casablanca, Morocco’s largest city, where manychild domestic workers find employment, and the remainder in the Imintanouteregion, a poor, rural area southwest of Marrakech which is known as a sendingarea for child domestic workers. Interviewees were identified with theassistance of NGOs that provide programs and services for former child domesticworkers. Interviews were conducted in private in Arabic or Tamazight (Berber),with interpretation provided by a Human Rights Watch research assistant.Interviews were given on a voluntary basis, and no incentives were offered orprovided to persons interviewed. We have changed the names of all former childdomestic workers quoted in this report in order to protect their privacy.Former child domestic workers who have left domestic workand are in NGO programs may be more likely to have suffered abuse orexploitation and therefore may not be considered representative of the generalpopulation of child domestic workers. Thus, the interviews in this report arenot necessarily typical of all child domestic workers in Morocco, but theirexperiences are illustrative of the challenges and abuses that many childdomestic workers may face.During our field mission, Human Rights Watch met with theminister of employment and professional training; the minister of solidarity,women, family, and social development; and representatives of the Ministry ofJustice, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education, Ministry of HigherEducation, and the General Council of the government. We also met with staff ofthe Casablanca Child Protection Unit (CPU), which operates under the directionof the Ministry of Solidarity, Women, Family, and Social Development, and theindependent National Human Rights Council. Following our field mission, werequested additional information through the Interministerial Delegation forHuman Rights (a governmental body set up in 2011 to elaborate and implementgovernment policy on human rights) regarding existing government initiatives toaddress child domestic labor and enforcement of relevant existing laws.Information received from the Interministerial Delegation as of June 15, 2012,is reflected in the body of the report and reprinted in the appendix. We alsoreviewed available secondary sources, including available surveys, governmentreports, NGO reports, news stories in the media, and other relevant materials.Despite the cooperation noted above, authorities impeded ourwork by informing us at the beginning of 2012 that they would not allow ourMorocco-based research assistant, Brahim Elansari, to attend any meetingbetween Human Rights Watch and government officials.  Despite Human RightsWatch’s protests that it alone should decide who is to represent it,authorities have refused to lift its ban on Mr. Elansari’s participationin official meetings and events.In this report, “child” and“children” are used to refer to anyone under the age of 18,consistent with usage under international law.This is Human RightsWatch’s second report on child domestic labor in Morocco, and our 20threport documenting abuses against domestic workers, including both children andmigrant domestic workers, who are often more vulnerable to abuse andexploitation compared to other domestic workers. We have documented abusesagainst child domestic workers in El Salvador, Guatemala, Guinea, Indonesia,Morocco, and Togo, and abuses against migrant domestic workers in Bahrain,Cambodia, Indonesia, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Singapore, Saudi Arabia,the United Arab Emirates, and the United States.This is also our 43rd report on child labor. Inaddition to the work noted above relating to child domestic labor, we haveinvestigated bonded child labor in India and Pakistan, the failure to protectchild farmworkers in the United States, child labor in Egypt’s cottonfields, child labor in artisanal gold mining in Mali, the exploitation ofmigrant child tobacco workers in Kazakhstan, the use of child labor inEcuador’s banana sector, the use of child labor in sugarcane cultivationin El Salvador, child trafficking in Togo, the economic exploitation ofchildren as a consequence of the genocide in Rwanda, and the forced orcompulsory recruitment of children for use in armed conflict—one of theworst forms of child labor—in Angola, Burma, Burundi, Chad, Colombia, theDemocratic Republic of Congo, India, Liberia, Nepal, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan,and Uganda.I. Child Domestic Workin MoroccoGlobally, the International Labour Organization (ILO)estimates that between 50 and 100 million people —at least 83 percentwomen and girls—work as domestic workers.[1] AcrossAfrica and the Middle East, domestic work makes up an estimated 4.9 percent(Africa) to 8 percent (Middle East) of total employment.[2]Over 15 million domestic workers are children under age 18, making up nearly 30percent of all domestic workers worldwide.[3]Currently, there are no accurate statistics regarding thenumbers of children working as domestic workers in Morocco. No specific surveyson child domestic work have been conducted since 2001, when a government surveyfound that 23,000 girls under the age of 18 (including 13,580 girls under age15) worked as child domestic workers in the greater Casablanca area alone. A2001 study by the Norwegian-based Fafo Institute for Applied Social Scienceestimated that nationally between 66,000 and 86,000 girls under 15 were workingas domestic workers.[4] Thegovernment of Morocco reported to the ILO that it planned a new survey on childdomestic workers in greater Casablanca in 2010, with results and data to beextrapolated to the national level.[5] In June2012, the government reported that the survey was being prepared, but had notyet been completed.[6]Despite the lack of credible data, the number of childdomestic workers in Morocco appears to be on the decline. Virtually all of theactors whom Human Rights Watch interviewed, including local NGOs, UNICEF, ILO,local teachers, and government officials, reported that the practice appears tobe less common than when Human Rights Watch published its first report in 2005.NGOs and other organizationspoint to several reasons for the decline, including efforts by NGOs, UNagencies and the government to raise public awareness about the dangers ofchild domestic work; increased attention to the phenomenon by the Moroccanmedia (including coverage of high-profile criminal cases against employers forabuses against child domestic workers such as the death of a 10-year-old childdomestic worker named Khadija in 2011); and government and NGO efforts toexpand educational opportunities and keep children in school, particularlytargeting poor rural areas that are common sending areas for child domesticworkers.The Moroccan High Commissionfor Planning, a ministerial entity with primary responsibility for producingeconomic, social, and demographic statistics, reported a substantial decline inchild labor generally between 1999 and 2011.[7]Based on surveys of 60,000 families, it found that in2011, 2.5 percent of children between ages 7 and 15 were working (a total of123,000 children), compared to 9.7 percent of the age group (517,000 children)who were working in 1999.[8]The survey found that 91.7 percent of child labor wasin rural areas, and that 6 in 10 working children were male. The surveyestimated that 10,000 children under age 15 were working in the cities(compared to 65,000 in 1999), and of these, 54.3 percent (or approximately5,430) were working in “services,” which could include domesticwork.[9]Whilethe High Commission for Planning annual survey suggests a much lower number ofchild domestic workers than found by the 2001 surveys, both NGOs and UNagencies expressed skepticism about the relevance of the findings for childdomestic work. A UNICEF representative said, “We are concerned about thestatistics. The survey does not cover all children involved in child labor,such as children in invisible work like domestic work.”[10]UNICEF stressed the need for accurate statistics on child domestic labor, basedon clear indicators and methodology that would effectively identify childrenworking in the sector.[11]The president of INSAF said, “If you look at the official figures, theydo not correspond to what we have experienced on the ground. We don’thave concrete numbers, but our feeling is that the problem is bigger than theofficial reports.”[12]UN and other independent studies have found that household surveys oftenunderestimate the extent of child labor, particularly in the illegal orinformal sectors, because of household members’ unwillingness to reportsuch labor.[13]Thegovernment, in its 2012 report to the Committee on the Rights of the Child,also acknowledged that the “real scale is still hard to quantify due toseveral reasons: it is “clandestine”; labor inspectors are unableto go inside houses; and thirdly, it is difficult for these young and oftenilliterate girls who come from rural areas to have access to redressmechanisms.” [14]Despite evidence that child labor generally and childdomestic labor specifically is on the decline, Human Rights Watch’sfindings suggest that child domestic labor is still a serious problem inMorocco. Continuing efforts are needed to eliminate it.Characteristics ofChild Domestic Workers: Age, Origin, and SchoolingThe vast majority of child domestic workers in Morocco comefrom poor rural areas to work in larger cities such as Casablanca, Rabat,Marrakech, Tangiers, Agadir, or Fes. Some of these girls begin working at agesas young as eight or nine. The 2001 government survey of child domestic workersin greater Casablanca found that 59.2 percent of the girls were under the ageof 15. A 2010 study by INSAF surveying child domestic workers under the age of15 from 299 sending families found that 62 percent were between the ages of 13and 15, and 38 percent between the ages of 8 and 12.[15]Of the 20 former child domestic workers interviewed by Human Rights Watch, theyoungest began working at age 8, and 15 (or 75 percent of those interviewed)began work at ages 9, 10, or 11. (Due to the small number of those interviewedand how interviewees were identified, however, this group should not beconsidered a representative sample.)Although Moroccan law requires compulsory education untilage 15, child domestic workers typically have little schooling. Of the twentyformer child domestic workers interviewed by Human Rights Watch, only two hadcompleted the third grade before beginning to work. Most told us they onlyattended one or two years of school before going to work, and six (30 percentof those interviewed) had never attended school at all.Similarly, the 2010 INSAF survey of child domestic workersfound that 30 percent of those surveyed had never attended school. Forty-ninepercent of the child domestic workers INSAF surveyed had dropped out of school,while 21 percent were still in school but worked during school holidays. While43 percent of the girls left school for financial reasons, 25 percent cited thedistance between the school and their home as a reason for not continuing theireducation.[16]Virtually all of the childdomestic workers in Morocco are girls. Domestic work is a highly genderedsector of employment, traditionally regarded as “women’swork” because of its focus on cooking, housecleaning, child care, andother tasks carried out within the home. The ILO estimates that domesticworkers are overwhelmingly female—83 percent worldwide.[17]Reasons for WorkingThe majority of girlsinterviewed by Human Rights Watch said they entered domestic work because theybelieved their family needed the income they could provide. Karima R., whobegan working at age 10, told Human Rights Watch, “I went to work becausemy family was poor. I needed to help my family.”[18]In some cases, the parents’ income was notenough to support the family, while in others, girls went to work when a parentdied, or their fathers became ill or disabled and were no longer able to work,leaving their children’s domestic work as the family’s only sourceof income. Nadia R., for example, explained that her father was a farmer, andthat “when there was rain there was work, but when there was no rain,there was no work.”[19]INSAF’s 2010 survey of 299 “sending”families in 5 regions of Morocco found that only 9 percent of the families hadany regular income and that 94 percent of the mothers and 72 percent of thefathers were illiterate.[20]Although some of the girlsinterviewed said they were reluctant to leave school, many nonethelessexpressed a strong sense of obligation to help their family. Najat S. left schoolin grade three when she was nine years old. She said, “My father wassick, so my mother asked me and my sister to work. I wanted to continue mystudies, but when I saw my father was sick, I wanted to work.”[21]Zohra H.’s father died when she was 10. She saidwhen an intermediary came to their house proposing that Zohra go to work as adomestic worker, her mother initially refused, but Zohra convinced her that shewanted to work in order to help the family.[22]In other cases, the girls had no desire to work, but feltthey had no choice. Amina K. was 10 when she first started working as adomestic worker. She said, “My father asked me to go to work. Hedidn’t say why. I didn’t want to go and didn’t know where Iwas going, but my father forced me to go.”[23]The girls often agreed to work without any understanding ofthe conditions or treatment they would endure. In many cases, intermediariesapproach families with job opportunities, typically promising good workingconditions. Nadia R., for example, was told that her prospective employers wereteachers and would treat her well.[24] Anintermediary told Latifa L. that her employers would be “verykind.”[25] MalikaS. said that she knew other girls her age who were working as domestic workers,but that “they were telling me only the good things, not how thetreatment really was.”[26] LeilaE. said, “I was happy to go to work and I thought that nothing bad wouldhappen to me.”[27]Recruitment intoDomestic WorkThe Role ofIntermediariesIntermediaries work as brokers, arranging for girls frompoor rural areas to work in the cities as domestic workers, and receiving feesfrom the employers for finding domestic workers to work in their homes. Once anagreement is reached, the intermediary typically accompanies the girl, often bybus, to the employer’s home.Of the 20 former child domestic workers Human Rights Watchinterviewed, 10 reported that an intermediary arranged for at least 1 of theirjobs. Most did not know the amount of the intermediary’s fee, but onegirl reported that her employer had paid 200 dirhams (US$23), while anothersaid that in her case, her employer paid 500 dirhams ($57). Local NGOs reportedthat fees may range up to 1500 dirhams ($167).[28] NGOsreport that in some cases, the families of child domestic workers are alsoexpected to pay the intermediary. If the family does not have the money inadvance, the girl is expected to work without salary for one to three months inorder to cover the fee.[29]Malika S. described the process in her case: “Theintermediary came to my village and came to my house and asked if I wanted towork. He was a man from another place, not from my village. He said the familywould take me and treat me well.”[30]Although most girls knew that they were to be employed asdomestic workers, some intermediaries deceived the girls and their familiesabout the nature of their employment. Fatima K. was told that she would only beanswering phones, and instead, found herself responsible for household tasksfor a family of eight.[31] HananE. went to Agadir at age 11, believing that she was going to stay with a familyand attend school. When she arrived, she realized she was expected to dodomestic work instead. When Hanan told her employer that her father had saidshe was there to study, the woman replied that “he did not know thearrangement.”[32]Because intermediaries only receive fees upon the placementof a domestic worker, it is also to their advantage to convince the domesticworker and her family to change employers so that they can collect more fees.Aicha E. worked 14 hours a day for a verbally abusive employer before beingplaced in a much better situation with an employer who treated her well and didnot expect her to work extremely long hours. Aicha said, “The womantreated me like her daughter. I liked working there.”[33]Aicha was only allowed to stay with that employer for a few months, however,before an intermediary convinced her father that she could get a better salaryelsewhere. The next employer, like the first, was abusive and forced her towork from 7 a.m. until 11 p.m.Other RecruitmentGirls may also be recruited for domestic employment throughcasual or family networks. For example, Najat S. said that a woman from aneighboring village who was not an intermediary approached her family after herfather fell sick regarding another family that was looking for a domesticworker.[34] RabiaM. also said she found out about her job from a woman in a neighboring villagewho was not an intermediary.[35] FatimaK.’s job was arranged by a friend of her father’s.[36]Souad B.’s job was arranged by her older sister, who was already workingas a domestic worker in Casablanca, she told us.[37]In other cases, former child domestic workers said they didnot know how their employment was arranged and that the negotiations weretypically handled by their parents. The girls often knew little about theiremployers or working conditions until they arrived at their employer’shousehold.II. The Life of a Child Domestic WorkerFatima K. started working when she was nine, she told HumanRights Watch.[38] She wastold that her job would be answering phones, but on arrival in Casablanca, sherealized that she would be the only domestic worker in a household with fivechildren.  She was expected to wake before dawn to make breakfast for thechildren and work non-stop until 11 p.m. She prepared meals, washed dishes,cleaned the floor, took care of the employer’s baby, did shopping, andserved guests. “I got very tired,” she said.Fatima’s employer beat her and verbally abused her.“At the beginning, she was just slapping me,” Fatima said,“but the second time, she used a plastic plumbing pipe. She beat me whenI broke something or when I got in a dispute with her son. She slapped me on myface and on my shoulder.”When Fatima fell ill, shesaid, she didn’t dare ask her employer for medicine or to take her to thedoctor. “If I asked her [for medicine], she would say that I was there towork, not to be taken care of, and if she gave me medicine, she would deductthe cost from my salary,” she said.Fatima worked for theemployer for two years with no holidays. “The most difficult part was notseeing my mother during that period,” she said. “I didn’teven get to talk to her on the telephone.”*****Girls employed as domesticworkers are responsible for a range of household tasks, depending on their age.They may cook and prepare meals, wash dishes, do laundry, wash floors andcarpets, do shopping for the family, care for young children, walk olderchildren to and from school, help them prepare their lunches, and serve guests.Younger girls are often not expected to cook but may be expected to take onsuch responsibilities as they get older. Fatima said that initially, she didlittle cooking, only preparing simple dishes such as eggs, but within sixmonths, was asked to prepare more complicated dishes and to cook couscous.[39]Girls who begin work at young ages often find themselvesunprepared for such responsibilities. At age 11, Hanan E. was expected to carefor a baby, but said she didn’t know how.[40]Zohra H. initially didn’t know how to do laundry and said she asked hermother to teach her when she was allowed to go home to visit.[41]Most of the girls interviewed were the only domestic workeremployed by the household, and in some cases, were expected to carry out mostof the household tasks for families of up to eight members. In a few cases, thefamily employed more than one domestic worker to share the tasks.Long Hours and Lack ofRestAlthough the Moroccan LaborCode sets 44 hours per week as the limit for the industrial sector, there is nominimum set by law for the hours worked by domestic workers. As a result, childdomestic workers are at the mercy of their employer. A few described workingjust a few hours a day or having several hours off in the afternoon or evening,while others began working early in the morning and did not finish untilevening, with little opportunity for rest. In the most extreme cases, girlsdescribed beginning work at 6 a.m. and continuing until midnight. The childdomestic worker often was expected to be the first one up in the morning andthe last person to bed at night. Fatima K. said, “The woman would notaccept it if she came into the kitchen in the morning and found that I was notthere.”[42]She described the pressure to work continuously:“The woman [the employer] wouldn’t let me sit. Even if I wasfinished with my tasks she wouldn’t let me sit. I had to act as if I wasworking because if she saw me sitting, she would shout at me.”[43]Malika S., who began working at age 11, typicallybegan work at 6 a.m. She said, “The house was big. In this house, younever stop working. When I finished cleaning the floor, the woman asked me todo it again.”[44]Most of the girls worked seven days a week with no day off.Najat S., who started work at age nine, said she worked for two years withoutreceiving a day off or the chance to go home to visit her family.[45]Hanan E., who started work at age eleven, also told us she worked for more thantwo years with no days off. She typically worked from 5 or 6 in the morninguntil midnight. If she tried to rest, her employer would shout at her. Hanansaid, “I felt very tired and that the woman did not care about me.”[46]Wage ExploitationAs of July 1, 2011, the minimum wage for the industrialsector in Morocco was 2,230.80 dirhams (US$254) per month. It increased to2,333.76 dirhams ($265) per month on July 1, 2012.[47]No minimum wage is currently established for domestic work.The girls interviewed by Human Rights Watch, on average,earned 545 dirhams ($61) per month, barely one-quarter of the minimum wage forindustrial jobs, often for working hours far in excess of the 44 hours per weekset by the labor code for the industrial sector. While some earned as much as750 dirhams ($84) per month, Nadia R. told us she earned only 100 dirhams ($11)per month and several said that they had no idea of their wages. In almost allcases, their wages were negotiated by an intermediary or their parents, andwere paid directly to their parents.In addition to their cash salary, domestic workers who livewith their employers are also provided with room and board, which is discussedbelow. Although it is difficult to estimate the monetary value of these“in-kind” payments, the evidence gathered for this report suggeststhat their value does not come close to making up the gap between a typicaldomestic worker’s cash salary and the prevailing minimum wage.International standards state that payments in kind should represent only alimited portion of domestic worker’s remuneration.[48]Beginning at age nine, Najat S. spent two years working in aCasablanca household for 350 dirhams ($40) per month, she told Human RightsWatch. Her employer allowed her a few hours rest in the afternoon, but shestill typically worked 12 hours a day, 7 days a week, for a total of 84 hoursper week. On an hourly basis, her wages averaged about 1 dirham ($0.11) perhour, less than 10 percent of Morocco’s formal minimum wage.[49]Hanan E. said she earned 250 dirhams ($28) per month whileworking for more than two years without a day off. She said she typicallyworked 18 hours a day, from 5 or 6 a.m. until midnight, or over 120 hours perweek, for less than half a dirham per hour. After she left the job, her fathertold her that her employer had reduced her wages over time, paying even lessthan the agreed 250 dirhams per month, claiming that she was deducting money tocover clothes and food for Hanan. Hanan said that the employer never bought herclothes and that the food she provided was often inedible.[50]Several girls expressed fear that their employer woulddeduct money from their wages and that this would cause hardships for theirfamilies. Fatima K. did not know how much her family received for her work, butsaid that when she became ill, she did not ask her employer for medicine forfear that the cost would be deducted from her salary. She once broke a vasethat belonged to her employer, and said, “The woman threatened to tell myfather, so when I saw him, I told him that everything was okay. I wanted totell him that I wanted to come home, but I never did because I was afraid thewoman would tell him about the vase and she would deduct the cost from mywages.”[51]Girls who worked in multiple households reported that theirwages typically increased over time. Even after years of employment, however,only one former child domestic worker reported receiving more than 750 dirhamsper month. Even at this wage, however, such an experienced domestic worker madeonly 34 percent of the minimum wage of the formal sector, often for far longerhours of work.None of the girls interviewed said they received anyspending money of their own. Latifa L. said that if there was some money leftafter she finished shopping for the family, she would use it to call her familyfrom a public phone.[52]Although most of the girls said that their employer provided them withessentials like soap and toothpaste, very few of the girls said that theiremployer provided them with clothes or other items. Amina M. said that when sheneeded soap or shampoo, sometimes her employer would provide them, but notalways. “Sometimes I’d ask but she refused, so I stoppedasking.”[53]Zohra H. said that she brought personal items and toiletries from her family’shome when she visited.[54]Verbal and PhysicalViolenceThe majority of the former child domestic workers HumanRights Watch interviewed described both verbal and physical abuse by theiremployers. Fatima K. said: “The woman beat me whenever I did somethingshe didn’t like. She beat me with anything she found in front of her.Sometimes with a wooden stick, sometimes with her hand, sometimes with aplastic pipe. When I asked her not to beat me with such things, she would say,“It’s not up to you what I can beat you with.”[55]Aziza S., who started working in Casablanca when she wasnine, said, “The woman never spoke to me with respect. She used every badword she could think of.  She talked to me badly. When I didn’t dosomething as she wanted, she started shouting at me and took me into a room andstarted beating me. This happened several times a week. She beat me with herhands and pinched me. Once she beat me with a stick.”[56]Employers beat girls if tasks were not completed to theirsatisfaction or if the girl broke something, the girls told us. In someinstances, girls took the blame for incidents involving the employers’children. Fatima K. said that once her employer slapped her on the face becausethe employer’s daughter broke a laptop computer. “I wasn’teven there,” said Fatima, “but the woman blamed me.”[57]The 20 former child domestic workers interviewed by HumanRights Watch worked in a total of 35 different households. They reportedphysical beatings in 19 of those 35 households and verbal abuse, typicallyshouting or insults, in 24 of 35.Sexual Violence andHarassmentThe isolation of child domestic workers in private homesputs them at particular risk of sexual violence from male members of thehousehold in which they work. Aziza S., 13, said she started working inCasablanca when she was 9. Her employer had two sons; the eldest was 22 yearsold. Aziza told Human Rights Watch: “One time when the woman traveled,the son got drunk and tried to rape me. I pushed back and ran away.… Ididn’t know where the police were, but there was a bus stop near myemployer’s house. I ran to the bus stop and told the bus driver my story.He took me to the police.”[58]The police took Aziza to a shelter run by social services;she never returned to her employer and said she did not know if the policeconducted an investigation.Fatima K., now fifteen, worked at a house in Casablanca fortwo years beginning when she was nine. She said that her employer’soldest son, age 20, would often beat her and that once when she was alone inthe house, he entered from the back door and approached her from behind,covering her mouth with his hand. Her employer came home before he did anythingfurther, but Fatima said that she was afraid of being alone with him.[59]Amal K., now 25, worked forseveral households beginning when she was 9 years old.[60]She told Human Rights Watch that she was sexuallyassaulted in two of the households where she worked. She said when she was 14:“The eldest son came into my room and did things to me. He told me not totell anyone. I didn’t tell anyone. I was afraid he would hurt me if Itold.” One of the other sons once tried to force her to kiss him in thekitchen, she told us.Amal also described an assault that took place in adifferent household when she was 19:In one house where I worked, the husband tried to rape me.He grabbed me by force and tried to take off my clothes. The woman came in andhe slapped me on the face. He said he was punishing me because I was notwilling to do some work. I didn’t tell the woman what really happenedbecause I was frightened that he might do something bad to me. I was 19 yearsold. In that case, I was an adult, so what would happen to someone who wasyounger?[61]Food Deprivation andLiving ConditionsSeveral of the girls said their employers did not give themenough food and that they were often hungry. Hanan E. said her employersometimes gave her leftovers that had become inedible.[62]Samira B. said that she was given olive oil and bread twice a day. “Ididn’t get breakfast until I cleaned the floor, did the other morningtasks, and cooked lunch. I didn’t get dinner until the family slept. Thefamily ate lunch but didn’t leave me any food.”[63]Samira’s employer often beat her, and she said that even though she wasoften hungry, she didn’t ask for more food because she was scared.Latifa L. also said she received only two meals a day. Sheate breakfast at 7 in the morning, but had no other food until receiving dinnerat around midnight. She finally left the house because, she said, “I felttired and there was not enough food. I don’t mind working, but to bebeaten and not to have enough food, this is the hardest part of it.”[64]A few girls reported that they ate with theiremployer’s family and received the same food as the family ate, whileothers said they ate separately, often eating what was left over from theemployers’ meal. If there was no food left over, sometimes the girlswould be allowed to prepare something else, but in other cases, the girl wouldsimply not eat. Zohra H. said that for breakfast, she was given cheese and abit of bread, and for lunch, she ate eggs, tomato, and onion. She received nofood after lunch. When the family had dinner, they did not give her any food.She said she was sometimes hungry but didn’t ask for more. “I wasshy and I was afraid that she [the employer] would beat me if I askedher.”[65]Some of the girls had their own room and their own bed tosleep in at night, but others said they slept on the couch in the living room,in a closet, or on the floor. For nearly a year, Zohra slept on the floor in acloset, with one blanket to sleep on, and another to cover herself. She said,“At night it was sometimes cold.”[66] SamiraB. said she slept on blankets on the kitchen floor.[67]IsolationChild domestic workers often travel long distances fromtheir homes to work as domestic workers. Girls interviewed by Human RightsWatch typically found themselves in a strange city, where they knew no oneapart from their employers’ families. Many of the girls were not allowedoutside of their employer’s home.Many child domestic workers interviewed said they hadlimited or no contact with their own families during their employment. FatimaK. worked for her employer for two years, beginning at age nine, without seeingor speaking to her mother.[68] Inother cases, girls were allowed to call their families, but their employerstayed near the phone during the call to monitor their conversations so thatthe girls were not allowed to speak freely. Leila E. was an exception: she saidher employer bought her a cellphone so that she could speak to her family oncea week.[69]Malika S. said that her employer repeatedly refused herrequests to contact her father. Finally she lied and said she was ill so that shecould call her brother. Once she reached him, she asked him to come fetch her.[70]Hafida H. was able to speak with her family once a week by telephone and gohome to visit for two weeks each year. However, she said that she was not ableto get used to living at her employer’s house and said that, “Ifelt like I was living in a prison.”[71]Most of the girls Human Rights Watch interviewed, even thoseenduring routine violence and exhausting working conditions, said they did notconsider running away. They stayed because they were not familiar with the cityand did not know where to go or who to approach for help. Aziza S., who startedworking in Casablanca when she was nine, explained, “I never thoughtabout it [running away], because I didn’t know the neighborhood. Ididn’t know anyone. I only knew what I could see from the window.”[72]Some of the girls also faced language barriers if they spoke Tamazight and didnot understand Arabic, the language spoken by the majority of Moroccans.Lack of Access to EducationNone of the child domestic workers Human Rights Watchinterviewed were allowed to attend school by their employers. Karima R. said,“My employer told my parents I would be allowed to go to school, but Inever was able to go. The woman never told me why.”[73]Souad B. said she once asked her employer if she could attend school, but heremployer refused without giving a reason.[74]Although a few of the girls interviewed initially were promised an education,most of the girls entered domestic work knowing that they were hired to workand had no expectation of going to school.For some, seeing the childrenof their employer or other children in the neighborhood attend school when theyhad no such opportunity was particularly difficult. When Karima R. was askedabout the most difficult aspect of being a domestic worker, she replied,“The hardest part was when I saw other girls going to school and I wasforced to stay at the house.”[75]Lack of Protection andPressure to Keep WorkingFew of the girls described any government intervention intheir situations, including those employed illegally because they were underthe minimum age for employment and those who experienced physical orpsychological abuse.None of the girls interviewed by Human Rights Watch saidthey approached the police or knew of any government entity that could offerthem assistance. Only two dared to appeal outside their family for assistance.Aziza S. fled her employer’s home when the employer’s son tried torape her. She said, “I didn’t know where the police were, but therewas a bus stop near my employer’s house. I ran to the bus stop and toldthe bus driver my story. He took me to the police.”[76]She said the police then took her to social services. At age 10, Karima R.worked for an employer who, she said, verbally abused her and treated herbadly. Karima heard about Bayti, an NGO that assists vulnerable children, froma local hairdresser. When her employer beat her with a belt, Karima told thehairdresser, who took her to Bayti.[77]A social assistant[78] workingwith former child domestic workers said:The majority of the girls do not know of any kind ofassistance or of any law that protects them if they are subject to violence.Some flee and try to find their intermediary or go home, if they know the way.Sometimes they get lost. Often girls change household because of how they aretreated, or they lie to the employer and give a pretext, for example, thattheir mother is sick, so they can go home.[79]In some cases of underage employment or abusive treatment,NGOs intervene. For example, Bayti came to the house where Souad B. worked tospeak with her about her working conditions after Souad’s older sister,who also worked as a domestic worker in Casablanca, asked the organization tocheck on Souad.[80]In other cases Human Rights Watch documented, INSAF, the NGO described above,approached the families of girl domestic workers to educate them about therisks of domestic work and to offer monthly stipends if they agreed to bringtheir daughters home and enroll them in school.A number of girls said theyleft their employer by appealing to their families to allow them to come home.Some families agreed only reluctantly, or tried to convince the girl to keepworking, even under abusive conditions, in order to maintain income for thefamily. For example, Amina K., who began working at age 10, said, “It wasdifficult to convince my father to let me go,” she said. “I toldhim that the woman was beating me and wouldn’t let me leave thehouse.” Even once Amina returned home, she said her father wanted her togo to work someplace else, but she refused. “He tried to convince me, butI was tired of working.”[81]Nadia R. started working at age 12 because her father wasmaking only an irregular income in agriculture. After a month, she said, shecame home and told her family that she wanted to go to school and didn’twant to work. “They tried to convince me to stay at the employer’shouse, but I refused, so they sent another sister to work for the samefamily.”[82]Some of the girls continued to work, enduring physicalviolence and exhausting working conditions without complaint because of theirsense of obligation to their family. Hanan E., who said she would often workfrom 5 or 6 a.m. until midnight and that her employer often beat her, told usshe did not tell her parents the truth about her situation. “I told themeverything was okay. I didn’t want them to be sad.”[83]Positive ExperiencesSome of the former child domestic workers described positiveexperiences with their employers. As mentioned above, Leila E. said that heremployer bought her a cell phone so that she could call her family once a week,and that on Sundays, the children in the family often invited her to accompanythem to the beach.[84] RabiaM. said that her employer sometimes took her out for sweets in the afternoon.[85]Yasmina M. said that on her day off, Sundays, a daughter from the house tookher to the hammam (public bath).[86]Malika S. worked in three different households by the timeshe was twelve. She said that the third household was the best: “Theywere kind with me. They treated me well, they took me outside, they took mewith them when they went places. I did the same tasks in that house as theothers, but the woman was helping me. I didn’t have any days off, but thework wasn’t hard.”[87]However, even when treated kindly by their employers, formerchild domestic workers often described the difficulty of being separated fromtheir family, their sadness at not attending school, and their belief that suchwork was inappropriate for young girls. Najat S., who began work at age nine,had several hours of rest every afternoon and said that her employers were“nice.” However, she said she missed her family a lot and oftencried because she was lonely.[88] All ofthe girls Human Rights Watch interviewed believed that domestic work was notappropriate for children. Rabia M., age 14, said, “They are too young andthey work hard. This kind of work should only be for older people.”[89]The FutureSixteen of the twenty formerchild domestic workers interviewed by Human Rights Watch were back in schoolthrough the assistance of INSAF and Bayti, NGOs that assist former childdomestic workers. The others were working in other jobs or receiving vocationaltraining through the Association Solidarité Feminine, another NGO.Without exception, the girls who were back in school said they were happy to bestudying. None expressed a desire to return to domestic work. Malika R. said,“I don’t like working in houses. In all the houses where I worked,the children were going to school.... Now I am happy I am going toschool.”[90]Najat S. said that in the future, she hopes to become anarchitect or an engineer. Rabia M. and Zohra H. both said they wanted to becomea teacher.[91] FatimaK., who worked in three different households, said, “I would like to do ajob to keep girls from working as child domestic workers because I know howthey feel.” Hanan E., who was repeatedly beaten by her employer, said shewanted to become a police investigator. “If you are a policeinvestigator, you defend and protect yourself,” she said. “Youdon’t have to wait for someone else to defend and protect you.”III. Legal FrameworkMoroccan LawMorocco’s Labor Code sets 15 as the minimum age foremployment. Employing children under the age of 15 is sanctionable by finesranging from 25,000 to 30,000 dirhams ($2,811 to $3,373). In the case ofrepeated offenses, the fine may be doubled, or the employer may be sentenced toprison for up to three months.[92] Employerswho physically abuse child domestic workers are subject to prosecution underMorocco’s Criminal Code. For example, individuals who willfully injure achild or deprive a child of food or care can be imprisoned for one to threeyears, and adults who have custody of a child and perpetrate such abuse may besubject to two to five years’ imprisonment.[93]On December 29, 2004, Morocco issued a decree outliningspecific forms of dangerous work prohibited for children under the age of 18.On November 16, 2010, it issued a revised decree, further elaborating types oflabor that are prohibited for children. The new decree added new elementsrelevant to child domestic workers, for example, exposure to dangerousbiological agents or other dangerous chemicals (for example, harsh chemicalsthat may be used for cleaning), carrying weights above 8 kg (for girls age 15)or weights above 10 kg (for girls 16 and 17); tasks that expose females to therisk of falling or slipping; or tasks where the person has to squat or bendover constantly.[94] It doesnot specifically prohibit children from performing domestic work.Domestic workers are excluded from Morocco’s LaborCode and therefore do not enjoy many of the basic rights extended to workers inthe formal sector and in agriculture. Under the Labor Code, other workers areguaranteed a minimum wage (with one set for industry, trade and otherprofessions, and another set for the agricultural sector), enjoy a standardwork week of 44 hours (for non-agricultural workers), with a daily work periodnot to exceed 10 hours. Employees must also receive a full day of rest eachweek.In 2006, the government began preparing a draft law toregulate domestic work. The law was approved by the Government Council onOctober 12, 2011, and submitted to Parliament on October 27, 2011. Followingelections in November 2011, the new government decided to re-examine it.[95] In May 2012, the Minister ofEmployment and Professional Training, Addelouehed Souhail, told Human RightsWatch that adopting the law was a “priority” for his ministry andfor the government,[96] but atthe time of writing, the law had not yet been adopted.Like the existing Labor Code,the draft law explicitly forbids the employment of children under the age of 15as domestic workers, and specifies that any individual employing a child underthe age of 15 for domestic work may be subject to a fine of 25,000 to 30,000dirhams ($2,811 to $3,373). Repeated offenses are punishable by fines of 50,000to 60,000 dirhams ($5,622 to $6,746) and imprisonment of one to threemonths.New provisions in the draft law that are not included inexisting law include required authorization by a guardian for the employment ofchildren between 15 and 18 for domestic work, and fines of 25,000 to 30,000dirhams ($2,811 to $3,373) for intermediaries and any person who employs achild between the ages of 15 and 18 without the authorization of theirguardian.The draft law also specifies working conditions for domesticworkers generally, which affect children who are above age 15 and thus legallyable to work. For example, the draft law states that domestic workers shouldnot be given work that involves excessive danger, exceeds the capacity of theworker, or could affect morally accepted behavior. However, the specified finesfor violating this provision are very low: only 300 to 500 dirhams.Other key provisions of the draft law include the following:A requirement for an employment contract, signed by both theworker and employer and deposited with a labor inspection office;A weekly rest period of 24 consecutive hours;Annual paid holiday of a day and a half for each month of work;Rest during national and religious holidays and time off forfamily events;Compensation in the event of dismissal after at least one year ofservice.[97]The draft law is a welcome effort to extend laborprotections to domestic workers. However, the draft law is not fully incompliance with the ILO Convention 189 Concerning Decent Work for DomesticWorkers (“Domestic Workers Convention”), a new international labortreaty adopted in 2011 to establish international standards for domestic work.For example, the Domestic Worker Convention specifies that working hours fordomestic workers should be equivalent to those for other sectors. Although theMoroccan Labor Code sets 44 hours per week as the limit for other workers, thedraft law does not set any limits to the hours of work for domesticworkers.The Domestic Workers Convention also specifies that domesticworkers should enjoy minimum wage coverage where it exists. The draft law, incontrast, states that wages for domestic workers should not be less than 50percent of the minimum wage for the industrial sector. In meetings with HumanRights Watch, officials from the Ministry of Employment and Vocational Trainingexplained that “in-kind” payments to domestic workers, includingfood and accommodation, could account for the remaining 50 percent. Theconvention, however, specifies that payments in kind should be a “limited”proportion of domestic workers’ remuneration, and the recommendationassociated with the convention further specifies that a limit should be set onin-kind payments to allow a salary necessary for the maintenance of domesticworkers and their families.[98]The proposed law allows the accumulation of weekly rest (forup to two months), yearly leave (for up to two years) and the postponement of aworker’s entitled rest for national or religious holidays. Suchaccumulation provisions can lead to workers being legally forced to work forlong periods without breaks, impeding their right to adequate rest. ILORecommendation 201 accompanying the Domestic Workers Convention recommends thatweekly rest not be accumulated for more than 14 days.[99]NGOs have also criticized the draft law for not includingmechanisms to identify and remove child domestic workers from illegal,exploitative, or abusive work situations, and for not providing them withrehabilitative services.[100]International LawSeveral international instruments relate to child domesticwork, including the following:Convention on the Rights of the Child: Moroccoratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child in June 1993. The conventionstates that children have a right “to be protected from economicexploitation and from performing any work that is likely to be hazardous or tointerfere with the child’s education, or to be harmful to thechild’s health or physical, mental, spiritual, moral or socialdevelopment.”[101] Theconvention requires governments to take appropriate legislative,administrative, social, and educational measures in this regard, and especiallyto provide for a minimum age of employment, appropriate regulation of workhours and conditions of employment, and appropriate sanctions to ensureenforcement.[102]The Committee on the Rights of the Child last reviewedMorocco’s compliance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child in2003. The Committee said that it was “deeply concerned” at thesituation of child domestic workers in Morocco and urged the government to takeall necessary measures to prevent and end the practice of children working asdomestic servants, through a comprehensive strategy.[103]The government of Morocco submitted its third periodicreport on compliance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child inmid-2012. The Committee will likely review the report in 2013.Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention: Moroccoratified the ILO Convention 182 Concerning the Prohibition and ImmediateElimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor (“Worst Forms of ChildLabor Convention”) on January 26, 2001. The Convention obliges allratifying states to “secure the prohibition and elimination of the worstforms of child labour as a matter of urgency.”[104]It is one of the most widely ratified labor conventions, with 174 statesparties.The Convention prohibits“slavery or practices similar to slavery, such as the sale andtrafficking of children,” “forced or compulsory labor,” aswell as “work which, by its nature of the circumstances in which it iscarried out, is likely to harm the health, safety or morals of children.”[105]Exactly what constitutes such types of work is leftto be determined by states parties, in consultation with employer and workerorganizations and in consideration of international standards, in particularthe ILO Worst Forms of Child Labor Recommendation. This recommendation, alsoadopted in 1999, outlines factors which should be considered in determining theworst forms of child labor. Of particular relevance to child domestic work, therecommendation suggests that work “which exposes children to physical,emotional or sexual abuse” and “work under particularly difficultconditions, such as work for long hours or during the night, or work which doesnot allow for the possibility of returning home each day” should beconsidered among the worst forms of child labor.[106]In 2011, the ILO Committee of Experts on the Application ofConventions and Recommendations noted measures taken by the Moroccan governmentto implement the Worst forms of Child Labor Convention, but expressed its deepconcern at the “exploitation” of children under the age of 18 asdomestic workers in conditions similar to slavery or under other hazardousconditions. The Committee reminded the government that work done under suchconditions should be eliminated as a matter of urgency and also urged thegovernment to adopt the domestic worker bill as a matter of urgency. Itrequested the government to take immediate steps to conduct thoroughinvestigations and robust prosecutions of persons who subject children underage 18 to forced or hazardous domestic labor and urged that “sufficientlyeffective and dissuasive penalties are imposed in practice.”[107]Domestic Workers Convention: In June 2011, members ofthe International Labour Organization voted overwhelmingly to adopt ILOConvention 189 Concerning Decent Work for Domestic Workers (Domestic WorkersConvention), the first international treaty to establish global labor standardsfor domestic workers.[108] Underthe Convention, domestic workers are entitled to the same basic labor rights asother workers in their country, including weekly days off, minimum wagecoverage, limits to their hours of work, overtime compensation, socialsecurity, and clear information on the terms and conditions of work. Theconvention obliges governments to take measures to protect domestic workersfrom violence and abuse, and to regulate private employment agencies thatrecruit and employ domestic workers.Regarding children, the Convention requires governments toset a minimum age for domestic work that is in line with the ILO’sMinimum Age Convention[109] andWorst Forms of Child Labor Convention, and to ensure that domestic workperformed by children under the age of 18 but above the minimum age ofemployment does not does not deprive them of compulsory education or interferewith opportunities to participate in further education or vocational training.[110]To provide further guidance to states, the ILO also adopteda non-binding Recommendation 201 Concerning Decent Work for Domestic Workers(Domestic Workers Recommendation). The recommendation urges states to identifytypes of domestic work that, by their nature or the circumstances in which theyare carried out, are likely to harm the health, safety, or morals of children,and to prohibit and eliminate such child labor.[111]The recommendation also urges states to take special measures to protectdomestic workers above the minimum age of employment but below the age of 18,including by:strictly limitingtheir hours of work to ensure adequate time for rest, education and training,leisure activities and family contacts;prohibiting nightwork;placingrestrictions on work that is excessively demanding, whether physically orpsychologically; andestablishing orstrengthening mechanisms to monitor their working and living conditions.[112]Morocco voted in favor of adoption of the Domestic WorkersConvention at the International Labor Conference in June 2011, but as ofOctober 2012, had not yet ratified the Convention. The Minister of Employmentand Vocational Training, Addelouehed Souhail, told Human Rights Watch in May2012 that as soon as Morocco adopts its domestic law on domestic workers, itwill ratify the Domestic Workers Convention.[113]IV. Moroccan Government Efforts to AddressChild Domestic LaborEducationEducation in Morocco is freeand compulsory until age 15. The 2011 Constitution stipulates that basiceducation is the right of a child and an obligation of the family and state.[114]Moroccan law further specifies that all childrenshould be registered for school at age six, and that parents and guardians areresponsible to ensure school attendance until age fifteen. Those that do notcomply may be subject to a fine of 120-800 dirhams (US$13-90).[115]Although the compulsory schooling law is poorly enforced,the Moroccan government has made significant efforts to increase schoolenrollment for Moroccan children. Increasing school enrollment and retentionnot only helps fulfill Morocco’s obligation to ensure children’sright to education, it can also help reduce child domestic labor, as girls whoremain in school are less likely to enter domestic work.According to government statistics cited by the World Bank,in 2002 only 62 percent of Moroccan children (56 percent of girls and 67percent of boys) finished primary school.[116] By2010, that figure had risen to an estimated 85 percent. Gender gaps alsonarrowed, with 82 percent of girls and 87 percent of boys completing primaryschool in 2010. Between 2007 and 2010, the number of primary school-agedchildren who were out of school decreased from 380,029 to 207,749.[117]In 2008, the government launched the “Tayssir”program to provide financial help to poor families, on the condition that theysend their children to school. The goal of the program was to increase schoolenrollment by alleviating schooling costs and financial pressures on familiesto send their children to work. Monthly cash allowances were given to familiesof children who missed no more than four days of school per month, ranging from60 dirhams ($7) per month for children in the first or second year of primaryschool to 140 dirhams ($16) per month for those in middle school.[118]The Tayssir program began with 88,000 students from 47,000families in poor, rural areas as beneficiaries. By the 2011-2012 school year,it had expanded to included 690,000 students from 406,000 families.[119]According to the government, the program decreased absenteeism by 60 percentand the annual dropout rate by 68 percent. It also increased the return ofstudents who had previously dropped out of school by 245 percent.[120]An independent assessment of the Tayssir program found that3 percent of participating children were employed outside their own family atthe beginning of the program in 2008. By 2010, rates of employment for thisgroup declined by one-third.[121]Researchers evaluating the program cautioned, however, that there was littleway to determine specifically whether the cash allowance program reduced the numberthe number of girls who migrated from rural areas to urban areas to work asdomestic workers. “Household surveys will tell us if girls left the home,but they don’t tell us why or what they are doing,” said FlorenciaDevoto of the Poverty Action Lab.[122]In addition to the Tayssir program, the government hasundertaken other initiatives designed to increase school attendance. Forexample, according to information provided by the government, it providesschoolbags and other necessary supplies to the majority of students at primarylevel. Between 2008-2009 and 2011-2012, the number of school children receivingthe schoolbags increased from 1,273,846 to 4,079,808.[123]The government says it provided cafeteria meals to 1,257,348students at primary and secondary schools in 2011-2012, an increase of 32percent from 2008-2009. During the same period, boarding school admissionsincreased by 55 percent (from 76,924 to 119,868), providing schoolingopportunities for children who do not have accessible schools near their homes.[124]The government also significantly increased schooltransportation services in rural areas, where children often have to travellong distances to reach school. In 2008-2009, the Ministry of Educationprovided transport to 2,200 schools, it reports; by 2011-2012, it had expandedtransportation services to 30,995 schools.[125]Overall, the government reported that the net enrollmentrate in primary schooling increased from 90.4 percent in 2007-2008 to 96.4percent in 2010-2011, and that during that period, the dropout rate at primarylevel decreased from 5.4 percent to 3.1 percent for boys and from 6 percent to3.8 percent for girls.[126]Enforcement of theProhibition on Child LaborAs noted earlier, the Moroccan Labor Code prohibits childlabor under the age of 15. Employing children under that age is punishable byfines ranging from 25,000 to 30,000 dirhams ($2,811 to $3,373), which can bedoubled in the case of repeated offenses. In June 2012, the Minister ofSolidarity, Women, Family, and Social Development, Bassima Hakkaoui, publiclycalled for increases in the penalties against those employing children ofschool age.[127]With the support of the ILO’s International Programmeon the Elimination of Child Labor (IPEC) and UNICEF, the Ministry of Employmentand Vocational Training has established a specialized Child Labor Unit toaddress child labor and has identified child labor focal points at each of 43labor inspectorates across the country. The ILO has provided specializedtraining in child labor and child domestic labor to these focal points andindividual labor inspectors to help them identify, protect, and withdrawchildren involved in exploitative labor.[128] In2011, labor inspectors carried out 383 child labor inspections of commercialenterprises. They identified 119 children under the age of 15 working, butrecorded only 9 offenses. In contrast, they carried out 515 child laborinspections in 2010, recording 45 fines and offenses. [129]Enforcement of the law has been extremely weak regardingchild domestic labor, however. A significant impediment to enforcement is thatMorocco has no provisions to allow labor inspectors to access private homes.Information provided to Human Rights Watch by the government indicated that nofines were imposed or offenses recorded against employers of child domesticworkers in either 2010 or 2011.[130] TheILO office in Morocco also indicated that it was not aware of any penaltiesthat had been imposed against employers of child domestic workers under theLabor Code.[131]The government notes that the draft domestic workers billallows labor inspectors to receive complaints by domestic workers and write upreports on the matter.[132]However, it is not clear what action would be taken from the reports, and thereis no system in place to educate domestic workers generally, or child domesticworkers specifically, on how they can register a complaint with laborinspectors. The Minister of Employment and Professional Training acknowledgedthat this needs to be developed and told Human Rights Watch, “We need towork with NGOs and local officials to set up an alert system to be able tomonitor the situation, but we need to be realistic and not think the situationwill disappear as soon as the law is adopted.”[133]Other ministry officials indicated that monitoring mechanisms could beestablished through an implementing decree.[134]AssistanceUnder the government’s National Plan for Childhood(2006-2015), five Child Protection Units have been established in the cities ofCasablanca, Marakesh, Tangiers, Meknès, and Essaouira. The purpose ofthe units is to provide social services and referrals to vulnerable children,including those who are victims of violence or mistreatment. According to thegovernment, the units have provided assistance in 1,188 cases.[135]In practice, however, theChild Protection Units provide assistance to very few child domestic workers.The director of the Casablanca unit informed Human Rights Watch that in 2010,the unit handled 342 cases, and in 2011, 456 cases.  However, in those twoyears, she estimated that the unit had assisted fewer than ten child domesticworkers. The biggest problem, she said, was the inaccessibility of childrenemployed in domestic work.[136]The Casablanca unit has become much more professional and increasedits case load significantly since 2010. [137] Otherunits have been much less active, however. The Marrakech unit has only handled81 cases since it was established (compared to Casablanca’s 456) and whenHuman Rights Watch asked the director of a local NGO working with vulnerablechildren about the unit, he replied, “In my view, they don’t doanything.”[138] Bothhe and others, including Child Protection Unit staff, said that the units havebeen hampered by the government’s failure to formalize the operation ofthe units and provide adequate staff and resources.[139]None of the girls interviewed by Human Rights Watch had anyknowledge of the Child Protection Units, where they were located, or whatassistance they might provide. As shown by the findings of this report, manychild domestic workers are isolated in their employer’s home and havelittle contact with the outside world. Without a system to inform childdomestic workers about the existence of the Child Protection Units or otheravailable services, or a way to make those units accessible to children, it isunlikely that child domestic workers will receive any meaningful aid.Meriem Kamal, of the NGO INSAF, said, “The CPUs [ChildProtection Units] are not the right place to host and receive child domesticworkers. We need specialized centers for girls, not for street children, butfor girls who have been sent by their families to work for other families wherethey have experienced abuse.”[140] Shealso noted that the units were not operating in the whole country.The minister of solidarity, women, family, and socialdevelopment, Bassima Hakkaoui, informed Human Rights Watch that the ministrywas developing a new system of observation centers, intended to facilitatemonitoring and reporting by any individual with knowledge of abuses againstchildren, including child domestic workers, as well as to provide shelter tochildren in need.[141] Shesaid the observation centers would have the potential to “reducedrastically the ‘petites bonnes’ phenomenon.”[142]The government told Human Rights Watch in June 2012 that itwas preparing the second phase of its national plan on childhood, incoordination with the ministerial Commission for the Child, which is composedof 17 ministerial departments. The plan, according to the government, will giveparticular attention to children in difficult circumstances, including childdomestic workers.[143] TheMinistry of Solidarity, Women, Family, and Social Development has developed apilot program in Casablanca to coordinate services for child victims ofviolence, and told Human Rights Watch that it intends to expand the program toMarakesh, Agadir, Tangiers, Salé, and Oujda.[144]The government also acknowledges ongoing difficulties inensuring protection for children and implementing existing law. In its 2012report to the Committee on the Rights of the Child, it stated, “Childrights-promoting policies are being developed but a number of factors areundermining them. The different actors do not coordinate sufficiently and thereis a lack of staff specialized in child care. The social workers, experts,labor inspectors and occupational doctors are limited in number and do not havesufficient equipment in order to accomplish their mission efficiently”.[145]Public Education,Training, and Support to NGOsThe government carried out national public educationcampaigns on child domestic labor in 2007 and 2010, with the support andcooperation of ILO-IPEC and UNICEF, and organized training sessions for localactors on the issue in 2008 and 2009. Interviews with NGOs and others indicatethat the public education campaigns have helped to raise awareness regardingchild domestic labor in Morocco, though many families are still unaware of thelegal prohibition on the employment of children under age 15. INSAF, forexample, found in its 2010 survey that 76 percent of sending families wereunaware of laws prohibiting employment before age 15, and that 68 percent wereunaware of laws requiring the education of children until age 15.[146]The Ministry of Solidarity, Women, Family, and SocialDevelopment provides financial assistance to NGOs working in the field of childprotection, including those working to prevent child domestic labor and supportchildren who have been removed from domestic work. In 2009, the Ministryallocated 7.1 million dirhams (approximately $808,000) for this purpose. Itincreased the amount to 17.4 million dirhams (approximately $1.98 million) forboth 2010 and 2011.[147]The Ministry of Employment and Vocational Training providesapproximately 1.5 million dirhams (approximately $170,000) per year, to supportprojects by approximately 20 nongovernmental organizations to eliminate childlabor.[148]Criminal ProsecutionEmployers who physically abuse child domestic workers shouldbe subject to prosecution under Morocco’s Criminal Code. For example,individuals who willfully injure a child or deprive a child of food or care canbe imprisoned for one to three years, and adults who have custody of a childmay be subject to two to five years’ imprisonment.[149]In mid-2012, the Ministry of Justice said it was drafting revisions to thepenal code to strengthen sanctions against individuals responsible fortrafficking of women and children.[150]In 2012, the criminal chamber of the Court of Appealsentenced a 31-year-old woman to 10 years in prison for beating a 10-year-oldchild domestic worker, leading to the child’s death, according to newsreports and local NGOs.[151] Thegirl’s employer “loaned” the girl to her daughter and thedaughter’s husband while on vacation in July 2011. A week later, thegirl, identified as Khadija, was found dead, her body covered with bruises. Thegirl’s father initially accepted money from the perpetrator and declinedto press charges, but concerned NGOs, including Bayti and INSAF, pursued legalaction. The woman was charged and convicted with assault resulting in death.Khadija’s death prompted protests by local NGOs andsignificant coverage by the Moroccan media. Local NGOs said the publicityaround the case helped to raise public awareness regarding violence againstchild domestic workers and the possibility of criminal prosecution for suchabuse.Prosecutions of employers who abuse child domestic workersare very rare, however. A government official told Human Rights Watch that in2011 only 16 individuals in Morocco were prosecuted for violence ormistreatment against children, and did not indicate whether any of the casesinvolved violence against child domestic workers.[152]INSAF informed Human Rights Watch of one other case in 2010 of an employersentenced to one year in prison for physical abuse of a child domestic worker,but said the sentence was later reduced to six months.[153]NGOs working with child domestic workers acknowledge that itis difficult to pursue legal action against employers in the absence of strongmedical evidence of physical abuse or a formal complaint. According toILO staff and local NGOs, some cases of abuse are resolved informally betweenthe employer and the child’s family, for example, through a financialpayment, and never become public.[154] Arepresentative of INSAF said, “In many cases, the parents and the girlsare pressured by the employer and intermediaries to accept financialcompensation because of their poor financial situation. In a very few cases, thecourts may impose a sentence, but it happens rarely and after a longtrial.”[155]The Ministry of Justice has undertaken a number ofinitiatives to strengthen legal assistance to women and children who arevictims of violence, including establishing protection cells in all courttribunals to facilitate access to legal protection for women and children,developing information materials about child rights and the services providedby the tribunals, and developing a guidebook on the judicial management of casesof abuse for magistrates, judges, social workers, and others. The Ministry hasalso established regional and local commissions, coordinated by the AttorneyGeneral, to ensure cooperation between government ministries and NGOs workingto provide child protection for victims of violence and mistreatment.[156]Although these measures may be helpful for cases that enterthe judicial system, Human Rights Watch’s interviews suggest that thevast majority of child domestic workers are not aware of the legal or childprotection services that might be available to them, or even where they mightbe able to find a local police station.V. Response by OtherActorsNon-GovernmentalOrganizationsA national network of 34 organizations, known as theCollectif pour l’Eradication du Travail des “Petites Bonnes,”(Collective for the Eradication of Child Domestic Labor) coordinates advocacyand other efforts to prevent child domestic labor in Morocco, to remove girlsfrom abusive or exploitative domestic labor, and to provide them withassistance. Members of the collective, both individually and as a network, havehelped raise public awareness regarding child domestic labor in the country andplay a primary role in assisting child domestic workers who have experiencedabuse. In practice, the most active programs to remove girls from domesticlabor are run by NGOs, not by the government. Although these NGOs receive somegovernment support, they told Human Rights Watch that it is not sufficient tomeet their needs.INSAF serves as secretariat of the collective and has fivestaff dedicated to its program on child domestic labor. It advocates for lawsand policies to protect children from domestic work, raises awareness about thehazards of child domestic work with local communities and the media, and hasprovided direct support to girls by helping remove them from domestic work andreturn to school.In sending areas where families have commonly sent theirdaughters to enter domestic work, INSAF staff work with local school administratorsto identify girls who are of school age but not attending school. If INSAFdetermines that girls are working as domestic workers, they approach thefamilies to discuss the possible hazards of such employment. If the parentsagree to bring the daughter home and enroll her in school, INSAF will sign anagreement with the family to pay a monthly stipend, conditioned on thegirl’s continued school attendance. INSAF staff conduct monthly follow-upvisits with the girls and their families. Since the program began, INSAF hasprovided direct support to 172 former child domestic workers; 147 werereceiving assistance in mid-2012.[157]Association Bayti also, as part of its program on streetchildren, assists former child domestic workers. The organization wasestablished in 1995 and runs community programs for 200-300 street children inCasablanca and a shelter that hosts approximately 20 children. In the late1990’s, it estimated that approximately 45 percent of street children inCasablanca were girls, and that of those girls, approximately 15 to 20 percentwere former child domestic workers who had fled abuse.[158]In 2000, Bayti began working actively to assist child domestic workers, incollaboration with UNICEF.Bayti staff learn of cases of child domestic workers byknocking on doors in residential neighborhoods; from reports by concernedindividuals, such as neighbors; and referrals from the general prosecutor. Iteducates employers regarding relevant laws and programs offered by Bayti, andencourages them to send child domestic workers to the Bayti office toparticipate in literacy and other programs. Staff also interview girls who cometo the office to identify cases of violence or exploitation. The organizationthen works to reintegrate the girl with her family, or if returning her to herfamily is not possible or in her best interest, will host her at the Baytishelter. It also refers cases of abuse to the general prosecutor’s officefor possible criminal prosecution.Bayti staff report that the phenomenon of child domesticlabor is much better known than in previous years, but that individuals arestill afraid to report cases of abuse against child domestic workers. Theorganization worked on twelve child domestic worker cases during the eight monthsbetween September 2011 and April 2012, the director told us.[159]InternationalOrganizations: The ILO and UNICEFThe International Labour Organization (ILO) has been activein Morocco since 1996 and in recent years, has prioritized child domesticlabor. According to ILO staff, it has conducted trainings for labor inspectorsand for other government officials in child labor generally, and child domesticlabor in particular. It has worked with the government to identify hazardouschild labor that should be prohibited and to develop the draft domestic workerlaw. It has also supported programs on the ground to remove children fromdomestic labor and collaborated with other UN agencies and governmentministries to include child domestic labor in a multi-sectoral program to fightgender violence.[160]The ILO’s activities onchild domestic work in Morocco have been cut back, however, as donorallocations to the program have dropped drastically. In 2008, ILO-IPECexpenditures in Morocco were US$1,054,000, with contributions from the UnitedStates ($851,000), Belgium ($165,000), France ($15,000), and the UN Multi-DonorTrust Fund ($23,000).[161]In 2009, total IPEC allocations for Morocco droppedto $227,000,[162]and by 2011, total allocations were only $104,000,with the UN Multi-Donor Trust Fund the only remaining donor.[163]The cuts in the ILO program and budget in Morocco reflectoverall cuts in ILO-IPEC’s budget, due to the international financialcrisis, and significant reductions in funding from the United States,IPEC’s largest donor.  According to the ILO program officer, thereduction in donor funding also may reflect a perception that Morocco has madeprogress in reducing child labor and is less in need of continued support.[164]Between 2002 and 2006, UNICEFsupported pilot projects in Morocco designed to eliminate child labor,including awareness-raising and programs to support non-formal education andincome-generating activities for families as an alternative to child labor. Inrecent years, UNICEF has focused on child protection more generally, includingsupport for legislative reforms and building the capacity of national actors.UNICEF staff in Morocco said the organization has been assisting the Ministryof Solidarity, Women, Family and Social Development in reviewing its nationalaction plan for children, and strengthening child protection initiatives forthe second phase of the plan, to be implemented from 2012 to 2015.[165]ConclusionChild domestic workers make up one of the most vulnerableand hidden groups of child workers. Although Morocco has made significantadvances in reducing rates of child labor and increasing the number of childrenin school, it must increase its efforts to prevent and eliminate child domesticlabor. The distinctive circumstances of child domestic work—involvingwork in private homes, far from one’s family, and isolated from theoutside world—require unique strategies to prevent children’s entryinto domestic labor, to identify and withdraw them from illegal and hazardouswork, and to provide these children with appropriate assistance. Although thenumber of girls entering domestic work appears to be on the decline, many girlsunder age 15 continue to enter domestic work in violation of the Labor Code,and girls of all ages experience violence and mistreatment that constitutecriminal abuse.The Moroccan government has acknowledged that child domesticlabor is a serious problem and has committed itself to eliminate it. HumanRights Watch urges the government to continue and intensify its efforts, inconjunction with civil society and international organizations, until childdomestic work before the age of 15 has been eradicated and girls who arelegally employed enjoy decent working conditions.RecommendationsTo the Moroccan GovernmentStrictly enforce 15 as the minimum age for all employment,including for domestic work, and impose appropriate penalties on bothemployers and labor recruiters who employ or recruit children under theage of 15;Amend the proposed domestic worker law to ensurecompliance with ILO Convention 189 on Decent Work for Domestic Workers(2011), and present the law to Parliament for adoption;  inparticular, amend the draft law to ensure:Limits to hours of work, equivalent to those for other workers,with additional limits on the working hours of children between the ages of 15and 18 to ensure proper rest, education and training, leisure time, and familycontact; Minimum wage coverage equivalent to other workers;A strict limit to the proportion of remuneration that may be paid“in-kind” (e.g. room and board).Continue and expand public awareness campaigns to educateboth sending families and potential employers of laws prohibiting theemployment of children under the age of 15, and the risks of such employmentto child domestic workers; engage the media in such campaigns;Create an effective monitoring system, involving police,social workers, educators, local NGOs, and local authorities to identifychildren under the age of 15 who have entered domestic work and childrenbetween 15 and 18 who may be subject to abuse or conditions thatconstitute the worst forms of child labor;Create an effective and accessible complaints mechanismfor child domestic workers and others to report violations against child domesticworkers, and ensure that the hotline managed by the National Observatoryof Child Rights is widely publicized via television, radio, and publicnotices in transportation centers, schools, post offices, telephoneoffices, and other public locations;Investigate cases of underage employment or abuse of childdomestic workers, authorizing police, social workers, and/or laborinspectors to enter employers’ homes when child domestic labor issuspected, and to withdraw children who are under age 15 or who have beensubject to abuse;Consistent with the proposed domestic worker law, ensurethat employers of child domestic workers below the age of 18 but above theage of 15 file written contracts with labor authorities; implement specialmeasures to monitor conditions for domestic workers under the age of 18,including employment conditions that may jeopardize their health or safetyor interfere with opportunities to participate in further education andtraining;To Morocco’s ParliamentAdopt the proposed domesticworkers law, making necessary amendments to ensure compliance with ILOConvention 189 on Decent Work for Domestic Workers (2011);Ratify ILO Convention 189 on Decent Work for DomesticWorkers (2011).To the Ministry of Employment and ProfessionalTrainingImplement mechanisms to better monitor possible underageemployment of domestic workers, for example, through home visits with theconsent of employers or by interviewing child domestic workers regardingtheir working conditions at local labor offices;Upon adoption of the proposed domestic worker law,establish mechanisms to verify the ages for  domestic workers betweenages 15 and 18 whose contracts have been deposited with labor authorities;and that authorization of their guardian has been obtained;Actively investigate reports of employers orintermediaries who employ or recruit children under the age of 15 andimpose appropriate penalties, as allowed by law;Report cases of underage employment to the police or otherauthorities to allow the removal of children illegally employed and theirreturn to their homes or appropriate shelters or hosting arrangements;Report cases of physical or other abuse of child domesticworkers to police and prosecutors for investigation and possible prosecution;Continue and increase support for NGOs working toeliminate child domestic labor and to assist child domestic workers whohave been employed illegally or victim to violence or exploitation.To the Ministry of Solidarity, Women, Family, andSocial DevelopmentProvide shelters and medical and social services, asappropriate, for child domestic workers who have been subject to abuse orexploitation to facilitate their rehabilitation, entry into school, andreunification with their family, when it is in the child’s bestinterests. Establish alternative long-term hosting arrangements for formerchild domestic workers when reunification with the family is not possibleor in the best interests of the child;Complete a comprehensive survey to establish an accurateestimate of the number of all domestic workers in Morocco, disaggregatedby sex, age, geographic origin, and geographic location of employment;Continue and increase support for NGOs working toeliminate child domestic labor and to assist child domestic workers whohave been employed illegally or victim to violence or exploitation;Coordinate with other ministries to ensure that familiesof children who have been removed from child domestic labor are benefitingfrom appropriate social welfare schemes, such as the Tayssir program.To the Ministry of JusticeProsecute individuals under the Moroccan Criminal Code whoare responsible for violence or other criminal offenses against childdomestic workers;Collect and publish data on prosecutions of individualsfor abuse or exploitation of domestic workers, disaggregated by sex andage of the worker.To the Ministry of National Education, HigherEducation, Staff Development, and Scientific ResearchEnsure that all children under the age of 15 enjoy theirright to a free and compulsory basic education, continuing and expandinginitiatives which are designed to increase school enrollment, particularlyamong girls who are vulnerable to child domestic labor;Develop specific strategies to ensure that domesticworkers above age 15 but below the age of 18 have opportunities tocontinue their schooling if they desire;At the local level, provide regular reports to laborinspectors or other relevant authorities regarding children who are notattending school and may be employed in domestic labor for follow-upintervention and investigation.To International Donors, including the UnitedStates, France, and BelgiumSupport programs designed to prevent the entry of girlsunder age 15 into domestic work and to identify, withdraw, and provideassistance to girls who have been employed under the minimum age or haveexperienced violence or exploitation;Support adoption and implementation of a national law ondomestic workers.To the International Labour Organization and UnitedNations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)Continue and, as feasible, expand projects aimed toprevent girls from entering child domestic labor and effectiveimplementation of Moroccan law prohibiting the employment of childrenunder age 15.AcknowledgementsThis report was researchedand written by Jo Becker, advocacy director of the Children’s RightsDivision of Human Rights Watch, with research assistance by Brahim Elansari,research assistant for the Middle East and North Africa Division of HumanRights Watch.The report was reviewed byZama Coursen-Neff, director of the Children’s Rights Division; EricGoldstein, deputy director of the Middle East and North Africa Division; NishaVaria, senior researcher in the Women’s Rights Division; Clive Baldwin,senior legal advisor; and Babatunde Olugboji, deputy program director of HumanRights Watch.  Production and editing assistance was provided by NoahBeaudette, associate in the Children’s Rights Division. Anna Lopriore,creative manager, Grace Choi, publication director, Kathy Mills, publicationsspecialist, and Fitzroy Hepkins, mail and print manager, provided productionassistance.Human Rights Watch is grateful to the following for theirinvaluable assistance during our research, and in particular, for facilitatingour interviews with former child domestic workers: Omar El Kindi, Meriem Kamal,Omar Saadoune, Amal Mouhssine, and Larby Bakhouz of INSAF; Amina L’Malihand Saida Saghir of Association Bayti; and Hafida El Baz of Association SolidariteFeminine. We also thank Malika El Atifi and Mahdi Halmi of UNICEF; Malak BenChekroun and Laurence Dubois of the International Labour Organization;Saadia Serghini of the Casablanca Child Protection Unit; and representatives of the National HumanRights Council (CNDH) for meeting with us andproviding helpful information.We acknowledge the helpful cooperation of Abderrazak Rouwaneand the Interministerial Delegation for Human Rights of the Kingdom of Morocco;and thank the government officials who agreed to be interviewed for thisreport, including Abdelouahad Souhail, minister of employment and professionaldevelopment, and Bassima Hakkaoui, minister of solidarity, women, family, andsocial development.Most of all, Human Rights Watch thanks the girls and youngwomen who shared with us their experiences as domestic workers in Morocco.Appendix IClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageAppendix IIClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand Image[1]International Labor Organization, Global and regional estimates on domesticworkers: Domestic Work Policy Brief 4 (Geneva, ILO, 2011), p. 6.[2]Ibid, p. 8.[3]Ibid., p. 9.[4]Tone Sommerfelt, ed., Domestic Child Labor in Morocco: An analysis of theparties involved in relationships to “Petites Bonnes,” FafoInstitute for Applied Social Science (Oslo: Fafo, 2001), pp. 15-17.[5]International Labor Organization (ILO), Report of the Committee of Experts onthe Application of Conventions and Recommendations, ILC, 100thSession, 2011, ICL.100/111/1A, p 358.[6]Email communication from the Moroccan Interministerial Delegation for HumanRights to Human Rights Watch, June 15, 2012.[7]High Commission for Planning, “Information noteofthe HighCommission for Planningon the occasion oftheWorld Day againstChildLabour,” (“Note d’information duHaut-Commissariat au Plan à l’occasion de la Journéemondiale contre le travail des enfants”), June 12, 2012.[8]Ibid.[9]Ibid.[10]Human Rights Watch interview with Malika El Atifi, child protection specialist,UNICEF, Rabat, Morocco, April 24, 2012.[11]Ibid.[12]Human Rights Watch interview with Omar El Kindi, president, INSAF, Casablanca,July 14, 2012.[13]For example, Understanding Children’s Work (UCW), UnderstandingChildren’s Work in Morocco, prepared by the inter-Agency ResearchCooperation Initiative of the ILO, UNICEF, and World Bank, March 2003, pp.17-18.[14]Government of the Kingdom of Morocco, 3rd and 4thPeriodic Report to the Committee on the Rights of the Child, May 2012, para359.14Collectif Associatif pour l’Eradication du Travail des “PetitesBonnes,” “Contre le Travail Domestique des Filles Agees de Moins de15 ans: Mémorandum,” November 2010, p. 10.[16]Ibid.[17]ILO, Global and Regional Estimates on Domestic Workers: Domestic Work PolicyBrief 4 (Geneva, ILO, 2011), p 7. Men who are officially counted amongdomestic workers are often employed as gardeners, groundskeepers, securityguards, or private drivers.[18]Human Rights Watch interview with Karima R., Casablanca, Morocco, April 25,2012.[19]Human Rights Watch interview with Nadia, Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30, 2012.[20]Collectif Associatif pour l’Eradication du Travail des “PetitesBonnes,” “Ending Domestic Work of Girls Under15: Memorandum”(“Contre le Travail Domestique des Filles Agées de Moins de 15ans: Mémorandum”), November 2010, p. 10. The five sendingregions were Casablanca, Rabat, Meknès, Tangiers, and Marrakesh.[21]Human Rights Watch interview with Najat S., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[22]Human Rights Watch interview with Zohra H., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[23]Human Rights Watch interview with Amina K., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[24]Human Rights Watch interview with Nadia R., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[25]Human Rights Watch interview with Latifa L., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[26]Human Rights Watch interview with Malika S., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[27]Human Rights Watch interview with Leila E., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[28]Human Rights Watch interview with Amal Mouhssine, social assistant, INSAF,Imintanoute, Morocco, July 10, 2012.[29]Ibid.[30]Human Rights Watch interview with Malika S., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[31]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatima K., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[32]Human Rights Watch interview with Hanan E., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[33]Human Rights Watch interview with Aicha E., Casablanca, Morocco, April 27,2012.[34]Human Rights Watch interview with Najat S., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[35]Human Rights Watch interview with Rabia M., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[36]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatima K., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[37]Human Rights Watch interview with Souad B., Casablanda, Morocco, April 25,2012.[38]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatima K., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[39]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatima K., Inimtanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[40]Human Rights Watch interview with Hanan E., Inimtanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[41]Human Rights Watch interview with Zohra H., Inimtanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[42]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatima K., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[43]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatima K., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[44]Human Rights Watch interview with Malika S., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[45]Human Rights Watch interview with Najat S., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[46]Human Rights Watch interview with Hanan E., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[47]Government decree no 2.11.247, issued July 1, 2011, published in the OfficialGazette No. 5959 on July 11, 2011. The minimum wage was agreed between theMoroccan government and Moroccan trade unions.[48]ILO Convention 189 concerning Decent Work for Domestic Workers, art. 12(2); ILORecommendation 201 concerning Decent Work for Domestic Workers, art. 14 (a).[49]Human Rights Watch interview with Najat S., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[50]Human Rights Watch interview with Hanan E., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[51]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatima L, Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[52]Human Rights Watch interview with Latifa L., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[53]Human Rights Watch interview with Amina K., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[54]Human Rights Watch interview with Zohra H., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[55]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatima K., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[56]Human Rights Watch interview with Aziza S., Casablanca, Morocco, April 25,2012.[57]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatima K., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[58]Human Rights Watch interview with Aziza S., Casablanca, Morocco, April 25,2012.[59]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatima K., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[60]Amal’s experience as a child domestic worker predated the period of ourinquiry (2005 to 2012) but is included to further illustrate the vulnerabilityof child domestic workers to sexual violence.[61]Human Rights Watch interview with Amal K., Casablanca, Morocco, April 27, 2012.[62]Human Rights Watch interview with Hanan E., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[63]Human Rights Watch interview with Samira B., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[64]Human Rights Watch interview with Latifa L., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[65]Human Rights Watch interview with Zohra H., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[66]Human Rights Watch interview with Zohra H., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[67]Human Rights Watch interview with Samira B., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[68]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatima K., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[69]Human Rights Watch interview with Leila E., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[70]Human Rights Watch interview with Malika S., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[71]Human Rights Watch interview with Hafida H., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[72]Human Rights Watch interview with Aziza S., Casablanca, Morocco, April 25,2012.[73]Human Rights Watch interview with Karima R., Casablanca, Morocco, April 25,2012.[74]Human Rights Watch interview with Souad B., Casablanca, Morocco, April 25,2012.[75]Human Rights Watch interview with Karima R., Casablanca, Morocco, April 25,2012.[76]Human Rights Watch interview with Aziza S., Casablanca, Morocco, April 25,2012.[77]Human Rights Watch interview with Karima R., Casablanca, Morocco, April 25,2012.[78]A social assistant is similar to a social worker, but does not have the sametraining.[79]Human Rights Watch interview with Amal Mouhssine, Social Assistant, INSAF,Imintanoute, Morocco, July 10, 2012.[80]Human Rights Watch interview with Souad B., Casablanca, Morocco, April 25,2012.[81]Human Rights Watch interview with Amina K., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[82]Human Rights Watch interview with Nadia R., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[83]Human Rights Watch interview with Hanan E., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[84]Human Rights Watch interview with Leila E., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[85]Human Rights Watch interview with Rabia M., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[86]Human Rights Watch interview with Yasmina M., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012[87]Human Rights Watch interview with Malika S., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[88]Human Rights Watch interview with Najat S., Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[89]Human Rights Watch interview with Rabia M., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[90]Human Rights Watch interview with Malika S., Imintanoute, Morocco, April 30,2012.[91]Human Rights Watch interviews, Imintanoute, Morocco, May 1, 2012.[92]Morocco Labor Code, Law No 99-65, enacted June 2004, art. 143.[93]Moroccan Penal Code, arts. 408 and 411.[94]Decree No. 2-10-183, November 16, 2010, published in the Official Gazette,January 6, 2011.[95]Interministerial Delegation, June 15, 2012.[96]Human Rights Watch interview with Addelouehed Souhail, minister of employmentand professional training, May 2, 2012.[97]The draft law specifies salary for 96 hours of work (the equivalent of 12 days,based on an 8-hour work day) for the first 5 years of service, ranging up to240 hours of salary for a period of service of more than 15 years.[98]The convention states: “National laws, regulations, collective agreementsor arbitration awards may provide for the payment of a limited proportion ofthe remuneration of domestic workers in the form of payments in kind that arenot less favourable than those generally applicable to other categories ofworkers, provided that measures are taken to ensure that such payments in kindare agreed to by the worker, are for the personal use and benefit of theworker, and that the monetary value attributed to them is fair andreasonable.” ILO Convention 189 concerning Decent Work for DomesticWorkers, art. 12 (2). The accompanying recommendation states: “Whenprovision is made for the payment in kind of a limited proportion ofremuneration, Members should consider: (a) establishing an overall limit on theproportion of the remuneration that may be paid in kind so as not to diminishunduly the remuneration necessary for the maintenance of domestic workers andtheir families; ... (d) ensuring that, when a domestic worker is required tolive in accommodation provided by the household, no deduction may be made fromthe remuneration with respect to that accommodation, unless otherwise agreed toby the worker....” ILO Recommendation 201 concerning Decent Work forDomestic Workers, art. 14, (a) and (d).[99]ILO Recommendation 201 concerning Decent Work for Domestic Workers, art. 11(3).[100]Human Rights Watch interview with Meriem Kamal, director of partnerships andcommunication, INSAF, Casablanca, April 23, 2012.[101]Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), G.A. res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N.GAOR Supp. (No 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into forceSeptember 2, 1990.[102]CRC, art. 32.[103]Committee on the Rights of the Child, “Concluding Observations:Morocco,” CRC/C/15/Add.211, July 10, 2003, para. 61.[104]ILO Convention 182 Concerning the Prohibition and immediate Action for theElimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor (“Worst Forms of ChildLabor Convention”), adopted June 17, 1999, ILM 1207 (entered into forceNovember 19, 2000), art. 1.[105]Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention, arts. 3(a) and (d).[106]International Labor Organization Recommendation Concerning the Prohibition andImmediate Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor, paras. 3(a) and(e).[107]ILO, Report of the Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions andRecommendations, International Labor Convention, 100th Session,2011, ILC.100/111/1A, p 358.[108]ILO Convention 189 concerning Decent Work for Domestic Workers (DomesticWorkers Convention), adopted June 16, 2011, not yet in force.[109]ILO Convention No 138 concerning the Minimum Age for Admission to Employment(Minimum Age Convention) was ratified by Morocco on January 6, 2000. It setsthe minimum age for admission to employment at 15, allowing exceptions only fora state “whose economy and educational facilities are insufficientlydeveloped,” which may “initially specify a minimum age of 14years.” Art. 2(4). Under the Convention, Morocco set its minimum age at15.[110]Domestic Workers Convention, art. 4.[111]Domestic Workers Recommendation, para. 5(1).[112]Domestic Workers Convention, para. 5(2).[113]Human Rights Watch interview with Addelouehed Souhail, minister of employmentand professional training, May 2, 2012.[114]Constitution of Morocco, Article 32.[115]Law no. 04.00, implemented by Dahir no. 1.00.200 issued on May 9, 2000.Articles 1, 3, 5, 6.[116]World Bank, World Development Indicators: Morocco, available athttp://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.PRM.CMPT.ZS?display=default (accessedJune 26, 2012).[117]Ibid.[118]Children in the first and second years of primary school receive 60dirham/month; those in the third and fourth years receive 80 dirham/month;fifth- and sixth-years receive 100 dirham/month; beginning in 2011, those inmiddle school receive 140 dirham/month.[119]Interministerial Delegation for Human Rights, June 15, 2012 communication toHuman Rights Watch.[120]Ibid.[121]Human Rights Watch interview with Florencia Devoto, researcher, Poverty ActionLab, April 17, 2012.[122]Ibid.[123]Interministerial Delegation, June 15, 2012.[124]Ibid.[125]Ibid.[126]Interministerial Delegation, June 15, 2012. The net enrollment rate is thenumber of children of official primary school age who are enrolled in primaryeducation as a percentage of the total children of the official primaryschool-age population. Enrollment rates do not measure students’ actualattendance.[127]Le Matin, “Child Labor: Ending theExploitation” (“Travail des enfants : Mettre fin àl'instrumentalisation“), June 13, 2012, available at http://www.lematin.ma/express/Travail-des-enfants-_Mettre-fin-a-l-instrumentalisation/167739.html[128]Human Rights Watch interview with Malak Ben Chekroun, program administrator,ILO Morocco, Rabat, April 24, 2012.[129]Interministerial Delegation, June 15, 2012.[130]Interministerial Delegation, June 15, 2012.[131]Human Rights Watch interview with Malak Ben Chekroun, program administrator,ILO Morocco, Rabat. April 24, 2012.[132]Interministerial delegation, June 15, 2012.[133]Human Rights Watch interview with Addelouehed Souhail, minister of employmentand vocational training, Rabat, May 2, 2012.[134]Ibid.[135]Interministerial Delegation, June 15, 2012. The information provided did notindicate the period of time in which these cases were handled.[136]Human Rights Watch interview with Serghini Saadia, director, Casablanca ChildProtection Unit, April 27, 2012, Casablanca.[137]Ibid.[138]Human Rights Watch with local NGO worker, identity withheld, April 28, 2012,Marrakech.[139]Interview with NGO worker, April 28, 2012, Marrakech; interview with SaadiaSerghini Saadia, director, Casablanca Child Protection Unit, April 27, 2012,Casablanca.[140]Human Rights Watch interview with Meriem Kamal, director of partnerships andcommunication, INSAF, April 23, 2012, Casablanca.[141]Human Rights Watch interview with Bassima Hakkaoui, minister of solidarity,women, family and social development, Rabat, Morocco, May 3, 2012.[142]Human Rights Watch interview with Bassima Hakkaoui, minister of solidarity,women, family, and social development, Rabat, Morocco, May 3, 2012.[143]Interministerial Delegation, June 15, 2012.[144]Interministerial Delegation, June 15, 2012.[145]Government of the Kingdom of Morocco, “Third and Fourth Periodic Reportto the Committee on the Rights of the Child,” May 2012, para 39.[146]Collectif Associatif pour l’Eradication du Travail des “Petites Bonnes,”“Contre le Travail Domestique des Filles Agees de Moins de 15 ans:Mémorandum,” November 2010, p. 10.[147]Interministerial Delegation, June 15, 2012.[148]Human Rights Watch interview with Mr. Addelouehed Souhail, minister ofemployment and professional training, May 2, 2012, Casablanca.[149]Moroccan Penal Code, arts. 408 and 411.[150]Human Rights Watch meeting with representatives of the Ministry of Justice, May4, 2012, Rabat; Interministerial Delegation communication to Human RightsWatch, June 15, 2012.[151]Abderrafii Aloumliki, “Al Jadida: She killed her 10-year old maid and got10 years in prison,” Maghress, April 17, 2012, available athttp://www.maghress.com/fr/aujourdhui/87580.[152]Human Rights Watch meeting with representatives of the Ministry of Justice, May4, 2012, Rabat; Interministerial Delegation communication to Human RightsWatch, June 15, 2012.[153]Human Rights Watch interview with Meriem Kamal, Casablanca, April 23, 2012.[154]Human Rights Watch interview with Malak Ben Chekroun, program administrator,ILO Morocco, April 24, 2012, Rabat.[155]Human Rights Watch interview with Amal Mouhssine, social assistant, INSAF,Imintanoute, Morocco, July 10, 2012.[156]Ibid.[157]Human Rights Watch interview with Meriem Kamal, Partnerships and Communication,INSAF, April 23, 2012, Casablanca.[158]Human Rights Watch interview with Amina L’Malih, director, and SaidaSaghir, educator, Bayti, April 23, 2012, Casablanca.[159]Human Rights Watch interview with Amina L’Malih, director, and SaidaSaghir, educator, Bayti, April 23, 2012, Casablanca.[160]Human Rights Watch interview with Malak Ben Checkroun, program administrator,ILO Morocco, April 24, 2012, Rabat.[161]International Labor Organization, “Action Against Child Labor:IPEC Highlights 2008,” February 2009, p. 64.The previous year, France hadallocated US$78,238 for child labor programs in Morocco. Ibid.[162]International Labor Organization, “Action Against Child Labor2008-2009: IPEC Progress and Future Priorities,” February 2010, p. 89.[163]International Labor Organization, “IPEC Action Against Child Labor2010-2011: Progress and Future Priorities,” February 2012, p. 108.[164] HumanRights Watch interview with Malak Ben Checkroun, program administrator, ILOMorocco, April 24, 2012, Rabat.[165]Human Rights Watch interview with Malika El Atifi, child protection specialist,and Mahdi Halmi, social and political specialist, UNICEF, Rabat, April 24,2012.Related ContentNovember 15, 2012News ReleaseMorocco: Abuse of Child Domestic WorkersBeatings, Little Pay or Rest, Weak Enforcement of Child Labor LawsNovember 15, 2012News ReleaseMorocco: Abuse of Child Domestic WorkersRegion / CountryMiddle East/North Africa Morocco/Western SaharaProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch