Exploitation in the Name of Education: Uneven Progress in Ending Forced Child Begging in Senegal | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportMarch 19, 2014Exploitation in the Name of EducationUneven Progress in Ending Forced Child Begging in SenegalAvailable InEnglishFrançaisA boy counts his earnings to make sure he has reached the daily begging quota set by his Quranic teacher, in the Medina Gounass suburb of Dakar, Senegal.© 2013 Rebecca Blackwell/Associated PressExploitation in the Name of EducationUnevenProgress in Ending Forced Child Begging in SenegalMap ofSenegal and Guinea-BissauSummaryRecommendationsTo theNational AssemblyTo theGovernment of President SallOn theApplication of the Law against Forced BeggingOn theRegulation of Quranic SchoolsToInternational DonorsMethodologyI.Regulation of Quranic SchoolsUnsafeLiving Conditions in Quranic Schools Marked by AbuseGovernmentEfforts to Introduce Regulations, Minimum StandardsFactors thatThreaten Progress in Realizing Minimum StandardsNeed forPolitical Will and CourageNeed forFinancial Commitment to Enforce RegulationsAllies inWaiting: Religious Leaders and Many Quranic TeachersII.Application of the Law against Forced BeggingExploitationand Abuse through Forced BeggingGovernmentEfforts to Enforce the Law against Forced BeggingFactors thatThreaten Progress in Enforcing the LawLack ofHigh-Level Political WillLack ofCourage from Lower-level AuthoritiesUntrainedJudges, Police, and ProsecutorsPoorCommunication from the GovernmentAcknowledgmentsMap of Senegal andGuinea-BissauClick to expand ImageThe main routes of migration in Senegal andGuinea-Bissau for boys in Quranic boarding schools marked by forced childbegging. The routes shown are based on Human Rights Watch’s research forits 2010 report as well as studies by other organizations working on the issue.© 2010 John Emerson / Human RightsWatchSummaryThese children are in a system that benefits everyone butthem…. The child works by begging for goods and for money, which will begiven to his parents or taken by the Quranic teacher. And the child, 5 or 10years later, hasn’t even finished learning the Quran.... If the countrydoes not … care for these children and tackle the Quranic educationproblem once and for all, in 10 years we will have a huge problem on our hands,because we will have to deal with these children.—Senegalese civil society activist, Dakar, January2014Late on March 3, 2013, a fire erupted in the Dakarneighborhood of Medina. Flames quickly engulfed a Quranic boarding school,housed in a makeshift shack; eight young boys at the school were burned todeath. The teacher—and de facto guardian—was absent, havingreturned to his home because, in the words of one neighbor, “where thechildren sleep [was] unsanitary and uninhabitable.” A host of high-levelgovernment officials visited the site in the days after the fire and vowed,“Never again.”President Macky Sall, who came to power in April 2012,promised to end forced child begging and the inhuman living conditions incertain Quranic schools, pledging: “Strong measures will be taken to endthe exploitation of children, under the pretext that they are Quranic students.This tragedy demands that we intervene and identify every site like this onethat exists. They will be closed and the children provided for.”While there has been some progress, Sall’s promiseremains largely unrealized one year later. After the Medina fire, authoritiesintervened to close only one school that threatened children’s safety,although activists say that hundreds more are easily identifiable. As a resultof the lax enforcement of laws on the books, tens of thousands of boys acrossSenegal continue to be subjected to the practice of forced begging.This report, which follows Human Rights Watch’s April2010 report that documented the system of exploitation and abuse in many ofSenegal’s Quranic boarding schools, examines the uneven governmentefforts in the year since the Medina tragedy to follow through on PresidentSall’s pledge. Interviews with boys experiencing such abuse and withSenegalese civil society activists working on the issue, coupled with sitevisits to some 25 Quranic schools in October 2013 and January 2014, revealedthe serious consequences of insufficient government action.In the town of Saint Louis, Human Rights Watch visited twoQuranic schools, inhabited by boys as young as seven years old, that sit within10 meters of a garbage dump littered with animal carcasses, old car parts, andburned refuse. In the Dakar suburb of Guédiawaye, at least 150 youngboys, some no older than six, sleep in an abandoned concrete structure with noelectricity or water—except for pools of rainwater—hundreds ofmosquitoes, and no toilet except for the dirt floor on which they stand tobathe. Similar schools exist in other urban areas throughout the country. Manyare woefully overcrowded, with 20 or more boys sharing the floor of a smallroom at night—or choosing instead to brave the elements outside.Diseases, from skin infections to malaria, are common, and those in charge ofthe schools are often negligent in obtaining treatment.Thousands of boys at certain Quranic schools spend themajority of their day begging on the streets of Senegal’s cities. Theirteacher demands that they bring back a set quota of money, uncooked rice, andsugar. The money fills his pockets. The rice and sugar are used for his family—almostnever for the boys at the school, who beg for their own meals—or arebagged and sold, to make even greater profits off of the boys’ labor.When they fail to bring back the daily quota, the punishment is swift andfierce, with the teacher often meting out brutal beatings. Unsurprisingly,hundreds of boys run away each year.The actions needed to end the exploitation and abuse of childrenin certain Quranic schools have long been identified by Senegalese civilsociety: first, introduce regulations and government oversight for Quranicschools in order to ensure standards that protect the children’s rights;and second, apply the 2005 law that criminalizes trafficking and profiting fromforced begging.Over the past year, the government has made some progresstoward creating a legal framework that would regulate Quranic schools. A draftlaw and several draft implementing decrees that would recognize and establishoversight for Quranic schools is expected to be presented to the NationalAssembly in the coming months. If passed, the law and decrees would establishimportant norms and standards about school conditions and teacher qualifications;require that the schools submit to education and health inspections; and endthe practice of begging in any school recognized by the government. Aninspector in the education ministry said that, once the law is passed,authorities will close schools that exist mainly for the teacher’sbenefit through exploiting children. The groundwork to swiftly and effectivelyapply the proposed law, including by shutting down schools where childrensuffer exploitation and abuse, is also being laid by the justice ministry’santi-trafficking unit, which has done a census of almost all of the Quranicschools in the region of Dakar and plans to extend the project throughout thecountry.But the real impact of the proposed law remains uncertain.There is a risk that it will merely add a new text to the many strong laws andplans that already exist in Senegal. In February 2013, the government created adetailed action plan to eradicate child begging by 2015, and in December 2013,it validated a national child protection strategy. These important achievementsboth referenced the need to apply the 2005 law against forced begging andtrafficking. Designed in large part to tackle the exploitation and abuse incertain Quranic schools, the 2005 law has rarely been enforced, even inegregious cases, due primarily to lack of political will.For the last decade, Senegal’s inability to end thewidespread exploitation of children through forced begging has never beenbecause of a lack of strong laws. Absent the courage and commitment to followthrough and enforce the draft law that will regulate Quranic schools, the lawcurrently under review will end up like the 2005 law against forced begging:good on paper, but irrelevant in ending abuse. Moreover, the draft regulatorylaw should not be seen as a substitute for the law against forced begging. Thetwo laws can and should work together, empowering authorities to recognize andsupport the thousands of Quranic teachers who educate and provide for the childrenin their care; close schools with unsanitary conditions that endanger children’shealth and safety; and arrest and prosecute those who profit from forcing youngboys to beg and inflict often extreme abuse to enforce their system ofexploitation.In the year since the Medina fire, Human Rights Watch isaware of only one prosecution specifically for forced child begging—despitethe widespread evidence of crimes, with thousands of boys begging in the open,often near police officers and police stations; and scores of boys in contactwith state social workers after having run away from Quranic schools where theysuffered extreme exploitation and abuse. As with previous governments,President Sall seems to have backtracked after an outcry from certain groups ofQuranic teachers that no school should be closed and no teacher prosecuted. Yetincreasingly in Senegal, civil society, imams, and many Quranic teachers areready allies in ending abuses. A leading religious authority in Senegal’sholy city of Touba told Human Rights Watch that to call those who force kids tobeg “Quranic teachers” or their places “Quranicschools” was an “insult” to the real ones.Thousands of boys continue to toil in conditions akin tomodern servitude. To protect them from further abuse, the government should notonly support the country’s thousands of good Quranic teachers, but alsoclose down schools that threaten children’s health and safety and holdaccountable those who exploit and abuse children who they have been entrustedto educate and protect.Click to expand ImagePeople gather at the site where at least eight boys at aQuranic boarding school died in a fire on March 3, 2013 in Dakar. © 2013AFP/Getty ImagesRecommendationsTo the NationalAssemblyPass, as a matter of priority, the draft law and all draftimplementing decrees related to the regulation of Quranic schools.Revise Article 245 of the Penal Code so that the act ofbegging is no longer criminalized, particularly when done by children.To the Government ofPresident SallOn the Application ofthe Law against Forced BeggingState publicly unambiguous support for the enforcement ofLaw No. 2005-06, which criminalizes trafficking and profiting from forcinganother person to beg.Issue a decree or order stating that the act of forcingchildren to beg, including by Quranic teachers, is not covered by theexception in Penal Code Article 245.Issue, from the president and key ministers, instructionsaddressed to relevant authorities in the interior, justice, family, andeducation ministries stating that the law’s implementation is apriority in line with the government’s recently adopted childprotection strategy.Enforce immediately the law against forced begging againstthose who demand that boys return specific quotas of money from long hoursof begging each day and often inflict severe physical abuse to enforcethese payments.Instruct the police to proactively investigate theconditions of children found begging on the streets and to report casesof child exploitation and abuse to the proper judicial authorities forprosecution.Prioritize, through efforts already underway in theanti-trafficking unit, trainings for police, gendarmes, prosecutors, andjudges on the law against forced begging, the types of cases to look for,and how to conduct proper investigations that can hold up in a court oflaw.Ensure that prosecutors and investigative judges operatein full independence of the Executive and are able to pursue cases ofchild exploitation and abuse without interference or consequences.Communicate effectively with religious leaders and thegeneral population about the enforcement of the law, making clear thatauthorities will only target those who engage in exploitation and abuse ofboys in their charge.Publish communiqués that outline the facts behindconvictions for forced begging, to better explain to the public andreligious authorities the necessity of such action.Consider issuing an amendment to the law against forcedbegging to provide for a greater range of penalties, modifying the currentpunishment of mandatory two- to five year prison sentences to includeprison sentences under two years as well as non-custodial sentences, sothat punishments can be better apportioned to the severity ofexploitation.Publish every six months, based on the recently concludedagreement between the justice and interior ministries, statisticsassociated with anti-trafficking efforts, including arrests, charges, andconvictions. Collate and publish statistics specifically on arrests,charges, and convictions related to forced begging.Organize a meeting with religious authorities—includingthe Caliphs, leading imams, and Quranic teachers—with a view to issuea joint statement supporting the application of the law against those whoexploit boys through forced begging.On the Regulation ofQuranic SchoolsTake immediate steps to remove children from schools thatviolate their rights to health, education, and freedom from exploitationand physical or emotional abuse. Work with civil society to temporarilyplace such children in shelters already identified by the family ministry,while undertaking family tracing to return the children to their parents.Publicize swiftly and widely the law regulating Quranicschools, once passed by the National Assembly. Translate the relevant lawsand implementing decrees in local languages and disseminate them through keyoutlets, including community radios around the country.Establish a hotline for people to report Quranic schoolsthat appear to have unsanitary or dangerous conditions or whose studentsare often seen begging, facilitating inspections by relevant stateofficials.Ensure that there are adequate inspectors responsible foroverseeing that Quranic schools meet minimum conditions that protectchildren’s rights to health, education, and freedom fromexploitation and abuse. Ensure that the inspectors regularly conductunannounced site visits and close sites that do not meet standards thatprotect the best interests of the child.Collect and systematically make public statistics on thenumber of site visits conducted by inspectors; the number of schoolsidentified as not meeting basic standards; and the actions taken when suchschools are identified.Provide additional financial and logistical support to theanti-trafficking unit, so that it can continue its exhaustive mapping ofQuranic schools countrywide.To International DonorsConsider providing increased budgetary support for thejustice ministry’s anti-trafficking unit, in particular in regardsto its efforts to enforce the law against forced begging and to conduct anexhaustive mapping of Quranic schools across the country.Consider providing budgetary, technical, and logisticalsupport to relevant authorities in the education ministry responsible forinspecting and overseeing appropriate conditions in schools, includingQuranic schools.For more detailed recommendations, see Human Rights Watch’sApril 2010 report, “Off the Backs of the Children.”MethodologyThis report is based primarily on research missions toSenegal in October 2013 and January 2014, each lasting around two weeks. Theresearch was conducted in the capital Dakar and its suburbs; the cities ofSaint Louis, Diourbel, and Touba; as well as several villages between Diourbeland Touba. Human Rights Watch interviewed more than 60 people in total,including Senegalese civil society activists; Quranic teachers; current andformer students from both model Quranic schools and schools where exploitationand abuse is rife; religious authorities from Senegal’s brotherhoods;Senegalese academics on Islam and the history of Quranic education;representatives of the United Nations, diplomatic missions, and humanitarianorganizations; and government officials in the justice, education, and familyministries. The report examines the mixed record of President Sall’sgovernment in addressing forced begging and unsafe living conditions in certainQuranic boarding schools—particularly in the year after a fire at onesuch school killed eight boys.Interviews were conducted individually, with the presence insome cases of Senegalese civil society activists who knew and introduced theperson to Human Rights Watch. Interviews with children, Quranicteachers, and some religious authorities were conducted with the use of aninterpreter between French and either Wolof or Pulaar. Human Rights Watch didnot offer interviewees any incentive, and people were able to end the interviewat any time. Throughout the report, names and identifying information of someinterviewees have been withheld to protect their privacy. Some people spoke onthe condition of anonymity, out of fear of repercussions for voicingcriticisms.The work builds on 11 weeks of field research that HumanRights Watch conducted in 2009 and 2010, which formed the basis of the April2010 report “Off the Backs of the Children”: Forced Begging and Other Abuses against Talibés in Senegal. That report provides a much more detailed account of the history ofQuranic education in Senegal, the rise of exploitation and abuse in certainschools, and the experiences of young boys in such schools. The 2010 report wasbased on interviews with 175 children who were current or former students inQuranic schools; 33 Quranic teachers and imams; 20 families in Senegalese andBissau-Guinean villages who had sent their children to Quranic schools;national and local government officials in Senegal and Guinea-Bissau; academicsand religious historians; and representatives from diplomatic missions as wellas national and international organizations working on the issue of forcedchild begging.This report is organized according to the twooverarching issues that Senegalese civil society and many government officialsidentify as the keys to ending the widespread exploitation and abuse of youngboys at certain Quranic schools. Section I examines government measures to endthe longstanding lack of regulation of Quranic schools, which has allowedcertain teachers to open schools in unsanitary, unsafe conditions. Section IIexamines the scant enforcement of the country’s law against traffickingand forced begging, which has allowed certain men to manipulate traditionaleducation into a business built on the labor of young boys forced to beg forlong hours.Throughout the report, Human Rights Watch willat times put in quotes words like “Quranic school” or“teacher,” to signify that the proper meaning of those terms hardlyapplies when boys spend most of their time begging to meet the “teacher’s”daily demand for a specific amount of money. Many Senegalese civil societyactivists and religious authorities routinely refer to the abusive andexploitative places as “so-called Quranic schools” or“self-proclaimed Quranic schools”—todistinguish them from the thousands of daaras, or Quranic schools, wherechildren do not beg, are well cared for by the marabout, or Quranicteacher, and receive a strong religious and moral education. However, becausethe places present themselves as “Quranic schools”—and the children do spend some time learning the Quran, even ifsignificantly less than they spend on the street begging—it remains the most appropriate terminology.I. Regulation of Quranic SchoolsThe draft law to regulate the daaras[1]is a good thing, but in the past, the government has been quick to say it wasgoing to do something, but then [not follow through]…. Applying the lawcould pose a problem, just as with the law [against forced begging].—Senegalese civil societyactivist[2]In the 2010 report, Human Rights Watch documented how thelack of regulation of Quranic schools—including schools where young boyslive, far from their families—had allowed for the proliferation ofschools where teachers twisted religious education into economic exploitation.A leading Senegalese civil society activist on the talibé,[3]or Quranic student, issue explained in January that this remains a coreproblem:When an educational gap exists and no monitoring mechanismsare put into place … there will always be people who take advantage ofthe situation…. [S]ince there is no monitoring, simply anybody can open adaara, anywhere and anyhow, provided that that person looks the part. I couldgo into a neighborhood where nobody knows me today, dressed exactly as I am,and become a Quranic teacher, even if I know I don’t know the Quran, simplybecause there are no measures for monitoring and reporting [bad daaras]. Sowhat happens? There are some Quranic teachers who are good, who were trained inthe best schools, who are truly Quranic scholars…. There are others whotake advantage of the system in order to exploit children through begging. Thisis why there is such chaos today…. Some students are at Quranic schoolsfor 10 years and know nothing of the Quran. The Quranic teacher is gettingrich. Some get so rich that they leave the country to live abroad. Others makethe children work so they can build big houses. The problem is the lack ofmonitoring, inadequate regulation.[4]In general, boys in Quranic boarding schools in urbanSenegal come from the poorest, rural regions of the country as well as fromneighboring countries, particularly Guinea-Bissau.[5]Many parents who send children to such schools appear motivated by a desire forthe child to memorize the Quran and obtain a moral education. For some parents,however, the decision is rooted in neglect; by confiding a child to a Quranicteacher, it becomes the teacher’s responsibility, and no longer theirown, to feed, house, and care for the child.[6] Many ofthe abusive Quranic teachers themselves hail from poor, rural villages and haveused the lack of regulation to set up “schools” where they enrichthemselves through the children’s labor, as described by the activistabove. Some of these “teachers” bring back money or bags of rice tofamilies who have sent them a child, creating a web of exploitation basedaround the child’s begging.[7]In the year since the Medina fire, President Macky Sall’sgovernment has made notable progress toward introducing basic standards forQuranic schools and Quranic teachers. A draft law and four draft implementingdecrees all designed to regulate and oversee Quranic schools are currently inthe pipeline for the National Assembly. Passing the law and decrees wouldconstitute an important step forward.At the same time, as discussed in more detail in Section IIbelow, Senegal already has strong laws and policies that could be used to endthe practice of forced child begging, but these laws are almost never enforced.While the new law will provide a different and, in some respects, potentiallymore effective tool to improve the situation of all children attending Quranicschools, it will only succeed if there is the political determination andfinancial support to enforce the law.Click to expand ImageTwo boys, one of whom is ill, at a Quranicboarding school in Saint Louis, Senegal, October 4, 2012. © 2012 HollyPickett/ReduxUnsafe LivingConditions in Quranic Schools Marked by AbuseHuman Rights Watch’s 2010 report described in detailhow certain Quranic teachers open schools in dilapidated shacks or abandonedhouses that are completely unfit for living, particularly for young children.Diseases—from skin infections to malaria—are rampant due to theunsanitary and overcrowded conditions, and the boys are often left to seektreatment on their own. The follow-up research in October 2013 and January 2014showed that this remains a widespread problem, even in the aftermath of thefire in the Medina daara.In the Golf Sud neighborhood of a Dakar suburb, Human RightsWatch visited a Quranic boarding school in January 2014 where over 150talibés from Guinea-Bissau reside, crammed 20 to 30 to a room at nightin an unfinished and abandoned concrete structure. Boys there said that theyare forced to beg for 500 francs CFA (US$1) a day. The Quranic teacher livescomfortably with his family in a home about a kilometer away, leaving theschool—and boys as young as six years old—in the care of older studentsin their teens and early 20s. There is no electricity or water, and the boysuse the same dirt floor as both a toilet and a place to bathe. They sleep onthe concrete floor or on thin mats in rooms that, even on a cloudlessafternoon, are pitch black. Except for winter, many boys sleep outside in theopen air to avoid stifling heat. Without windows or doors, the place routinelyfloods during the rainy season. Dozens of mosquitoes drone in every room.[8]Human Rights Watch has visited dozens of similar shacks,abandoned houses, and unfinished buildings that serve as Quranic boardingschools. In Saint Louis, a town some 250 kilometers north of Dakar, HumanRights Watch visited two Quranic schools that were located within 10 meters ofa large trash dump, filled with batteries, old car parts, and animal carcasses.Some talibés in Saint Louis describe digging through the trash to findscrap metal or plastic bottles they can sell to meet their begging quota.During a night round with a talibé activist in Saint Louis in January2014, Human Rights Watch stumbled across a small Quranic school—no biggerthan 5 meters by 3 meters—in which some 25 boys were crammed. The olderboys had drawn lines in the sand floor that the younger boys could not cross—thisallowed the older boys to lie fully down, but obliged the younger ones to stackon top of each other in a pyramid of arms and legs.Click to expand ImageBoys sleep in the crowded room thatserves as their classroom and living quarters at a Quranic school in the MedinaGounass suburb of Dakar, Senegal, September 24, 2013. © RebeccaBlackwell/Associated PressA talibé activist in Saint Louis, who providesmedical care for boys from Quranic schools and tries to improve the schools’conditions, described the often poor living situation:[Some of the] traditional daaras are a laughingstock. Theyare in ruins and totally out of line with how a daara should be.... If the Quranicteacher lived with them, it would be a different story. But [he] has a housenearby and forces the children to live in an abandoned building or builds atiny hovel where he makes 30 kids live. When you see 50 children living in tworooms, you can no longer call that a daara. It’s simply exploitation. Andit’s from this that we say that certain people who are Quranic teachersare exploiting children. They force them to beg.... It’s the children whodress themselves. It’s the children who feed themselves. It’s thechildren who keep themselves clean…. Many children who come here fortreatment have bad skin problems…. They have roundworms and lice. Wetreat scabies….We have been to some daaras to ask the Quranic teacher toremove all the clothes and burn them, because there are lice and fleas in thedaara and each time we treat the children and they heal, the illness returns.Why? Because the daara is abominable. We have to go in there with our machineto disinfect the entire daara…. We also often offer mats to the Quranicteacher so that [the children] at least have something to sleep on. But some [teachers]don’t use the mats [in the daara]. They take them to their village ortheir own home. I have visited Quranic teachers who we have given mats to. I havesat down on a mat that we had given to [the Quranic teacher] for the children,but instead it was at his house. So, you see, we have the sense that theseQuranic teachers do nothing to make sure the children are healthy andclean, nor do they provide a healthy living environment. The only thing that[the teacher] cares about is whether or not the child brings him [what hedemands each day]….[9]If the draft law regulating daaras is to mean anything, itmust spell the end of thousands of boys living in structures that endangertheir health and safety. Such schools are a stark reminder of the tragic firein Medina in which eight young boys died. According to witnesses interviewed byHuman Rights Watch, the Quranic teacher was not present when the fire eruptedaround 10 p.m. on March 3, in the small shack where some 50 boys occupied tworooms.[10] As aneighbor of the daara told Human Rights Watch:[The Quranic teacher] would sometimes come in the eveningto collect the money that [the boys] had begged for, but then he would go homebecause he lived elsewhere…. Most Quranic teachers [at bad daaras] don’tlive at the same place as the children … because where the children sleepis unsanitary and uninhabitable…. Things like [the fire], you hope tonever see them again. But unfortunately, there are other daaras in Dakarsimilar to this one…. The daaras in slums, hovels, and shacks should beclosed. There should only be modern, habitable daaras…. Otherwise thiswill happen again.[11]A civil society leader working on the talibé issuedescribed the abusive conditions in a Quranic school he recently visited andcalled on the government to fulfill its promises:There’s a place not far from here … near theswamps in HLM. There is a daara with over 250 children that live in adilapidated building. The children go into the swamp and drink the water, alongwith lizards and other animals. They bathe in the swamp. And nobody saysanything. Why? Because the government is often timid, because it’s easyto hit a nerve when talking about religion, and sometimes people are afraid ofthat.People are scared. But we can’t remain silent here inSenegal. When the government backed away from measures that were [promisedafter the Medina fire], rumor had it that the Quranic teachers said, ‘We’regoing to take our prayer beads, do what we want to do, and the President willgo away.’ Yes. But I think—and I know I’m nobody and my jobis not at stake—I think that beyond all these religious beliefs, we haveto look at the crux of the matter. What will tomorrow look like? We have tobuild the Senegal of tomorrow together…. Today we should concentrate ourmost important efforts on the future of these children…. That’swhat I’m asking the government to do … make good on its commitmentsand take action.[12]As described in Human Rights Watch’s 2010 report andfurther documented here, the living conditions in certain Quranic schools violate the government’s obligations under the Convention on theRights of the Child and the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of theChild with respect to the boys’ rights to life, health, physical andmental development, education, and recreation and leisure.[13]Click to expand ImageA talibé in Saint Louis, Senegal, suffers from askin disease. © 2013 Issa Kouyaté/Maison de la GareGovernment Efforts toIntroduce Regulations, Minimum StandardsFor more than a decade, governments in Senegal have promisedto modernize Quranic schools so that they meet minimum standards that protectchildren’s rights and provide quality education. During the last year,President Sall’s government has moved closer to realizing that promisethan ever before. A draft law that would establish legal status, oversight, andregulation of the country’s Quranic schools is at an advanced stage.Human Rights Watch saw a version of the draft law andimplementing decrees, dated October 23, 2013. The draft implementing decreesincluded articles related to the opening of a Quranic school, thequalifications of Quranic teachers, the hours and quality of education, and arequirement to submit to inspections by the education and health ministries. Ofparticular importance, one of the implementing decrees requires that Quranicschools “give up the practice of begging.”[14]Quranic schools that meet these minimum standards would be formally recognizedby the education ministry, with the potential for subsidies and otherincentives for the school and teacher.An official in the education ministry’s daarainspectorate told Human Rights Watch that all of the relevant ministries and divisionshad reviewed and commented on the draft law. He said the government would soonpresent the draft law to the National Assembly, where he hoped it would bepassed promptly.[15] Theofficial said that, once the law is passed, “there will be daaras that wewill close, those that we call ‘daaras’ but in reality aren’tthere for true religious education. They’re there for the [Quranicteacher’s] own gain.”[16]The groundwork to swiftly and effectively apply the draftlaw, shutting down “schools” where children are exploited or livein dangerous conditions, is also being laid by the justice ministry’santi-trafficking unit.[17] Theunit is currently overseeing an exhaustive mapping of daaras in the region ofDakar, identifying and obtaining information on more than 1,000 daaras there.[18]It envisions expanding its work nationwide, mapping daaras throughout thecountry to identify those where children’s rights appear to be respected,those where abuses are taking place but could be remedied quickly with support,and those where conditions are so deplorable that the “schools”need to be swiftly closed.[19] Ahigh-level official in the justice ministry explained:It’s very easy. Once the law has been voted, we knowwhere the [abusive] daaras are [in Dakar, as a result of the mapping], and wewill apply the law. The interior ministry, justice ministry, andanti-trafficking unit don’t exist for nothing. Instead of adults takingcare of children, in these schools—or fake schools—you have littlechildren feeding—enriching—the adults. In a country based on laws,this can’t be allowed.[20]Finally, the government, with significant funding supportfrom the Islamic Development Bank, is in the process of building 64“model daaras,” whose curriculum will include mastering the Quranas well as the core subjects in public schools, such as reading, arithmetic,and French.[21] Themodel daaras will be built in seven administrative regions around the country;half of the schools will be state-run and half will be privately run, with thegovernment responsible for inspecting conditions and overseeing the curriculumin all of them.[22] Anofficial in the education ministry said that each school should be able tohouse at least 320 children across eight grade levels.[23]The government will need to ensure that the schools service not only the wealthy,mostly urban Senegalese, but also the poor, rural populations which producemany of the boys currently toiling in Quranic boarding schools where exploitationand abuse is constant. The areas of Senegal from which a disproportionatenumber of these boys originate should be targeted particularly in theconstruction of model daaras. A Senegalese civil society activist also stressedthe importance of supporting village daaras, so that children can stay withtheir parents and combine attending a village primary school with learning theQuran.[24]Click to expand ImageA boy who had fallen ill restsinside one of the small rooms at a Quranic boarding school in Saint Louis,Senegal, October 4, 2012. © 2012 Holly Pickett/ReduxFactors that ThreatenProgress in Realizing Minimum StandardsAs noted in the quote from a civil society activist at theoutset of this section, if the National Assembly passes the law andimplementing decrees to provide oversight and regulation of Quranic schools, itwill be a big step forward. At the same time, the law will only succeed inprotecting children from abuse and exploitation if it is actually applied andleads to the closure of schools that violate children’s rights to health,food, physical and mental development, and freedom from exploitation. Officialsfrom the education ministry will have to consistently monitor whether schoolsmeet the standards outlined under the law and, when they do not, work togetherwith officials in the family, interior, and justice ministries to close suchschools, place children in a temporary, protective environment, and ultimatelyreturn them to their families. Realizing minimum standards that protectchildren’s rights will require political support from the president andrelevant ministers as well as the financial means to enforce the law—twoareas in which previous governments have consistently fallen short when dealingwith issues related to Quranic schools.Need for Political Willand CourageBuilding model daaras and supporting Quranic teachers whorun exemplary schools is commendable, but the real test of the government’scommitment to protect children from exploitation and abuse will come in whetherit follows through and closes “schools” where the violation ofchildren’s rights is not immediately remediable. In many ways, the legalframework for such action already exists, through the 2005 law against forcedbegging (see Section II for a more detailed discussion). Yet authorities haveapplied this law in only the rarest of circumstances, effectively allowing forthe continued proliferation of schools where boys are exploited and live indeplorable conditions.Several government officials told Human Rights Watch thatQuranic teachers and Senegalese society more generally will be more acceptingof the new law as a means for widespread intervention, because it will involveclosing schools with inhuman living conditions—within a broader frameworkof supporting good Quranic schools—rather than prosecuting men seen bysome as religious figures.[25] Thereare reasons to be skeptical.In the aftermath of the fire in Medina in March 2013, theDakar suburb of Guédiawaye showed both how things should ideally workand how progress remains blocked. Neighbors and civil society activists identifiedfour Quranic schools that presented dangerous conditions that “might haveled to the next Medina.”[26] Workingwith local government officials, one school was closed; the children spent aweek at local shelters, before being returned to their villages, primarily incentral Senegal. One activist involved in the process said that there was“real synergy, everyone was working together—civil society, thepopulation, the local child protection committee, and [local governmentofficials]. Civil society got rid of all obstacles, making sure that sheltersand other sites were ready to house the kids. But then we ran intoproblems.”[27]After returning the boys from the first daara, the sameactors readied to close the second identified daara. But central governmentofficials reportedly stopped them. One person involved in the process said thatthe local child protection committee ran out of financing, with neither thecentral government nor key international donors willing to provide the fundsrequired to go ahead with the other three daaras.[28]Another person reported that the problem was primarily about the lack ofgovernment will, indicating that local government officials had said thatgovernment officials at the highest levels in Dakar “had not yet decidedto go ahead with closing [abusive] daaras. They said we could not continue,because there wasn’t the political support [for such action].”[29]The three other daaras that had been identified continue to operate inGuédiawaye in the same exploitative conditions, with long hours offorced begging and living situations that threaten the health and safety of theboys who live there.[30]Need for FinancialCommitment to Enforce RegulationsIn addition to political will, effectively regulatingQuranic schools will require resources to perform routine inspections; sanctionand, when necessary, close schools in violation of the law; move boys into anenvironment that protects their basic rights; and, in many cases, trace theboys’ family and reunify them. At present, the relevant government bodiesare understaffed and underfunded to an extent that would severely undermineimplementation.[31]The education ministry’s daara inspectorate has eightfull-time staff, including two inspectors.[32] Tocover the tens of thousands of daaras across Senegal—there are more than1,000 each in Dakar and Touba alone—the inspectorate relies on local“inspectors of Arabic teaching,” who, in addition to Quranicschools, are responsible for inspecting Arabic classes in public schools aswell as private French-Arabic schools.[33] Atpresent, there is not even an inspector of Arabic teaching for eachadministrative department in the country.[34] Even ifthere were, the idea that the current staffing levels could safeguard standardsat all of these schools is fanciful, as described by an official in the daarainspectorate: “If we’re going to inspect or even overseeinspections across Senegal, we need more personnel, we need more equipment.Many inspectors don’t have cars.”[35] He saidthat, as of now, they planned for each field inspector to perform at least onemonitoring mission per month, with the head inspectors from Dakar doing oneeach three months.[36]Although an improvement over the current situation, this level of monitoringwould barely scratch the surface in identifying schools that pose a significantthreat to children’s well-being.Greater support for implementing the draft law will becrucial, while recognizing Senegal’s budget constraints—a problemthat runs through children’s rights policy more generally. In December2013, the Senegalese government took the positive step of passing a nationalchild protection strategy, which the government has said will form the basisfor future actions. The strategy specifically identifies the problem of childbegging and calls on the government to enforce laws and policies that willprotect children from such abuse. The strategy should also help improvecoordination between the various ministries that work on children’srights issues, including the ministries of justice, family, education, health, andinterior. A representative from one diplomatic mission said that the nationalstrategy was “very well thought through, but there wasn’t themoney” to fully implement it.[37]The government should seek out efficient, low-cost ways tofacilitate implementation of the draft law and decrees that will regulateQuranic schools. For example, the government should consider establishing ahotline within the education ministry’s daara inspectorate and divisionof Arabic teaching, allowing civil society representatives and the generalpopulation to call and identify schools from which children beg or in whichthey face substandard conditions that threaten their health and safety.Allies inWaiting: Religious Leaders and Many Quranic TeachersSenegalesecivil society activists as well as some mid-level government officials saidthat both the previous government of President Abdoulaye Wade and the currentgovernment of President Macky Sall backed down, to varying degrees, fromtheir promises to eradicate forced child begging after certain Quranicteachers accused the government of attacking Islam and Quranic education.[38]Yet in reneging on their commitments, both governments failed to realizethat, rather than foes, the country’s preeminent religious leaders aswell as many Quranic teachers are ready allies. A justice ministry officialsaid, “The paradox is that most of the population is against this, evenmost of the religious leaders are against this—they want theapplication of the law [against forced begging]. The government often backsdown when there is an outcry from certain groups of Quranic teachers, but theyare in the minority.”[39]In theaftermath of the Medina fire, the Association of Imams in Senegal came out instrong support of government efforts to end child begging, saying, accordingto local media reports, that the practice of forcing talibés to begfor money taught them “lying and stealing, which are behaviors barredby the Muslim religion.”[40]Human Rights Watch interviewed more than a dozen Quranic teachers in Touba,Diourbel, Saint Louis, and Dakar who expressed similar support for governmentaction to stop exploitation through begging. A respected religious authorityin Diourbel, who also heads a Quranic teachers’ association, said thatstories of boys in Quranic schools being forced to bring back a daily quotaof money “really anger me.” He continued:Tohear so often that these so-called Quranic teachers exploit children likethis, it’s not at all okay. It’s these bad Quranic teachers thatlead to the problem of street children, that lead to children having to steal[to get the demanded money]. The authorities should get on the ground,identify those who are doing this, and take measures to settle the problemfor good.[41]AnotherQuranic teacher, from a village between Diourbel and Touba, said:Alltoo often, there are self-proclaimed Quranic teachers who go to cities insearch for money. A true daara is about education, the Quran, notmoney…. We’re in the era of ‘rights,’ this practiceof begging is not acceptable…. The government should step in toregulate Quranic schools and teachers. That will allow it to get rid of [theabusive ones].[42]ManyQuranic teachers go above and beyond in supporting children in their care.Human Rights Watch visited several Quranic schools in Diourbel where theteachers systematically enrolled Quranic boarding students in the local,public schools—so that children went through public school courseworkat the same time they memorized the Quran at the daara. Without any financialsupport from parents, the teachers house and feed the boys and oversee cleandaaras. One such teacher said of his decision to enroll boys in publicschool: “It’s absolutely necessary so that the boys can thrive inthe world. Even before the government started talking about modernizing, wemodernized on our own.”[43]Inaddition to Quranic teachers, the government could make allies with thehighest religious authorities in Senegal. In 2010 and again in January 2014,Human Rights Watch met with key authorities from the Tidjane and Mouridereligious families, the two largest and most powerful brotherhoods in Senegal.They unanimously expressed opposition to the scourge of boys from Quranicschools begging on the streets.SokhnaMame Issa Mbacké, a descendant of the brother of the Mouride founder,Cheikh Amadou Bamba, and supporter of 13 modern daaras where boys and girlsalso learn French, Arabic, science, and computer literacy, told Human RightsWatch: “Comparing those who exploit children through begging to realQuranic teachers is an insult to the real teachers.”[44]Sokhna Maï Mbacké, the daughter of the third Mouride caliph,Serigne Abdoul Ahad Mbacké, similarly expressed outrage over those“who say that they are bringing kids to Touba to learn [the Quran], butthen force them to work, to beg. Then when the so-called Quranic teacher goesback to his village during the harvest, he brings back money, bags of rice,and sugar from the boys’ work. This has to be denounced.”[45]Severalreligious leaders in Touba told Human Rights Watch that some abusive Quranicteachers had fled Dakar for Touba after authorities prosecuted severalQuranic teachers in Dakar in September 2010. As a result, the religiousleaders said, the problem of child begging had increased in the holy city,with abusive “teachers” there demanding that boys bring back 400to 750 francs CFA ($0.80 to $1.50) a day. Idrissa Cissé N’Diaye,a prominent official on Touba’s Rural Council (le Conseil rural de Touba-Mosquée),the highest political and moral authority for the semi-autonomous holy city,told Human Rights Watch that he had overseen a mapping of the daaras inTouba. Of the 1,274 daaras that had been identified, he said that “lessthan 700 of them exist according to the appropriate norms andcriteria.”[46]He continued:Thereare people who come and set themselves up in a shack or an unfinishedbuilding, claiming that they are trained in Quranic studies but reallyaren’t. [Many of them] don’t have but 25 to 50 kids. Thesearen’t ‘daaras.’ … These are men who don’t haveany source of revenue, so they use—exploit—children to make aliving…. These ‘schools’ do not deserve to be kept inplace…. We tell those in charge to disappear, and we’ll work toput the kids in real daaras. A child’s place is in school, not on thestreet.[47]Thepresident of the Rural Council’s commission on education and religiousaffairs, Serigne Moustapha Diattara, said that the council was crafting itsown plan to end the problem of forced begging in Touba. He said there wouldbe a committee to regulate all daaras in Touba, including by testing aQuranic teacher’s knowledge before allowing him to open a school, establishinga set curriculum, and ensuring that the schools meet basic standards thatprotect children’s rights. He said the proposal was awaiting validationby the Caliph before being implemented. He also stressed: “From thebeginning to the end of the Quran, there is nothing [authorizing] the beggingor mistreatment of children…. The Quran is about sanctity and piety,this practice of forced begging is not of the Quran. Those who are doingthis, they should learn the Quran. They’re taking kids and exploitingthem.”[48]Severallocal activists and mid-level government officials suggested that PresidentSall should bring together the heads of the religious families in Senegal, aswell as key imams and leaders from progressive Quranic teachers’associations, to issue a joint statement of support for closing schools wherechildren live in unsafe conditions and for applying the law against those whoexploit young boys through forced begging (see Section II, below). At aminimum, the government should stop backtracking every time certain groups ofQuranic teachers—often those who profit greatly from the statusquo—cause an uproar. Many other religious authorities supportgovernment efforts to end forced child begging.II. Application of the Law against Forced BeggingAs we’re working to establish modern daaras, we alsoneed to crack down on those who exploit boys at self-proclaimed Quranicschools. Those who force children to bring back money each day, they aren’tteaching, they’re exploiting—they’re modern-day slavedrivers.—Alioune Tine, President ofSenegal’s Human Rights Commission[49]As described in detail in Human Rights Watch’s 2010report, thousands of young boys are forced to spend long hours on the streetsof Senegal’s cities each day begging for money, uncooked rice, and sugarto bring back to the person who oversees their Quranic boarding school. In theworst “schools,” the boys are systematically beaten if they fail toreturn with a set amount of money, which almost exclusively goes to the benefitof the “teacher” and his family. Some “teachers”inflict punishments against young boys that could qualify as torture, includingby brutally beating them, burning them with caustic substances like the sapfrom raw cashew nuts, and forcing them to remain in stress positions.[50]In 2005, the National Assembly passed an anti-traffickinglaw that made it a serious crime for anyone to “organize the begging ofanother in order to make a profit.”[51] The lawwas squarely aimed at attacking the problem of forced begging in certainQuranic schools, but there has been scant application over the subsequentdecade, except for a brief period in September 2010 under the Wade government.Under pressure from international partners, nine Quranic teachers wereconvicted during a period of several weeks, leading to an exodus of childbeggars from the streets of Dakar.[52]However, during a Council of Ministers meeting in October 2010, Wade said thathe disagreed with the actions.[53] Theprosecutions stopped, and thousands of children quickly returned to the streetsand resumed begging to meet their daily quota.In the aftermath of the Medina fire, President Sall’sgovernment promised the swift and resolute application of the law againstforced begging.[54] Civilsociety activists told Human Rights Watch that, once again, the streets largelyemptied. But as the commitment to apply the law appeared to waver, some Quranicteachers sent children back out to beg. One year later, with few exceptions—includinga notable case in January 2014—the law remains unenforced, due largely,in the words of both civil society and many government officials, to a lack ofpolitical courage. There are promising signs that this may be changing,however, due in particular to strong leadership from high-level officials inthe justice ministry, including the head of the anti-trafficking unit.Click to expand ImageA young boy from a Quranic school begs for change from adriver stopped at a gas station, in the Medina Gounass suburb of Dakar,Senegal, September 24, 2013. © 2013 Rebecca Blackwell/Associated PressExploitation and Abusethrough Forced BeggingEach day in the poor suburbs of Dakar, boys can be seen hoppingaboard public transport to head downtown, where they beg all day for money,uncooked rice, and sugar—as well as their own meals. Each evening, manyhead back out to hand over their day’s earnings to the Quranic “teacher.”[55]Some boys stay behind and sleep on the streets, afraid of the beating that willcome if they fail to obtain the daily demanded sum. Others choose the beatingfrom a whip or an electrical cord over sleeping on the streets. Each day, this isrepeated in major cities across the country.At “schools” overseen by exploitative Quranicteachers, the focus is not on education, religious or otherwise, but on theaccumulation of money for the “teacher.” A Senegalese civil societyactivist explained:These are Senegalese children who are victims of theirparents and of dubious so-called Quranic teachers who are exploiting them fortheir own gain…. If a Quranic teacher doesn’t have anyqualifications … what does he do? He stays in a situation in which heexpects others to financially support him. That’s the problem. Whosupports him financially? The child. Who does what? The child works. It’sthe opposite of how it should be.[56]In a recent mapping of daaras in the region of Dakar,investigators from civil society found that boys in Quranic schools whereteachers force them to beg spend an average of at least six hours a day on thestreets looking for money and food.[57] Asdetailed in Human Rights Watch’s 2010 report, young boys in Dakar oftenhave to bring their Quranic “teacher” between 300 and 1,000 francsCFA ($0.60 to $2) a day. In other major cities, the demanded sum is oftenlower, somewhere between 150 and 500 francs CFA ($0.35 to $1). With dozens ofboys working for them seven days a week, exploitative Quranic teachers amassearnings well beyond what a mid-level government official—much less theaverage resident of Senegal—makes.[58]Click to expand ImageAt dawn, a baker breaks off pieces ofa baguette for talibés, in the Medina Gounass suburb of Dakar, Senegal,September 24, 2013. Boys at some Quranic schools have to beg not only for theirdaily money quota, but also for food for themselves. © 2013 RebeccaBlackwell/Associated PressIn addition to money, many “teachers” demandthat boys bring back quotas of uncooked rice and sugar cubes.[59]In schools run for the teacher’s profit, this food does not go to theboys, but rather serves as an additional source of income for the teacher.[60]A civil society activist in Saint Louis described watching boys in severalschools stack their sugar cubes in boxes and pour uncooked rice into sacks inthe teachers’ home, which the teachers then sell for profit at smallshops they run.[61] HumanRights Watch has seen several such shops and, during the course of its 2010research, interviewed scores of current and former talibés who said thatthe uncooked rice and sugar was never used for their benefit—but insteadalways packed up for the teacher’s family to use or, most often, to sell.[62]Many boys describe their overriding feeling as one of fear—fearof the punishment they will face if they fail to collect the demanded moneyquota. While some “teachers” give one or two warnings, anyadditional failure to hand over the quota results in often extreme physicalabuse—to ensure the boy never again fails to beg long enough. An8-year-old boy interviewed in January 2014, who reported having to bring hisQuranic teacher 200 francs CFA ($0.40), 500 grams of uncooked rice (worth 150 francsCFA, or $0.35), and 10 sugar cubes each day, said: “I work and sweatuntil I have the quota…. Sometimes I go back out [to the streets] after 5p.m. to look for my quota…. If I have it, [the Quranic teacher] won’tbeat me. But if I don’t have it, he will beat me.”[63]A 10-year old boy interviewed in January 2014 explainedsimilarly:We wake up at 7 a.m., and we go and beg. We’re outthere until about 9 a.m. We come back, give 25 francs CFA ($0.05) and [500grams of uncooked] rice [to the Quranic teacher]…. We stay [at theschool] and study the Quran until 10 a.m. After that, we go back to the market[to beg] … until 3 p.m., then study until 5 p.m. Then we go back to themarket [to beg] for a bit…. When we’re finished we each have togive 200 francs CFA ($0.40)…. If you don’t have your quota, youtell him, ‘I don’t have my quota, tomorrow I will bring it.’Then the next day you have bring 400 francs CFA ($.80)…. [If you can’tget the 400 francs CFA the next day], then he will beat you. He beats us with ahorse whip…. [When he hits you,] you just think about your home…. Whenthey beat us [at the Quranic school], it’s painful. But when you’reat your home, no one hits you.[64]An activist in Saint Louis who works closely with currentand runaway talibés described some of the typical and more extreme caseshe has recently observed:The [abusive] Quranic teachers have techniques for hurting[the children]. It’s torture for a child who is 7, 8, or, at the most, 12years old. They hurt them because they didn’t bring their daily quota orthey didn’t learn their Quranic lesson…. [The boys] are beaten ontheir back with chains, tires—the detached inside edge of tires. Or they’rebeaten with wet ropes. They often use what are called ‘12 centimeterropes,’ thick ropes that are used to tie up cattle. They soak the rope inwater until it’s fully wet and then use it in beatings. They say [wetropes] don’t hurt you on the surface but rather below the surface….Many children … the first thing we have to do is look at their body. Whenyou look at these children’s backs, it’s unbelievable….There is [also] something called ‘djingue.’When I think of it, slavery comes to mind. Why? Because the word ‘djingue’means to tie someone up until they can’t move anymore. There are daarasthat have special punishment rooms. In the punishment room, you’ll oftenfind an object called a ‘djingue.’ A child who runs awayoften is tied up…. There is a particular type of pole. A chain is fedthrough the pole, entering one end and exiting the other. They take the chainand wrap it around the child’s wrists, locking it with a padlock….The child can’t move anymore because all four [limbs are attached]. Bothwrists and both ankles are attached together and the child has to sit onthem…. After only an hour you are suffering, and [in some daaras I know]they have to stay that way for a whole day…. They do it so that it hurtsand so that the boy won’t run away anymore. If he is caught another time,he knows what will happen to him.[65]As a result of the fear of serious physical abuse, many boyswho are unable to collect the daily quota spend the night on the streets ratherthan return to the school. In January 2014, Human Rights Watch encountered a6-year-old boy sleeping across the street from the Saint Louis bus station. Inthe cold of winter, the boy was curled up into a ball, with his oversizet-shirt draped over him in a way that made it difficult to determine at firstthat it was a person. When asked why he was there at 2 a.m., he said that hewas short 100 francs CFA ($0.20) and did not want to be beaten.[66]According to local activists in Dakar and Saint Louis, at least scores of boysfrom Quranic schools overseen by abusive teachers make a similar decision eachday.[67]Tired of suffering physical abuse and sleeping on thestreets, many boys decide to run away permanently. If caught and returned,runaways are often subjected to particularly brutal forms of physical abuse, asdescribed by the activist above and a 9-year-old former talibé:I went in [a room] and they locked me in. Later, the mancalled for another boy to open the door. After that, the Serigne [a Wolof termfor Quranic teacher] chained up my legs…. They chained my arms and legstogether … and locked [the door]. [It lasted] for one day… I askedthe Serigne to forgive me but he wouldn’t… The Serigne told me thatI would not see my father again, that I would die here, be buried here, have afuneral here.[68]After several weeks of abuse for his attempts to run away,the boy fled again. This time he succeeded and was brought back to his family.Other runaways become semi-permanent street children. A 16-year-oldtalibé described to Human Rights Watch in January 2014 how several boysfrom his Quranic school ran away after several days of failing to bring backthe daily quota of 500 francs CFA ($1). Living on the streets, the formertalibés had taken up stealing to get by.[69]Several civil society activists said that many of the semi-permanent streetchildren in Senegal’s cities are a legacy of the abuses in some Quranicschools.[70]Some boys who flee exploitation and abuse make their way toshelters for runaways, like Samusocial and Empire des Enfants. The lead socialworker at Empire des Enfants, Cheikh Sall, described why many boys run away andwhat impact the abuse often has:For most of the kids that we take care of here, they fledbecause of the abuse they experienced at their Quranic school. Often, theQuranic teacher sends them on the street to beg…. If they’re unableto bring back the money, they’re beaten by the Quranic teacher or [hisassistant, often one of the oldest boys]…. When they arrive here, they’reoften worn out, worn out because they were traumatized by the Quranic teacheror, if it’s not the Quranic teacher, by people who live on the street.[71]The failure to apply the law against forced begging allowsfor the exploitation and abuse to flourish without consequences. A Senegalesecivil society activist in a Dakar suburb, who works closely on thetalibé issue, described his frustration with the lack of prosecutions:We’re tired of workshops and discussions. This is adisgrace for the country. It’s a bunch of kids who work for lazy, oldmen. The abusive ones, the fake Quranic teachers, they complain that they don’thave help, but when they do, they [often] just use it for themselves. We gave abunch of material to some daaras around here, and when we went back a coupleweeks later, the Quranic teachers had taken it all back to their own houses.There are plenty of cases in which the Quranic teachers live in a nice place—anapartment, a house—right next to their daara, where the kids live inintolerable conditions. It’s nothing more than a commercial activity. Ifyou did in France one-tenth of what happens here to the talibés, notonly would you go to prison, but they’d close down the establishment.Heck, even the mayor would probably be in trouble for complicity in allowingthe place to exist. Why do people think it’s normal that, in order tolearn the Quran, children—innocent children—have to be put in thisposition of servitude?[72]As described in detail in the 2010 report, the system offorced begging in certain Quranic schools qualifies as a worst form of childlabor and, in many cases, as child trafficking and child slavery.[73]It also violates the Senegalese government’s responsibility to ensurechildren’s rights to health, physical and mentaldevelopment, protection from economic exploitation, and protection from“all forms of physical or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect ornegligent treatment.”[74] The African Children’s Charter also requires states to take“all appropriate measures to prevent” the trafficking of childrenand “the use of children in all forms of begging,” as well as“all appropriate measures to eliminate harmful social and culturalpractices” that affect children’s well-being and development.[75]Government Efforts toEnforce the Law against Forced BeggingOther than a prosecution for forced child begging in January2014, there have been remarkably few such prosecutions since President Sallcame to power, including in the year following the fire in the Medina daara.However, there are some signs of potential progress, particularly in the workbeing led by the justice ministry’s anti-trafficking unit, discussed in SectionI in relation to the ongoing mapping of Quranic schools.The US State Department’s 2013 Trafficking in Personsreport, which covers the year 2012, said that while there were someprosecutions in cases of extreme physical abuse, there were no knownprosecutions that year under the 2005 law against forced begging:The Government of Senegal demonstrated negligibleanti-trafficking law enforcement efforts during the reporting period…. Thegovernment did not maintain or publish statistics relating to human traffickinginvestigations and did not report any prosecutions or convictions fortrafficking during the reporting period. The government prosecuted an unknownnumber of marabouts[76] forseverely beating talibes who they exploited through forced begging;however, these marabouts were only prosecuted for child abuse crimes andwere allowed to continue to engage in forced begging.[77]According to civil society activists and representatives of diplomaticmissions who closely monitor the issue, the same dearth of prosecutions forforced child begging held true for the year 2013. Officials in the justiceministry, including in the anti-trafficking unit, said that, up to recently,they have not systematically kept statistics on the number of people who hadbeen arrested, charged, or convicted under the 2005 law—and thereforecould not provide Human Rights Watch with specifics.[78]Several government officials highlighted the prosecution ofan imam in January 2014 as demonstrating their will to apply the law againstforced begging. According to local media, a talibé with a daily demandedquota of 400 francs CFA ($0.80) told a woman in his Dakar neighborhood that hedid not want to go back to his Quranic school because he would be beaten for failingto bring back the full amount. After seeing marks of physical abuse on the boy’sback, the woman reported the case to the police, who arrested the father andson who ran the Quranic school.[79] Thefather, an imam, was prosecuted and convicted for exploitation through forcedbegging and for being an accomplice to bodily harm against a child. Theprosecution asked for two years of prison; on January 8, the judge sentencedthe man to one month, which he had already served.[80]The imam’s son, who allegedly carried out the beatings, is reportedlystill to be judged in a juvenile court.[81]The case could represent a turning point in protectingchildren from abuse. Unlike with the prosecutions in 2010, during theperiod of the Wade government, this prosecution does not appear to haveoccurred as a result of external pressure from international partners. In manyways, the arrest and prosecution seem to be a model for how such cases can andshould proceed. A person reported potential child exploitation and abuse to thepolice, who promptly investigated and arrested the responsible parties. Despitepressure from some religious leaders in the neighborhood, according to civilsociety activists who closely followed the case, the prosecutor filed chargesand pursued them rigorously.But the case also demonstrates the continued reluctance ofsome judicial authorities to see the exploitation and abuse of talibésas a serious crime. Although the 2005 law says that the penalty forexploitation through begging is two to five years imprisonment and specifiesthat the “execution of the sentence will not be stayed when the crime iscommitted against a minor,”[82] thejudge sentenced the imam to one month in prison.Moreover, the case is so notable—and referenced bynearly every government official interviewed by Human Rights Watch—preciselybecause it is an outlier. At least hundreds of young boys beg on the streets ofmany major cities each day, and no one—from the population, the police,or government social services—asks them why they are begging or whatconsequences they might face if they fail to give their “teacher”the daily money quota. Many boys beg in plain view of police officers or policestations. Dozens of boys who have recently run away from Quranic schools fillthe state-run Ginddi Center (Centre Ginddi) and the handful ofprivately-run shelters in Dakar, Saint Louis, and other major cities. Most ofthese young boys have stories of being exploited through forced begging, andmany of them were subject to extreme physical abuse. Yet, despite the ease ofidentifying and building judicial cases against men who are exploiting youngboys through forced begging, it almost never happens.The failure to prosecute individuals who violate the lawagainst forced begging contravenes the government’s own strategic plan,adopted in February 2013, to eradicate child begging by 2015. The plan’sfirst action point calls on the government to “reinforce the protectionof children through the application of the provisions in the 2005 law onexploitation through begging.”[83]There are several positive developments, however. First, thejustice ministry’s anti-trafficking unit is currently working on a mediacampaign against child begging. The proposed announcements, which officialssaid would start being aired shortly, will speak about the problems of forcedchild begging and the physical abuse that many boys suffer when they cannotbring back the daily demanded quota. One official in the justice ministry toldHuman Rights Watch that after rolling out the campaign on TV and radio, theministry plans to ramp up prosecutions for forced child begging andtrafficking.[84] ElHadji Malick Sow, a judge and the president of the anti-trafficking unit,explained his frustration with the lack of application of the law up to presentas well as his determination to change that:The issue I am championing, one of my main priorities hereat the [anti-trafficking] unit, is the application of the 2005 law…. Weneed the ministries of justice, interior, and defense to work together so thatthe law is applied rigorously. We are pleading for this, we are working towardsthis.... The president and then-prime minister said after the incident [at theMedina daara] that the law would be applied rigorously, but it hasn’t been,unfortunately. We have some indications as to why the law hasn’t beenapplied, but it doesn’t justify it. A law was voted, it should beapplied…. There is not a complete absence of application. It is startingto be applied, but timidly. We’re working so that it develops further,becomes more common, so that the police have the means to go on the ground andwork with children who are victims, identify the so-called teachers who sendthem on the street…. With time and more determination, we will hopefullymake progress in applying the law.[85]Second, in mid-January the anti-trafficking unit and theinterior ministry’s department of criminal affairs formalized a projectto systematically collect data related to anti-trafficking efforts—respondingto the fact, as one justice ministry official said, that there was “nosystem in place to measure the number of investigations, prosecutions, andconvictions.”[86] Justiceministry officials said that collecting such information would allow for moreeffective interventions, improve cooperation between officials in the justiceand interior ministries, and better inform the public.[87]Given the dearth of prosecutions to date, these statistics will also provide animportant benchmark of progress going forward.Factors that ThreatenProgress in Enforcing the LawCivil society activists and government officials identifiedfour main problems that have impeded arrests and prosecutions of those whoprofit from forcing children to beg: a lack of high-level political will from theExecutive; a lack of courage from low-level government officials, includingpolice and state social workers; a lack of training for police and judicialauthorities; and poor communication that has allowed opponents to dominatedebate.Lack of High-LevelPolitical WillIn the aftermath of the Medina fire, President Sall andthen-Prime Minister Abdoul Mbaye made strong statements about the need to applythe law against forced begging. The Prime Minister’s office oversaw aworking group, which, in close collaboration with civil society leaders, calledfor the immediate application of the law against those who were exploitingchildren in their care.[88] Severalcivil society activists and United Nations officials told Human Rights Watchthat a group of Quranic teachers forced a meeting with President Sall anddemanded that authorities not proceed with criminal prosecutions (see Text Box afterSection I about allies among religious authorities).[89]The government backed off its call to apply the law, focusing instead on movingahead with the regulation of Quranic schools and support for modern daaras.Civil society representatives and many mid-level governmentofficials say that political will from the highest levels of the government,notably the president and the interior and justice ministers, is the keyvariable needed to eradicate exploitation in certain Quranic“schools.” A UN official told Human Rights Watch:Really the only thing that remains is the political will[to apply the law]. The necessary laws, government bodies, and supportmechanisms are in place. After the fire, there was a lot of financing put intoshelters and modern daaras that could house children removed from abusivedaaras. We thought there would be a big need, but then the government backedoff.[90]A high-level official in the justice ministry agreed:What is needed is a lot more political courage. For thelast 10 years, NGOs have spent a lot of money [on the talibé issue], thegovernment has spent a lot of money. There has been so much awareness-raising,awareness-raising, awareness-raising. The only thing left is the application ofthe law.[91]There is a belief among many authorities—reinforcedevery time a president or prime minister backtracks from strong commitments toprioritize the law’s enforcement—that high-level governmentofficials want to avoid criminal prosecutions even of Quranic“teachers” implicated in the exploitation and abuse of children.This hesitance, combined with a lack of sufficient financial and logisticalsupport, then filters down to state authorities responsible for the law’simplementation. The police fail to do investigations, even when faced with boysbegging on the streets; state social workers from the justice and familyministries fail to inform prosecutors of cases even when boys from Quranicschools, including runaways, have stories and markings depicting severephysical abuse; and inspectors from the education ministry fail to report toauthorities schools where boys live in abysmal conditions. Although few casesactually reach prosecutors or investigative judges, they may also come underpressure to avoid pursuing too many prosecutions or too harsh of sentences.President Sall and key ministers could demonstrate theirresolve to end exploitation and abuse in certain Quranic schools by issuing instructionsto relevant authorities that they should pursue aggressively the law’senforcement. Another justice ministry official compared the pervasive failureto apply the law against forced begging with the government’s resolve—andsuccess—in removing the glut of street peddlers from downtown Dakar:It’s not at all difficult. The government couldeasily say, like it did with the street peddlers, that prefects and governorsshould prioritize ending this, that the [police and judiciary] shouldprioritize ending this. The magistrates are ready, they say they’rewaiting to be brought cases…. But there is not the political will [at themoment].[92]Lack of Courage fromLower-level AuthoritiesProgress in applying the law against forced begging is alsosometimes obstructed by police officers and government social workers whorefuse to inform the proper authorities even when presented with extreme casesof exploitation and abuse.A civil society activist told Human Rights Watch aparticularly egregious story from mid-2013. A young boy came to him with markson his back “like nothing I had ever seen.”[93]After speaking with the boy, he learned that the Quranic teacher had used thecaustic sap from raw cashew nuts to repeatedly burn the boy on his back forhaving tried to run away from the daara. The case was brought to the localauthorities, including the AEMO (Action éducative en milieu ouvert),a part of the justice ministry that works on child protection, but the Quranicteacher was ultimately not charged.[94]The activist said that the problem was recurrent:I do my job, I report cases to the AEMO, but they alwaysresolve them ‘amicably’ with the Quranic teacher, no matter how badthe abuse. Cases of physical abuse and even torture, cases in which atalibé has had skin infections that worsen for months without theQuranic teacher taking action [to get care], cases in which a talibédies from malaria after a Quranic teacher hides him away instead of seeking outfree treatment—I have reported many of them, but they never go anywhere.[95]Untrained Judges,Police, and ProsecutorsSeveral officials in the justice ministry said progress wasblocked by a general lack of understanding from police and judicial authoritiesabout the law against forced begging.[96] Inparticular, one official said that some prosecutors and judges remain confusedabout the interplay between the 2005 law and Article 245 of Senegal’sPenal Code. That article forbids begging, but states that “solicitingalms on days, in locations, and under conditions associated with religioustraditions does not constitute begging.”[97]A high-level official in the justice ministry said thatthere was a need “to better explain” to police, prosecutors, andjudges “that the 2005 law can and should be applied, that it is notblocked in any way by the previous law.”[98] WhereasPenal Code Article 245 focuses primarily on criminalizing the act of beggingitself, the 2005 law takes a far better approach in criminalizing those whoprofit off of forcing another person to beg.Moreover, children forced to beg six or seven days a week,spending hours a day in traffic and outside restaurants asking for money—allin order to return a set quota to their “teacher”—are not“soliciting alms on days, in locations, and under conditions associatedwith religious traditions.” Human Rights Watch’s previous reportexamined in detail, based on interviews with Senegalese religious authoritiesand Islamic scholars, how the modern practice in abusive, urban Quranic schoolsof forcing boys to obtain quotas of money is far removed from tradition.[99]As Sokhna Mame Issa Mbacké explained in January 2014, “Thetradition, for those who begged, was to spend a couple minutes in their villagegoing to houses to ask for food, to teach humility. It wasn’t to takekids to the city and force them to beg all day for money. Any real marabout isagainst such a practice.”[100]The anti-trafficking unit has started training magistrates,border officials, judicial police, and the juvenile police squad on childlabor, trafficking, and the law against forced begging. Several representativesfrom diplomatic partners to Senegal expressed that this was crucial work thatneeded to continue and be expanded.[101]To end any remaining ambiguity, the justice minister shouldconsider issuing a decree or order stating that the act of forcing children tobeg, even by Quranic teachers, is not covered by the exception in Article 245.Legislative authorities should also consider revising Article 245 so that theact of begging is no longer criminalized, particularly when done by children.Prosecutorial efforts should focus solely on those who exploit others throughbegging, criminalized by the 2005 law.Poor Communication fromthe GovernmentA final impediment to the application of the law againstforced begging is the government’s poor communication about the type ofperson likely to be subject to the law, which has allowed opponents to dominatethe debate. As noted above, except for the case in January 2014, mostprosecutions for forced begging—as well as government statements that thelaw should be applied—have come in reaction to pressure frominternational partners or after tragic events, like the Medina fire. The government’spanic to be seen as doing something has been obvious, and its ambitiousbut poorly communicated promises have lent themselves to manipulation. Forexample, after President Sall’s statements in March 2013, a group ofQuranic teachers was quoted in local press as saying the government had an“ancient desire to eliminate the daaras, and the Medina fire presenteditself as an undreamt of opportunity.”[102] Theirleader clamored in the same article, “Our prayers, united, will bringdown this government…. No daara will be closed!”[103]A civil society activist told Human Rights Watch:“Those … who break the law are protesting and making lots of noise,but are not talking about the heart of the matter, [the abuse that] has takenplace. In a country like ours… when a person breaks the law…whether it be a teacher or a Quranic teacher or any other citizen, he should beprosecuted.”[104]The government, if it is to succeed in rooting out theexploitation of young boys through forced begging, needs to do a far better jobof “talking about the heart of the matter.” It should, as describedin the text box above, make greater efforts to seek allies among the religiouscommunity, including Quranic teachers. It should explain that the law in no waytargets the country’s tradition of religious education, but rather menwho profit—often greatly—from demanding daily quotas of money fromyoung boys. It should focus on telling the often haunting stories of the boysthemselves, including the toil of long hours on the streets and the constantfear of being beaten. After obtaining convictions, authorities should considerissuing communiqués to explain the facts on which their actions werebased. Along with widespread support from Senegalese civil society, bettercommunication would allow the government to easily counter attacks from thosewho question the appropriateness or necessity of such prosecutions.AcknowledgmentsThis report was researched and authored by Matt Wells, WestAfrica researcher. It was reviewed and edited by Corinne Dufka, senior WestAfrica researcher; Zama Coursen-Neff, director of the Children’s RightsDivision; Clive Baldwin, senior legal advisor; and Babatunde Olugboji, deputyprogram director. Additional research and editing assistance was provided byMarianna Enamoneta, senior West Africa associate; and Nora Sturm, West Africaintern. The report was translated into French by Hervé Couturier;vetting of the translation was provided by Matt Wells, Marianna Enamoneta, NoraSturm, and Peter Huvos, French website editor. The report was prepared forpublication by Kathy Mills, publicationsspecialist, and Fitzroy Hepkins, mail manager. The multimedia piece thataccompanies this report was filmed by Andrew Oberstadt and edited by JessieGraham, senior multimedia producer; and Sakae Ishikawa, senior video editor.Human Rights Watch thanks all individuals and organizations whocontributed to this research, including: everyone involved in la Plateforme pourla Promotion et la Protection des Droits Humains (PPDH), a coalition ofSenegalese civil society organizations working on the talibé issue; IssaKouyaté, from Maison de la Gare; Abdou Fodé Sow, from Intermonde;Cheikh Sall, from Empire des Enfants; Boubacar Cambel Ndiaye; and Isabellede Guillebon, from Samusocial Sénégal.Human Rights Watch greatly appreciates the openness shown byreligious leaders in Touba and Diourbel. Sokhna Mame Issa Mbacké and IdrissaCissé N’Diaye, both of whom facilitated meetings and visits toQuranic schools, deserve special thanks. Human Rights Watch is also gratefulfor the cooperation from Senegal’s government throughout the time thisresearch was conducted, particularly from officials in Ministry of Justice, theMinistry of National Education, and the Ministry of Women, Family, and Children.The collective efforts of civil society, religious authorities, and certaingovernment officials inspire confidence that progress toward ending forced childbegging is finally within reach.Human Rights Watch is particularly indebted to the boys and Quranicteachers who were willing to share their stories, both during the currentresearch and during the initial research in 2009-2010.[1]Daara means “Quranic school.” The two terms will be usedinterchangeably throughout this report, as they generally are in Senegal. Forunderstandable reasons, some people believe that the term “daara”should be avoided when talking about “schools” dominated by forcedbegging rather than Quranic learning, since daara carries a connotation ofesteem. However, the term is widely used in Senegal, including by people quotedin this report, to signify both good Quranic schools and schools where abuseand exploitation is endemic. The report will follow the same approach.[2]Human Rights Watch interview with Senegalese civil society activist, Dakar,October 24, 2013.[3]“Talibé” means “student” or“religious follower.” As with daara, terminology is complicated.The word talibé applies to almost every Senegalese person, as a“follower” of a certain marabout, or religious guide. Theterm also refers to boys who are students in the thousands of clean, upstandingQuranic schools in Senegal. Yet the term is also widely used, almostdisparagingly at times, to describe the young boys from Quranic“schools” who are seen begging on the streets. Given how commonlythe term talibé is used in Senegal to describe boys from Quranic schoolswho are forced to beg, Human Rights Watch will do so here, though it shouldalways be clear that not all—or even most—talibés in Senegalare subject to such abuse.[4]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdou Fodé Sow, Guédiawaye,January 12, 2014.[5]Human Rights Watch, “Off the Backs of the Children”: ForcedBegging and Other Abuses against Talibés in Senegal, April 15, 2010,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2010/04/15/backs-children-0, pp. 14-23,85-88.[6]For a longer discussion of the reasons why parents send children to Quranicboarding schools, see Human Rights Watch, “Off the Backs of theChildren,” pp. 85-86.[7]Human Rights Watch interviews with Senegalese civil society activists who workon the talibé issue, Dakar, January 11 and 21, 2014.[8]Human Rights Watch observations and interviews with boys at the Quranic school,Guédiawaye, January 22, 2014.[9]Human Rights Watch interview with Issa Kouyaté, Saint Louis, January 18,2014.[10]Human Rights Watch interviews with witnesses to the fire in the Medina daara,Dakar, January 11 and 12, 2014.[11]Human Rights Watch interview with neighbor of Medina daara, Dakar, January 11,2014.[12]Human Rights Watch interview with Senegalese civil society activist, Dakar,January 12, 2014.[13]Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, G.A.Res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49(1989), entered into force September 2, 1990, ratified by Senegal July 31, 1990;African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child (ACRWC), OAU Doc. CAB/LEG/24.9/49(1990), entered into force November 29, 1999, ratified by Senegal September 29,1998.[14]Draft decree, Condition de la reconnaissance et auxmodalités d’attribution des subventions, primes et appuis auxDaaras, October 23, 2013.[15]Human Rights Watch interview with official in the daara inspectorate, Dakar,January 22, 2014.[16]Human Rights Watch interview with official in the daara inspectorate, Dakar,January 22, 2014.[17]The unit’s full name is the National Unit for the Fight againstTrafficking in Persons, in Particular Women and Children (la Cellulenationale de lutte contre la Traite des Personnes, en particulier des femmes etdes enfants, or CNLTP). It was established in October 2010 by primeministerial decree and started its work in earnest in January 2012.[18]Several civil society investigators involved in the mapping project told HumanRights Watch that some Quranic “teachers” declined to take part inthe census, refusing to provide any information about themselves, their school,and the boys living and learning there. The investigators said that these“schools” often presented some of the worst living conditions andsigns of exploitation. The mapping of the region of Dakar is therefore somewhatincomplete, but the investigators said that they made note of the“schools” where they were denied any information. Daara inspectorsfrom the education ministry should prioritize inspections of these“schools.” Human Rights Watch interviews with civil societyinvestigators, Dakar, January 9, 11, and 12, 2014.[19]Human Rights Watch interviews with Senegalese civil society activist involvedin the project, Dakar, January 21, 2014; and with justice ministry official,Dakar, January 13, 2014.[20]Human Rights Watch interview with justice ministry official, Dakar, January 21,2014.[21]Human Rights Watch interview with official in the daara inspectorate, Dakar,January 22, 2014.[22]Human Rights Watch interview with official in the daara inspectorate, Dakar,January 22, 2014. There are 14 total administrative regions in Senegal. SeeGouvernement du Sénégal, “Cartes administratives duSénégal,” http://www.gouv.sn/Cartes.html (accessed February24, 2014).[23]Human Rights Watch interview with official in the daara inspectorate, Dakar,January 22, 2014.[24]Human Rights Watch interview with civil society activist, Dakar, January 12,2014.[25]Human Rights Watch interview with high-level justice ministry official, Dakar,January 13, 2014.[26]Human Rights Watch interview with Senegalese civil society activist, Dakar, October21, 2013.[27]Human Rights Watch interview with Senegalese civil society activist, Dakar, October21, 2013.[28]Human Rights Watch interview with Senegalese civil society activist, Guédiawaye,January 12, 2014.[29]Human Rights Watch interview with Senegalese civil society activist, Dakar, October21, 2013.[30]Human Rights Watch interview with Senegalese civil society activist, Guédiawaye,January 12, 2014.[31]The relevant government bodies include the education ministry’s daarainspectorate and its division of Arabic teaching; the family ministry’schildren’s rights division; as well as the justice ministry’santi-trafficking unit, its division of correctional education and socialprotection (la Direction de l’éducation surveillée et dela protection sociale), and its non-institutional educational outreachservices (Action éducative en milieu ouvert).[32]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with official in the daara inspectorate,Dakar, February 25, 2014.[33]Human Rights Watch interview with official in the daara inspectorate, Dakar,January 22, 2014.[34]Human Rights Watch interview with official in the daara inspectorate, Dakar,January 22, 2014.[35]Human Rights Watch interview with official in the daara inspectorate, Dakar,January 22, 2014. For example, a civil society activist in Guédiawayetold Human Rights Watch that the inspectors there responsible for daaras andschools in which Arabic is taught do not have any vehicles. Human Rights Watchinterview, Guédiawaye, October 24, 2013.[36]Human Rights Watch interview with official in the daara inspectorate, Dakar,January 22, 2014.[37]Human Rights Watch interview with representative of a diplomatic mission,Dakar, January 10, 2014.[38]Human Rights Watch interviews, October 2013 and January 2014. For an example ofthe reaction of some Quranic teachers, see Mama Moustapha Mbaye, “Lesmaitres coraniques de Touba; Darou Moukhty, Diourbel: « Aucun daara nesera fermé ! »,” leseral.net, March 8, 2013, http://www.leral.net/Les-maitres-coraniques-de-Touba--Darou-Moukhty-Diourbel-Aucun-daara-ne-sera-ferme-_a76712.html(accessed February 24, 2014).[39]Human Rights Watch interview with justice ministry official, Dakar, January 14,2014.[40]N.F.G., “Interdiction de la mendicité des enfants,les imams approuvent,” leral.net, March 14, 2013, http://www.leral.net/Interdiction-de-la-mendicite-des-enfants-les-imams-approuvent_a77290.html(accessed February 23, 2014); Aliou Fama, “Interdiction de lamendicité des enfants: Des Imams approuvent et demandent à l’Etatd’aller jusqu’au bout,” senego.net, March 14, 2013, http://senego.net/2013/03/14/interdiction-mendicite-enfants-imams-approuvent-demnadent-letat-daller-jusquau-bout_81899.html(accessed February 23, 2014).[41]Human Rights Watch interview with head of a Quranic teachers’association, Diourbel, January 14, 2014.[42]Human Rights Watch interview with Serigne El Hadj Mamadou Toudien, Ndula,January 15, 2014.[43]Human Rights Watch interview with Quranic teacher, Diourbel, January 14, 2014.[44]Human Rights Watch interview with Sokhna Mame Issa Mbacké, Touba,January 15, 2014.[45]Human Rights Watch interview with Sokhna Maï Mbacké, Touba, January16, 2014.[46]Human Rights Watch interview with Idrissa Cissé N’Diaye, Touba,January 16, 2014.[47]Human Rights Watch interview with Idrissa Cissé N’Diaye, Touba,January 16, 2014.[48]Human Rights Watch interview with Serigne Moustapha Diattara, Touba, January17, 2014.[49]Human Rights Watch interview with Alioune Tine, Dakar, January 21, 2014.[50]Some abusive Quranic “teachers” force one of the otherstudents—generally one of the older boys—to carry out the punishment,rather than doing so themselves.[51]Law no. 2005-06 of May 10, 2005, relating to the fight against the traffickingof persons and similar practices and the protection of victims, art. 3.[52]Adam Nossiter, “Senegal Court Forbids Forcing Children to Beg,” NewYork Times, September 12, 2010, http://www.nytimes.com/2010/09/13/world/africa/13dakar.html?_r=0;US State Department, Office To Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons,“Country report on Trafficking in Persons – 2011: Senegal,”June 2011, http://www.state.gov/j/tip/rls/tiprpt/2011/164233.htm (accessedFebruary 15, 2014).[53]See “Conseil des Ministres du 07 octobre 2010,”http://www.gouv.sn/Conseil-des-Ministres-du-07,1022.html (accessed February 24,2014); “Sénégal : le président Wade contestel’interdiction de la mendicité dans les lieux publics,”Radio France Internationale, October 9, 2010chools”nin their care; close “sNora Sturm, and n about the project from a justiceministry document. tographie des daaras le 12, http://www.rfi.fr/afrique/20101009-senegal-le-president-wade-conteste-interdiction-mendicite-lieux-publics/(accessed February 24, 2014).[54]Jean-Gervais Ndjimbi-Ndong, “9 morts et un brulé grave dans unincendie à la Medina,” Sud Quotidien, March 5, 2013,https://mobile.sudonline.sn/9-morts-et-un-brule-grave-dans-un-incendie-a-la-medina_m_12719.htm(accessed February 24, 2014) (quoting President Sall as saying, “Severemeasures will be taken against anyone who, in the name of Islam, continues tooversee such living conditions … like those here.”).[55]The boys often have to use their begging earnings to pay for their transport,meaning they must accumulate more each day than the “teacher’s”demanded quota.[56]Human Rights Watch interview with Senegalese civil society activist, Dakar,January 2014.[57]Human Rights Watch interview with several investigators involved in themapping, Dakar, January 2014.[58]For a longer discussion, see Human Rights Watch, “Off the Backs of theChildren,” pp. 25-52, 65-71.[59]Uncooked rice and sugar cubes are by far the most common goods that boys haveto bring exploitative “teachers,” though Human Rights Watch hasoccasionally interviewed boys who were required to bring back other goods, suchas millet. Rice and sugar are easy for the “teacher” to collect andthen sell back to the community, either in individual servings or re-packagedin a rice sack or box of sugar cubes. If the Quranic “teacher”demands only a set amount of money, many boys will still collect uncooked riceand sugar cubes and then sell the goods themselves to help accumulate the moneyquota.[60]Human Rights Watch interviews with civil society activists and current andformer talibés, Dakar and Saint Louis, October 2013 and January 2014.See also Human Rights Watch, “Off the Backs of the Children,”pp. 30-33, 42-52.[61]Human Rights Watch interview with Senegalese civil society activist, SaintLouis, January 18, 2014.[62]Human Rights Watch, “Off the Backs of the Children,” pp.25-52, 65-71.[63]Human Rights Watch interview with 8-year-old boy at Quranic school, SaintLouis, January 20, 2014.[64]Human Rights Watch interview with 10-year-old boy at Quranic school, SaintLouis, January 20, 2014.[65]Human Rights Watch interview with Issa Kouyaté, Saint Louis, January 18,2014.[66]Human Rights Watch interview with 6-year-old Quranic student, Saint Louis,January 19, 2014.[67]Human Rights Watch interviews, October 2013 and January 2014.[68]Human Rights Watch interview with 9-year-old boy, location and date withheld.[69]Human Rights Watch interview with 16-year-old Quranic student, Saint Louis,January 2014.[70]Human Rights Watch interviews, Dakar and Saint Louis, October 2013 and January2014.[71]Human Rights Watch interview with Cheikh Sall, Empire des Enfants, January 22,2014.[72]Human Rights Watch interview with Senegalese civil society activist, Mbao, October2013.[73]Human Rights Watch, “Off the Backs of theChildren”, pp. 94-101.[74]Convention on the Rights of the Child, art. 19.[75]African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child, arts. 29 (forcedbegging), 21 (harmful social and cultural practices).[76]Marabout is a term often used to signify “Quranic teacher,”but which means more generally a “respected religious authority.”While Human Rights Watch used the term widely in its 2010 report, it has chosenin this report to use the term “Quranic teacher” throughout,particularly when dealing with those who engage in exploitation and abuse. Asmany religious authorities and Senegalese civil society activists stress, noone who exploits children through long hours of forced begging and physicalabuse merits the term “marabout,” which carries with it greatimportance in Senegal.[77]US State Department, Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons, “Countryreport on Trafficking in Persons – 2013: Senegal,” June 19, 2013, http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/210741.pdf(accessed February 4, 2014).[78]Human Rights Watch interviews with justice ministry officials, Dakar, October2013 and January 2014.[79]“Un imam encourt deux ans ferme pour exploitation de lamendicité et Complicité de CBV,” setal.net, January 7,2014, http://www.setal.net/Un-imam-encourt-deux-ans-ferme-pour-exploitation-de-la-mendicite-et-Complicite-de-CBV_a22591.html(accessed February 24, 2014).[80]“Imam Omar Niang prend un mois ferme et sort de prison,”setal.net, January 9, 2014, http://www.setal.net/Imam-Omar-Niang-prend-un-mois-ferme-et-sort-de-prison_a22661.html(accessed February 4, 2014).[81]Ibid.[82]Law no. 2005-06 of May 10, 2005, art. 3.[83]Republic of Senegal, Strategic Plan in Response to Child Begging, 2013-2015,February 2013.[84]Human Rights Watch interview with justice ministry official, Dakar, January 14,2014.[85]Human Rights Watch interview with El Hadji Malick Sow, January 22, 2014.[86]Human Rights Watch interview with justice ministry official, Dakar, January 13,2014. Human Rights Watch received additional information about the project froma justice ministry document. Cellule Nationale de Lutte contre laTraite des Personnes en particulier des femmes et des enfants (CNLTP), Termes de Référence atelier de validation, January 20,2014.[87]Human Rights Watch interviews, Dakar, January 2014.[88]Human Rights Watch obtained several of the working group’s action plans.The information also comes from interviews with Senegalese civil societyactivists in October 2013 and January 2014.[89]Human Rights Watch interviews, Dakar, October 2013 and January 2014.[90]Human Rights Watch interview with UN official, Dakar, October 22, 2013.[91]Human Rights Watch interview with director in the justice ministry, Dakar,January 13, 2014.[92]Human Rights Watch interview with justice ministry official, Dakar, January 14,2014.[93]Human Rights Watch interview with Senegalese civil society activist, locationwithheld, January 2014.[94]Human Rights Watch interview with Senegalese civil society activist, locationwithheld, January 2014.[95]Human Rights Watch interview with Senegalese civil society activist, locationwithheld, January 2014.[96]Human Rights Watch interview with justice ministry officials, Dakar, October2013 and January 2014.[97]Penal Code of Senegal, art. 245.[98]Human Rights Watch interview with justice ministry official, Dakar, January 14,2014.[99]Human Rights Watch, “Off the Backs of the Children,” pp.14-24.[100]Human Rights Watch interview with Sokhna Mame Issa Mbacké, Touba,January 15, 2014.[101]Human Rights Watch interviews with representatives of diplomatic missions,Dakar, October 2013 and January 2014.[102]Mama Moustapha Mbaye, “Les maitres coraniques de Touba ;Darou Moukhty, Diourbel: « Aucun daara ne sera fermé ! ».”[103]Ibid.[104]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdou Fodé Sow, civil societyactivist, Guédiawaye, January 12, 2014.Related ContentMarch 19, 2014News ReleaseSenegal: Urgent Action Needed on Forced Child BeggingDespite Promises, Thousands of Boys Face Exploitation, AbuseMarch 19, 2014News ReleaseSenegal: Urgent Action Needed on Forced Child BeggingRegion / CountryAfrica SenegalProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch