"You Don’t Have Rights Here": US Border Screening and Returns of Central Americans to Risk of Serious Harm | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload summary: Photo featureDownload the full reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload summary: Photo featureDownload the full reportOctober 16, 2014"You Don’t Have Rights Here"US Border Screening and Returns of Central Americans to Risk of Serious HarmReturned migrants at the Attention Center for the Returned Migrant, San Pedro Sula airport, Honduras.© 2014 Stephen Ferry for Human Rights Watch“YouDon’t Have Rights Here”US Border Screening and Returnsof Central Americans to Risk of Serious HarmSummaryMethodologyI. Background on Threats in HondurasII. First-Hand Accounts: ThreatsFacing Returned HonduransIII. Expedited Removal, Reinstatementof Removal, and Screening for Credible FearIV. First-HandAccounts: Asylum Seekers’ Experiences in Expedited RemovalV. Detention and Access to CounselVI. US Law and International RefugeeLawRecommendationsAcknowledgmentsSummaryI told them, I cried, that I couldn’t go back tomy country… but they deported us.—Alicia R., deported from the United States followingBorder Patrol screening in August 2014 with her two children, ages 3 and 10,feared retribution from gang members in Honduras after witnessing the murder ofher mother.[1]Migrants from Central America and Mexico seek to enter theUnited States without authorization for many reasons. Some seek economicopportunity. Others are fleeing violent gangs in countries such as Guatemala,El Salvador, and Honduras, where local officials may be complicit with gangs orotherwise unable or unwilling to provide meaningful protection. Many have mixedmotives for leaving, including poverty, gang violence, and reuniting withseparated family members.At the US-Mexico border, US immigration officers issuedeportation orders to unauthorized migrants in accelerated processes known as“expedited removal” or “reinstatement of removal.”These processes include rapid-fire screening for a migrant’s fear ofpersecution or torture upon return to their home country or an intention toapply for asylum. As detailed in this report, this cursory screening is failingto effectively identify people fleeing serious risks to their lives and safety.In the past two decades, US laws and policies have becomeless responsive to the risks faced by arriving migrants seeking asylum frompersecution. In 1996, and subsequently in 2006, the US government severelyundermined the system for identifying asylum seekers through the establishmentand expansion of expedited removal. The flaws of that approach are readilyapparent today at the US-Mexico border.This report is based on 35 interviews with Central Americanmigrants in detention in the US or recently deported to Honduras. Whilefocusing on the situation facing Hondurans, our findings and recommendationsapply to others coming to the US from Central America and Mexico.All migrants we interviewed expressed a fear of returning toHonduras. Some of those who had been returned to Honduras had fear so acutethat they were living in hiding, afraid to go out in public. Several who wererecently deported provided accounts that, if true, should qualify them forasylum in the US. They said that, prior to attempting to enter the US, they hadbeen subject to serious threats from gangs in Honduras. These included smallbusiness owners who refused to make demanded payments to gangs; victims of orwitnesses to gang crimes, including murder and rape; and fear of a gangforcibly recruiting a family’s young son. Others fled abusive domesticpartners or violence related to sexual orientation, both grounds for asylumunder US law.Virtually all of those we interviewed who had beenapprehended at or near the border were deported summarily, via expeditedremoval or reinstatement of removal. Many said they had expressed their fearsto US Border Patrol officials charged with screening for fear of return beforebeing deported, but fewer than half of these were referred by US Border Patrolfor a further assessment of whether they had a “credible” or“reasonable” fear of returning to Honduras. US law requires thatwhen a migrant in expedited or reinstatement of removal expresses a fear ofreturn to their country of origin, they be referred to a US Citizenship andImmigration Services (USCIS) asylum officer for an interview to determinewhether their fear might qualify them for asylum or other protection.Human Rights Watch was unable to corroborate claims aboutthe specific dangers interviewees said they faced in Honduras. However, theexperiences they described and the fears they expressed should have led USimmigration authorities to give their cases sufficient scrutiny before theywere returned to their home country. The principle of nonrefoulement, the rightnot to be returned to a place where one would likely face threats to life orfreedom or other serious harm, recognized under both US and international law,demands as much.*    **The vast majority of migrants crossing the US-Mexico borderwithout authorization are placed in detention and undergo a hasty two-partassessment by US officials under either “expedited removal,” forfirst-time border crossers, or “reinstatement of removal,” formigrants who have previously been deported from the United States.In either case, to pass the first stage an agent fromCustoms and Border Protection (CBP) or another US immigration agency must flagthe person for a “credible fear” or “reasonable fear”assessment. To pass the second stage, migrants meet with an asylum officer fromUSCIS who determines whether their fear of return is “credible,” orin reinstatement cases, “reasonable” – that is, whether thereis a significant possibility they will prevail in immigration court on theirclaim for asylum or protection from deportation to a country where they arelikely to face torture.While there is evidence that fewer people are passingthrough this second stage,[2]Human Rights Watch’s investigations in Honduras suggests that many asylumseekers are being turned away in the first stage. The failure of CBP and otherUS immigration agencies to identify asylum seekers raises concerns that the USgovernment is violating its international human rights obligations to examineasylum claims before returning them to places where their lives or freedomwould be threatened.Data for 2011 and 2012 that Human Rights Watch obtained fromCustoms and Border Protection under the Freedom of Information Act indicatethat few Central American migrants are identified by CBP as people who fearreturn to their country in the first stage of the expedited removal process.The data show that the vast majority of Hondurans, at least 80 percent, areplaced in fast-track expedited removal and reinstatement of removal proceedingsbut only a minuscule minority, 1.9 percent, got flagged for credible fearassessments by CBP. The percentages for Mexico, Honduras, El Salvador, andGuatemala are similar, ranging from 0.1 to 5.5 percent. By comparison, 21percent of migrants from other countries who underwent the same proceedings inthe same years were flagged for credible fear interviews by CBP.CBP has a proactive duty to initially screen migrants forfear of return to their country of origin when it apprehends them crossing theborder and places them in expedited or reinstatement of removal. However, amigrant may be identified as fearing return to their country by an immigrationofficial after they have left CBP custody and entered the custody ofImmigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), the agency responsible for moreprolonged detention of migrants. ICE, however, does not have a duty toproactively screen all migrants in its custody for their fear of return. It istelling, then, that the majority of credible and reasonable fear referrals thatUSCIS received in 2011 and 2012 did not come from CBP, but from ICE and otherimmigration agencies that learn of migrants’ fear of return on an ad-hocbasis. In 2012, for example, CBP referred only 615 of the 2,405 Hondurans whoeventually were flagged for credible fear interviews by USCIS.[3] Approximatelythree-quarters of the credible fear referrals USCIS conducted in 2012 came fromagencies other than the CBP, even though that year CBP was responsible forapproximately 57 percent of all noncitizen apprehensions.Migrants who feared returning to Honduras told Human RightsWatch about problems they encountered at all stages of the summary removalprocess: some said that US border officials ignored their expressions of fearand removed them with no opportunity to have their claims examined; others saidborder officials acknowledged hearing their expressions of fear but pressuredthem to abandon their claims. For those who were referred for “crediblefear” interviews, some said they were intimidated and confused by theinterview process and complex immigration court asylum proceedings that theyhad to navigate on their own while detained and without legal assistance.When immigration officials place potential asylum seekersfrom Honduras and other Central American countries in summary removal withoutputting them into the “credible fear” process, the migrants have noopportunity to have an asylum officer or immigration judge consider their case.US immigration courts are badly backlogged, but many migrants apprehended inthe interior of the country – and thus not subject to Customs and BorderProtection custody – are able to present their defenses against removalfrom the United States, including any claims to asylum, before a decision-makerwho can make a more thorough examination of their claims.Things are different at the border. Research by Human RightsWatch and others show that the CBP’s methods for interviewing migrants inexpedited removal procedures are seriously flawed. Unlike “credible orreasonable fear” assessments, which usually last over 45 minutes and takeplace at least 48 hours after a migrant is in ICE custody, Border Patrolscreening interviews occur in Border Patrol stations and are much shorter.Uniformed CBP officers are usually armed while apprehending migrants; when theyinterview the migrants a few hours or days later their holsters are empty butvisible; they often conduct interviews in crowded settings, withoutconfidentiality from family members or others. All of these factors appear tohamper the ability of officers to identify those in need of more in-depthscreening. The migrants we interviewed said that the CBP officers whom theyencountered seemed singularly focused on removing them from the United States,which impeded their ability to make their fears known.One man who was deported in September 2014 told Human RightsWatch that when he informed a Border Patrol officer of the threats to his lifein Honduras, “He told me there was nothing I could do and I didn’thave a case so there was no reason to dispute the deportation…. I toldhim he was violating my right to life and he said, ‘You don’t haverights here.’”Arriving migrants in expedited removal or reinstatement ofremoval are subject to mandatory detention under US law. In recent years, thishas meant US immigration officials have exercised their discretion not to usethese accelerated procedures for most arriving families with children, whichwould mean they would be mandatorily detained, opting instead to place familiesin removal proceedings before immigration judges. In 2009, facing lawsuits andunder pressure from rights organizations, the Obama administration ended familydetention at the T. Don Hutto Detention Center, which had 490 beds for thedetention of migrant families with children. Since it was one of two migrantfacilities in the country equipped to detain families with children (the other,in Berks, Pennsylvania, has 85 beds), this decision indicated an intention todrastically reduce the practice of detaining families.Since that time, however, the US government has reversed itsplans. In June 2014, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) established twodetention facilities in Artesia, New Mexico, and Karnes, Texas, with between500 and 700 beds each to hold arriving families. In September 2014, DHS announcedplans to contract with a private prison company, the Corrections Corporation ofAmerica, to build a 2,400-bed family detention facility in Dilley, Texas. Thefacilities now in operation have been used to detain families primarily fromHonduras, Guatemala, and El Salvador who are in the process of expeditedremoval.International law prohibits the detention of migrantchildren and discourages the detention of asylum seekers. Detention interfereswith individuals’ ability to assert claims to asylum, access counsel, andharms the physical and mental health of children as they struggle with lifebehind bars and the uncertainties of indefinite detention. These policies alsocontravene international standards against the use of immigration detention todeter asylum seekers.Human Rights Watch urges the Obama administration and theCongress to immediately address US border policies that are risking the livesof Central American migrants. They should cease fast-tracking Central Americanmigrants for deportation to ensure migrants have an adequate opportunity tomake a claim for asylum. If fast-tracking continues, the US should takeimmediate measures to ensure all migrants who express fear are being flaggedfor further screening. The administration should also reverse its decision toexpand the detention of migrant families, evidenced by the creation of two newfamily detention facilities in June and July and plans announced in Septemberto build a 2,400-bed facility in Dilley, Texas. Finally, the government shouldincrease migrants’ access to legal counsel, which would improve handlingof asylum claims and better ensure the US does not return people to countrieswhere they face persecution or torture.MethodologyThis report is based largely on interviews conducted byHuman Rights Watch from September 4 to 12, 2014 in three cities inHonduras—San Pedro Sula, Comayagua, and Tegucigalpa—as well asinterviews in July and September 2014 in family detention facilities inArtesia, New Mexico, and Karnes, Texas. We also interviewed officials at BorderPatrol facilities in McAllen, Texas in July 2014. Human Rights Watchinterviewed 25 Hondurans who were recently deported from the United States, 10Central American detainees in family detention centers, and one in an adultdetention center in the United States. We also interviewed migrant servicesproviders, lawyers, academics, and government officials in Honduras and in theUnited States.Human Rights Watch carried out interviews in English or inSpanish, depending on the preference of the interviewee, without interpreters.We informed the interviewees of the purpose of our research and did not paythem or offer them other incentives to speak with us. In some cases in thereport, we have used pseudonyms and withheld other identifying information toprotect interviewees and their families from possible retaliation.The report also contains quantitative analysis of dataacquired from CBP via US Freedom of Information Act requests. The data containsinformation on all CBP apprehensions through fiscal years 2011 and 2012 (morethan 683,000 apprehensions). Analysis is focused on descriptive statistics ofthe nationality and disposition variables.I. Background on Threats inHondurasHonduras suffers from rampant crime and impunity for humanrights abuses. The murder rate, which has risen consistently over the lastdecade, was the highest in the world in 2013.[4]For young adult males between the ages of 20 and 34, the murder rate inHonduras exceeds 300 per 100,000.[5]Violence in Honduras is largely the result of conflict overcontrol of drug trafficking routes and turf wars between criminal groups,[6] although,as in many other countries, these groups target other people in theircommunities as well. Local street gangs, the key drivers of violence, areprimarily affiliated with transnational gangs such as the Mara Salvatrucha (orMS-13) or Barrio 18 (also known as Calle 18, La 18 or Mara-18).[7] Both groups exertinfluence over entire neighborhoods, profiting economically by levying an impuestode guerra or “war tax” on residents and local business people.[8] Failure topay this “tax” can result in violent retaliation by gangs.[9]Witnesses to gang-related crimes in Honduras fearretaliatory violence, whether or not they speak out about what they have seen.[10]“Here in Honduras, you can’t make a complaint, because then thegang comes and finishes your family,” said one man who survived anear-fatal attack by a gang member.[11]Gang death threats may follow a person wherever they gowithin the country. As Central American gang expert Thomas Boerman puts it,“if you go to a new community everyone recognizes you as a strangerincluding the police officers and the gang members. It takes only a little bitof time for anyone looking for you to find you.”[12]Young people are often targeted by gangs for recruitment andto carry out crime.[13]Gangs typically recruit poor, homeless, or marginalized youth, sometimesputting them through initiation rituals involving violent acts. Membership isseen as a life-long commitment and desertion is severely punished. One father,speaking of his 10-year-old son, told Human Rights Watch, “I’mscared for him. They already start making them do things at 10.”[14]Girls may also be targeted by gangs for forced recruitmentor sexual harassment and abuse.[15]Cecilia N., a 14-year-old girl who was deported from the US with her mother,said, “I’m terrified because they have taken girls from my schooland raped them.”[16]After her visit to Honduras in July 2014, the United Nations special rapporteuron violence against women noted that violent deaths among women had increasedby 263 percent between 2005 and 2013 and that reports indicated a 95 percentrate of impunity for femicide and sexual violence crimes.[17]Bias-motivated attacks on lesbian, gay, bisexual,transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) people are also a serious problem. Thealleged involvement of Honduran police in some of these violent crimes is ofparticular concern. In 2011 and 2012, the government established specialprosecutors’ units to investigate these crimes, yet there is no evidencethat these efforts have resulted in a significant increase in prosecutions.[18]Perpetrators of killings and other violent crimes inHonduras are rarely brought to justice. The institutions responsible forproviding public security continue to be largely effectual and are marred bycorruption and abuse, while efforts to reform them have made little progress.[19] Criminalgroups have reportedly deeply penetrated the Honduran national police,demanding bribes and passing information to criminal groups.[20]II. First-Hand Accounts: Threats Facing Returned HonduransHondurans interviewed by Human Rights Watch who had beenrecently deported from the United States said they were subject to specificthreats that, if true, would make them eligible for asylum in the UnitedStates. Many described threats from gangs in Honduras. Some of these threatsarose from the common practice of gangs demanding extortion payments from smallbusiness owners. Others were victims or witnesses to crimes such as murder andrape and targeted on that basis. One said that he feared the forced recruitmentof his young son into a gang. Others faced dangers from other sources,including abusive domestic partners. Nearly all said they had no meaningfulprotection from such violence in Honduras.Some said their fear was so acute that they were afraid togo out in public after they were deported to Honduras.[21] One 27-year-old mantold Human Rights Watch he could not leave his sister’s house nor tellhis four young children that he was back in the country for fear of being foundby gangs. He described leaving the house only rarely and, even then, only whenwearing a motorcycle helmet with a darkened visor.[22] A deported woman describedmoving from house to house among her relatives every few days for fear ofretaliation by the gang that she had witnessed murder her mother.[23]Almosteveryone suffering these kinds of threats told Human Rights Watch that theyplanned to try to flee the country again as soon as possible.Mateo S., who was deported from the United States toHonduras on September 9, 2014, told Human Rights Watch:It’s run by a gang where I live. I can’t saythe name, because it wouldn’t be safe, but they are in charge…. Ihad my own business here in my city. I sold bleach and other cleaning suppliesfrom house to house. At some point, the gang started to ask me for money. Here,they call it a “war tax.” Eventually, they were asking me for aboutUS$300 dollars a month, which is the same thing here as the minimum wage. Itwas impossible for me. They saw that I couldn’t pay this money so theystarted to mess with my family, with my son, who is seven years old, and withmy wife. Eventually, they were threatening me all the time. I was paying themmoney for six to eight months, every month. And then I couldn’t pay itanymore and my business went bankrupt and then I was using our savings to paythe gang members. I had to pay because I was afraid they would do something tomy family.Then they tried to kidnap my son in June 2014. I usuallycome early to school to pick up my son at lunchtime. They got there maybe 10 or20 minutes before the kids come out. I recognized them. They had already toldme that something was going to happen to my son and to my wife. I didn’thesitate. I jumped the school fence with my son. I pushed him over and then Ijumped. Later in the day, the teachers told me that [the gang members] werelooking for a kid of my son’s age. I didn’t send him back to school.…We had some savings from three or four years so I sent my son and my wife tothe United States. Once I knew they were safe, I fled too.[24]Mercedes R. also felt threatened because of her inability topay “taxes” to the gangs in Honduras. She said, “I was facingthreats from the gangs because I had a store that sold food. Starting in 2013,I spent a year paying them dollars and then I couldn’t anymore. I feltlike I wasn’t living anymore. I mistrusted everyone. I didn’t feelsafe.”[25]People who witness murders or other crimes committed bygangs often fear for their lives. Roberto L., who was deported from the UnitedStates to Honduras in September 2014, said:They killed my mother right in front of me. She had a smallclothing shop. I was shot at the same time. This was in September 2013. I havebeen fleeing since, because I know they are looking for me. I have two kidshere but I can’t see them because that would put them in danger. Theycan’t know I’m here. The assassins who are looking for me are at anational level, they will find me anywhere. I’m just going to be here forthree weeks, then I’ll try again.[26]Alicia R. explained that her witnessing her mother’smurder put her at risk from gang members:They took my mother’s life.… The day that shedied I was going to pick her up because she had some money to give me. I gotthere and then the criminals who killed her arrived. I witnessed everythingthat happened.… They were coming to kill somebody who was there and shewas there too. She didn’t have any problems. The issue is that I saw itand they saw me. They were supposedly from a gang called “18” here.The people from the gangs don’t have any heart, whether with adults,children. They don’t have hearts.We buried my mother … and then I had to leave thehouse we lived in because they came to look for us. I left everything. I wentto my mother in law’s house and then an aunt’s house. I keep movingbetween these places for protection because when you get to one place oranother, they find out quickly. They check. So as not to be in danger I alwaysmove, so that I’m never in the same place …Ican’t rest. I can’t even work here. I’ve always lived herebut now I have to stay on the move from place to place to protect myself fromthem and to protect the lives of my children. I don’t have any peace. Idon’t want to be in this country because my life is in danger.[27]Jacobo E., who was deported from the United States toHonduras in August 2014, said he was living in fear for his life. He told HumanRights Watch,I’ve always worked. I’ve never been in a gang.I was baptized as a Mormon in 1994 and I have four kids with my wife. I had toflee though because my wife started an affair with a guy from “18.”… I saw the guy leaving my house one day and we had a fight. Then theytold my sister that the gang was going to kill me, so I fled. Now thatI’m back here again I don’t go out. I can’t. My parents aresupporting me and I live with my sister…. I put on a motorcycle helmetinside the house to come here.I can’t work. If I look for work they’ll seeme. They are in charge in many places, the “18” is nearlyeverywhere. Being locked up like this is ugly. I think about my children allthe time. I can’t contact them or tell them that I’m back in thecountry though. That would be dangerous.The pervasive nature of gang violence in Honduras placesrandom individuals under threat. Marlon J., who was deported from the UnitedStates to Honduras in August 2014, said,I was a door-to-door salesman in a neighborhood called LaCanada. One day I was passing by a corner with three guys just standing there.I wasn’t afraid because I usually walked around there. But then one ofthem ran at me and shot me seven times in the back. They left me for dead …I spent two months in the hospital and it took seven months to be able to walk.When I came back to work one of my clients told me the gangwas after me because that guy was going through a test. He had to kill thefirst person who walked by, to show he was brave. He would have to kill me nowsince I was supposed to be dead. I went to another part of the city, but thenmy brother-in-law was killed for not paying the “war tax.” Thatmade me even more afraid.I’m a father of two kids, two and five years old. Ihave a lot to live for. When they deported me from the United States they saidthey would put me in prison for six months if I come back. It doesn’tmatter to me if I get six months, at least in Port Isabel [detention center inTexas], it’s safe. What I want is to be out of here.[28]Returned migrants to Honduras did not feel the Honduranauthorities were able or willing to protect them. As Marlon J., put it, afterreceiving seven gunshot wounds at the hands of a gang initiate, “Here inHonduras, you can’t file a police complaint because after that the gangcomes and finishes your family. Delinquency is what governs.”[29]Alicia R., who witnessed her mother’s murder, alsofelt she could not seek protection from Honduran police:I never filed a complaint because sometimes in this countrythere is a lot of corruption.… Sometimes the police work together withthe criminals.… If you go do something like that [lodge a complaint]sometimes that means they are going to be waiting for you outside of the policestation.[30]III. Expedited Removal,Reinstatement of Removal, and Screening for Credible FearThe Universal Declaration of Human Rights provides that“[e]veryone has the right to seek and to enjoy in other countries asylumfrom persecution.”[31]In the past two decades, US laws and practices have increasingly narrowed thatright.In 1996, as part of the Illegal Immigration Reform andImmigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA), the US Congress enacted a new provisioncalled “expedited removal.” It allows the summary expulsion ofnoncitizens who have not been admitted or paroled into the US, who have been inthe US for less than two years, and who present fraudulent documents or have nodocuments. Unless they express a fear of persecution or torture upon return totheir home countries or indicate an intention to apply for asylum, they may bedeported immediately and will be barred from returning to the US for at leastfive years, and often much longer.[32]Initially, the US government applied expedited removalprovisions only to noncitizens arriving at official entry points along theborder or at airports known as “ports of entry.” Over the lastdecade, however, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), which wasestablished in 2002 after the September 11, 2001 attacks on the United States,has applied expedited removal procedures to people apprehended along the entireUS border. Under DHS regulations this includes people apprehended within 100miles of the border.[33]For asylum seekers—those in need of protection fromforced return—the IIRIRA created another hurdle, called reinstatement ofremoval. If an individual is removed or voluntarily leaves under an order ofremoval, and subsequently reenters the United States illegally, they face thereinstatement of the previous order.[34]A border crosser whose order has been reinstated is barred from applying forasylum but may access other remedies such as withholding of removal orprotection from return to torture under the Convention against Torture andOther Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“Conventionagainst Torture”), to which the US is a party.[35]Many individuals crossing the border first discuss theircases with a Customs and Border Protection agent who, under US law, is supposedto inform them that they may ask for protection if they have a fear ofreturning home. If a fear of return is expressed, the agent should flag themfor a more thorough assessment known as a “credible fear”interview.[36]Research by Human Rights Watch and others show that the CBP’s methods forinterviewing migrants in expedited removal procedures are seriously flawed.[37]A primary finding of Human Rights Watch’sinvestigation in Honduras is that individuals seeking asylum are not beingflagged for credible fear interviews by CBP officers. This is supported by USgovernment data. Between October 2010 and September 2012, the vast majority ofHondurans, 81 percent, were placed in the fast-track expedited removal andreinstatement of removal proceedings; only a miniscule minority, 1.9 percent,were flagged for credible fear assessments by CBP.[38]The data also show low rates of credible fear referrals byCBP for nationals of Mexico, El Salvador, and Guatemala. Only 0.1 percent ofMexicans, 0.8 percent of Guatemalans, and 5.5 percent of Salvadorans inexpedited or reinstatement of removal were referred to a credible or reasonablefear interview by CBP. However, 21 percent of migrants from countries otherthan these, who underwent the same proceedings in the same years, were flaggedfor credible fear interviews by CBP. On October 9, 2014, Human Rights Watchrequested updated apprehension data from CBP, which could shed light on thetrends in CBP credible fear referral rates during the 2013 and 2014 influx ofmigrant adults, families and children from Central America.Click to expand ImageClick to expand ImageAs discussed above, those unauthorized migrants who areflagged for having a fear of return, proceed to a pre-asylum screening todetermine whether there is a significant possibility that they can establishpersecution or fear of persecution before an immigration judge.[39]In recent years, migrants from Honduras, Guatemala, and ElSalvador have formed an increasing proportion of the credible fear referralsreceived by USCIS.[40]Absolute numbers of Central Americans identified for credible or reasonablefear screening have also been increasing. Referrals of Hondurans, for instance,have increased from 1,108 individuals in 2006 to 8,539 in 2013.[41]Most of these referrals, however, do not come from CBP,despite CBP’s proactive duty to screen migrants it places in expedited orreinstatement of removal for fear of return to their country of origin. In2012, for example, CBP referred only 615 of the 2,405 Hondurans who eventuallyreceived credible fear interviews.[42]Approximately three-quarters of the credible fear referrals USCIS conducted in2012 came from agencies other than the CBP, even though that year CBP wasresponsible for approximately 57 percent of all noncitizen apprehensions.[43]A migrant may be referred by an immigration official after theyhave left CBP custody and entered the custody of Immigrations and CustomsEnforcement (ICE), the agency responsible for more prolonged detention ofmigrants. ICE, however, does not have a duty to proactively screen all migrantsin its custody for their fear of return. The majority of credible andreasonable fear referrals that USCIS received in 2011 and 2012 did not comefrom CBP but other immigration agencies, which learn of migrants’ fear ofreturn on an ad-hoc basis.For those who are referred to credible fear interviews, thelikelihood of being permitted to apply for asylum appears to have fallensignificantly in recent months. This comes in the wake of problematic newguidance for asylum officers conducting interviews (referred to as the “lessonplan”) issued in February 2014.[44]Before the lesson plan was enacted, in January 2014, 83 percent of those whoreceived credible fear interviews were permitted to apply for asylum. In July2014, six months later, that figure was 63 percent.[45] While this could be anartifact of a larger number of credible fear referrals or a smaller sample sizeof the months since the plan, this evidence suggests that the lesson plan hasreduced the proportion of interviews in which credible fear is found. Theprecipitous apparent decline occurred in the period after the release of thenew lesson plan, and not in tandem with the rise in referrals. Asylum lawexperts have criticized the lesson plan for inappropriately raising the burdenof proof required at the credible or reasonable fear stage.[46]If a noncitizen is found to have a credible fear, they maythen apply for asylum as a defense against deportation in immigration court.Though the asylum seeker will be able to go before a judge to make their claimfor protection, they have no right to a government-appointed lawyer to assistthem. ICE may detain noncitizens going through these immigration courtprocedures for the duration of the deportation process on a discretionarybasis, though some become eligible for release on bond or on their ownrecognizance once they are transferred to immigration court.‎IV.First-Hand Accounts: Asylum Seekers’ Experiences in Expedited RemovalUS Customs and Border Protection officers are required toscreen people in expedited removal for fear of return to their country and, ifthe noncitizen expresses fear, refer them for a credible fear interview.[47] Despitethis requirement, Human Rights Watch spoke with deportees who reported thatthey were not informed of the availability of protection or that they were notreferred to an asylum officer for a credible fear interview after they told aBorder Patrol agent they were afraid to return to their country.[48] Somewould-be asylum seekers also reported that Border Patrol officers harassed,threatened, and attempted to dissuade them from applying for asylum.Additionally, CBP officers conduct interviews about fear ofreturn in a sometimes crowded and public enforcement setting and withoutconfidentiality from family members or others, factors that appear to hamperthe ability of the officers to identify those in need of more in-depthscreening. Human Rights Watch observed the interview location for detainees atthe McAllen Border Patrol station in Texas in July 2014. CBP officers showedHuman Rights Watch a large public space in which they process migrants at ahorseshoe-shaped table designed to accommodate multiple officer-migrant pairsin close proximity. Holding cells ring the room, with concrete floors and wallsand toilets behind half-high barriers. CBP officers told and demonstrated toHuman Rights Watch how they check their weapons before entering, but wear theiruniform with holsters – which can be particularly intimidating to personsfearful of the security forces in their home countries.[49] CBP officers toldHuman Rights Watch that the McAllen Border Patrol station was physicallysimilar to many other such stations along the Mexican border.Migrants who were not referred for a credible fear interviewtold Human Rights Watch that interviews by CBP are brief and focused onexplaining additional consequences of deportation, such as bars to return forset periods of time, rather than exploring their fear of return. “Theofficers don’t pay attention to you. If you say you are afraid they saythey ‘can’t do anything,” Marlon J. told Human Rights Watch.“All they said to me was that if I came back they would give me sixmonths in prison.”[50]Some Border Patrol officers apparently tried to convinceborder crossers not to apply for asylum. “I asked for asylum,” saidJacobo E., who fled after being shot and seeing his mother killed for herfailure to pay fees to gang members to run her small clothing business.“The officer told me don’t apply, 90 percent of the people who dodon’t get it.”[51]Some deportees and detainees with whom we spoke reported that they resistedsigning forms offered by Border Patrol, or were coerced into signing somethingthey did not understand. “‘Fingerprint, fingerprint,’ theyjust kept saying, I didn’t know what I was signing,” said Jacobo E.who was in hiding in Honduras after being deported.[52] Maribel V., who wasdeported from the Artesia, New Mexico family detention center with her children,said:They made me sign the deportation in the“icebox” [slang for the cold Border Patrol detention cells]. Nojudge or lawyer spoke with me. They called me and they said that I had to signthis paper. They told me that it was for a judge to see my case. But I neversaw a judge and they told me I had a deportation order. They told me I wasalready deported.[53]Mateo S., who had fled death threats from a gang, said hetried to not sign papers agreeing to his deportation:I was detained for six days in the cold rooms. They justasked me my name, where I came from, and they told me I was punished for fiveyears and I had to sign the deportation. I didn’t want to sign. When themoment of the interview came I said I wouldn’t sign. The officer insultedme. They started waking me up every couple of hours and moving me from cell tocell. It was hard…. The officer filled out all the paperwork and told meto sign, I told him I wouldn’t sign and I hoped the US government wouldadmit me. He ripped up all the paper and threw it almost at my face. He told meI was deported anyway. He said he “had the law in his hand and he wasgoing to sign for me.” I told him he was violating my right to life andhe said, “You don’t have rights here.”[54]Alicia R., an asylum seeker who crossed the border with hertwo children, 3 and 10 years old, told officers of her fear of returning toHonduras. In an attempt at self-preservation, thinking it would keep her frombeing deported to Honduras, she also told them she was from Mexico:The truth is because I didn’t want to come backhere [to Honduras], I told them that I was from Mexico. I told them, Icried, I said I couldn’t return to my country. Sometimesyou are so afraid … to be sent back so you just say something.[55]After two days, US officials turned Alicia and her childrenover to the Mexican government, which deported them two weeks later back toHonduras.[56]Some migrants told Human Rights Watch that when they triedto tell US officials about their fear of returning, they were denied furtherexploration of that claim, and were put in touch with consular officers from theircountry of origin. This practice runs counter to international protectionstandards, which recognize the problematic relationship asylum seekers may havewith officials from their home countries. “The [US] officers don’tspeak with you. They just set it up so you can speak with a consular officerand then so you sign the papers,” said Marlon J.[57]In some cases, migrants reported that consular officersdissuaded them from making international protection claims. Mateo S. explained,They put me in touch with someone who they said was theconsul of Honduras on a video screen. I explained to him in total confidencethat I was fleeing my country and the threats I was facing. He told me Ididn’t have a case, so why try?[58]V. Detention and Accessto CounselNone of the asylum seekers Human Rights Watch met with whohad been deported to Honduras had had lawyers while in the United States,though several had tried to obtain them. While many asylum seekers withoutfinancial resources have difficulty obtaining legal counsel in the US, it isparticularly difficult for those who are placed in detention facilities nearthe border and put in expedited proceedings.Detention of noncitizens in expedited removal proceedingsand reinstatement of removal is mandatory under US law.[59] Because nearly allarriving Central Americans without authorization are placed in expeditedremoval proceedings, the vast majority are also detained prior to deportation.Detention adds to the burdens and fears asylum seekers face.The fact that it is administrative rather than criminal detention may be oflittle practical consequence. Several told Human Rights Watch how beingdetained weighed on them. “I didn’t have any idea what a prisonwas,” said Jacobo E. “They just treated me like a criminal.”[60]Detention also makes it more difficult for asylum seekers togather evidence that might be useful in their cases. Roberto L. was detainedfor six months while he attempted to apply for asylum on the basis of threatsand past harm. “They said I needed proof,” he said. “But theysaid you have to be detained for [an additional] six months [to keep applyingfor asylum], so I signed the deportation.”[61]Detainees also face considerable obstacles in obtaininglegal counsel, a challenge made more difficult when they are held in detentionfacilities. “I need to find a lawyer but it seems impossible,” onewoman from Honduras then detained in Artesia, New Mexico told Human RightsWatch. “I will die if I am sent back to my country.”[62] Maria F.was deported in September after being detained at Karnes family detentioncenter with her 8-year-old daughter. “They give you a paper with [thenames of] free lawyers. But nobody answers when you call.”[63]One legal service provider in San Francisco agreed thatdetained migrants had difficulty locating legal counsel:We get many calls from people whose family members are indetention, including in Texas. Usually we get the call after they’vecalled multiple other organizations or lawyers. The few legal service providerswho have called them back charge very high fees. There’s just a very highdemand and not enough supply. We never get initial calls from detaineesthemselves. They need to have someone on the outside who can help them find alawyer and even then it’s very difficult.[64]In 2005, the United States Commission on InternationalReligious Freedom (USCIRF), a government agency, found that the expeditedremoval process lacks adequate safeguards to prevent improper removal andextended detention of bona fide refugees in the United States.[65] USCIRF’sanalysis also found that asylum seekers in expedited removal who arerepresented by an attorney were granted relief 25 percent of the time, whileasylum seekers who were representing themselves were granted relief 2 percentof the time.[66]Robert A. Katzmann, a judge of the US Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit,summed up the results of a two-year study on immigrant representation in NewYork: “The two most important variables affecting the ability to secure asuccessful outcome in a case (defined as relief or termination) are havingrepresentation and being free from detention.”[67]Human Rights Watch has previously documented how detainingnoncitizens, sometimes far from family members and friends, affects theiraccess to counsel.[68]The Executive Office for Immigration Review recently reported that thepercentage of represented cases in immigration court has increased in the pastfive years from 35 percent in 2009 to 59 percent in 2014.[69] Yet there is a largegap between representation rates for detained versus non-detained immigrants inimmigration court proceedings. The New York Immigrant Representation Studyfound in 2011 that 40 percent of detained immigrants and 73 percent ofnon-detained immigrants in the New York City area had lawyers.[70]Things are even worse for migrants detained in south Texas,like most of those interviewed for this report. Texas Appleseed, a non-profitlegal services organization, found 86 percent of immigration detainees in Texaswere unrepresented in 2009.[71]Several more recent reports indicate that systematic problems withdetainees’ access to counsel have not been resolved.[72] The AmericanImmigration Council and Penn State Law found in 2012 that,ICE fails to provide or facilitate access to counsel whenquestioning represented individuals, restricts attorney-client communicationsin detention facilities, and has also discouraged noncitizens from seekinglegal counsel.[73]Dani A., one of the few individuals interviewed by HumanRights Watch who had passed the credible fear interview stage, ended updeported to Honduras apparently due to her inability to secure counsel while indetention. At 21, Dani had been in an abusive relationship for four years inwhich her husband regularly beat her and kicked her. Two years ago, herhusband’s cousin ambushed her in a deserted part of town and raped her.She went to the police to report the rape, but “nothing wasresolved.”[74]Not knowing she had made a complaint, the cousin told her that if she toldanyone about the attack he would kill her. She feared the cousin would harm heragain and that her husband would seek her out and harm her.After entering the United States and being identified by CBPfor further screening, Dani spoke with an asylum officer who found that therewas “a significant possibility” she could establish in a fullhearing that she would qualify for refugee status.[75] A recent decision bythe Board of Immigration Appeals recognizes domestic violence as a basis forasylum, establishing a formally binding precedent upholding earlier immigrationcourt rulings.[76]Detained in Houston, Texas, with only three years of formalschooling and no money to pay a lawyer, Dani tried to move forward with herasylum claim. Gender-based asylum claims, including those related to domesticviolence like Dani experienced, are particularly legally complex. Officialsgave her a list of free legal services providers in the area but she said,“They never answered my calls.” With the help of other detaineeswho spoke more English, she filled out the application for asylum orwithholding of removal. To the question “Are you afraid of beingsubjected to torture in your home country or any other country to which you maybe removed?,” Dani’s asylum application read, “Am afraid to goback to abusers. Nature of turture: sexual assault and beat to death.”[sic] Where the form asked if she feared harm or mistreatment if she returnedto her home country the form stated: “1) Kill by gang husband gangmembers 2) Husband and husband gang members 3) because I am running away frommy husband, he can kill me and sexsually asult.” [sic]These two responses formed the substance of Dani’sasylum application. She told Human Rights Watch that the judge in charge of hercase ordered her deported at the first hearing after she filed the application.“I wanted to get a lawyer,” she said. “I didn’t haveone.”Family detention presents particular due process problems.In its guidelines on international protection for child asylum claims, theUnited Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the UN refugee agency,recommends separate and confidential interviews for all family members togive each an opportunity to discuss any independent claims for protection.[77] UNHCR hasalso found that a lack of confidentiality could hinder the ability ofwomen to fully access asylum procedures and recommended that “aconfidential personal interview, that is gender and culturally sensitive,should be guaranteed in the asylum process, to help ensure access.”[78]Officials at the Artesia, New Mexico, family detentioncenter told Human Rights Watch in July 2014 that credible fear interviews werebeing conducted with female detainees in the presence of their children. Thechildren’s presence may have inhibited women from speaking frankly,interfering with their ability to make their claim, and may further traumatizeboth the mother and her children.Noemi M., who was detained while awaiting an asyluminterview, told Human Rights Watch that she would only speak about the deaththreats she received from gangs in Honduras when her 8- and 11-year-oldchildren were out of earshot.[79]DHS officials have since told Human Rights Watch that women in Artesia arebeing interviewed by asylum officers separately from their children.[80]Once a noncitizen in expedited removal has passed a crediblefear interview, detention is no longer legally mandated but at the discretionof immigration officials. US officials in Artesia told Human Rights Watch thatwomen and children who file for asylum in immigration court could be detainedthroughout the entire process, which can last months or even years. Immigrationattorneys report that ICE is opposing bond requests from women and children infamily detention, arguing that the families pose national security threats.[81] Suchprolonged detention, with no defined end date, can cause serious psychologicalharm, especially for children, including anxiety, depression, and long-termcognitive damage.[82]Marleen V. from El Salvador, who had been detained with her 2-year-old daughterfor two weeks at the time she spoke with Human Rights Watch, said of herdaughter, “I notice her losing weight. She just won’t eat.”[83]VI. US Law and InternationalRefugee LawThe United States committed to the central guarantees of the1951 Refugee Convention by its accession to the Refugee Convention’s 1967Protocol.[84]The US government passed the Refugee Act of 1980 in order to bring thecountry’s laws into compliance with the Refugee Convention and Protocol,by incorporating into US law the convention’s definition of a“refugee” and the principle of nonrefoulement, which prohibits thereturn of refugees to countries where they would face persecution.[85]The US, as a party to the Convention against Torture, isalso obligated not to return someone to a country “where there aresubstantial grounds for believing that [they] would be in danger of beingsubjected to torture.”[86]As described above, Human Rights Watch is concerned that theUS system of expedited removal and reinstatement of removal fails to ensurethat the US complies with these international legal obligations, and defeatsother mechanisms already in place in US law (specifically the asylum process inUS immigration courts) to ensure that asylum seekers are identified and have afair process through which to present their claims.In particular, the Hondurans interviewed for this reportdescribed rushed interviews and unsympathetic reactions from CBP officials thatrun contrary to international standards on appropriate procedures for thedetermination of refugee status. The UNHCR’s authoritative Handbook onProcedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status (“UNHCRHandbook”), states,It should be recalled that an applicant for refugee statusis normally in a particularly vulnerable situation. He finds himself in analien environment and may experience serious difficulties, technical andpsychological, in submitting his case to the authorities of a foreign country.[87]CBP’s role in the process—involving the sameuniformed and armed agents responsible for apprehending migrants that screenthem for fear of return—conflicts with additional guidance from the UNHCRHandbook:A person who, because of his experiences, was in fear ofthe authorities in his own country may still feel apprehensive vis-à-visany authority. He may therefore be afraid to speak freely and give a full andaccurate account of his case.[88]The rapid-fire nature of the expedited removal process, inparticular the role played by CBP at the outset, is at odds with therecognition by UNHCR’s Executive Committee (“Excom”) thatexpedited procedures may be fair only when applied to cases that are“clearly fraudulent or not related to the criteria for the granting ofrefugee status laid down in the [1951 Refugee Convention].”[89]Human Rights Watch is also concerned that interviews ofHonduran asylum seekers by Honduran consular officials do not meetinternational standards. The UNHCR Handbook states that, by definition, arefugee’s relationship with their country of origin may be severelystrained. The Handbook also states that, “it is, of course, of the utmostimportance that the applicant’s statements will be treated asconfidential.” In all cases in which a migrant has expressed a fear ofreturning home to US border or immigration officials, it is a serious breach ofconfidentiality to encourage and facilitate meetings between an asylum seekerand an official of the asylum seeker’s home government. US immigrationofficials, first, should take all reasonable measures to determine whether amigrant is an asylum seeker, and, second, should preserve confidentiality,which includes insulating them from home government officials while theirclaims are pending.Detention of asylum seekers should always be a measure of lastresort and should only be for reasons clearly recognized in international law,such as concerns about danger to the public, or an inability to confirm anindividual’s identity.Expanding family detention is inconsistent withinternational standards, particularly the fundamental principle—reflectedin both international and US law—that “best interest of thechild” should govern the state’s actions toward children.[90] Ifdetention of children is used at all, it should only be in rare and exceptionalcases, and for the shortest amount of time and in an appropriate setting wherethe children’s needs can be addressed without causing further trauma orharm.[91]Deprivation of liberty has a negative effect on children’s capacity torealize various fundamental rights, including the rights to education, health,and family unity.79Previously, the US government made greater use ofalternatives to detention for families, such as proven “appearancesupport” programs that ensure migrants in immigration proceedings understandhow and when to appear.[92]Finally, using detention explicitly as a deterrent to entryinto the United States for people seeking international protection is unlawfulunder international law[93]and US law.[94]However, the Obama administration has openly stated that one purpose for theincrease in family detention beds is to deter all unauthorized migrants fromentering the country. DHS Secretary Jeh Johnson has referred to detention aspart of an “aggressive deterrence strategy” in Senate testimony andhas told the media that he believed detention “would deter future illegalcrossings.”[95]The ICE Assistant Director of Investigative Programs for Homeland SecurityInvestigations has stated that “[i]mplementing a ‘no bond’ or‘high bond’ policy would help alleviate these disruptionsby deterring further mass migration.”[96] The ICE press releaseannouncing the Dilley, Texas family detention facility stated: “Thesefacilities will help ensure more timely and effective removals that comply withour legal and international obligations, while deterring others from taking thedangerous journey and illegally crossing into the United States.”[97]As we were finalizing this report, the Obama administrationon September 30, 2014 announced a targeted program to process from inside theirhome countries children with lawfully present parents in the United States foradmission to the United States as refugees.[98]The program, according to administration officials, would provide a safealternative to the dangerous journey to the United States through Mexico forthose children who would qualify to be reunited with a lawfully present parent.While this program could potentially assist the relativelysmall group of children who would qualify, it would do nothing to address theprotection needs of the vast majority of children and adults who do not have alawfully present parent in the United States or who did have such a parent butwho would be too afraid to wait for months or years to be processed after beingthreatened by a gang. The existence of this program should not be used as anexcuse for continuing or even expanding the harsh measures already in place atthe border—and in Mexico—to block Central Americans from seekingasylum and to summarily return them to places where they face a serious risk ofharm.Whatever policies the Obama administration seeks to put inplace to deter unauthorized migration, it needs to preserve the right to seekasylum from persecution. The US government should ensure that it does notdeport people crossing the US-Mexico border without proper consideration oftheir need for international protection.RecommendationsThe recommendations below apply to US treatment ofunauthorized migrants not only from Honduras, the research focus of thisreport, but from similarly situated countries where large numbers of migrantsand asylum seekers are fleeing violence by non-state actors and conditions thatprevent that country’s nationals from returning to a situation of basicsecurity, notably Mexico, El Salvador, and Guatemala.To ensure that migrants arriving at the US-Mexico border whoexpress fear of return to their countries are flagged for screening that wouldpermit them to access refugee protection or protection under the ConventionAgainst Torture:TheDepartment of Homeland Security should:Cease the use of expedited removal forindividuals and families arriving at the US border with Mexico from countriesexperiencing conditions that prevent the country’s nationals fromreturning to a situation of basic security;Ensure via training; modification ofoversight mechanisms; accountability measures, including better qualityassurance supervision; and any and all other appropriate measures that initialinterviews of arriving noncitizens conducted by Customs and Border Protection(CBP) properly identify individuals who express fear of return so that they areafforded “credible” or “reasonable” fear assessments;Until that time, instruct CBP to apply apresumption of fear of return for migrants in expedited removal orreinstatement of removal who are nationals of countries experiencing conditionsthat prevent the country's nationals from returning to a situation of basicsecurity; andUnless and until Department of HomelandSecurity (DHS) can implement appropriate protection interviews as a part ofexpedited removal or it instructs CBP to adopt a presumption for asylumscreening for Central Americans,instruct Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) to conduct aproactive screening for fear of return for every non-citizen arriving in itscustody from CBP custody.To ensure that credible and reasonable fear interviewsare fair and efficient:TheDepartment of Homeland Security should:Ensure that United States Citizenship andImmigration Services (USCIS) has adequate staffing levels, training, andsupervision; andReview guidance for USCIS staff to ensurethat the procedures used in “credible fear” interviews do notunduly bar asylum seekers from access to immigration courts.Congressshould:Adopt legislation that would allow the USCISto conduct timely in-person “credible fear” and “reasonablefear” screening interviews and address backlogs, without creating delaysfor  affirmative asylum interviews;Adopt legislation to address removal-hearingdelays, eliminate backlogs and conduct prompt hearings, including by increasingthe number of immigration court judges, law clerks, government immigrationlawyers and related resources, as well as increasing incentives for legal aidand private lawyers to represent migrants in underserved areas.To protect children and adults from the harmful effectsof detention and ensure the due process rights of asylum seekers:TheDepartment of Homeland Security should:Revert to previous US government policy thatlimited the detention of arriving migrant families with children. This wouldentail closing the new family detention center in Artesia, New Mexico, revertingthe family detention center in Karnes, Texas back to a civil detention facilityfor adults, and converting plans to build a 2,400-bed facility in Dilley, Texasfrom family detention to adult civil detention. DHS should augment alternativecustody and monitoring programs that ensure court appearances instead ofdetention for families and other border arrivals who present no danger or needassistance to appear in court; andApply a presumption in favor of release onbond or parole for asylum seekers who have passed credible or reasonable fearscreenings.To respect asylum seekers’ right to access counsel,improve disposition of asylum claims, and better ensure that the US does notreturn people to countries where they face repression or torture:Theadministration and Congress should:Approve reallocation of already appropriatedfunds to increase access to counsel for indigent asylum seekers and thoserequesting protection under the Convention Against Torture;Consider passing a law concerning asylumseekers akin to the provision in the Senate Border Security, EconomicOpportunity and Immigration Modernization Act (S.744) of 2013 that mandates theUS attorney general to appoint counsel, at government expense if necessary, forunaccompanied minors, people with mental disabilities, and other non-citizens“considered particularly vulnerable;” andConsider passing legislation to allowimmigration judges the discretion to appoint counsel for indigentnon-citizens in all standard immigration removal proceedings.AcknowledgmentsThis report was researched and written by Clara Long, USProgram researcher on immigration and border policy at Human Rights Watch.Antonio Ginatta, advocacy director for the US program, conducted interviews inthe Karnes family detention facility. Brian Root, quantitative analyst at HumanRights Watch, conducted data analysis.Alison Parker, US program director, edited and contributedto research and writing of the report. The report was also edited by BillFrelick, refugee rights director; José Miguel Vivanco, Americasdirector; Meghan Rhoad, women’s rights researcher; and Alice Farmer,child rights researcher. Samantha Reiser and W. Paul Smith, associates in theUS Program, also contributed to editing. James Ross, legal and policy director,provided legal review. Joe Saunders, deputy program director, provided programreview. Grace Choi, publications director, provided photo editing and layout design.Human Rights Watch thanks the government officials, lawyers,social service providers and others who spoke with us during the research forthis report. We are especially grateful to the Central American migrants andasylum seekers whose participation in this research made this report possible.[1]Human Rights Watch interview with Alicia R. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 8, 2014. The names of migrants quoted in this report havebeen changed in the interest of the security of those concerned.[2]Ana Campoy, “Illegal Immigrants Seeking Asylum Face a Higher Bar,” WallStreet Journal, September 28, 2014, http://online.wsj.com/articles/illegal-immigrants-seeking-asylum-face-a-higher-bar-1411945370(accessed October 9, 2014).[3]Some noncitizens, apprehended in the interior of the country and placed inreinstatement of removal by ICE, may not pass through CBP custody and should bescreened by ICE for fear of return.[4]United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), “Global Study onHomicide 2013: Trends, Contexts, Data,” April 2014, http://www.unodc.org/gsh/ (accessed October 9, 2014).[5]Ibid.[6]Ibid.[7]Ibid.[8]“Milesde reclutas de las maras cobran el ‘impuesto de guerra’,” LaTribuna, March 12, 2013, http://www.latribuna.hn/2013/03/12/miles-de-reclutas-de-las-maras-cobran-el-impuesto-de-guerra/(accessed October 9, 2014).[9]United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), “GuidanceNote on Refugee Claims Relating to Victims of Organized Gangs,” March 31,2010, http://www.refworld.org/docid/4bb21fa02.html (accessed October 13,2014); Human Rights Watch interview with Marlon J. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 6, 2014.[10]Nicholas Phillips, “In Honduras, Going From Door to Door toProsecutors,” New York Times, March 4, 2014,http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/04/world/americas/in-honduras-going-from-door-to-door-to-prosecutors.html(accessed October 9, 2014).[11]Human Rights Watch interview with Marlon J. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 6, 2014.[12]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Thomas Boerman, Central AmericanSecurity Specialist, Eugene, Oregon, August 28, 2014.[13]UNHCR, “Guidance Note On Refugee Claims Relating To Victims Of OrganizedGangs,” March 2010, http://www.uscrirefugees.org/2010Website/5_Resources/5_4_For_Lawyers/5_4_1%20Asylum%20Research/5_4_1_2_Gang_Related_Asylum_Resources/5_4_1_2_4_Reports/UNHCR_Guidance_Note_on_Refugee_Claims.pdf(accessed October 10, 2014).[14]Human Rights Watch interview with Jacobo E. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 7, 2014.[15]CIDEHUM, UNHCR, “Forced Displacement and Protection Needs Produced by NewForms of Violence and Criminality in Central America,” May 2012, http://www.nanseninitiative.org/sites/default/files/UNHCR%20Research%20Paper%20May%202012.pdf (accessed October 10, 2014).[16]Human Rights Watch interview with Cecilia N. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 8, 2014. Cecilia N. and her mother, Josefa N. (pseudonym)were detained from July 28, 2014 until they were deported on September 6, 2014at the Immigrations and Customs Enforcement family detention center in Artesia,New Mexico.[17]Rashida Manjoo, “Special Rapporteur on violence against women finalizescountry mission to Honduras and calls for urgent action to address the cultureof impunity for crimes against women and girls,” July 7, 2014, http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=14833&LangID=E#sthash.aEX2teov.dpuf(accessed October 13, 2014).[18]Human Rights Watch, World Report 2014: Honduras (New York: Human RightsWatch, 2014), http://www.hrw.org/world-report/2014/country-chapters/honduras/.[19]Ibid.[20]InSight Crime, “Honduras,” undated, http://www.insightcrime.org/organized-crime-profile/honduras(accessed October 9, 2014).[21]See Jorge Ramos and Daniel Lieberman, “Deported mom lives in fear afterreturning to Honduras,” Fusion, August 20, 2014, http://fusion.net/story/6335/deported-mom-lives-in-fear-after-returning-to-honduras/(accessed October 13, 2014).[22]Human Rights Watch interview with Jacobo E. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 7, 2014 (Jacobo was deported from the US in August 2014).[23]Human Rights Watch interview with Alicia R. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 8, 2014. (Alicia told US border officials that she and herchildren were Mexican. She and her children were deported from the UnitedStates to Mexico and then from Mexico to Honduras in August 2014.)[24]Human Rights Watch interview with Mateo S. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 9, 2014. (Mateo was deported to Honduras from the UnitedStates in September 2014.)[25]Human Rights Watch interview with Mercedes R. (pseudonym), Karnes DetentionCenter, Texas, September 16, 2014. (Mercedes was detained at Karnes with herseven-year-old son.)[26]Human Rights Watch interview with Roberto L. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 9, 2014. (Roberto was deported from the United States inSeptember 2014, after being detained for six months while seeking asylum.)[27]Human Rights Watch interview with Alicia R. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 8, 2014. (Alicia was deported from the United States toMexico in August 2014 before being returned to her native Honduras.)[28]Human Rights Watch interview with Marlon J. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 6, 2014. (Marlon was deported from the United States inAugust 2014.)[29]Ibid.[30]Human Rights Watch interview with Alicia R. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 8, 2014.[31]Universal Declaration of Human Rights(UDHR), adopted December 10, 1948, G.A. res. 217A (III), U.N. Doc A/810 at71 (1948).[32]Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) 235(b), codified as 8 U.S.C. 1225(b) andenacted as regulation at 8 C.F.R. 235.3(b)(c); INA 241(c), codified as 8 U.S.C.§1231(c) and enacted as regulation at 8 C.F.R. 241; INA 212(a)(9)(a) and(a)(9)c)(i), codified as 8 U.S.C. 1182(a)(9)a) and (a)(9)(c)(i).[33]Designating Aliens for Expedited Removal, 69 Fed. Reg. 48877 (August 11, 2004);“DHS Streamlines Removal Process Along Entire US Border,” DHS pressrelease, January 31, 2006, http://www.govtech.com/policy-management/Department-of-Homeland-Security-Streamlines-Removal.html(accessed October 10, 2014).[34]INA 241(a)(5), codified as 8 U.S.C. 1231(a)(5).[35]Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“Convention againstTorture”), G.A. Res. 39/46, annex, 39 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 51) at197, U.N. Doc. A/39/51 (1984), entered into force June 26, 1987. TheUS ratified the Convention against Torture in1994 and passed enablinglegislation with Foreign Affairs Reform and Restructuring Act of 1998, P.L.105-277. The US currently implements its duties under the Convention againstTorture through a process called “withholding of removal.” 8 C.F.R.208.16. The protections granted by the United States under the Conventionagainst Torture are narrower than the protections afforded to refugees. Ahigher burden of proof must be shown to establish eligibility; it provides anarrower scope of relief, such as restrictions on international travel; andthere is limited opportunity for conversion to legal permanent resident status.[36]8 C.F.R. 235.3(b)(4) (stating that if an applicant requests asylum or expressesa fear of return, the “examining immigration officer shall recordsufficient information in the sworn statement to establish and record that thealien has indicated such intention, fear, or concern,” and should thenrefer the alien for a credible fear interview).[37]Human Rights First, “How to Protect Refugees and Prevent Abuse at theBorder: Blueprint for U.S. Government Policy,” June 2014,http://www.humanrightsfirst.org/sites/default/files/Asylum-on-the-Border-final.pdf(accessed October 10, 2014); Sara Campos and Joan Friedland, “Mexican andCentral American Asylum and Credible Fear Claims: Background andContext,” American Immigration Council Special Report, May 2014,http://www.immigrationpolicy.org/sites/default/files/docs/asylum_and_credible_fear_claims_final.pdf(accessed October 10, 2014); Michele R. Pistone and John J. Hoeffner,“Rules are Made to be Broken: How the Process of Expedited Removal FailsAsylum Seekers,” Villanova University School of Law, 2006, http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?params=/context/wps/article/1049/&path_info=(accessed October 14, 2014); US Commission on International Religious Freedom,“Study on Asylum Seekers in Expedited Removal,” February 2005,http://www.uscirf.gov/reports-briefs/special-reports/report-asylum-seekers-in-expedited-removal(accessed October 10, 2014).[38]Calculated from CBP data on apprehensions provided to Human Rights Watch via a Freedomof Information Act request.[39]INA 235.3(b)(4).[40]In FY 2013, 65 percent of credible fear referrals and 58 percent of reasonablefear referrals were for nationals of Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador,combined. In 2004, nationals from these three countries represented less than2.5 percent of referrals. Calculated from USCIS, “Credible FearNationality Report, 2014,” http://www.uscis.gov/sites/default/files/USCIS/Outreach/Notes%20from%20Previous%20Engagements/AdditionalStatisticRequestedApril2014AsylumStakeholderEngagement.pdf(accessed October 10, 2014).[41]Ibid.[42]Ibid.[43]Calculated from Department of Homeland Security, “Immigration Actions:2012,” Table 1, http://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/ois_enforcement_ar_2012_1.pdf(accessed October 13, 2014).[44]“Credible Fear,” Lesson Plan, Refugee, Asylum, and InternationalOperations Directorate Officer Training; Asylum Division Officer TrainingCourse, February 28, 2014, http://cmsny.org/wp-content/uploads/credible-fear-of-persecution-and-torture.pdf(accessed October 10, 2014).[45]Ana Campoy, “Illegal Immigrants Seeking Asylum Face a Higher Bar,” WallStreet Journal, September 28, 2014, http://online.wsj.com/articles/illegal-immigrants-seeking-asylum-face-a-higher-bar-1411945370(accessed October 10, 2014).[46]Bill Ong Hing, Memorandum to John Lafferty, Chief, USCIS Asylum DivisionConcerning Lesson Plan, Credible Fear of Persecution and TortureDeterminations, April 21, 2014, http://static.squarespace.com/static/50b1609de4b054abacd5ab6c/t/53558353e4b02071f74ee3c4/1398113107754/Response%20to%20USCIS%20Credible%20Fear%20Memo,%20Bill%20Hing,%2004.21.2014.pdf(accessed October 13, 2014).[47]8 C.F.R. 235.3(b)(2) (“In every case in which the expedited removalprovisions will be applied and before removing an alien from the United Statespursuant to this section, the examining immigration officer shall create arecord of the facts of the case and statements made by the alien. This shall beaccomplished by means of a sworn statement using Form I-867AB, Record of SwornStatement in Proceedings under Section 235(b)(1) of the Act. The examiningimmigration officer shall read (or have read) to the alien all informationcontained on Form I-867A. Following questioning and recording of the alien'sstatement regarding identity, alienage, and inadmissibility, the examiningimmigration officer shall record the alien's response to the questionscontained on Form I-867B, and have the alien read (or have read to him or her)the statement, and the alien shall sign and initial each page of the statementand each correction.”). Form I-867A includes the provision that theimmigration officer read the following statement:U.S. law provides protectionto certain persons who face persecution, harm or torture upon return to theirhome country. If you fear or have a concern about being removed from the UnitedStates or about being sent home, you should tell me so during this interviewbecause you may not have another chance. You will have the opportunity to speakprivately and confidentially to another officer about your fear or concern.That officer will determine if you should remain in the United States and notbe removed because of that fear.Form I-867B requires that the immigration officer askand record the answer to the question, “Do you have any fear or concernabout being returned to your home country or being removed from the UnitedStates?” Forms I-867A&B available in Appendix A of Charles Kuck,“Legal Assistance for Asylum Seekers inExpedited Removal: A Survey of Alternative Practices” Expert Report in USCommission on International Religious Freedom, “Report on Asylum Seekersin Expedited Removal,” February 8, 2005, http://www.uscirf.gov/sites/default/files/resources/stories/pdf/asylum_seekers/legalAssist.pdf (accessed October 13, 2014).[48]Human Rights Watch interviews, San Pedro Sula, Honduras, September 6, 7, 8, and9, 2014.[49]Human Rights Watch visit to McAllen Border Patrol Station, McAllen, Texas, July25, 2014.[50]Human Rights Watch interview with Marlon J. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 6, 2014. (“Los oficiales ya a uno no le prestanatención. Si uno dice que tiene miedo dicen que no pueden hacer nada, ‘I’msorry,’ lo siento.”)[51]Human Rights Watch interview with Roberto L. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 9, 2014.[52]Human Rights Watch interview with Jacobo E. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 7, 2014.[53]Human Rights Watch interview with Maribel V. (pseudonym), Comayagua, Honduras,September 6, 2014. (Maribel was deported with her children in September 2104.“Ice box” or hielera is how migrants commonly refer toBorder Patrol detention, in reference to the cold temperatures in the cells.)[54]Human Rights Watch interview with Mateo S. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 9, 2014. (Mateo was deported to Honduras from the UnitedStates in September 2014.) Immigration attorneys have reported hearing fromother migrants of similar treatment in the McAllen Border Patrol station. HumanRights Watch email correspondence with Carlos Garcia, Immigration Attorney inMcAllen, Texas and Rex Chen, Immigration attorney at Catholic Charities ofNewark, September 9, 2014.[55]Human Rights Watch interview with Alicia R. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 8, 2014.[56]Ibid.[57]Human Rights Watch interview with Marlon J. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 6, 2014.[58]Human Rights Watch interview with Mateo S. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 9, 2014.[59]INA 235(b)(1)(b)(iii)(iv) (“Any aliensubject to the procedures under this clause shall be detained pending a finaldetermination of credible fear of persecution and, if found not to have such afear, until removed.”); 8 U.S.C. 1225(b)(1)(b)(iii)(iv). 8 U.S.C.1231(a)(2) (“During the removal period, the Attorney General shall detainthe alien.”).[60]Human Rights Watch interview with Jacobo E. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 7, 2014.[61]Human Rights Watch interview with Roberto L. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 9, 2014.[62]Human RightsWatch Interview with Noemi M. (pseudonym), Artesia, New Mexico, July 22, 2014.[63]Human Rights Watch interview with Maria F. (pseudonym), Comayagua, Honduras,September 6, 2014.[64]Human Rights Watch phone interview with Niloufar Khonsari, Immigration Attorneyand Executive Director at Pangea Legal Services in San Francisco, California,October 11, 2014.[65]US Commission on International Religious Freedom, “Study on Asylum Seekersin Expedited Removal,” February 2005,http://www.uscirf.gov/reports-briefs/special-reports/report-asylum-seekers-in-expedited-removal(accessed October 10, 2014).[66]Ibid.[67]Robert Katzmann, “You Shall Love the Stranger: Meeting the Urgent LegalNeeds of the Immigrant Poor,” The Jethro Lecture, New York City, February1, 2013, http://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/administrative/immigration/katzmannimmlecture_feb13.authcheckdam.pdf(accessed October 13, 2014).[68]Human Rights Watch, Locked Up Far Away: The Transfer of Immigrants to RemoteDetention Centers in the United States, December 2, 2009, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/us1209webwcover.pdf.[69]US Department of Justice, Executive Office for Immigration Review, “FY2013 Statistics Yearbook,” April 2014, http://www.justice.gov/eoir/statspub/fy13syb.pdf(accessed October 13, 2014).[70]New York Immigrant Representation Study, “Accessing Justice: TheAvailability and Adequacy of Counsel in Immigration Proceedings,” CardozoLaw Review vol. 33 (2011), http://www.cardozolawreview.com/Joomla1.5/content/33-2/NYIRS%20Report.33-2.pdf(accessed October 13, 2014).[71]Texas Appleseed, “Justice for Immigration’s Hidden Population:Protecting the Rights of Persons with Mental Disabilities in the ImmigrationCourt and Detention System,” March 2010, http://www.texasappleseed.net/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_download&gid=313(accessed October 13, 2014), p.13.[72]Penn State Law and Legal Action Center of theAmerican Immigration Council, “Behind Closed Doors: An Overview of DHSRestrictions on Access to Counsel,” May 2012,http://www.legalactioncenter.org/sites/default/files/docs/lac/Behind_Closed_Doors_5-31-12.pdf(accessed October 12, 2014); National ImmigrantJustice Center, “Isolated in Detention: Limited Access to Counsel inImmigration Detention Facilities Jeopardizes a Fair Day in Court,”September 2010,https://www.immigrantjustice.org/sites/immigrantjustice.org/files/Detention%20Isolation%20Report%20FULL%20REPORT%202010%2009%2023.pdf(accessed October 12, 2014).[73]Penn State Law and Legal Action Center of theAmerican Immigration Council, “Behind Closed Doors: An Overview of DHSRestrictions on Access to Counsel,” May 2012,http://www.legalactioncenter.org/sites/default/files/docs/lac/Behind_Closed_Doors_5-31-12.pdf(accessed October 12, 2014).[74]Human Rights Watch interview with Dani A. (pseudonym), San Pedro Sula,Honduras, September 9, 2014.[75]Ibid.[76]Matter of A-R-C-G- et al., Respondents, Board of Immigration Appeals,August 26, 2014. 26 I&N Dec. 388 (BIA 2014).[77]UNHCR, “Guidelines on International Protection No. 8: Child Asylum Claimsunder Articles 1(A)2 and 1(F) of the 1951 Convention and/or 1967 Protocolrelating to the Status of Refugees,” December 22, 2009, HCR/GIP/09/08, http://www.refworld.org/docid/4b2f4f6d2.html(accessed October 10, 2014).[78]UNHCR, “Untold stories...families in the asylum process,” June2013, http://www.unhcr.org.uk/fileadmin/user_upload/pdf/aUNHCR_Report_Untold_Stories.pdf(accessed October 10, 2014).[79]Human Rights Watch interview with Noemi M. (pseudonym), Artesia New Mexico July22, 2014.[80]Human Rights Watch meeting with officials with Department of Homeland Security, October 9, 2014.[81]John Stanton, “Government Declares Undocumented Immigrant Child, Mother A‘National Security Threat’,” Buzzfeed, August 5, 2014,http://www.buzzfeed.com/johnstanton/government-declares-undocumented-immigrant-child-mother-a-na#24rdgfh(accessed October 9, 2014).[82]Alice Farmer, “The impact of immigration detention on children,” ForcedMigration Review, September 2013, http://www.fmreview.org/detention/farmer(accessed October 9, 2014).[83]Human Rights Watch interview with Marleen V. (pseudonym), Artesia, New Mexico,July 22, 2014.[84]Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, 189U.N.T.S. 150, entered into force April 22, 1954,http://www.unhcr.org/3b66c2aa10.html; U.N. Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees, 606U.N.T.S. 268, entered into force October 4, 1967. The United States acceded tothe 1967 Protocol in 1968.[85]The USincorporated the provisions of the 1967 Protocol into domestic law through theRefugee Act of 1980, Pub. L. No. 96-212, 94 Stat 102 (1980). As the SupremeCourt has confirmed, a primary purpose of Congress in passing the Refugee Act“was to bring United States refugee law into conformance with the 1967United Nations Protocol.” INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421,426 (1987); see also INS v. Stevic, 467 U.S. 407, 416-24 (1984) (providinga history of the incorporation of the Refugee Convention standards into US lawthrough the Refugee Protocol and the Refugee Act of 1980.)[86]Convention against Torture, art. 3(1).[87]UNHCR, Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status, UNDoc. HCP/1P/4/Eng/REV.2, 1979, (edited 1992), para. 190. The UNHCR Handbook wasprepared at the request of member countries of UNHCR’s Executive Committee(“ExCom”) for the guidance of governments. The Handbook is anauthoritative interpretative guide and is treated as such by governments. SeeGuy Goodwin-Gill, The Refugee in International Law, (Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press, 1996), p. 34.[88]UNHCR Handbook, para. 198.[89]UNHCR Executive Committee Conclusion No. 30 (XXXIV) – 1983 – TheProblem of Manifestly Unfounded or Abusive Applications for Refugee Status orAsylum, para. (d). The Executive Committee of the High Commissioner’sProgram is UNHCR's governing body. Since 1975, ExCom has passed a series ofConclusions at its annual meetings. The Conclusions are intended to guidestates in their treatment of refugees and asylum seekers and in theirinterpretation of existing international refugee law. While the Conclusions arenot legally binding, they do constitute a body of soft international refugeelaw. They are adopted by consensus by the ExCom member states, are broadly representativeof the views of the international community, and carry persuasive authority.Since the members of ExCom, which includes the US, have negotiated and agreedto their provisions, they are under a good faith obligation to abide by theConclusions.[90]The Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) inarticle 3(1) gives the child the right to have their best interests assessedand taken into account as a primary consideration in all actions or decisionsthat concern them, both in the public and private sphere.Convention on theRights of the Child, G.A.res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49(1989), entered into force Sept. 2, 1990. The US has signed but notratified the CRC, meaning that it may not take any action that is contrary tothe object and purpose of the treaty. The Committee on the Rights of the Child,which monitors adherence to the CRC, has identified article 3(1), as one of thefour general principles of the CRC for interpreting and implementing all therights of the child, and applies it as a dynamic concept that requires anassessment appropriate to the specific context. UN Committee on the Rights ofthe Child, General Comment No. 14 (2013) on the right of the child to have hisor her best interests taken as a primary consideration (art. 3, para. 1), U.N.Doc. CRC /C/GC/14 (2013), available athttp://www2.ohchr.org/English/bodies/crc/docs/GC/CRC_C_GC_14_ENG.pdf(accessed July 1, 2014). In the United States, allstates and the District of Columbia have statutes “requiring that thebest interests of the child be considered whenever specified types of decisionsare made regarding a child’s custody, placement, or other critical lifeissues.” Child Welfare Information Gateway, Department of Health andHuman Services, “Determining the Best Interests of the Child,”2012, available athttps://www.childwelfare.gov/systemwide/laws_policies/statutes/best_interest.cfm(accessed October 13, 2014) (listing state statutesrequiring best interests considerations and factors considered for suchdeterminations). One form of immigration relief, Special Immigrant JuvenileStatus, requires consideration of the best interests of the child. INA101(a)(27)(J), 8 U.S.C. 1101 (requiring, in part, a finding that return to thechild’s country of origin is not in the child’s best interests).[91]The Committee on the Rights of the Child inFebruary 2013 urged states to “expeditiously and completely cease thedetention of children on the basis of their immigration status,”concluding that such detention is never in the child’s best interest. Inthe interim, the committee stated, while immigration detention of childrenremains, governments should impose strict time limits to the child’sdetention in order to minimize the loss of education and impact on mentalhealth. UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, “Report of the 2012 Dayof General Discussion on the Rights of All Children in the Context ofInternational Migration,” para. 78, February 2013, available atwww2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/crc/docs/discussion2012/2012CRC_DGD-Childrens_Rights_InternationalMigration.pdf(accessed September 15, 2014).[92]Vera Institute of Justice, “The Appearance Assistance Program, AttainingCompliance with Immigration Laws Through Community Supervision,” 1998,available athttp://www.vera.org/sites/default/files/resources/downloads/aap.pdf (accessedOctober 13, 2014).[93]According to UNHCR, “detention policies aimed at deterrence are generallyunlawful under international human rights law as they are not based on anindividual assessment as to the necessity to detain.” See UNHCR,“Detention Guidelines: Guidelines on the Applicable Criteria andStandards relating to the Detention of Asylum-Seekers and Alternatives toDetention,” 2012, http://www.unhcr.org/505b10ee9.html (accessed October10, 2014). Detention that is imposed to deter future asylum seekers, or todissuade those who have commenced their claims from pursuing them, isinconsistent with international norms. Furthermore, detention is not permittedas a punitive—for example, criminal—measure or a disciplinarysanction for irregular entry or presence in the country. See 1951 RefugeeConvention, art. 31.[94]See Zadvydas v. Davis, 533 U.S. 678 (2001),https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/533/678/ (accessed October 13,2014) (describing immigration detention as “nonpunitive in purpose andeffect”); Wong Wing v. United States, 163 U.S. 228 (1896),https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/163/228/ (accessed October 13,2014) (finding that under the Fifth and Sixth Amendments to the Constitution,the detention of non-citizens was valid only to facilitate the “expulsionof aliens.”).[95]“Statement by Secretary of Homeland Security Jeh Johnson Before theSenate Committee on Appropriations,” DHS press release, July 10, 2014, availableat http://www.dhs.gov/news/2014/07/10/statement-secretary-homeland-security-jeh-johnson-senate-committee-appropriations(accessed October 9, 2014); Mónica Ortiz Uribe, “New DetentionCenter To Begin Deporting Immigrant Families,” Fronteras, July 11,2014, http://www.fronterasdesk.org/content/9708/new-detention-center-begin-deporting-immigrant-families(accessed October 9, 2014).[96]César Cuauhtémoc, “Is DHS Admitting Immigration Detentionis Punishment?,” post to Crimmigration (blog), September 25, 2014, http://crimmigration.com/2014/09/25/is-dhs-admitting-immigration-detention-is-punishment/(accessed October 9, 2014).[97]“ICE to open additional facility in South Texas to house adults withchildren,” ICE press release, September 22, 2014, http://www.ice.gov/news/releases/1409/140922dilley.htm(accessed October 9, 2014).[98]Michael D. Shear, “Obama Approves Plan to Let Children in Central AmericaApply for Refugee Status,” New York Times, September 30, 2014,available at http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/01/us/obama-approves-plan-to-let-children-apply-for-refugee-status-in-central-america.html(accessed October 13, 2014); United States Department of State, ProposedRefugee Admissions for Fiscal Year 2015: Report to Congress, http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/232029.pdf(accessed October 13, 2014).Region / CountryAmericas Honduras United States ImmigrationProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch