Left to Survive: Systematic Failure to Protect Unaccompanied Migrant Children in Greece | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload reportDownload report with coverDonate NowDownloadsDownload reportDownload report with coverDecember 22, 2008Left to SurviveSystematic Failure to Protect Unaccompanied Migrant Children in GreeceAvailable InEnglishΕλληνικάLeft toSurviveSystematic Failure to Protect UnaccompaniedMigrant Children in GreeceMap of GreeceSummary and Key RecommendationsKeyRecommendationsMethodologyand ScopeI. Unaccompanied Child Migrants andAsylum Seekers in GreeceFlight fromPoverty, Persecution, Exploitation and DiscriminationGreek Lawand the Protection System for Unaccompanied ChildrenII. First Contact with theAuthoritiesAssessingAgeGuardianshipAssessingVulnerabilityIII. Violence against Children byState AgentsIll-Treatmentby Port Police Officers in PatrasOther Casesof Abuse by State AgentsIV. Unaccompanied Children SeekingAsylum..AsylumProcedures for Unaccompanied ChildrenV. Detention of UnaccompaniedChildrenDuration ofDetentionVI. The Duty of CareCareArrangementsVII. Exploitation of ChildrenChild LaborTraffickingVIII. Returns and DeportationsIX. Recommendations104To theMinistry of Health and Social Solidarity104To theMinistry of Justice and Public Prosecutors104To theMinistry of Interior105To theMinistry of Labor107To theGovernment as a Whole107To theEuropean Commission108To theCouncil of the European Union109To theEuropean Parliament109To EuropeanUnion Member States109To theCouncil of Europe110To theUnited Nations110Acknowledgements111Map of GreeceClick to expand Image© 2008 Rafael JimenezSummary and KeyRecommendationsBy the end of the year, an estimatedtotal of 1,000 unaccompanied migrant and asylum-seeking children will haveentered Greece during 2008. Arriving without a parent or adult responsible fortheir care, many have fled countries wracked by armed conflict such as Afghanistan, Somalia, and Iraq. Some are fleeing persecution, violence, discrimination andexploitation. Others are running from a destiny of poverty and illiteracy. Anunknown number may have been trafficked.Many will have been caught by the authorities as they enterthe country, sometimes by boat, others as they try to leave for other parts ofthe European Union. Yet others will have been detained by police making sweepsagainst migrants, such as that which took place in Patras at the start of 2008,or in action against street traders or petty criminality. A few will declarethemselves through the process of applying for asylum.These unaccompanied children are particularly vulnerable toviolence, exploitation and abuse. Yet the official protection and asylumregimes fail them-migrants and asylum-seekers alike. That systemic failure isthe focus of this report.While Greek legislation recognizes, to an extent, thegovernment's obligations to care for and protect unaccompanied migrantchildren, the situation on the ground is woeful. The police are responsible forvirtually all aspects of immigration and asylum-including the adjudication ofasylum claims in the first instance and the deportation of migrants. Yetchildren (and adult migrants) report being beaten, kicked or slapped by policeofficers and coast guards. One child told Human Rights Watch of being subjectedto a mock execution by a port police officer in Patras. Others reported beingthrown into the sea.Children are routinely detained, contrary to internationalstandards, sometimes in the same cells as adults. Procedures for assessingtheir age or vulnerability are totally inadequate. Children report arbitraryage assessments.The inadequacy of identification procedures followed bypolice combined with the lack of trained personnel and interpreters mean thatthere is a serious risk that trafficked children are not recognized as such.One official declared that his detention center did not have any traffickingvictims within it-but there were no interpreters employed at the center and oneof the detainees, an Afghan girl, told Human Rights Watch researchers that shehad not been interviewed since her arrival. One boy described how he would bekept "like a prisoner" by the man who smuggled him if his uncle back home didnot pay the agreed US$6000 smuggling fee. A 16-year-old girl from the Philippines told how she had come to Athens to join "her aunt," taking up a job as a domesticworker.The guardianship system, the responsibility of juvenile andcourt prosecutors, is dysfunctional. There are no standard proceduresexplaining the mandate of guardians for foreign unaccompanied children, and asa result prosecutors have widely differing views of what their role entails.Some believe that they cannot act on behalf of detained children.Only a small minority of unaccompanied children ask forasylum no matter how solid their refugee claims. Many believe they have no chancesof receiving refugee status. Indeed, Greece's recognition rate of asylum-seekersafter a first assessment stands at 0.03 percent.Unaccompanied children who want to apply for asylum in Greece face serious obstacles simply accessing asylum procedures. None of the childreninterviewed by Human Rights Watch, many of whom are illiterate, had been orallyinformed by police of their right to claim asylum. Although the authorities saythat applications from children can be received any day of the week, inreality, unaccompanied children are lined up with hundreds of adults outside thePetrou Ralli police station in Athens each Sunday-the main facility forprocessing asylum claims. Children described waiting in line overnight andreturning six or seven times before finally managing to enter the building.Some told us they gave up trying to file an asylum application. During theasylum interview, few are represented by a guardian or lawyer. Unaccompaniedchildren told of interviews lasting only a few minutes in which key informationabout their situation was not recorded and some were denied the chance toexplain why they left their country of origin or their families.With only one opportunity to ask for asylum in Europe underthe European Union's Dublin II regulation, once children are released fromdetention in Greece, many attempt to travel onwards to Italy and other EU countries-often a risky and life-threatening journey. In Italy, they may find themselves summarily returned to Greece. Those who travel onwards after theymade an asylum application in Greece may be transferred back under the DublinII regulation that allows EU member states to return any asylum seeker,including unaccompanied children, to the country where they first asked forasylum.There is a severe shortage of safe accommodation forunaccompanied foreign children. As of November 2008, the Ministry of Healthfunded or co-funded only around 200 places in care institutions. This is farfrom the number needed for children already in the country, much less for thoseexpected to arrive in the months to come-yet the ministry has no plans toextend this provision. There is no specialized center for unaccompanied girlsand no foster family system is available for unaccompanied migrant children.Indeed, the reality is that children who have not asked for asylum have less chanceof accessing a care placement, and finding places for those who are seekingasylum is equally a struggle. The recent opening of a care center for up to 100unaccompanied children on Lesvos Island is an encouraging step. However, as alarge-scale center in an isolated and remote location, it is only adequate as atransit center but not for extended placement.As a result of the lack of care places, unaccompaniedchildren are typically released from detention with nothing but a deportationorder requiring them to leave the country, but no further assistance. If theyfail to leave the country and do not apply for asylum, or otherwise fail toaccess or fall out of the asylum procedures, they are subject to renewed arrestand detention and at risk of deportation.Most find themselves without accommodation and thereforesleep in parks, share apartments with adult strangers, or otherwise findovercrowded and squalid accommodation, such as over-crowded "hotels," typicallydecrepit buildings in the center of Athens where spots to sleep on the floor arerented out for three to five euro a night.Forced to fend for themselves, children struggle daily forsurvival, are out of school and have to search for income as day laborers. As aresult, they are at serious risk of ending up illegally employed inexploitative work, performing heavy and hazardous tasks at risk to theirhealth.The protection failures documented in this report representthe continuation in 2008 of systemic failures which have led to criticism andconcern expressed by both UN and Greek bodies over many previous years. The UNCommittee on the Rights of the Child expressed concern about the treatment ofunaccompanied migrant and asylum-seeking children as long ago as 2002. In 2004,the UN Human Rights Committee noted an "absence of child welfare protection."In 2005, the Greek Ombudsman called on the government to identify, register,and provide adequate care to all unaccompanied children in the country-a callbasically repeated by the Greek National Commission for Human Rights in2007.Key RecommendationsTo the Government of GreeceGreece needs to revise its entire system and services toprotect unaccompanied migrant and asylum seeking children:The Ministry of Health and Social Solidarity shouldincrease the number of care places for unaccompanied children to the levelrequired to ensure placements for all unaccompanied children in thecountry. In cooperation with the Ministry of Interior, the Ministry ofHealth should set up a registration and tracking system in Greece to account for every child. It should also design programs to reach out tounaccompanied migrant children who live outside state-sponsored care andfacilitate their access to state protection.The Ministry of Interior should grant unaccompaniedchildren a regular status for as long as they are on Greek territory toensure their enjoyment of rights and protection on an equal basis withGreek children, and to protect them from repeated arrest and detention. Incooperation with the Ministry of Health, it should establish a functioningsystem to refer all unaccompanied migrant children to care places andspecialized services. The Ministry of Interior should further suspend thedeportation of unaccompanied children until the adoption of revisedlegislation that ensures children's safe return and integration in thecountry of origin in accordance with their best interests.The Greek government should revise the current temporaryguardianship system for unaccompanied migrant children. It should ensurethat sufficient and trained guardians are available to carry out theirduties and safeguard children's best interests in a responsible manner.Police and other government officials should condemnill-treatment of child and other migrants and asylum seekers at the handof state agents. They should also ensure prompt and full investigation ofsuch acts including disciplinary or penal accountability of those foundresponsible.The Greek government should overhaul its asylum system byimproving access to asylum procedures, guaranteeing fairer and moreeffective determinations, training for adjudicators on child-specificpersecution, and effective legal representation throughout the asylumprocedure, in order to ensure that children who flee persecution as wellas those who cannot return due to humanitarian reasons, violence, or therisk of ill-treatment and exploitation, are permitted to stay inaccordance with their entitlements under international law. Children whoare not permitted to stay should not be deported until safeguards are inplace to ensure that a return is in their best interests and poses nodanger to their well-being and safety.To European Union Member States·Suspend all transfers of unaccompanied children to Greece under the Dublin II regulation until such time as Greece's asylum systems and protectionservices for unaccompanied children meet international standards.To the European Commission·Recognize that the European asylum instruments and the Dublin IIregulation do not guarantee sufficient protection for unaccompanied children inthe European Union; start negotiations on a separate and comprehensive legalinstrument for all unaccompanied children in the European Union.Methodology and ScopeThis report addresses the treatmentof unaccompanied children who seek asylum or who migrate to Greece. With the exception of deportations, it does not address unaccompanied children who enter Greece from Albania, as a series of reports by other organizations has been published in the pasteight years on their situation.[1] Neitherdoes this report document conditions in detention or in care centers, which arediscussed in a separate Human Rights Watch report entitled Greece-Stuck in aRevolving Door: Iraqis and other Asylum seekers and Migrants at theGreece-Turkey Entrance Gate to the European Union.Thisreport does not repeat these findings and instead only refers to conclusionsdocumented in the second report.[2]Research was carried out in Greece from April 14-16 and from May 21 to June 12. Ninety-nine migrants and asylumseekers, among them 53 unaccompanied children, were interviewed-three of them girls.Thirty-seven children were from Afghanistan, 10 were from Somalia, 2 were fromIraq, and the remaining 4 were from Congo-Brazzaville, the Philippines, Nigeria, and Pakistan. Twenty-two children, including all three girls, were below age16, and the remaining were 16 or 17 years old.[3]Many children did not know theirexact date of birth, and all were told that they could be interviewedregardless of their age. In two cases, we concluded after the interview thatthe persons interviewed were most likely 18 or older; one young-looking girldid not want to tell us her age. We did not count these individuals aschildren.We conducted a majority ofinterviews with the help of interpreters. We interviewed migrants and asylumseekers in four detention centers and in the following locations: Athens, Volos, Patras, Samos Island, Mitilini, Hagius Andreas.[4]In Athens, we found children with the help of members of migrant communities aswell as through human rights defenders. In Volos, we interviewed unaccompaniedchildren at a care center for boys. In Patras, we interviewed unaccompaniedchildren staying at an informal settlement. We also interviewed childrenshortly after their release from detention in Mitilini, while traveling on aferry to Athens.Interviews conducted in Athens, on the ferry, and in the care center were fully private and confidential.Interviews in most cases lasted around 45 minutes, and in some cases up to oneand half hours. Interviews in detention centers were generally much shorter.While those interviews were carried out away from staff, other detainees mighthave been able to hear the conversation. Also, with few exceptions, interviewsin Patras were not conducted fully in private; often, conversations werelistened to by other migrants who lived in the informal settlement.In Greece we met with policeofficials, staff working with the Prefectures, representatives from theMinistry of Health, the Ministry of Interior, the Greek Ombudsman, the NationalCommission for Human Rights, the Greek office of the United Nations HighCommissioner for Refugees, non-governmental organizations, and human rightslawyers and activists.All names of childreninterviewed have been replaced by pseudonyms to protect their identity. In someinstances, we also withhold the child's country of origin, or the exact dateand location of the interview in order to avoid the possibility of identifyingthe child. Some names of staff who work with unaccompanied children have alsobeen withheld to protect them from possible repercussions for the informationshared.In line with international instruments, the term "child"refers to a person under the age of 18.[5]For the purpose of this report, we use the term "unaccompanied child" todescribe both unaccompanied and separated children as defined by the Committeeon the Rights of the Child: "'Unaccompanied children' are children, as definedin article 1 of the Convention, who have been separated from both parents andother relatives and are not being cared for by an adult who, by law or custom,is responsible for doing so. 'Separated children' are children, as defined inarticle 1 of the Convention, who have been separated from both parents, or fromtheir previous legal or customary primary caregiver, but not necessarily fromother relatives. These may, therefore, include children accompanied by otheradult family members."[6]I. Unaccompanied Child Migrants and Asylum Seekers in GreeceBy the end of 2008, approximately 1,000 separated andunaccompanied children-that is, children separated from their parents orcustomary caregiver but not necessarily from other adult relatives, andchildren unaccompanied by a relative or another adult customarily or legallyresponsible for their care-will have entered Greece during the year. A few willhave applied for asylum, most will not. Many will come into contact with thestate by being caught by the police and subsequently served with a deportationorder. For the purposes of this report, we refer to all of them asunaccompanied children.The figure of 1,000 is an estimate based on a mix ofsources-UNHCR, various Greek government departments and service-providing NGOs.[7]Human Rights Watch was unable to obtain a definitive official figure on thenumber of unaccompanied children in Greece, and authorities do not publish abreak-down by age of the number of persons who are caught in Greece without legal status.[8]Although a migrant apprehended by the police is typically registered, thepolice also often fail to identify correctly whether a person is a child and ifso whether unaccompanied.What is striking is that official sources contradictthemselves as well as each other-and no single body appears to be responsiblefor maintaining a clear overview tracking children in need of protection. Thefact that the authorities have no clear idea how many unaccompaniedasylum-seeking or migrant children have come into contact with official bodies ishighly indicative of the subject of this report: the fundamental, systemicfailure of the Greek authorities to provide protection to these particularlyvulnerable and at risk young people.Flight from Poverty, Persecution, Exploitation andDiscriminationGovernment sources and NGOs generally agree that mostunaccompanied children currently coming into Greece are from Afghanistan,followed by countries including Somalia or Iraq-each heavily affected by armedconflict-and many are from other countries. However, given the lack ofbreak-down by age of official figures on migration, there remains uncertainty fromwhich countries unaccompanied children originate.Of the 53 unaccompanied children Human Rights Watchinterviewed (see Methodology and Scope, above) most were from Afghanistan, with a majority belonging to the Hazara ethnic group. Many were from Somalia, some from Iraq, but others were from Congo-Brazzaville, Nigeria, the Philippines and Pakistan. The majority were boys aged 15 to 17.Many Afghan children told similar stories and motivationsbehind their journeys to Greece. A majority left Afghanistan in the 1990s atyoung ages, mainly for Iran. Many had only scant memories of their country,town or village. Sometimes children left jointly with their families, but aconsiderable number left Afghanistan on their own. Some did not know the exactcircumstances behind their families' departure; others recounted details ofviolence, drought, or persecution by the Taliban.Afghan children who had initially settled in Iran started working as early as age 10 to support themselves or their families, manyemployed in sweatshops or on construction sites and performing hazardous labor.Several children told Human Rights Watch that they suffered from chronic healthproblems as a result of such work at a young age. A vast majority said they hadleft Iran because the Iranian government started deporting Afghans who didn'thave regular status.[9]Children who left Afghanistan or one of the refugee camps inPakistan in more recent years spoke of a variety of push factors behind theirdeparture. Many shared stories of lawless areas run by local warlords. Childrenfled for many reasons-because they were targeted for sexual abuse, religiousviews, political affiliation with the Taliban, or simply for befriending thedaughter of a local strongman. One child told us he left because "his fatherdid not behave well" and another was orphaned at a young age. All shared ahistory of child labor; hardly any were able to read or write, and many hadgone to school for only two or three years before they took up work. Two Afghansiblings came to be reunited with their mother in another EU country.We did not interview sufficient numbers of children fromother nationalities to draw general conclusions about the reasons for theirdeparture. Several Somali children, however, told us they were from Mogadishu and fled violence and fighting. One African boy said he was persecuted after hetried to seek justice for the killing of his politically active family. A boyfrom Iraq fled after his entire family was killed and he became the target ofinsurgents.Human Rights Watch did not set out to research child traffickingand no research on contemporary child trafficking has, to our knowledge, beencarried out by other organizations.[10] However, some of thechildren we interviewed appeared to have been trafficked. Furthermore,unaccompanied children who have made it to Greece risk falling into the handsof trafficking gangs operating in the country, including for the purpose oflabor exploitation (see chapter VII for a fuller discussion). Unaccompaniedgirls, who face particular risks, remain largely invisible, with no specializedcare center existing for them.In this report Human Rights Watch does not assess whetherthe children we spoke to have a case for being granted asylum. Some, perhaps many,undoubtedly do. The focus of the report is on how the protection and asylumregimes in Greece fail all of them-asylum seekers and migrants alike.A History of ProtectionFailureUnaccompanied migrant and refugee children coming to Greece is not a new phenomenon. Especially with the collapse of the former Yugoslavia and the crisis that ensued in Albania in the 1990s, Greece has for over a decade beenfaced with the challenge of having hundreds of unaccompanied children fromthird countries on its territory. The presence of Albanian children, oftenunaccompanied and from Albania's Roma ethnic minority, manifested itself visiblyin the early 1990s. Many of these children were living on the streets-begging,washing car windows at traffic lights, selling minor items, or engaging inpetty criminality. Many were believed to have been trafficked and somereportedly ended up being sexually exploited.As now, the total number of foreign children in Greece was not known and the government did not keep track of them. A UNICEF sponsoredstudy in 2000 estimated that there were about 5,800 street children in thecountry, a majority Albanian, but more than 14 percent were estimated to befrom Iraq, Pakistan, and of Kurdish origin.[11]The government of Greece reacted to the presence of these childrenwith a law and order approach, euphemistically entitled "Protection and SocialCare for Street Children," under which children were arrested and some were chargedwith begging, a criminal offense.[12]Following arrest, children were taken to large-scale care institutions, one ofthem the Aghia Varvara center in Athens, or were deported, sometimes to bere-trafficked.[13]Approximately 500 children who had been arrested by thepolice and taken to the "Aghia Varvara" care center between 1998 and 2002 wentmissing from the institution over time, and no one knows where they went.[14] Theirgradual departure did not ring alarm bells in Greece until the Albanian mediapublished a story.[15]By the time the Greek Ombudsman investigated the case, the management of the"Protection and Social Care for Street Children" program lacked institutionalleadership and the "Aghia Varvara" center had staff who were insufficient innumbers and untrained.[16]Despite the Ombudsman's investigation, no one was held accountableforthe grave neglect of children in state care.The Greek government's failure to adequately protect childrenfrom third countries has not gone unnoticed by international human rightsbodies. In 2002, the United Nations Committee on theRights of the Child expressed its concerns about insufficient attention paid tothe situation of unaccompanied migrant and asylum-seeking children, and itcalled on Greece to develop mechanisms to attend to these children's specificneeds.[17]In 2004, the United Nations Human Rights Committee noted an"absence of child welfare protection." It urged Greece to protect unaccompaniedforeign children and to refrain from releasing them without any carearrangements.[18] In2005, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, childprostitution and child pornography expressed concern about the absence of aninstitutionalized child protection system and the lack of adequate shelters forunaccompanied children, which exposes children to trafficking and otherrisks.[19]UNHCR and Greek institutions have spoken out about specificaspects of the protection of unaccompanied migrant and refugee children. AUNHCR-sponsored report about reception conditions for vulnerable groups in 2004called on the government to enhance reception conditions, to refrain fromdetaining children, and to expand access to services for children who have notasked for asylum.[20]In 2005, the Greek Ombudsman published a special reportabout the detention and deportation of migrant children. It urged thegovernment to refrain from such practices and to replace deportation procedureswith repatriations that respect children'srights. The government wasfurther called upon to identify, register, and provide adequate care to all unaccompaniedchildren in the country.[21]Jointly with the UNHCR, the Ombudsman also issued in 2005 acomprehensive set of guidelines for the treatment of unaccompanied childrenseeking asylum.[22]The Greek Council for Refugees published a Plan of Action in 2006.[23]The Greek National Commission for Human Rights, in early 2007, called on thegovernment to refrain from detaining children, to systematically register,identify, and represent children, to adopt a formal age assessment procedure,and to provide adequate accommodation.[24]Greek Law and the Protection System for UnaccompaniedChildrenGreek legislation to a certain extent recognizes the government'sobligations to care for and protect unaccompanied migrant children.The most recent Greek asylum laws define an unaccompaniedchild as a person below the age of 18 without an adult customarily or legallyresponsible for his or her care[25]and it makes representation of all unaccompanied children by a guardianmandatory, regardless of whether the child has asked for asylum.[26]According to the law, an unaccompanied child's asylum claim is to be assessedby a competent official, on the basis of up-to-date and precise information,and after an objective and impartial examination, taking into accountchild-specific forms of persecution.[27]In reality, however, asylum applications are routinely rejected and remainwithout a fair and full assessment (see chapter IV).There is, furthermore, a lack of legal protection forunaccompanied children who do not seek asylum, including those who areprevented from accessing asylum procedures because of existing obstacles.Although these children are by law represented by a (temporary) guardian, theirirregular status as migrants who illegally entered the country remainsunchanged. As such, they are subject to arrest, detention, and deportation.[28]InstitutionalResponsibilitiesResponsibility for unaccompanied refugee and migrantchildren is divided among various government entities.The police are responsible for virtually all aspectsof immigration and asylum-including the adjudication of asylum claims at firstinstance and the deportation of migrants. The system lacks independentoversight and an unaccompanied child may be in contact only with the policefrom the point of arrival until his or her deportation.The Ministry of Health and Social Solidarity(Ministry of Health) is responsible for providing accommodation, access tomedical services (including for victims of abuse or armed conflict), and anadequate standard of living for asylum seekers.[29]It supports regional social services as well as NGOs in providing suchservices.Juvenile prosecutors or prosecutors of first-instancecourts act as temporary guardians for all unaccompanied children, regardless ofwhether they apply for asylum.[30]There are a number of other institutions that have roles inmonitoring the protection of children's rights in Greece. These do not haveoperational responsibilities within the protection or immigration regimes, butcan act as watchdogs on behalf of children within wider sets ofresponsibilities for monitoring the implementation of human rights measures:these include the Greek Ombudsman, entrusted to protect the rights of citizensand non-citizens, with a separate department on children's rights,[31]and the Greek National Commission for Human Rights, with a mandate to monitorthe protection of human rights, raise public awareness, and advise the Greekgovernment on human rights protection.[32]Furthermore, a number of NGOs, such as the Greek Council forRefugees, the Ecumenical Refugee Program, the Hellenic Red Cross, and ARSIS,offer government funded services, including legal advice to asylum seekers orassistance to access social services for unaccompanied children and othergroups. Generally, however, these organizations are under-resourced and accessto their services outside of Athens is limited.Despite consistent criticism of Greece's policies and callsfor improvements in its child protection system, Human Rights Watch's researchfor this report found that the protection of unaccompanied children isdysfunctional and children continue to be subjected to violence and abuse.Reasonable, if limited, laws are not implemented. Neither the police nor otherauthorities are making meaningful efforts to give effect to legal obligationsto ensure that children receive the level of protection to which they areentitled. At various points within the system, children are not merely thevictims of measures that violate their rights by omission but are beingsubjected to acts of violence and brutality by persons supposed to beresponsible for their welfare. Past failures have not led to much neededimprovements of the child protection system.II. First Contact with the AuthoritiesTypically, the first contact between unaccompanied childrenand the authorities involves the Hellenic police, port police, border guards orthe coastguard.[33]Often this is in the context of official action against migrants who enter thecountry illegally. Unaccompanied children may be picked up by the coastguardfrom boats as they enter Greek waters. They may be found hiding within trucksentering Greece or leaving the country for other European Union (EU) memberstates. In other cases, children are arrested in sweeps against migrants. Theymay also be arrested during identity checks in Athens and other bigger cities.When police pick up a young person certain procedures oughtto kick into action. For one, if the migrant is undocumented and there aredoubts about the person's age, an age assessment should be made to determine whetherthe person is a child and therefore entitled to certain protection measures. Ifso, competent child protection services should be called in. Authorities shouldalso assess whether the child is unaccompanied and, in such a case, ensurerepresentation by a guardian without delay. All unaccompanied children shouldbe registered, tracked, and records need to be continuously updated. Asdescribed above, the law provides that children who are victims of abuse,neglect, exploitation, torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, or armedconflict should receive appropriate rehabilitation services and mental healthcare if needed. All these identification procedures require specialized staff workingclosely with law enforcement bodies. Furthermore, children should be informedabout their right to seek asylum and interviewed about the possible existenceof international protection needs right after their apprehension.The reality is woeful. Not a single child interviewed byHuman Rights Watch had a proper interview after his or her arrival. Childrensaid that only basic data was recorded following their entry into Greekterritory, such as their name, their father's name, their country of origin andtheir age. Translation, if available at all, was arranged ad hoc, by fellowmigrants rather than police interpreters.There are no official procedures for assessing children'sages. Police officers who register children's identities sometimes record theirages as older than that given by the children. At other times they do notquestion children who claim to be adults. Police do not register children asunaccompanied and they fail to identify and refer children who have beentraumatized or trafficked to specialized services.While police in border areas do generally informprosecutors-the child's temporary guardian-that a child migrant has been detained,prosecutors subsequently fail to safeguard the child's interests or keep trackof a child as he or she moves through different parts of the immigrationsystem.Assessing AgeThe authorities have not defined any official procedures forage determination. A presidential decree adopted in mid-July 2008 provides forthe possibility of a medical exam to determine a person's age. It remainssilent, however, on the type of medical or other examination and provides noinstruction on how to take into account the margin of error medicalexaminations are prone to.[34]The decree requires that a person who claims to be a child be treated as suchuntil the completion of the medical examination.[35]Medical examinations used to determine the age of presumedchildren are subject to margins of error of up to five years.[36]Pediatricians have further criticized the fact that some exams expose childrento X-ray for non-medical purposes.[37]The Committee on the Rights of the Child and UNHCR have both asked states notto base age assessments solely on the physical appearance of a child, but toalso consider his or her psychological maturity, to take into account themargin of error that medical exams are subject to, and to give the child thebenefit of doubt.[38]In fact, few of the children Human Rights Watch spoke to hadundergone a medical age examination for the purpose of age determination. Policeofficers either register age based on a person's declaration, or independentlymake what can only be described as an arbitrary assessment. When Human RightsWatch asked a senior police officer whether they followed any procedure whendetermining a person's age, he told us, "The only thing we can do is to look atthe child to determine the age."[39]As a result children are often registered as older and sometimes younger thantheir real ages.[40]Hayatullah R., who Human Rights Watch met shortly after hewas released from the detention center in Mitilini, Lesvos Island, reported,I said I was 12 but they wrote 15. I saw how he wrote 15. Itold them I was 12, but they didn't say anything.[41]Fahim F., who was apprehended by police in early 2008 on Lesvos Island, said,I'm 17 years old. Here I'm 14 years old.… The police askedme how old I was but I couldn't understand their question so they wrote themselves14. I didn't say I was 14.[42]Sixteen-year-old Sobir S. told us that the police on Lesvos Island did not take into account his identification document during registration:I had an ID but the police didn't consider it. When I gotthe deportation order my age was written as 18, but I told them I was Afghanand showed them my ID from Afghanistan where my birthday is written in Arabicnumbers and according to the Afghan calendar. There was no interpreter. Theyalso misspelled my name.[43]Sixteen-year-old Hamed P. was registered as 21 years oldwithout being asked any questions about his age. That age was subsequentlytransferred into his red card identifying him as an asylum seeker. Because helooks underage, he now finds himself blamed by police for the citing the wrongage: "Sometimes when I show my red card to the police they accuse me for nothaving said the truth that I am underage."[44]Children are often illiterate and not necessarily aware whatage they were registered at. Sixteen-year-old Raz G. for example did not knowthat his deportation order said he was 26 years old.[45]Multiple ageassessmentsThe registration of a child's age following his or her entryinto the country is not the only time a child may undergo an age assessment.Anunaccompanied child who has not filed an asylum application remains withoutdocumentation. If arrested a second time, or if the child makes an asylumapplication, he or she might face another age assessment and may be registeredas a different age.[46]Sixteen-year-old Najib M. told us how his age was alteredduring a subsequent arrest: "I was arrested in the port and spent one night inthe port police station, then four nights in Athens. On my first paper my agewas 16. When I was arrested in Patras they made my age 18 and took the firstpaper away."[47]Similarly, Sami F. told us, "In Mitilini I was 17. Here they put 19 on the redcard.[48]The police looked at me and said 'you are not 17, you are two years older.' Ididn't say anything."[49]Children who claim tobe adultsChildren may declare themselves and be registered as adults evenif it is beyond any doubt that they are underage. Stating the opposite, thechief of police in Samos assured us that such registrations would not occur:"In some cases children are small and they declare to be older to be releasedearlier. We don't accept that."[50]Yet, 14-year-old Hussein S. declared himself as an adult to Samos police andwas registered as 18 years old, even though he looked very immature and therewas no doubt that he was underage.[51]Some children are of the view that a higher age works totheir advantage. Sixteen-year-old Hamed P., who was registered as a 21-year-oldtold us, "My friend told me it's better to be 21 because I could get a workpermit because nobody will help me here. I work every day now in a beerfactory. First the owner said I was underage. When I showed him my red card hesaid 'ok, you can start working.'"[52]The lack of any formal age assessment procedures also meansthat there is no legal way to challenge and rectify an arbitrary or wrongassessment. Although a social worker told us that a child could change the ageif a doctor certified that he or she was underage, this does not seem to be anofficial procedure or one that is known to practitioners.When Hussein S. applied for asylum he was told by his lawyerthere was no way to change his age: "when I applied for asylum they took thesame age. I told the lawyer that I was 14 but the lawyer told me that now itwas too late and that the police would not believe me."[53]Similarly, Musa M., who arrived at the age of 16 and was registered as 18 yearsold, told us: "I told them how old I am. I also went to the Greek Council ofRefugees (GCR) and said that they registered me at an older age but GCR told meit was not possible to change. I told the police my date of birth but I don'tknow how it was translated."[54]The Case of Leros IslandAuthorities used medical tests to determine the age of agroup of migrants, including a large number of unaccompanied children, whoarrived on Leros Island between March and May 2008. The Greek Council ofRefugees (GCR) interviewed all of them and concluded that out of 118 migrants,32 were below age 17, and an unknown number were around 17 or 18 years old.[55]Although GCR made its age assessment available, authorities neverthelessordered X-rays of the wrist bones of an unknown number of persons.[56]Following medical examinations and the departure of an unknown number ofchildren, 22 children were transferred to care centers.[57]The head of the Aliens' Division within the Hellenic Policetold Human Rights Watch that authorities intend to carry out age assessmentsmore systematically throughout the country.[58] Yet he did not specifythat a plan was in place or when such exams would be carried out. Moreover, whenHuman Rights Watch spoke to the Ministry of Health it was unaware of suchplans.GuardianshipThe Committee on the Rights of the Child specifies thatstates are required to secure proper representation of an unaccompanied child'sbest interests. This requirement derives from the binding obligation that achild's best interest is to be a primary consideration in all actions affectingthe child.[59]To this end, states should appoint a guardian or advisor as soon as an unaccompaniedchild is identified.[60]The guardian should be consulted and informed about all actions taken withregard to the child.[61]The Committee on the Rights of the Child also asks that guardianship bereviewed[62]and it specifies that in case a child enters the asylum procedure he or sheshould, in addition, be given legal representation.[63]Greek legislation and a Ministry of Interior circularprovide that public prosecutors are tasked to act as temporary guardians forall unaccompanied children-migrants, refugees and asylum seekers.[64] Theguardianship system for Greek children deprived of their family environment isslightly different in that public prosecutors do not act as temporary guardians.[65]Greek law stipulates that a child is to be represented by aguardian when neither parent exercises care, or when the child is unaccompaniedand not taken into substantial care by an adult responsible for the child bylaw or custom.[66]The guardian's duty includes an obligation to take care of the child, to representthe child in any legal or judicial proceeding, to hear the child prior to anydecision-making, and to act in the child's best interests. The obligation ofcare is the same for a guardian as for a parent and includes the child'supbringing, education, and housing.[67]The law foresees that the exercise of guardianship ismonitored by a supervisory council.[68]Guardians, courts, and the supervisory council are mandated to hear the childprior to any decision-making and to act in the child's best interests.[69]Guardianship can be removed if the court or supervisory council considers thata continuation puts the child in danger or is against the child's interests.[70]A guardian may refuse appointment or resign for "important reasons."[71]While these provisions are generally in line withinternational standards, the authorities have not defined standard proceduresthat explain the mandate of temporary guardians with regard to third countryunaccompanied children.[72]As a result, prosecutors, already under-resourced, have widely differing viewsof what their role entails.[73]They rarely undertake actions in the child's best interests, neither during thechild's asylum procedure nor when the child is detained. Temporary guardiansinterviewed by Human Rights Watch did not know how many unaccompanied childrenthey were responsible for and were not keeping track of children.[74] Someexpressed skepticism about their mandate. In short, the guardianship system forunaccompanied children is dysfunctional.The juvenile prosecutor in Athens, for example, told HumanRights Watch that her mandate was strictly limited to "signing the proposal fora permanent guardian" and that it was the responsibility of NGOs to findsuitable guardians.[75]She explained that she did not have sufficient resources for this mandate,besides her other responsibilities for juvenile offenders and child victims ofcrimes.[76]Both she and the deputy prosecutor in Orestiada were of theview that they could not act on behalf of a child in administrative detention."It is very hard to say this, but legally these children don't exist. Becausethey are in an administrative procedure they are out of my jurisdiction," thedeputy prosecutor in Orestiada told us.[77] The Athens prosecutorfor juveniles held that she could only take action on behalf of the child ifthe child had committed an offense.[78]This view that prosecutors cannot act on behalf of childrenin an administrative procedure is shared by some police officials. The policedirector of the Aliens' division in Attica told us, "Because asylum is anadministrative procedure there is no role for the prosecutor. The prosecutorusually gives orders to an NGO or anybody else to help the child."[79]A child needs the guardian's consent to enroll in school. Wewere told that the temporary guardianship system does not function to theextent that there is no legal way to enroll an unaccompanied child in a schoolin Athens. NGOs have resorted to informal ways of enrolling children. The GreekCouncil for Refugees, for example, asserts that it is the permanent guardianfor the child in order to enroll the child.[80]Assessing VulnerabilityThe fact of being unaccompanied is a key factor in renderinga child vulnerable. Yet in practice, Greek police hardly ever establish whethera child is unaccompanied. Indeed, it appears that the authorities are reluctantto identify children as such.[81]When asked about the presence of unaccompanied children, thechief of Samos police said, "Usually, children who arrive here are accompanied;they stay with their families and then they leave together."[82]A representative of the Hellenic coastguard told Human Rights Watch that out ofmore than 25,000 persons the coastguard had apprehended in the past five years"there were no reported cases of unaccompanied minors."[83]In 2007 and the first half of 2oo8, the Ministry of Interiorissued a total of 12,904 orders of deportation to children for illegal entry orpresence in the country. The Ministry, however, was unable to tell Human RightsWatch how many of these orders were given to unaccompanied children and howmany had been given multiple times to the same persons (see chapters V and VIIIfor a discussion on detention and deportation orders).[84]This blindness to a whole category of children means that few are even enteringthe protection system, inadequate as it is.There are serious flaws in the way authorities identifyvulnerable individuals. Human Rights Watch interviewed several unaccompaniedchildren who were victims of armed conflict, violence, or abuse. Some appearedto be victims of trafficking. In no case did the police correctly identifytheir vulnerability and special needs, or refer them to special services (seealso chapter VII).[85]Indeed, the chief of police in Samos openly doubted the credibility of refugeesand migrants who arrive to Samos Island: "many say they come from countries atwar but we don't see injuries and they don't ask for asylum."[86]Fourteen-year-old Hussein S., an unaccompanied boy from Iraq whose case is mentioned above, entered Greece through Samos Island. He was traumatized to suchan extent that he had harmed himself and suffered from nightmares. He clung toa doll throughout the interview. His mental state seemed to be the result ofhaving witnessed family members killed and his father abducted and murdered,before insurgents started to target him. He arrived to Samos in March 2008, wasregistered as an adult based on his own declaration and detained for 27 daysjointly with adults, before being put outside the Samos detention center with adeportation order but no assistance.[87]At the time of the interview, this boy was living with an unrelated Iraqi manwho spoke so incoherently that Human Rights Watch had to break off theinterview with him.Although the Samos detention center is a brand-new facilityequipped with a doctor's office and a social worker, no interpreter ispermanently present in the center, which seriously undermines any effort toidentify vulnerable individuals.The failure to correctly identify children who have sufferedfrom violence and torture or those who have been traumatized results in aviolation of their entitlement to special assistance and exposes them toserious harm. If these children file an asylum application, they may be lessable to speak coherently and convincingly about the reasons for and events thatled to their displacement. They may contradict themselves and their storiesmight be inconsistent due to mental stress. In the worst case, their claims canbe deemed unfounded or not credible. Hussein S. had his asylum interviewwithout any prior examination by a psychologist.Seventeen-year-old Awali N. fled war-torn Mogadishu inAugust 2007 and arrived in Greece in early 2008. He told us that all his familyexcept for his mother had been killed. He was living in an overcrowded andsqualid house and struggled to make a living in Greece. He was visibly undermental stress. Parts of his story were confusing and he admitted that hecouldn't concentrate and remember details. He was in a constant sweat anddescribed his mental state as follows:I can't sleep at night-I'm thinking about my problems. Whyare they not doing anything for me in Greece? I can't sleep because of mydreams and because I'm thinking.… I don't know where my mother is and whethershe's still alive. I was the only boy left and fled.[88]Two brothers, one of them eight years old at the time of theevents described, told us that they were released from detention without beingtransferred to a care center in 2006, and ended up in the hands of a criminalgang who subjected them to severe ill-treatment. This included beatings, fooddeprivation, and infliction of burns with metal objects. The boys said thatthey managed to escape their torment after nine days, sought help from the policeand were re-arrested. They were taken to the first-instance asylum interview,which resulted in a denial, without any prior psychological assistance and incircumstances that were clearly intimidating:[89]I and my brother did separate interviews. There was aninterpreter…. They asked a lot of questions. It lasted for about 20 minutes. Theyonly asked my brother what his name was but nothing-else. He was only eightyears old. We both had physical signs of mistreatment-burns of the metal. Weshowed the scars and injuries to them.At that time I was ok to do the interview and I told them, butmy brother was crying all the time.… I also cried during the interview becausethey asked about my brother and I became very upset. I didn't have anypsychological support. There was no support. There was no doctor orpsychologist. They took me from the jail that day to the interview and thenback into jail. When they brought us to the interview our hands were tied inthe back. Not during the interview but from jail to the car they tied our hands.When we finished the interview they tied our hands again and brought us back.[90]III. Violence against Children by State AgentsThe previous chapter has described the near routine failureof the police to carry out rigorous age and vulnerability assessment-includingidentifying whether children are unaccompanied in the first place. Even worse, manyof the unaccompanied children, in addition to numerous adults, interviewed byHuman Rights Watch described violence and ill-treatment at the hands of police,port police, coastguards or border guards-the very officials with lead responsibilityfor their protection.This generally took place close to the moment of arrest.Children spoke about ill-treatment taking place during interception at sea andduring arrest or detention. Human Rights Watch documented allegations ofbeatings, slaps, kicks, and punches. Extraordinarily, one child reported beingsubjected to a mock execution. Several children interviewed said they sufferedfrom health problems resulting from such acts.In 2007 the European Committee on the Prevention of Tortureand Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) reported numerousallegations of ill-treatment by persons, including migrants, in the custody ofstate agents and concluded that "persons deprived of their liberty by lawenforcement officials in Greece run a real risk of being ill-treated."[91]Ill-Treatment by Port Police Officers in PatrasSome of the most dramatic testimony Human Rights Watchcollected relates to the behavior of port police officers in the town ofPatras, an important terminal for ferries leaving for Ancona, Bari and Veniceand hence a jumping off point for travel to other parts of the EU.Migrants apprehended inside the port area who had tried tohide on a truck or a ferry departing for Italy consistently spoke ofill-treatment and beatings by Patras port police officers. Human Rights Watchinterviewed two adult Afghan migrants who suffered injuries after havingallegedly been beaten by the port police the same day. Both persons had visiblewounds and required medical treatment.[92]Children are not spared from such ill-treatment. Habib T., a13-year-old Afghan who was caught hiding in a truck in spring 2008, reported:The police took me from inside the truck. Three policeofficers took my fingerprints. They beat me…. they beat me on my arms and myback. They beat me four times – there's no traces left now. My back shoulderstill hurts. At night when I am sleeping it starts hurting.[93]Fourteen-year-old Daoud A. from Afghanistan was caughtinside the port fence:They were two policemen. They handcuffed me, put me intothe (vehicle) trunk, closed it and brought me to the port police building…. Theyput on gloves and searched me. They took everything from me except for myclothes and put me inside a room with other persons and closed the door…. I wasarrested with another underage boy. We were both thrown into the trunk.[94]Human Rights Watch researchers received testimony that aport police officer known to migrants in Patras by the nickname 'Jabar'subjected one child to a mock execution, with the participation of otherofficials. Human Rights Watch also documented another case of seriousill-treatment that appears to have been carried out by the same officer. Thetwo testimonies were recorded on different days, in different locations, andwith the assistance of different interpreters. Both children gave similarphysical descriptions of their main assailant.Fifteen-year-old Ghulam S., who has been caught a number oftimes by port police officers attempting to hide in trucks, reported,Once they caught me inside the port. That was two monthsago at 4 a.m. I tried to find a place to hide inside a truck. They came with acar and I didn't see them arrive. Four of them in uniforms came from differentsides. Jabar was among them. They forced me to lie flat on the ground with myarms stretched out. One guy pressed my head down with his boot… then he calledthe others to kick me and they all kicked me. They kicked me one after theother for about five minutes. Then they tied my hands on the back and took meto the railway line. They were still the four of them.Jabar pulled out his gun. He loaded the gun held it to my headand said 'I will kill you.' He pulled the trigger but the gun was empty. I sawthat they took out the bullets but they didn't realize that I had seen it. Afterwardsthey asked me how old I was. I said I was 14. They all started laughing. Thenthey told me to leave and run fast. They came running after me and shouted toscare me.… I couldn't lie on my back because of the beating. It hurt so badly.My friends took care of me.[95]Sixteen-year-old Jafar F. told us how he was subjected toill-treatment jointly with two other boys by a group of four port policeofficers, among them 'Jabar':They arrested me. First they threw my bag into the sea andthen [us]. They took us out and beat us. I was thrown inside the sea, takenout, and beaten, thrown into the water again, taken out, and beaten again. Theywere four police officers. That was one month ago…. The other boys were [namewithheld] and [name withheld]. [Name withheld] is so young, he is 15, [namewithheld] is 15 or 16.[96]Neither of these boys, nor any other person we have spokento attempted to file a complaint about the behavior of port police officers.When we asked Ghulam S. whether he had tried to lodge a complaint, he said:"there was nobody to complain to."[97]Indeed, the way in which the authorities investigated themultiple stabbing of 14-year-old Ismail F., an unaccompanied child from Afghanistan, inside the port premises in November 2007, reinforces the rationality ofGhulam S.'s perspective.According to various sources, a person in uniform stabbedIsmail F. several times with a sharp object while he was hiding under a truck.[98]He was taken to a hospital and received medical treatment. A medicalexamination of the boy's injuries first concluded that the boy had been hit bya blunt and heavy object. Two months later the hospital revised the medicalreport to conclude his injuries were caused by a sharp object.[99]The Hellenic Red Cross provided legal assistance to the boy and to a secondwitness who was also underage and helped them to file a complaint.[100]The case was also brought to the attention of the Greek Ombudsman.During a pre-investigation by the responsible office of theMinistry of Mercantile Marine, the two boys were asked to identify theperpetrator from among only two officers presented to them. No victimprotection mechanism was put in place and the boys were visible during theidentification procedure. They did not identify either officer as aperpetrator. They were also not referred to any safe housing by the state forthe duration of the investigation.The Greek Ombudsman demanded that the port police thoroughlyinvestigate the allegations and present all 30 staff to the boys. Ministry ofMercantile Marine officials, the ministry in charge of port police, however,refused this request.[101]Both Ismail F. and the witness soon afterwards departed from Greece. Sources close to them told Human Rights Watch that he and the witness were very scared andanother source said they might have received help to leave the country.[102]Nobody has yet been charged for the crime.Click to expand ImageIsmail F.'s wounds © 2007 HumanRights WatchClick to expand ImageIsmail F.'s wounds © 2007 HumanRights WatchOther Cases of Abuse by State AgentsSeveral migrant children (and adults) told us that Greekborder guards beat and kicked them after they were intercepted in the AegeanSea while trying to cross into Greece on boats.[103]Seventeen-year-old Abdul G. remembered the precise date when he was interceptedoff the coast of Lesvos:That was on April 24, 2008…. Four coastguard police were onthe coastguard boat. It was about 10 meters long. Maybe the color of theiruniform was blue, but I'm not sure. I couldn't recognize the color at night. Whenthe police took us on their ship they searched our pockets and threw ourclothes into the water….One person, maybe he was the captain, didn't beat us. Twoothers beat us. The third beat us a little. I thought the first person was thecaptain because he was standing in the cabin. They slapped me two or threetimes and kicked me one or two times. Because I was underage, they beat me less.They beat the other men with the handle of their guns and kicked them a lot,maybe eight or ten times. Each person got injured; one in the back, some in theneck, others in the leg.[104]Fourteen-year-old Lal S. told Human Rights Watch that he hadbeen beaten by coastguards off Lesvos Island at the end of 2007: "They kickedme in the head. I was dizzy. I fell down. I felt the first kick to my head andthen I lost consciousness. The first kick was to the side of my head. Icouldn't see how the police kicked the others; three of them were my age andone was a year younger."[105]Sixteen-year-old Najib M. also remembered the date of hisinterception at sea and described the beatings:It was the night from May 19 to May 20.… We were about twohours away from Leros Island when we got arrested. They threw a rope down to usand told us to go onto their ship. When we got onto the ship they beat us. Wefell into the sea. Then they threw the rope down again.Four times I tried to get onto the ship. My friends evenmore. When we wanted to climb onto the ship they kicked us with the boot and wefell down. They kicked me until I fell down. Then they threw the rope again. Afterwe got onto the ship they beat us on the ship. My cousin got punched in his eyeand he has problems until now…. He is 15 years old.… There were 10-12 policeofficers on the ship. It was a big ship…. They were in military clothes and hadKalashnikovs. All of them had the same uniform.[106]Other unaccompanied children reported being subjected to beatingswhile coming into contact with police in other contexts. Fifteen-year-oldNurullah F., an asylum seeker from Afghanistan, told Human Rights Watch thatpolice beat him severely during an arrest near Omonia square.[107]He said that he has been in pain ever since:One day we sold clothes on the streets…. The police caughtus and took 50 T-shirts …. That was eight months ago in Omonia square. Theykicked me several times inside the police car while the car was driving. Onepolice man was on my left side, one was in the front. The officer in the frontkicked me. He kicked me several times, for about 15-20 minutes…. The car was avan like a Pajero but I don't know its brand. I was taken to the police stationnear Omonia. The police beat me all over my body and 2-3 kicks into my chest.Since then I had that problem. I cannot carry anything heavy or else I feelpain.… At night I cannot sleep on my belly. I can only sleep on my back. When Isleep on my left side I feel pain in my chest.[108]Legal Standards on Torture,Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or PunishmentInternational human rights law unambiguously bans tortureand other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. It is widelyrecognized to be a binding and absolute norm of customary international lawfrom which no derogation is permitted. Torture is defined as any act by whichsevere pain or suffering is intentionally inflicted on a person with theconsent or acquiescence of a public official, for a purpose such as obtaininginformation, punishing for an act, or for any discrimination-based reason.[109]A mock execution is a form of torture. The acts by Patrasport police, as alleged by Najib M. and Jafar F., would constitute at leastcruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. By repeatedly throwing victims into thewater and beating them, perpetrators demonstrated that they were in completecontrol. The victims had a real fear of drowning and do not know whether theywill be pulled out of the water again; the possibility of a child's drowning asa result of such ill-treatment is real.Greece is a state party to the UN Convention againstTorture, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, theConvention on the Rights of the Child, and the European Convention on HumanRights, which all prohibit the use of torture and inhuman or degradingtreatment or punishment.[110]IV. Unaccompanied Children Seeking AsylumAs described in chapter II, when police officers firstapprehend an unaccompanied child they are supposed to inform them of their rightto claim asylum and ensure representation by a competent guardian.Unaccompanied children who do not ask for asylum have no regular status in Greece; nor do those who have had their asylum application rejected or have otherwisefallen out of the asylum procedure. Children who lack regular status can bedetained and deported under the same procedures as adult migrants. NGOsfurthermore told Human Rights Watch that unaccompanied children withoutregularized status cannot access all care centers and are often left to fendfor themselves. In contrast, those who do apply for asylum are entitled to atemporary permission to stay until their claim is adjudicated. This permissionto stay-commonly referred to as the "red card"-protects them from deportation.Unaccompanied children who seek asylum are also more likely to access carecenters (see chapter VI).Unaccompanied children aged 14 and above may file an asylumapplication if deemed mature enough by the competent police official tocomprehend the meaning of such an action. Children below age 14 may only submitan asylum application through their legal representative. In practice, thesechildren may be barred from seeking asylum as they are often unaware of whotheir guardian is (see also chapter II about the guardianship system).[111]However, very few unaccompanied children actually do applyfor asylum, even if they have a well-founded fear of persecution. Many childreninterviewed by Human Rights Watch said they do not want to apply for asylum,including because they have experienced ill-treatment and violence at the handsof state agents. Others believe that they have no chance of receiving refugeestatus in Greece. The recognition rate at first instance in Greece in 2007 stood at 0.04 percent. During the first nine months of 2008, it dropped further to 0.03percent.[112]Many children also told us they believe that benefits and support in other EUcountries are better. As a result, they attempt to travel illegally to anotherEU country, often a dangerous and life-threatening journey, in order to submitan asylum application or to remain there otherwise.Asylum Procedures for Unaccompanied ChildrenUnaccompanied children who want to apply for asylum in Greece face serious obstacles in gaining access to asylum procedures. Some resort toseeking a letter from NGOs addressed to police authorities in order to be ableto access the building and file an asylum application. During the asylumprocedure unaccompanied children are rarely represented by a lawyer or guardian,and very few children are assisted in getting ready for their asylum interview.As a result, children are often not given an opportunity to fully explain theirreasons for coming to Greece, which significantly reduces their chance of beinggranted refugee status. Indeed, the reality of the system is that their chancesare close to zero.[113]The law does not provide for legal representation for an asylum seeker, thoughit does not exclude it. However, there is a paucity of lawyers who representasylum seekers in Greece, and this service is provided only by few NGOs or probono lawyers.[114]Access to asylumproceduresEven though police officials told Human Rights Watch thatasylum applications by children are treated as a priority,  childrenthemselves described immense difficulties in accessing procedures.[115]Unaccompanied children are among the approximately 1,000 persons who queue onSunday mornings to submit their asylum applications at the Petrou Ralli policestation[116]in Athens, the facility where 94 percent of Greece's asylum applications areprocessed.[117]Fourteen-year-old Lal S. told Human Rights Watch that he gave up trying to submitan asylum application there after several unsuccessful attempts to enter thebuilding: "I tried many times to get the red card.[118]They give the red card only on Sundays and we couldn't enter. We tried severaltimes but we gave up."[119]Similarly, 17-year-old Musa M. told Human Rights Watch that he had spent threenights waiting in line:I got the red card at Petrou Ralli station. To receive it Ihad to go several times. I went three times during the night. We went there at8 p.m. or 9 p.m. on Saturday night to keep the place in the queue. Maybe it wasthe sixth or seventh time that I managed to enter. Because I was small I waspushing so I managed to get inside.[120]Sixteen-year-old Hamed P. recounted how he had to clear thestreet of rubbish left by those in the queue in order to be able to apply forasylum:When I went to the police station there were 700 persons atthe police station. I arrived at 4 a.m. and waited in line. There were morethan 400 who went inside.… The police told us to clean the street and then wewould be taken inside the police station. At that time the weather was cold sosome people had brought cardboard, blankets, and made fires while waiting so wecleaned everything. We were 15 persons. Then they gave us a small paper with anappointment.[121]Sixteen-year-old Ali N. arrived alone at Athens airport froman African country in February 2008. He tried to apply for asylum at thepassport counter but didn't speak any Greek or English. He told us that he wastaken into detention at the Petrou Ralli detention center for two monthsinstead. He said he was not given an opportunity to ask for asylum, he had notseen a copy of the UNHCR publication for asylum seekers, and he never met aninterpreter:When I was arrested in Greece, I spent two nights at the airportdetention center. I couldn't communicate with the Greek police. Then I spenttwo months in Petrou Ralli.… When I was released from jail I was given adeportation order for three months. I couldn't ask for asylum in Petrou Ralli.I never had the opportunity to speak to an interpreter to make an asylumapplication.… I had no information. The police didn't give me any information.There was no interpreter. I had no idea how long I would be detained.[122]Some children manage to contact service-providing NGOs forinformation about and help to access the asylum procedure in Greece, and their rights as asylum seekers.[123]Some children only managed to enter the police building to physically file anasylum application after the Greek Council for Refugees (GCR) issued them aletter addressed to authorities at Petrou Ralli station. Seventeen-year-old FahimF. told us: "I went three or four times to the police station. I stayed in linefor two or three hours. Then GCR gave me a letter and I entered." Authoritiesconfirmed that they accept asylum applications from children who are referredto them by NGOs any day of the week. Even if this is the case, not all childrenare able to seek the help of GCR or other NGO legal service providers, and sucha system does not guarantee access to asylum procedures.Access is further hampered by the fact that most of thechildren interviewed were illiterate or possessed insufficient reading abilityto understand printed materials about asylum that are sometimes available indetention centers. None of the children interviewed by Human Rights Watch hadbeen orally informed by the police about their right to seek asylum, althoughpolice are instructed to do so.[124]Children's understanding of the meaning of asylum, includingby those who have made an application, was very limited, and children oftenhighlighted that the red card meant they would not be arrested. According to15-year-old Nurullah F. from Afghanistan, his father told him to flee from arefugee camp after the killing of a relative due to links to a political group.His understanding of asylum was as follows: "I know that if I have the red cardI have regular status for six months, so I decided to have the red card."[125]The government-funded Red Cross program in Patras was apositive example of providing access to asylum procedures for unaccompaniedchildren and asylum seekers in general. Unaccompanied children arrested bypolice or port police were referred to the Red Cross, informed about theirrights to seek asylum and offered a place in a care center. The Red Crossassisted more than 100 unaccompanied children in filing an asylum applicationwithin the two years the program was operating. The program, however, washalted at the end of August 2008 after funding by the EU and the Greekgovernment was used up.[126]Representation duringAsylum ProceduresAs mentioned above, a child aged 14 or older and deemedmature enough to understand the meaning of an asylum application does not haveto be represented by his or her guardian by law, and the police in that caseonly have to inform the child's guardian. This obligation to notify the child'sguardian stops if the child is 16 or 17 years old, if he or she is likely toturn 18 before the first-instance decision, or if the child is married or hasbeen married.[127]These legal loopholes result in an absence of legal representation andprotection of unaccompanied children in the asylum procedure.None of the children interviewed by Human Rights Watch whosubmitted their asylum applications at Petrou Ralli police station have beenrepresented by a guardian or lawyer. The Greek Council for Refugees told HumanRights Watch they do not have sufficient numbers of lawyers on staff to ensurerepresentation for unaccompanied children during the first-instance interview.[128]The juvenile prosecutor of Attica region, who is supposed to act as thetemporary guardian for unaccompanied children in her region, told Human RightsWatch that she "never heard that an asylum-seeking child is not represented"during the asylum interview. Yet, she clearly did not consider that suchrepresentation was part of her mandate.[129]The presence of a lawyer during the asylum interview appearsto make a significant difference for the interview process. Children who hadbeen represented, in contrast to those who hadn't, told Human Rights Watch thattheir interviews with the police were long and that they were able to telltheir full stories.[130]Asylum InterviewWith few exceptions, unaccompanied children who had not beenrepresented told Human Rights Watch that the asylum interview lastedapproximately 10 to 15 minutes, that they were asked a few questions of arather general nature and not given an opportunity to fully explain the reasonsfor their displacement. Many children were ill-prepared for the interview andheld the mistaken belief that since they were not asked detailed questions aboutthe reasons for leaving their country it meant they did not have to give suchinformation. Interviewers, furthermore, ask leading questions to elicitstatements that asylum applicants came to Greece for economic reasons.[131]Sami F., who was 17 at the time of his interview, reported,They asked me what problems I had. I said my father was afarmer and didn't have land. They asked about my province and district. I toldthem about the commander, but they didn't ask me many details about thecommander. There was an interpreter and the interview lasted 15 minutes.Seventeen-year-old Musa M. was interviewed by police throughan interpreter:They asked me some questions and made fingerprints. Therewas an Iranian interpreter. I was asked what my problem was in Afghanistan, where I had gone to and where I had entered Greece. After that they gave me the redcard. It lasted 15 minutes.… The police did not ask me about my story so Ididn't tell them. They asked me which province I was from but not whichdistrict.[132]Musa M. told Human Rights Watch that he fled from Afghanistan with his family at the age of eight due to the ruthless rule of a localcommander that led to the displacement of hundreds of families. Police did notask him what district (Daikundi) his family was from, and the boy himself wasunaware that the district had been turned into a province since he left. Hence,Greek authorities registered him as a resident of the wrong province. The factthat they failed to record such important basic information makes a carefulverification of the boy's claim on the basis of country-of-origin informationvery difficult.[133]Two children told Human Rights Watch that they wereinterviewed by an interpreter only, with no police officer present. Greeklegislation prescribes the presence of at least one police officer and aninterpreter during the asylum interview.[134] The interpreter in bothcases was described as an Iranian woman.Fahim F., a 17-year-old from Afghanistan, described hisinterview:I went to the police and had few and short questions.… AnIranian interpreter [did] the interview but there was no police officer present.The [Iranian] woman didn't ask a lot of questions. She asked why I had come,from where I was, and for how long I have been in Greece…. She wrote somethingbut I don't know what. I think she wrote what she wanted to write. Thatinterview lasted for 10 minutes. She didn't ask further questions and Ianswered all the questions she asked.[135]Hafez S., 16-year-old boy, said,I was at the big police station. An Iranian woman asked mequestions: why I came and what my difficulties were. There was no policeofficer present, only the Iranian woman was asking me questions. The police wasbusy taking fingerprints…. In GCR I gave a one-and-a-half hour interview. Therewere too many people at the police station so they couldn't do long interviews.They just asked me very simple questions at the police.… I answered all thequestions she asked me. The questions were short and I couldn't fully explainmy case.[136]Sixteen-year-old Hamed P., who had eventually managed to getaccess to file his claim by cleaning the street, told us that he was pressuredduring the interview to say he came for economic reasons. He further said thatthe police officer in the interview intimidated him. His interview was taken atPetrou Ralli police station in early 2008:The policeman in civilian clothes askedsomething and the Iranian woman told me I should say I came for a better life.I don't know whether the police officer said that or not because I didn'tunderstand him. I told the Iranian woman that I wanted to explain my otherproblems. At that point the police officer shouted at me and I got scared. Idon't remember what I said after that…. I thought if I said something more thepolice would kick me out without documents. I was scared. I was then told tostep to the side for fingerprints. The Iranian woman said two or three timesthat I should say I came for a better life. The interview took five minutes.[137]He told Human Rights Watch that he had fled from Afghanistan on his own at the age of 13 because he was threatened by a local commander:There was a commander. His name was (he whispers) [namewithheld]. Always when I went to work – they stopped me and told me to comewith them. This person wanted to keep underage boys for dancing and more. I gotscared and left Afghanistan. At that time I was 13 years old. I went to Iran alone.… My father is old. The commander threatened me and said if I complained toanybody he would kill me. He had two other boys who were underage with him.… Whenthe government of Iran decided to deport Afghans I was afraid to go back and Idecided to move to Europe.… You can speak to anybody in [location withheld] andask about [name of commander withheld]. He's a very bad person and everybodyknows him.[138]Even though authorities are obliged to take intoconsideration child-specific forms of persecution when children file asylumapplications, Hamed P. was not given a chance to explain the circumstances behindhis escape from Afghanistan.[139]The UNHCR guidelines for assessing asylum applications by Afghan nationalsspecifically mention that unaccompanied children continue to be exposed toexploitation and that there are cases of boys who are abducted for sexualexploitation.[140]NGOs and lawyers who provide legal aid and information to asylumseekers insist that the first-instance asylum interview is superficial, thatthe right questions are not being asked, that asylum seekers' claims areroutinely rejected, and that the claim is considered to be unfounded if theasylum seekers make any mention of economic reasons.[141]"They don't give you a chance to tell why you left your country," EfthaliaPappa from the Ecumenical Refugee Program told us.[142]Similarly, the main refugee rights organization, the GreekCouncil for Refugees, said that, besides a lack of resources, one reason whythey do not send lawyers to represent children during the first-instance asyluminterview is because the first instance procedure was not a meaningfulassessment of a person's claim.[143]A UNHCR-commissioned study found that authorities use a pre-writtenintroductory note for the files of asylum seekers. The note includes as apermanent entry that the responsible police officer does not recommend thegranting of refugee status. The note was wrongfully included into three filesof child asylum seekers for whom the granting of asylum was actuallyrecommended.[144]Authorities do not publish a recognition rate for asylumapplications by unaccompanied children.[145] A UNHCR sponsored studyby independent researchers found that examinations of asylum claims byunaccompanied children are delayed by authorities until children reachadulthood.[146]Efthalia Pappa from the Ecumenical Refugee Program told usthat even in convincing cases the police would conclude that an asylum seekercame for economic reasons:We accompanied an unaccompanied minor from Eritrea to his first-instance interview.This boy had the capacity to tell how he hadbeen tortured.Because a lawyer was present, the police officer wasobliged to write it down.At the end, though, he wrote 'manifestly unfounded,came for economic reasons.'There was a lawyer there. We got the minutesof the interview. Our lawyer was present at the interview. If she had not beenpresent, the boy would not even have been able to tell his story.[147]These findings highlight the extent to which the governmentof Greece falls short of its obligations under international law with regardsto unaccompanied children seeking asylum. Article 22 of the Convention on theRights of the Child obliges states parties to ensure that a child who seeksasylum or is considered a refugee shall "receive appropriate protection andhumanitarian assistance in the enjoyment of applicable rights" set forth ininternational law.[148]The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child specifies that this obligationentails, inter alia, "the responsibility to set up a functioning asylum system"and to "build capacities necessary to realize this treatment in accordance withapplicable rights" so that "asylum-seeking children, including those who areunaccompanied or separated, shall enjoy access to asylum procedures and othercomplementary mechanisms providing international protection, irrespective oftheir age."[149]The Committee on the Rights of the Child further urgesauthorities to give priority to asylum applications by unaccompanied childrenand it recommends that children in the asylum procedure be represented by aperson familiar with the child's background as well as a lawyer.[150]Authorities are explicitly called upon to take into account UNHCR positions, toacknowledge the various manifestations of persecution in children's experience,and to give "utmost attention" to such forms of persecution.[151]V. Detention of Unaccompanied ChildrenThe routine detention of unaccompanied children is afundamental dysfunction at the heart of the way the Greek immigration andsocial welfare systems address the challenge of caring for unaccompaniedmigrant children. According to international standards, the detention ofchildren should only take place in exceptional cases, as a last resort andshould be limited to the time strictly necessary.[152]However, there is a serious shortage of sufficient and adequate accommodationfor all unaccompanied children in Greece, including migrants and asylumseekers. The Ministry of Health funds or co-funds approximately 200 care placesonly. Even though this shortage is one possible reason for the prolongeddetention of unaccompanied children, the practice of detaining children onlyadds to children's risks and vulnerability. Furthermore, once these childrenare released from detention they are basically dumped onto the streets with atbest minimal assistance and at worst nothing at all. This exposes them to otherserious risks, and is analyzed in the next chapter.Greek law does not prohibit or regulate the administrativedetention of children who enter Greece without valid papers and the authoritiesdetain unaccompanied children either after arrival or when found without validdocuments for anything from a few hours to several days or months. The reasonsfor keeping children for longer or shorter periods appear to be arbitrary.The detention of unaccompanied migrant children isadministered on the same legal basis as that of adults, which means that the authoritiesmay detain a third-country national without valid papers for the purpose ofdeportation.[153]Once a deportation order is issued, police may continue to detain a person forup to three months, if they believe that he or she might escape or is considereda danger to public order.[154]If a foreigner does not fall within either category, the person is releasedwith a written order to leave the country within thirty days.[155]On August 1, 2008, Greek authorities were holding a total of 269 children inadministrative detention throughout the country.[156]The authorities, however, told Human Rights Watch that theyhave no means of deporting certain foreign nationals, such as Afghans andSomalis, because their embassies do not cooperate.[157]Where it is not possible to enforce deportation for these groups, there appearsto be no legal ground that would permit administrative detention. Thatnotwithstanding, children who enter Greece from Turkey through the Evros borderregion, as well as those who are sent to detention centers in the same area,are regularly detained for the full three months.Children may face additional risks in the detention centersin which they are placed by the authorities. In some centers, children are heldtogether with adults, contrary to international standards, and some childreninterviewed by Human Rights Watch were subject to ill-treatment at the hands offellow adult detainees. Furthermore, detention conditions in some facilitieswhere unaccompanied children are held amount to inhuman and degradingtreatment.[158]Children in administrative detention are not entitled to legal aid free ofcharge and rarely have access to pro bono lawyers. Public prosecutors entrustedto act as their temporary guardians believe that they cannot challengechildren's detention.[159]Recently adopted legislation does specify that the detentionand confinement of children who seek asylum should be avoided.[160]However, as has been described in the previous chapter, this is a minority of migrantchildren.Duration of DetentionHuman Rights Watch has not managed to identify any coherentrationale for why children are detained for longer or shorter periods. On Lesvos Island, where a majority of children interviewed by Human Rights Watch entered Greece, the length of their detention appears to be dependent on how many days prior to a"release day"–the day authorities process migrant's release from detention–achild entered the country. The day Human Rights Watch visited Lesvos Island authorities released a group of unaccompanied boys who had spent between threeand 12 days in detention.[161]A care center for unaccompanied children opened on the island in July 2008 andoffers police officials an alternative to detaining them. Despite thisavailable alternative, authorities continue to hold children behind bars forseveral weeks and in conditions that are far below minimum standards.[162]Twelve-year-old Sharzad P. and her 16-year-old brotherSardar P. from Afghanistan were detained in the Kyprinou facility in Fylakiowhen we interviewed them:We have been here for 65 days.… Someone informed us that wewould stay here for three months, the police told me that. We don't agree to stayfor three months.… I want to be released and I don't want to stay longer.[163]Twelve-year-old Sharzad P. shared her cell with about sixadult women with whom she was unable to communicate. Before being detained formore than two months in that facility, the two siblings told us they had beenheld in a border police station for 11 days. Their temporary guardian had notbeen informed[164]during that time and the chief of police in Orestiada told us that migrantswould usually spend only "two to three days" in border police stations.Twelve-year-oldSharzad P. described that place as follows: "I didn't have a bed, only ablanket. The blanket was dirty and there were a lot of bugs-bugs that bite. We werebitten during the night. We couldn't sleep. We were scratching our skin all thetime."[165]During our visit to the Amygdaleza detention facility forunaccompanied boys, the responsible police officials explained that two boyswere held longer than others: "Right now there are two teenagers withoutdeclaration of their country of origin. We keep them for a longer time."[166]One of them, 14-year-old Abdullahi Y., told us that he was Somali and caught atthe airport with a fake Swedish passport.[167] It is not apparent whythe police deemed it impossible to determine their nationality, and how theirsituation differed from that of other children without valid documents.Multiple DetentionsUnaccompanied children who have not filed an asylumapplication, who have fallen out of the asylum system, or who have had theirapplications denied have no regular status while in Greece.[168]As such, they are subject to repeated detention.A 10-year-old unaccompanied Somali girl who was detained atPetrou Ralli detention facility told us that within six months she was detainedfour times (her case is further described in chapter VII).[169]Seventeen-year-old Sami F. said he was arrested twice the same day and issuedfour deportation orders within eight months:In eight months, I received four deportation orders…. Whenthe police caught us from the street they brought me to the police station andgave me a deportation order. After two hours the police caught me again. Ishowed them the deportation order, the police took it badly and I was detainedfor seven days; after seven days they brought me here to Amygdaleza.… I askedhow long I would stay but the police said they didn't know.[170]Sixteen-year-old Mohammed W. told Human Rights Watch: "Ihave been arrested three days ago in Attiki. I've been here for three days, andfor eight months in Greece. I have been arrested two times so far and spent 16days in Mitilini detention camp."[171]The repeated arrest and detention of children serves nolegal purpose and has a detrimental impact on children's well-being and safety.[172]Greek authorities admit that they can not enforce many children's deportationbecause embassies do not cooperate, children's detention is not in their bestinterests, and children are rarely ever transferred to care arrangements uponrelease.[173]The practice of routinely and repeatedly detaining unaccompanied children is aviolation of Greece's obligations under international law.[174]Invisible ChildrenThe failure to carry out proper age and vulnerabilityassessments means, as discussed in chapter II, that many children in detentionare simply not recognized to be children. The practice appears to be sowidespread that it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that it is deliberateon the part of the immigration authorities. Even if it is merely a failure ofpolice officers ill-equipped and inadequately trained to work with children correctly,it indicates the systemic failure of the Greek authorities to maintain afunctioning protection system. The case of unaccompanied migrant childrenrounded up in Patras in early 2008 is revealing.Around 10 years ago an informal slum settlement, which hasgrown to consist of approximately 500 cardboard huts, developed close to theport in Patras as migrants assembled to find ways onto ferries departing Greece for Italy. Today several hundred migrants and asylum seekers stay in the settlement in squalidliving conditions, among them unaccompanied children, estimated to number inthe hundreds.[175]At the end of January 2008, the local authorities attemptedto destroy the camp. According to human rights activists, police and bulldozersreportedly moved into the camp and destroyed several huts.[176]Large-scale arrests of children and adults in and outside the camp were part ofthis operation. A number of organizations, including the UNHCR, criticized theaction, in particular because no alternative accommodation for residents wasprovided,[177]and in early February 2008 the police halted the destruction of the camp(although persons who stayed told Human Rights Watch that the police continuedto harass and arrest camp residents).Dozens of those who were arrested in Patras in the course ofthis round up and afterwards were transferred to the Venna detention center,and possibly other places of detention in the Evros border region and detainedfor three months. Among them were an unknown number of unaccompanied childrenwho were registered in detention centers as adults. In early 2008, the HellenicRed Cross and UNHCR estimated that there were around 250 unaccompanied childrenin the camp, but it is not known how many were arrested.Human Rights Watch sought access to the Venna detentionfacility in the Evros region in May 2008. We were not granted access to thecells; however, we were able to look over more than 200 entries in theregistration log and briefly spoke to one detainee. The majority of personsdetained were registered as Afghan, Iraqi, or Pakistani arrested in Patras or Athens.No detainees were registered as younger than 18 and, indeed,the police officer on duty told us that no children were held at the center.[178]However, the year of birth of at least 20-30 detainees was recorded as 1990.While not evidence in itself, this seemed an unusual pattern.More compelling evidence of unaccompanied children detainedjointly with adults at Venna, and for the full three months, came from othersources. We were able to speak briefly to one detainee before authoritiesinterrupted our conversation. He told us: "I'm 16 years old but the police wrotethat I'm 18. I've been here for two months and 10 days. I was arrested inPatras. There are three other boys who are 14 and 15 years old. Their names are[names withheld]."[179]The presence of underage boys was confirmed by a secondsource who asked not to be identified. A third person who was detained in Vennabetween February and May 2008 told Human Rights Watch: "There was a 14-year-oldboy but when the police caught him he had the deportation order of his friend.His friend was registered as an 18-year-old but the police didn't care. He wassmall. There were more underage boys. In each cell there were four to five underageboys. I'm sure about that. They were also detained for three months."[180]Ill-Treatment ofChildren in DetentionHuman Rights Watch documents in a second report on Greece that, with few exceptions, detention conditions in Greece, especially in Venna, Mitilini on Lesvos Island, the border police stations in the Evros region, and in the airport, amountto inhuman or degrading treatment.[181]Greek authorities detain unaccompanied children in all of these facilities.Take the example of facilities within the port premises usedby the port police in Patras. We were told that until an earthquake in earlyJune 2008, port police detained migrants, including unaccompanied children, inovercrowded detention cells where sewage leaked into rooms. One adult who had beenheld in such conditions had a visible open and infected wound on his legfollowing his detention for 11 days.[182]Although we were told that port police in Patras tend todetain unaccompanied children for shorter periods than adults, Daoud A.explained to us: "Inside the jail there is no rule. Sometimes the young boysstay longer, sometimes not. You never know when you will get out."[183]Since the earthquake the port police detain migrants, including unaccompaniedchildren, in an empty metal container.[184]Greek law requires the separation of adults from children indetention.[185]The Amygdaleza detention center was opened in April 2008 as a special facilityfor unaccompanied boys. In all other detention centers, however, boys arerarely separated from men in detention and girls are never separated from womenin detention. Boys in the Mitilini detention center are separated from men iftheir number does not exceed available space. In the Kyprinou detentionfacility in Fylakio, only the sleeping compartments for boys are separated fromthose for men, but they share a common courtyard. None of the other detentioncenters, including the brand-new center on Samos Island has separate sleepingcompartments for underage boys or girls.Keeping children and adults together in detention putschildren at an increased risk of abuse and ill-treatment. A global study onviolence against children found that children detained in the same cells withadults are at risk of violence, including sexual violence.[186]Fifteen-year-old Nurullah F. told us he was made to sleep on the floor in thepolice lock-up on Kos Island by fellow adult detainees:I stayed there for 10 days. We were three persons in onecell… there was one bed only. Two slept in that bed and I slept on the floor. Ihad one blanket. I used half of it as a blanket and half as a bed…. I couldn'tsleep in that place. The floor was concrete and it was humid. When I put myblanket on the floor I was cold at night. The other two were older than me so Ialways had to sleep on the floor.[187]Sixteen-year-old Sobir S. told us that he was beaten inAvlona prison by a fellow inmate: "An Albanian detainee inside the cell hit meinto my eye. I was injured and still have a headache. Some of these others werecriminals, robbers and murderers…. I was the youngest."[188]The separation of children from adults is a key safeguard toprotect children from violence and ill-treatment in detention.A further crucial measure of protection in any detentionsetting is a confidential complaints mechanism. We asked a senior policeofficial in the newly renovated Amygdaleza detention facility for unaccompaniedchildren how boys could file a confidential complaint, in case of acts ofviolence by staff or peers.[189]He told us: "if a child has a problem he can write a message to the responsibleauthority here. Every morning the officer goes to the rooms and asks if anybodyhas a complaint."[190]Boys told us they had never even been given paper and a pen, except for the dayof our visit, when they were tasked to make drawings. Furthermore, many areilliterate and no interpreters are employed in the center.[191]Legal StandardsGoverning the Detention of ChildrenThe Convention on the Rights of the Child limits theadministration and duration of detention for children. Their detention must belawful, for the shortest appropriate time, and may be used only as a measure oflast resort.[192]The Convention stipulates that the best interests of the child shall be aprimary consideration in all actions taken by authorities, which includes theadministration of detention.[193]The Committee on the Rights of the Child, the body that oversees theConvention's implementation, has specified that "[unaccompanied] childrenshould not, as a general rule, be detained," and that "detention cannot bejustified solely […] on their migratory or residence status, or lack thereof."[194]The Convention on the Rights of the Child as well as theInternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights oblige states parties toseparate adults from children in detention.[195] The European Court ofHuman Rights held in Mubilanzila Mayeka and Kaniki Mitunga v. Belgiumthat the prolonged detention of an unaccompanied child jointly with adultsamounted to inhuman or degrading treatment.[196]Besides the obligation to separate children from adults indetention, a number of procedural safeguards apply to children who aredetained. The Convention on the Rights of the Child mandates states parties toprovide detained children "the right to prompt access to legal and other appropriateassistance, as well as the right to challenge the legality of the deprivationof his or her liberty…"[197]Not only were children interviewed by Human Rights Watchrarely granted their right to assistance, but authorities' policy oftransferring children to detention centers in the Evros border region reducesthe likelihood of exercising this right down to almost zero. Very few pro bonoworkers are available in Greece and those, as well as NGO service providers,are rarely able to travel to the Evros region.Both the Convention on the Rights of the Child and theInternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) prohibit thearbitrary detention of children.[198]The United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, defined detention asarbitrary, amongst other things, "when it is clearly impossible to invoke anylegal basis justifying the deprivation of liberty," or if detention "is of suchgravity as to give the deprivation of liberty an arbitrary character."[199]The UN Human Rights Committee, which oversees implementationof the ICCPR, has examined the practice of indefinite detention of asylumseekers in Australia.[200]The Committee emphasized that the concept of arbitrariness should not beequated with "against the law" but must also include such elements as"inappropriateness and injustice." It noted that to avoid being arbitrary,detention should not continue beyond the period for which a State can provideappropriate justification. It also pointed out that detention could beconsidered arbitrary if "it is not necessary in all the circumstances," forexample to prevent flight, and that "the element of proportionality becomesrelevant in this context."In the context of Greek detentions, where the lawfuldeportation of child is not feasible, then to continue to detain such childrenwould appear to be unjustified and disproportionate, and so could be deemedarbitrary detention.VI. The Duty of CareCare ArrangementsSafe accommodation is a fundamental measure for theprotection of children from exploitation and abuse. According to internationalstandards, a child deprived of his or her family environment is entitled tospecial protection and assistance from the state, and states parties are toensure the provision of alternative care for such a child. Such care includesfoster placement, adoption or, if necessary, placement in a suitableinstitution for children.[201] The Convention on theRights of the Child requires that states parties "render appropriate assistanceto parents and legal guardians in the performance of their child-rearingresponsibilities" and "ensure the development of institutions, facilities andservices for the care of the children."[202]In Greece there is an acute shortage of sufficient andadequate accommodation for unaccompanied migrant children, and no foster caresystem exists for them.[203]As of November 2008, the Ministry of Health funded or co-funded approximately 200places for unaccompanied children in care institutions only. Many centers aremanaged by NGOs and funded partly or fully by the government.[204]Furthermore, it does not have short- or medium-term plans to make sufficientcare places available. There is no center specifically for unaccompanied girlsand the ministry does not plan to open a special center for them. AlthoughHuman Rights Watch noted that more than one dozen unaccompanied girls entered Greece within the course of a few weeks,[205]when we asked the Ministry about its plans to meet these girls' protectionneeds we were informed that a center would only be opened if the number ofgirls increased "dramatically."[206]Furthermore, no minimum standards exist for the functioning of care centers forunaccompanied children, and levels and quality of service differ considerablyfrom one center to another.[207]Although unaccompanied foreign children are not prohibitedby law from entering care centers designated for Greek children, in practice,they may be barred from gaining access, or centers do not have adequateresources to care for foreign children.[208] The juvenile prosecutorin Athens told us that if she called such a center to refer a foreign child,"they ask whether the child is HIV positive or has a criminal record. It's verydifficult to place a child in those centers…. The Ministry of Health is not atthe frontline.... it doesn't really care and I'm the person at the frontline.That is why we try to push NGOs to find shelters."[209]With the exception of one large-scale center on Lesvos Island that offers 100 places for unaccompanied children irrespective of their asylumstatus, it is very difficult for unaccompanied children who have not asked forasylum to access other state-sponsored accommodation.[210]Maria Kaldani from the NGO Arsis explained to us: "As an unaccompanied childyou don't have regular status. If a child has not asked for asylum we can't doanything for the child. The status of illegality overrules any other status….The shelter would ask whether the child speaks Greek or has a passport. Theywould say the child needs to have a paper."[211]Although the Greek authorities claim that they make sureunaccompanied children safely reach a care center after release from detention,the reality is the opposite.[212]A Ministry of Interior circular specifies that in case an unaccompanied childmakes an asylum application, the police, in cooperation with the competentservices of the Ministry of Health, shall ensure that accommodation is providedfor the child and is adequate to protect the child from exploitation andtrafficking.[213]But in fact even those who have applied for asylum are not always able toaccess care places because the number of care placements are insufficient andbecause the referral system does not function effectively.GCR operated a Ministry of Health funded program to providetemporary accommodation for asylum seekers, including unaccompanied children,in hotels until a permanent place in a reception center became available. Thegeneral lack of permanent reception places resulted in prolonged stay of asylumseekers in these hotels, and by mid July 2008 funds were used up and theprogram was closed.[214]ReferralThe lack of sufficient care places appears to be the singlemost important obstacle that prevents authorities from referring unaccompaniedchildren to safe accommodation. One prosecutor said: "I can't find a fosterplacement, not even for a Greek child."[215] The Athens prosecutorsimilarly told us that "right now there are very few shelters for unaccompaniedchildren," adding that it was the responsibility of NGOs to find such places.[216]In a similar statement, the NGO Arsis informed us: "the Ministry of Healthsays: 'if you find a shelter I give the order to send the child.'"[217]In the Evros region and in Athens, an unaccompanied child isreleased from detention with a deportation order but no further assistance. AliN.'s account of his release from Petrou Ralli detention center in Athens is typical of what children told us: "When I was released I got no information. Iwas told to disappear. I was accompanied up to the gate, then they said'leave'…. After I was released I spent the first night at Omonia."[218]In most cases, children are left to their own devices the day they are releasedfrom detention.[219]The Greek Council for Refugees told Human Rights Watch that careplaces are often not immediately available, even for children and families: "sometimes,it takes between one and three months to get accommodation. Children andfamilies are treated as a priority."[220] Once a place is foundthe permission to finally send a child to the location also takes time-timeduring which a child is left without accommodation: "we used to contact an NGOdirectly, transfer the child and inform the Ministry of Health afterwards. Nowwe have to inform the Ministry of Health which informs the Ministry of Interiorand only then the child can be transferred," Human Rights Watch was told.[221]Since July 2008, unaccompanied children who arrive on Lesvosand Samos Islands are referred to a newly renovated former sanatorium on Lesvos Island that offers care places for 100 unaccompanied children. While the status ofthis center remains unclear, it appears from its set-up that it should functionas a transit center rather than a place for long-term accommodation. In a veryisolated location and with a capacity for 100 children, it is ill-designed tooffer unaccompanied children long-term care which allows real opportunity forsocial, educational, and economic integration.In fact, a high number of children who had been referred tothis center gradually absconded from it.[222] Whilenot in a position to set out the individual circumstances that causedparticular children to leave, important factors that contribute to childrenabsconding from care centers include the fact that unaccompanied children whodo not file an asylum application remain without regular status, that nominimum standards govern the operation of centers, and that large scale andisolated centers are not conducive to a child's integration and may increasesome children's vulnerabilities. These are priority issues that need to beaddressed by the government.A positive example was the referral procedure forunaccompanied children in the port town of Patras by the Hellenic Red Cross.Unaccompanied children referred to the Red Cross by police and port police wereinformed about their right to seek asylum and the option of going to a carecenter.[223]If the program, including number of care places, had been extended to includeall unaccompanied children, such a referral procedure would be an example ofgood practice. Human Rights Watch, however, learned at the end of August 2008that the program was discontinued as the government did not step in when the EUfunding was terminated.[224]Planning and Financingof Care PlacementsThe Ministry of Health's plans for care placements do notextend beyond 2008 and they are dependent on funding from the EuropeanCommission's Refugee Fund.[225]The Ministry was unable to specify the exact number of care placements it wasgoing to open in the coming two to five years.[226]The Ministry provides funding for care centers in Greece on a one-year basisonly, in some cases for even shorter periods.[227]Such short funding cycles pose a real difficulty for entities in charge ofcenters to design their services and interventions according to children'sneeds well in advance.Two crises led to the creation of care placements by the Ministryof Health. Both situations ensued after prosecutors, who acted as children'sguardians, ordered the confinement of around 70 unaccompanied children on Leros Island, and of 100 unaccompanied children in the detention center of Lesvos Island, until care arrangements were found. Children in both instances staged a hungerstrike to protest overcrowding and poor conditions; children detained on Lesvos Island threatened to kill themselves.[228]The deputy Ministry of Health was dispatched to Leros Island after local human rights activists attracted the media and he ordered the transferof all children to Athens initially, where they underwent an age assessment andhad asylum applications processed (see chapter II on age assessments). Thosedetermined to be children were transferred to care centers.[229]With regards to the approximately 100 unaccompanied children who were detainedon Lesvos Island, the Ministry of Health opened a newly-renovated sanatorium,which continues to operate today.[230]In early 2008, the Ministry of Health in cooperation withthe Hellenic Red Cross, referred 101 unaccompanied children who were staying atthe settlement in Patras to hotel rooms in advance of a 10-day period of severecold. Among those, 60 decided to file asylum applications and were referred tocare centers around the country.[231]Accommodation outsideCare PlacementsChildren outside state-funded care work to pay for theiraccommodation and often live in conditions that are overcrowded, unhygienic,and a risk for their health. Many informal "hotels" exist in the center of Athens where immigrants and asylum seekers, including unaccompanied children, findaccommodation. These "hotels" are typically large and decrepit buildings where spotsto sleep on the floor are rented out by private landlords for three to five Eurosper night.Children who stayed in such accommodation told Human RightsWatch about contracting skin diseases and experiencing very poor hygiene. MusaM., who was 16 years old at the time he arrived in Greece, stayed for almost aweek in such a "hotel": "The hotel was very dirty. We were seven or eight personsin one room. It was about 15 m2. I slept on the floor. It wasdifficult for me there. It was very dirty. We borrowed some money from friendsand ate outside. I paid three Euros per night."[232]Up to 250 unaccompanied children reside in squalidconditions in a slum settlement in Patras. The NGO Médecins sans Frontièresstarted a medical assistance program there in mid-May 2008. According to theorganization, the most common pathologies among camp residents are skindiseases (scabies and skin infections), followed by respiratory tractinfections and diarrhea.[233]Similarly, the NGO Doctors of the World noticed an increase in skin diseasesamong migrants in Greece, which they attribute to the squalid and overcrowdedliving conditions in Athens, especially in informal "hotels."[234]Fifteen-year-old Aktar P. told us he was recruited from Athens and transferred to a plantation to work during the orange harvest (see also chapterVII on child labor). At that time, he did not have permanent accommodationanywhere. After his work was terminated and he had no place to go, he put up acardboard hut with friends and stayed there for two weeks during the winter:We put up some wooden boards and covered them with plastic.I slept with six to seven other persons. We were jobless and didn't have to payfor that. There was no work so we moved to this tent because it was for free.…We took pieces of wood from the garbage and put it on the soil. It was in anagricultural area and sometimes we took cauliflowers from the field. We had [akind of] heater and used wood. It was very cold. During the night when we sleptit got so cold and when it rained it rained inside. When it rained we had toconstantly move because it was raining inside so we couldn't sleep.[235]Several children told Human Rights Watch that they spent afew days sleeping in a public park until they found accommodation-typically bytrusting in strangers who approached them with an offer for a place to stay.Fifteen-year-old Adisa P. from Nigeria had applied for asylum but the policehad not referred him to a care center. He told us that he waited foraccommodation an NGO promised to arrange for him and survived in the meantimeon begging and sleeping in public parks in Athens:I still don't have a place for me to live. The lawyers gaveme an appointment to have a place to live. Now I sleep out on the streets. I don'tlive anywhere. I have cold to my body. I don't feel safe. I walk around toafter 1am or 2am. Then I find a park to sleep in.[236]The majority of unaccompanied children interviewed by HumanRights Watch were staying with adults in shared housing and paid for that placewith their earnings from work. Such housing is not necessarily safe forchildren and children without income find themselves in a very vulnerableposition and at risk of losing their place to stay. Fifteen-year-old Ahmad R.told us that he had no more money and paid for his accommodation throughdomestic work: "I work inside the house. I clean the house and wash the dishes.I always do this work…. I don't feel free. I don't know the language. I'munderage and this country does not give us good documents. I don't have afuture. I don't agree with this situation."[237]In at least one case, unaccompanied children not providedwith care after release from detention have fallen into the hands of criminalgangs. Noorzai A., 18 years old at the time, told us how he, jointly with hiseight-year-old brother and three other boys were abducted by a criminal gangafter release from detention in Volos in late 2006. The gang locked the boysup, severely ill-treated them and blackmailed their relatives to pay ransom (theircase is also discussed in chapter II).[238]Legal StandardsThe Council of Europe's Parliamentary Assembly hascriticized the practice of detaining children and recommends they be placed inadequate care and reception structures instead.[239]The European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), the Convention on the Rights ofthe Child, and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights protectchildren from inhuman or degrading treatment.[240]The European Court of Human Rights, in applying Article 3 of the ECHR whichsets out the prohibition on such treatment, held that this protection entails apositive obligation on states to provide children with adequate protectionagainst such treatment. In the case of Z and Others v. the United Kingdom,the court ruled against the UK government's social service system because itfailed to protect children from serious, long-term neglect and abuse.[241]The European Commission of Human Rights, when it considered the admissibilityof this case, specified that the protection of children who "by reason of theirage and vulnerability are not capable of protecting themselves," may imply apositive obligation on authorities to take preventive measures to protect achild who is at risk from another individual.[242]Greece fails to take the minimum precautions to protectunaccompanied children as required by article 3 of the ECHR. There areinsufficient care placements available, children experience delays in accessingcare and not all existing places are accessible for children who have not filedan asylum application. Children are furthermore released from state custodywithout any referral to accommodation and with no attempt by state authoritiesto adequately protect the child from harm, violence, and exploitation.VII. Exploitation of ChildrenUnaccompanied children outside of care have to fend forthemselves. Children who have not applied for asylum do not have a regularstatus and as such are barred from legal employment. In contrast, children whohave filed an asylum application and are over the age of 15[243]are,in theory, permitted to work in non-hazardous jobs;however, due to the dysfunctional guardianship system described in chapter II,they are often unable to secure the necessary guardian's consent to obtain a workpermit.[244]As a result unaccompanied children who live outside of state-sponsored carearrangements-most unaccompanied children-find themselves in a daily strugglefor survival, compelled to accept any type of work they find. Operating outsidethe legislative framework, many end up performing exploitative and hazardouswork.Children interviewed were paid wages below and sometimes farbelow the minimum wage, and they worked for extensive hours. Work under suchconditions amounts to exploitation that may reach the level of forced labor.[245]Although Human Rights Watch's research did not focus on trafficking, some childrenwhose testimonies are documented in this report may have been trafficked, asdefined in international law.[246]Child LaborThe Constitution of Greece prohibits any form of compulsorywork.[247]In the context of protection of the family and citizen's health care, the stateis obliged to adopt special measures for the protection of childhood and youth.[248]Children from the ages of 15 to 17 who are employed areentitled to special labor protection relating to work hours and must be paid atleast the minimum wage.[249]Greek law reflects international standards and prohibits employment of childrenbelow age 18 in occupations that may harm their health, security, or morals.[250]Human Rights Watch found unaccompanied children who weremainly working in the agriculture and construction sectors and some in garmentmanufacturing-all working without legal protection in situations that violatedGreek law. Interviews with both children and adults suggest that a large partof the workforce during orange, olive, and onion harvests consists of children."There were a lot of children working there. Out of 15 persons… only five orsix were adults," said 16-year-old Hafez S. about the orange harvest in Argos.[251]Children were recruited from Athens or Patras, typically through fellownationals, and lived next to the plantation during the harvest. In contrast,unaccompanied children who worked in construction found such work around Athens, on short notice, and often for a few days only.Not surprisingly, children said it is more difficult to findjobs without a work permit. Fifteen-year-old Nurullah F. told Human RightsWatch: "I found three jobs but because I don't have a work permit I can't work.The person I had to work for told me I could not get a work permit until I'm18. He told me to go back to the police to say that I'm 18 and to have mybirthday changed."[252]Similarly, 17-year-old Musa M. told us: "They tell me that I'm underage so theydon't want to keep me."[253]Human Rights Watch visited a square in Athens where dozens of migrants andasylum seekers wait for jobs every morning. We encountered several young boysstanding in a group. Although some of them seemed clearly younger than 18, whenwe asked them about their age, they were firm that they were not underage.The Risk to Children'sHealthChildren employed in farm work and on construction sitesperform labor that exposes them to a combination of health and safety risks:the lifting of heavy loads, the risk of falling from height, cold temperaturesover long hours, and substandard and unhygienic accommodation. None of thechildren interviewed performed such work under the exceptions permissible innational law, and the required safeguards and protection were not applied.Health and safety risks make such work prohibited forms of child labor andbring them into the category of worst form of child labor, as defined byarticle 3 of the Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention.[254]While this is also in violation of Greek law, there was little evidence thatthe Greek authorities take steps to enforce the law and protect children (seebelow).All children who worked in the construction sector told usthat they had to lift heavy loads and almost all had to mix cement and carry itup several floors for other workers. Fourteen-year-old Wali P. said he wasn'table to find any lighter work on construction sites: "carrying up the cement isthe hardest. Always the young [boys] carry up the cement," adding, "I can'tfind any other work."[255]Nurullah F., age 15, reported: "I had to carry cement up to the fourth floor.…They cut plastic containers and put cement inside and I had to carry thosecontainers up to the fourth floor. They weighed about 18 kg."[256]Children working outside the construction sector also endedup carrying heavy loads. Fifteen-year-old Nurullah F. told us: "I worked for 20days in a factory…. We took boxes from the container and carried them into theshop. The boxes were sometimes one meter large, sometimes half a meter…. Theywere very heavy.… They weighed about 20-25 kilos."[257]Some children carried their heavy loads on concrete stairs;others, however, had to balance their loads on scaffolds and unfinished stairswithout safety measures to prevent them from falling. Several children reportedwork injuries that resulted from falling off scaffolds and unfinished stairs. WaliP. told about his work and the fate of a friend:I walk up on wooden beams, as high as five floors. The[scaffold] is dangerous to walk up on and it's difficult to keep the balancewith one big bucket on a small beam. My friend fell down from the second flooronto the scaffold [underneath]. He injured his hand.… He went to the hospitaland was in hospital for two weeks.[258]Hazards were not limited to work in the construction sector.The risk of falling was also a risk for children employed in agriculture, amajority of whom harvested oranges. Boys climbed on ladders that stood on softground and reached out to pick oranges from the tops of trees. They told us howthey and others frequently fell from these ladders. Hafez S, 16 years old, hadharvested oranges:We had ladders and a bucket. We sometimes fell from theladder. I fell down four times in one month. It wasn't very high so I wasn'tinjured. The soil was soft so the ladder wasn't very stable.[259]Ghulam S., aged 15, also spoke of the consequences offalling:Some trees were big. Two persons collected [from below] asfar as hands could reach, and two climbed on a ladder to pick [from the top].…Sometimes people fell down from the ladder. My friend fell down and wasunconscious for 30 minutes. Once he fell down and broke his finger.[260]Agricultural laborers are typically paid by the amount offruit they harvest. Such schemes lead to competitive work environments in whichevery person tries to harvest as fast as he possibly can. This increases thelikelihood of accidents as workers are less likely to take precautions. Twenty-five-year-oldYusuf K. described the competitive work environment during the olive harvest inSparti: "We had to climb onto the tree to collect the olives. It was dangerousand many people fell down. Everybody tried to work fast to fill their boxes. Itwas very competitive.… I fell down many times."[261]In garment manufacturing, children typically have to workfor 10-12 hours per day over a period of several months. Although the workitself is not subject to hazards, the excessively long work hours, coupled withthe fact that they have to perform repeated tasks over prolonged periods in thesame physical position, pose a health risk. Zahir B. told us: "The work wasvery hard, especially to sit in a chair for so many hours. It was an easy jobthat didn't require special knowledge but it was hard. I had back pain andshoulder pain, because I always had to lean forward I now have pain in my neck."[262]Seventeen-year-old Musa M. has a history of child labor andhas been sewing clothes for years. He describes the impact of the long workinghours on his health: "When I was in Iran I worked as a tailor and in Turkey as well. The doctor said I should change the job because I'm sitting for many hourswithout moving…. If I work too much I have pain in my kidneys…. If I work hardI feel a lot of pain. Then I take medicine."[263]The orange harvest takes place during the winter months, inthe cold and rainy season. Children who harvested oranges told us they had tostart their work day as early as 4 a.m., in freezing temperatures, and theoranges they collected were covered in frost. Children did not havesufficiently warm clothing. Some fell ill as a result from working in suchconditions. Sixteen-year-old Hafez S. said: "In the morning the trees were fullof ice; we made a fire in the plantation; after a few minutes [of harvesting]we went back to the fire to warm our hands; we didn't have warm clothes."[264]An adult, Yusuf K., recalled how workers who harvestedoranges in Arta, among them children aged 14 and 15, fell ill: "It was veryhard and very cold. At 4am there was frost and we had to put our hands underour armpits to warm them.… When we went to work without water we were compelledto eat oranges. These oranges were frozen so people got sick. Some people alsoforgot to bring water and one bottle was finished very quickly and then theyhad no more water."[265]Children who work on construction sites risk damage to theirhealth from working unprotected under the sun. Fourteen-year-old Wali P.compared his work on construction to work in a greenhouse: "It's better to workin a greenhouse…. It's hot in the greenhouse but work outside is almost alwaysunder the sun."[266]Arif L. told us how he got sick after working unprotected under the sun: "Oneday I got sick. On that day I worked to carry bricks up to the third floor. WhenI got home suddenly my nose started bleeding. It was a very sunny day and Iworked in the sun all day…. There was no protection against the sun."[267]Living in substandard, overcrowded, poorly heated andunhygienic conditions jointly with adults, poses security and health risks forunaccompanied children. Unaccompanied children interviewed by Human RightsWatch who were employed on plantations stayed with other workers in oftenfilthy accommodation provided by their employers, in some cases payingexcessive rents. Yusuf K. described how 30 persons had to share a single toiletand as many as 60 persons stayed in one room, where they slept, ate, and stayedwhenever weather conditions didn't permit outdoor work. For that place, theowner collected 90 Euros monthly rent from each person, which adds up to around5,000 Euros.[268]All persons interviewed by Human Rights Watch said that numerous underage boys wereliving and working in such conditions. Fifteen-year-old Aktar P. recalledpicking oranges in Argos:They kept in each room 10 persons together. The room was….about 12 square meters. We paid one Euro per night. There was a mattress but noblanket and no sheet. My friend had a blanket and we slept the two of us under oneblanket…. The room was not clean because there was no place for shoes and weate and slept in the same room. We had one toilet for all [37 persons]. Thetoilet was in the garden, without roof and no running water.[269]Work Hours and PaymentWork hours and payment for children interviewed by HumanRights Watch varied on the type of sector they worked in. Common to allchildren was that wages were below the minimum wages prescribed by law.Sometimes children were paid as little as 30 percent of the minimum salary fora day's work.[270]In the construction sector, where children are oftenrecruited on a day-to-day basis, work lasts from early morning to around 3 or 4p.m. Wages, children told us, are around 25 Euros per day: "I worked from 7 a.m.until 4 or 5 p.m. and got 20, 25, or 30 Euros," 16-year-old Mohammed W. toldus.[271]Children in agriculture and garment manufacturing regularlyworked for 12 hours and more. In garment manufacturing, they were paid betweentwo Euro fifty and three Euros per hour. In agriculture they were paid peramount of harvested fruit, around 15 Euros for one ton of harvested oranges.This meant that in plantations with less fruit, children ended up workinglonger hours for the same wage-a day wage could be as low as ten Euros.Children employed in agriculture additionally had to pay for the oftensubstandard accommodation provided by their employers from their salary. Sixteen-year-oldHafez S. recalled:For one ton of oranges we got 15 Euros. We tried to collectas much as possible. We collected four persons in one group. I earned about tento fifteen Euros [per day]. One day I managed to earn 20 Euros.… I worked for19 days and.… after I paid food and rent I got 150 Euros.[272]Children did not receive sufficient hours of rest in-betweenwork days; breaks during the day were forbidden or very short. They got up asearly as 3:30 a.m. either to travel to a distant work place or to queue formorning hygiene in overcrowded shared accommodation.[273]In one case, a boy who was 17 told us that during his 12 hour work day in a garmentsweatshop "I wasn't allowed to stop for one minute, otherwise I would have beenfired."[274]Without a guardian who acts in their best interest, with noregular status or work permit, children are forced to make a living without anymeans to protect themselves from exploitative work conditions and conditionsthat are akin to forced labor. Being dependent on such income they become easytargets for exploitation. Fifteen-year-old Nurullah F., who unloaded heavycargo from trucks in a factory, told us,At the beginning the owner told me if I got a work permit Iwould get 29 Euros a day. After 20 days [he said] 400 Euros was sufficient andthat I should leave. Because I worked overtime he owed me 300 Euros more. WhenI asked about overtime the owner told me if I needed more time to do [the samejob] it was my choice.[275]Exploitation of children at their workplace in some casesmay reach the level of forced labor. Wali N. arrived to Greece in 2004 at the age of 14. He traveled to Athens on his own, trusted in a stranger he managedto communicate with and was put to work for seven months:[In Athens] I recognized a person… who spoke Bangla… so Imade friends with that person. He said we would go to a factory to sew clothes,to work and stay there. I worked in that place and slept in that place. Iworked for 12 hours a day and I slept on a table there. I worked every day andI never went outside. I had the red card but the guy told me that this paperwas not good and that the police would arrest me. He told me for my own safetyI should stay inside.… I stayed there for about 7 months. The boss told me thathe deducted from my salary the fees for sleeping and for food. For one month Ireceived 50 Euros.[276]Legal StandardsGoverning Child LaborInternational law does not prohibit all work carried out bychildren. However, International Labor Organization (ILO) conventions prohibitwork that deprives children of their childhood, interferes with theirschooling, their potential, their dignity, and is harmful for their physical,mental, and social development.[277]Greece is a state party to some of the key conventionsprohibiting child labor, such as the Convention on the Rights of the Child,[278]but also the ILO Convention No. 182 concerning the Prohibition and ImmediateAction for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor (Worst Forms ofChild Labor Convention), and ILO Convention No. 138 concerning the Minimum Agefor Admission to Employment (Minimum Age Convention).[279]Greece has, however, not ratified ILO Convention 184 concerning Safety andHealth in Agriculture.[280]The European Social Charter contains additional protective provisions includingthe child's right to a fair wage and the necessity to limit work hours inaccordance with the child's development.[281] Internationalconventions to which Greece is a state party form an integral part of domesticlaw and prevail over any contrary domestic provision.[282]Sanctions are provided for by both immigration and laborlegislation. Immigration legislation forbids employers to hire aliens withoutresidence permits.[283]If an employer violates the prohibition of child labor, he or she facesimprisonment of up to two years, a fine, and administrative penalties that mayinclude the closing of business.[284]Both provisions extend the same sanctions to the child's guardian.[285]Despite these legal provisions, employers' who violate them face a low risk ofbeing sanctioned.Upon Greece's ratification of the Worst Forms of Child LaborConvention in 2001, labor inspectors were tasked to take targeted action toprotect children.[286]The Greek government reported for the year 2004 that labor inspectors detecteda total of 35 children in prohibited forms of employment. Thirty-threeemployers were fined and charges were brought against two.[287]In 2005, five employers were charged for the illegal employment of children and29 fined; two of the cases were in the construction sector. In 2006, chargeswere brought against two employers and 17 fines were issued, none of them inthe construction sector. In 2007, a total of nine employers were charged forthe illegal employment of children and 18 were fined, none of them in theconstruction sector.[288]These figures appear low in comparison to the numbers ofchildren believed to be working, based on the testimony of 14 personsinterviewed by Human Rights Watch who performed or witnessed prohibited formsof child labor.[289]Furthermore, no case of child labor was uncovered in the agricultural sector,where we recorded most testimonies of child labor.[290]We asked the Ministry of Labor and Social Protection whether unaccompaniedchildren face a particular risk of performing child labor and what programswere in place to mitigate such risks. The Ministry replied that "special careis taken for unaccompanied children seeking asylum, prosecutors are notified ofa child's illegal entry, and children are separated from adults in detention."[291]Sadly, as this report uncovers, this statement does not appear to reflectreality.TraffickingAs the authorities assess vulnerability, as discussed inchapter II above, one of the issues they need to be alert to is the possibilitythat unaccompanied children are victims of trafficking. The reality is that ifnot already in hands of traffickers bringing them into Greece, the failure of the protection system means unaccompanied children are at high risk offalling into their hands once they are in the country. The inadequateprocedures followed by police-or perhaps, more accurately, the lack ofprocedures-mean that trafficking victims are not identified. The inadequateprovision of care makes it easy for trafficking gangs to operate. According tothe International Organization for Migration (IOM), the authorities have notadapted to the new forms of trafficking that involve child victims and variousforms of exploitation, not just sexual. Instead, we were told, in the minds ofofficials trafficking is still largely associated with women from EasternEuropean countries trafficked for sexual exploitation.[292]Unaccompanied GirlsSexual exploitation is, of course, one of a range ofsignificant risks. The United Nations Special Rapporteur on the sale ofchildren, child prostitution and child pornography noted as early as 2005 thatthe trafficking of unaccompanied girls from Africa into Greece for sexual exploitation could be a new trend in the country.[293]Currently, very little is known about the fate ofunaccompanied girls. There are no specialized shelters for girl victims oftrafficking (that provide higher level of security and address specific needsthese girls face) nor for unaccompanied girls in general.[294]Rigorous in depth research is needed to document their situation. In the courseof researching this report, Human Rights Watch collected only anecdotal storiesabout their fate. However, practitioners who work within NGOs and are familiarwith the phenomenon of child trafficking in Greece state that girls end up insexual exploitation, including working as prostitutes in Athens.[295]Human Rights Watch interviewed three unaccompanied girl childrenin detention who were possible trafficking victims. A 16-year-old girl from thePhilippines said to us she was going to join "her aunt" in Athens to take up ajob as a domestic worker.[296]She later absconded from a care center jointly with a younger Somali girl. Bothtold staff that they had "husbands" in Athens.Ten-year-old Fatime S., an unaccompanied Somali girl, toldus that she had been detained for 15 days at the Petru Ralli detention centerin Athens when we met her. It was her fourth time in detention:My name is Fatime. I am 10 years old. I told the police howold I am, but they haven't had another place for me. I was arrested at theborder. I got a paper to leave in one month. I've been in this jail for 15days. But before I was arrested in the airport twice and released. I am alone.I have nobody here. If they release me, I'll just go to Omonia square. I haveno one. I have been in Greece for six months. I came from the airport.[297]The girl had not been seen by any specialized organization sinceshe was detained. When we asked staff at the detention center about theprocedures in place for a girl like her, they were unable to explain to us thecourse of action to protect her from harm or refer her to specialized services.[298]Unaccompanied BoysHuman Rights Watch interviewed a dozen unaccompanied boysshortly after their release from the detention center in Mitilini, Lesvos Island. They all had been taken to the port after their release, given a ticket forthe Athens-bound ferry, and were left to fend for themselves without furtherinformation or assistance. Among them was Shakib K., a 15-year-old Afghan boy.Based on his description about his migration from Pakistan, he appeared to havebeen trafficked and to remain at imminent risk:My uncle told me I should go to Greece and that my lifewould be better. My father didn't accept but my uncle said I had to go. Myuncle has to pay about 6,000 USD.… He told me that I would work and pay himback.… There are two smugglers, one is in Pakistan and one in Athens. They saidthey will take me like a prisoner unless they are given the money. I think myuncle will pay them.… The smuggler knows that I'm on the ferry. When I arrivethe smuggler waits for me and will take me to a house to call Pakistan. If [my uncle] doesn't give the money they will keep me.[299]Shakib K. had been released from detention that day with alarge number of adults and children. He had been given a deportation order,which required him to leave the country within 30 days. There was nointerpreter in the Mitilini detention center on Lesvos Island and authoritiesdid not conduct an interview with him.[300]Once the ferry arrived, Human Rights Watch stood close byand watched the boys disembark. Shakib K., together with other boys, was swiftlyapproached by a contact. The Human Rights Watch interpreter was a young-lookingAfghan and mingled with the boys from the ferry. He was promptly approached bya stranger who offered him a place to stay. The price for the accommodation, hewas told, would be discussed once they get there.[301]Several police officers stood 15 meters away from this scene and took nointerest in where these boys were going next.Inadequate Procedures Failto Identify Trafficking or Risk of Falling Victim to ItIndeed, officials appear to remain blind to the inadequacyof their procedures which mean that trafficking-and the risks that children ofbecoming trafficking victims-may not be recognized. Visiting the Kyprinouimmigration detention facility in Fylakio, Human Rights Watch asked the seniorofficial in charge (the chief of police in Orestiada, in the Evros borderregion) whether there might be trafficking victims among half a dozen women ofEastern European origin and a number of unaccompanied children, among them a12-year-old girl, at the center. He responded: "we don't have traffickingvictims. I'm trained on this matter and we can identify them."[302]Despite his assurances, Human Rights Watch noted that there was no interpreteramong the staff in the detention center. Furthermore, the Afghan girl whotraveled with her underage brother and cousin told Human Rights Watch thatneither she nor her brother had been interviewed since their arrival. They wereonly told they would be detained for three months, and their presence was dealtwith as if they were adults.[303]Human Rights Watch was unable to further investigate whether other childrenwith special needs were present in the center because the authorities did notgrant us permission to speak to all detainees.Human Rights Watch received credible information that on oneof the Aegean islands, girls who were possible trafficking victims had beendetained together with their presumed trafficker. Although the police werealerted about the presence of the presumed trafficker, the police released themtogether. "For the police, it's too much trouble to protect these girls," wewere told.[304]Lack of Safeguards on Release from DetentionThe Samos chief of police described to Human Rights Watchhow unaccompanied children were released from the Samos detention center: "Ifthe next day a relative comes and asks for the child's release we release thechild-even the next day."[305]When we questioned further how the identity of the relative was verified, hereconsidered his statement and said they would not hand over the child if theyare not sure that the person is indeed a relative. He added that childrenrarely possessed documents. His answers strongly suggest that no standardprocedures are followed when persons who claim to be children's relatives orcare-givers seek their release.The chief of police in Orestiada, where unaccompaniedchildren go after their release, told Human Rights Watch: "unaccompaniedchildren stay up to three months [in detention]. Relatives or friends come topick them up.… Normally somebody comes to pick them up. They don't travelalone."[306]We were told, however, that in practice children are released with adeportation order and no further assistance.[307]The lack of safeguards leaves the way wide open fortraffickers to exploit the desperate situation in which many unaccompaniedchildren find themselves. Gangs recruit children for labor exploitation fromplaces such as Athens and Patras (see the first part of this chapter). Theyalso operate in public places where children can be easily approached and lurethem with the promise to take them to another country. Fourteen-year-old WaliP. told us:One person told me he could take children to Europe-that was in Monastiraki. He was an Afghan. He told me there is a lady from anotherEuropean country and she wants to bring children to another country. That ladywould come and bring other children abroad if they didn't have theirfingerprints taken. They asked me if I wanted to go. He told me it would notcost anything.… They only want children who are alone. He told me that lady wasfrom a refugee organization, maybe UNICEF.[308]The Convention on the Rights of the Child obliges statesparties to take all appropriate measures to prevent the abduction of, the saleof or traffic in children for any purpose or any form.[309]The Convention's Optional Protocol on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitutionand Child Pornography recognizes that particularly vulnerable groups, includinggirl children, are at greater risk of sexual exploitation and it calls onstates parties to pay particular attention to the protection of such children.[310]Both Amnesty International and the US Department of Statehave criticized authorities' failure to correctly identify trafficking victims.[311]Furthermore, Greek legislation only recognizes and protects trafficking victimsfrom expulsion if the victim has "shown a clear intention to cooperate."[312]Victims are given a 30-day reflection period to decide whether they willcooperate in the investigation of traffickers. Only if they agree to cooperateare they granted victim status and entitled to temporary residence.Thereare no provisions that would balance this requirement to cooperate with therisk of reprisal victims or their families may face.[313]Only few victims are granted trafficking victim status.[314]Human Rights Watch asked the Ministry of Justice to provide us the number ofchildren who had been recognized as trafficking victims and eligible fortemporary residence. As of the time of writing we have not received a reply.The definition of trafficking in children in Greeklegislation is not as far-reaching as those in international treaties andEuropean law. A trafficker in Greece can be convicted if he or she exploits aperson by using violence, threat or coercion, exercise of control or abuse ofpower, deceit, or takes advantage of a person's vulnerability. The TraffickingProtocol makes trafficking of a child a crime even if none of these means areused.[315]Among the key international treaties combating trafficking inhuman beings, Greece has ratified only the Optional Protocol to the Conventionon the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution andChild Pornography.[316]It has signed but not ratified the United Nations Convention on CombatingTransnational Organized Crime and its supplementing Protocol to prevent,suppress and punish trafficking in persons, especially women and children.[317]Greece has signed but not ratified the Council of Europe Convention on Actionagainst Trafficking in Human Beings and it is among the signatories of theCouncil of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against SexualExploitation and Sexual Abuse.[318]VIII. Returns and DeportationsUnaccompanied children who enter Greece without validdocuments and do not ask for asylum are issued deportation orders. Authoritiesissue such orders without tracing the child's family, without determining thechild's best interest, without assessing who will take care of the child uponreturn, and without enabling the child to legally challenge such a decision. Greece has a track record of deporting unaccompanied children without any safeguards, especially to Albania, many of whom were believed to have been re-trafficked upon return.[319]The Ministry of Interior issued a total of 12,904deportation orders to children in 2007 and the first half of 2008. Out ofthese, 2,599 deportations were carried out.[320] We only receivedseparate deportation statistics for unaccompanied children who have previouslymade an asylum application but not for unaccompanied children who never filedan asylum claim. The Ministry informed us that 76 unaccompanied children whohad sought asylum were deported in 2007; this figure rose to 119 for the firstseven months of 2008.[321]Deportations from GreeceDeportation procedures in law do not differentiate betweenunaccompanied children and adults. Greek law provides that an alien withoutvalid documentation can be deported under an administrative procedure.[322]There is no provision in Greek law that requires authorities to assess whethera deportation of an unaccompanied child is in his or her best interests, orwhether adequate care is available upon return. Equally, the readmissionagreement between Greece and Turkey for third-country nationals does notcontain any special provisions for unaccompanied children.[323]Greek law only provides for the safe repatriation of recognizedtrafficking victims.[324]Deportation orders mandate a person to leave Greece within a maximum of thirtydays.[325]The failure to do so may result in repeated detention followed by the issuingof another deportation order (see chapter V).[326]A person has the right to appeal a deportation order withinfive days after notification.[327]The police, the body that issues deportations, also reviews the appeals.[328]Human Rights Watch interviewed children shortly after their release fromdetention on Lesvos Island. All had been issued a deportation order. Not onlywere they unaware of their right to challenge these deportation decisions, theydidn't know what the order in Greek said. Some were of the mistaken view thatthe deportation order legalizes their stay for one month and allows them totravel onwards to another country.The Greek Ombudsman called upon the government in 2005 torefrain from deporting children and to carry out safe repatriations thatrespect their rights.[329]The national commission for human rights in a 2007 observation equally urgedthe government to stop "the measure of deportation for alien minors."[330]When we asked authorities whether unaccompanied children aredeported from Greece, we received a range of answers. The general manager ofthe Aliens Division of Attica told us that they only deported children withpassports, which suggests that the obstacle in deporting children is not of alegal nature but rather due to a lack of documents and cooperation fromembassies.[331]During our visit to Amygdaleza detention center for unaccompanied boys, we weretold: "Albanian children are kept for 10 days and then deported to theirfamilies."[332]Returns to Greece under the Dublin II RegulationThe 2003 Dublin II regulation was designed to determinewhich EU member state is responsible for examining a person's asylumapplication.[333]It was meant to determine the country in charge of assessing an asylum seeker'sapplication and to prevent asylum seekers from submitting applications in morethan one country. While there are a number of criteria that may be used todetermine in what country a person's asylum claim should be processed, inpractice the criteria most often applied is the country in which the asylumseeker first set foot.[334]On the basis of this criterion, an asylum seeker may thus be transferred by onemember state to another for the examination of the claim. Any member state mayrefrain from transferring an asylum seeker and examine the claim even iftransfer criteria apply.[335]In order to trace asylum seekers and migrants, foreign nationals above the ageof 14 are fingerprinted and their data are entered into an EU-wide database.The regulation is slightly different for unaccompaniedchildren: they may not be transferred to the member state they first enteredbut instead to where they first lodged an asylum application.[336]However, the regulation does not provide for unaccompanied children to make anasylum application in the country of choice.[337] The regulation alsoprovides for unaccompanied children to be reunited with family members if it isin their best interests, yet the definition of a family member is veryrestrictive and only applies to parents, guardians or spouses.[338]Several NGOs and the UNHCR have documented violations ofinternational standards in the application of the provision for unaccompaniedminors in several countries: children had been transferred to the country theyfirst entered and not to the country in which they first applied for asylum, noassessment of their best interests preceded their transfer, their previousexperience was not taken into consideration, and no legal representation forthe child during the decision-making was made available.[339]Human Rights Watch was unable to obtain data on the numberof unaccompanied children who have been transferred from EU member states to Greece. Such data are not systematically gathered by either the sending or the receivingcountry and there is no such requirement under relevant EU regulation.[340]After NGOs and the UNHCR openly criticized Greece's asylum system, including the lack of protection and care for unaccompanied children,several countries suspended transfers of asylum seekers to Greece under the Dublin II regulation. Norway announced in February 2008 it would stop transferring anyasylum seeker back to Greece under the Dublin II regulation. In September, itbacktracked and announced that transfers to Greece would be based on individualassessments.[341]In April 2008 Finland announced a similar move.[342]Germany and Sweden have limited the suspension of transfers to unaccompaniedchildren only.[343]Summary Returns from ItalyHuman Rights Watch gathered numerous testimonies allegingthat Italian authorities in the ports of Venice and Ancona have summarilyreturned asylum seekers and migrants to Greece.[344]"Ten persons are returned back from Italy on a daily basis," we were told inPatras.[345]Italy not only returns migrants and asylum seekers to Greece outside the Dublin II regulation, it returns unaccompanied children as young as 12 withoutproviding the child with an opportunity to file an asylum application. Twelve-year-oldNader Q. told us,I traveled to Italy inside a truck with 15 other persons toAncona. We were found inside the port in Italy….The police in Italy did not discuss with us.We were found when they checked the ship. They sent us back into the ship and theydidn't ask us any questions. There was no lawyer and they just put us back onthe ship. I was the youngest. There was a lot of police…. Back on the ferrythey first put us into a big room then they brought ten of us into the toilet….The toilet was very small. We were all sitting and we couldn't sleep. The ferrystaff gave us macaroni to eat and also water. I was 24 hours inside the toilet.All the adults were strangers. I didn't know any of them.[346]Sixteen-year-old Jafar F. spent his return trip to Greece similarly: "I was locked into the toilet downstairs. I had nothing to eat or drink.It was for one night. It was very noisy."[347]Human Rights Watch found that Italian authorities permittedsome unaccompanied children to remain in Italy. Fourteen-year-old Wali P. wasdetected on a ferry in Venice in July 2008 and was granted permission to stay.[348]Fifteen-year-old Ghulam S. traveled hidden inside a container to Venice on June 11, 2008. Italian authorities discovered a total of 12 persons, includinghim, and sent back everyone with the exception of a younger boy, who reportedlywas around 12 years old. Ghulam S. wanted to apply for asylum in Italy but had no opportunity to file an application.[349] The physical appearanceof Ghulam S., Jafar F., and Nader Q. strongly suggests that they were underagewhen they reached Italy. Italian authorities did not consider their specialneeds and their rights as unaccompanied children and instead treated them asmigrants without valid documents.European law mandates member states to sanction carriersthat transport persons without valid papers.[350] An employee of oneferry company that operates out of Patras told Human Rights Watch thatsanctions are not imposed as long as the company agrees to take interceptedpersons back immediately. He told us they always take persons back, even whenthey're full.[351]Ferry company representatives, however, were reluctant to tell us whether theyemploy private security agents to check trucks prior to departure from Greece.[352]Legal StandardsGoverning the Repatriation of Unaccompanied ChildrenThe Convention on the Rights of the Child urges statesparties to identify a durable solution that is in the child's best interestsand addresses their protection needs as soon as possible after their arrival.[353]States parties are also obliged to guarantee children access to asylum andsubsidiary protection procedures and they must protect and assist children whoare refugees or seeking asylum.[354]The repatriation of an unaccompanied child shall only take place after athorough assessment including whether such a move is in the child's bestinterests.[355]States must refrain from returning a child if the principleof non-refoulement applies, in other words, if the return poses a realrisk that the person will be subject to torture, inhuman or degrading treatmentor if the return poses a threat to the person's life or freedom due topersecution, including child-specific forms thereof.[356]With regards to children specifically, the Committee on the Rights of the Childheld that the return or deportation of a child is not an option if there is a"reasonable risk" that this would lead to the violation of a child'sfundamental rights.[357]Such an assessment of risks includes, inter alia, the safety and securitysituation awaiting the child, socio-economic conditions, the availability ofadequate care as well as the duration of absence from the home country.[358]Children enjoy procedural safeguards during repatriationproceedings. If their return poses a risk of refoulement, as explainedabove, they must be given access to an effective remedy and the right tolegally challenge a repatriation decision.[359] The Committee on theRights of the Child asks member states to ensure children's representation by aguardian and a lawyer during such proceedings.[360]The UNHCR calls on states to carry out a best interest determination prior todeciding on any durable solution, and to document such an assessment.[361]Greece's routine practice of issuing deportation orders without ensuringrepresentation or legal assistance for the child, and without providingchildren with an opportunity to appeal a deportation decision bars them fromthe right to an effective remedy. Furthermore, the practice of ordering andimplementing children's deportation without any prior assessment of whether thechild flees persecution or risks inhuman or degrading treatment upon return isa flagrant disregard of international norms.In the case of Mubilanzila Mayeka and Kaniki Mitunga v.Belgium, which involved the deportation of an unaccompanied girl to theDemocratic Republic of Congo, the European Court of Human Rights held thatstates parties to the European Convention on Human Rights must take requisitemeasures and precautions against torture, inhuman or degrading treatment whendeporting a foreign national. The court stated that Belgian authorities "didnot seek to ensure that she [the child] would be properly looked after or haveregard to the real situation she was likely to encounter on her return to hercountry of origin."[362]In Nsona v. The Netherlands, which also involved the forced removal ofan unaccompanied child, the court explained states parties' responsibilityunder Article 3 of the ECHR:The responsibility under Article 3 in cases of this kindlies in the act of exposing an individual to the risk of ill-treatment, theexistence of the risk must be assessed primarily with reference to those factswhich were known or ought to have been known to the Contracting Statesat the time of the expulsion.[363](emphasis added)Returns and Transfers toGreeceGiven the systemic deficiencies in protecting unaccompaniedchildren in Greece, EU states should suspend the transfer of unaccompaniedchildren to Greece under the Dublin II regulation, and they should stopreturning children summarily at ports of entry. Instead, EU member statesshould refer unaccompanied children to their national child protectionservices, and if a child seeks asylum, take responsibility to assess the claimin a child-friendly, fair and expeditious manner.International law stipulates that the child's best interestis a primary consideration in any decision affecting the child and thatchildren deprived of their family environment are entitled to specialprotection and assistance by the state.[364] As documented in thisreport, Greece does not provide sufficient care places for unaccompaniedchildren and no minimum standards govern existing places. Unaccompaniedchildren outside care arrangements find themselves in an extremely vulnerablesituation. They perform exploitative and dangerous work and they are at risk ofbeing trafficked. Unaccompanied children may be detained in Greece, including in conditions that are below minimum standards and may in some cases amount toinhuman and degrading treatment. They are at risk of ill-treatment at the handsof state agents during arrest, and they risk violence by fellow inmates indetention.IX. RecommendationsTo the Ministry ofHealth and Social SolidarityCare arrangements for unaccompanied childrenIncrease the number of care places to the level requiredto ensure placements for all unaccompanied children in the country.Establish and enforce minimum standards for all care placements andprovide specialized care for unaccompanied girl children and traffickingvictims. Set up a foster family system and provide adequate support to fosterparents in the exercise of their function. Ensure that care placementsprovide social, educational, and economic integration and access to legalaid free of charge, and protect children from violence and ill-treatment.Design programs to reach out to unaccompanied children who live outsidestate-sponsored care to facilitate their access to state protection. Identification and registrationIn cooperation with the Ministry of Interior andchildren's guardians, set up a registration and tracking system forunaccompanied children in Greece to account for every child. Investigateincidents of unaccompanied children who abscond from care centers anddesign strategies to counter such occurrences.Build capacity within the government and among serviceproviders to identify child victims of trafficking; cooperate with theMinistry of Interior to support police officials in correctly identifyingtrafficking victims and referring them to specialized services andaccommodation.To the Ministry of Justice and Public ProsecutorsThe guardianship system·Revise the current temporary guardianship system forunaccompanied children. Ensure that sufficient numbers of trained guardians areavailable to carry out their duties for unaccompanied children in a responsiblemanner and that more emphasis is given to the appointment of permanent ratherthan temporary guardians.·Issue binding instructions and provide training for guardians toclarify their mandate and to ensure that the exercise of their duties complieswith Greece's civil code and international standards.To the Ministry of InteriorIdentification and access to care and specializedservices·Grant unaccompanied children regular status for as long as theyare on Greek territory to ensure their enjoyment of rights and protection on anequal basis with Greek children and to protect them from repeated arrest anddetention. Consider the granting of temporary residence for unaccompaniedchildren on humanitarian grounds, as provided for in article 44(c) of Law3386/2005, until a durable solution in the child's best interests is found.·In cooperation with the Ministry of Health, the United NationsHigh Commissioner for Refugees, the International Organization for Migration,and specialized NGOs, establish a system to refer these children to care placesand facilitate their access to specialized services. Train police officers andother officials to correctly identify unaccompanied children, traffickingvictims, or others with special protection needs, and to refer them to servicesas warranted.·Adopt formal age determination procedures. These proceduresshould take a holistic approach and not exclusively rely on medical exams,which are inexact.Asylum procedures and other forms of protection·Ensure that all unaccompanied migrant children in Greece are given an opportunity to seek asylum, and are provided representation by aguardian and a lawyer for all unaccompanied children who seek asylum.Prioritize the determination of asylum applications by unaccompanied children whileensuring a fair and full assessment of their claim.·Ensure that qualified interpreters assist communication withasylum-seeking children. Provide unaccompanied children who are illiterate withverbal information about their rights and entitlements in Greece, including their right to seek asylum and facilitate their access to asylumprocedure.·Train asylum interviewers, including interpreters, in conductingchild-friendly interviews. Provide training to those who adjudicate asylumapplications by children about child-specific forms of persecutions.Detention and ill-treatment of unaccompaniedchildren·Make a public commitment to ensure that unaccompanied migrantchildren apprehended in Greece are treated in a humane and dignified manner.Promptly investigate any allegation of ill-treatment of children by stateofficials and hold perpetrators fully accountable. Take targeted andcomprehensive measures to prevent ill-treatment of migrants, includingunaccompanied children, in the custody of state agents. Put in place victimprotection mechanisms during investigations and make public statementscondemning such acts.·Stop the practice of routinely detaining children. Detention ofunaccompanied children should only be administered as a measure of last resortand for the shortest time possible. Refrain from detaining children jointlywith adults. Ensure the separation of both boys and girls from adults indetention and the availability of a confidential complaint mechanism in alldetention and confinement settings.Deportation of unaccompanied children·Suspend the issuing of deportation orders under existingprocedures and halt the deportation of unaccompanied children. Enact proceduresthat make mandatory a careful and impartial assessment of the child's bestinterests before a decision is made to return a child. Children who cannot bereturned to their country of origin due to legal or other reasons should beallowed to remain in the host country and provided with an opportunity tointegrate.Registry, data, and statistics·Systematically register and keep track of every unaccompaniedchild found in Greece. Compile and publish data on unaccompanied children inGreece  with a break-down by age, gender, country of origin, the number ofasylum applications filed, and the number of those  granted refugee status orother forms of protection at first and second instance. Publish figures ofunaccompanied children returned from Greece, with a breakdown by age, gender,asylum status, country of origin, and the country the child was returned to.To the Ministry of Labor·Enhance child labor inspections in the agricultural andconstruction sectors. Undertake such inspections as part of a comprehensiveresponse with other ministries to address the causes of child labor byunaccompanied children, including the lack of care arrangements, obstacles toaccess state care and protection, the absence of a regular status forunaccompanied migrant children, and the dysfunctional guardianship system.Ensure that such inspections do not lead to more clandestine forms of childlabor, and monitor possible negative effects of such inspections on childrenwho continue to rely on illegal work. Provide all children found working inprohibited forms of labor access to state-funded care as well as rehabilitationand reintegration services.To the Government as a WholeLegislative reform·Revise legislation governing the administrative detention ofchildren. Children, as a general rule should not be detained, unless detentionis a proportionate measure of last resort. Ensure that children in detentionare represented by a guardian and have access to legal aid free of charge.·Enact legislation to provide legal assistance free of charge forunaccompanied children in all administrative and judicial proceedings.·Revise legislation regulating the return of unaccompaniedchildren in accordance with international law and standards. The return of anunaccompanied child to the country of origin should only be carried out if itis a durable solution in the child's best interests, and it must be preceded byan assessment of risks and dangers upon return, the care arrangementsavailable, and the child's exercise of fundamental rights. A decision to returna child should not be made and carried out solely by the police. Instead, theprocedure must include oversight by an independent body and independent andcompetent representation for the child. Repatriation decisions furthermore mustrespect Greece's obligation under articles 3 and 8 of the European Human RightsConvention, which say that a person may not be returned to a country where heor she faces torture or inhuman or degrading treatment, and that the person'sright for family and private life must be respected.Revise Greece's anti-trafficking legislation by broadeningthe definition of trafficking and expanding the exception clause for childvictims. Protection from deportation and access to benefits should notdepend on the trafficking victim's consent to cooperate in a criminalinvestigation against traffickers.To the European Commission·Examine the initiation of infringement procedures against Greece for violating its legal obligations to provide appropriate reception conditions forunaccompanied children seeking asylum, and for failing to guarantee minimumstandards on procedures for granting and withdrawing refugee status.·Propose a separate instrument for unaccompanied children whoenter the European Union (EU) to ensure the full respect of their rights andspecial needs from their arrival until the identification of a durablesolution. In the meantime, propose strengthening the protection ofunaccompanied children in the upcoming revision of asylum directives byensuring that provisions for unaccompanied children are in line withinternational law applicable in all EU member states.·Consider allocating to Greece funding under the Commission'sEmergency Fund to increase care placements for unaccompanied children. Makesuch funding dependent on Greece's commitment to addressing the systemic flawsof its child protection system, providing enhanced services for unaccompaniedchildren, and reforming deportation and detention practices in accordance withinternational standards.·Propose a revision to Council Directive 2004/81/EC to ensure thatchild victims of trafficking are granted temporary residence irrespective oftheir agreement to cooperate with authorities in an investigation againstpresumed traffickers and that they are protected from deportation on the basisof illegal entry.To the Council of the European Union·Revise the 2002 Framework Council Decision to ensure thattrafficking victims are entitled to protection irrespective of their agreementto cooperate in an investigation against the presumed trafficker.·Strengthen the protection of unaccompanied children in theupcoming revision of asylum directives by ensuring that provisions forunaccompanied children are in line with international law applicable in all EUmember statesTo the European Parliament·Initiate a report investigating protection and assistance forunaccompanied children in Greece, including children's access to asylumprocedures.·Include more comprehensive guarantees in the upcoming revision ofEU asylum instruments in line with recommendations in this report, in order toensure better protection for unaccompanied children throughout the EU.To European Union Member States·Suspend all transfers of unaccompanied children to Greece under the Dublin II regulation until such time as Greece's asylum systems and protection servicesfor unaccompanied children meet international standards. Refrain from summarilyreturning unaccompanied migrant and asylum seeking children to Greece at ports of entry.·Extend the application of the reception conditions directive andthe procedures directive to all unaccompanied children, whether or not theyhave made an asylum application, in line with obligations under the UNConvention on the Rights of the Child.To the Council of EuropeTo the European Committee on the Prevention ofTorture (CPT)·Carry out ad-hoc visits to police lock-ups and places ofadministrative detention in Greece, including detention facilities under thejurisdiction of border and port police.To the Parliamentary Assembly·Follow-up on member states' implementation of Recommendation 1703on protection and assistance for separated children seeking asylum.To the Commissioner for Human Rights·Carry out a visit to Greece to assess Greece's asylum system andthe level of protection and care provided for unaccompanied children, includinggirl children.To the United NationsTo the United Nations treaty bodies·Request specific information and scrutinize the practices of theGreek government regarding the level of protection and care for unaccompaniedchildren when Greece reports to a treaty body.To the United Nations Special Rapporteur on thesale of children, child prostitution and child pornography·Carry out a visit to Greece to follow up on Greece's implementation of recommendations issued in 2006.UN Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants·Carry out a visit to Greece to assess the treatment of unaccompaniedchildren and other migrants.AcknowledgementsSimone Troller, researcher in the Children's RightsDivision, wrote this report based on her research in Greece in May and June2008, and that of Bill Frelick, director of the Refugee Policy Program. AriadniSpanaki, Roland Algrant fellow in the Children's Rights Division, providedadditional research assistance.The report was edited by Lois Whitman, director of theChildren's Rights Division; Bill Frelick; Ben Ward, associate director of the Europe and Central Asia Division; Aisling Reidy, senior legal advisor; and Andrew Mawson,deputy program director.Production assistance was provided by Cassandra Mikicic and Kennji Kizuka, associates in the Children's Rights Division; Anna Lopriore, creative manager; Grace Choi, publications director; and Fitzroy Hepkins, mail manager. The report was translatedinto Greek by Ioannis Papageorgiu.We wish to thank all children and adults who shared theirstories with us. We are also grateful to non-governmental organizations, theUNHCR, and human rights defenders for their expertise, advice, and support inthe course of this research. We also thank Greek authorities who allocated timeto speak to us in Greece and replied to our requests for information.[1] See for example, United Nations Children's Fund(UNICEF), United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights(OHCHR), Organizationfor Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)/Office for DemocraticInstitutions and Human Rights (ODIHR),"Trafficking in human beings inSoutheastern Europe: 2004 - Focus on Prevention in: Albania, Bosnia andHerzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,Moldova, Romania, Serbia and Montenegro, and the UN Administered Province ofKosovo," March 2005, http://www.unicef.org/ceecis/Trafficking.Report.2005.pdf(accessed September 3, 2008); UNICEF, OHCHR, OSCE/ODIHR, "Trafficking in humanbeings in Southeastern Europe: Current situation and responses to traffickingin human beings in Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, theFederal Republic of Yugoslavia, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,Moldova and Romania," June 2002, http://www.osce.org/documents/odihr/2002/06/1847_en.pdf(accessed September 3, 2008); Terre des hommes, "The Trafficking of AlbanianChildren in Greece," January 2003, http://www.tdh.ch/website/doc_dnld.nsf/bf25ab0f47ba5dd785256499006b15a4/aa38138679a23d33c12571760041dd5d/$FILE/albania_childtrafficking_03_eng.pdf(accessed September 3, 2008);Terre des hommes,"Transnational Protection of Children: the Case of Albania and Greece2000-2006," 2006,   http://www.tdh.ch/website/doc_dnld.nsf/bf25ab0f47ba5dd785256499006b15a4/aa38138679a23d33c12571760041dd5d/$FILE/transnational_protection_children_albania_greece_en_06.pdf(accessed September3, 2008).[2]Human Rights Watch, Greece – Stuck in a Revolving Door: Iraqis and other Asylum seekers andMigrants at the Greece-Turkey Entrance Gate to the European Union,November 2008, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2008/11/26/stuck-revolving-door-0,pp. 68-85. For an assessment of services provided in state-funded care centers,see Ioannis Papageorgiu, Georgia Dimitropoulou, "Unaccompanied Minors AsylumSeekers in Greece" (Unaccompanied Minors Study), April 2008, http://hosting01.vivodinet.gr/unhcr/UAM_english.pdf(accessed August 18, 2008), pp. 58-70.[3]The youngest child, a girl, was 10 years old, two boys and one girl were 12,one boy was 13, six boys were 14, 11 boys were 15, and the remaining childrenwere 16 and 17 years old. We also conducted interviews with six adults whoarrived to Greece at a time they were unaccompanied and below age 18.[4]We visited four detention facilities in Greece: Kyprinou facility in Fylakio,Evros region; Petrou Ralli detention facility in Athens; the detention facilityfor migrants and asylum-seekers on Samos Island; and Amygdaleza detentioncenter for unaccompanied boys outside Athens.[5]Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, G.A.Res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49(1989), entered into force September 2, 1990, ratified by Greece on May 11, 1993, art. 1.[6]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, "Treatment of Unaccompanied andSeparated Children Outside their Country of Origin," General Comment No. 6, UNDoc. CRC/GC/2005/6 (2005), paras. 7-8.[7]For example, based on reports by the UNHCR and the Greek Council for Refugeesat least 200 unaccompanied children entered Greece between April and June 2008:70, including 50 Somali children, entered through the Evros border region,around 60-70, mostly Afghan children, through Leros Island, and about 100children, including 15 girls, through Lesvos Island.[8]Thegovernment compiles official figures on unaccompanied children who seek asylumbut these have proven to be unreliable. On May 22, 2008, Constantinos Kordatosand Nik Stavrakakis of the Hellenic Police's Aliens Division told Human RightsWatch that only 44 unaccompanied children sought asylum in 2007, compared to124 unaccompanied children in 2006, 158 in 2005, and 302 in 2004. AUNHCR-commissioned study showed that these figures contradict other officialsources (see Papageorgiu and Dimitropoulou, Unaccompanied Minors Study, pp.20-21). Official figures also contradict those compiled by the three main NGOswho work with asylum seekers: the Greek Council for Refugees, the Hellenic RedCross and the Ecumenical Refugee Program recorded that they assisted more than200 unaccompanied children who sought asylum in 2007. Both the Greek Councilfor Refugees and UNHCR told Human Rights Watch that year on year fewer childrenare seeking asylum in Greece and that children who do not ask for asylumoutnumber those who file an asylum application. A Greek Ministry of Interiorpresentation at the Justice and Home Affairs Council shows that in 2007,112,364 persons had been arrested for illegal entry or presence in Greece (presentation on file with Human Rights Watch, given on April, 18, 2008, inLuxemburg.)[9]See for example, United States Committee for Refugees and Immigrants, "WorldRefugee Survey 2008 - Iran," June 19, 2008, http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/485f50d92.html(accessed September 11, 2008).[10] There are several reports about the trafficking ofunaccompanied children from Albania, especially during the 1990s (see alsofootnote 1), but none about children from Africa or countries affected byconflict. The UN Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitutionand child pornography noted in 2005 that thetrafficking ofunaccompanied women and girls from Africa appears to be a new trend in Greece. UN Commission on Human Rights, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the sale ofchildren, child prostitution and child pornography, Juan Miguel Petit, Missionto Greece, E/CN.4/2006/67/Add.3, March 27, 2006, para. 12.[11]UNICEF, "Street Children in Greece: Research conducted by ALKO on behalf ofUNICEF," November 2000, http://www.unicef.gr/reports/alko/street.php (accessedAugust 18, 2008).[12]Greek Ombudsman, "Conclusions: Implementation of the Program 'Protection andSocial Care for Street Children,'" March 2004,http://www.synigoros.gr/reports/ag_varvara.pdf (accessed August 18, 2008).[13]Committee on the Rights of the Child, "Summary Record of the 754thMeeting, Consideration of Reports by Statesparties, Initial report of Greece (continued)," CRC/C/SR.754, September 13,2002, para. 48. Greek Ombudsman, "Conclusions: Implementation of theProgram 'Protection and Social Care for Street Children,'" March 2004, pp.18-19; Terre des hommes, "The Trafficking of Albanian Children in Greece," January 2003,http://www.tdh.ch/website/doc_dnld.nsf/bf25ab0f47ba5dd785256499006b15a4/aa38138679a23d33c12571760041dd5d/$FILE/albania_childtrafficking_03_eng.pdf(accessed August 18, 2008), p. 29.[14]Greek Ombudsman, "Conclusions: Implementation of the Program 'Protection andSocial Care for Street Children,'" March 2004, http://www.synigoros.gr/reports/ag_varvara.pdf(accessed August 18, 2008), p. 15. The center recorded the admission ofchildren from war-affected countries, including Iraq and Sierra Leone, a foreshadowing of the current arrival of unaccompanied children.[15]The Albanian branch of the NGO Terre des Hommes brought the case to theattention of the media.[16]Greek Ombudsman, "Conclusions: Implementation of the Program," pp. 6, 16-17,23.[17]Committee on the Rights of the Child, "Consideration of Reports Submitted byStates Parties under Article 44 of the Convention, Concluding Observations ofthe Committee on the Rights of the Child: Greece," CRC/C/15/Add.170, April 2,2002,  http://daccessdds.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G02/409/76/PDF/G0240976.pdf?OpenElement(accessed August 12, 2008) paras. 68-69.[18] UN Human Rights Committee,"Consideration of Reports Submitted by States parties under Article 40 of theCovenant, Concluding Observations of the Human Rights Committee, Greece,"CCPR/CO/83/GRC, April 25, 2005, http://daccessdds.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G05/413/94/PDF/G0541394.pdf?OpenElement(accessed August 12, 2008), para. 10 (b).[19] UN Commission on HumanRights, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, childprostitution and child pornography, Juan Miguel Petit, Mission to Greece, E/CN.4/2006/67/Add.3,March 27, 2006, paras. 48-49.[20]Theodora D. Tsovili and Efithia Voutira, "Asylum seeking single women, womenhead of families and separated children: Reception practices in Greece," October 2004, http://www.antigone.gr/listpage/selected_publications/greece/070427.pdf(accessed August 27, 2008).[21]Greek Ombudsman, "Special Report: Administrative Detention and Deportation ofAlien Minors," October 2005,http://www.synigoros.gr/reports/SR-detention-expulsionOCTOBER-2005.pdf(accessed August 12, 2008). For a list of publications by the Greek Ombudsmanon unaccompanied children since 2004, see http://www.synigoros.gr/pdfs/Stp_Unaccomp_minors2004-2007.pdf(accessed August 19, 2008).[22]GreekOmbudsman and UNHCR, "Guidelines on Children Seeking Asylum," Athens, June 7,2005, http://www.synigoros.gr/docs/odigies_prosfigon.pdf(accessed August 18, 2008). The UNHCR commissioned a study to assess theadherence to these guidelines in 2007. See  Papageorgiu and GeorgiaDimitropoulou, "Unaccompanied Minors Asylum Seekers in Greece," April 2008, http://hosting01.vivodinet.gr/unhcr/UAM_english.pdf (accessed August18, 2008).[23]Greek Council for Refugees, "Separated Children in Greece: Concerns andSuggestions," September 20, 2006.[24]Greek National Commission for Human Rights, "Observations regarding the issueof Unaccompanied Minors," February 15, 2007,http://www.nchr.gr/media/gnwmateuseis_eeda/paidia/unaccompanied_minors15022007.doc(accessed August 12, 2008).[25]This definition does notmake the additional distinction between an unaccompanied and a separated child,and there is no reference to whether an adult person who accompanies the childis the child's primary care-giver (see definition by the Committee on theRights of the Child in the methodology section).[26]Presidential Decree 220/2007, art. 19.1; Ministry of Interior Circular, Prot.No.: 5401/ 1 – 261100, February 23, 2008, Section 3.[27]Presidential Decree 90/2008, art. 6(2); Presidential Decree 96/2008, art. 9(f).[28]Law 3386/2005, arts. 76, 79(1), 83.[29] Presidential Decree90/2008, "Adjusting Greek legislation to the provisions of Directive 2005/85/ECof the Council of 1st December 2005 on minimum standards on procedures inmember states for granting and withdrawing refugee status (L326/13.12.2005)," OfficialGazette A 138, art. 2(g); Presidential Decree 96/2008, "Adjusting Greeklegislation to the provisions of Directive 2004/ 83/ EC of the Council of 29thApril 2004 on minimum standards for the qualification and status of thirdcountry nationals or stateless persons as refugees or as persons who otherwiseneed international protection for other reasons (L 304/30.09.2004)," OfficialGazette A 152, art. 2(h); Presidential Decree 220/2007, arts. 6(2), 13, 18.Ministry of Interior Circular, Prot. No.: 5401/1–261100, February 23, 2008.[30]Presidential Decree 61/1999, Refugee Status Recognition Procedure, Revocationof the Recognition and Deportation of an Alien, Entry Permission for theMembers of his Family and Mode of Cooperation with the United Nations HighCommissioner for Refugees, Official Gazette A 63,art. 1(4);Presidential Decree 220/2007, art. 19; Ministryof Interior Circular, Prot. No.: 5401/1–261100, February 23, 2008. For afull discussion of the Greek guardianship system, see chapter II.[31]Its powers include the right to act upon individual complaints or upon its owninitiative. It investigates cases and communicates its findings andrecommendations to the government entity in charge, and it may choose to makeits findings public. The Ombudsman reports annually to the Prime Minister andthe Parliament. Law 3094/2003, The Ombudsman and other Provisions, January 22,2003; Presidential Decree 273, Regulations of the Ombudsman, October 22, 1999,http://www.synigoros.gr/en_index.htm (accessed October 10, 2008).[32]The National Commission for Human Rights publishes reports, issues resolutions,positions, opinions and proposals. It also advises the government onlegislative amendments and undertakes public awareness initiatives. Itsmembers, which are appointed by the Prime Minister, consist of trade unions,non-governmental organizations (NGOs), political parties, scientificassociations, the Greek Ombudsman, academics and representatives fromMinistries. The latter do not have a right to vote. Law 2667/1998, "Establishmentof the Greek National Commission for Human Rights and National Commission forBioethics," Official Gazette A 281,http://www.nchr.gr/category.php?category_id=3 (accessed October 10, 2008);Human Rights Watch interview with Kostis Papaioannou, chairman, Greek NationalCommission for Human Rights, Athens, June 5, 2008.A National Children's Rights Observatory wasestablished in 2001 under the Ministry of Education's Secretariat for youth tomonitor and promote the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of theChild. The body, however, is barely functioning. In response to a Human RightsWatch letter, the Secretariat could not specify how many permanent staff itemployed, nor would it summarize its activities in 2007, provide any nationaldata relating to the situation of children in Greece, or specify its currentareas of research. Letter from V. Manola, director children's rightsobservatory, general secretariat for youth, Ministry of Education, to HumanRights Watch, July 30, 2008;  Law 2909/2001, Regulating access to third leveleducation and other provisions, Official Gazette A'90, art. 4.[33]Border guards and Hellenic police are under the authority of the Ministry ofInterior; coast guards and port police officers act under the authority of theMinistry of Mercantile Marine.[34]Presidential Decree 90/2008, "Adjusting Greek legislation to the provisions ofthe  Directive 2005/85/EC on minimum standards on procedures in Member Statesfor granting and withdrawing refugee status," Official Gazette A 138,art. 12.[35]Presidential Decree 90/2008, art. 12 (4) (d).[36]"Age determination is an inexact science and the margin of error can sometimesbe as much as 5 years either side." Royal College of Paediatrics and ChildHealth, The Health of Refugee Children: Guidelines for Practitioners (London: 1999), p.13[37]Ibid, pp.13-14.[38]United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), "Guidelines on Policiesand Procedures in Dealing with Unaccompanied Children Seeking Asylum"(hereafter UNHCR Guidelines), February 1997,http://www.unhcr.org/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/refworld/rwmain?page=search&docid=3ae6b3360(accessed September 1, 2008), section 5.11; Committee on the Rights of theChild, "Treatment of Unaccompanied and Separated Children outside their Countryof Origin," General Comment No. 6, CRC/GC/2005/6 (2005), para. 31 (i).[39]Human Rights Watch interview with Yiorgos Paliouras, police director, Aliens'Division of Attica, Amygdaleza detention center, Athens, June 3, 2008.[40]Adults have also been registered as children after they declared themselves tobe underage. The date of birth is usually registered as January 1.[41]Human Rights Watch interview with Hayatullah R., ferry Mitilini-Piraeus, June2, 2008.[42]Human Rights Watch interview with Fahim F., Volos, June 11, 2008.[43]HumanRights Watch interview with Sobir S., Volos, June 11, 2008. Human Rights Watchwas unable to determine whether the police deliberately did not take thedocument into consideration or whether it was due to the lack of interpreterand unfamiliarity with the Persian calendar.[44]Human Rights Watch interview with Hamed P., Athens, June 4, 2008.[45]Human Rights Watch interview with Raz G., ferry Lesvos-Piraeus, June 2, 2008[46]EU members also do not enter the date of birth of migrants and asylum seekersinto an EU-wide database. Council Regulation (EC) No 2725/2000 of December 11, 2000concerning the establishment of 'Eurodac' for the comparison of fingerprintsfor the effective application of the Dublin Convention, Official JournalL316 , 15/12/2000 P. 0001 – 0010,http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32000R2725:EN:HTML(accessed October 17, 2008), art.8.[47]Human Rights Watch interview with Najib M., Patras, June 8, 2008.[48]"Red card" is the commonly used to describe the red-colored identificationdocument for asylum seekers[49]Human Rights Watch interview with Sami F., Athens, May 28, 2008.[50]Human Rights Watch interview with Ioannis Kotsampasi, chief of police Samos, May 30, 2008.[51]Human Rights Watch interview with Hussein S., Samos, May 30, 2008.[52]Human Rights Watch interview with Hamed P., Athens, June 4, 2008.[53]Human Rights Watch interview with Hussein S., Samos, May 30, 2008.[54]Human Rights Watch interview with Musa M., Athens, May 28, 2008.[55]Human Rights Watch interview with Alexandros Anastasiou, June 6, 2008.[56]We asked the Ministry of Health for clarification on how many persons underwentan X-ray age assessment, and how many were found to be children during ameeting and in a follow-up letter. The Ministry did not tell us how manypersons were subject to an X-ray or how many were ultimately considered to bechildren; Human Rights Watch interview with Maria Trochani, secretary general,Ministry of Health, Athens, June 12, 2008. Letter from Maria Trochani to HumanRights Watch, October 3, 2008.[57]Human Rights Watch interview with interview with Alexandros Anastasiou, June 6,2008.[58]Human Rights interview with Constantinos Kordatos, commander, Aliens' Division,Hellenic Police-Headquarters, Athens, June 6, 2008.[59]CRC, art.3.[60]This position is supported by the UNHCR. See, Office of the United Nations HighCommissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), "Guidelines on Policies and Procedures inDealing with Unaccompanied Children Seeking Asylum," (UNHCR Guidelines),February 1997, executive summary.[61]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No.6, para. 33. TheSeparated Children in Europe Program specifies what a guardian's mandate shouldinclude. See, Separated Children in Europe Program, Statement of Good Practice2004, Third Edition,http://www.separated-children-europe-programme.org/separated_children/good_practice/index.html(accessed September 3, 2008) p.16.[62]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No.6, para.35[63]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No.6, para.36[64]Presidential Decree 220/2007, art. 19.1; Ministry of Interior Circular, Prot.No.: 5401/ 1 – 261100, February 23, 2008, Section 3. Most unaccompanied migrantchildren are only represented by temporary guardians, either the prosecutor forjuveniles or the head of the regional first instance court. Temporary guardiansmay propose the appointment of a permanent guardian through the court,according to articles 1592 and 1601 of the Greek Civil Code. The start oftemporary guardianship for unaccompanied children does not require a courtdecision according to Presidential Decree 220/2007, art. 19.1.[65]Greek Civil Code, arts. 1592, 1600-1601.[66]Greek Civil Code, art. 1589; Presidential Decree 220/2007, art. 1 (f).[67]Greek Civil Code, arts. 1518, 1606, 1647-1648. The guardian may become liablefor damage caused by the child if such arises out of his or her mistake in theexercise of duties, Greek Civil Code, art. 1632.[68]Greek Civil Code, art. 1634.[69]Greek Civil Code, arts. 1647-1648.[70]Greek Civil Code, art. 1651.[71]Greek Civil Code, art. 1599.[72]Human Rights Watch interview with Filippos Karatzidis, deputy prosecutor,Orestiada, May 26, 2008.[73]Greek Civil Code, arts. 1606, 1647-1648.[74]HumanRights Watch interviews with Sylla Papataksiarhi, prosecutor for juveniles, Athens, June 12, 2008. Human Rights Watch interview with Filippos Karatsidis, deputyprosecutor, Orestiada, May 26, 2008; Human Rights Watch interview withKonstantinos Boudzikos, prosecutor of 1st instance court, Mitilini, LesvosIsland, June 2, 2008; Prosecutors outside of Athens are informed by the policewhen an unaccompanied child is arrested.[75]A recent UNHCR sponsored study found that children have been unable to enrollin school because their temporary guardian did not consider this to be part ofhis or her mandate, Papageorgiu and Dimitropoulou, Unaccompanied MinorsStudy, p.77.[76]Human Rights Watch interview with Sylla Papataksiarhi, prosecutor forjuveniles, Athens, June 12, 2008.[77]Human Rights Watch interview with Filippos Karatsidis, deputy prosecutor,Orestiada, May 26, 2008.[78]Human Rights Watch interview with Sylla Papataksiarhi, prosecutor forjuveniles, Athens, June 12, 2008.[79]Human Rights Watch interview with Yiorgos Paliouras, police director, Aliens'Division of Attica, Athens, June 3, 2008.[80]Human Rights Watch interview with AlexandrosAnastasiou, coordinator, social services department, Athens, June 6, 2008. Seealso, Papageorgiu and Dimitropoulou,UnaccompaniedMinors Study, pp.75-84. Human RightsWatch was told that permanent guardians on Kalymnos and Samos Islands who were appointed by court had been able to find solutions for children's specificneeds and in the child's best interests. Email correspondence from PanayotisPapadimitriou to Human Rights Watch, August 29, 2008.[81]The NGO Pro Asyl found that police in Mitilini, Lesvos Island, deliberatelyregistered unaccompanied children as being accompanied by strangers. Pro Asyl,"The truth may be bitter but it must be told," October 2007, http://www.proasyl.de/fileadmin/proasyl/fm_redakteure/Englisch/Griechenlandbericht_Engl.pdf(accessed September 1, 2008) p. 25, and Papageorgiu and Dimitropoulou,Unaccompanied Minors Study, pp. 42-43.[82]Human Rights Watch interview with Ioannis Kotsampasi, chief of police, Samos, May 30, 2008.[83]Human Rights Watch interview with Konstantinos Gialelis, Hellenic Coast Guard,Intelligence Directorate, Piraeus, June 5, 2008.[84]The Deputy Minister of Interior made these figures public in a response letterto a question by a Member of Parliament on August 11, 2008. A copy of theletter is on file with Human Rights Watch.[85]An Athens-based service provider for torture victims told us that the majorityof patients are referred to them by NGOs and that the police had made referralsin the past two years. We were furthermore told that state funding for theseservices ceased after September 2008. Human Rights Watch telephone interviewwith Ekavi Papadimitriou, Medical Center for the Rehabilitation of TortureVictims, September 1, 2008.[86]Human Rights Watch interview with Ioannis Kotsampasi, chief of police, Samos, May 30, 2008.[87]Human Rights Watch interview with Hussein S., Samos, May 30, 2008.[88]Human Rights Watch interview with Awali N., Athens, May 24, 2008.[89]The two boys were granted refugee status at second instance. Sources close tothem told Human Rights Watch that the police were put under great pressure bythe media that fully covered the story of these boys. The police were blamedfor being partly responsible for their kidnapping, because they released theboys from detention without any assistance. See also Papageorgiu andDimitropoulou, Unaccompanied Minors Study, footnote 152, and "Illegaldetention of five Afghan unaccompanied minors seeking asylum for 45 days inVolos and Athens," Group of Lawyers for the Rights of Refugees and Migrants,Press Release, http://cm.greekhelsinki.gr/index.php?cid=2854&sec=194(accessed September 11, 2008).[90]Human Rights Watch interview with Noorzai A., June 2008 (exact date and placewithheld).[91]The CPT explicitly stated that it would consider making a public statementshould Greece fail to improve the situation in accordance with the Committee'srecommendations; European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhumanor Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT), "Report to the Government of Greeceon the visit to Greece carried out by the European Committee for the Preventionof Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) from 20 to 27February 2007," CPT/Inf (2008) 3, Strasbourg, February 8, 2008,http://www.cpt.coe.int/documents/grc/2008-03-inf-eng.pdf (accessed September 1,2008), p. 29.[92]Human Rights Watch interview with Rahman G., Patras, June 7, 2008, and Nabi D.,Patras, June 8, 2008. Human Rights Watch has pictures of their injuries onfile.[93]Human Rights Watch interview with Habib T., Patras, June 8, 2008.[94]Human Rights Watch interview with Daoud A., Patras, June 7, 2008.[95]Human Rights Watch interview with Ghulam S., Athens, June 5, 2008.[96]Human Rights Watch interview with Jafar F., Patras, June 8, 2008.[97]Human Rights Watchinterview with Ghulam S., Athens, June 5, 2008. Human Rights Watch was unableto meet with the port police in Patras on June 9. We brought allegations ofill-treatment against the Patras port police to the attention of the Ministerof Mercantile Marine in a letter and called for an investigation. We had notreceived any reply from the Ministry when this report went to print.[98]Human Rights Watch interview in Patras, June 9, 2008 (exact name withheld);Human Rights Watch interviews with refugee rights activists in Athens on May22, and June 5, 2008 (exact names withheld); Human Rights Watch interview withGreek Ombudsman office, Athens, June 10, 2008.[99]The Greek Ombudsman strongly criticized the Patras hospital's initial wrongdiagnosis of the object that caused the boy's injuries. In a letter to thehospital, the Greek Ombudsman argues that this wrong examination had a directimpact on the investigation and disciplinary and penal responsibilities. HumanRights Watch has a copy of the letter on file.[100]Human Rights Watchinterview, Patras, June 9, 2008 (exact name withheld); Human Rights Watchinterviews with refugee rights activists in Athens, May 22, and June 5, 2008(exact names withheld).[101]The boy's description of the perpetrator's uniform was reportedly notconsistent with uniforms worn by port police; Human Rights Watch interview withGreek Ombudsman office, Athens, June 10, 2008.[102]Human Rights Watch interview, June 2008 (name, date and location withheld).[103]See also HumanRights Watch, Greece– Stuck in a Revolving Door, pp. 32-33, 42-45 and Pro Asyl, "The truth may be bitterbut it must be told," pp. 10-11.[104]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdul G., Athens, May 28, 2008.[105]Human Rights Watch interview with Lal S., Athens, May 27, 2008.[106]Human Rights Watch interview with Najib M., Patras, June 8, 2008.[107]The police station near Omonia square has been the subject of serious allegationsof ill-treatment. A video showing acts of ill-treatment at the police stationcame into the public domain. The Council of Europe's Committee for thePrevention of Torture condemned police behavior during its fact-finding missionto the Omonia police station in strongest terms. European Committee for thePrevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT),"Report to the Government of Greece on the visit to Greece carried out by theEuropean Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or DegradingTreatment or Punishment (CPT) from 20 to 27 February 2007," CPT/Inf (2008) 3,Strasbourg, February 8, 2008,http://www.cpt.coe.int/documents/grc/2008-03-inf-eng.pdf (accessed September 1,2008), paras. 7, 13, 15, 41.[108]Human Rights Watch interview with Nurullah F., Athens, May 27, 2008.[109]The Convention against Torture defines torture as"any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, isintentionally inflicted on a person for such purposes as obtaining from him ora third person information or a confession, punishing him for an act he or athird person has committed or is suspected of having committed, or intimidatingor coercing him or a third person, or for any reason based on discrimination ofany kind, when such pain or suffering is inflicted by or at the instigation ofor with the consent or acquiescence of a public official or other person actingin an official capacity. It does not include pain or suffering arising onlyfrom, inherent in or incidental to lawful sanctions;" Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman orDegrading Treatment or Punishment (Convention against Torture), adoptedDecember 10, 1984, G.A. res. 39/46, annex, 39 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 51) at 197,U.N. Doc. A/39/51 (1984), entered into force June 26, 1987, ratified by Greece on October 6, 1988, art.1.[110]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc.A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23, 1976, ratified byGreece on May 5, 1997, art. 7.Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), adoptedNovember 20, 1989, G.A. Res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167,U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into force September 2, 1990, ratified by Greece on May 11, 1993, art. 37(b).European Convention for the Protection of Human Rightsand Fundamental Freedoms, 213 U.N.T.S. 222, entered into force September 3,1953, as amended by Protocols No. 3, 5, 8, and 11 which entered into force onSeptember 21, 1970, December 20, 1971, January 1, 1990, and November 1, 1998,respectively, ratified by Greece on November 28, 1974, art. 3.[111]Presidential Decree 90/2008, arts. 4.3, and 4.4; Presidential Decree 61/1999,art. 1.4.[112] Human RightsWatch interview with Panagiotis Hinofotis, deputy minister of interior, Athens,November 25, 2008 and Human Rights Watch, Greece – Stuck in a Revolving Door,p. 92.[113]See also Human Rights Watch, Greece – Stuck in a Revolving Door, pp.86-105, for a full discussion about the Greek asylum system.[114]Most legal aid services are provided by three NGOs and a network of pro bonolawyers, and primarily in Athens: The Greek Council for Refugees, theEcumenical Refugee Program, the Hellenic Red Cross, and the Group of Lawyersfor the Rights of Refugees and Migrants.[115]Human Rights Watch interview with Christos Gavras, director asylum office, Athens, June 4, 2008 and Anastasios Festas, general manager of Aliens Division Attica, Athens, June 4, 2008. For a discussion on access to asylum on the Aegean Islands and the Evros region, see Human Rights Watch, Greece – Stuck in a Revolving Door,pp. 86-90.[116]The Petrou Ralli police station in Athens is the main facility in Greece where asylum applications are registered and where asylum interviews are held. Thebuilding also consists of a detention center where migrants and failed asylumseekers are held prior to deportation.[117]Papageorgiu and Dimitropoulou, Unaccompanied Minors Study, p. 38. Human Rights Watch went to the Petrou Ralli station ona Sunday morning. Authorities accept three hundred persons for appointments butthe queue was at least three times larger than the number of persons accepted.[118]The red card is commonly used to describe the red colored documentation forasylum seekers.[119]Human Rights Watch interview with Lal S., Athens, May 27, 2008.[120]Human Rights Watch interview with Musa M., Athens, May 28, 2008.[121]Human Rights Watch interview with Hamed P., Athens, June 4, 2008.[122]Human Rights Watch interview with Ali N. (exact date and location withheld).[123]These NGOs include the Greek Council for Refugees, the Ecumenical RefugeeProgram, and the Hellenic Red Cross.[124]Ministry of Interior Circular, Prot. No. 5401/ 1– 261100, February 23, 2008, section 3.[125]Human Rights Watch interview with Nurullah F., Athens, May 27, 2008.[126]Email correspondence from Dora Papadopoulou, Hellenic Red Cross, to HumanRights Watch, September 4, 2008.[127]Presidential Decree 90/2008, art. 12.1-3.[128]Email correspondence from Alexia Vassiliou, member of the legal assistanceunit, Greek Council for Refugees, to Human Rights Watch, July 14, 2008.[129]Human Rights Watch interview with Sylla Papataksiarhi, prosecutor forjuveniles, Athens, June 12, 2008. For a more complete discussion on theguardianship system ,see chapter II.[130]Human Rights Watch interviews with Isa P., Nader Q., Volos, June 11, 2008. Thecare center in Volos for unaccompanied children, run by the Hellenic Red Cross,cooperates with a lawyer who represents unaccompanied children during theasylum interview.[131]See Human Rights Watch, Greece – Stuck in a Revolving Door, p.97.[132]Human Rights Watch interview with Musa M., Athens, May 28, 2008.[133]Greek national legislation mandates authorities to collect precise andup-to-date information as to the situation prevailing in an applicant's countryof origin. Such information shall be made available to authorities receivingand examining asylum applications; and "Decisions on asylum applications shallbe taken individually, after an appropriate, objective and impartialexamination. Presidential Decree 90/2008, art. 6.2 [unofficial translation].[134]Presidential Decree 61/1999, art.2.3; Presidential Decree 90/2008, art. 10.1.[135]Human Rights Watch interview with Fahim F., age 17, Volos, June 11, 2008.[136]Human Rights Watch interview with Hafez S., age 16, Volos, June 11, 2008.[137]Human Rights Watch interview with Hamed P., Athens, June 4, 2008.[138]Human Rights Watch interview with Hamed P., Athens, June 4, 2008.[139]PresidentialDecree 96/2008, art. 9.2(f). Scholars argue that the recent jurisprudenceexpanded the meaning of persecution to include several child-specific forms,such as child abuse, child sale and trafficking, or vulnerabilities arising outof being a street child. Also, certain behavior (such as the witnessing thedeath of close relatives) do not rise to the threshold of persecution for anadult but may do so for a child. See Jacqueline Bhabha, "Children, Migrationand International Norms," in: T. Alexander Aleinikoff & Vincent Chetail, Migrationand International Legal Norms, T.M.C.Asser Press, The Hague, 2003, p. 217.[140]UNHigh Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), "UNHCR's eligibility guidelines forassessing the international protection needs of Afghan asylum seekers," Afghanistan, December 2007, http://www.unhcr.org/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/refworld/rwmain?docid=477ce70a2&page=search(accessed August 26, 2008) pp.64-72. The guidelines conclude that, depending onthe circumstances in the individual case, they could fall under the scope ofarticle 1 A(2) of the 1951 Refugee Convention.[141]See also Human Rights Watch, Greece – Stuck in a Revolving Door, pp.97-99. A first instance decision whether a person is granted refugee status orsubsidiary protection, or denied any form of international protection is madeafter a first assessment of a person's claim. If denied refugee status, anasylum seeker may file an appeal to have his or her claim considered at secondinstance.[142]HumanRights Watch interview with Efthalia Pappa, director Ecumenical RefugeeProgram, Athens, June 2, 2008.[143]Email correspondence fromAlexia Vassiliou, Greek Council for Refugees, to Human Rights Watch, July 14,2008. A first instance decision, whether a person is granted refugee status orsubsidiary protection, or denied any form of international protection, is madeafter a first assessment of a person's claim. If denied refugee status, anasylum seeker may file an appeal to have his or her claim considered at secondinstance .For more information about the Greek asylum system, see Human RightsWatch, Greece – Stuck in a Revolving Door, pp. 86-105.[144]Papageorgiu and Dimitropoulou, Unaccompanied Minors Study, p.92. The study also found that 10 files of unaccompanied children who filed anasylum application in 2007 and were in possession of the red card contained noinformation whatsoever. Officials explained that they lagged behind in filingdocuments.[145]A UNHCR commissioned study contains some data, albeit non-representative: inthe second half of 2007, 198 negative first instance decisions were issued tounaccompanied children, among them four 12-year-old children and one11-year-old boy. It found that asylum was granted at first instance for twochildren and at second instance for 6 children. See Papageorgiu andDimitropoulou, Unaccompanied Minors Study, pp.89-90.[146]Papageorgiu and Dimitropoulou, Unaccompanied Minors Study,p. 88.[147]Human Rights Watch interview with Efthalia Pappa, director Ecumenical RefugeeProgram, Athens, June 2, 2008.[148]CRC, art. 22[149]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No.6, paras. 64-66.[150]Ibid., paras. 68-72.[151]Ibid., para. 74.[152]CRC, art. 37(b).[153]Illegal entry into and exit from Greece are criminal offenses under article 83 of Law 3386/2005. Prosecutors, however, toldus that they do not press charges for illegal entry.[154]Ibid.[155]Law 3386/2005 Article 76, para. 4.[156]Reply by the Deputy Minister of Interior to a Member of Parliament, August 11,2008. Human Rights Watch has a copy of the reply on file. It is not clear howmany of these children are unaccompanied. Thirty-two were kept in theAmygdaleza detention center for unaccompanied children, 64 in Mitilini, LesvosIsland, 35 on Samos Island, 24 on Rhodos Island, 12 in the Evros region, 79 inAttika region (among those 33 in Petrou Ralli detention center), and 55children were detained in the rest of Greece.[157]Human Rights Watch interview with Anastasios Festas, general manager, Aliens'Division of Attica, Athens, June 4, 2008. See also Human Rights Watch, Greece– Stuck in a Revolving Door, p. 35.[158]For a full discussion of detention conditions in Greece see: Human RightsWatch, Greece – Stuck in a Revolving Door, pp. 68-85.[159]For a discussion about the guardianship system, see chapter II.[160]Presidential Decree 90/2008, art. 13.4 (b).[161]We were not granted access to the detention center on Lesvos Island despite several requests.[162]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with various contact persons in July,August and September 2008 (names withheld). We were not able to assess whetherthe detention of unaccompanied children on Samos Island goes beyond what isstrictly necessary before they are transferred to Lesvos. In the absence of anycare center on Samos Island, children's detention could only be justified if itremains strictly limited in time and if authorities make a real effort totransfer children as quickly as possible to alternative care.[163]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharzad P. and Sardar P., Fylakio detentioncenter, May 25, 2008.[164]Human Rights Watch interview with Filippos Karatzidis, deputy prosecutor,Orestiada, May 26, 2008. For a discussion of the guardianship system, seechapter II.[165]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharzad P., Fylakio detention center, May 25,2008.[166]Human Rights Watch interview with Yiorgos Paliouras, police director, Aliens'Division of Attica, Amygdaleza detention center, Athens, June 3, 2008.[167]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdullahi Y., Amygdaleza detention center, Athens, June 3, 2008.[168]For a discussion of Greek asylum procedures, see Human Rights Watch, Greece– Stuck in a Revolving Door, pp. 86-105.[169]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatime S., Petrou Ralli detention center, Athens, June 4, 2008.[170]Human Rights Watch interview with Sami F., Amygdaleza detention center, June 3,2008.[171]Human Rights Watch interview with Mohammed W., Amygdaleza detention center,June 3, 2008. An additional testimony of multiple detention was made by16-year-old Hafez S.[172]Seealso Greek Ombudsman, "Special Report: Administrative Detention andDeportation of Alien Minors," October 2005, http://www.synigoros.gr/reports/SR-detention-expulsionOCTOBER-2005.pdf (accessedSeptember 1, 2008), pp. 26-28. The Ombudsman concludes that the detention ofchildren is inappropriate and a disproportionate measure that violates theirrights.[173]See chapter VI for a discussion about referral to care.[174]CRC, art. 37.[175]The Hellenic RedCross and the UNHCR estimated that there were about 250 unaccompanied childrenin the settlement in early 2008. Email correspondence from Dora Papadopoulou,Hellenic Red Cross, to Human Rights Watch, April 22, 2008; "UNHCR expressesconcern over children and asylum seekers at Patras camp," UNHCR press release,No. 07/08, February 7, 2008, http://www.unhcr.gr/Press_Rel/7_2008.htm(accessed September 1, 2008).[176]Human Rights Watch interviews with human rights activists in Patras, June 8-9,2008, and in Athens, June 5, 2008 (exact names withheld).[177]"UNHCR expressesconcern over children and asylum seekers at Patras camp," UNHCR press release,No. 07/08, February 7, 2008, http://www.unhcr.gr/Press_Rel/7_2008.htm(accessed September 1, 2008).[178]Human Rights Watch visit to Venna detention center, 2008 (exact date withheld).We did not record the name of the police officer on duty.[179]Human Rights Watch interview with Habibullah R., Venna detention center (exactdate withheld).[180]Human Rights Watch interview with Timur F., Athens, June 6, 2008.[181]Human Rights Watch found evidence of overcrowding, very dirty facilities, poorsanitation, lack of personal hygiene, lack of access to fresh air, and policebrutality. For a full discussion of detention conditions for migrants andasylum-seekers in Greece, see Human Rights Watch, Greece – Stuck in aRevolving Door, pp. 68-85.[182]Human Rights Watch interview with Khudai N., Patras, June 7, 2008.[183]Human Rights Watch interview with Daoud A., Patras, June 7, 2008.[184]Human Rights Watch has pictures of the inside of the container on file. A videofrom inside the container was posted on YouTube, seehttp://www.youtube.com/watch?v=69t7Zcfl5t4 (accessed October 10, 2008).[185]Presidential Decree 141/1991, "Competencies and internal regulations of thepersonnel of the Ministry of Public Order," art. 67, para. 3: "Militarypersonnel, police officers, women and minors shall be detained in specialdetention places." (unofficial translation)[186]Paulo Sérgio Pinheiro, World Report on Violence against Children, Geneva: October 2006, www.violencestudy.org/a553 (accessed August 30, 2008) p. 199.[187]Human Rights Watch interview with Nurullah F., Athens, May 27, 2008.[188]Human Rights Watch interview with Sobir S., Volos, June 11, 2008.[189]Human Rights Watch did not record any allegations of ill-treatment by staff atthe center. Human Rights Watch visit to Amygdaleza detention center, June 3,2008.[190]Human Rights Watch interview with Yiorgos Paliouras, police director, Aliens'Division of Attica, Amygdaleza detention center, Athens, June 3, 2008.[191]Children detained at the center also do not receive any education.[192]CRC, art. 37(b).[193]CRC, art. 3(1),(2).[194]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No.6, para 61.[195] CRC, art. 37 (c), ICCPR, art. 10(b). The CRC only allows thejoint detention of children and adults if it is in the child's best interests.Ibid.[196]"The Court notes that the second applicant was detained in a closed centreintended for illegal immigrants in the same conditions as adults; theseconditions were consequently not adapted to the position of extremevulnerability in which she found herself as a result of her position as anunaccompanied foreign minor," Mubilanzila Mayeka and Kaniki Mitunga v.Belgium, (Application no. 13178/03), Judgment of 12 October 2006, availableat www.echr.coe.int, para. 103.[197]CRC, art. 37(d).[198]CRC, art. 37(b);ICCPR, art.9(1). Article 5 of the European Convention on Human Rights equallyprohibits arbitrary detention, yet a coherent definition of what arbitrarinessentails has not been put forward. See NualaMole, Asylum and the European Convention on Human Rights, Strasbourg: Council of Europe Publishing, Fourth edition, July 2008, p. 81.European Convention for the Protection of Human Rightsand Fundamental Freedoms, 213 U.N.T.S. 222, entered into force September 3,1953, as amended by Protocols No. 3, 5, 8, and 11 which entered into force onSeptember 21, 1970, December 20, 1971, January 1, 1990, and November 1, 1998,respectively, ratified by Greece on November 28, 1974.[199]Ibid. Additional circumstances that make a detention arbitrary include thedetention of persons because they exercised other Convention rights, the denialof the right to fair trial, or, where detention is of such a grave nature thatit possesses an arbitrary character. See Nuala Mole, Asylum and the EuropeanConvention on Human Rights, p. 81.[200]Decisionsof the Human Rights Committee, A v. Australia No 560/1993, U.N. Doc.CCPR/C/59/D/560/1993 (1997); C v.AustraliaNo 900/1999, op.cit.; Baban v. Australia No 1014/2001, U.N. Doc.CCPR/C/78/D/1014/2001 (2003) , Bakhtiyari v.Australia, U.N. Doc CCPR/C/79/D/1069/2002 (2003).[201]CRC, art. 18(2), 20.(1-3)[202]CRC, art. 18(2)[203]This was already the case in 2005. See UN Commission on Human Rights, Report ofthe Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and childpornography, Juan Miguel Petit, Mission to Greece, E/CN.4/2006/67/Add.3, March27, 2006, para. 48.[204]For a full assessment of care centers for unaccompanied children see Papageorgiuand Dimitropoulou, Unaccompanied Minors Study, pp. 58-70.[205]See footnote 7.[206]Letter from Maria Trochani, secretary general, Ministry of Health, to HumanRights Watch, October 3, 2008.Foster care arrangements are currently not providedfor but the Ministry of Health told us that this option was under discussion.Human Rights Watch meeting with Maria Trochani, secretary general, Secretariatfor Social Solidarity, Ministry of Health and Social Solidarity, Athens, June 12, 2008.[207]For a full assessment of services in care centers for unaccompanied childrensee Papageorgiu and Dimitropoulou, Unaccompanied Minors Study, pp.58-70. Only the Lavrio reception center for asylum seekers is set up through alegal provision, Presidential Decree 266/1999, and puts forth minimumstandards. Access to the center, however, is very restricted for asylum seekersand it is not designed as a care center for unaccompanied children and they arenot considered a group that is granted priority access; Presidential Decree266/1999, art. 7, paras. 1-2.[208]The Greek Council for Refugees told us that unaccompanied foreign childrenreferred to centers for Greek children absconded within one week. Center staffare neither trained to work with this category of children nor able tocommunicate with them. Email correspondence from Alexandros Anastasiou, GreekCouncil for Refugees, to Human Rights Watch, October 6, 2008.[209]Human Rights Watch interview with Sylla Papataksiarhi, prosecutor forjuveniles, Athens, June 12, 2008.[210]Human Rights Watch interview with Alexandros Anastasiou, coordinator, socialservices department, Athens, June 6, 2008.[211]Human Rights Watch interview with Maria Kaldani, ARSIS, Athens, June 10, 2008.[212]Greek Ministry of Interior Presentation at the Justice and Home AffairsCouncil, Luxemburg, April 18, 2008, p. 42. The presentation is on file withHuman Rights Watch.[213]Ministry ofInterior, Prot. No. 5401/ 1 – 261100, February 23, 2008, section 3.[214]Email correspondence from Alexandros Anastasiou, Greek Council for Refugees, toHuman Rights Watch, October 6, 2008.[215]Human Rights Watch interview with Filippos Karatzidis, deputy prosecutor,Orestiada, May 26, 2008.[216]Human Rights Watch interview with Sylla Papataksiarhi, Athens, June 12, 2008.[217]Human Rights Watch interview with Maria Kaldani, ARSIS, Athens, June 10, 2008.[218]Human Rights Watch interview with Ali N. (exact date and location withheld).Omonia is a square in central Athens.[219]Authorities opened a new care center on Lesvos Island where children who arriveto the Aegean Islands of Lesvos or Samos can be referred to, if places areavailable. In November 2008, Human Rights Watch was told that the center wasfull.[220]Human Rights Watch interview with social services department, Greek Council forRefugees, Athens, April 24, 2008.[221]Human Rights Watch interview with Alexandros Anastasiou, coordinator, socialservices department, Greek Council for Refugees, Athens, June 6, 2008.[222]Email correspondence from UNHCR-Greece to Human Rights Watch, July 9, 2008.[223]Human Rights Watch interview with Giorgios Bisbikis, public prosecutor, firstinstance court, Patras, June 9, 2008; Human Rights Watch interview with NikosKomblas, Hellenic Red Cross lawyer, Patras, June 9, 2008; Human Rights Watchinterview with Greek Ombdusman office, Athens, June 10, 2008.[224]Email correspondence from Dora Papadopoulou, Hellenic Red Cross, to HumanRights Watch, September 4, 2008.[225]See Papageorgiu and Dimitropoulou, Unaccompanied Minors Study, p. 70.[226]Letter from Maria Trochani, secretary general, Ministry of Health, to HumanRights Watch, October 3, 2008.[227]See Papageorgiu and Dimitropoulou, Unaccompanied Minors Study, p. 70.[228]Malcolm Brabant, "Victory for hunger strikers in Greece," BBC News, May25, 2008, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/7419667.stm (accessed September 12,2008); Human Rights Watch interview with AlexandrosAnastasiou, coordinator, social services department, Athens, June 6, 2008.[229]This action, however, remained an isolated initiative and other migrants,including families who have subsequently arrived on the neighboring island of Patmos did not benefit from any referral to care. See Malcolm Brabant, "Greece accused of refugee neglect," BBC News, July 24, 2008,http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/7523775.stm (accessed September 12, 2008).[230]The Greek Ombudsman praised this initiative and commended the personnel of thecenter as well as the climate within the institution. However, he noted theserious deficiencies that children accommodated in the center lacked regularstatus, that the status of the center was not clear , and that staff working inthe centers had not signed any contracts. Greek Ombudsman, "Positive initiativein accommodating unaccompanied children in Lesvos – further measures required,"Press Release, Athens, August 11, 2008,http://www.synigoros.gr/pdf_01/synigoros.pdf (accessed August 26, 2008).[231]Email correspondence from Dora Papadopoulou, head of Social Welfare Division,Hellenic Red Cross, to Human Rights Watch, April 23, 2008.[232]Human Rights Watch interview with Musa M., Athens, May 28, 2008;[233]See also chapter V. Médecins sans Frontières also reports that migrantsfrequently suffer from injuries they incur while attempting to hide in trucks. "Médecinssans Frontières' work with migrants–undocumented migrants," Médecins sansFrontières,http://www.msf.gr/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1862&Itemid=235(accessed August 26, 2008).[234]Human Rights Watch interview with Maria Logara, Doctors of the World, Athens, June 4, 2008.[235]Human Rights Watch interview with Aktar P., Athens, June 6, 2008.[236]Human Rights Watch interview with Adisa P., Athens, May 29, 2008.[237]Human Rights Watch interview with Ahmad R., June 3, 2008. Children have reportedlybeen sexually abused in return for staying in an apartment. Fotis Parthenidis,a social worker, had come across a boy who had been sexually abused by fellowhousemates. When he asked the boy what kind of work he performed, the boyreportedly told him he had been the woman of the house; Human Rights Watchinterview with Fotis Parthenidis, Athens, May 29, 2008.[238]HumanRights Watch interview with Noorzai A., June 2008 (exact date and placewithheld).See also chapter II for more information about their case.[239]Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly, "Protection and assistance forseparated children seeking asylum," Recommendation 1703 (2005), para. 5.[240]European Convention on Human Rights, art. 3, CRC, art. 37 (a), ICCPR, art. 7.[241]EuropeanCourt of Human Rights, Z and Others v. the United Kingdom, (Applicationno. 29392/95), Judgment of 10 May 2001, available at www.echr.coe.int.[242]European Commission of Human Rights, Z and Others v. the United Kingdom,(Application no. 29392/95), Report of the Commission, adopted September 10,1999, available at www.echr.coe.int, para. 93.[243]Presidential Decree 62/1998, Measures for the protection of youth, inaccordance with Directive 94/33/EC, Official Gazette A 67, arts. 2, 4;Law 1837/1989, Employment of minors – protection of minors, Official GazetteA 85, arts. 2(1), 3.[244]Civil Code, arts. 1619-1620. See also Papageorgiu and Dimitropoulou,Unaccompanied Minors Study, pp. 80-84.[245]Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention 182, art. 3(a).[246]For the purposes of this Protocol:(a) "Trafficking in persons' shall mean therecruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, bymeans of the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction,of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerabilityor of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent ofa person having control over another person, for the purpose of exploitation.Exploitation shall include, at a minimum, the exploitation of the prostitutionof others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services,slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs;(b) The consent of a victim of trafficking in personsto the intended exploitation set forth in subparagraph (a) of this articleshall be irrelevant where any of the means set forth in subparagraph (a) havebeen used;(c) The recruitment, transportation, transfer,harbouring or receipt of a child for the purpose of exploitation shall beconsidered "trafficking in persons" even if this does not involve any of themeans set forth in subparagraph (a) of this article;(d) "Child" shall mean any person under eighteen yearsof age," Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,Especially Women and Children, Supplementing the United Nations Convention onTransnational Organized Crime (Trafficking Protocol), adopted November 15,2000, G.A. Res. 55/25, annex II, 55 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 60, U.N. Doc.A/45/49 (Vol.I) (2001), entered into force December 25, 2003, art. 3.[247]Constitution of Greece, section 1, art. 22 (3).[248]Constitution of Greece, section 1, art. 21 (1),(3).[249]Children aged 15 may not work more than six hours per day and 30 hours perweek. All children employed are to get a rest period of at least 12 continuoushours per day, and a break of at least 30 minutes for any work period overfour-and-a-half hours. Overtime and night labor is prohibited for children.[250]Law 3144/2003, Social dialogue for the promotion of employment and socialprotection and other provisions, Official Gazette A 111, art. 4(1); Law1837/1989, art. 2(2); Presidential Decree 62/1998, art. 7(1-3). Occupationsthat are considered harmful for children's health, security and morals coverthe following activities: employment in construction, work that involvesclimbing for the harvesting of crops, labor that entails the risk of fallingfrom heights,  work in which the child is exposed to very low or hightemperatures, and work that involves the lifting of heavy loads.In an important exception, children from the age of 15may be employed in hazardous labor for vocational training purposes, ifsupervised, and upon permission of the labor inspector. This exception is incontrast to ILO standards that set the threshold age at 16, and it isinconsistent with the more protective provisions contained in the Convention onthe Rights of the Child and the European Social Charter. Presidential Decree62/1998, arts. 2, 7(5).[251]Human Rights Watch interview with Hafez S., Volos, June 11, 2008.[252]Human Rights Watch interview with Hazrat A., Athens, May 27, 2008.[253]Human Rights Watch interview with Musa M., Athens, May 28, 2008.[254]"For the purposes of this Convention, the term "the worst forms of childlabour" comprises:(a) all forms of slavery or practices similar toslavery, such as the sale and trafficking of children, debt bondage and serfdomand forced or compulsory labour, including forced or compulsory recruitment ofchildren for use in armed conflict;(b) the use, procuring or offering of a child forprostitution, for the production of pornography or for pornographicperformances;(c) the use, procuring or offering of a child forillicit activities, in particular for the production and trafficking of drugsas defined in the relevant international treaties;(d) work which, by its nature or the circumstances inwhich it is carried out, is likely to harm the health, safety or morals ofchildren;" Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention 182, art. 3.[255]Human Rights Watch interview with Wali P., Athens, May 27, 2008.[256]Human Rights Watch interview with Nurullah F., Athens, May 27, 2008.[257]Human Rights Watch interview with Nurullah F., Athens, May 27, 2008.[258]Human Rights Watch interview with Wali P., Athens, May 27, 2008.[259]Human Rights Watch interview with Hafez S., Volos, June 11, 2008.[260]Human Rights Watch interview with Aktar P., Athens, June 6, 2008.[261]Human Rights Watch interview with Yusuf K., Athens, May 23, 2008.[262]Human Rights Watch interview with Zahir B., Athens, May 29, 2008.[263]Human Rights Watch interview with Musa M., Athens, May 28, 2008.[264]Human Rights Watch interview with Hafez S., Volos, June 11, 2008.[265]Human Rights Watch interview with Yusuf K., Athens, May 23, 2008.[266]Human Rights Watch interview with Wali P., Athens, May 27, 2008.[267]Human Rights Watch interview with Arif L., Athens, June 4, 2008.[268]Human Rights Watch interview with Yusuf K., Athens, May 23, 2008.[269]Human Rights Watch interview with Aktar P., Athens, June 6, 2008.[270]The minimum salary in Greece for the year 2008 is 30.40 Euros per day and680.59 Euros per month. National general collective bargaining agreement forthe years 2008-2009, January 1, 2008,http://www.kepea.gr/uplds/File/egsee20082009.pdf (accessed August 22, 2008),art. 1(b), p. 11.[271]Human Rights Watch interview with Mohammed W., Amygdaleza detention center,June 3, 2008.[272]Human Rights Watch interview with Hafez S., Volos, June 11, 2008.[273]For example, Human Rights Watch interview with Aktar P., Athens, June 6, 2008and Human Rights Watch interview with Nurullah F., Athens, May 27, 2008.[274]Human Rights Watch interview with Zahir B., Athens, May 29, 2008.[275]Human Rights Watch interview with Nurullah F., Athens, May 27, 2008.[276]Human Rights Watch interview with Noorzai A., Athens, June 3, 2008.[277]"Child Labour and IPEC: An overview," ILO,http://www.ilo.org/public/english/region/asro/manila/ipec/about/overview.htm(accessed August 21, 2008).[278]CRC, art. 32.[279]ILO Convention No. 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for theElimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor (Worst Forms of Child LaborConvention), adopted June 17, 1999, 38 I.L.M. 1207 (entered into force November19, 2000), ratified by Greece on November 6, 2001. ILO Convention No. 138concerning the Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (Minimum AgeConvention), adopted June 26, 1973, 1015 U.N.T.S. 297, entered into force June19, 1976, ratified by Greece on March 14, 1986. These instruments prohibit theemployment of anyone under 18 in work with the potential to harm their health,safety and morals. However they allow for a significant exception and permitchildren's employment in such types of work from the age of 16 on anexceptional basis, and under application of safeguards.[280]ILO Convention 184 concerning Safety and Health in Agriculture, adopted June21, 2001, entered into force on September 20, 2003.[281]EuropeanSocial Charter, Turin, October 18, 1961, entered into force February 26, 1965,ratified by Greece on June 6, 1984, art. 7.The Charter of 1961 however, is applicable in scopeonly to children who are legal residents or who regularly live in the memberstate….Thus, among the children interviewed by Human Rights Watch, only thosewho have asked for asylum or have been granted refugee status or residenceunder subsidiary protection fall under the scope of the Charter.[282]Constitution of Greece, art. 28(1).[283]Offenses are punished with imprisonment of at least three months and a finebetween 3,000 and 15,000 Euros; Law 3386/2005, art. 86.[284]Law 3144/2003, art. 4 (4); Law 1837/1989, art. 18.[285]The guardian of the child only faces these sanctions under Law 1837/1989, art.18, if he or she allowed the employment of a child contrary to legalprovisions. Under the more recent law 3144/2003, art. 4 (4) the guardian of thechild faces in any case the same sanctions as the employer and there is norequirement that the guardian must have consented to the child's employment.[286]Law 3144/2003, art. 4 (3-4); Law 1837/1989, art. 18; Law 2639/1998, Regulationsof labor relations, establishment of a Labor Inspectorate and other provisions,Official Gazette A 205, art. 7.[287]Report of the Committee of Experts on the Application of Convention s andRecommendations, Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention, 1999 (No.182), Directrequest, CEACR 2007/78th Session,http://webfusion.ilo.org/public/db/standards/normes/appl/appl-displaycomment.cfm?hdroff=1&ctry=0260&year=2007&type=R&conv=C182&lang=EN(accessed July 17, 2008)[288]Letter from Dimitris Kontos, secretary general, Ministry of Labor and SocialProtection, to Human Rights Watch, August 11, 2008.[289]Greece acknowledged it had insufficient numbers of labor inspectors in 2004,when the European Committee of Social Rights, the body that judges conformityof law and practice with the European Social Charter, concluded that Greece lacks effective supervision of health and safety regulations. See European Committeeof Social Rights, Conclusions XVIII-2 (GREECE), December 2007, http://www.coe.int/t/e/human_rights/esc/3_reporting_procedure/2_recent_conclusions/1_by_state/GreeceXVIII2_en.pdf(accessed July 18, 2008). Additionally, Greece was found to be in violation ofSocial Charter provisions in 2006 because it failed to effectively monitorhealth and safety regulations for mining workers, inter alia, due to a shortageof supervisory staff. European Committee of Social Rights, Decision on themerits, December 6, 2006, Marangopoulos Foundation for Human Rights (MFHR)v. Greece, Complaint No. 30/2005, http://hudoc.esc.coe.int/esc/search/default.asp?mode=esc&language=en&source=reage=en&source=re(accessed July 18, 2008).[290]The Legal Department of the Greek trade union G.S.E.E. informed us that laborinspectors do not inspect the agricultural sector due to a combination ofobstacles, including the lack of sufficient labor inspectors, restrictions inlabor legislation, and the application of a different social insurance schemefor the agricultural sector. Additionally, Greece has not ratified ILOConvention 184 concerning Safety and Health in Agriculture. Even though childlabor is not subject to these restrictions in law, these obstacles contributeto the lack of supervision of the entire sector. Human Rights Watch telephoneinterview with Elli Vartholome, legal advisor, trade union G.S.E.E., August 25,2008.[291]Dimitris Kontos, secretary general, Ministry of Labor and Social Protection, toHuman Rights Watch, August 11, 2008.[292]Human Rights Watch interview with Daniel Esdras, head of mission, InternationalOrganization for Migration, Athens, June 4, 2008. IOM trained judges andprosecutors in the past, but it has no on-going anti-trafficking trainingprogram for police officials.[293]UN Commission on Human Rights, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the sale ofchildren, child prostitution and child pornography, Juan Miguel Petit, Missionto Greece, E/CN.4/2006/67/Add.3, March 27, 2006, para. 12.[294]See also US State Department, Office to Monitorand Combat Trafficking in Human Beings, "Trafficking in Persons Report 2008: Greece," June 4, 2008, http://www.state.gov/g/tip/rls/tiprpt/2008/ (accessed September 12,2008).[295]Human Rights Watch interviews with Maria Kaldani, ARSIS, June 10, 2008; HumanRights Watch interview with Fotis Parthenidis, social worker, June 3, 2008;Human Rights Watch interview with Marina Rota, researcher, June 5, 2008.[296]Human Rights Watch interview with Gloria M., Samos, May 30, 2008.[297]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatime S., Petrou Ralli detention center, Athens, June 4, 2008.[298]Human Rights Watch visit to Petrou Ralli detention center, Athens, June 4,2008. Amnesty International did not findguidelines for police officers to identify trafficking victims during aninitial assessment. See Amnesty International, "Greece: Uphold the rights ofwomen and girls trafficked for sexual exploitation," June 12, 2007,http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/EUR25/002/2007/en/dom-EUR250022007en.pdf(accessed August 24, 2008), p. 12.[299]Human Rights Watch interview with Shakib K., ferry Mitilini-Piraeus, May 24,2008.[300]A recent UNHCR-commissioned study found that more than 22 Somali boys had beenarrested for drug-related offenses shortly after their arrival to Greece. They were apparently trafficked into Greece. See Papageorgiu and Dimitropoulou, UnaccompaniedMinors Study, p. 96.[301]Not all persons who offer accommodation when the ferry arrives are necessarilytraffickers. However, trafficking networks have an easy hand to operate andrecruit unaccompanied children who arrive to Athens without a place to stay.[302]The detention center had been without social worker for more than four months,as the former employee's contract expired, but it had a nurse on staff the dayof our visit.[303]In fact, the 12-year-old girl had been detained for two months before she, herbrother and cousin were detected by UNHCR/GCR staff. Nobody in the detentioncenter, including medical staff, alerted a specialized organization about herpresence. After the intervention by GCR, UNHCR, the Greek Ombudsman and severalother NGOs, the children were transferred to a care center; Human Rights Watchinterview with Panayotis Papadimitriou, Orestiada, May 25, 2008; Human RightsWatch interview with Sharzad P. and Sardar P., Kyprinou detention center, May25, 2008.[304]Human Rights Watch interview in June 2008 (Name, date, and exact locationwithheld).[305]Human Rights Watch interview with Ioannis Kotsampasis, chief of police, Samos, May 30, 2008.[306]Human Rights Watch interview with Georgios Salamagas, Kyprinou detentioncenter, May 25, 2008.[307]Human Rights Watch interview with Panayotis Papadimitriou, Greek Council forRefugees, Orestiada, May 25, 2008.[308]Human Rights Watch interview with Wali P., Athens, May 27, 2008.[309]CRC, art. 35.[310]Optional Protocol to theConvention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, childprostitution and child pornography, adopted May 25, 2000, G.A. Res.54/263, Annex II, 54 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 6, U.N. Doc. A/54/49, Vol. III(2000), entered into force January 18, 2002, ratified by Greece on February 22, 2008, preamble, art. 9(1).[311]See also Amnesty International, "Greece: Upholdthe rights of women and girls trafficked for sexual exploitation,"June12, 2007,http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/EUR25/002/2007 (accessed August 24,2008), pp. 8-10 and US State Department, Office to Monitor and CombatTrafficking in Human Beings, "Trafficking in Persons Report 2008: Greece," June4, 2008, http://www.state.gov/g/tip/rls/tiprpt/2008/ (accessed September 12, 2008).[312]Law 3386/2005, arts. 47(1), 48(1), 50(1).[313]Children can be granted additional reflection time of one month, according toarticle 48.2 of law 3386/2005, but they still have to cooperate withauthorities to receive victim status.[314]Human Rights Watch interview with Maria Kaldani, ARSIS, Athens, June 10, 2008. US State Department, Office to Monitor and CombatTrafficking in Human Beings, "Trafficking in Persons Report 2008: Greece," June 4, 2008, http://www.state.gov/g/tip/rls/tiprpt/2008/ (accessed September 12,2008)[315]The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress andPunish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, Supplementing theUnited Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime (TraffickingProtocol), G.A. Res. 25, annex II, U.N. GAOR, 55th Sess. Supp. No. 49, at 60,U.N. Doc. A/45/49 (Vol. I) (2001), entered into force December 25, 2003, art. 3; Law 3064/2002 oncombating trafficking in human beings, crimes against sexual freedom, childpornography and generally the economic exploitation of sexual freedom, andassistance to victims of such acts, Official Gazette A 248, art. 1. Thisexception is also included in article 1(3) of the legally binding EU CouncilFramework Decision of July 19, 2002 on combating trafficking in human beings(2002/629/JHA), http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2002:203:0001:0004:EN:PDF (accessed August 24,2008).[316]Greece ratified the optional protocol on February 22, 2008.[317]Greece signed the trafficking protocol on December 13, 2000.[318]Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings,CETS 197, entered into force February 1, 2008. Council of Europe Convention onthe Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse, CETS201, not yet in force.[319]The Committee on the Rights of the Child noted in 2002 that expulsion of streetchildren had taken place without regard as to their best interest.UNCommittee on the Rights of the Child, "Summary Record of the 754thMeeting." CRC/C/SR.754, September 13, 2002, para.48.The UN Special Rapporteur on the sale of children,child prostitution and child pornography raised serious concerns after hismission to Greece in 2005 that deportation of children remained the rule andtheir protection an exception. UN Commission on Human Rights, Report of theSpecial Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and childpornography, Juan Miguel Petit, Mission to Greece, E/CN.4/2006/67/Add.3, March27, 2006, para. 35.The Greek Ombudsman, in a special report issued in2005, highlighted a range of children's rights violation that were theconsequence of the government's practice of issuing deportation orders andenforcing deportation to countries that cooperate. George Moschos, KeynoteSpeech, Council of Europe Regional Conference on "Migration of UnaccompaniedMinors: Acting in the Best Interests of the Child," October 27-28, 2005,MG-RCONF (2005) 27e, p. 27.[320]The Deputy Minister of the Interior made these figures public on August 11,2008, in a reply to a parliamentary question. A copy of the reply is on filewith Human Rights Watch.[321]Facsimile from Constantinos Kordatos, Commander Aliens Division, HellenicPolice Headquarters to Human Rights Watch, October 1, 2008. The facsimile doesnot clarify whether these children had been refused refugee status or hadotherwise dropped out of asylum procedures.[322]Law 3386/2005, art. 76; According to article 79(1) of the same law, onlychildren who have asked for asylum, children sentenced by a juvenile court, orchildren whose parents reside legally in Greece are exempt from expulsion.[323]The cooperation agreement provides that both states agree to readmit persons,their own nationals as well as third-country nationals, who have crossedillegally from one country to the other. Agreement between the HellenicRepublic and the Republic of Turkey on cooperation of the Ministry of PublicOrder of the Hellenic Republic and the Ministry of Internal Affairs of theRepublic of Turkey on combating crime, especially, terrorism, organized crime,illicit drug trafficking and illegal immigration, January 20, 2000, art. 8.[324]Law 3064/2002, art. 13. The article provides thattrafficking victims "are repatriated by safe means without their dignity beingabused. For the repatriation of a child victim it is necessary for thecompetent prosecutor of minors to agree with the report of the officer ofminors prepared for this purpose." (unofficial translation). The bilateralagreement between Albania and Greece for the assistance of child victims oftrafficking provides for the safe repatriation of children. Greece ratified this agreement in August 2008, but has not applied it at the time thisreport went to press. Agreement between the Government of the Hellenic Republic and the Council of Ministers of the Republic of Albania for the protectionand assistance of children victims of trafficking, art. 14;"Greece has yet toratify a 2004 child repatriation agreement negotiated with Albania," US StateDepartment, Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Human Beings,"Trafficking in Persons Report 2008: Greece," June 4, 2008,http://www.state.gov/g/tip/rls/tiprpt/2008/ (accessed September 12, 2008).[325]Law 3386/2005, art. 76.[326]Human Rights Watch interviewed several adults who wanted to leave Greece but were unable to because they neither had money for a ticket nor validdocumentation.[327]Law 3386/2005, art. 77.[328]Ibid.[329]Greek Ombudsman, "Special Report: Administrative Detention and Deportation ofAlien Minors," Athens, October 2005, http://www.synigoros.gr/reports/SR-detention-expulsionOCTOBER-2005.pdf(accessed August 12, 2008), pp. 25-35.[330]National Commission for Human Rights, "Observations regarding the issue ofUnaccompanied Minors," February 15, 2007, in National Commission for HumanRights, Report 2006: Summary in English, March 2007.[331]Human Rights Watch interview with Anastasios G. Festas, general manager,Aliens' Division of Attica, Athens, June 4, 2008.[332]Human Rights Watch interview with Yiorgos Paliouras, police director, Aliens'Division of Attica, Amygdaleza detention center, Athens, June 3, 2008.[333]Council Regulation (EC) No. 343/2003 of 18 February 2003, establishing thecriteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible forexamining an asylum application lodged in one of the Member States by athird-country national, Official Journal L 050 , 25/02/2003 P. 0001 – 0010, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32003R0343:EN:HTML(accessed October 23, 2008); for a full discussion of the Dublin II regulation,see Human Rights Watch, Greece – Stuck in a Revolving Door, pp. 22-26.[334]For asummary of applicable criteria to determine the member state responsible forassessing a person's asylum application, see European Council on Refugees andExiles, "Report on the Application of the Dublin II Regulation in Europe,"AD3/3/2006/EXT/MH, March 2006,http://www.ecre.org/files/ECRE%20Dublin%20Report%2007.03.06%20-%20final.pdf(accessed October 23, 2008), p. 11.[335]Council Regulation (EC) No. 343/2003, art. 3(2).[336]"Wherethe applicant for asylum is an unaccompanied minor, the Member State responsible for examining the application shall be that where a member of his or herfamily is legally present, provided that this is in the best interest of theminor. In the absence of a family member, the Member State responsible forexamining the application shall be that where the minor has lodged his or herapplication for asylum," Council Regulation (EC) No. 343/2003, art.6.[337]Memberstates may but are not obliged to bring together family members on humanitariangrounds; member states are  also urged to unite, if possible, unaccompaniedchildren with relative(s) unless it is not in the child's best interests.Council Regulation (EC) No. 343/2003, art. 15,(1)(3).[338]Council Regulation (EC) No. 343/2003, art. 2(i).[339]Separated Children in Europe Programme, "TheImplementation of the Dublin II Regulation and the Best Interests of SeparatedChildren," March, 2006,http://www.separated-children-europe-programme.org/separated_children/publications/reports/Dublin_II.pdf(accessed August 14, 2008); UNHCR, "The Dublin II Regulation," April 2006, http://www.unhcr.org/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/refworld/rwmain?docid=4445fe344&page=search(accessed August 14, 2008); European Council on Refugees and Exiles andEuropean Legal Network on Asylum, "Summary Report on the Application of theDublin II Regulation in Europe," March 2006, http://www.ecre.org/files/ECRE%20Summary%20Report%20on%20Dublin%2007.03.06%20-%20final.pdf(accessed August 14, 2008); European Council on Refugees and Exiles (ECRE),"The Dublin Regulation: Twenty Voices – Twenty Reasons for Change," March 2007,http://www.europarl.europa.eu/document/activities/cont/200805/20080522ATT29686/20080522ATT29686EN.pdf(accessed August 14, 2008).[340]Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on Communitystatistics on migration and international protection and repealing CouncilRegulation (EEC) No. 311/76 on the compilation of statistics on foreignworkers, Official Journal L 199 , 31/07/2007 P. 0023 - 0029 , June 1,2007,http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32007R0862:EN:HTML(accessed August 28, 2008), art. 4.4. Member states are not required to enterthe age of the migrant or asylum seeker into the "Eurodac" database. ECRegulation EC 2725/2000of11 December 2000 concerning the establishment of 'Eurodac' for the comparisonof fingerprints for the effective application of the Dublin Convention, L316/1, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2000:316:0001:0010:EN:PDF(accessed August 29, 2008), art. 5.[341]Greek Helsinki Monitor, "Norway suspends asylum seekers referral to Greece because of rights violations," press release, February 10, 2008,http://www.statewatch.org/news/2008/feb/greece-norway-dublin-violations.pdf(accessed September 3, 2008). "Tightening of the immigration policy," NorwayMinistry of Labour and Social Inclusion, press release, no. 88, September 3,2008,http://www.regjeringen.no/en/dep/aid/Press-Centre/Press-Releases/2008/tightening-of-the-immigration-policy.html?id=525564(accessed September 12, 2008).[342]Leigh Philips, "Finland halts Migrant Transfer to Greece after UN criticism," EUObserver, April 21, 2008 http://euobserver.com/9/26016 (accessed September3, 2008).[343]"Sweden halts return of child asylum seekers to Greece," The Local, May 7, 2008, http://www.thelocal.se/11584/20080507/ (accessedSeptember 12, 2008). UN High Commissioner for Refugees, UNHCRPosition on the Return of Asylum seekers to Greece under the "Dublin Regulation," April 15, 2008, http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/4805bde42.html(accessed September 12, 2008), footnote 31.Additionally, several national courts, includingcourts in the Netherlands, Belgium, Germany and Sweden, as well as the EuropeanCourt of Human Rights, have halted transfers under the Dublin regulation. SeeHuman Rights Watch, Greece – Stuck in a Revolving Door, p. 85, footnote214. European Council on Refugees and Exile, "Dutch district court blocks Dublin transfer to Greece," ECRAN Weekly Update of July 11,http://www.ecre.org/files/ECRAN%20Weekly%20Update%2011%20July%202008.pdf(accessed September 3, 2008). European Council on Refugees and Exile,"Belgian court stops Dublin-transfer of asylum seeker to Greece," ECRAN Weekly Update of April 18, 2008,http://www.ecre.org/files/ECRAN%20Weekly%20Update%2018%20April%202008.pdf(accessed September 12, 2008). NGOs, however, raised concerns that whilecountries suspended transfers to Greece they did not examine the claims andasylum seekers found themselves in legal limbo.[344]Testimonieswere also provided by Nader Q., Khan A., Muhsin T., and Nabi D.[345]HumanRights Watch interview, Patras, June 9, 2008 (exact name withheld).[346]HumanRights Watch interview with Nader Q., Volos, June 11, 2008.[347]Human Rights Watch interview with Jafar F., Patras, June 8, 2008.[348]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Wali P., August 29, 2008. The boytold us that Italian police offered not to fingerprint him should he intend totravel to another country.[349]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with a friend of Ghulam S., June 17,2008 (exact name withheld).[350]European Council Directive 2001/51/EC of 28 June 2001, supplementing theprovisions of Article 26 of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreementof 14 June 1985.[351]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Giorgos Telonis, Blue Star Ferries,September 1, 2008.[352] Ferry and truck companiesare reported employ private security personnel who operate within the Patrasport premises; Human Rights Watch interview, Patras, June 9, 2008 (exact namewithheld).[353]CRC, art. 3; UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 6,para. 79.[354]CRC, art. 22; UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 6,para. 66. UNHCR Guidelines, section 7, 1.[355]CRC, art. 3; UNHCR Guidelines, section 9.[356]ICCPR, art. 7; CAT, art. 3; ECHR, art.3: CRC, art. 37(1); Geneva Convention,art. 33.[357]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No.6, para. 84.[358]Ibid.[359]ECHR, art. 13 and art. 3[360]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No.6, para. 36.[361]UNHCR Guidelines, section 9. UN High Commissioner for Refugees, "UNHCRGuidelines on Formal Determination of the Best Interests of the Child," May2006, http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/447d5bf24.html (accessed 3 September2008).[362]MubilanzilaMayeka and Kaniki Mitunga v. Belgium, (Application no. 13178/03), October12, 2006, available atwww.echr.coe.int,para. 68.[363]Nsonav. The Netherlands, (23366/94), Judgment of 26 June and 26 October 1996;63/1995/569/655, available atwww.echr.coe.int,para. 92(c).[364]CRC, arts. 3(1), 20(1).Region / CountryEurope/Central Asia GreeceProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch