Abandoned by the State: Violence, Neglect, and Isolation for Children with Disabilities in Russian Orphanages | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload the summary and recommendations: photo featureDownload the easy to read versionDonate NowPhoto GalleryDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload the summary and recommendations: photo featureDownload the easy to read versionSeptember 15, 2014Abandoned by the StateViolence, Neglect, and Isolation for Children with Disabilities in Russian OrphanagesAvailable InEnglishРусскийDownload the easy to read versionPhoto GalleryChildren in specialized orphanages for young children in central Russia often spend their days with little to no attention from staff, who often lacked training on how to engage children with disabilities in educational or recreational activities. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Nikita P., a 10-year-old boy, in his crib in a Sverdlovsk region orphanage for children with developmental disabilities. Children segregated into separate “lying-down” rooms spend the overwhelming majority of their days confined to cribs or beds. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Roman K., 18, (left) and Lyuba P., 15, in a “lying-down” ward of an orphanage for children with disabilities in northwest Russia. Roman K. was awaiting transfer to an institution for adults with disabilities. A pediatrician specializing in the health of children with disabilities told Human Rights Watch that, based on photographs, both Roman K. and Lyuba P. appeared significantly underdeveloped for their ages, a possible result of lack of adequate nutrition, stimulation, and health care. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Sveta L., a 13-year-old girl in her crib in a “lying-down” room of an orphanage for children with disabilities in northwest Russia. A pediatrician specializing in the health of children with disabilities told Human Rights Watch that, based on photographs, Sveta L. appeared significantly underdeveloped for her age, a possible result of lack of stimulation and a well-rounded diet. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Natasha K. lives in an orphanage for children with disabilities in northwest Russia, in a room for girls between the ages of 12 and 18. Lacking training and other resources to engage Natasha K. using nonviolent means, staff bound Natasha K.’s hands behind her back in order to prevent her from scratching at her eyes. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Children in a specialized orphanage for young children with disabilities in central Russia. Staff sometimes bound children’s arms to their torsos in order to prevent them from scratching at their eyes or from leaving their high chairs or cribs. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309A boy crouches on the floor of a state orphanage for children with disabilities, Sverdlovsk region. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309A group of girls, ages 10 to 15, in an orphanage for children with disabilities in northwest Russia. Many children in “specialized” orphanages spend their days seated in rooms with minimal attention from staff, who often lack training and other resources to engage children in activities appropriate to their ages and disabilities. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Wheelchairs stacked on the upper balconies of an institution for adults with disabilities in northwest Russia. Staff told Human Rights Watch that the institution saves rehabilitation equipment such as wheelchairs in order to account for them during government audits. Residents of this institution who could use these wheelchairs are instead confined to beds all day due to staff’s conviction that they are too sick to engage in activities. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309The wall surrounding a psychoneurological internat, or a closed institution for adults with disabilities. For the vast majority of children with disabilities living in state orphanages, entry into psychoneurological internats at age 18 is a near certainty. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Dasha, a girl with Down syndrome, shortly after her first birthday in Moscow in 2000. This photo was taken during Dasha’s first days at home with her family to whom she returned after spending the first year of her life in a local orphanage. © Private 452309Dasha, who spent her first year of her life in an orphanage, reading at home in Moscow with her younger sister Anya. © Private 452309Dasha, at home in Moscow with her parents, where she enjoys taking care of her elderly grandmother and younger sister, also in the photo. © Private 452309452309A child in a Russian state orphanage for children with disabilities.© 2011 Gordon Welters/laif /ReduxPhoto GalleryChildren in specialized orphanages for young children in central Russia often spend their days with little to no attention from staff, who often lacked training on how to engage children with disabilities in educational or recreational activities. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Nikita P., a 10-year-old boy, in his crib in a Sverdlovsk region orphanage for children with developmental disabilities. Children segregated into separate “lying-down” rooms spend the overwhelming majority of their days confined to cribs or beds. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Roman K., 18, (left) and Lyuba P., 15, in a “lying-down” ward of an orphanage for children with disabilities in northwest Russia. Roman K. was awaiting transfer to an institution for adults with disabilities. A pediatrician specializing in the health of children with disabilities told Human Rights Watch that, based on photographs, both Roman K. and Lyuba P. appeared significantly underdeveloped for their ages, a possible result of lack of adequate nutrition, stimulation, and health care. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Sveta L., a 13-year-old girl in her crib in a “lying-down” room of an orphanage for children with disabilities in northwest Russia. A pediatrician specializing in the health of children with disabilities told Human Rights Watch that, based on photographs, Sveta L. appeared significantly underdeveloped for her age, a possible result of lack of stimulation and a well-rounded diet. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Natasha K. lives in an orphanage for children with disabilities in northwest Russia, in a room for girls between the ages of 12 and 18. Lacking training and other resources to engage Natasha K. using nonviolent means, staff bound Natasha K.’s hands behind her back in order to prevent her from scratching at her eyes. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Children in a specialized orphanage for young children with disabilities in central Russia. Staff sometimes bound children’s arms to their torsos in order to prevent them from scratching at their eyes or from leaving their high chairs or cribs. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309A boy crouches on the floor of a state orphanage for children with disabilities, Sverdlovsk region. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309A group of girls, ages 10 to 15, in an orphanage for children with disabilities in northwest Russia. Many children in “specialized” orphanages spend their days seated in rooms with minimal attention from staff, who often lack training and other resources to engage children in activities appropriate to their ages and disabilities. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Wheelchairs stacked on the upper balconies of an institution for adults with disabilities in northwest Russia. Staff told Human Rights Watch that the institution saves rehabilitation equipment such as wheelchairs in order to account for them during government audits. Residents of this institution who could use these wheelchairs are instead confined to beds all day due to staff’s conviction that they are too sick to engage in activities. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309The wall surrounding a psychoneurological internat, or a closed institution for adults with disabilities. For the vast majority of children with disabilities living in state orphanages, entry into psychoneurological internats at age 18 is a near certainty. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Dasha, a girl with Down syndrome, shortly after her first birthday in Moscow in 2000. This photo was taken during Dasha’s first days at home with her family to whom she returned after spending the first year of her life in a local orphanage. © Private 452309Dasha, who spent her first year of her life in an orphanage, reading at home in Moscow with her younger sister Anya. © Private 452309Dasha, at home in Moscow with her parents, where she enjoys taking care of her elderly grandmother and younger sister, also in the photo. © Private 452309452309Abandoned by the StateViolence, Neglect, and Isolation for Children withDisabilities in Russian OrphanagesKey TermsSummaryKeyRecommendationsTo theRussian Government, including the Ministries of Labor and Social Protection,Health, and EducationImmediatelyMedium toLong-TermToRussia’s International Partners, Including the European Union and itsMember States, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the WorldBank and Other International Financial Institutions, and All Donors –Governmental and Nongovernmental – Engaged in Assistance Programs withRussia in the Context of Multilateral and Bilateral FundingMethodologyI.BackgroundHigh Ratesof InstitutionalizationRussia’sSystem of SegregationInfant CareInstitutionsInstitutionsfor School-Age ChildrenConsequencesof Institutionalization and Better AlternativesII. Physicaland Psychological Violence in  Russian InstitutionsPhysicalViolenceUse ofRestraintsBindingConfinementto CribsCaseStudies: Developmental Consequences of Physical RestraintsChemicalRestraints (Sedatives)ForcedPsychiatric Hospitalization as PunishmentUse ofIsolation When Transferring to New Institutions or as PunishmentPsychologicalViolenceThreatsInsults andDerogatory LanguageNeglect byCaregiversDiscouragementof Family ContactLack ofEffective Complaint MechanismsLack ofEffective Monitoring: “No One Checks on the Child”III. Neglectand Lack of Health Care, Education, and PlayLack ofAdequate NutritionLack ofAdequate Health Care and RehabilitationClinicalExaminations (“Dispanserizatsiia”)Failure toSecure Treatment Outside of InstitutionsLack ofAccess to EducationAbsence ofEducation for Children in “Lying-down” RoomsEfforts atEducation for Children Living in InstitutionsLack ofAccess to Play and RecreationSeverePhysical and Cognitive UnderdevelopmentNikita P.:Confinement to a Metal CribSveta L.:The Influence of Chronic StressLyuba P.: AnAvoidable Developmental DelayRoman K.: ALifetime of DeprivationThe PMPCExamLack ofPreparation for Self-Reliance and Participation in the CommunityRights toHealth, Adequate Nutrition, Education, and PlayIV.Pressures to Institutionalize ChildrenPressure onParents by Medical PersonnelPressure toRelinquish Children at BirthPressure toRelinquish Children in Older YearsObstacles toRaising Children in the CommunityLack ofFinancial SupportLack ofAccess to Health Care and RehabilitationLack ofAccess to EducationRights toFamily Life, Education, and an Accessible EnvironmentV. GovernmentResponseThe NationalAction Strategy in the Interests of Children for 2012-2017Foundationfor Support of Children in Difficult Life SituationsDraftAmendments on Accessibility and NondiscriminationRecentInitiatives Concerning OrphanagesVI.Alternatives to InstitutionalizationProblemswith Existing Alternatives to InstitutionalizationLack ofMechanisms to Place Children with FamiliesLack ofSocial Support for Foster and Adoptive FamiliesDissuadingPeople from Adopting Children with DisabilitiesSuccessStories: Children’s Transformations in Family SettingsNGOs Fillingthe GapsRecommendationsTo theRussian Government, Including the Ministries of Labor and Social Protection,Health, and EducationImmediatelyMedium toLong-TermTo theRussian State DumaToRussia’s Children’s Rights CommissionerToRussia’s International PartnersAcknowledgementsAppendix:Government Letters, RepliesSummaryThe staff used to hit me and drag me by the hair. They gaveme pills to calm me down.– Nastia Y., a 19-year-old woman with a developmentaldisability, describing the treatment of staff in an orphanage for children withdevelopmental disabilities in Pskov region, where she lived from 1998 to 2011Every child with a disability in Russia has a significantchance of ending up in a state-run orphanage. Nearly 30 percent of all Russianchildren with disabilities live separately from their families and communitiesin closed institutions. These children have a rangeof impairments, including physical disabilities such as limited mobility,blindness, and deafness; developmental disabilities such as Down’ssyndrome; and psychosocial disabilities such as depression, among others. Childrenwith disabilities in state orphanages may be subject to serious abuses andneglect that severely impede their physical, emotional, and intellectualgrowth.Children with disabilities may be overrepresented ininstitutional care. An international children’s rights nongovernmentalorganization (NGO) estimates that approximately 45 percent of children livingin state institutions have some form of disability, despite the fact thatchildren with disabilities account for only 2 to 5 percent of Russia’stotal child population. The Russian government’s failure to ensuremeaningful alternatives for these children means that many children withdisabilities spend their childhoods within the walls of institutions, neverenjoying a family home, attending school, or playing outside like otherchildren.Children in specialized orphanages for young children in central Russia often spend their days with little to no attention from staff, who often lacked training on how to engage children with disabilities in educational or recreational activities. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Nikita P., a 10-year-old boy, in his crib in a Sverdlovsk region orphanage for children with developmental disabilities. Children segregated into separate “lying-down” rooms spend the overwhelming majority of their days confined to cribs or beds. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Roman K., 18, (left) and Lyuba P., 15, in a “lying-down” ward of an orphanage for children with disabilities in northwest Russia. Roman K. was awaiting transfer to an institution for adults with disabilities. A pediatrician specializing in the health of children with disabilities told Human Rights Watch that, based on photographs, both Roman K. and Lyuba P. appeared significantly underdeveloped for their ages, a possible result of lack of adequate nutrition, stimulation, and health care. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Sveta L., a 13-year-old girl in her crib in a “lying-down” room of an orphanage for children with disabilities in northwest Russia. A pediatrician specializing in the health of children with disabilities told Human Rights Watch that, based on photographs, Sveta L. appeared significantly underdeveloped for her age, a possible result of lack of stimulation and a well-rounded diet. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Natasha K. lives in an orphanage for children with disabilities in northwest Russia, in a room for girls between the ages of 12 and 18. Lacking training and other resources to engage Natasha K. using nonviolent means, staff bound Natasha K.’s hands behind her back in order to prevent her from scratching at her eyes. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Children in a specialized orphanage for young children with disabilities in central Russia. Staff sometimes bound children’s arms to their torsos in order to prevent them from scratching at their eyes or from leaving their high chairs or cribs. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309A boy crouches on the floor of a state orphanage for children with disabilities, Sverdlovsk region. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309A group of girls, ages 10 to 15, in an orphanage for children with disabilities in northwest Russia. Many children in “specialized” orphanages spend their days seated in rooms with minimal attention from staff, who often lack training and other resources to engage children in activities appropriate to their ages and disabilities. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Wheelchairs stacked on the upper balconies of an institution for adults with disabilities in northwest Russia. Staff told Human Rights Watch that the institution saves rehabilitation equipment such as wheelchairs in order to account for them during government audits. Residents of this institution who could use these wheelchairs are instead confined to beds all day due to staff’s conviction that they are too sick to engage in activities. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309The wall surrounding a psychoneurological internat, or a closed institution for adults with disabilities. For the vast majority of children with disabilities living in state orphanages, entry into psychoneurological internats at age 18 is a near certainty. © 2013 Andrea Mazzarino/Human Rights Watch 452309Dasha, a girl with Down syndrome, shortly after her first birthday in Moscow in 2000. This photo was taken during Dasha’s first days at home with her family to whom she returned after spending the first year of her life in a local orphanage. © Private 452309Dasha, who spent her first year of her life in an orphanage, reading at home in Moscow with her younger sister Anya. © Private 452309Dasha, at home in Moscow with her parents, where she enjoys taking care of her elderly grandmother and younger sister, also in the photo. © Private 452309 452309This report is based on visits by Human Rights Watchresearchers to 10 orphanages in 6 regions of Russia, as well as on more than200 interviews with parents, children, and young people currently and formerlyliving in institutions in these regions in addition to 2 other regions ofRussia. Children described how orphanage staff beat them, used physicalrestraints to tie them to furniture, or gave them powerful sedatives in effortsto control behavior that staff deemed undesirable. Staff also forcibly isolatedchildren, denied them contact with their relatives, and sometimes forced themto undergo psychiatric hospitalization as punishment.Many children also experienced poor nutrition and lack ofmedical care and rehabilitation, resulting in some cases in severely stuntedgrowth and lack of normal physical development. Human Rights Watch determinedthat the combination of these practices can constitute inhuman and degradingtreatment. Children with disabilities living in orphanages also had little orno access to education, recreation, and play.Children with certain types of disabilities, typically thosewho cannot walk or talk, are confined to so-called “lying-down”rooms in separate wards, where staff force them to remain in cribs for almosttheir entire lives. Human Rights Watch documented particularly severe forms ofneglect in “lying-down” rooms in the institutions it researched.The practice of keeping children with certain types of disabilities in suchconditions is discriminatory, inhumane and degrading, and it should beabolished.Research by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)and others has demonstrated that institutionalization has serious consequencesfor children’s physical, cognitive, and emotional development, and thatthe violence children may experience in institutions can lead to severedevelopmental delays, various disabilities, irreversible psychological harm,and increased rates of suicide and criminal activity. UNICEF has urgedgovernments throughout Central and Eastern Europe and Central Asia to stopsending children under the age of 3, including children with disabilities, toinstitutions.While Russia lacks comprehensive and clear statistics onchildren in state institutions or foster care, experts estimate that the overwhelmingmajority of these children have at least one living parent. Russia’s highrate of institutionalization of children with disabilities results from a lackof government and state-supported services, such as inclusive education,accessible rehabilitation, and other support that would make it feasible forchildren’s families to raise them. In addition, many parents facepressure from healthcare workers to relinquish children with disabilities tostate care, including at birth. Human Rights Watch documented a number of casesin which medical staff claimed, falsely, that children with certain types ofdisabilities had no potential to develop intellectually or emotionally and wouldpose a burden with which parents will be unable to cope. In all of these cases,the children raised in their families had far exceeded any expectations.Children with disabilities who enter institutions at a youngage are unlikely to return to their birth families as a result of the practice oflocal-level state commissions to recommend continued institutionalization ofchildren. The Russian government has failed to adequately support andfacilitate adoption and fostering of children with disabilities, although thesetypes of programs formally exist. As a result, when children with disabilitiesturn 18 and age out of orphanages, they are overwhelmingly placed in stateinstitutions for adults with disabilities. Staff in many orphanages also failto provide training and practical knowledge that would give children the skillsthey need to live independently once they become adults.While in orphanages, children with disabilities may besubject to serious violence, neglect, and threats. For example, Human RightsWatch documented the use of sedatives to restrain children deemed to be too“active” in 8 out of the 10 institutions it visited in the courseof researching this report. Twenty-five year-old Andrei M., a young man with adevelopmental disability who lived in an orphanage in Pskov region until 2008,told Human Rights Watch, “They constantly gave us injections, and thenthey sent us to the bedroom so that we would sleep.”Human Rights Watch spoke with many orphanage staff whoexpressed a desire to support children’s maximal development and whoworked hard to do so with the information and resources at their disposal. Someof these staff were also those who used practices such as physical and chemicalrestraints, for example. The findings below are presented with theunderstanding that well-intentioned staff often engage in unacceptablechildrearing methods because they lack information, such as training innonviolent disciplinary methods, as well as resources, such as additionalpersonnel to help them care for large numbers of children.Children with disabilities living in state institutions mayalso face various forms of neglect, including lack of access to adequatenutrition, health care and rehabilitation, play and recreation, attention fromcaregivers, and education. For example, Olga V., a pediatrician at a Sverdlovskregion orphanage for children with developmental disabilities, stated that notall children in the orphanage go to school, including 150 children in“lying-down” rooms who she claimed were “uneducable” (neobuchaemy)– an outdated diagnosis that state doctors and institution staff continueto assign to some children. In the same orphanage, another pediatrician statedthat rather than select food appropriate for children’s ages and healthneeds, staff “grind up whatever we have and use tubes to feed the ones whocan’t feed themselves.”As a result of violence and neglect, children withdisabilities in state institutions can be severely physically and cognitively underdevelopedfor their ages. Nina B., an independent, Moscow-based pediatrician specializingin the health of children with disabilities, told Human Rights Watch thatchildren from orphanages often become atrophied due to lack of stimulation,movement, and access to rehabilitation services.Children with disabilities living in state institutions alsoface numerous obstacles to adoption and fostering, including lack of governmentmechanisms to actively locate foster and adoptive parents for children withdisabilities; lack of support for adoptive and foster families of children withdisabilities; and some state officials’ negative attitudes towardschildren with disabilities and their active attempts to dissuade parents fromadopting or fostering these children on the basis that they will be unable tocare for them.The Russian federal government has in recent years developedseveral policies that include important measures to end institutionalizationand provide better alternatives for children with disabilities and theirfamilies. For example, the government formulated the National Action Strategyin the Interests of Children for 2012-2017, which aims to create governmentsupport services that would enable children with disabilities to remain intheir birth families, return children with disabilities who live ininstitutions to their birth families, and increase the number of Russianregions that do not use any form of institutional care for orphans. Thegovernment also established a foundation to finance projects by regionalgovernments and NGOs in certain priority areas, including prevention of child abandonmentand social inclusion of children with disabilities.However, these well-intentioned policies lack clear federalplans for implementation and monitoring. As such, they fail to adequatelyaddress the widespread practice of institutionalization of children withdisabilities and to create sufficient meaningful alternatives for children withdisabilities and their families.In May 2014 the Russian government also passed a resolutionthat establishes orphanages as temporary institutions whose primary purpose isto place children in families and mandates that orphanages protectchildren’s rights to health care, nutrition, and information about theirrights, among other fundamental rights guaranteed under the Convention on theRights of the Child (CRC). While the resolution contains important protectionsfor all children living in state institutions, Human Rights Watch is concernedthat several of its articles may segregate children with disabilities living instate institutions from their peers without disabilities and that theresolution does not give sufficient attention to the needs of children withdisabilities with regard to adoption, fostering, and access to information ontheir rights.Russia has a robust civil society, including many groups thatadvocate on behalf of children with disabilities and provide services to both childrenin institutions and children with disabilities and their families outside ofinstitutions. For example, several groups in Moscow and other Russian citiesraise awareness about the human rights and dignity of people with disabilities,provide parents of newborns with disabilities with information on servicesavailable to these children in the community, and provide services such assupport groups to parents of children with disabilities.With regard to disability rights, the Russian government hastaken steps to create more accessible infrastructure and community-basedservices for all persons with disabilities. For example, in May 2014 theRussian State Duma accepted in their first reading a set of amendments that includea prohibition against disability-based discrimination and an expanded list ofchanges to be made so that public facilities and services are accessible.While these initiatives are important, Russia has a long wayto go to enable children with disabilities to grow up in their communities andparticipate in community life. Most importantly, Human Rights Watch has foundthat children with disabilities and their families have felt the effects of thegovernment measures to a very limited extent. Parents continue to give up theirchildren to state care with little or no information about theirchildren’s rights and developmental potential or about community-basedservices that are available to help them raise their children.In order to ensure protection of the rights of children withdisabilities in Russia and to comply with its international human rightsobligations, the government should immediately adopt a zero tolerance policyfor violence, ill-treatment, isolation, and neglect of children withdisabilities living in state institutions and guarantee children’s rightsto food, education, and play. In addition, the government should accelerate andexpand initiatives to prevent healthcare workers from pressuring parents of childrenwith disabilities to relinquish care to institutions. In cases where childrenare orphaned or living without parental care, the government should ensure thatinstitutionalization is used only in the short term, in emergency situations,to prevent the separation of siblings, and when necessary and constructive forthe child and in his or her best interest.In the long term, Russia should take concrete steps to endthe institutionalization of children, especially infants separated from theirparents, with extremely limited exceptions, as described above.Until the government acts, it will needlessly continue toconsign these children to lifetimes within four walls, isolated from theirfamilies and communities, and robbed of the opportunities available to otherchildren.Key RecommendationsTo the RussianGovernment, including the Ministries of Labor and Social Protection, Health,and EducationImmediatelyEstablish a zero tolerance policy for statechildren’s institution staff who beat, humiliate, or insultchildren.End the use of physical restraints, sedatives, forcedisolation, and forced psychiatric treatment as means of managing ordisciplining children in care.Abolish the practice of confining children with certaintypes of disabilities to “lying-down” rooms.Ensure that parents and children are able to contact andvisit with one another at will, with no adverse consequences to children’swell-being.Guarantee children with disabilities living in stateinstitutions access to inclusive education, adequate nutrition and water,health care, rehabilitation, and play.Establish robust monitoring mechanisms and systems ofredress accessible to children with disabilities.Ensure institutionalization is used only in the short term,in emergency situations, to prevent the separation of siblings, whennecessary and constructive for the child, and in his or her best interest,including by:Providing information to expectant parents and healthcareworkers who serve new parents on the rights and dignity of children withdisabilities;Providing parents of children with disabilities telephonenumbers and addresses of community-based support services such as earlyeducation programs for children with disabilities.Medium to Long-TermEstablish a time-bound plan to end theinstitutionalization of children, especially infants separated from theirparents, with extremely limited exceptions. This plan should:Ensure that state financing for formal care of childrenwith disabilities privileges family-based care options;Include measures to return children with disabilities totheir birth families and ensure that families have adequate support tocare for these children;Include measures to actively encourage adoption andfostering of children with disabilities.Fully realize efforts to make Russian communitiesaccessible and inclusive to all persons with disabilities, includingchildren with disabilities.To Russia’s International Partners, Includingthe European Union and its Member States, the United Nations Children’sFund (UNICEF), the World Bank and Other International Financial Institutions,and All Donors – Governmental and Nongovernmental – Engaged inAssistance Programs with Russia in the Context of Multilateral and Bilateral FundingEarmark financial and other forms of support andassistance toward support services for families of young children withdisabilities and prevention of child abandonment, as well as toward familyreunification and other forms of family-based care for children withdisabilities separated from their biological families.MethodologyThe field research for this report was conducted betweenNovember 2012 and December 2013 across eight regions of Russia (city of Moscow,Moscow region, city of St. Petersburg, Leningrad region, Sverdlovsk region,Buryatia, Karelia, and Pskov region).These regions were selected because of their diversity. InSt. Petersburg and Leningrad region, we were interested in measures city andregional governments had taken to increase access to education for childrenwith disabilities in institutions. We chose Sverdlovsk region, Buryatia,Karelia, the city of Moscow, Moscow region, and Pskov region because of variousinnovative measures that nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in several citiesin these regions are taking to support accessibility for people – includingchildren with disabilities – to education and health care and to supportfoster care and adoption of children with disabilities. To protect the securityof several institution staff, volunteers, children, and activists, this reportrefers to some interviews as having taken place in northwest Russia.This report is based on 213 interviews, both in Russia andby phone before and after field research, including with 48 children and youngpeople with disabilities who currently live in or have lived in stateinstitutions within the past 10 years. Human Rights Watch also interviewed 48parents and family members of children with disabilities, including foster andadoptive parents.Twenty-five interviewees were children ages 5 to 17, and 23were young adults ages 18 to 28. The term “children and young people withdisabilities” includes those with developmental disabilities such asDown’s syndrome; psychosocial disabilities such as depression; sensorydisabilities (including blindness, low vision, deafness, and hardness ofhearing); and limited mobility. Some children and young people whom HumanRights Watch interviewed had multiple disabilities.Human Rights Watch visited 10 state institutions wherechildren with disabilities live, housing up to 400 children. These institutionsincluded 3 specialized infant care institutions (“baby houses”) forchildren with disabilities from newborn to age 4 and 7 children’s homesfor children between ages 4 to 17. Six of the children’s homes were specializedhomes for children with disabilities and one children’s home includedchildren with and without disabilities. In addition, we visited twoinstitutions for adults with disabilities (in Russian, psychoneurologicalinternats or PNIs) in Moscow region and in northwest Russia.During our institutional visits and in other settings, weinterviewed 39 current or former staff members (directors and vice-directorsand medical and other staff) of state children’s institutions, including3 former directors of children’s homes. Additionally, Human Rights Watchconducted interviews with three Russian doctors who specialize in the health of children with disabilities, includingchildren residing in institutions. We also spoke with two regional governmentofficials: Yuri Kuznitsov, advisor to the chairmanof the St. PetersburgCommitteeon Social Policy, and Tatiana Merzliakova,Sverdlovsk region human rights ombudsperson.Human Rights Watch spoke alsowith 39 activists with local and international children’s and disabilityrights NGOs with offices in Russia. HumanRights Watch researchers also consulted international disability rights expertsat various stages of the research.Whenever possible, Human Rights Watch spoke directly withchildren and young people with disabilities. In all regions but Pskov andnorthwest Russia as a whole, researchers faced difficulties speaking withchildren living in institutions in conditions that would not place them at riskof possible retaliation by orphanage staff. For this reason, the majority of directtestimony from children and young people with disabilities comes from theseregions.We interviewed children and young people with disabilitieson a variety of topics, including their treatment by staff in institutions;their access to education, adequate nutrition, and health care andrehabilitation in institutions; their access to recreation; and their contactwith family members, among other issues. We also interviewed children and youngpeople with disabilities about their experiences accessing education, healthcare, and rehabilitation in their communities.This report notes children’s ages at the time whenevents they reported occurred whenever possible. However, many children andyoung people whom Human Rights Watch interviewed who had spent years living ininstitutions were unable to recall their ages or the years and months in whichevents occurred. These children and young people did not attend schoolregularly, spent most of their time indoors with little or no access to theInternet or print media, did not celebrate their birthdays, and had few otherways to recall dates or their ages when events in their lives occurred.Sometimes they referenced events by the day of the week they occurred becausemany children ate the same meal on a given day of the week for years. It wastherefore not uncommon for a child to make a statement that a violent event“happened on a Sunday, because we had potatoes,” for example.With activists, parents, doctors, journalists, andinstitution staff, we discussed these topics as well as pressure that parentshave experienced to relinquish care of their children to institutions. We alsodiscussed mechanisms for the placement of children in foster or adoptivefamilies and mechanisms for the return of children to their birth families.Nearly all interviews were facilitated by local NGOs, disabled personsorganizations (DPOs), or children’s and disability rights advocates.All interviews were conducted in Russian or English. Foreach person interviewed, we explained our work in age-appropriate terms. Beforeeach interview, we informed potential participants of the purpose of theresearch and asked whether they wanted to participate. We informed participantsthat they could discontinue the interview at any time or decline to answer anyspecific questions without consequence.Human Rights Watch took great care to interview people in asensitive manner and ensured that the interviews took place in a location wherethe interviewees’ privacy was protected. Most persons over age 18 in thereport are identified by pseudonyms in order to protect their privacy andconfidentiality, unless they requested to be identified by their real names.Human Rights Watch has used pseudonyms for all children interviewed for thisreport as well as their parents, except where indicated.Human Rights Watch sent letters to the Ministry of Health,the Ministry of Labor and Social Protection, the Ministry of Education, and toPavel Alekseevich Astakhov, children’s rights commissioner of the RussianFederation, with questions regarding the findings of this report; seekingrecent statistics on the number of children with disabilities in Russian stateinstitutions; and requesting information on the government’s handling ofcomplaints by or on behalf of children with disabilities regarding abuses instate institutions. We received a response from each of the abovementionedministries and offices.[10]As part of this research, we also reviewed a number ofRussian government policies and laws and relevant reports from United Nationsagencies and NGOs.Key TermsBaby houses(doma rebyonka): State residential institutionsfor orphans and children without parental care, age 4 and under.Cerebral palsy: An impairment of muscular function and weakness ofthe limbs. Often accompanied by poor motor skills, it sometimes involves speechand learning difficulties.[1]Children’s homes(detskie doma): State residential institutionsfor orphans and children without parental care, ages 4 to 18.Child without parentalcare: A child under the age of 18living without the care of a parent.[2]Developmental disability: An umbrella term that refers to any disabilitystarting before the age of 22 and continuing indefinitely (i.e., that willlikely be life-long).[3]It limits one or more major life activities such asself-care, language, learning, mobility, self-direction, independent living, oreconomic self-sufficiency.[4]While this includes intellectual disabilities such asDown’s syndrome, it also includes conditions that do not necessarily havea cognitive impairment component, such as cerebral palsy, autism, and epilepsyand other seizure disorders. Some developmental disabilities are purelyphysical, such as sensory impairments or congenital physical disabilities. Adevelopmental disability may also be the result of multiple disabilities. Whileautism is often conflated with learning disabilities, it is actually adevelopmental disability.Disabled personsorganizations (DPOs): These areformal groups of people who are living with disabilities and who work topromote self-representation, participation, equality, and integration of allpeople with disabilities.Down’s syndrome: A condition in which a person is born with an extracopy ofchromosome 21. People withDown’s syndrome can have hearing problems and problems with theintestines, eyes, thyroid, and skeleton, as well as intellectual disabilities.[5]Guardianship and custodyagencies(organy opeki ipopechitelstva):Local-levelcommittees of teachers, psychologists, lawyers, social workers, and civilservants responsible for monitoring conditions in all state children’sinstitutions on a regular basis, as well as for selecting and training peoplewishing to become guardians of children, among other responsibilities.Institutional caretakers:A range of staff employed by Russian stateinstitutions for children with disabilities, including pediatricians, nurses,psychologists, and speech therapists, as well as caregivers called vospitatelsand sanitarkas.[6]For clarity, this report refers to all sanitarkas andvospitatels as institution staff.Learning disability: A condition affecting the brain’s ability to receive,process, retain, respond to, and communicate information.[7]Orphan: A child under the age of 18 whose parents are nolonger alive.[8]Psychologo-Medical-PedagogicalCommission (PMPC)(pskhikologo-mediko-pedagogicheskaiakomissia): A city-level commissionconsisting of state psychologists, physicians, and education specialists thatevaluates children and formulates a plan for a child’supbringing. The commission evaluates every child living in an infant careinstitution at age 3 or 4 and recommends the child’s continued residencein a state institution.Psychoneurologicalinternats for adults (PNI)(pskhikonevrologicheskieinternaty): State residential institutions for adults with variousdisabilities age 18 and above and for elderly people considered by thegovernment to be unable to care for themselves.Psychosocial disability: The preferred term to describe persons with mental healthproblems such as depression, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia. Psychosocialdisability relates to the interaction between psychological differences andsocial/cultural limits for behavior, as well as the stigma that societyattaches to persons with mental impairments.[9]Specialized statechildren’s institutions: Stateresidential institutions housing up to 400 children of various ages (see“baby houses” and “children’s homes” above) whomthe government designates as having disabilities or health conditions thatrequire specialized medical and rehabilitation services. These includespecialized baby houses and children’s homes. Placement of a child in such an institution withthe purpose of his or her indefinite residence there is referred toas “institutionalization.”I. BackgroundHigh Rates ofInstitutionalizationThe Russian government lacks age- and disability-disaggregated statistics on children with disabilities in Russia and whetherthey live in family-based or institutional care. An internationalchildren’s rights nongovernmental organization (NGO), whose work includesadvocating for community-based support for children with disabilities,estimates that approximately 45 percent of children living in state institutionshave some form of disability. They base this figure on United NationsChildren’s Fund (UNICEF) and Russian government data and their ownobservations and consultations with NGO colleagues.[11]The NGO also estimates that approximately 30 percent of all Russian childrenwith disabilities live in state institutions, despite the fact that childrenwith disabilities account for approximately 2 to 5 percent of Russia’stotal child population.[12]According to a 2010 UNICEF report surveying 21 countries inCentral and Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States, Russiaaccounted for half of all children under the age of 3 living in institutions inthe region and has the fourth highest rate of children under the age of 3 inthe region.[13] A 2012report by an international children’s advocacy organization states thatof 10 countries surveyed around the world, Russia has the highest rate ofchildren living in institutional care, although it also has the lowest povertyrate of the countries surveyed.[14]Russia’s System of SegregationThe Russian system of state children’s institutionsincludes mainstream institutions for children without disabilities (hereafterreferred to as “mainstream institutions”) as well as institutionsfor children with disabilities.Infant CareInstitutionsMany children enter the stateinstitution system directly after birth, when health workers transport themfrom birthing hospitals to infant care institutions, or “babyhouses.” Russia has 194 infant care institutions in which 13,977 childrenlive. Approximately 26 percent of Russia’s “baby house”residents are children with disabilities.[15]The government designates some “babyhouses” as “specialized” or “correctional babyhouses” (hereafter referred to as “specialized infant careinstitutions”). Specialized infant care institutions may include childrenwith various disabilities or children with particular kinds of disabilities.Institutions forSchool-Age ChildrenWhen children in infant care institutions reach the age of 3or 4, they appear before a regional commission called the Psychologo-Medical-PedagogicalCommission (PMPC), consisting of a variety of health and educationalprofessionals. The commission’s official role is to medically andpsychologically examine children, identify developmental delays, and formulatea structured plan for a child’s further education and upbringing.[16]If the PMPC believes that the child is unable to live in a family, thecommission designates the type of institutions in which a child can be placed.In the vast majority of cases, the commissions send children with disabilitiesto specialized “children’s homes,” sometimes referred to as“internats,” overseen by the Ministry of Labor and Social Protection.[17]Activists familiar with different types of institutions report that conditionsin mainstream children’s homes, which are supervised by the Ministry ofEducation, are generally better than those in the specialized stateinstitutions and that children have more opportunities for education inmainstream children’s homes.[18]The Ministry of Education also oversees boarding schools forchildren with disabilities (shkoly-internaty), which are usuallyspecialized by type of disability. Many children live in these schools becausetheir communities lack inclusive education or specialized schools with morespecific accommodations for children with disabilities that children and theirparents may seek.[19]Alternatively, children at different ages, both with andwithout disabilities, may be placed in temporary institutions either becausetheir parents are unable to care for them for a period of time or becauselocal-level state agencies that organize the placement of children withoutparental care have yet to establish more permanent alternative care forchildren.[20]Consequences ofInstitutionalization and Better AlternativesUNICEF and others have documented how high rates ofinstitutionalization hold serious consequences for children’s physical,cognitive, and emotional development. Institutional care for children is oftencharacterized by large groups homogeneous in age and disability; overcrowding;unstable caregiver relationships; lack of specialist training in socialinteractional factors; lack of caregiver responsiveness; sleep, eating, andhygiene routines not tailored to children’s needs; and sometimes,insufficient material resources.[21] UNICEFhas urged governments throughout Central and Eastern Europe and Central Asia tostop sending children under the age of 3, including children with disabilities,to institutions.[22]Psychologists and other child development specialists widelyagree that life in institutions contributes to physical underdevelopment,deteriorated brain growth, below average IQs and intellectual development, and reducedsocial abilities, such as difficulties forming stable relationships withothers, including later in life.[23]Institutional care for children is also often characterizedby physical, psychological, and sexual violence by staff and other children.[24]Violence that children may experience in institutions is often long-term andcan lead to severe developmental delays, various disabilities, irreversiblepsychological harm, and increased rates of suicide and criminal activity.[25]Children who enter institutional care under the age of 3face particularly severe consequences. Birth to age 3 is the most importantdevelopmental phase in life with lasting and sometimes irreversible impacts onchildren’s physical, cognitive, and emotional development. UNICEF researchon young children adopted from institutions in Eastern Europe has documenteddeficiencies in physical and brain growth, cognitive problems, speech delays,inattention, difficulties forming attachments, and hyperactivity.[26]The deprivation of stable caregiver relationships for young institutionalizedchildren can cause severe damage and has been equated with violence.[27]Children who are moved from institutional care into adoptiveor foster families before the age of 6 months can still reach optimal physicaland psychological development, which is characterized by the ability to expressoneself and to form close relationships later in life, among other markers ofdevelopment.[28]Children of all ages transferred from institutions to foster care experiencemarked gains in cognitive functioning, with younger children experiencingbetter outcomes.[29]II. Physical and Psychological Violence inRussian InstitutionsHuman Rights Watch documentedconditions in 10 state institutions devoted to the care of disabled children inRussia. Through interviews with children and young people with disabilities,institution staff, and activists, as well as visits to the institutions,researchers found a range of abuses against children in 8 of theseinstitutions. Most of the cases of abuse appeared to involve staff usingabusive measures to control children’s behaviors or punish children,including for behaviors which were directly related to their disabilities.These abuses include: physical violence in the form of beatings or pouring coldwater over children’s heads; the use of physical restraints, includingbinding children to cribs or wheelchairs; the frequent use of sedatives tocontrol or punish children; and forced psychiatric hospitalization aspunishment. Human Rights Watch also documented psychological violence in theform of forced isolation; denial of contact with family members; threats ofdeath, beatings, or psychiatric hospitalization; insults; humiliation; and lackof attention from caregivers. Each of the 23 children living in institutions atthe time Human Rights Watch interviewed them described at least one, andusually many more, incidents of abuse against them by institution staff or byother children while institution staff did not intervene.None of the children or youngpeople interviewed by Human Rights Watch had recourse to systems through whichthey could safely report violence without fear of retaliation.Human Rights Watch hasdetermined that the ill-treatment of some children in institutions asdocumented in this report may rise to the level of torture, particularly giventhe combination of different types of physical and psychological violence usedagainst children, use of physical and chemical restraints, and psychiatrichospitalization. Other forms of violence against children that may contributeto treatment rising to the level of torture include forced isolation fromparents and families, as well as malnutrition and neglect.Human Rights Watch spoke withmany orphanage staff who expressed a desire to support children’s maximaldevelopment and who worked hard to do so with the information and resources attheir disposal. Some of these staff were also those who used practices such asphysical and chemical restraints, for example. The findings below are presentedwith the understanding that well-intentioned staff often engage in unacceptablechildrearing methods because they lack information, such as training innonviolent disciplinary methods, as well as resources, such as additionalpersonnel to help them care for large numbers of children. Human Rights Watchtherefore urges the Russian government to ensure that staff receive allappropriate support to care for children in a way that respects their rightsand dignity, as indicated in the recommendations below.Russia has obligations undernational and international law to protect children with disabilities living inRussian state institutions from all forms of violence. Russian national lawprohibits torture and inhuman and degrading treatment and guarantees allcitizens in state care the right to humane treatment.[30]As a party to the Conventionagainst Torture, the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), theConvention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), and the EuropeanConvention on Human Rights (ECHR), Russia is obligated to protect children withdisabilities from all forms of violence and from torture or inhuman ordegrading treatment.[31]The CRC states that children should be protected from“all forms of physical or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect ornegligent treatment, [and] maltreatment or exploitation….”[32]The European Court of Human Rights has repeatedlyheld governments responsible for failure to protect children from violence andneglect, whether in a domestic situation or in state care.[33]Under these treaties, Russiamust also ensure effective monitoring and mechanisms for reporting abuse.However, the Russian government lacks federally enforced monitoring mechanismsto ensure children’s enjoyment of their basic human rights while livingin institutions.Physical ViolenceChildren and young adults with disabilities whom HumanRights Watch interviewed reported suffering various forms of violence whileliving in specialized state institutions or witnessing violence inflicted onother children with disabilities by staff or peers. Interviewees reportedbeatings by staff and older children with disabilities and other attempts toinflict pain or discomfort, such as pouring cold water on children withdisabilities.Several activists and institution volunteers from St.Petersburg, Leningrad region, Karelia, and Nizhny Novgorod region whom HumanRights Watch interviewed stated that physical abuse in state institutions thatthey had visited is common. They based these assessments on frequent visits inwhich they either witnessed beatings firsthand or observed physical andpsychological signs of violence in their interactions with children.[34]For example, a children’s rights activist who runs a volunteer program ina specialized infant care institution in Nizhny Novgorod region reportedmultiple cases between 2010 and 2013 in which children demonstrated beatings byinstitution staff using dolls. When the activist asked the institution directorto investigate, the latter stated that she would not investigate the violenceon the basis that the staff member in question had herself been raised in astate institution and was therefore expected to treat others harshly.[35]In 2013 Margarita M., a volunteer at a state children’s institution innorthwest Russia, reported witnessing an institution staff member kick in thehead a 10-year-old girl who had been crying. Margarita M. reported the incidentto the head nurse who she alleges replied, “We need to wait for the nextevent to occur [before taking further action].” Margarita M. told HumanRights Watch, “I don’t know where to take complaints about howthese children are treated.”[36]Nineteen-year-old Nastia Y., a young woman with adevelopmental disability, lived in a Pskov region specialized state institutionfrom 1998 to 2011. Nastia Y. told Human Rights Watch that she experiencedbeatings by institution staff on several occasions, including by institutionstaff who were drunk:The staff used to hit me and drag me by the hair. They gaveme pills to calm me down. They hit me when they came to work and found me roughhousingwith the other kids…. When they got drunk, they would hit the otherchildren and me often. I remember one incident, when a staff member wasdrunk. She asked me where the key to her office was. When I told her I did notknow, she dragged me into a room and beat me up.[37]According to Nastia Y., she was beaten repeatedly while atthe institution. The last time she was beaten there was in 2011 shortly beforeshe left when she refused to sign a contract agreeing to be transferred to anadult institution.[38] AntonK., a 21-year-old man with a physical disability who lived in a specializedstate children’s institution in northwest Russia from 2000 until 2011,described a violent incident he witnessed in the institution in 2006, when astaff member punished a boy with a physical disability in Anton K.’sgroup of children:One day, I saw a doctor beat a boy badly. Then they tiedhis hands together with a belt and held his head under water in the bathtub.Since then, whenever I saw doctors, I was quiet. I tried not to be noticed.[39]Nastia Y., whose case is described above, reported thatother girls in the orphanage where she lived used to hit and kick her in thepresence of institution staff members, who did not intervene.[40]Aside from beatings, children reported experiencing orwitnessing other forms of physical violence. For example, Anton K., mentionedabove, told Human Rights Watch that he repeatedly witnessed institution staffpunishing children by pouring cold water on them when they cried.[41]Each of the children and young people whom Human RightsWatch interviewed reported that they knew of no procedure for reportingviolence.[42] In severalcases, institution staff also explicitly threatened them to prevent them fromtelling anyone about the violence.[43] Institutionstaff or volunteers may be reluctant to report abuse due to lack of knowledgeon how to do so, fear of retaliation, or fear of being implicated in the abuse.[44]Use of RestraintsHuman Rights Watch documented how staff in many institutionsfrequently used physical restraints on children, including tyingchildren’s arms, heads, or torsos, often with rags or scraps of cloth, tocribs or wheelchairs, as well as confining children to cribs. Human RightsWatch researchers witnessed the use of each of these forms of restraints in 8of the 10 institutions that they visited.[45]Activists, orphanage volunteers, and some institution staff reported that theuse of these forms of restraints is a common practice in specialized“children’s homes.”[46]Institution staff stated that they tied children to prevent certain types ofbehavior, such as clawing at their eyes, knocking their heads against cribs orwalls, jumping out of their cribs and injuring themselves, or attempting toescape their rooms or the institutions where they lived. Staff did not usealternative approaches to help children with these behaviors refrain fromhurting themselves and others or from disrupting institution routines.The United Nations special rapporteur on torture’s2013 report on abuses in healthcare settings states that any restraint onpeople with mental disabilities, including seclusion, even for a short periodof time, may constitute torture and ill-treatment.[47]The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child has stated thatall persons working with children in care institutions should be trained in nonviolentdisciplinary and childrearing methods.[48]BindingHuman Rights Watch observed children who had their heads,arms, or torsos bound by rags or clothing to cribs or other furniture such aswheelchairs in eight of the 10 institutions that researchers visited. Innorthwest Russia, children’s rights activist Yana D., mentioned above,described her observations while working in three specialized children’sinstitutions in northwest Russia between 2006 and 2009. Yana D. reported havingwitnessed children tied to cribs in all three institutions. In cases wheninstitution staff did not bind children to cribs, according to Yana D., theygave children sedatives to prevent them from knocking their heads against thecrib railings.[49]In April 2013 a 7-year-old boy with a developmentaldisability died after a health worker in a Nizhny Novgorod region specialized statechildren’s institution used cloth diapers to tie him to his bed. Apreliminary account stated that the boy may have choked on his own vomit andthat being tied down stopped him from rolling overto breathe.[50] Children’sRights Commissioner Pavel Astakhov urged the government to investigate thedeath and called for Russia to ban the practice of tying children up, notingthat other children have died in similar circumstances.[51]Astakhov did not comment on the widespread nature of the use of restraints inRussian state children’s institutions and the ways in which the practicedenies children even the most basic conditions to grow and develop.A pediatrician at a specialized state children’sinstitution in Sverdlovsk region for children with developmental disabilitiestold Human Rights Watch that personnel tie some children to their beds as a“pedagogical technique” to prevent “self-aggression” orbanging one’s head against the wall or crib railings.[52]When Human Rights Watch toured the Sverdlovsk region children’s homedescribed above, a researcher observed eight children bound to the railings oftheir cribs, to wheelchairs, or with their hands bound to their torsos usingrags.Confinement to CribsHuman Rights Watch research found that in 8t of the 10institutions that researchers visited, all of them specialized statechildren’s institutions, staff confined many children of all ages tocribs all day, seven days per week, in so-called “lying-down”rooms. Rooms typically had 4 to 15 cribs. Staff provided these children withminimal time outdoors and did not give children opportunities to get up andwalk or move around in wheelchairs. Staff working in the institutions thatHuman Rights Watch visited reported a variety of diagnoses for childrenconfined to cribs, including cerebral palsy, schizophrenia, Down’ssyndrome, and the Russian diagnoses of “debility” (debilnost),“imbecility” (imbesilnost), and “idiocy” (idiotia).[53]Staff justified keeping children confined to cribs stating that children werecontagious (including in cases when children had non-communicable diseases suchas schizophrenia); that children did not understand anything and thereforecould not benefit from going outside or to classes, when the latter opportunitieswere available; or that the children’s health was too fragile to removethem from their beds.[54]For example, in a Pskov region specialized state institutionfor children with various disabilities, Human Rights Watch visited several “lying-down”rooms. Some of the cribs were fortified with wooden planks bound to theirsides, which reached taller than the crib railings. The director of theinstitution explained that the walls were put up “to keep children fromjumping out of their beds.” However, the director also claimed that thechildren were confined to the beds because their health was too fragile toparticipate in the routines of the institution and that they needed to rest.[55]Case Studies:Developmental Consequences of Physical RestraintsIn Moscow and northwest Russia, Human Rights Watchdocumented three cases in which children who had learned to walk, or who mayhave been able to walk given their ages and lack of physical disabilities, wereprevented from doing so because staff used restraints such as rags to bind themto crib railings or wheelchairs or confined them to cribs indefinitely.In a Moscow specialized infant care institution, one staffmember told Human Rights Watch that she had bound a 4-year-old blind girl to awheelchair using rags tied around the girl’s head and torso, despite thefact that the girl could walk. The staff member justified the binding, stating,“She’s blind and she was hitting her head on the edges offurniture.”[56]Similarly, in a specialized state children’sinstitution in northwest Russia, a Human Rights Watch researcher saw a14-year-old girl named Lyuda who staff stated had cerebral palsy tied by thearms and torso to a wheelchair. A volunteer stated, “Lyuda used to beable to walk, but we tied her to a wheelchair to prevent her from running away.We didn’t want her to get beaten up by the staff [as punishment]. But nowshe has forgotten how to walk.”[57]Human Rights Watch interviewed Valentina P., the formervice-director of a specialized state institution in Moscow region who hadworked at the home from 2006 to 2008. Valentina P. reported that when she beganworking there staff bound many children indefinitely to cribs and furniture,including even 10- to 15- year-olds whose diagnoses with developmentaldisabilities would not have prevented them from learning how to walk. Thesechildren were not able to walk when Valentina P. first assumed her post. Otherchildren had been perpetually confined to their beds and were unable to walk.According to Valentina P., about a year after she hired new and more staff andestablished a plan to engage the children daily, most of these children learnedto walk.[58]Chemical Restraints (Sedatives)The vast majority of current or former specializedchildren’s institution residents whom Human Rights Watch interviewedreported that they had been given sedatives or that they had witnessed otherchildren being given sedatives. Some institution staff also reported regularlyand frequently administering sedatives to children, typically to control orpunish them, and several activists confirmed that this is the case. HumanRights Watch is concerned that the regular and frequent use of sedatives onchildren, often apparently in order to control certain behaviors, may suggestthat sedatives are being overused and may not always be used for theirspecified therapeutic purposes.Human Rights Watch spoke with eight current institutionstaff in five institutions who confirmed the regular and frequent use ofsedatives in the institutions where they worked.[59]Personnel typically stated that they gave sedatives to prevent children frombanging their heads against crib railings or walls or to prevent children fromdisrupting institution routines.[60]Olga V., the head doctor in a Sverdlovsk region specialized state institutionfor children with developmental disabilities, reported, “At least 100children here receive strong sedatives: five types, three times per day. If thechildren are not manageable, then we use medication.”[61]Valia T., a 15-year-old girl with a physical disabilityresiding in a northwest Russia specialized state institution, told Human RightsWatch, “Some children get pills every day, and it hurts me to see this,because the medications make them just want to sleep.” Valia T. toldHuman Rights Watch that she believed staff found these other children to be too“active” because they were the ones who sometimes tried to leave theroom in which they were confined all day.[62]Staff most commonly gave children whom Human Rights Watchinterviewed or who lived in institutions Human Rights Watch visited a drugcalled Aminazin, though children did not always know what types of drugs theyor other children were given. Aminazin, a brand name of chlorpromazine, is anantipsychotic drug used to treat schizophrenia, sleep disorders, and strongpain.[63]In the cases that Human Rights Watch documented, Aminazin was either injectedor delivered orally.[64] The known side effects of Aminazin aresignificant and include: drowsiness, fatigue, depression, helplessness,indifference, lack of motor control, and incessant tremors. There is also arisk of liver damage.[65] Use ofAminazin for anything other than diagnostic and treatment purposes inaccordance with the nature of a disorder is a violation of Russian federal law.[66]Both children and institution staff reported the effects ofAminazin on children whom they observed being injected with it or on themselves:drowsiness, extreme fatigue (including resulting in sleep for more than 24hours), and loss of appetite. For example, 25-year-old Andrei M., a man with adevelopmental disability, lived in a Pskov region specialized state institutionfrom age 10 to 20 where staff regularly injected him and other children withAminazin. He told Human Rights Watch,They constantly gave us injections, and then they sent usto the bedroom so that we would sleep. There were no evening caretakers. Sothey gave us Aminazin to get us to sleep. Children became drowsy, and the nextday they did not eat.[67]Human Rights Watch spoke withchildren’s and disability rights activists with experience working inspecialized orphanages in four regions who did not know whether childrenreceived sedatives according to their diagnoses, ages, and weights, or andwhether orphanage staff monitored children who received sedatives.[68]Human Rights Watch therefore believes that the burdenlies on the Ministry of Health, in conjunction with the other ministriesresponsible for running orphanages where children with disabilities live, tolead a comprehensive audit of all such institutions in order to ensure thatsedatives are used only when they have a therapeutic effect on children.Forced PsychiatricHospitalization as PunishmentSeveral young people with disabilities who lived orpreviously lived in specialized state children’s institutions reportedthat staff of specialized state children’s homes forcibly sent them topsychiatric hospitals as a form of punishment for “bad” behavior orfor being too “active”: for running indoors, roughhousing withother children, or trying to leave their rooms or go outdoors, for example.Human Rights Watch interviewed 19-year-old Nastia Y., ayoung woman with a developmental disability who grew up in a specialized stateinstitution in Pskov region. She described how staff gave her medication ortook her to a local psychiatric hospital named Bogdanova, aspunishment:If you misbehave, then they give you pills to put you tosleep or they take you to Bogdanova. Bogdanova is a psychiatric hospital wherethere are bars on the windows. Staff there tie kids’ hands together andgive them pills and injections…. I felt very badly when I was there.[69]Nastia Y. could not recallthe year when she was hospitalized. Several other young people whom HumanRights Watch interviewed in Pskov region also reported having seen otherchildren in the institution being punished in this way.[70]Pavel R., a young man with aphysical disability who spent his childhood in a specialized state institutionin northwest Russia, said that he had been sent to a psychiatric hospital aspunishment for being too “active.” He told Human Rights Watch thatit was painful to describe his treatment there. “It’s something Inever want to talk about,” he said.[71]Pavel R. also described anincident in 2006 when institution staff sent a 15-year-old boy named Nikita tothe psychiatric hospital for running around the bedroom that he shared with 12other boys. Pavel R. said, “He returned drowsy, and he slept fordays.”[72]Valia T., a 15-year-old girlwith a disability who was living in specialized state institution in northwestRussia during the time of her interview with Human Rights Watch in 2013, said,On a Sunday, a boy ran away from the children’s home.They put him in a psychiatric hospital. He’s been there for five months.When children return from the hospital, they are quiet. Their bodies tremble.[73]Valia T. feared exactly this type of punishment for speakingabout what she had witnessed. “Don’t tell anyone that I told youthis,” she said. “They’ll put me away in a crazy house.They’ll kill me.”[74]Use of Isolation WhenTransferring to New Institutions or as PunishmentHuman Rights Watch documented how staff in many institutionsroutinely put children in isolation when they arrive or reenter an institution,when they are transferred from other institutions, or following visits withrelatives.When children move from one institution to another, medicalpersonnel at the receiving institution typically require children to spendanywhere from several days to a month inside a separate medical wing called an“isolator” (isoliator). Children are assigned to beds wherethey are expected to spend their days with little stimulation while staffmonitor their health. The purpose of an isolator is to ensure that children donot carry contagious illnesses into the institution. While children reside inisolators they do not study, interact with other children, or play, allegedlybecause they need to be watched for signs of infection.[75]Some staff also claimed that they place children inisolators so that they do not carry illnesses back into the institution aftervisits with their families.[76]However, some institution staff stated explicitly that the isolator served as adisciplinary method for children returning from visits with relatives, who areassumed to overindulge children.[77] Forexample, one specialized state institution doctor told researchers,“Children return from home spoiled by their parents. They’ve grownused to too much attention. They need to calm down.”[78]Time spent in isolators can be emotionally damaging tochildren. The vice director of an orphanage for children with developmentaldisabilities in northwest Russia explained to Human Rights Watch why a16-year-old girl stared at her desk instead of responding to the vicedirector’s question of what she was drawing. “She’s justspent a few days in the isolator,” said the vice director.“Children sometimes return from there shut down [zamknuty].”[79]In Pskov region, a 25-year-old man named Andrei M. who has a developmentaldisability reported that he was forced to spend a month in an isolator at theage of 10 upon his transfer to a specialized state children’sinstitution. He said, “It was tedious and lonely. I missed my family. Ididn’t know what was going on. There was nothing to do.”[80]Psychological ViolenceIn 8 of 10 institutions forchildren with disabilities that Human Rights Watch visited, researchersdocumented how staff issued threats against children, including death threatsand threats of beating or psychiatric hospitalization, as punishment forbehavior deemed “bad” or “wild”; called children derogatorynames such as “vegetables” and claimed children have no potentialto learn or live independently; denied children attention; and either activelydenied children’s contact with relatives or failed to take measures tofacilitate such contact.The 2006 UN report, WorldReport on Violence Against Children, identifies nonphysical forms ofviolence typically inflicted on children that can be “detrimental to achild’s psychological development and well-being” to includepersistent threats, insults, name-calling, ignoring, isolation, rejection,threats, emotional indifference, and belittlement.[81]While little is known about the effects on childrenliving in institutions, in families characterized by nonphysical forms ofviolence “there is constant fear and anxiety caused by the anticipationof violence; pain, humiliation and fear during its enactment; and in older agegroups, the loneliness of parental rejection, distrust, and at timesself-disgust.”[82]ThreatsA 22-year-old man with a developmental disability namedKostya K. told Human Rights Watch that staff from a Pskov region specializedstate institution where he lived from age 5 to 18 (1997 to 2010) repeatedlythreatened him and other children with psychiatric hospitalization when theyran in their bedrooms or in the hallways. Kostya K. said, “Staff said,‘If you roughhouse, you’re going straight to Bogdanova [a nearbypsychiatric hospital].”[83] Nineother children and young people with disabilities who lived or have lived ininstitutions reported that staff threatened them with psychiatrichospitalization if they roughhoused, ran indoors, or were late for meals.[84]Insults and Derogatory LanguageIn four regions, researchers observed many incidents inwhich staff referred to children as “vegetables” (ovoshchi)in children’s immediate presence to denote their alleged lack ofintelligence or social responsiveness. For example, in Sverdlovsk region, HumanRights Watch visited one orphanage for children with developmentaldisabilities. While a researcher was speaking to a group of small boys, a staffmember approached and stated, “They’re vegetables. They don’tunderstand anything.”[85]In a “lying-down” room in a northwest Russiaspecialized state children’s institution a Human Rights Watch researcherattempted to speak with Sveta, a 15-year-old girl with a developmentaldisability. However, a staff member immediately approached theresearcher and said, “She can’t understand anything. She’suneducable.”[86]In another case, a researcher was speaking with oneinstitution staff member when a 13-year-old girl approached, sat next tothe researcher, and leaned against her. The staff member slapped thegirl on the arm and said to the researcher, “She’s a schizophrenic.Let her touch you, and she’ll hang on you like an insect.”[87]Neglect by CaregiversSeveral activists whom Human Rights Watch interviewed statedthat lack of individualized attention from orphanage caregivers is asignificant problem in orphanages for children with disabilities across Russia.[88]As noted above, lack of stable caregiver relationships for younginstitutionalized children can cause severe psychological damage and has beenequated with violence.[89]Children’s rights activist Yana D. worked in twospecialized state institutions for children with developmental disabilities innorthwest Russia from 2006 through 2008 and a third from 2008 through 2009. Shereported that two to three “lying-down” rooms in each of theseinstitutions had only one institution staff member per 13 children. Further,the staff in these rooms lacked pedagogical training. As a result, Yana D.said, “Other than having basic needs such as diaper changes taken careof, children had no individualized attention. They also never left therooms.”[90]  YanaD. also underscored the consequences of isolation for children she worked with:Usually, the media calls attention to cases of harshtreatment, deep medical problems, and poor nutrition in children’s homes.But deep isolation is also very harsh treatment. People don’t understandthat. Staff will say, “These children are very difficult, theydon’t understand anything.  Why give him attention?”  Infact, the more severe the disability, the more attention [the child] needs, themore you need to work with him.[91]Because of understaffing and because the children in“lying-down” rooms are seen as especially weak and in need ofattention, many NGOs run volunteer programs to provide these children withadditional attention and care, such as more frequent diaper changes. Often, theonly social interaction that children get is from these volunteers who visit ona semi-regular basis.[92] Severalcurrent and former volunteers in state institutions for children withdisabilities reported to Human Rights Watch that staff in the institutionswhere they have worked have discouraged them from paying attention toparticular children by playing with them regularly or taking them on outingsinto the community on the basis that individualized attention would“spoil” children by giving them attention that they would notalways receive.[93]Discouragement ofFamily ContactHuman Rights Watch research in Russia found that staff ofsome children’s institutions actively discourage children from havingcontact with their parents and other relatives or do not take sufficientmeasures to facilitate such contact, despite Russia’s obligations underfederal law and as party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child toprotect the rights of the children separated from one or both parents tomaintain regular contact with parents.[94]Staff at two separate institutions reported to Human RightsWatch that they do not attempt to contact children’s parents anddiscourage visits claiming that children tend to be “spoiled” byspecial treatment on the part of their parents and return from family visitsprone to misbehavior.[95] In St.Petersburg, children’s rights activist Alexander D. told Human RightsWatch, “Some doctors [at specialized state institutions] tell parents notto visit because their presence upsets children.”[96]Karina M., the mother of a 19-year-old young man with a developmentaldisability who has spent his life living in institutions in northwest Russia,reported to Human Rights Watch that institution staff sometimes prevented herfrom spending time with her son outside the territory of the state orphanagewhere he lived under the rationale that he would bring infections back into theinstitution.[97]Several senior specialized children’s home staff whomHuman Rights Watch interviewed claimed that there is no system in theirinstitutions to connect children with their parents and relatives.[98]Human Rights Watch spoke with three children and young people currently orformerly living in state institutions who requested information about theirparents and relatives and were told by staff that such information wasunavailable.[99] HumanRights Watch was unable to confirm whether staff actually did not have suchinformation or did not wish to facilitate such contact.Many state institutions are located remotely from cities.All of the institutions that Human Rights Watch visited were located far fromcity centers and most were not reachable by public transportation. The hoursand travel costs can create significant obstacles for many Russian families.Lack of EffectiveComplaint MechanismsSeveral children whom Human Rights Watch interviewed statedthat they did not know of any way to file a complaint or receive help afterfacing abuse. Others attempted to complain about abuse to another staff memberand were not given help or were afraid to complain out of fear of retaliationor punishment. For example, Nastia Y., whose case is also described above,appealed to the institution psychologist after an institution staff member beather: “I asked [the psychologist] to help me so that it would not happenagain, and she told me there was nothing she could do to help.”[100]Anton K., a young man with a physical disability who grew upin a specialized orphanage in northwest Russia, reported that institution staffmembers and doctors often beat him and his peers with belts and mops andpoured cold water on them when the children attempted to leave their bedroomsand go into the courtyard without permission. However, he knew no way to reportthe staff’s behavior. Anton K. said, “I just wanted to see themjudged. My heart’s last desire is justice.”[101]All Russian children have the right to legal protection bytheir parents, their legal guardians, by guardianship and custody agencies, theprosecutor’s office, or the courts. Children “with full legalcapacity” have the right to independently exercise their rights andobligations, including their right to protection.[102]If a child’s rights are violated, the child has the right toindependently apply for protection to guardianship and custody agencies, and atage 14, to a court.[103]Officials and other citizens who learn of a threat to a child’s life orhealth or of a violation of his or her rights and legal interests are obligatedto inform guardianship and custody agencies in the city or region where thechild lives. Upon receiving such information, the guardianship and custodyagencies are obligated to take necessary measures to protect the legitimaterights and interests of the child.[104]According to Inna A., an expert on people with disabilities living in Russianstate institutions, these children usually are unaware of their rights and theprocedure for appealing to guardianship and custody agencies and lack access tothe Internet or other means of filing a complaint independently.“It’s [only] parents or orphanage volunteers who make it possiblefor children to appeal to authorities,” Inna A. stated.[105]Under the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC),states parties must guarantee the right of a child capable of forming his orher own views to express those views freely in all matters that affect thechild, giving due weight to the child’s age and maturity.[106]The state must also ensure that children enjoy safe and effective means ofreporting maltreatment.[107] TheCRC also guarantees children the opportunity to be heard in any judicial andadministrative proceedings that affect him or her, either directly or through arepresentative or other “appropriate body.”[108]As party to the Convention on the Rights of Persons withDisabilities (CRPD), as part of its efforts to protect persons withdisabilities from all forms of violence, states parties should provide personswith disabilities and their families and caregivers with “information andeducation on how to avoid, recognize and report instances of exploitation,violence and abuse.”[109]Protection services must be age-, gender-, and disability-sensitive.Lack of EffectiveMonitoring: “No One Checks on the Child”Russia lacks federally enforced monitoring mechanisms toensure that children with disabilities live free from neglect and abuse. UnderRussian law, guardianship and custody agencies at the regional and city levelare responsible for regularly monitoring conditions in all state residentialinstitutions for children.[110] Oneactivist, Tatiana O., who oversees volunteer programs in several stateinstitutions for people with disabilities and runs an organization advocatingfor stronger monitoring mechanisms in these institutions, reported that in herexperience, inspections by these agencies are not sufficiently thorough.“No one checks on the child,” she said. Having witnessedinspections of a number of occasions in different institutions in northwestRussia, Tatiana O. observed that inspectors did not speak with children orexamine children’s physical conditions. The inspectors limited theirinspection to whether the institution followed sanitary regulations, whetherthe appropriate number of medical personnel were working in the facilities, andwhether children living in the facilities are of the right age.[111]Two other activists, one working in a specialized children’s home innorthwest Russia and the other in specialized children’s homes in Moscowand Tula regions, reported that guardianship and custody agency inspectors donot pay attention to whether specialized orphanages protect children’srights, focusing instead on formal indicators such as whether children of theright ages and with the correct diagnoses are located in the correctinstitutions.[112]In December 2012 Deputy Prime Minister Olga Golodetz issuedwritten instructions authorizing the creation of commissions to inspect allspecialized state institutions for people with disabilities, including children’sinstitutions. The instructions indicate that commissions can include regionalofficials and NGO representatives but do not specify the content of theinspections.[113]In line with these instructions, NGO activist Anna A.organized an independent commission of NGO representatives with many years ofexperience working to protect the rights of children with disabilities livingin Russian state institutions. The commission was able to inspect threespecialized state children’s homes for children with developmentaldisabilities in one region in 2013. However, Anna A. told Human Rights Watchthat in several cases, institution staff did not grant inspectors access.[114]Another Moscow-based NGO providing rehabilitation servicesto children with disabilities and their families visited seven differentspecialized state children’s homes in 2013 and publicly reported problemssuch as overcrowding and a high proportion of children with disabilities livingin institutions in spite of having at least one living parent.[115]States parties to the Convention on the Rights of Personswith Disabilities are obligated to monitor the convention’simplementation, including in all institutions and programs serving persons withdisabilities. States parties must determine focal point(s) within thegovernment tasked with implementing the convention and establish a coordinationmechanism “to facilitate related action in different sectors and atdifferent levels,” which Russia has done through the formation of acoordinating council to implement its National Action Strategy in the Interestsof Children for 2012-2017, as described below. States parties should alsocreate, maintain, and strengthen mechanisms to monitor implementation of theCRPD, involving civil society and DPOs in particular, in the monitoringprocess.[116] Inorder to prevent all forms of violence, abuse, and exploitation, states partiesmust ensure that all facilities and programs created to serve people withdisabilities are monitored by independent authorities.[117]III. Neglect and Lack of Health Care, Education,and PlayIn all 10 institutions that Human Rights Watch visited,researchers documented many cases in which children suffered various forms ofneglect, namely lack of adequate nutrition, inadequate health care, lack ofaccess to rehabilitation services, lack of access to education, andinsufficient access to leisure and play.[118]Many children with disabilities whom researchers metappeared significantly physically underdeveloped for their ages. Many also hadprotruding ribs and were unable to walk or crawl, despite the absence ofphysical or developmental disabilities that may have prevented them from beingable to do so. According to several activists, factors affectingchildren’s lack of physical development include feeding methods that areinappropriate for children based on their disabilities, diets that fail to meetchildren’s caloric and nutritional requirements, and lack of stimulationand freedom to move.These abuses and forms of neglect were particularlypronounced among children confined to “lying-down” rooms. Thesewards, where children spend their days in cribs, house children whom stateofficials have deemed to have particularly severe disabilities on the basis ofan arbitrary exam given to children with disabilities to determine theirplacement in institutions (see below regarding the PMPC exam).[119]The children whom Human Rights Watch observed in lying down rooms were usuallyunable to walk and talk.Children living in other parts of institutions, while alsofacing various forms of neglect such as lack of sufficient opportunities foreducation, recreation, and leisure, were usually free to move around the roomswhere they spent most of their days and sometimes to play with toys.Human Rights Watch has determined that the practice ofconfining children with certain types of disabilities to“lying-down” rooms, where children receive minimal care and aregiven little or no opportunity or support for physical, emotional, orintellectual growth, amounts to inhuman and degrading treatment and should beabolished. The practice also discriminates against children with particulartypes of disabilities. The exam administered by local-level Psychologo-Medico-PedagogicalCommissions to children that typically determines their placement ininstitutions, including in these types of rooms, is also discriminatory, asdetailed below.Lack of AdequateNutritionInterviews with activists and children and young adults withdisabilities, as well as Human Rights Watch’s firsthand observations,suggest that many children with disabilities living in Russian stateinstitutions lack adequate nutrition and water to facilitate their fulldevelopment. Human Rights Watch research identified several problems, includinglack of sufficient calories and an adequately varied diet, sufficient drinkingwater, and knowledge on the part of the staff of these homes about appropriate feedingmethods for children.According to one disability and children’s rightsactivist:Food is a big problem in specialized children’s homesin Russia. The children do not get enough calories to allow them to develop.The quality and variety of food is also insufficient. Doctors don’t thinkthat the children have any potential to develop and they feed them the samething every day.[120]Institution staff and activists with whom Human Rights Watchspoke in different regions consistently stated that children receive the samefoods nearly every week with little consideration for dietary needs specific tochildren’s disabilities and ages.[121] Apediatrician in a Sverdlovsk region orphanage indicated that the institutiondoes not select food appropriate for children’s ages and specific healthneeds, stating, “We grind up whatever we have and we use tubes to feedthe ones who can’t feed themselves.”[122]Some children with disabilities who live in stateinstitutions also may not always receive sufficient drinking water. Marina G.,an activist in St. Petersburg, described conditions in a specialized stateinstitution where she runs a volunteer program:The children [in the specialized state institution]don’t drink much. They get their diapers changed three times per day, butthe staff can’t give them more diapers. So they limit the amount of waterthe children drink.[123]Children with disabilities in state institutions also maysuffer inadequate nutrition because staff lack training in appropriate feedingmethods for these children. According to Moscow-based pediatric psychiatristStanislav A., “Children who have certain genetic conditions cannot be fedwith spoons and forks. They need special instruments, which institutionsdon’t have and which personnel are not trained to use.”[124]Children’s and disability rights activist Tatiana O. told Human RightsWatch that staff do not regularly re-evaluate whether or not a given feedingmethod is appropriate for children: “If a child has it written on hisstate medical documents that he needs to be fed through a dropper, thenthat’s what the child will get indefinitely,” she said.[125]Lack of Adequate HealthCare and RehabilitationAccording to several activists whom Human Rights Watchinterviewed, many children with disabilities living in Russian stateinstitutions do not receive adequate health care and rehabilitation primarilydue to the lack of qualified and trained personnel.[126]For example, activist Tatiana O. reported that medicalservices in specialized children’s institutions lag behind services inthe community. Some staff lack any training to treat children with disabilitiesand others do not participate in professional development training that theircounterparts in community-based hospitals and clinics undertake.[127]According to one independent child psychiatrist based in theMoscow region, specialized state institutions lack sufficient numbers ofmedical personnel to provide appropriate medical services to children withdisabilities, and “very few of the personnel are trained to work withchildren with conditions such as autism, attention deficit disorder, andschizophrenia.”[128]According to several activists and institution staff whomHuman Rights Watch interviewed, children in “lying-down” wardsoften lack access to basic rehabilitation services. Nina B., an independentMoscow-based pediatrician who specializes in the health of children who live orhave lived in institutions, reported that most specialized state institutionslack trained rehabilitation personnel.[129]According to Valentina P., the former vice director of a specialized statechildren’s institution in Moscow region, many children in thatinstitution lacked access to needed health care and rehabilitation services dueto both a lack of sufficient staff and to these staff members’ lack ofsufficient medical or pedagogical training. She described conditions in theinstitution:When I assumed the vice directorship in 2006, there was norehabilitation in the ward for children in “lying-down” rooms. Theylay in their cribs all day and had their diapers changed a few times a day.[130]According to Valentina P., doctors and pedagogical staffspent more time dispensing medications (including sedatives) to children andwatching to see that they did not leave their beds than they did providingrehabilitative services and engaging in other activities that may havebenefited children.[131]Even in institutions which had specialized facilities andstaff trained to meet the rehabilitation needs of children with disabilities,staff denied children with certain types of disabilities access to theseservices. For example, in a Moscow region specialized infant care institution,Elena R., a speech therapist, showed Human Rights Watch several facilitiesmeant to help children born with both physical and developmental disabilitiessuch as cerebral palsy and Down’s syndrome to develop cognitive and motorskills. For example, the institution had a “sensory room” withcolorful lights, textured toys, and ocean sounds to stimulate children’ssenses; walkers to help children with physical disabilities to learn to walk;and climbing walls to facilitate muscular development. Elena R. reported toHuman Rights Watch that most children had access to rehabilitation services suchas the sensory room, “except for the most difficult children. What for?They can’t understand what is going on anyway.”[132]Clinical Examinations(“Dispanserizatsiia”)Beginning in 2013, the Russian government began to implementa policy called “clinical examinations” (dispanserizatsiia).Under this policy, teams of 12 doctors conduct annual visits to each statechildren’s institution in Russia (including specialized children’s institutions)in order to evaluate whether children have been given the correct diagnoses.[133]In response to a letter from Human Rights Watch related to this report, theRussian Ministry of Health stated that as a result of its policy of dispanserizatsiia,“all children with disabilities are provided with specialized …medical assistance.”[134]However, according to pediatrician Nina B., mentioned above, children who areexamined by doctors in accordance with this policy do not always receivefollow-up health care and rehabilitation services to treat the conditions withwhich they have been diagnosed.[135]Failure to Secure Treatment Outside of InstitutionsDepending on a particular institution’s medicallicense and the specialties and training of its medical personnel, institutionstaff may not be capable of providing a child with needed health care. HumanRights Watch documented four cases in which institution staff failed to providechildren with disabilities with medical treatment outside of an institutionwhen necessary care was not available in the institution.[136]As a result of the lack of federally regulated mechanisms tosecure needed health care for children with disabilities in the community, achild who needs surgery or rehabilitation may need to wait for a third partysuch as a volunteer, a prospective foster parent, or an institution staffmember to take the initiative to arrange for such treatment.[137]However, experts and foster families explained that staff may not alwaysarrange for such treatment, for a variety of reasons, including lack ofsufficient personnel to arrange the paperwork and accompany a child to anoutside medical facility; their view that a child is too gravely ill fortreatment to be worthwhile; or fear of outside scrutiny on the care orcondition of a child.[138]For example, Alexei P., mentioned above, the foster fatherof a 13-year-old boy named Timofei P. with a physical disability, explained howhe helped Timofei receive necessary healthcare and rehabilitation services.While working as a volunteer at the specialized state children’sinstitution in northwest Russia where Timofei P. lived, Alexei P. asked theinstitution director to send Timofei P. to a pediatric orthopedic center inearly February 2012 to receive surgery and physical therapy to enable him towalk. When no one at the institution was willing to arrange the procedure forTimofei P. or accompany him, Alexei P. compiled the necessary state medicaldocuments and received a federal authorization enabling him to take Timofei P.to Moscow for government-funded surgery and rehabilitation. Alexei P. provided TimofeiP. with basic care such as feeding him and supporting him emotionally.[139]Lack of Access toEducationMany children with disabilities living in specialized stateinstitutions receive little to no education. The education that these childrendo receive usually takes place within institutional walls rather than in thecommunity, alongside other children.[140]Children’s rights activist Anna A. has conductedinspections of three specialized children’s homes in one Russian regionand runs a Moscow-based NGO extending educational and other services tochildren with disabilities living in Russian state institutions. She reported,“Many children living in state institutions run by the Ministry of SocialProtection receive no education.”[141] In oneregion in 2013, Anna A. and a group of four other NGO representatives visited aspecialized children’s home for children with developmental disabilitiesand spoke with staff. According to Anna A., while most children received someform of limited education appropriate for their ages and skill levels, the vastmajority of children in the “lying-down” ward did not partake indevelopmental and educational programs.[142]Similarly, Anton K., who grew up in a specialized statechildren’s institution in northwest Russia, reported that he and otherchildren spent the majority of their school time doing crafts such as paintingenvelopes. Anton K. said,Subjects such as physics and chemistry were missing. Whenwe asked to study more things, the staff members cited our diagnosis: profoundmental retardation. We were not thinking about our diagnosis. We just wanted tolearn something new.[143]Anton K. reported that “there was no one to complainto” about his lack of education.[144]Absence of Educationfor Children in “Lying-down” RoomsChildren held in “lying-down” rooms ofspecialized state children’s institutions receive little or noeducation.  A federal decree on the staff assigned to“lying-down” rooms does not include any teachers.[145]By contrast, the decree recommends that other specialized institution wardshave two and a half positions for staff with pedagogical training per group of12 children with disabilities.[146] In oneSverdlovsk region specialized infant care institution that Human Rights Watchvisited, the director showed a researcher two rooms where 2-, 3- and 4-year-oldchildren were reading with staff and coloring in coloring books as well as two“lying-down” rooms in an isolator ward with four children each. Thechildren in these rooms lay in metal cribs, where one girl knocked her headagainst the wall. The director said that these children’s health was toofragile for them to be engaged in activities and that they had to stay in theisolator ward indefinitely due to severe forms of psychiatric illnesses,infections, and high temperatures.[147]The international disability rights NGO Inclusion Europe haspublished a report on best practices in inclusive education, which documentseducation techniques through which educators have successfully included childrenwith a variety of types of disabilities into mainstream classrooms.[148]Efforts at Educationfor Children Living in InstitutionsIn northwest Russia, 100 of approximately 400 children withdisabilities living in a state orphanage study in community-based specializedschools.[149]However, according to two local activists, stigma towards institutionalizedchildren among other children’s parents and school staff is so great thatstaff require children from state institutions to study in separate classroomsand on different schedules. One specialized state children’s home mustrent space in six different schools to meet this requirement.[150]According to one of the activists, Valeria I., teachers in thesecommunity-based schools are not trained to accommodate the learning needs ofchildren with disabilities, and evaluation methods for these children incommunity-based schools lack consideration for their skill levels and learningneeds. For example, to pass their courses, children need to take oral andwritten exams, which may prove difficult for some children with disabilities.Nevertheless, teachers pass children despite the fact that they can neitherwrite nor talk. Valeria I. stated, “Here is how even a relativelysuccessful attempt to bring children with disabilities into the community fallsshort of actually helping them reach their potential.”[151]In the institutions that Human Rights Watch visited, somechildren were receiving some limited education while children who resided in“lying-down” rooms received no education.According to the Ministry of Labor and Social Protection, thegovernment organized inter-ministerial monitoring commissions to inspect stateinstitutions for children with disabilities according to a number of criteria,including whether or not institutions guarantee children’s right toeducation. The commissions found that orphanages guaranteed thesechildren’s rights to education with adapted programs taking into accountchildren’s needs.[152]Lack of Access to Playand RecreationThe children with disabilities living in state institutionsthat Human Rights Watch visited also lacked access to play and recreation.During institution visits researchers encountered few examples in whichchildren were engaged in recreation or play with one another or withinstitution staff. The majority of children with disabilities whom Human RightsWatch met spent their days seated in classrooms or lying in beds, with toysdisplayed out of reach.Children in “lying-down” rooms and children whomstaff considered to have the most severe disabilities had the least access toplay and recreation. For example, in a Pskov region specialized“children’s home,” Human Rights Watch researchers visitedseveral classrooms where children with various disabilities such as Down’ssyndrome, blindness, and physical disabilities were singing and playing withstaff members. However, in other rooms, researchers met children with thesedisabilities and others, such as autism, who were unable to talk and who sataround the perimeter of empty, bare-floored rooms on mats and beanbags. Thechildren rocked back and forth. Toys were arranged on windowsills, out ofreach.Several children and young people with disabilities reportedto Human Rights Watch that they received few opportunities to play while livingin institutions, and they especially wished to play outside of institutions,with other children. For example, in a Sverdlovsk region specializedchildren’s home, an 11-year-old boy named Maxim A. with a developmentaldisability said, “I wish they took us on excursions to the park. I wishwe could go out into the city.”[153] Innorthwest Russia, 7 of 10 institutions Human Rights Watch visited hadplaygrounds, but all but one were devoid of children during Human RightsWatch’s daytime visits. Staff at the other six institutions reported thatsome children were allowed outside for regular play. However, staff in theseinstitutions reported that children whose health they deemed too fragile orwhom they deemed incapable of responding to stimulation did not leave theirrooms.Severe Physical andCognitive UnderdevelopmentAs a result of a lack of stimulation, adequate nutrition,and health care, children with disabilities in state institutions can beseverely physically and cognitively underdeveloped for their ages. Human RightsWatch saw dozens of children in specialized state institutions of all ages wholay in cribs, moving little, with their ribs visibly protruding through theskin of their torsos. None of the children in the eight “lying-down”wards Human Rights Watch visited could talk, and the vast majority could notwalk.[154]To better understand these children’s conditions,Human Rights Watch consulted with Moscow-based pediatrician Nina B., mentionedabove, who evaluated numerous photographs taken by Human Rights Watch inseveral “lying-down” wards of specialized state institutions forchildren with disabilities and commented on the conditions in which they live.Below, the circumstances under which Human Rights Watch met the children are described,along with Nina B.’s commentary. Please see the report summary for thephotos discussed below.Nikita P.: Confinementto a Metal CribNikita P. is a 10-year-old boy. He lives in a specializedstate institution for children with developmental disabilities in Sverdlovskregion in a “lying-down” room. An institution staff member reportedto Human Rights Watch that Nikita P.’s diagnosis is cerebral palsy and“profound mental retardation” and that he can neither walk nortalk. He spends all of his time indoors in his crib and is not taken out to theyard with children from other wards. A staff member claimed that NikitaP.’s fragile health would be further jeopardized by too much exertion andexposure to the elements.[155] When aHuman Rights Watch researcher met Nikita P., his arms were bound to his bodyusing a shirt tied around his torso. The institution staff member explainedthat this was to prevent “self-aggression.” Nikita P. scratched hiseyes, the staff member said. The researcher noted a raw wound on NikitaP.’s head near the metal bar of his crib, which, according to the staffmember, was from rocking back and forth.According to Nina B., Nikita P.’s diagnosis of cerebralpalsy might cause delays in physical growth but not to the extent exhibited byNikita P. at 10 years of age. Nina B. said,This kind of physical condition is the result of chronicstress. Stress is a result of prolonged isolation and lack of stimulation, socialengagement, and movement. For a child to be able to grow, he needs to be ableto move around.[156]Nina B. added that children living in these specializedhomes often look atrophied like Nikita P. does due to their lack of access torehabilitation services. Nina B. said, “No one tells children’scaretakers about rehabilitation and a child’s right to movement.”[157]The pediatrician also noted that rocking back and forth and other forms of“self-aggression” results from a child’s attempt to stimulatehimself: “It is a sign of discomfort, and the absence ofstimulation.” She concluded, “There is no question that this childhas the potential for more growth.”[158]Sveta L.: The Influenceof Chronic StressIn a specialized state children’s institution innorthwest Russia, Human Rights Watch met Sveta L., a 13-year-old girl whom an institutionvolunteer stated had a diagnosis of “imbecility” (imbesilnost),a developmental disability, explained above.[159] SvetaL. resides in the “lying-down” ward of the institution, where thechildren spend their time in cribs or wheelchairs. In the summertime, she takesthe occasional trip outside in a wheelchair at the initiative of youngvolunteers who come semi-regularly to the institution. Sveta L. wears diapersand is fed ground up food through a tube. Sveta L.’s ribs protrude fromher torso and her legs are extremely thin.According to Nina B., Sveta L. more likely has a learningdisability and may have cerebral palsy. She noted Sveta L.’s“unmotivated smile” and the lack of motor control it suggested andstated that Sveta L.’s physical underdevelopment could result from manyfactors. However, she continued, “It is probably influenced by thechronic stress of growing up in an institution: lack of stimulation and lack ofa well-rounded diet. You can help any child, including her.”[160]Lyuba P.: An AvoidableDevelopmental DelayAlso in the “lying-down” ward of the specializedstate children’s institution in northwest Russia, Human Rights Watch met15-year-old Lyuba P., who had been diagnosed with “imbecility,” ora developmental disability.[161] LyubaP. wore only a diaper and stood by clutching the sidebars of her crib. LikeSveta L., her rib cage protruded, though she was clearly stronger; she grabbedthe researcher’s arm and tried to climb out of her crib. Also like SvetaL., Lyuba P. was unable to talk and was taken outside only occasionally byvolunteers.According to Nina B., based on Lyuba P.’s facialfeatures and lack of growth for her age, she may have an iron or hormonaldeficiency. However, if this were to be the case, hormonal deficiencies are veryeasy to correct, Nina B. said. Possibly, Lyuba P. could have fetal alcoholsyndrome as well. She continued, “But fetal alcohol syndrome would alsonot be enough to singlehandedly influence such a pronounced delay ingrowth.”[162]Roman K.: A Lifetime ofDeprivationWhen Human Rights Watch met Roman K., an 18-year-old youngman whom an institution volunteer stated had Down’s syndrome, he wasawaiting transfer to an adult institution – a psychoneurologicalinternat.[163]However, based on Roman K.’s small size, his inability to walk and talk,and the fact that he sat in his crib wearing a diaper, he appeared to be achild under the age of 3.[164]When Human Rights Watch showed Nina B. Roman K.’spicture, she said,This is horrible. Down’s syndrome comes with delaysin growth, but not to that extent. Once again, this is about an absence ofstimulation and probably, a lack of adequate nutrition as well.[165]The PMPC ExamAs mentioned above, children living in institutions appearat age 3 or 4 before a local-level commission called a Psychologo-Medico-PedagogicalCommission (PMPC), which uses interview examinations to evaluate both the formsof rehabilitation to which children are entitled and the institutions to whichthey will usually be transferred, barring opportunities for fostering oradoption. According to one children’s rights activist, Anna A., the PMPChas no legal right to formally approve children’s continued residence ininstitutions.[166]However, in practice, the commission uses children’sprior diagnoses and their failure to pass the exam as evidence that a child isunable to live outside of an institution.[167]Further, according to Anna A., many children with disabilities remain ininstitutions because the PMPC indicates to their parents that institutions are theonly places where children can receive educational and rehabilitation services.The PMPC may lack information on accessible community-based services to provideto parents.[168]According to a letter to Human Rights Watch from theMinistry of Labor and Social Protection, a commission of doctors separate fromthe PMPC annually evaluates children in institutions designated for childrenwith developmental disabilities in order to determine whether it is necessaryfor them to continue living in specialized state institutions, among otherquestions such as children’s consent to placement in institutions, forexample. Additionally, the inter-ministerial monitoring commissions mentionedabove found no incidents of unjustified placement of children with disabilitiesin specialized orphanages.[169]The PMPC exam discriminates against children on the basis oftheir disability in at least two areas. The exam is administered in the form ofan interview and those administering it do not make accommodations for childrenwho are unable to speak and may have developmental disabilities that preventthem from engaging in conversation, understanding questions of the typeadministered on the exam, or other disabilities.Interviewees who currently or at one point had worked in orphanagesas staff or volunteers, as well as experts on children with disabilities livingin Russian state institutions, told Human Rights Watch that the PMPC examquestions which they had direct knowledge of appeared arbitrary, irrelevant tochildren’s experiences, and often difficult for most 3- or 4-year-oldchildren to answer.[170]For example, the head doctor of one specialized stateinstitution for children with developmental disabilities, Olga V., told HumanRights Watch that during the PMPC exam, children are asked to identify the nameof their city of residence and the capital of Russia; their age; to identifydifferent types of trees based on drawings; and to distinguish betweendifferent colors.[171]In addition, there is no formal mechanism to explain to thechild the purpose and nature of the examination, and children living ininstitutions may have no way to independently acquire the knowledge required toanswer many of the exam questions.Olga V., the head doctor referred to above, told Human RightsWatch that not all children in the orphanage where she works go to school,including the 150 children in the “lying-down” rooms whom thedoctor claimed were “uneducable” (neobuchaemy) – adiagnosis that is outdated given that under federal law, all people have theright to an education.[172] Inaddition, the doctor confirmed that these children have no teachers or otherstaff with pedagogical training assigned to their wing.[173]Children at that institution, like the others Human Rights Watch visited,remain on the premises full time unless their relatives bring them home on theweekends, thus making it even less likely that they would have someone else intheir lives to teach them information relevant to the PMPC exam.Disability rights experts also told Human Rights Watch thatcommittee members often fail to make an effort to establish rapport with thechild, who is meeting them for the first time and who is immediately given aseries of tasks or questions for which he or she has not necessarily been prepared.[174]As a result of the PMPC exam, many children stay inspecialized institutions where they suffer continued isolation from theircommunities and from children without disabilities. Human Rights Watch believesthat the exam as currently administered is discriminatory and may in some casesviolate children’s right to not be separated from their families andtheir right to live in the community.Lack of Preparation forSelf-Reliance and Participation in the CommunityWhen children with disabilities living in state institutionsreach 18 years of age, the vast majority of them are sent by the government to psychoneurologicalinternats (PNIs). Many of these closed medical institutions are located faroutside of Russian cities, in rural areas. Resident-to-staff ratios tend to befar higher in PNIs; and violence, the use of sedatives, and psychiatrichospitalization are common.[175] Forchildren with disabilities who do not have parents or relatives to care forthem, entry into PNI upon reaching 18 years of age is a near certainty.Human Rights Watch research found that staff of stateinstitutions rarely offer children the option of living in their communities asadults. For example, Nastia Y., a 19-year-old woman with a developmentaldisability who grew up in a specialized children’s home in Pskov region,reported that after she turned 17,A children’s home administrator told me that I had tosign an application to go to the psychoneurological internat. I said,“I won’t sign your application,” and [the administrator]replied, “The city is not the right place for you.” I said, “Neitheris a psychoneurological internat.”Nastia Y. received assistance from a local NGO and movedinto their assisted living facility.[176]In St. Petersburg, 21-year-old Pavel R. recalled, “Thedirector called me into her office one day when I was 17. She said, ‘In afew months, you’ll be transferred to a PNI.’ That was it.”[177]All young people who age out of children’sinstitutions have the legal right to state-funded housing, a monthly stipend,free public transport, subsidized clothing, and other state subsidies. However,many children with disabilities living in state institutions grow up without aneducation and without the opportunity to learn basic skills such as cooking,purchasing products at the store, and managing their money.[178]Rights to Health,Adequate Nutrition, Education, and PlayRussian law and Russia’s international obligationsrequire the state to ensure children living in institutions are provided withadequate nutrition, health care, education, and opportunities for play andrecreation.Russian federal law specifies that children in state custodymust receive from their guardians decent living conditions, an education, “well-roundeddevelopment, and respect for their human dignity,” among other rights.[179]Russian law also entitles people with disabilities to free medical care as partof Russia’s larger state insurance system as well as certain federallyapproved and funded rehabilitation devices and services.[180]Additionally, Russian law guarantees orphans and children living withoutparental care free health care within medical organizations run by the Ministryof Health, including but not limited to regular medical examinations, as wellas treatment outside the territory of the Russian Federation funded by thefederal budget.[181]The Convention on the Rights of the Child guarantees allchildren enjoyment of “the highest attainable standard of health and tofacilities for the treatment of illness and rehabilitation of health.”[182]States parties also must combat disease and malnutrition through the“application of readily available technology and through the provision ofadequate nutritious foods and clean drinking-water….”[183]Under the CRPD, all persons with disabilities have the right to health“without discrimination on the basis of disability….”[184]The CRPD defines discrimination based on disability as “any distinction,exclusion or restriction” on the basis of disability that obstructs orprevents the enjoyment of rights and freedoms on an equal basis with others,including reasonable accommodations on the basis of peoples’disabilities.[185] Statesparties must also provide health services to persons with disabilities thatthey need specifically because of their disabilities, including earlyidentification and intervention to minimize and prevent the development offurther disabilities, including among children. States parties also mustprevent discriminatory denial of health care, food, or fluids on the basis ofdisability.[186]Under the CRC, children have the right to rest, leisure,play, and recreational activities appropriate to their age. They also have theright to “participate fully in cultural and artistic life.”States parties must “encourage theprovision of appropriate and equal opportunities for cultural, artistic,recreational and leisure activity.”[187]Children with disabilities enjoy the right to a full and decent life, “inconditions which ensure dignity, promote self -reliance” and facilitatetheir “active participation in the community.”[188]The CRC also prohibits discrimination of any kind against children, includingon the basis of disability.[189]Under the CRPD, all persons with disabilities enjoy theright to live independently and be included in the community.[190]States parties must ensure that a child with a disability enjoys “a fulland decent life, in conditions which ensure dignity, promote self-reliance andfacilitate the child’s active participation in the community.”[191]IV. Pressures to Institutionalize ChildrenThe internationalnongovernmental organization (NGO) Partnership for Every Child believes thatover 95 percent of Russian children living in orphanages or various types offoster homes have at least one living parent.[192]The governmentlacks clear and publicly accessible statistics on the reasons why childrenenter institutions and other forms of state care such as fostering. However,the National Action Strategy in the Interests of Children for 2012-2017, afederal policy aiming to bring Russia into compliance with the Convention onthe Rights of the Child (CRC), notes that insufficient social assistance suchas education and rehabilitation and intolerant societal attitudes ofteninfluence parents to relinquish custody of children to state institutions.[193]Families of children andyoung people with disabilities face pressure to relinquish theirchildren’s care to state-run institutions. In some cases, doctors andnurses may pressure parents of newborns with disabilities to relinquish custodyon the basis that children will be unable to develop and form relationships,that parents will be unable to care for them, or that children will die.[194]Lack of inclusive education, access to rehabilitationand health care, as well as lack of financial and other state supports, alsoinfluence parents’ decisions to place or keep their children ininstitutions.Pressure on Parents byMedical PersonnelPressure to Relinquish Childrenat BirthAccording to the Ministry of Health, approximately 0.3percent of newborns were given up by their parents in 2012.[195]Estimates from NGOs suggest that national rates may be higher, particularlyamong children with developmental disabilities. For example, according to a2011 report by Partnership for Every Child, of 40 families from Moscow and St.Petersburg with children with Down’s syndrome, 35 reported in 2006 thatstaff in (mostly state) birthing hospitals recommended that parents relinquishcustody of their children to state children’s institutions.[196]Human Rights Watch interviewed 18 biological parents ofchildren with disabilities who faced pressure from healthcare workers to giveup their children in six of eight regions researchers visited. Two cases in thecity of Moscow city took place in 2012 and 2013, and the remainder took placebetween 1999 and 2008 in Moscow and other cities.Healthcare workers told several parents that their childrenwould fail to develop and form social relationships. In May 2012 a doctor andnurse from a state hospital in Moscow tried to convince Claudia K. to give herson to a state infant care institution after he was born with Down syndrome:The doctor told me, “Why spoil your life with thischild? You have two other healthy ones.” After two weeks, when I decidedto bring him home, the doctor said, “Well, it’ll be like having adog at home. He’ll do things that make you happy sometimes, buthe’ll stay a dog.”[197]A nurse who had been present during the birth told ClaudiaK. that her son would die in two weeks from heart problems. When Human RightsWatch interviewed Claudia several months before her son’s secondbirthday, her son was able to recognize different songs and enjoy picture booksand was healthy, though Claudia had difficulty securing preschool andhealthcare services due to negative attitudes from the heads of childdevelopment centers and pediatricians.[198]When Eva R. gave birth to her daughter in 2013, also inMoscow, three doctors in a state hospital advised her to give her child up tostate custody on the basis that her daughter was a “vegetable” whowould not develop and would die before she reached two years of age. LikeClaudia K., Eva R. decided to take her child home.[199]Ksenia L., who lives in Moscow, described the pressure shefaced to give up care of her son, Pasha L., who was born with Down’ssyndrome in 2006. Healthcare personnel claimed that Pasha L. was“defective” and that she risked social alienation should she try toraise her son:[After Pasha L.’s birth], doctors came in and out ofthe hospital room. One after the other they said to me, “Do youunderstand? Every cell of your child is defective. This is an entirelydefective creation. Kindergartens will reject you. Your husband will leave you.Others will turn away from you.” Day and night, this continued….They kept saying, “He’s not capable of learning. Not capable ofadapting. He’s not capable of anything.”[200]Other women interviewed by Human Rights Watch stated thatmedical personnel tried to convince them to give up their children to statecare or be forced to quit their jobs in order to care for children withdisabilities full time. For example, in Pskov region, Tamara N., the mother ofan 8-year-old girl with Down’s syndrome, told Human Rights Watch whatdoctors said to her immediately following her daughter’s birth:Why do you need to raise this child? You’re going tospend all of your time taking care of her, and you won’t be able to earnyour own money.[201]Tamara N. left her daughter at the hospital but then decidedto bring her home when she was a year and 3 months old.Some healthcare workers tell parents that their childrenwill not live to adulthood because of their disabilities. In St. Petersburg,activist Alexander D. told Human Rights Watch, “Doctors in birthinghouses tell new parents that their children will not live long and that theyshould not get attached to them because of that.”[202]This was what doctors told Nastia D. when her daughter, Dasha D., now 14, wasborn with Down’s syndrome in 1999:They told me she would die in my arms, that her illness wasso severe that she would need constant care. They compared her to a broken toythat you can return to the store.[203]Nastia D. initially left Dasha D. at the hospital butregained custody of her shortly after Dasha D.’s first birthday.[204]Other parents leave their children to the care of the stateonly to discover that they had been misinformed of their children’spotential. A children’s rights activist and volunteer in a specializedstate children’s institution in northwest Russia told Human Rights Watch,I meet parents who were told in the birthing houses thattheir children would not live or be capable of learning to do anything. Thenthey return here to the children’s home ten years later and find theirchildren are still alive. The parents need emotional support after they realizethey have missed so much.[205]Pressure to RelinquishChildren in Older YearsAccording to Stanislav A., a pediatric psychiatrist whoworks with children with psychosocial and developmental disabilities, someparents choose to relinquish their children’s care at an older agebecause they are unable to find appropriate health care and medications intheir communities.[206]  KarinaM. gave her son Stas M., who has a disability, to a specialized infant careinstitution when he was 2 years old at the recommendation of Stas M.’spediatrician, who told her that appropriate medication was not available in thecommunity. Stas M. spent his entire childhood in institutions and entered anadult institution at age 18 in 2011. Karina M. said she would have liked totake Stas M. home to raise him, but lack of medication, inclusive education,and psychological support for herself and her son in the community made itunfeasible for her to do so.[207]Obstacles to Raising Children in the CommunityLack of FinancialSupportThe Russian federal government provides children withdisabilities and their parents with monthly pensions with an average ofapproximately 16,700 rubles (US$494.18) per month until children reach the ageof 18.[208]However, many parents of children with disabilities reported that this fundingcovers a fraction of parents’ costs for services that they must pay forprivately given a lack of adequate or in some cases any government services tosupport children with disabilities.[209]Lack of Access toHealth Care and RehabilitationParents reported to Human Rights Watch key barriers tohealth care and rehabilitation in their communities. In some communities,specialists qualified to provide the right services are lacking.[210]In other cases, parents encounter difficulties with physicians who do not treattheir children with dignity, both when they directly seek out specialists forsuch services and when they appeal to government healthcare workers for statefunding for such services.[211]  PashaL., described above, at age 3 appeared before a city-level commission whichdetermines the benefits and services to which children with disabilities areentitled. After speaking to Pasha L. for fifteen minutes, the commissionpsychiatrist said to his mother, Ksenia L., “I don’t understandwhat possibilities you see for this child.” The commission designatedonly a pension for Pasha and omitted services that Ksenia L. deemed crucial toher son’s continued development.[212]In addition, the Russian federal government allocates neededrehabilitation services to children based not on their cities of residence buton pre-established quotas of available services such as physical therapy orrehabilitative surgeries in a given city or town. If a child with a disabilityneeds services at a particular time and local hospitals are at capacity, thatchild must travel to another location. Families must sometimes be prepared totake time from work and other familial responsibilities in order to travel andstay with their children in other cities.[213]Lack of Access toEducationHuman Rights Watch research in a number of cities foundchildren with disabilities and their parents encounter a number of barriers toeducation, including: a dearth of accessible mainstream schools with staff whoare trained and willing to integrate children with disabilities into theirclassrooms; an insufficient number of specialized schools in children’shome towns; and parents’ lack of knowledge of their children’srights.[214] TheHuman Rights Watch report, Barriers Everywhere, documents a range ofother accessibility issues that impact children’s access to education.[215]Rights to Family Life,Education, and an Accessible EnvironmentAs party to the CRC, Russia shall ensure that children arenot separated from their parents unless that separation lies in thechild’s “best interests.”[216] Underthe Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), in allactions concerning children with disabilities, states parties shall make thebest interests of the child a primary consideration, giving due weight to thechild’s age and maturity.[217] In itsGeneral Comment 1, the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities hasstated that governments “must examine their laws to ensure that the will andpreferences of children with disabilities are respected on an equal basis withother children.”[218]The CRPD also guarantees children the right from birth toknow and be cared for by their parents and states that states parties must“prevent concealment, abandonment, neglect and segregation of childrenwith disabilities.”[219] Statesmust also “undertake to provide early and comprehensive information,services and support to children with disabilities and their families.”[220]The United Nations Guidelines for the Alternative Care ofChildren additionally state that children should be placed in institutionalcare only under circumstances when such care is “specificallyappropriate, necessary and constructive for the individual child concerned andin his/her best interests.”[221]In its January 2014 concluding observations on Russia, theUN Committee on the Rights of the Child expressed concern over the widespreadinstitutionalization of children with disabilities due to stigma and theabsence of social support services. The committee urged Russia to preventwidespread institutionalization of these children and to ensure sufficientfamily- and community-based alternatives through public education and theprovision of support services to children with disabilities and their families.[222]The Russian federal law “On Education in the RussianFederation,” which came into force in September 2013, defines inclusiveeducation as the “provision of equal access to education for allstudents, given a diversity of special educational needs and individualcapabilities.”[223] Thelaw requires regional and city-level governments to create the conditions forquality education without discrimination towards persons with disabilities,“using appropriate pedagogical and communication methods….”[224]This law does not set minimum inclusive education standards regulating factorssuch as specialized teacher education, reasonable accommodations, and otherinfrastructural and curricular changes to ensure that inclusive education ismade available to all children in practice.[225]However, the Ministry of Education is currently sponsoring aproject to develop educational programs differentiated by the particulareducational needs of students with disabilities to be implemented in bothspecialized and inclusive schools.[226]The CRC guarantees the right of the child to education,progressively and on the basis of equal opportunity and that education of thechild shall be directed to the “development of the child’spersonality, talents and mental and physical abilities to their fullestpotential.”[227] TheCRPD guarantees persons with disabilities access to inclusive primary andsecondary education in the communities where they live. Reasonableaccommodations of individuals’ educational requirements should beprovided.[228]The Russian federal law “On the Social Protection ofthe Disabled” guarantees accessible infrastructure and information topeople with disabilities, as well as education and health care. Under the CRPD,all persons with disabilities have the right to accessible infrastructure orservices open or provided to the public. Additionally, people with disabilitiesenjoy the right to access education and health care and rehabilitation serviceson an equal basis with others.V. Government ResponseThe Russian government has taken several measures intendedto create more accessible communities for children with disabilities and theirfamilies, to prevent children with disabilities from entering institutions, andto transition children with disabilities living in institutions into familiesand communities. These measures include several national policies including aNational Action Strategy in the Interests of Children for 2012-2017 listinggoals towards bringing Russia into closer compliance with the Convention on theRights of the Child (CRC), as well as the establishment of a federal foundationproviding funding to some regional governments and NGOs to establish supportservices for families and children, including children with disabilities. Also,a May 2014 government resolution designates that orphanages are temporaryinstitutions whose purpose is to place children in families and mandates thatorphanages protect children’s rights to health care, family contact, anda variety of other rights under the CRC. In addition, in May 2014 the RussianState Duma accepted in their first reading a set of amendments that would includea prohibition against disability-based discrimination and an expanded list ofchanges to be made so that public facilities and services are physicallyaccessible to people with various kinds of disabilities.These measures are steps in the right direction, but theycould go much further to ensure children with disabilities the right to a fulland decent life and participation in their communities, especially throughmeaningful implementation of progressive policies and laws.The National ActionStrategy in the Interests of Children for 2012-2017The National Action Strategy in the Interests of Childrenfor 2012-2017 aims to bring Russia into accordance with its obligations underthe CRC.The National Strategy’s main aims are to prevent theentrance of children, including children with disabilities, into institutionsand provide child-friendly and accessible educational, healthcare, and rehabilitationservices; prioritize family-based alternative care for children living ininstitutions, including children with disabilities; and return children withdisabilities who live in institutions to their birth families.[229]To begin implementing the strategy, in 2012 the governmentformed a coordinating council to oversee realization of the strategy,established priority measures to implement the strategy by the year 2014, andrecommended that regional governments adopt programs for implementing the strategy.[230]According to one representativefrom an international children’s rights NGO with an office in Russia,while the National Strategy contains some strong messages regardingdeinstitutionalization, it is not yet clear how and to what extent regionalgovernments have translated these statements into concrete programs.[231]Foundation for Supportof Children in Difficult Life SituationsIn 2008 the Russian government created the Foundation forthe Support of Children in Difficult Life Situations.[232]Through the foundation, the federal government provides financial support toregional governments or NGOs to carry out programs for the prevention of childabandonment and child abuse; family placement for orphans and children withoutparental care; and social inclusion for children with disabilities and theirfamilies, among other topics.[233] NGOscan receive funding through local governments awarded these federal funds.Regional governments are responsible for reporting directly to the federalgovernment on their progress.[234]According to one Russia-based NGO representative, supportfrom the foundation has led to the start of several significant projects inRussian cities. For example, in Volgograd region, the government developedinfant abandonment prevention services in maternity hospitals.[235]In the five years since the foundation’s creation,there has been no formal evaluation by the federal government of theimplementation of services created with foundation funding.[236]Draft Amendments onAccessibility and NondiscriminationIn May 2014 the State Duma, Russia’s lower house ofparliament, accepted in their first reading a series of amendments to 25federal laws related to disability rights. The amendments include a prohibitionagainst disability-based discrimination and an expanded list of changes to bemade so that public transport and other facilities and services are physicallyaccessible. Human Rights Watch believes that passage of the amendments would bea positive step towards inclusion of Russian citizens with disabilities insociety. However, Human Rights Watch calls on the government to consideradditional amendments to protect the rights of people with developmental andpsychosocial disabilities, in addition to those that would ensure adequate enforcementof Russia’s disability rights laws.[237]Recent InitiativesConcerning OrphanagesIn May 2014 Prime Minister Dmitri Medvedev signed a resolutiondeveloped by the Ministry of Educationconcerning institutions and their purpose that appears to address a number ofconcerns about treatment of children, both with and without disabilities,living in state institutions, including: guaranteeing contact between childrenand their families and communities, including to facilitate children’sreturn to their families; information for children about their rights andsystems of redress; access to health care and other services, including forchildren with disabilities; and nutrition appropriate to children’s agesand disabilities. The resolution also addresses the need for the government tomore actively place children in institutions in foster or adoptive families andstates that children are to be placed in orphanages temporarily, only untilthey can be placed in families.[238]Notwithstanding theseimportant statements, Human Rights Watch has concerns that implementation ofthe resolution may lead to continued segregation of children with disabilitiesfrom their peers without disabilities living in state institutions and thecommunity. For example, the resolution lacks specific requirements thatchildren with disabilities living in institutions study in mainstream schools,without exception.[239]While the resolution requires that children in state orphanages live ingroups of mixed age and disabilities, it grants wide discretion to orphanage directors and local guardianship and custodyagencies to segregatechildren under the age of 4 with certain types of disabilities in separatefacilities.[240]The practice of segregating children onthe basis of their disabilities is discriminatory and should be abolished. Inaddition, as described above, children placed in “lying-down” roomsare disproportionately denied lack access to health care, education, nutrition,and play.The resolution also fails tospecify how certain provisions protecting the rights of children living instate institutions would benefit children with disabilities. For example, theresolution lacks mention of how orphanages are to encourage foster care andadoption of children with disabilities.[241]Also, the resolution requires orphanages to providechildren with accessible information on their rights as well as telephonenumbers and electronic and mailing information for children to receive freelegal, psychological, and other assistance. [242] However, it does not specify how children withdisabilities, who may not be able to talk, read, or write, will gain access toinformation on their rights and access to these forms of support.VI. Alternatives to InstitutionalizationRussia’s child welfare system includes variouspossibilities for alternative care for children, including adoption, fostering,and other arrangements. However, Human Rights Watch interviews with activistsas well as with foster and adoptive parents suggest that Russia faces manychallenges to ensuring alternative care for children with disabilities. Thesechallenges include lack of independent mechanisms to place children withoutparental care in families; lack of social support for foster and adoptive familiesof children with disabilities; and attempts by local-level officials todissuade families from adopting or fostering children with disabilities.Data from a database run by the United NationsChildren’s Emergency and Relief Fund suggest that overall domestic andinternational adoption rates in Russia have been declining between 2004 and2011, the last year for which data is available, and children with disabilitiescomprise just 2 percent of 10,816 Russian children adopted in 2011. The vastmajority of children with disabilities adopted in each of these years wereadopted internationally rather than by Russian families.[243]According to a May 2014 letter from the Ministry of Education to Human RightsWatch in response to questions regarding the findings in this report, in 2012and 2013 a total of 9,169 and 8,245 children were adopted, respectively.Children with disabilities comprised approximately 2 percent of all childrenadopted in each of those years.[244]Under Russian law, children without parental care should beplaced in families through adoption or more temporary forms of family placementsuch as fostering and in the absence of such possibilities, should betemporarily placed in orphanages until they can be placed in families.[245]Under the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), achild deprived of his or her family environment, or in whose best interestscannot remain in that environment, is entitled to “special protection andassistance” from the government.[246] Statesparties shall ensure alternative care for such a child.[247]Under the CRC and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities(CRPD), governments shall grant paramount consideration to a child’s bestinterests in all matters concerning guardianship, wardship, trusteeship, andadoption.[248]The UN Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children statethat in order to meet the emotional, social, and other needs of each childliving without parental care, states should take all necessary legislative,policy, and financial measures to provide for adequate alternative care optionsthat grant priority to “family-and community-based solutions.”[249]Young children, especially those under 3 years of age, should receive care infamily-based settings, except in emergency cases or to prevent the separationof siblings, when residential care should be for a limited duration and“with planned family reintegration or other appropriate long-term caresolution as its outcome.”[250]The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child has called onstates parties to establish programs to deinstitutionalize children withdisabilities, returning them to their biological or extended families orplacing them in foster care, and providing children’s families withsystematic support to include children into their homes.[251]Parents and other extended family members should be provided with the necessaryand systematic support and training for including their child back into theirhome environment.”[252]Human Rights Watch documented several cases in whichchildren with disabilities previously living in institutions who found homes inRussian adoptive and foster families experienced significant improvements intheir well-being and development.Russia has several forms of alternative, family-based carefor children deprived of parental care, including but not limited to adoptionand fostering.[253] Thecases included in this section relate to situations of fostering and adoption.Problems with ExistingAlternatives to InstitutionalizationLack of Mechanisms toPlace Children with FamiliesUnder current policies, Russia’s local-levelguardianship and custody agencies store lists  in their databases ofchildren who are eligible to be placed in family-based care, and prospectivefoster and adoptive parents can call for information on these children. Thegovernment does very little, however, to identify potential adoptive or fosterparents for children, including for children with disabilities, and providethem with post-adoption support.[254] In2009 the Pskov region NGO Rostok and the Levada Center, an independent polling organization, surveyed over 140 stateinstitutions for children with developmental and psychosocial disabilities.They found that none of the directors of these institutions made findingadoptive or foster parents for children in state institutions a priority ordevoted significant time or resources to placing children in foster or adoptivefamilies.[255]Lack of Social Supportfor Foster and Adoptive FamiliesRussia also lacks a cohesive state infrastructure to ensureadequate material and social support for children with disabilities after theyare placed with adoptive or foster families.Social payments to foster parents of children withdisabilities vary by municipality. For example, in St. Petersburg fosterparents and “guest” parents receive 10,000 rubles per month(US$278), and in Moscow city, they receive 15,000 rubles per month (US$418).[256]Foster and guest parents told Human Rights Watch that they encountered manyexpenses in excess of these payments in caring for children with disabilitiesin their custody.For example, in Karelia region Human Rights Watchinterviewed Natalia and Sergei S., the foster parents of two children withphysical disabilities, ages 11 and 6, from a specialized children’s homeand a specialized infant care institution, respectively, and one child, age 8,with a developmental disability. Natalia and Sergei S. reported severalchallenges raising the children, including insufficient funds from thegovernment to afford necessities such as orthopedic shoes for their youngestdaughter; the absence of services such as state developmental psychologists togive guidance on their children’s development; and a lack of anaccessible kindergarten and schools in their community. As a result, Natalia S.homeschools the 8-year-old boy, who has a disability, because the teachers at alocal specialized school required that she stay with him throughout the day inthe absence of school personnel to provide necessary support. Since Natalia S.must also accompany their 6-year-old foster daughter to kindergarten to helpher move around the premises, Natalia S. is unable to accompany her foster sonto school as well.[257]Dissuading People fromAdopting Children with DisabilitiesWhen prospective foster and adoptive parents approachguardianship and custody agency officials and institution staff, the lattersometimes try to discourage prospective parents on the basis that thesechildren lack prospects for development.[258] Forexample, in 2012 Valentina Y. approached officials at a Moscow regionguardianship and custody agency to inquire about adoption of two boys withpsychosocial disabilities from a specialized infant care institution. Anofficial said to her, “You won’t manage. You don’t need themanyway.”[259]Success Stories:Children’s Transformations in Family SettingsDespite the many challenges that foster and adoptive parentsface, Human Rights Watch documented a number of cases in which children whotransitioned from institutional to family-based care demonstrated dramaticimprovements in health and overall well-being.In Moscow region Human Rights Watch met Maria T., the fostermother of an 11- year-old boy named Artur T. Maria T. met Artur T. in 2011 whileArtur T. was still living in a specialized state children’s institution.The PMPC had labeled Artur T. as “uneducable,” and he neitherattended school, nor walked, nor talked. He spent his days lying in a crib inthe institution. With the help of a local children’s and disabilityrights activist, Maria T. arranged to foster Artur T. in 2012 and securedphysical therapy for him.[260] ArturT. is learning how to walk and attends a specialized school for children withdevelopmental disabilities.[261]Sergei and Natalia S.’s foster children have alsodisplayed marked gains in cognitive and physical development: For example,6-year-old Katya S. moved from a specialized infant care institution to livewith the family when she was 3 years old. At first, she could not talk, walk,or sit up. Now she can do all of these things. However, according to NataliaS., Katya S.’s pediatrician says that she is currently within the growthrange of a 3-year-old child due to lack of adequate nutrition and stimulationearly in life.[262]Valentina Y. succeeded in adopting two boys withpsychosocial disabilities, ages 3 and 4, from a specialized infant careinstitution. Both boys have displayed marked improvements in their well-beingduring the past year and a half. Valentina Y. said,They didn’t used to laugh. Now they do. Before, theyhad trouble sleeping through the night. The doctor said this was fromposttraumatic stress disorder as a result of neglect. Now they both sleepthrough the night. They used to lie in their beds in the morning until I cameto get them. Now I find them playing in the morning.[263]NGOs Filling the GapsHuman Rights Watch research found that in many cases, it isNGOs rather than the government that provide children with disabilities andtheir families with essential social support. Numerous NGOs work in the fieldof disability, providing direct support and services to adults and childrenwith disabilities and their families, including foster families. Many are alsoadvocacy groups that raise awareness about the rights and dignity of personswith disabilities, including children with disabilities, and promote inclusiveeducation and employment, among other initiatives.An NGO in the Sverdlovsk region that supports familiesstruggling with poverty and families of children with disabilities providesinformation on children’s rights and community services to parents ofnewborns with disabilities in maternity wards. Also, in cases when parentsdecide to relinquish custody of their children, the NGO encourages stateagencies to prioritize children’s placement with relatives rather than ininstitutions or foster families.[264]Other NGOs provide ongoing services such as support groupsfor parents of children with disabilities and speech therapy for children. Apsychologist at one NGO that provides support groups and psychologicalassistance to children with disabilities and their families told Human RightsWatch, “The majority of families who receive psychological helpdon’t give up their children.”[265]The evidence is overwhelmingly clear that children withdisabilities are able to live in their communities when they and their familiesare offered sufficient support services. For example, Dasha D., describedabove, who was born with Down’s syndrome, learned to talk, walk, and readand began to attend school after returning home from an infant care institutionto live with her family. There could be many more cases like hers if thegovernment followed the example of local children’s and disability rightsNGOs and extended social support to all children with disabilities and theirfamilies.RecommendationsTo the Russian Government, Including the Ministriesof Labor and Social Protection, Health, and EducationImmediatelyEnd violence and ill-treatment against children withdisabilities in state institutions:Establish a zero tolerance policy for statechildren’s institution staff who beat, humiliate, insult orotherwise exert physical or psychological violence on children;Promote a culture of respect for human rights anddiversity, including respect for the rights of children withdisabilities.End the use of physical restraints, forced isolation, andforced psychiatric treatment as a means of managing or discipliningchildren in care. Any physical intervention should be strictly limited toemergency situations where a child is in immediate danger of physical harmand should be used only as a last resort, lasting only as long as theimmediate danger has subsided.Develop and implement alternative means of discipline, basedon principles of nonviolence, tolerance, and respect, including asarticulated in the Council of Europe commissioner for human rights paper,“The right not to be hit, as a children’s right.”Ensure medical interventions are based on the full andinformed consent of the child. Any forced medical intervention should bestrictly limited to emergency situations where the child’s life isexposed to imminent danger and should be used only as a last resort in thesame manner it would be used on any child or adult with a life threateningcondition who is unable to consent to treatment at that moment, lastingonly until the immediate danger has subsided.Conduct an audit of all state institutions where childrenwith disabilities live to ensure that sedatives are used therapeutically,for a short period of time, in limited dosages, and are accompanied byappropriate follow-up monitoring.Abolish the practice of confining children with certaintypes of disabilities to “lying-down” rooms and ensure thatall children with disabilities living in state institutions are free fromdiscrimination. Children should undergo an assessment, subject to regularreview, to identity technical assistive devices that could provide themwith the support they need to sit, hold up their heads, be mobile,communicate, feed themselves, and where possible take full care ofthemselves. Steps should be taken to ensure children have access to suchtechnical assistive devices.Ensure that parents and children are able to contact andvisit with one another at will, with no adverse consequences tochildren’s well-being.Abolish isolators. To preventthe spread of contagious diseases among children living in institutions,ensure that all children receive necessary vaccinations and provide accessto health clinics or doctors so that children who present with symptoms ofinfectious or contagious diseases can receive appropriate treatment.Guarantee children access to adequate nutrition and water,including through the use of feeding methods that are appropriate tochildren’s ages and disabilities. Ensure that the feeding methodsused for each child with a disability are re-evaluated regularly by healthprofessionals with appropriate expertise and that children are assisted inlearning how to feed themselves wherever possible including with the useof appropriate technology or assistive devices.Guarantee children with disabilities the right to aninclusive, quality education, including all children living ininstitutions, through the following measures:Introduce amendments to the “Law onEducation” to explicitly guarantee inclusive education to allchildren, including children with disabilities living in institutions;Ensure that the “Law on Education” isimplemented fully, including by ending the practice of categorizingchildren as “uneducable”; Follow through with the current project to develop clearstandards specifying curricular and other types of accommodations to makeinclusive education accessible to children with various kinds of disabilities,including but not limited to children with developmental or psychosocialdisabilities; Create training standards for teachers who work withchildren with various disabilities and train teachers;Develop awareness-raising campaigns among specialized stateinstitution staff, mainstream kindergarten and school administrators,teachers, and other school staff, as well as among children withoutdisabilities and their parents, on the rights, dignity, and potential ofchildren with disabilities, including their right to freedom fromdiscrimination of any kind;Provide accessible public transport for children withdisabilities between institutions and kindergartens and schools inchildren’s communities;Take steps to integrate into education as far as possiblethe latest advances in assistive technology, devices, and equipment thatcan help children with disabilities to maximize their communityparticipation.Guarantee children with disabilities access to regularplay and recreation appropriate to their age. Consult with competentauthorities to ensure that recreational activities and toys provided tochildren with disabilities living within specialized state institutionsare developmentally appropriate and accessible to children.Ensure that staff in specialized state institutions forchildren with disabilities receive appropriate training to care forchildren with disabilities, assess their changing needs, and support themto maximize their potential across all areas of functioning.Create accessible and effective mechanisms for childrenwith disabilities in state institutions to report abuse without riskingrepercussions:Regularly inform children of their rights and of ways inwhich to file complaints and receive psychological and legal assistance.Ensure that this information is provided in an accessible manner to allchildren;Ensure that complaint mechanisms are confidential andaccessible to children with diverse disabilities;Ensure that children’s complaints are reviewed andaddressed promptly and impartially.Establish meaningful monitoring of all state institutionswhere children with disabilities live:Ensure that monitoring commissions include independentexperts from civil society with experience and expertise on the rights ofchildren with disabilities, their developmental potential, on inclusiveeducation, and health care and rehabilitation for children withdisabilities;Ensure that monitors enjoy unimpeded access to institutionsat different times of day and that they are able to make unannounced aswell as announced visits;Include in monitoring commissions private, confidential,and accessible interviews with children on their treatment and theirenjoyment of the rights and freedoms to which they are entitled under theConvention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Rights ofPersons with Disabilities.Reform the Psychologo-Medical-Pedagogical Commission toensure that:The official purpose of the PMPC is to protect the bestinterests of the child, granting due weight to the child’s will andpreferences and in accordance with the child’s age and maturity;Professionals who comprise the commission receiveinformation on the rights, dignity, and potential of children withdisabilities, including a child’s right not to be separated fromhis or her parents against their will; to inclusive education; and to afull and decent life in conditions that promote self-reliance;Professionals who comprise the commission providechildren with disabilities and their families with information onservices available to children with disabilities in their communities,including but not limited to inclusive education and accessible andchild-friendly healthcare and rehabilitation services;The PMPC exam administered to 3- and 4-year-old childrenincludes questions that are appropriate to children’s ages anddisabilities and is administered in accessible formats;Children are adequately prepared for the exam and that itis administered in a friendly and non-intimidating environment byprofessionals whom the child has previously met.In line with the United Nations Guidelines for theAlternative Care of Children, adopt policies and introduce amendments toall relevant laws to ensure institutionalization is used in limitedcircumstances, such as in emergencies and to prevent the separation ofsiblings, and when specifically appropriate, necessary and constructivefor the individual child concerned, and in his or her best interests.Ensure authorities:Provide information to expectant parents and healthcareworkers who serve new parents on the rights and dignity of children withdisabilities, including but not limited to these children’s rightsto inclusive education, accessible health care and rehabilitation, and aphysically accessible environment; Provide parents of children with disabilities telephonenumbers and addresses of community-based support services such as earlyeducation programs for children with disabilities and parents’support groups, among other kinds of services; Devote particular attention to ensuring that youngchildren under age 3 receive care in families.Collect and make publicly available statistics on thenumber of children with disabilities living in Russia, as well as thenumber of children with disabilities living in state institutions. Datashould be disaggregated by region, children’s ages, and their typesof disabilities, as well as the types of institutions in which childrenlive.Throughout the process of reforming policies and amendinglaws, actively seek and take into consideration the input of children andyoung people previously in institutional care, as well as the views ofexperts and NGOs working in the field of disability rights.Implement the federal resolution “On the activitiesof organizations for orphans…” with regard to the following:Educating children’s institution personnel onchildren’s rights, including on the prohibition of ill-treatmentand the extent and severity of consequences of violence against children;Ensuring that all children, including children withdisabilities, receive necessary skills training to prepare them forindependent living;Increasing ratios of child care workers to children andensuring that assigned childcare workers include personnel withpedagogical training;Guaranteeing opportunities for children to safely meetregularly with relatives, legal guardians, and other individualsmeaningful to children and to correspond in writing and speak bytelephone to these people unless competent authorities independent ofinstitutions in which children reside determine that such contact liescontrary to a child’s best interests.Implement the recommendations made by the UN Committee onthe Rights of the Child following its January 2014 review of Russia.Medium to Long-TermDevelop a clear, time-bound plan to end theinstitutionalization of children, especially infants separated from theirparents, with extremely limited exceptions granted to emergency andtemporary use of institutions, as described above; and either returnchildren living in institutions to their birth families or place them infoster or adoptive families. Ensure that the plan has adequate resourcesto reach its goals. This plan should:Ensure that state financing for formal care of childrenwith disabilities privileges family-based care options; Develop sufficient short-term, emergency family-basedcare placement spaces for children with disabilities who are relinquishedat birth or in the first years of life if necessary while long-term,permanent care options such as adoption or long-term foster care aresought for them;Include measures to return children with disabilities totheir natal families, except in cases when such measures do not liewithin children’s best interests, and ensure that families haveadequate support to care for these children; Include measures to actively encourage adoption andfostering of children with disabilities, including but not limited toawareness- raising campaigns on the rights and dignity of these childrenand on services available to them in the community.In line with the UN Committee on the Rights of Personswith Disabilities General Comment No. 2 (Article 9: Accessibility), establisha time-bound plan, subject to available resources, to develop accessible,community-based infrastructure and services for children with disabilitiesand their families, including foster and adoptive families, in sufficientnumbers to be accessible to people in their communities:Establish, staff, and fund support groups for parents ofchildren with disabilities led by professionals with appropriate trainingand knowledge on the rights, dignity, and potential of children withdisabilities and with knowledge of the challenges that children withdisabilities and their families face to living and participating in theircommunities;Ensure that pre-school age children with disabilitieshave access to pre-school and child care centers on an equal basis asothers and ensure that they are accessible and that staff at thesefacilities receive appropriate training and knowledge on thesechildren’s rights and potential;Ensure that healthcare facilities have sufficientcapacity to treat children with disabilities in or near theircommunities, including by hiring appropriately trained personnel andequipping hospitals and clinics with child-friendly anddisability-accessible medical equipment;Ensure that parents are informed about rehabilitationcenters for children with disabilities in their area and that the centersare accessible and effective in meeting assessed psycho-social andrehabilitation needs of children and families and support families andchildren to access inclusive education, leisure, employment, and otherrelevant community services in their local area.Ensure that all children living in institutions beforeturning 18 have meaningful consultations regarding their futures, aregiven opportunities to live in the community, and are not automaticallytransferred to state institutions for adults:Establish and fund community-based assisted living toenable young people with disabilities to transition out of stateinstitutions and realize their right to participate and be included intheir communities.To the Russian StateDumaAmend the law “On Guardianship and Custody” toestablish a procedure for developing an understanding of a child’sbest interests, including through the use of accessible mechanisms forchildren to express their wills and preferences in their own placementdecisions. Incorporate diverse means of communication and supporteddecision-making for children, when needed.Amend Russia’s Code of Administrative Violations toinclude harsher penalties for officials who obstruct the family placementof children left without parental care.Pass amendments introduced in May 2014 designed toprohibit disability-based discrimination and expand the list of changes tobe made so that public transport and other facilities and services arephysically accessible.Introduce additional amendments to federal legislationthat would protect the rights of all persons with developmental andpsychosocial disabilities to accessible community-based infrastructure andservices and that would establish clear mechanisms for enforcement ofRussia’s disability rights laws, at all levels of government.To Russia’s Children’s Rights CommissionerIssue a public statement calling for a ban on thefollowing practices:The use of all forms of physical violence, including butnot limited to restraint, beatings, forced psychiatric hospitalization,and isolation;  Derogatory language, threats, and insults on the part ofinstitution staff to children;Denial of children’s contact with family members.Ensure that all monitoring of children’sinstitutions is accompanied by appropriate follow-up to guaranteeprotection of the rights of all children, including children withdisabilities.Work with the relevant ministries to ensure appropriateguidance for protecting children with disabilities from all forms ofviolence and neglect, including but not limited to lack of adequatenutrition, access to education, play, and recreation.To Russia’sInternational PartnersRussia’s international partners, including theEuropean Union and its member states, UNICEF, the World Bank, and otherinternational financial institutions and all donors – governmentaland nongovernmental – engaged in assistance programs with Russia inthe context of multilaterial and bilateral funding should:Raise the concerns detailed in this report about theplight of institutionalized children with disabilities on the occasion ofbilateral and multilateral dialogues with Russia and proactively look foropportunities to advance the recommendations formulated to address them;Earmark financial and other forms of support andassistance toward support services for families of young children withdisabilities and prevention of child abandonment, as well as towardsfamily reunification and other forms of family-based care for childrenwith disabilities separated from their biological families;Ensure that projects receiving funding for initiativessuch as prevention of child abandonment, family reunification ofinstitutionalized children, and protection of the rights of childrenliving in institutions, explicitly include children with disabilities;Continuously monitor all community-based projectsproviding services and infrastructure for children such as schools,recreational programs, and health care to ensure that all partiesimplementing such projects (i.e. contractors, construction workers,program managers, and other parties) incorporate the needs of childrenwith disabilities for accessible services and infrastructure.AcknowledgementsAndrea Mazzarino, research fellow in the Europe and Central Asia Division of Human Rights Watch, researched and wrote this report. Some of the research was conducted together with Maria Kunineva, Natalia Estemirova Fellow with the Europe and Central Asia Division.This report was edited by Jane Buchanan, associate directorof the Europe and Central Asia Division; Alice Farmer, researcher in theChildren’s Rights Division; Shantha Rau Barriga, director of theDisability Rights Program; Veronika Szente Goldston, advocacy director of theEurope and Central Asia Division; and Danielle Haas, senior editor in theProgram office. Aisling Reidy, senior legal advisor, provided legal review, andTom Porteous, deputy program director, provided Program review.Production assistance was provided by Kaitlin Martin, Scout Katovich, senior associates in the Europe and Central Asia Division, and Jonny Dzhibladze, Natalia Estemirova Fellow with the Europe and Central Asia Division; Kathy Mills, publications specialist; and Fitzroy Hepkins, production manager. Jessie Graham, senior multimedia producer, directed and produced the multimedia components of the project. Ksenia Kutyreva, intern in the Europe and Central Asia Division, provided research assistance. Jonny Dzhibladze provided research assistance as well.Human Rights Watch is deeply grateful to all those whohelped us conduct our research in Russia. We are especially grateful to all ofthe children and young people with disabilities and their families who spoke tous about their experiences.Human Rights Watch would like to thank the American Councilof Learned Societies for their support of this research.Appendix: Government Letters, RepliesHumanRights Watch correspondence with the Children’s Rights Commissioner forthe President of the Russian FederationHumanRights Watch correspondence with the Ministry of EducationHumanRights Watch correspondence with the Ministry of HealthHumanRights Watch correspondence with the Ministry of Labor and Social ProtectionMarch21, 2014125993,Moscow, GSP-3, Miusskaya pl., d. 7, str. 1PavelAlekseevich AstakhovChildren’sRights Commissioner for the President of the Russian FederationDearPavel Alekseevich,Pleaseaccept my greetings on behalf of Human Rights Watch. As you may know, HumanRights Watch is an independent, international human rights organization thatadvocates respect for human rights in some ninety countries worldwide,including Russia. For more than 20 years, Human Rights Watch has conductedresearch on a range of human rights concerns in Russia, including, recently, onthe rights of people with disabilities. In September 2013 we published a reporton the accessibility barriers people with disabilities experience in Russia andhave discussed the report extensively and constructively with a wide range ofgovernment officials. As part of our program on the rights of people withdisabilities we are also focusing on the rights of children with disabilities.Ourbasis for all of our research is Russia’s commitments and obligationsunder international human rights law. Specifically, in our work on the rightsof children with disabilities, we are guided by the Convention on the Rights of the Child(CRC) and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities(CRPD).Weare writing to you to learn more about the Office of the Children’sRights Commissioner’s policies and procedures concerning protection ofthe rights of children with disabilities, including of children living in stateinstitutions.HumanRights Watch has conducted interviews with children with disabilities, theirfamilies, staff of state institutions for children with disabilities, anddisability and children’s rights experts in several cities in Russia.Based on our interviews, we have identified a number of concerns. The purposeof this letter is to share some of these concerns with you and learn about theways in which the Commissioner’s Office may be addressing these issues,so that we can reflect information and perspectives from your Office in anyforthcoming reporting.Theseconcerns related to the following areas:Linkagesto birth families.HumanRights Watch research identified concerns regarding the ability of childrenwith disabilities to remain with their birth families rather than be placed ininstitutions, or to maintain contact with their families in the event that theyhave been placed in institutions without their parents having lost or given uptheir parental rights.Education. Human Rights Watchis aware that all children living in Russian state institutions are entitled toeducation, but our research suggests that not all children with disabilitiesliving in state institutions enjoy accessible education, particularly ininclusive settings.Nutrition,health care, and discipline.Our research identified several concerns regarding children withdisabilities living in state institutions and their freedom from violence andparticularly corporal punishment; their access to health care andrehabilitation; and their access to adequate nutrition sufficient for theirdevelopment.Supportfor families of children with disabilities and individuals with disabilities tolive in their communities.Human Rights Watch research identified concerns regarding the availabilityand appropriateness of support services to consistently enable parents to raisetheir children with disabilities at home and facilitate these children’sparticipation and inclusion in their communities.Wewould welcome information from the Commissioner’s Office regarding itsrole monitoring observance of the rights of children with disabilities,including those living in state institutions, specifically with regard to thefollowing questions:Oversightof children’s placement in families and institutions:Doprocesses exist through which children who are in institutions or who may berecommended for placement in institutions can express their views in mattersrelated to their participation in family life, their placement in institutions,and their right to maintain linkages with their birth families? What are theseprocesses and how are they implemented?Arethere official criteria for determining whether institutional placement lies ina child’s best interests? If so, what are those criteria? If not, arethere efforts underway to develop these criteria?Monitoringof the rights of children living in institutions:Doesthe Office of the Children’s Rights Commissioner conduct monitoring ofstate institutions for children? If so, what is the nature and frequency ofthat monitoring?  Does the Office of the Children’s RightsCommissioner collaborate with any other state institutions in the monitoring ofhuman rights for children living in state institutions, such as local guardianand custody organs? If so, which ones? We would welcome any statistics from theOffice of the Children’s Rights Commissioner regarding such monitoring.Whatare the mechanisms for children with disabilities living in state institutionsto submit complaints regarding their conditions or treatment to competentauthorities? What safeguards exist against retaliation, in cases when abusesare reported? Is there a single mechanism available to children living ininstitutions falling under the jurisdiction of the Ministries of Education,Labor and Social Protection, and Health?Howmany complaints has the Office of the Children’s Rights Commissionerreceived in 2011, 2012, 2013, and to date in 2014 regarding alleged humanrights violations of children living in state institutions? How many of thesecomplaints specifically concern the rights of children with disabilities livingin state institutions? Human Rights Watch would welcome information from theOffice of the Children’s Rights Commissioner on the specific concernsraised in these complaints; whether they are from children, their relatives,institutional staff, or other parties, such as guardianship and custody organofficials, for example; and a breakdown of these complaints by year, type ofinstitution, and children’s ages and disabilities.Whatare the procedures for the Office of the Children’s Rights Commissionerto respond to and investigate complaints?Alternativesto institutionalization:Whatrole does the Office of the Children’s Rights Commissioner have in thedevelopment and promotion of alternatives to institutionalization? For example,what is the Office of the Children’s Rights Commissioner’sperspective on the expansion and development of programs to facilitate fostercare and adoption?Statisticson children with disabilities:Incompiling our report, Human Rights Watch has encountered difficulties locatingcomprehensive statistics on the number of children with disabilities living inRussian state institutions; the types of disabilities children withdisabilities living in Russian state institutions have; as well as rates ofabandonment, adoption, and fostering within Russia. We would thereforeappreciate if the Office of the Children’s Rights Commissioner shared thefollowing statistics:Whatis the total number of children with disabilities currently residing in stateinstitutions in Russia, disaggregated by type of institution; disability; age;gender; and region (krai or oblast)?Whatwas the total number of children living in state institutions in each of thefollowing years: 2009, 2004, and 1999? Human Rights Watch would welcomeinformation disaggregated by the types of institutions in which children havelived.uHuWhatis the rate at which children with disabilities are removed from institutionsand placed in (birth, foster, or adoptive) families?Whatare the mortality rates among children living in state institutions,disaggregated by disability, age, gender, type of institution, region (krai oroblast) and cause of death for the years 2014, 2009, 2004, and 1999? We wouldespecially welcome information on mortality rates among children recentlytransferred from one institution to another, or who have recently enteredinstitutions for the first time. Human Rights Watch would also welcomeinformation on how the mortality rate for children with disabilities comparesto the mortality rate for children without disabilities?Inlight of our upcoming report on the rights of children with disabilities inRussia, we would welcome your response to our concerns by April 25, 2014 sothat we have adequate opportunity to ensure that the report reflects theinformation and perspectives of the Office of the Children’s Rights Commissioner.Wethank you for your attention to these matters and look forward to receivingyour responses.Sincerely,RachelDenberDeputyDirectorEuropeand Central Asia DivisionHumanRights WatchClick to expand ImageMarch 21, 2014125993,Moscow, ul. Tverskaya, dom 11, GSP-3DmitriViktorovich LivanovMinisterof Education and ScienceDearDmitri Viktorovich,Thankyou for agreeing to meet with us in September regarding access to education forpeople with disabilities. We welcome the constructive dialogue between theMinistry of Education and Human Rights Watch.Weare writing to you to learn more about the Ministry of Education’spolicies and procedures concerning protection of the rights of children withdisabilities, including those living in state institutions. As you know, Russiahas ratified both the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) and the Conventionon the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD).HumanRights Watch has conducted interviews with children with disabilities, theirfamilies, and staff of state institutions for children with disabilities inseveral cities in Russia. Based on our interviews with the abovementionedgroups as well as disability and children’s rights experts, we haveidentified a number of concerns. The purpose of this letter is to share some ofthese concerns with you and learn about the ways in which the Ministry ofEducation may be addressing these issues, so that we can reflect informationand perspectives from the Ministry of Education in any forthcoming reporting.We have also written to other ministries regarding concerns that relatedirectly to issues within their competencies.Specifically,people with whom Human Rights Watch spoke reported the following concerns:Linkagesto birth families.HumanRights Watch research identified concerns regarding the ability of childrenwith disabilities to remain with their birth families rather than be placed ininstitutions, or to maintain contact with their families in the event that theyhave been placed in institutions. In this regard, we would welcome informationfrom the Ministry of Education concerning the following:Doesstaff of the Ministry and institutions under its supervision provideparents of children with disabilities information regarding the rights ofchildren, including children with disabilities, such as the right to aninclusive education and the right to participate in cultural life, forexample? What kind of information does the Ministry share with parentsregarding the nature of the disability (ies) identified in a child and howthe disability relates to the development of the child over his or herlifetime? How does it distribute this information?Doprocesses exist through which children in institutions or who may berecommended for placement in institutions can express their views inmatters related to their participation in family life and their placementin institutions? What are these processes and how are they implemented?Whatis the Ministry of Education’s role in overseeing or collaboratingwith local guardianship and custody organs, including in determiningwhether family separation lies in a child’s best interests? Does theMinistry collaborate with local guardianship and custody organs to overseechildren’s placement in families, whether placement involvesreunification with children’s biological relatives or in foster oradoptive families? If so, how does it collaborate with these organs?Whatare the official criteria for determining whether institutional placementlies in the best interests of the child? How does the Ministry ofEducation apply these criteria, including through its role in thepsycho-medico-pedagogical commissions (PMPC)?  How do PMPCs determinewhether continued institutionalization lies in the best interests ofchildren with disabilities who age out of baby houses? In cases when PMPCsdecide that institutionalization does lie in a child’s bestinterests, how do PMPCs determine whether a child will live inchildren’s homes run by the Ministry of Labor and Social Protectionor in those run by the Ministry of Education? In all of these decisions,we would appreciate information on how the Ministry of Education promotesand incorporates respect for the child’s views.Inwhat ways does the Ministry of Education act to protect the right ofchildren with disabilities living in state institutions to maintain linkageswith their birth families?HumanRights Watch would also appreciate more information on Article 155.1, part1, paragraph 2 of Russia’s Family Code, on the placement of childrenwithout parental care. The article states, “In the case that a childis left without parental care in a subject of the Russian Federationlacking an organization for orphans and children without parental care,where the child can be placed in order to ensure that child’s basicneeds and provide that child with an upbringing and an education, thatchild will be transferred to a guardianship and custody organ located onthe territory of a different subject.” In such cases when a child istransferred to an institution located in a different region than that ofhis or her immediate family or relatives, how does the Ministry ofEducation act to protect the right of the child to maintain linkages withhis or her birth family?Whatsteps is the Ministry of Education taking to support the development offederal anti-discrimination legislation to better reflect the principlesand provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and theConvention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and to address theneeds of children with disabilities in a nondiscriminatory manner, asrecommended in the Committee on the Rights of the Child’s concludingobservations on Russia in January 2014?Education. Human Rights Watchis aware that all children living in Russian state institutions are entitled toeducation. In this regard, Human Rights Watch would be grateful for informationfrom the Ministry of Education concerning the following:Whatspecific steps does the Ministry of Education take to ensure that childrenwith disabilities living in institutions under its jurisdiction have accessto education in their communities, particularly in inclusive settings? Wewould particularly appreciate any information that the Ministry couldprovide on any community-based inclusive education programs in place orunder development for children with disabilities living in institutions.Howdoes the Ministry of Education train and prepare teachers and other schoolpersonnel who work with children with disabilities, including childrenliving in institutions? Human Rights Watch is particularly interested insteps the Ministry might be taking to ensure accessible and inclusivecurricula aimed at children’s maximum development and facilitationof their self-reliance.Nutrition,health care, and discipline.According to article 155.1, part 3 of the Family Code, local guardianshipand custody organs are responsible for the living conditions, upbringing, andeducation of children residing in organizations for orphans and childrenwithout parental care. Given this, Human Rights Watch would appreciate the Ministryof Education’s input on the following questions:Whatfederal policies exist regarding nutrition for children living in stateinstitutions? What policies exist concerning nutrition for children withdisabilities that is adequate for their development, including regardingappropriate feeding methods in cases when children are unable to feedthemselves? In what ways does the Ministry of Education work with localguardianship and custody organs to ensure that children with disabilitiesliving in institutions under its supervision receive adequate nutrition?Whatfederal policies exist to ensure that children with disabilities living instate institutions have access to health care and rehabilitation,including health care specific to their disabilities? How does theMinistry of Education work with local guardianship and custody organs toensure that children with disabilities living in state institutions underits jurisdiction are provided with necessary healthcare and rehabilitationservices?Whatfederal policies currently exist regarding the following practices instate institutions for children:theuse of restraints to tie children’s hands to their bodies or to tiechildren to furniture or wheelchairs;theuse of sedatives;theuse of corporal punishment or other physical force by staff or otherchildren as punishment for behavior deemed to be disruptive;othersimilar measures, including disciplinary measures?Inwhat circumstances are institutional staff authorized to use force againsta child?Howdoes the Ministry of Education work with local guardianship and custody organsto ensure the freedom of all children from violence?Whatfederal policies are in place regarding psychiatric hospitalization ofchildren living in state institutions? What policies exist elaborating theconditions under which children with disabilities may be placed inpsychiatric institutions?  What procedures are in place by whichchildren with disabilities may provide their informed consent to be placedin psychiatric hospitals? How does the Ministry of Education collaboratewith local guardianship and custody organs to ensure that psychiatrichospitalization is used only when in the best interests of the child?Whatfederal policies exist regarding programs to ensure leisure time and playfor children living in state institutions falling under the Ministry ofEducation’s supervision, particularly for children withdisabilities? We would welcome information on what the Ministry does toensure that children with disabilities living in its institutions enjoyaccess to leisure and play according to the Ministry’s policies andprograms, and information on the number of hours of leisure and play towhich children are entitled.Doesthe Ministry of Education carry out any awareness-raising and educationprograms to promote positive, non-violent, and participatory forms ofchild rearing and discipline, as recommended in the Committee on theRights of the Child’s concluding observations on Russia in January2014? If so, what is the content of these programs, and which audiences dothese programs target?Monitoringand oversight.Human Rights Watch would welcome information from the Ministry of Education onwhether and how it collaborates with local guardianship and custody organs tosupervise conditions in children’s institutions falling under theMinistry’s jurisdiction, including through any complaint mechanisms thatmay be available to children with disabilities living in the Ministry’sinstitutions. In particular, we would appreciate answers to the followingquestions:Dochildren with disabilities living in state institutions run by theMinistry of Education enjoy accessible means of submitting complaintsregarding their conditions or treatment to competent authorities, withoutfear of retaliation? What are the mechanisms for children to file suchcomplaints? What safeguards exist against retaliation, in cases whenabuses are reported?  Is there a standardized set of complaintmechanisms available to children living in institutions falling under thejurisdiction of the Ministries of Education, Social Protection, andHealth?Howdoes the Ministry of Education collaborate with the Ministries of SocialProtection and Health and local guardianship and custody organs to ensurerespect for laws and policies in order to protect the rights of childrenliving in institutions, including children with disabilities, in thevarious institutions where children may live over the course of theirlives?Alternativesto institutionalization.HumanRights Watch would welcome information about existing efforts by the Russianfederal government and the Ministry of Education in particular to developalternatives to institutionalization, including, for example, efforts todevelop Russia’s system of foster care and adoption. In particular, wewould welcome information from the Ministry concerning the following:Howmany children are adopted or fostered each year in Russia?  We wouldwelcome this data disaggregated by the number of children withdisabilities placed in adoptive versus foster families. What is thepercentage of children with disabilities adopted or fostered relative toRussia’s total population of children who are adopted or fostered?Whatrole does the Ministry of Education have in overseeing or facilitatingadoption and fostering, including through involvement with the PMPCs andits potential role in collaborating with local guardianship and custodyorgans? Does the Ministry have any policies to encourage adoption ofchildren with disabilities? What steps does the Ministry take to ensurethat adoption or fostering is carried out in children’s bestinterests and with their input?HumanRights Watch would appreciate clarification from the Ministry of Educationon article 155.2, part 4 of the Family Code, regarding fostering. Thelegislation states that the temporary transfer of a child to a citizenliving in the Russian Federation shall take place for no longer than threemonths. The law also states that in exceptional circumstances, the term oftemporary transfer to a foster family can be extended with theguardianship organ’s consent, and that a continuous period oftemporary residence for a child may not exceed six months. Human RightsWatch would appreciate any clarification the Ministry might provide on whya child is permitted to stay with a foster family for only three to sixmonths, what the government considers to be exceptional circumstances, andwhat role the government may play in determining when exceptionalcircumstances exist.Supportfor families of children with disabilities and individuals with disabilities tolive in their communities.Human Rights Watch research identified concerns regarding the availabilityand appropriateness of support services to consistently enable parents to raisetheir children with disabilities and facilitate these children’sparticipation and inclusion in their communities.Whatforms of government support are available for children with disabilitiesand their families, including foster and adoptive families? What role doesthe Ministry of Education play in developing and providing these services?For example, is the Ministry creating or considering creating programs tosupport inclusive and accessible kindergartens and schools for childrenwith disabilities; psychological support services for children and familymembers; and parenting guidance for children with disabilities and theirfamilies?Howdoes the Ministry of Education inform children with disabilities living instate institutions of their right to live in and participate in thecommunity after reaching age 18? What measures does the Ministry take toactively facilitate these children’s self-reliance outside of stateinstitutions, including through job-search assistance, life-skillstraining, and other forms of education or vocational training?Statisticson children with disabilities.In compiling our report, Human Rights Watch has encountered difficultieslocating comprehensive statistics on the number of children with disabilitiesliving in Russian state institutions, the types of disabilities they have, aswell as rates of abandonment, adoption, and fostering within Russia. We wouldtherefore appreciate if the Ministry of Education shared the followingstatistics:Whatis the total number of children with disabilities currently residing instate institutions in Russia disaggregated by disability; age; gender;type of institution; and region (krai or oblast)? Human Rights Watch wouldalso welcome information on whether these institutions are specialized forchildren with particular kinds of disabilities. Additionally, what is thetotal number of children living in state institutions run by the Ministryof Education, disaggregated by the same categories?Whatwas the total number of children living in state institutions in each ofthe following years: 2009, 2004, and 1999? What was the total number ofchildren living in state institutions run by the Ministry of Education ineach of the following years: 2009, 2004, and 1999?Whatis the rate at which children with disabilities are removed frominstitutions under its supervision and placed in (birth, foster, oradoptive) families?Whatare the mortality rates among children living in state institutions,disaggregated by disability, age, type of institution, region (krai oroblast) and cause of death for the years 2014, 2009, 2004, and 1999? Wewould especially welcome information on mortality rates among childrenrecently transferred from one institution to another, or who have recentlyentered institutions for the first time.Inlight of our upcoming report on the rights of children with disabilities inRussia, we would welcome your response to our concerns by April 25, 2014 sothat we have adequate opportunity to ensure that the report reflects Ministry ofEducation’s informationand perspectives.Wethank you for your attention to these matters and look forward to receivingyour responses.Sincerely,RachelDenberDeputyDirectorEuropeand Central Asia DivisionHumanRights WatchClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageMarch 26, 2014127994,Moscow, GSP-4, Rakhmanovskii per., d. 3VeronikaIgorevna SkvortsovaMinisterof HealthDearVeronika IgorevnaThankyou for agreeing to meet with us in October regarding access to health care forpeople with disabilities. We welcome the constructive dialogue between theMinistry of Health and Human Rights Watch.Weare writing to you to learn more about the Ministry of Health’s policiesand procedures concerning protection of the rights of children withdisabilities, including those living in state institutions. As you know, Russiahas ratified both the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) and theConvention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD).HumanRights Watch has conducted interviews with children with disabilities, theirfamilies, and staff of state institutions for children with disabilities inseveral cities in Russia. Based on our interviews with the abovementionedgroups as well as disability and children’s rights experts, we haveidentified a number of concerns. The purpose of this letter is to share some ofthese concerns with you and learn about the ways in which the Ministry ofHealth may be addressing these issues, so that we can reflect information andperspectives from the Ministry of Health in any forthcoming reporting. We havealso written to other ministries regarding concerns that relate directly toissues within their competencies.Specifically,people with whom Human Rights Watch spoke reported the following concerns:Linkagesto birth families.HumanRights Watch research identified concerns regarding the ability of childrenwith disabilities to remain with their birth families rather than be placed ininstitutions, or to maintain contact with their families in the event that theyhave been placed in institutions. In this regard, we would welcome informationfrom the Ministry of Health concerning the following:Whatkind of information does staff of the Ministry and institutions under itssupervision provide to parents of children with disabilities in birthing housesand in other healthcare settings regarding the rights of children, includingchildren with disabilities, such as rights to an inclusive education, healthcare, rehabilitation, and other rights? What kind of information does theMinistry share with parents regarding the nature of the disability (ies)identified in a child and how the disability relates to the development of thechild over his or her lifetime? How does it distribute this information?Doprocesses exist through which children in institutions or who may be recommendedfor placement in institutions can express their views in matters related totheir participation in family life and their placement in institutions? Whatare these processes and how are they implemented?Whatis the Ministry of Health’s role in overseeing or collaborating withlocal guardianship and custody organs, including in determining whether familyseparation lies in a child’s best interests? Does the Ministrycollaborate with local guardianship and custody organs to oversee children’splacement in families, whether placement involves reunification withchildren’s biological relatives or in foster or adoptive families? If so,how does it collaborate with these organs?Whatare the official criteria for determining whether institutional placement liesin the best interests of the child? How does the Ministry of Health apply thesecriteria, including through its role in the psycho-medico-pedagogicalcommissions (PMPC)?  How do PMPCs determine whether continuedinstitutionalization lies in the best interests of children with disabilitieswho age out of baby houses? In cases when PMPCs decide thatinstitutionalization does lie in a child’s best interests, how do PMPCsdetermine whether a child will live in children’s homes run by the Ministryof Labor and Social Protection or in those run by the Ministry of Education? Inall of these decisions, we would appreciate information on how the Ministry ofHealth promotes and incorporates respect for the child’s views.Inwhat ways does the Ministry of Health act to protect the right of children withdisabilities living in state institutions to maintain linkages with their birthfamilies?HumanRights Watch would also appreciate more information on Article 155.1, part 1,paragraph 2 of Russia’s Family Code, on the placement of children withoutparental care. The article states, “In the case that a child is leftwithout parental care in a subject of the Russian Federation lacking anorganization for orphans and children without parental care, where the child canbe placed in order to ensure that child’s basic needs and provide thatchild with an upbringing and an education, that child will be transferred to aguardianship and custody organ located on the territory of a differentsubject.” In such cases when a child is transferred to an institutionlocated in a different region than that of his or her immediate family orrelatives, how does the Ministry of Health act to protect the right of thechild to maintain linkages with his or her birth family?Whatsteps is the Ministry of Health taking to support the development of federalanti-discrimination legislation to better reflect the principles and provisionsof the Convention on the Rights of the Child and Convention on the Rights ofPersons with Disabilities, and to address the needs of children withdisabilities in a nondiscriminatory manner, as recommended in the Committee onthe Rights of the Child’s concluding observations on Russia in January2014?Education. Human Rights Watchis aware that all children living in Russian state institutions are entitled toeducation. In this regard, Human Rights Watch would be grateful for informationfrom the Ministry of Health concerning the following:Whatspecific steps does the Ministry of Health take to ensure that children withdisabilities living in institutions under its jurisdiction have access toeducation in their communities? We would particularly appreciate anyinformation that the Ministry could provide on any community-based inclusiveeducation programs in place or under development for children with disabilitiesliving in institutions.Nutrition,health care, and discipline.According to article 155.1, part 3 of the Family Code, local guardianshipand custody organs are responsible for the living conditions, upbringing, andeducation of children residing in organizations for orphans and childrenwithout parental care. Given this, Human Rights Watch would appreciate theMinistry of Health’s input on the following questions:Whatfederal policies exist regarding nutrition for children living in stateinstitutions? What policies exist concerning nutrition for children withdisabilities that is adequate for their development, including regardingappropriate feeding methods in cases when children are unable to feedthemselves? In what ways does the Ministry of Health work with localguardianship and custody organs to ensure that children with disabilitiesliving in institutions under its supervision receive adequate nutrition?Whatfederal policies exist to ensure that children with disabilities living instate institutions have access to health care and rehabilitation, includinghealth care specific to their disabilities? How does the Ministry of Healthwork with local guardianship and custody organs to ensure that children withdisabilities living in state institutions under its supervision are providedwith necessary healthcare and rehabilitation services?Whatfederal policies currently exist regarding the following practices in stateinstitutions for children:the use of restraints totie children’s hands to their bodies or to tie children to furniture orwheelchairs;the use of sedatives;the use of corporalpunishment or other physical force by staff or other children as punishment forbehavior deemed to be disruptive;other similar measures,including disciplinary measures?Inwhat circumstances are institutional staff authorized to use force against achild?Howdoes the Ministry of Health work with local guardianship and custody organs toensure the freedom of all children from violence?Whatfederal policies are in place regarding psychiatric hospitalization of childrenliving in state institutions? What policies exist elaborating the conditionsunder which children with disabilities may be placed in psychiatricinstitutions?  What procedures are in place by which children withdisabilities may provide their informed consent to be placed in psychiatrichospitals? How does the Ministry of Health collaborate with local guardianshipand custody organs to ensure that psychiatric hospitalization is used only whenin the best interests of the child?Whatfederal policies exist regarding programs to ensure leisure time and play forchildren living in state institutions falling under the Ministry ofHealth’s supervision, particularly for children with disabilities? Wewould welcome information on what the Ministry does to ensure that childrenwith disabilities living in its institutions enjoy access to leisure and playaccording to the Ministry’s policies and programs, and information on thenumber of hours of leisure and play to which children are entitled.Doesthe Ministry of Health carry out any awareness-raising and education programsto promote positive, non-violent, and participatory forms of child rearing anddiscipline, as recommended in the Committee on the Rights of the Child’sconcluding observations on Russia in January 2014? If so, what is the contentof these programs, and which audiences do these programs target?Monitoringand oversight.Human Rights Watch would welcome information from the Ministry of Health onwhether and how it collaborates with local guardianship and custody organs to superviseconditions in children’s institutions falling under the Ministry’sjurisdiction, including through any complaint mechanisms that may be availableto children with disabilities living in the Ministry’s institutions. Inparticular, we would appreciate answers to the following questions:Canchildren with disabilities living in state institutions run by the Ministry ofHealth submit complaints (through an accessible process) regarding theirconditions or treatment to competent authorities, without fear of retaliation?What are the mechanisms for children to file such complaints? What safeguardsexist against retaliation, in cases when abuses are reported?  Is there astandardized set of complaint mechanisms available to children living in institutionsfalling under the jurisdiction of the Ministries of Health, Social Protection,and Education?Howdoes the Ministry of Health collaborate with the Ministries of SocialProtection and Education and local guardianship and custody organs to ensurerespect for laws and policies in order to protect the rights of children livingin institutions, including children with disabilities, in the variousinstitutions where children may live over the course of their lives?Alternativesto institutionalization.HumanRights Watch would welcome information about existing efforts by the Russianfederal government and the Ministry of Health in particular to developalternatives to institutionalization, including, for example, any efforts todevelop Russia’s system of foster care and adoption. In particular, wewould welcome information from the Ministry concerning the following:Howmany children are adopted or fostered each year in Russia?  We wouldwelcome this data disaggregated by the number of children with disabilitiesplaced in adoptive versus foster families, by gender, age, and type ofdisability. What is the percentage of children with disabilities adopted orfostered compared to Russia’s total population of children who areadopted or fostered?Whatrole does the Ministry of Health have in overseeing or facilitating adoptionand fostering, including through involvement with the PMPCs and its potentialrole in collaborating with local guardianship and custody organs? Does theMinistry have any policies to encourage adoption of children with disabilities?What steps does the Ministry take to ensure that adoption or fostering iscarried out in children’s best interests and with their input?HumanRights Watch would appreciate clarification from the Ministry of Health onarticle 155.2, part 4 of the Family Code, regarding fostering. The legislationstates that the temporary transfer of a child to a citizen living in theRussian Federation shall take place for no longer than three months. The lawalso states that in exceptional circumstances, the term of temporary transferto a foster family can be extended with the guardianship organ’s consent,and that a continuous period of temporary residence for a child may not exceedsix months. Human Rights Watch would appreciate any clarification the Ministrymight provide on why a child is permitted to stay with a foster family for onlythree to six months, what the government considers to be exceptionalcircumstances, and what role the government may play in determining whenexceptional circumstances exist.Supportfor families of children with disabilities and individuals with disabilities tolive in their communities.Human Rights Watch research identified concerns regarding the availabilityand appropriateness of support services to consistently enable parents to raisetheir children with disabilities and facilitate these children’sparticipation and inclusion in their communities.Whatforms of government support are available for children with disabilities and theirfamilies, including foster and adoptive families? What role does the Ministryof Health play in developing and providing these services? For example, is theMinistry creating or considering creating programs to support accessiblehealthcare and rehabilitation services in children’s communities;inclusive and accessible kindergartens and schools for children withdisabilities; rehabilitation and psychological support services for childrenand family members; and parenting guidance for children with disabilities andtheir families?Howdoes the Ministry of Health inform children with disabilities living in stateinstitutions of their right to live in and participate in the community afterreaching age 18? What measures does the Ministry take to actively facilitatethese children’s self-reliance outside of state institutions, includingthrough job-search assistance, life-skills training, and other forms ofeducation or vocational training?Statisticson children with disabilities.In compiling our report, Human Rights Watch has encountered difficultieslocating comprehensive statistics on the number of children with disabilitiesliving in Russian state institutions and the types of disabilities they have,as well as rates of abandonment, adoption, and fostering within Russia. Wewould therefore appreciate if the Ministry of Health shared the followingstatistics:Whatis the total number of children with disabilities currently residing in stateinstitutions in Russia disaggregated by disability; age; gender; type ofinstitution; and region (krai or oblast)? Human Rights Watch would also welcomeinformation on whether these institutions are specialized for children withparticular kinds of disabilities. Additionally, what is the total number ofchildren living in state institutions run by the Ministry of Health,disaggregated by the same categories?Whatwas the total number of children living in state institutions in each of thefollowing years: 2009, 2004, and 1999? What was the total number of children livingin state institutions run by the Ministry of Health in each of the followingyears: 2009, 2004, and 1999?Canthe Ministry of Health please provide statistics on the rate at which childrenwith disabilities are removed from institutions under its supervision andplaced in (birth, foster, or adoptive) families?Canthe Ministry of Health please provide statistics on mortality rates amongchildren living in state institutions, disaggregated by disability, age, typeof institution, region (krai or oblast) and cause of death for the years 2014,2009, 2004, and 1999? We would especially welcome information on mortalityrates among children recently transferred from one institution to another, orwho have recently entered institutions for the first time.Inlight of our upcoming report on the rights of children with disabilities inRussia, we would welcome your response to our concerns by April 25, 2014 sothat we have adequate opportunity to ensure that the report reflects Ministry of Health’sinformation andperspectives.Wethank you for your attention to these matters and look forward to receivingyour responses.Sincerely,RachelDenberDeputyDirector, Europe and Central Asia DivisionClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageMarch 21, 2014127994,Moscow, GSP-4, Ilinka, d. 21MaksimAnatolyevich TopilinMinisterof Labor and Social ProtectionDearMaksim Anatolyevich,Thankyou for agreeing to meet with us in September to discuss improving access toemployment for people with disabilities.HumanRights Watch has conducted interviews with children with disabilities, theirfamilies, and staff of state institutions for children with disabilities inseveral cities in Russia. Based on our interviews with the abovementionedgroups as well as disability and children’s rights experts, we haveidentified a number of concerns. As you are aware, Russia ratified the Convention on the Rights ofthe Child and Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. The purpose of thisletter is to inquire about additional information concerning the policy andprocedure of the Ministry of Labor as concerns defending the rights of childrenwith disabilities, and to share some of our concerns with you and learn aboutthe ways in which the Ministry of Labor may be addressing these issues, so thatwe can reflect information and perspectives from the Ministry of Labor in anyforthcoming reporting. We have also written to other ministries regardingconcerns that relate directly to issues within their competencies.Specifically,people with whom Human Rights Watch spoke reported the following concerns:Linkagesto biological families.HumanRights Watch research identified concerns regarding the ability of childrenwith disabilities to remain with their biological families rather than beplaced in institutions, or to maintain contact with their families in the eventthat they have been placed in institutions. In this regard, we would welcomeinformation from the Ministry of Labor concerning the following:Doesstaff of the Ministry and institutions under its supervision provide parents ofchildren with disabilities information regarding the rights of children, includingchildren with disabilities, such as the right to rehabilitation, for example?What kind of information does the Ministry share with parents regarding thenature of the disability (ies) identified in a child, how the disabilityrelates to the development of the child over his or her lifetime, and potentialopportunities for rehabilitation? How does it distribute this information?Doprocesses exist through which children in institutions or who may berecommended for placement in institutions can express their views in mattersrelated to their participation in family life and their placement ininstitutions? What are these processes and how are they implemented?Whatis the Ministry of Labor’s role in overseeing or collaborating with localguardianship and custody organs, including in determining whether familyseparation lies in a child’s best interests? Does the Ministrycollaborate with local guardianship and custody organs to overseechildren’s placement in families, whether placement involves reunificationwith children’s biological relatives or in foster or adoptive families?If so, how does it collaborate with these organs?Ministryof Education Order number 1082, issued on September 20, 2013, “Regardingthe establishment of Positions concerning psycho-medico-pedagogicalcommission” does not propose any sort of role for the Ministry of Laborin the basic structure of the psycho-medico-pedagogical commission (PMPK), butdoes it retain the possibility of attracting Ministry of Labor specialists?Human Rights Watch would be grateful for a clarification of the Ministry ofLabor’s role in the decisions and recommendations of the PMPK, as well asclarifications about the possibilities and precedents for participation ofmembers of the Ministry of Labor in the establishment of the PMPK.Inwhat ways does the Ministry of Labor act to protect the right of children withdisabilities living in state institutions to maintain linkages with theirbiological families?HumanRights Watch would also appreciate more information on Article 155.1, part 1,paragraph 2 of Russia’s Family Code, on the placement of children withoutparental care. The article states, “In the case that a child is leftwithout parental care in a subject of the Russian Federation lacking anorganization for orphans and children without parental care, where the childcan be placed in order to ensure that child’s basic needs and providethat child with an upbringing and an education, that child will be transferredto a guardianship and custody organ located on the territory of a differentsubject.” In such cases when a child is transferred to an institutionlocated in a different region than that of his or her immediate family orrelatives, how does the Ministry of Labor act to protect the right of the childto maintain linkages with his or her biological family?Whatsteps is the Ministry of Labor taking to support the development of federalanti-discrimination legislation to better reflect the principles and provisionsof the Convention on the Rights of the Child and Convention on the Rights ofPersons with Disabilities; and to address the needs of children withdisabilities in a nondiscriminatory manner, as recommended in the Committee onthe Rights of the Child’s concluding observations on Russia in January2014?Education. Human Rights Watchis aware that all children living in Russian state institutions are entitled toeducation. In this regard, Human Rights Watch would be grateful for informationfrom the Ministry of Labor concerning the following:Whatspecific steps does the Ministry of Labor take to ensure that children withdisabilities living in institutions under its jurisdiction have access toeducation in their communities? We would particularly appreciate anyinformation that the Ministry could provide on any community-based inclusiveeducation programs in place or under development for children with disabilitiesliving in institutions.Nutrition,health care, and discipline.According to article 155.1, part 3 of the Family Code, local guardianshipand custody organs are responsible for the living conditions, upbringing, andeducation of children residing in organizations for orphans and childrenwithout parental care. Given this, Human Rights Watch would appreciate the Ministryof Labor’s input on the following questions:Whatfederal policies exist regarding nutrition for children living in stateinstitutions? What policies exist concerning nutrition for children withdisabilities that is adequate for their development, including regardingappropriate feeding methods in cases when children are unable to feedthemselves? In what ways does the Ministry of Labor work with localguardianship and custody organs to ensure that children with disabilitiesliving in institutions under its supervision receive adequate nutrition?Whatfederal policies exist to ensure that children with disabilities living instate institutions have access to health care and rehabilitation, includinghealth care specific to their disabilities? How does the Ministry of Labor workwith local guardianship and custody organs to ensure that children withdisabilities living in state institutions under its jurisdiction are providedwith necessary healthcare and rehabilitation services?Whatfederal policies guide workers at state institutions for children regarding thefollowing practices:the use of restraints totie children’s hands to their bodies or to tie children to furniture orwheelchairs;the use of sedatives;the use of corporalpunishment or other physical force by staff or other children as punishment forbehavior deemed to be disruptive;other similar measures,including disciplinary measures?Inwhat circumstances are institutional staff authorized to use force against achild?Howdoes the Ministry of Labor work with local guardianship and custody organs toensure the freedom of all children from violence?Whatfederal policies are in place regarding psychiatric hospitalization of childrenliving in state institutions? What policies exist elaborating the conditionsunder which children with disabilities may be placed in psychiatricinstitutions?  What procedures are in place by which children withdisabilities may provide their informed consent to be placed in psychiatrichospitals? How does the Ministry of Labor collaborate with local guardianshipand custody organs to ensure that psychiatric hospitalization is used only whenin the best interests of the child?Whatfederal policies exist regarding programs to ensure leisure time and play forchildren living in state institutions falling under the Ministry ofLabor’s supervision, particularly for children with disabilities? Wewould welcome information on what the Ministry does to ensure that childrenwith disabilities living in its institutions enjoy access to leisure and playaccording to the Ministry’s policies and programs, and information on thenumber of hours of leisure and play to which children are entitled.Doesthe Ministry of Labor carry out any awareness-raising and education programs topromote positive, non-violent, and participatory forms of child rearing anddiscipline, as recommended in the Committee on the Rights of the Child’sconcluding observations on Russia in January 2014? If so, what is the contentof these programs, and which audiences do these programs target?Monitoringand oversight.Human Rights Watch would welcome information from the Ministry of Labor onwhether and how it collaborates with local guardianship and custody organs tosupervise conditions in children’s institutions falling under theMinistry’s jurisdiction, including through any complaint mechanisms thatmay be available to children with disabilities living in the Ministry’sinstitutions. In particular, we would appreciate answers to the followingquestions:Canchildren with disabilities living in state institutions run by the Ministry ofLabor submitting complaints (in an accessible process) regarding theirconditions or treatment to competent authorities, without fear of retaliation?What are the mechanisms for children to file such complaints? What safeguardsexist against retaliation, in cases when abuses are reported? Is there astandardized set of complaint mechanisms available to children living ininstitutions falling under the jurisdiction of the Ministries of Education,Labor, and Education?Howdoes the Ministry of Labor collaborate with the Ministries of Education andHealth and local guardianship and custody organs to ensure respect for laws andpolicies in order to protect the rights of orphaned children or children leftwithout parental care, including children with disabilities, in variousspecialized institutions?Alternativesto institutionalization.HumanRights Watch would welcome information about existing efforts by the Russianfederal government and the Ministry of Labor in particular to developalternatives to institutionalization, including, for example, efforts todevelop Russia’s system of foster care and adoption. In particular, wewould welcome information from the Ministry concerning the following:Howmany children are adopted or fostered each year in Russia?  We wouldwelcome this data disaggregated by the number of children with disabilitiesplaced in adoptive versus foster families as well as by age, gender and type ofdisability. What is the percentage of children with disabilities adopted orfostered relative to Russia’s total population of children who areadopted or fostered?Whatrole does the Ministry of Labor have in assisting adoption and fostering, includingthrough its potential role in collaborating with local guardianship and custodyorgans? Does the Ministry have any policies to encourage adoption of childrenwith disabilities? What steps does the Ministry take to ensure that adoption orfostering is carried out in children’s best interests and with theirinput?HumanRights Watch would appreciate clarification from the Ministry of Labor onarticle 155.2, part 4 of the Family Code, regarding fostering. The legislationstates that the temporary transfer of a child to a citizen living in theRussian Federation shall take place for no longer than three months. The lawalso states that in exceptional circumstances, the term of temporary transferto a foster family can be extended with the guardianship organ’s consent,and that a continuous period of temporary residence for a child may not exceedsix months. Human Rights Watch would appreciate any clarification the Ministrymight provide on why a child is permitted to stay with a foster family for onlythree to six months, what cases constitute “exceptionalcircumstances”, and what role the government may play in determining whenexceptional circumstances exist.Supportfor families of children with disabilities and individuals with disabilities tointegrate without problems into their surrounding communities.Human Rights Watch researchidentified concerns regarding the availability and appropriateness of supportservices to consistently enable parents to raise their children withdisabilities and facilitate these children’s participation and inclusionin their communities.Whatforms of government support are available for children with disabilities andtheir families, including foster and adoptive families? What role does theMinistry of Labor play in developing and providing these services? For example,is the Ministry creating or considering creating programs to support inclusiveand accessible kindergartens and schools for children with disabilities;rehabilitation and psychological support services for children and familymembers; and parenting guidance for children with disabilities and theirfamilies?Howdoes the Ministry of Labor inform children with disabilities living in stateinstitutions of their right to live in and participate in the community afterreaching age 18? What measures does the Ministry take to actively facilitatethese children’s self-reliance outside of state institutions, includingthrough job-search assistance, life-skills training, and other forms ofeducation or vocational training?Statisticson children with disabilities.In compiling our report, Human Rights Watch has encountered difficultieslocating comprehensive statistics on the number of children with disabilitiesor health impairments living in Russian state institutions, the types ofdisabilities or health impairments they have, as well as rates of abandonment,adoption, and fostering within Russia. We would therefore appreciate if theMinistry of Labor shared the following statistics:Whatis the total number of children with disabilities or health impairmentscurrently residing in state institutions in Russia disaggregated by disabilityor health impairment; age group; gender; type of institution; and region (kraior oblast)? Human Rights Watch would also welcome information on whether theseinstitutions are specialized for children with particular kinds of disabilitiesor health impairments. Additionally, what is the total number of childrenliving in state institutions run by the Ministry of Labor, disaggregated by thesame categories?Whatwas the total number of children living in state institutions in each of thefollowing years: 2009, 2004, and 1999? What was the total number of childrenwith disability or health impairments living in state institutions run by theMinistry of Labor in these same years?Canthe Ministry of Labor please provide statistics on the rate at which childrenwith disabilities or health impairments are removed from institutions under itssupervision and placed in (biological, foster, or adoptive) families?Canthe Ministry of Labor please provide statistics on mortality rates amongchildren living in state institutions, disaggregated by disability or healthimpairment, age, type of institution, region (krai or oblast) and cause ofdeath for the years 2014, 2009, 2004, and 1999? We would especially welcomeinformation on mortality rates among children recently transferred from oneinstitution to another, or who have recently entered institutions for the firsttime.Inlight of our upcoming report on the rights of children with disabilities inRussia, we would welcome your response to our concerns by April 25, 2014, sothat we have adequate opportunity to ensure that the report reflects Ministry of Labor’sinformation andperspectives.For more detailed information, and in case ofother questions or requests, please contact our researcher Andrea Mazzarino(emailmazzara@hrw.org, telephone –212-216-1229, Moscow office telephone (495) 648-29-24).Werequest that answers be sent in the form of an emailed letter (mazzara@hrw.organdnewsrussia@hrw.org) or as a letter addressedto our office in Moscow – 101000, Moscow, Armyanskiy per. Dom 9/1/1, str.1, office 516.Wethank you for your attention to these matters and look forward to receivingyour responses.Sincerely,RachelDenberDeputyDirectorEuropeand Central Asia DivisionHumanRights WatchClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand Image[1]“Cerebralpalsy,” Collins English Dictionary: Complete & Unabridged 10thEdition, 2009, http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/Cerebral+Palsy (accessedApril 6, 2013); American Heritage Stedman’s Medical Dictionary, 2002,http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/Cerebral+Palsy (accessed April 26,2013).[2]Federal law“Additional guarantees of social support for orphans and children leftwithout parental care [Одополнительныхгарантиях посоциальнойподдержкедетей-сирот идетей,оставшихсябезпопеченияродителей],” No.159-F3, 2013, art. 1, para. 3.[3]“FAQ onIntellectual Disability,” American Association on Intellectual andDevelopmental Disabilities, 2013, http://www.aamr.org/content_104.cfm (accessedApril 27, 2013); “Mental Retardation/Intellectual Disability,”Merck Source: Online Medical Library, October 2006,http://www.mercksource.com/pp/us/cns/cns_merckmanual_frameset.jspzQzpgzEzhttpzCzzSzzSzwwwzPzmerckzPzcomzSzmmhezSzsec23zSzch285zSzch285azPz.html(accessed June 17, 2013).[4]“DevelopmentalDisabilities,” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, November 8,2012, http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/dd/ (accessed April 27, 2013).[5]“Down’s syndrome,” MedLine Plus,http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/downsyndrome.html (accessed April 6, 2013).[6]The professional role of a vospitatel is to develop age-appropriateeducational programs for children that promote development; play and interactwith children; organize recreational or cultural excursions outside of theinstitution; assist families in decisions concerning children’supbringing; and maintain a friendly, tolerant, and safe environment. Vospitatelsare expected to have knowledge of “foundational children’s rightslegislation” as well as federal educational standards. Federal order“On approval of the professional standard of a pedagog (pedagogicalactivities in the sphere of preschool, primary general, basic general, andsecondary education) (vospitatel, teacher) [“Обутверждениипрофессиональногостандарта“Педагог(педагогическаядеятельностьв сфередошкольного,начальногообщего,основногообщего,среднегообщего образования)(воспитатель,учитель)],” No. 544, 2013, art.3.1.2. Sanitarkas do not have pedagogical education and are responsible formeeting children’s basic needs such as changing their diapers and feedingthem. Federal order “On approval of a single qualification handbook formanagers, professionals, and employees in the health sector [ОбутвержденииЕдиногоквалификационногосправочникадолжностейруководителей,специалистови служащих,раздел‘Квалификационныехарактеристикидолжностейработников всферездравоохранения’],”No. 541, 2010, part 4, paras. 1-3, 13.[7]NCLD Editorial Team, “What Are Learning Disabilities?” The NationalCenter for Learning Disabilities, 2014,http://www.ncld.org/types-learning-disabilities/what-is-ld/what-are-learning-disabilities(accessed July 21, 2014).[8]Federal law“Additional guarantees of social support for orphans and children leftwithout parental care,” No. 159-F3, 2013, art. 1, para. 2. The UnitedNations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) defines an orphan as “a child whohas lost one or both parents.” UNICEF, “Orphans,” 2008,http://www.unicef.org/media/media_45279.html (accessed June 15, 2014). HumanRights Watch spoke with some single parents of children with disabilitiesliving in Russia whose child’s other parent had died or did notparticipate in the child’s upbringing. These parents did not considertheir children to be orphans. This report uses the Russian government’sdefinition of orphans as children who have lost their only parent(s).[9]“Manual onImplementation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons withDisabilities,” World Network of Users and Survivors of Psychiatry,http://www.chrusp.org/home/resources (accessed August 4, 2011), p. 9.[10]Copies of all correspondences are included in the appendix to this report.[11]Human Rights Watch emailcorrespondence with Erica J. (pseudonym), children’s rights NGOrepresentative, May 29, 2014. Erica J. compiled data for the total number ofchildren with disabilities in Russia, as well as for the total number ofchildren with disabilities ages 4 to 18 living in state children’sinstitutions from the following sources: a joint report by UNICEF and theRussian Federal State Statistics Service (2009); a report from the RussianFederation on CRC implementation (2009); an unpublished Russian Ministry ofEducation report (2010); and a Ministry of Health report (2011). Data for thenumber of institutionalized children with disabilities up to age 3 comes from a2011 Russian Ministry of Health report. All other figures cited are from 2009.[12]Human Rights Watch emailcorrespondence with Erica J., May 29, 2014. The figure of 2 to 5 percent ofchildren with disabilities of Russia’s total child population is low incomparison with estimates from the World Health Organization (WHO), whichstates that approximately 15 percent of the world’s population has someform of disability. WHO, “Disability and Health,”2013,http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs352/en/ (accessed May 28, 2014).One difficulty in assessing relevant data may be different definitions ofdisability. WHO defines disability as “an umbrella term, covering impairments,activity limitations, and participation restrictions,” thereby includingrestrictions that arise from peoples’ interactions with barriers in theirenvironments.[13]UNICEF, “ChildrenUnder the Age of Three in Formal Care in Eastern Europe and CentralAsia,” 2012,http://www.unicef.org/ceecis/UNICEF_Report_Children_Under_3_FINAL.pdf (accessedApril 26, 2014).[14]“Context for Children and Policy Situation Paper,” Family for EveryChild, 2012, http://www.familyforeverychild.org/sites/default/files/resources/Context%20for%20Children%20and%20Policy%20situation%20paper.pdf(accessed June 27, 2014).[15]Letter from D.V. Kostennikov, state secretary-deputy minister, Ministry ofHealth, to Human Rights Watch, May 12, 2014. The vast majority of state infantcare institutions are run by the Ministry of Health, with the exception ofthose in the city of Moscow, where all state children’s institutions fallunder the jurisdiction of the Department of Social Protection, City of Moscow.Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Anna A. (pseudonym),children’s rights activist, April 25, 2014.[16]Federal order “On approval of the psychological-medical-pedagogicalcommission,” art. 2.[17]Human Rights Watch interviews with Anna A., Moscow, September 10, 2013 and withTamara P. (pseudonym), children’s and disability rights activist, Moscow,September 10, 2013.[18]Human Rights Watch interviews with Olga P. (pseudonym), children’s rightsactivist, Moscow, September 15, 2013; with Anna A., Moscow, September 10, 2013;and with Alexandra E. (pseudonym), children’s and disability rightsactivist, Pskov region, December 5, 2013.[19]Human Rights Watch interview with Valeria T. (pseudonym), children’s anddisability rights activist, Karelia region, December 11, 2013.[20]Human Rights Watch interview with Natalia G. (pseudonym), children’srights activist, Karelia region, December 10, 2013; and with Valeria T.,Karelia region, December 11, 2013.[21]Marinus H. van Ijzendoornet. al, “Children in Institutional Care: Delayed Development andResilience,” Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,vol. 76, issue 4 (2011). Megan M. Julian and Robert B. McCall, “TheDevelopment of Children within Alternative Residential CareEnvironments,” 2009,http://www.ocd.pitt.edu/Files/Documents/The%20Development%20of%20Children%20within%20Alternative%20Residential%20Care%20Environments%20copy.pdf(accessed February 13, 2014).[22]UNICEF, “End placing children under three years in institutions – acall to action,” 2011, http://www.unicef.org/ceecis/media_17370.html(accessed June 23, 2014).[23]Ibid.[24]UNICEF, “Violenceagainst Children in Care and Justice Institutions,” undated,http://www.unicef.org/violencestudy/5.%20World%20Report%20on%20Violence%20against%20Children.pdf(accessed February 13, 2014).[25]Ibid.[26]UNICEF, “End placing children under three years in institutions: A callto action,” 2011,http://www.unicef.org/ceecis/UNICEF_A_call_to_action_En_Web%281%29.pdf(accessed February 13, 2014); UNICEF, “At home or in a home? Formal careand adoption of children in Eastern Europe and Central Asia,” 2010,http://www.unicef.org/protection/Web-Unicef-rapport-home-20110623v2.pdf(accessed February 13, 2014); Rebecca Stanton et. al, “Young Children inInstitutional Care at Risk of Harm,” Trauma,Violence, & Abuse, 2006, http://stantatkin.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/import/ans/library/Institutional%20trauma%20Johnson06.pdf(accessed February 13, 2014).[27]Rebecca Stanton et. al, “Young Children in Institutional Care at Risk ofHarm.”[28]Ibid.[29]Ibid.[30]Federal law “On the Foundations of Social Service to the Population inthe Russian Federation [Обосновахсоциальногообслуживаниянаселения вРоссийскойФедерации],” No.195-F3, 2013, art. 5. For example, the Russian federal law on the Foundationsof Social Service of the Population in the Russian Federation names thefollowing principles as the basis of social service: targeted or tailored care(adresnost), accessibility, consent (dobrovolnost), humanity,priority in granting services to children in difficult life situations,confidentiality, and the preventative orientation of social services.[31]Convention on the Rightsof the Child (CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, G.A. Res. 44/25, entered intoforce September 2, 1990, ratified by Russia on August 16, 1990. Convention onthe Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), adopted December 13, 2006, G.A.Res. 61/106, entered into force May 3, 2008, ratified by Russia on September25, 2012, art. 15 and art. 16, para 1. UN Convention against Torture and otherCruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment of Punishment, U.N. Doc A/RES/49/36(1984), entered into force June 26, 1987, ratified by Russia on March 3, 1987.European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and FundamentalFreedoms, 213 U.N.T.S. 222, entered into force September 3, 1953. Russia becamea party to the ECHR on May 5, 1998. See article 3.[32]CRC, art. 19, para 1.[33]See Tyrer v. The UnitedKingdom, Application no. 5856/72, Judgment April 25, 1978, Others v. UnitedKingdom, Application no.29392/95, Grand Chamber judgment May 10, 2001, and Nencheva andOthers v. Bulgaria, Application no. 48609/06, Judgment June 18, 2013.[34]For example, Human Rights Watch interview with Tatiana O. (pseudonym),children’s and disability rights activist, St. Petersburg, June 24, 2013;and with Lyudmila P. (pseudonym), orphanage volunteer, northwest Russia, June28, 2013.[35]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Elizaveta L. (pseudonym),children’s rights activist, October 29, 2013.[36]Human Rights Watch interview with Margarita M. (pseudonym), institutionvolunteer, northwest Russia, June 28, 2013.[37]Human Rights Watch interview with Nastia Y., Pskov region, December 6, 2013.[38]Ibid.[39]Human Rights Watch interview with Anton K. (pseudonym), St. Petersburg, June26, 2013. According to Anton K., the peer group in which he lived at the timeof this incident ranged between 12 and 14 years of age.[40]Human Rights Watch interview with Nastia Y., Pskov region, December 6, 2013.[41]Human Rights Watch interview with Anton K. (pseudonym), St. Petersburg, June26, 2013.[42]For example, Human Rights Watch interviews with Anton K. (pseudonym), St.Petersburg, June 26, 2013; and with Nastia Y., Pskov region, December 6, 2013.[43]Human Rights Watch interviews with Ekaterina F. (pseudonym), 21, northwestRussia, June 29, 2013; with Valia T. (pseudonym), northwest Russia, 2013; andwith Kostya K. (pseudonym), Pskov region, December 5, 2013. The month and dateof the interview with Valia T. have been omitted to protect her security[44]Human Rights Watch email correspondences with Inna A. (pseudonym), expert onpeople with disabilities living in Russian state institutions, June 17, 2014;and with Alexander D. (pseudonym), children’s and disability rightsactivist, June 18, 2014.[45]In two of the 10 state children’s institutions that Human Rights Watchvisited, one in the city of Moscow and one in Karelia region, Human RightsWatch did not witness the use of restraints. The Moscow city statechildren’s institution included children with sensory, developmental, andpsychosocial disabilities living in mixed age groups where they were free tomove around the premises. However, Human Rights Watch was not granted access tothe separate “lying-down” ward housing children with disabilitiesthat the staff deemed to be more severe. The Karelia region statechildren’s institution mentioned above was a temporary institutionhousing both children with and without disabilities. Two of 30 childrenresiding in the institution during the time of Human Rights Watch’s visithad psychosocial disabilities, and they also moved freely about the premises.[46]For example, Human Rights Watch interview with Lyudmila P. (pseudonym),orphanage volunteer, northwest Russia, June 28, 2014; and Human Rights Watchtelephone interview with Yana D. (pseudonym), children’s rights activist,September 26, 2013.[47]United Nations HumanRights Council, Report of the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, Juan E. Mendez, A/HRC/22/53,February 1, 2013,http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/RegularSession/Session22/A.HRC.22.53_English.pdf(accessed April 27, 2014), para. 63. In this context, the special rapporteur ontorture also noted that healthcare professionals may seek to defend“serious [human rights] violations and discrimination against personswith disabilities” as “well intended.” Ibid, para. 20.[48]UN Committee on the Rightsof the Child, General Comment No. 8, The right of the child to protection fromcorporal punishment and other cruel or degrading forms of punishment, U.N. Doc.CRC/C/GC/8 (2007), para 48. The committee recommends a UNESCO handbook, whichincludes recommendations from an international panel of experts in constructiveand nonviolent child discipline. UNESCO, “Executive Summary: AgainstCorporal Punishment – Moving Toward Constructive Child Discipline,”2005.[49]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Yana D. (pseudonym),children’s rights activist, September 26, 2013.[50]Tatiana Ermoshkina, “Astakhov took control of the case of a child’sdeath in a Nizhny Novgorod children’s home[Астахов взялпод контрольдело о гибелиребенка внижегородскомдетдоме],” 2014, Rossiskaya Gazeta,http://www.rg.ru/2014/04/29/reg-pfo/detdom-anons.html (accessed May 13, 2014).[51]Alyona Konkina and MilenaCherevko, “Children’s home administration in Arzamas, where a childdied, suspended from duty[Руководителидетскогодома вАрзамасе, гдепогибребенок,отстраненыот работы],” 2014,Vremya,http://www.vremyan.ru/news/rukovoditeli_detskogo_doma_v_arzamase_gde_pogib_rebenok_otstraneny_ot_raboty.html(accessed May 13, 2014).[52]Human Rights Watch interview with Valeria N. (pseudonym), specialized statechildren’s institution pediatrician, Sverdlovsk region, July 8, 2013.[53]The terms “debility,” “idiocy,” and“imbecility” overlap with obsolete diagnostic categories from theWorld Health Organization ICD-10 (International Statistical Classification ofDiseases and Related Health Problems): moron, imbecile, and idiot. These termsare based on IQ ranges. They are not recommended for use. World HealthOrganization, “ICD Version 2007: Mental and Behavioral Disorders(F00-F99), 2007, http://apps.who.int/classifications/apps/icd/icd10online2007/index.htm?gf70.htm+(accessed April 26, 2014).[54]According to Nina B., an independent Moscow-based pediatrician who specializesin the health of children who live or have lived in institutions, theappearance of schizophrenia in children under the age of 12 is unlikely, andschizophrenia diagnoses in young children in this age range are probablyinaccurate. Behavioral changes in children that may sometimes be interpreted assymptoms of schizophrenia are more likely due to deprivation and stress in thecase of institutionalized young children. Human Rights Watch telephoneinterview with Nina B. (pseudonym), pediatrician, June 23, 2014.[55]Human Rights Watch interview with Vasilii V. (pseudonym), specialized state children’sinstitution director, Pskov region, 2013. The month and date of this interviewhave been omitted to protect staff members’ security.[56]Human Rights Watch interview with Irina K. (pseudonym), Moscow, September 16,2013.[57]Human Rights Watch interview with Lyudmila P. (pseudonym), orphanage volunteer,northwest Russia, June 28, 2013.[58]Human Rights Watch interview with Valentina P. (pseudonym), children’sand disability rights activist, Moscow region, September 16, 2013.[59]Human Rights Watch interviews with Olga V. (pseudonym), head doctor,specialized state children’s institution, Sverdlovsk region, July 8,2013; with Polina R. (pseudonym), specialized state children’sinstitution staff member, Sverdlovsk region, July 8, 2013; with Yana R.(pseudonym), specialized state children’s institution staff member,Sverdlovsk region, July 8, 2013; with Lyubov E. (pseudonym), pediatrician,specialized infant care institution, Karelia region; with Elena R. (pseudonym),speech therapist, specialized infant care institutions, Moscow, September 16,2013; with Radmila K. (pseudonym), specialized state children’sinstitution staff member, northwest Russia, June 28, 2013; with Irina V.(pseudonym), specialized state children’s institution staff member,northwest Russia, June 29, 2013; and with Darya V. (pseudonym), doctor,specialized state institution, Pskov region, 2013. The month and date of thisinterview have been omitted to protect staff members’ security.[60]Human Rights Watch interviews with Polina R. (pseudonym) and Yana R.(pseudonym), specialized state children’s institution staff members,Sverdlovsk region, July 8, 2013.[61]Human Rights Watch interview with Olga V. (pseudonym), head doctor, specializedstate children’s institution, Sverdlovsk region, July 8, 2013.[62]Human Rights Watch interview with Valia T. (pseudonym), northwest Russia, 2013.The month and date of this interview have been omitted to protect ValiaT.’s security.[63]“Aminazin application features[Аминазинособенностиприменения],”Farmacevtic.ru, 2008,http://www.farmacevtic.ru/aminazin_osobennosti_primenenija.html (accessed April28, 2014); “Chlorpromazine,” MedlinePlus, 2014, http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/druginfo/meds/a682040.html(accessed June 23, 2014).[64]Aminazin can be injected or ingested orally. NCBI,“Chlorpromazine,” undated,http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/summary/summary.cgi?cid=2726 (accessed April28, 2014). Injections of Aminazin are very painful. Natalia Chernova,“Sacrifice [Жертвоприношение],”Novaya Gazeta, February 17, 2014, http://www.novayagazeta.ru/society/62265.html(accessed April 28, 2014).[65]United States National Laboratory of Medicine, “Chlorpromazine,”2014, http://livertox.nlm.nih.gov/Chlorpromazine.htm (accessed June 23, 2014).[66]“Russian federallegislation in the area of psychiatry. Commentary on the federal law onpsychiatric help and guarantees of the rights of citizens in its provision[Законодательствороссийскойфедерации вобластипсихиатрии. Комментариик закону РФ опсихиатрическойпомощи игарантияхправ гражданпри ееоказании],” Psychoreanimatology.org, undated, http://www.psychoreanimatology.org/download/docs/psihiatriya_v_zakonodatelstve.pdf (accessed April 28, 2014).[67]Human Rights Watch interview with Andrei M., Pskov region, December 5, 2013.[68]Human Rights Watch email correspondences with Inna A. (pseudonym), expert onchildren with disabilities living in Russian state institutions, May 28, 2014;and with Alexander D. (pseudonym), children’s and disability rightsactivist, May 29, 2014. Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with Nina B.(pseudonym), pediatrician, May 20, 2014; and with Slava M. (pseudonym),children’s and disability rights activist, May 23, 2014.[69]Human Rights Watch interview with Nastia Y., Pskov region, December 6, 2013.[70]Human Rights Watch interview with Marat T., Pskov region, December 5, 2013;with Andrei M., Pskov region, December 5, 2013; and with Kostya K. (pseudonym),Pskov region, December 5, 2013.[71]Human Rights Watch interview with Pavel R. (pseudonym), 21, St. Petersburg,June 26, 2013.[72]Ibid.[73]Human Rights Watch interview with Valia T. (pseudonym), northwest Russia, 2013.The month and date of this interview have been omitted to protect ValiaT.’s security.[74]Ibid.[75]Human Rights Watch interview with Valeria N. (pseudonym), specialized statechildren’s institution pediatrician, Sverdlovsk region, July 8, 2013;with Yulia P. (pseudonym), vice director, specialized state children’sinstitution, northwest Russia, September 20, 2013; and with Elizaveta G.(pseudonym), specialized infant care institution director, Sverdlovsk region,July 4, 2013.[76]Human Rights Watch interview with Olga V. (pseudonym), head doctor, specializedstate children’s institution, Sverdlovsk region, July 8, 2013; withValeria N. (pseudonym), specialized state children’s institutionpediatrician, Sverdlovsk region, July 8, 2013; with Elizaveta G. (pseudonym),specialized infant care institution director, Sverdlovsk region, July 4, 2013;and with Yulia P. (pseudonym), vice director, specialized statechildren’s institution, northwest Russia, September 20, 2013.[77]Ibid.[78]Human Rights Watch interview with Valeria N. (pseudonym), pediatrician,specialized state children’s institution, Sverdlovsk region, July 8,2013.[79]Human Rights Watch interview with Yulia P. (pseudonym), vice director,specialized state children’s institution, northwest Russia, September 20,2013.[80]Human Rights Watch interview with Andrei M., Pskov region, December 5, 2013.[81]Paulo Sergio Pinheiro, “World Report on Violence Against Children,”UN, 2006, http://www.unicef.org/lac/full_tex(3).pdf (accessed April 28, 2014).[82]Ibid.[83]Human Rights Watch interview with Kostya K. (pseudonym), Pskov region, December5, 2013.[84]For example, Human Rights Watch interviews with Nastia Y., Pskov region,December 6, 2013; with Ekaterina F. (pseudonym), northwest Russia, June 29,2013; and with Valia T. (pseudonym), northwest Russia, 2013.[85]Human Rights Watch interview with Yulia T. (pseudonym), Sverdlovsk region, July8, 2013.[86]Human Rights Watch interview with Natalia L. (pseudonym), northwest Russia,June 29, 2013.[87]Human Rights Watch interview with Valentina V. (pseudonym), Sverdlovsk region,July 8, 2013.[88]For example, Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Yana D. (pseudonym),children’s rights activist, September 26, 2013; and Human Rights Watchinterviews with Inna A. (pseudonym), expert on people with disabilities livingin Russian state institutions, northwest Russia, March 2, 2013; and with NinaB., (pseudonym), pediatrician, Moscow, December 16, 2013.[89]Rebecca Stanton et. al., “Young Children in Institutional Care at Risk ofHarm,” Trauma, Violence, & Abuse, 2006,http://stantatkin.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/import/ans/library/Institutional%20trauma%20Johnson06.pdf(accessed February 13, 2014).[90]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Yana D. (pseudonym),children’s rights activist, September 26, 2013.[91]Ibid.94Human Rights Watch interview with Karina L.(pseudonym), former specialized state children’s institution director,Moscow region, September 12, 2013; and with Anna A. (pseudonym),children’s rights activist, Moscow, September 10, 2013.[93]Human Rights Watch interviews with Alexei P. (pseudonym), St. Petersburg, June27, 2013; with Maria F. (pseudonym), foster parent, Moscow region, December 17,2013; with Anna M., foster parent, St. Petersburg, June 29, 2013; with LyudmilaP. (pseudonym), orphanage volunteer, northwest Russia, June 28, 2013; and withNatalia G. (pseudonym), children’s rights activist, Karelia region,December 10, 2013.[94]An exception to thisobligation is if such contact lies contrary to a child’s best interests.Family Code of the Russian Federation, art. 148.1.5; CRC, art. 9(3).[95]Human Rights Watch interviews with Yulia P. (pseudonym), vice director,specialized state children’s institution, northwest Russia, September 20,2013; and with Olga V. (pseudonym), head doctor, specialized statechildren’s institution, Sverdlovsk region, July 8, 2013.[96]Human Rights Watch interview with Alexander D. (pseudonym), children’sand disability rights activist, St. Petersburg, June 25, 2013.[97]Human Rights Watch interview with Karina M. (pseudonym), St. Petersburg, June25, 2013.[98]Human Rights Watch interviews with Olga V. (pseudonym), head doctor,specialized state children’s institution, Sverdlovsk region, July 8,2013; with Valeria N. (pseudonym), specialized state children’sinstitution pediatrician, Sverdlovsk region, July 8, 2013; and with ElizavetaG. (pseudonym), specialized infant care institution director, Sverdlovskregion, July 4, 2013.[99]Human Rights Watch interviews with Marat T., and with Andrei M., Pskov region,December 5, 2013; and with Ruslan P., Sverdlovsk region, July 8, 2013.[100]Human Rights Watch interview with Nastia Y., Pskov region, December 6, 2013.[101]Human Rights Watch interview with Anton K. (pseudonym), 21, St. Petersburg,June 26, 2013.[102]Family Code of the Russian Federation, No. 223-F3, 2013, art. 56.[103]Ibid, para. 2.[104]Ibid, para. 3.[105]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Inna A. (pseudonym), expert onpeople with disabilities living in Russian state institutions, May 13, 2014.[106]CRC, art. 12(1).[107]CRC, art. 19(2).[108]CRC, art. 12(2).[109]CRPD, art. 16(2).[110]Federal law “On guardianship and custody [Обопеке ипопечительстве],”No. 48-F3, 2008, chapter 8, parts 8, 11.[111]Human Rights Watch interview with Tatiana O. (pseudonym), disability andchildren’s rights activist, St. Petersburg, February 25, 2013.[112]Human Rights Watch interviews with Anna A. (pseudonym), children’s rightsactivist, Moscow region, September 10, 2013; and with Alexander D., (pseudonym),children’s and disability rights activist, St. Petersburg, June 25, 2013.[113]The committee is “The Committee before the Russian Government onQuestions of Custody in the Social Sphere.” “Olga Golodetz issued aseries of instructions as a result of the hearing of the Committee before theRussian Government on questions of guardianship in the social sphere[ОльгаГолодец даларяд порученийпо итогамзаседанияСовета при ПравительствеРоссии повопросампопечительствав социальнойсфере],” December 18, 2012,http://government.ru/vice_news/7484 (accessed April 28, 2014).[114]Human Rights Watch interview with Anna A. (pseudonym), children’s rightsactivist, Moscow region, September 10, 2014.[115]For example, Vera Shengelia, “When all life happens in one room,it’s called a prison [Когдався жизньпроходит водной комнате– этоназываетсятюрьма],” Snob, October 9, 2013,http://www.snob.ru/selected/entry/66286 (accessed April 28, 2014).[116]CRPD art. 33 (1-3).[117]CRPD art. 16(3).[118]Human Rights Watch documented similar conditions and treatment of childrenliving in institutions, including children with disabilities, in a 1998 report.Abandoned to the State: Cruelty and Neglect in Russian Orphanages. HumanRights Watch report, December 1998. Mental Disability Rights Internationaldocumented conditions and treatment of children with disabilities living inRussian state institutions in 1999. Mental Disability Rights International, Childrenin Russia’s Institutions: Human Rights and Opportunities for Reform.Findings and Recommendations of a UNICEF-Sponsored Fact-Finding Mission to theRussian Federation, February 1999.[119]Both children with disabilities residing in mainstream infant care institutionsand children living in specialized institutions with disabilities the statedetermines to be “particularly severe” live in“lying-down” rooms. “Punitive Psychiatry against Orphans inRussia Revisited,”Citizens Commission on Human RightsRussia, December 2013, http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/Treaties/CRC/Shared%20Documents/RUS/INT_CRC_NGO_RUS_16026_E.pdf(accessed February 14, 2014); and Human Rights Watch observations in 8institutions in Russia in 2013.[120]Human Rights Watch interview with Marina G. (pseudonym), children’s anddisability rights activist, St. Petersburg, June 29, 2013.[121]Human Rights Watch interviews with Polina R. (pseudonym), specialized statechildren’s institution staff member, Sverdlovsk region, July 8, 2013; andwith Yana R. (pseudonym), specialized state children’s institution staffmember, July 8, 2013.[122]Human Rights Watch interview with Valeria N. (pseudonym), specialized statechildren’s institution pediatrician, Sverdlovsk region, July 8, 2013.[123]Human Rights Watch interview with Marina G. (pseudonym), children’s anddisability rights activist, St. Petersburg, June 29, 2013.[124]Human Rights Watch interview with Stanislav A. (pseudonym), pediatricpsychiatrist, Moscow, February 16, 2013.[125]Human Rights Watch interview with Tatiana O. (pseudonym), children’s anddisability rights activist, St. Petersburg, February 25, 2013. Children’sstate medical documents, or Individual Plans for Rehabilitation, list forms ofrehabilitation and accommodations to which they are entitled by law. The planis formulated by the Bureau of Medical-Social Expertise, a local-levelcommission consisting of doctors, healthcare and rehabilitation professionals,and a social worker. It issues a designation of a person’s level ofdisability based on the perceived severity of the person’s disability andits alleged effects on his or her daily activities. Federal law “On theOrder and Conditions of Declaring a Person Disabled [Опорядке иусловияхпризнаниялицаинвалидом],” No.95, 2006, art. 39, part 5. A child’s guardian, which is in this case theinstitution, need not abide by these recommendations. Therefore, institutionstaff could ostensibly change children’s feeding methods in consultationwith qualified specialists.[126]Human Rights Watch interview with Marina G. (pseudonym), children’s anddisability rights activist, St. Petersburg, June 29, 2013.[127]Human Rights Watch interview with Tatiana O. (pseudonym), disability andchildren’s rights activist, St. Petersburg, February 25, 2013.[128]Human Rights Watch interview with Stanislav A. (pseudonym), pediatricpsychiatrist, Moscow, February 16, 2013.[129]Human Rights Watch interview with Nina B. (pseudonym), pediatrician, Moscow,December 16, 2013.[130]Human Rights Watch interview with Valentina P. (pseudonym), children’sand disability rights activist, Moscow region, September 16, 2013.[131]Ibid.[132]Human Rights Watch interview with Elena R. (pseudonym), speech therapist,specialized infant care institution, Moscow, September 16, 2013.[133]Human Rights Watch interview with Nina B. (pseudonym), pediatrician, Moscow,December 16, 2013. Information on Russia’s federal policy ofdispanserizatsiia can be found here: Federal order “On conductingclinical examinations for orphans and children in difficult life situations[О проведениидиспансеризациипребывающихвстационарныхучрежденияхдетей-сирот идетей,находящихсяв труднойжизненнойситуации],” 2013, No.72H.[134]Letter from D.V.Kostennikov, State Secretary-Deputy Minister, Ministry of Health, to HumanRights Watch, May 12, 2014.[135]Human Rights Watch interview with Nina B. (pseudonym), pediatrician, Moscow,December 16, 2013.[136]Human Rights Watch interviews with Alexei P. (pseudonym), St. Petersburg, June27, 2013; with Maria T. (pseudonym), foster parent, Moscow region, December 17,2013; with Anna M. (pseudonym), foster parent, June 29, 2013; and Human RightsWatch group interview with Natalia and Sergei S. (pseudonyms), Karelia region,December 13, 2013.[137]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Inna A. (pseudonym), expert onpeople with disabilities living in Russian state institutions, May 13, 2014;Human Rights Watch interview with Nina B. (pseudonym), pediatrician, Moscow,December 16, 2013.[138]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Inna A. (pseudonym), expert onpeople with disabilities living in Russian state institutions, May 13, 2014.Human Rights Watch interview with Nina B. (pseudonym), pediatrician, Moscow,December 16, 2013; and with Alexei P. (pseudonym), St. Petersburg, June 27,2013.[139]Human Rights Watch interview with Alexei P. (pseudonym), St. Petersburg, June27, 2013.[140]Human Rights Watch interviews with Tatiana O. (pseudonym), disability andchildren’s rights activist, St. Petersburg, February 25, 2013; and withAnna A. (pseudonym), children’s rights activist, Moscow, September 10,2013.[141]Human Rights Watch interview with Anna A. (pseudonym), children’s rightsactivist, Moscow, September 10, 2013.[142]Ibid.[143]Human Rights Watch interview with Anton K. (pseudonym), St. Petersburg, June26, 2013. It was not clear to Anton K. why he had been diagnosed with ProfoundMental Retardation, the Russian medical equivalent of a developmentaldisability, given that his specific diagnosis, to the best of his knowledge,was cerebral palsy.[144]Ibid.[145]The decree assigns the following staff members for 25 children in a“lying-down” ward: one ward manager, four nurses, 22 sanitarkas orjunior medical workers, one physical education specialist, one maid, and onecook. Federal degree “On approval of methodological recommendations forthe organizing the activities of state (municipal) institutions“home-internat for mentally retarded children [Обутвержденииметодическихрекомендацийпо организациидеятельностигосударственного(муниципального)учреждения«дом-интернатдля умстенноотсталыхдетей»],” No. 54, 2002, paras. 3, 7.[146]Ibid.[147]Human Rights Watch interview with Elizaveta G. (pseudonym), specialized infantcare institution director, Sverdlovsk region, July 4, 2013.[148]Inclusion Europe, “Towards Inclusive Education,” 2013,http://inclusion-europe.org/images/stories/documents/policies/Education_BestPractice.pdf(accessed June 23, 2014).[149]Human Rights Watch interview with Tatiana O. (pseudonym), children’s anddisability rights activist, St. Petersburg, June 24, 2013.[150]Human Rights Watch interviews with Valeria I. (pseudonym), children’srights activist, St. Petersburg, June 29, 2013; and with Marina G. (pseudonym),children’s and disability rights activist, St. Petersburg, June 29, 2013.[151]Human Rights Watch interview with Valeria I. (pseudonym), children’srights activist, St. Petersburg, June 29, 2013.[152]Letter from A. V. Vovchenko, Deputy Minister, Ministry of Labor and SocialProtection, to Human Rights Watch, May 28, 2014.[153]Human Rights Watch interview with Maxim A. (pseudonym), Sverdlovsk region, July8, 2013. Maxim A. was among few children Human Rights Watch met whose parentsvisited him and took him home on some weekends, and was therefore able tocomment on what lay outside the institution wall.[154]Researchers were unable to confirm the official diagnoses of children, asvolunteers and junior personnel did not know or would not sharechildren’s diagnoses.[155]Human Rights Watch interview with Polina R. (pseudonym), specialized statechildren’s institution staff member, Sverdlovsk region, July 8, 2013.[156]Human Rights Watch interview with Nina B. (pseudonym), pediatrician, Moscow,December 16, 2013.[157]Ibid.[158]Ibid.[159]Human Rights Watch interview with Milena T. (pseudonym), state children’sinstitution volunteer, northwest Russia, June 27, 2013.[160]Human Rights Watch interview with Nina B. (pseudonym), pediatrician, Moscow,December 16, 2013.[161]Human Rights Watch interview with Milena T. (pseudonym), specialized statechildren’s institution volunteer, northwest Russia, June 27, 2013.[162]Human Rights Watch interview with Nina B. (pseudonym), pediatrician, Moscow,December 16, 2013.[163]Human Rights Watch interview with Milena T. (pseudonym), children’s homevolunteer, northwest Russia, June 27, 2013.[164]A Human Rights Watch researcher estimated roughly that Roman K. was under threefeet tall and weighed approximately 30 pounds.[165]Human Rights Watch interview with Nina B. (pseudonym), pediatrician, Moscow,December 16, 2013.[166]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Anna A. (pseudonym),children’s rights activist, August 17, 2014. The PMPC’s officialfunction is to recommend psychological, medical, or educational services forchildren. Federal Order “ОбутвержденииПоложения опсихолого-медико-педагогическойкомиссии [On approval of thepsychological-medical-pedagogical commission],” No. 1082, 2013, art. 2.[167]Human Rights Watch interview with Anna A. (pseudonym), children’s rightsactivist, Moscow, September 10, 2013.[168]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Anna A. (pseudonym),children’s rights activist, August 17, 2014.[169]Letter from A. V. Vovchenko, Deputy Minister, Ministry of Labor and SocialProtection, to Human Rights Watch, May 28, 2014.[170]Human Rights Watch interviews with Olga P. (pseudonym), children’s rightsactivist, Moscow, September 15, 2013; with Anna A. (pseudonym),children’s rights activist, Moscow, September 10, 2013; with Alexandra E.(pseudonym), children’s and disability rights activist, Pskov region,December 5, 2013; with Elena R. (pseudonym), speech therapist, specializedinfant care institution, Moscow, September 16, 2013; with Inna A. (pseudonym),expert on people with disabilities living in Russian state institutions, St.Petersburg, March 2, 2013 and Human Rights Watch telephone interview with YanaD. (pseudonym), children’s rights activist, September 26, 2013.[171]Human Rights Watch interview with Olga V. (pseudonym), head doctor, specializedstate children’s institution, Sverdlovsk region, July 8, 2013. Olga V.and other interviewees did not know if there was a standard set of questionsasked throughout Russia, or if other types of questions were asked in otherregions.[172]Human Rights Watch interview with Olga V. (pseudonym), head doctor, specializedstate children’s institution, Sverdlovsk region, July 8, 2013. Federallaw “On Education in the Russian Federation,” 2013, art. 5, para 1.According to Inna A., social scientist specializing in the rights of childrenwith disabilities living in Russian state children’s institutions,doctors evaluating children with disabilities continue to widely use this termas a diagnosis. Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Inna A.(pseudonym), expert on people with disabilities living in Russian stateinstitutions, June 16, 2014.[173]Human Rights Watch interview with Olga V. (pseudonym), head doctor, specializedstate children’s institution, Sverdlovsk region, July 8, 2013.[174]Human Rights Watch interviews with Olga P. (pseudonym), children’s rightsactivist, Moscow, September 15, 2013; with Anna A. (pseudonym),children’s rights activist, Moscow, September 10, 2013; and withAlexandra E. (pseudonym), children’s and disability rights activist,Pskov region, December 5, 2013.[175]Human Rights Watch interviews with Anatolii T. (pseudonym), children’sand disability rights activist, Moscow, December 8, 2012; and with Stanislav A.(pseudonym), pediatric psychiatrist, Moscow, February 16, 2013.[176]Human Rights Watch interview with Nastia Y., Pskov region, December 6, 2013.[177]Human Rights Watch interview with Pavel R. (pseudonym), St. Petersburg, June26, 2013.[178]Human Rights Watch interview with Mikhail G. (pseudonym), children’s anddisability rights activist, Pskov region, December 6, 2013.[179]Family Code of the Russian Federation, No. 223-F3, 2013, art. 155(3).179Federal law “On the Social Protection of the Disabled [Осоциальнойзащитеинвалидов вРоссийскойФедерации],” No.181-F3, 2013, arts. 10, 13.[181]Federal law “On additional guarantees of social support for orphans andchildren left without parental care,” No. 159-F3, 2013, chapter 7, part1.181 CRCart. 24(1).182Ibid, art. 24(2c).183Ibid, art. 25(b).[185]CRPD, art. 2(3).185Ibid, art. 25(b).186 CRCart. 31.[188]Ibid, art. 23(1).[189]CRC, art. 2(1).[190]CRPD, art. 19.[191]CRPD, art. 23(1).[192]EveryChild, “Russia,” undated,http://www.everychild.org.uk/where-we-work/russia (accessed April 28, 2014).[193]Presidential Decree of the Russian Federation, “On the National actionstrategy in the interests of children for 2012-2017 [ОНациональнойстратегиидействий винтересахдетей на 2012-2017годы],”http://graph.document.kremlin.ru/page.aspx?1613662 (accessed September 2,2014).[194]Human Rights Watch interviews with Stanislav A. (pseudonym), pediatricpsychiatrist, Moscow, February 16, 2013; and with Olga P. (pseudonym),children’s rights activist, Moscow, September 15, 2013.[195]Letter from T.V. Yakovleva, Deputy Minister of Health of the RussianFederation, to the heads of executive bodies of subjects of the RussianFederation in the field of health, October 15, 2013.[196]EveryChild, “Factorsaffecting the placement of children with special needs in state careinstitutions [Факторов  попаданиядетей  сособымипотребностямивгосударственныевоспитательныеучреждения],”2011.[197]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Claudia K. (pseudonym), April 19,2014.[198]Ibid.[199]For example, Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Eva R. (pseudonym),April 20, 2014.[200]Human Rights Watch interview with Ksenia L. (pseudonym), Moscow region,December 16, 2013.[201]Human Rights Watch interview with Tamara N. (pseudonym), Pskov region, December8, 2013.[202]Human Rights Watch interview with Alexander D. (pseudonym), children’sand disability rights activist, St. Petersburg, June 25, 2013.[203]Human Rights Watch interview with Nastia D., Moscow region, December 3, 2013.Nastia D. and Dasha D. are the interviewees’ real names.[204]Ibid.[205]Human Rights Watch interview with Lyudmila P. (pseudonym), orphanage volunteer,northwest Russia, June 28, 2013.[206]Human Rights Watch interview with Stanislav A. (pseudonym), pediatricpsychiatrist, Moscow, February 16, 2013.[207]Human Rights Watchinterview with Karina M. (pseudonym), St. Petersburg, June 25, 2013. HumanRights Watch documented only one case (Karina M., described above) in which theparent of a child with a disability relinquished custody of her child due to lackof accessible community-based services, rather than direct pressure fromhealthcare workers.[208]This includes an average of 11,200 rubles per month for each child with adisability, and 5,500 rubles per month for the parent(s) of each child with adisability. Pension Fund of the Russian Federation,“Индексацияпенсий [Indexation of pensions],”2014, http://www.pfrf.ru/pensionres/ (accessed June 24, 2014). Ibid;“Ежемесячнаявыплаталицам,осуществляющимуход задетьмиинвалидами иинвалидами сдетства I группы[Monthly payments for caretakers of disabled children and people disabled fromchildhood],” 2014, http://www.pfrf.ru/kompens/27152.html (accessed June24, 2014). Some regional and municipal governments also provide monthlypayments in addition to this. For example, the Moscow city government provideschildren with disabilities and their parents an additional 6,450 rubles(US$185) per month until children reach the age of 18 or 23, depending on theseverity of children’s disabilities as determined by local-levelMedical-Social Expertise commissions, mentioned above. “If there is achild with a disability in the family [Если всемьеребенок -инвалид],”mosblago.ru, 2014, http://www.mosblago.ru/articles/show-198.htm (accessed June2, 2014).[209]Parents reported paying for private schools, psychologists, learningspecialists, physical therapists, and private doctors. For example, HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Eva R. (pseudonym), April 20, 2014; andHuman Rights Watch interview with Ksenia L. (pseudonym), Moscow, December 16,2013; with Lilia (pseudonym), Karelia, December 12, 2013; and with Tamara N.(pseudonym), Pskov region, December 8, 2013.[210]Human Rights Watch, Barriers Everywhere: Lack of Accessibility for People withDisabilities in Russia, September 2013.[211]Human Rights Watch interview with Tatiana O. (pseudonym), disability andchildren’s rights activist, St. Petersburg, February 25, 2013.[212]Human Rights Watch interview with Ksenia L. (pseudonym), Moscow, December 16,2013. The commission is part of the local-level Bureau of Medical-SocialExpertise, defined above.[213]Human Rights Watch interview with Nina B. (pseudonym), pediatrician, Moscow,December 16, 2013.[214]“Education ofpeople with disabilities in Russia[Образованиеинвалидов вРоссии],” 2010, Perspektiva,http://perspektiva-inva.ru/protec-rights/articles/vw-840/(accessed October 28,2013). Human Rights Watch believes that the government should ultimately transitionto inclusive education rather than invest in specialized schools.[215]Human Rights Watch, Barriers Everywhere: Lack of Accessibility for People withDisabilities in Russia.[216]CRC, arts. 9(1) and 3(1).[217]CRPD, art. 7, paras. 2-3.[218]UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, General Comment No. 1,“Article 12: Equal Recognition Before the Law,” U.N. Doc.CRPD/C/GC/1 (2014), para 36.[219]CRPD, arts. 18(2), 23(3)[220]CRPD, art. 23(3).[221]Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children,http://www.mhlw.go.jp/stf/shingi/2r9852000001j8zz-att/2r9852000001j91g.pdf(accessed June 20, 2013), para. 21.[222]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, Concluding observations on thecombined fourth and fifth periodic reports of the Russian Federation, U.N. Doc.CRC/C/RUS/CO/4-5 (2014), para. 49(a), 50(a).[223]Federal Law “On Education in the Russian Federation,” 2013, art. 2,para 27.[224]Ibid., art. 5, para 5.1.[225]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Karina P. (pseudonym), disabilityrights activist, November 12, 2013.[226]Letter from L. P. Falkovskaya, Head of Education for Children withDevelopmental and Socialization Problems, Ministry of Education, to HumanRights Watch, May 29, 2014.[227]CRC, arts. 28(1), 29(1).[228]CRPD, art. 24(2b, c).[229]Presidential Decree of theRussian Federation, “On the National action strategy in the interests ofchildren for 2012-2017 [ОНациональнойстратегиидействий винтересахдетей на 2012-2017годы],” http://graph.document.kremlin.ru/page.aspx?1613662(accessedSeptember 2, 2014).[230]Federal order “On the National action strategy in the interests ofchildren for 2012-2017 [ОНациональнойстратегиидействий винтересах детейна 2012 - 2017 годы],” No. 761, 2012.Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Erica J. (pseudonym),children’s rights NGO representative, northwest Russia, April 22, 2014.[231]Ibid.[232]Presidential Decree of the Russian Federation “On creation of afoundation for support of children in difficult life situations [Осозданиифонда поддержкидетей, находящихсяв труднойжизненнойситуации],” No. 404,2008, http://graph.document.kremlin.ru/page.aspx?954214 (accessed August 29,2014).[233]“Official site of the foundation to support children in difficult lifecircumstances: areas of activity[Официальный сайтфондаподдержкидетей,находящихсяв труднойжизненнойситуации:Направления деятельности],”http://www.fond-detyam.ru/about/napravleniya-deyatelnosti/ (accessed August 29,2014).[234]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Erica J., children’s rightsNGO representative, northwest Russia, April 22, 2014.[235]Ibid.[236]Ibid.[237]“Russia: Pass Laws to Protect Disability Rights,” May 2014, HumanRights Watch news release,http://www.hrw.org/news/2014/05/11/russia-pass-laws-protect-disability-rights.[238]Federal resolution “On the activities of organizations for orphans andchildren without parental care, and on placing children without parental carein them [Одеятельностиорганизацийдлядетей-сирот идетей, оставшихсябезпопеченияродителей, иоб устройствев них детей,оставшихсябез попеченияродителей],” No.481, 2014, arts. 4, 27, 42, 49, 55, 51m, 51о, 53a.[239]Ibid, arts. 22-24.[240]Ibid, arts. 21, 33-34.[241]For example, articles 45 through 47 state that orphanages should securecomfortable conditions for prospective foster or adoptive parents withgovernment permission to visit children, to enable these parties to getacquainted with one another; should acquaint them with children’spersonal history; and provide consultations with medical, pedagogical, psychological,and other orphanage personnel.[242]Ibid, art. 27.[243]Data from 2011. TransMonEE 2013 Database, UNICEF Regional Office for CEE/CIS,“Russian Federation,” 2013, http://www.transmonee.org/About.html(accessed April 22, 2014).[244]Letter from L. P. Falkovskaya, Head of Education for Children withDevelopmental and Socialization Problems, Ministry of Education, to HumanRights Watch, May 29, 2014.[245]Family Code of the Russian Federation, art. 123(1).[246]CRC, art. 20(1).[247]CRC, art. 20(2).[248]CRC, art. 21, para 1. CRPD, art. 23(2).[249] Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children, http://www.mhlw.go.jp/stf/shingi/2r9852000001j8zz-att/2r9852000001j91g.pdf(accessed June 20, 2013), para. 53.[250]Ibid, para. 22.[251]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 9, The Rights ofChildren with Disabilities, U.N. Doc. CRC/C/GC/9/Corr.1 (2006), para 49.[252]Ibid.[253]Adoption entails thepermanent placement of a child in a family, whereby the parent or parents takeon all of the rights and responsibilities of a biological family. It is,however, not an option for children whose parents have not permanentlyrelinquished their rights. Guardianship entails rearing a child and caring forhis or her basic daily needs, but guardians are subject to regular monitoringby guardianship and custody agencies. Fostering is another temporary form offamily-based care for children who cannot legally be adopted or placed underguardianship or for whom an adoptive family cannot be found. Foster parentsreceive salaries. Patronage is a family-based form of childrearing by anemployee of a state institution. Patronage serves as a replacement for achild’s temporary placement within an institution and is often used as atransitory period leading to guardianship or adoption, pending resolution of achild’s legal status. A “guest family” takes place byagreement between a state children’s institution and a family for a childliving in the institution to visit the family temporarily during weekends andholidays while remaining an official ward of the institution. The purpose of aguest family is to allow a child to spend time outside of an institutionalsetting and experience family life. “Forms of family placement: a list ofguardians’ responsibilities [Семейныеформыустройств;переченьобязанностейопекунов],” Mamamoya,2010, http://mamamoya.ru/semeynie_formi_ustroystva.htm (accessed August 29,2014).[254]Human Rights Watch interview with Ekaterina M. (pseudonym), children’srights activist, Moscow region, February 13, 2013.[255]Human Rights Watch interview with Slava M. (pseudonym), children’s anddisability rights activist, Moscow region, September 23, 2013.[256]Human Rights Watch interviews with Alexei P. (pseudonym), St. Petersburg, June27, 2013; with Tatiana O. (pseudonym), disability and children’s rightsactivist, St. Petersburg, June 24, 2013; and with Ekaterina S. (pseudonym),children’s rights activist, Moscow region, September 17, 2013.  Fora definition of “guest families,” please see footnote 254.[257]Human Rights Watch interview with Natalia and Sergei S. (pseudonyms), Karelia,December 13, 2013.[258]Human Rights Watch interviews with children’s rights activist Karolina S.(pseudonym), Moscow region, December 16, 2013; with children’s anddisability rights activist Tatiana O., St. Petersburg, February 25, 2013; withMaria T. (pseudonym), foster parent, Moscow region, December 17, 2013; and withAnna T., foster parent, St. Petersburg, June 29, 2013.[259]Human Rights Watch interview with Valentina Y. (pseudonym), Moscow region,December 3, 2013. Valentina Y. reported inquiring about her prospectivesons’ diagnoses of the specialized infant care institution psychologistwhere the boys then lived. According to Valentina Y., the psychologist replied,“You don’t need to know this information. You don’t needthese children,” and told Valentina Y. that the boys were simply“inadequate.” According to Valentina Y., both of her sons haddifficulties speaking when they were adopted, but their speech improved shortlyafter coming to live with her and her family.[260]Human Rights Watch interview with Maria T. (pseudonym), foster parent, Moscowregion, December 17, 2013.[261]Human Rights Watch interview with Artur T. (pseudonym), Moscow region, December17, 2013.[262]Human Rights Watch group interview with Natalia and Sergei S. (pseudonyms),Karelia region, December 13, 2013.[263]Human Rights Watch interview with Valentina Y. (pseudonym), Moscow region,December 3, 2013.[264]Human Rights Watch interview with Margarita L. (pseudonym), children’srights activist, Sverdlovsk region, July 2, 2013. Recently, the Sverdlovskregional government has begun to provide some financial support to this NGO.[265]Human Rights Watch interview with Olga P. (pseudonym), psychologist, Moscow,September 15, 2013.Related ContentSeptember 15, 2014News ReleaseRussia: Children with Disabilities Face Violence, NeglectEnd ‘Orphanage’ System; Support Family CareSeptember 15, 2014News ReleaseRussia: Children with Disabilities Face Violence, NeglectRegion / CountryEurope/Central Asia RussiaProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch