“When I Die…They’ll Send Me Home”: Youth Sentenced to Life in Prison without Parole in California, An Update | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportMarch 1, 2012“When I Die…They’ll Send Me Home”Youth Sentenced to Life in Prison without Parole in California, An UpdateCalifornia State Prison, Centinela in Imperial County, California.© Rich LaSalle/Getty ImagesI. Youth Sentenced to Die in California PrisonsWhen I die, that’s whenthey’ll send me home.—Charles T., sentenced to life in prison without parolefor a crime that occurred when he was under the age of 18.[1]The state ofCalifornia has sentenced 301 youth to die in its prisons for crimes theycommitted under the age of 18.[2] These youth have not beensentenced to death; in 2005 the Supreme Court found the death penaltyunconstitutional for juveniles. Insteadtheseyoung people have been sentenced to prison for the rest of their lives with noopportunity for parole and no chance for release. It is a final, irrevocablejudgment. Their crimes were committed when they were teenagers, yet they willdie in prison.[3]301 Californiayouth have been sentenced to life without parole.“They said a kidcan’t get the death penalty, but life without [parole], it’s thesame thing. I’m condemned,” said Robert D., 36, who was in highschool when he participated in a robbery during which his co-defendant shot thevictim. “I don’t understand the difference.”[4]A life without parolesentence is a final judgment that classifies the defendant incorrigible. Whenrendered, it is a decision to throw away the life of the defendant. It is alsoa judgment from which there is no turning back: once made, there is nomechanism to compel review and no way to account for the changed adult that theteen may become.[5]In the case of teenaged defendants, the judgmentis made before the individual is fully formed.Click to expand ImageKalel S holds a certificate in a family picture. He was 16in this photo and at the time of his crime. © 2008 PrivateIn 2008 Human Rights Watch published the report “‘WhenI Die, They’ll Send Me Home’”and research on thesentencing of youth offenders to life without parole in California.[6]It painted a detailed picture of people serving life without parole for crimescommitted as youth.[7] Sincethat report, several key factors have changed:The UnitedStatesis nowtheonly country in the world that imposes this sentence on youth for crimescommitted under age 18.[8]The numberof youth sentenced to life without parole in the US has risen to 2,570.[9]The numberof youth sentenced to life without parole in Californiaincreased from 227 to 301.[10]The USSupreme Court declared thissentenceunconstitutional for youth convicted of non-homicide crimes.[11]At least 16state legislatures have introduced legislation that would curtail or eliminatethe sentence of life without parole for youth.[12]Click to expand ImageDrachir P. was 16 in this photo and 17 at the time of hiscrime. © 2008 PrivateTroubling Facts about California Lawand Practice“From amoral standpoint, it would be misguided to equate the failings of a minorwith those of an adult, for a greater possibility exists that a minor’scharacter deficiencies will be reformed.”—US SupremeCourt in Roper v. Simmons 2005Law and public opinion aboutthe use of life sentences for youth have evolved in recent years. Nevertheless,our previous research shows that California’s use of this sentenceremains particularly troubling. It would be logical to assume that life with nopossibility for parole is a sentence always reserved for the worst of theworst, wholly irredeemable criminals. In fact, as of 2010, the sentence is onlypermitted for youth convicted of homicide crimes. But that fact obscurescrucial details.Research byHuman Rights Watch in California and across thecountry has found that youth are sentenced to life without parole for a widerange of crimes and culpability:Nationally, it is estimated that over half of the youthsentenced to life without parole are first-time offenders without a single juvenilecourt adjudication on their records.[13]Nearlyhalf of the youth sentenced to life without parole did not actually commit themurder.[14]Cases include that of a youthwho stood by the garage door as a lookout during a car theft, a youth who satin the getaway car during a burglary, and a youth who participated in arobbery.[15]While tragically a victim waskilled in each of these crimes, murder was not part of the plan, or the youthconvicted was not the one who physically committed the murder.[16]Many ofthese youth committed their crimes under the influence of an adult.In 2008, we estimated that innearly 70 percent of California cases in which there were co-defendants, atleast one of these co-defendants was an adult.[17]It isestimated that in more than half the cases where there was an adultco-defendant, the adult received a lower sentence than the young person who wassentenced to life without parole.[18]Racialdisparities in California’s use of this sentence are significant: 85 percent of youth sentencedto life without parole are people of color. African American youth aresentenced to life without parole at a rate that is 18.3 times the rate forwhite youth.Hispanicyouth in California are sentenced to life without parole at a rate that is fivetimes that for white youth in the state.[19]Youthare often poorly represented and do not always adequately understand legalproceedings.Manyyouth offenders whom Human Rights Watch interviewed did not grasp the mostbasic aspects of their trial proceedings.[20]International Norms: The US Stands AloneSince our report in 2008 on this issue, the last countriesoutside the US ceased to sentence youth offenders to life without possibilityof parole.[21]As such, the US stands alone in its use of this sentence with people under theage of 18.The US Supreme Court noted this in its own recent ruling:There is an “overwhelming weight of international opinion against”juvenile life without parole.[22]Moreover, the sentence of life without parole for people under 18violates international law, which strictly prohibits the use of life withoutparole for those who are not yet 18 years old at the time of the crime.[23]International standards of justice hold that a life without parole sentence isnot warranted under any circumstances for a minor because youthoffenders lack the experience, education, and mental development of adults andmust be given a reasonable opportunity to obtain release based on demonstratedmaturity and rehabilitation.Click to expand ImageBrian C. in a photo taken when he was 17 years old, thesame age he was at the time of his crime. © 2008 PrivateAdolescents Differ from AdultsHuman beings change indramatic ways over time. Experience and a growing body of scientific evidenceconfirm that tremendous change naturally occurs during the years leading up toadulthood. “As a transitional period,” reports a study by TempleUniversity Professor of Psychology Laurence Steinberg and others,“adolescence is marked by rapid and dramatic [individual] change in therealms of biology, cognition, emotion, and intrapersonal relationships.”[24]Research has further clarified that it is not just a cognitive differencebetween adolescents and adults, but a complex combination of ability to makegood decisions and social and emotional capability that result in a differencein “maturity of judgment.”[25]The fact that youngpeople continue to develop into early adulthood suggests that they may beparticularly amenable to change.[26]“The reality that juveniles still struggleto define their identity,” noted the US Supreme Court in its 2005 Roperv. Simmons decision, “means it is less supportable to conclude thateven a heinous crime committed by a juvenile is evidence of irretrievablydepraved character.”[27]Both criminologists and development experts agreethat, “[f]or most teens, these [risky or illegal] behaviors are fleeting.Only a relatively small proportion of adolescents who experiment in risky orillegal activities develop entrenched patterns of problem behavior that persistinto adulthood.”[28]$663 million:The cost of imprisoning for life all youth currently sentenced to lifewithout parole in California.The Financial Cost of Sentencing Youth to Life withoutParole in CaliforniaThe concerns regarding this sentencing practice areamplified in California’s current climate of dire fiscal shortages.Locking up teens for life has a negative effect on the state’s budget.Even if the estimated average yearly cost per inmate in the California prisonsystem remains static, the current youth life without parole population willcost the state approximately $663 million dollars by the end of their lives, anumber that will only increase as more youth are sentenced to spend the rest oftheir lives behind bars.[29] Between1990 and 2008, California spent between $66 and $83 million incarceratingchildhood offenders sentenced to life without parole, according to experts atthe University of California at Berkeley and Tulane University.[30]Newly convicted youth offenders sentenced to life withoutparole will cost the state additional sums. Each new youth offender sentencedto life without parole will cost the state another $2.7 million. If Californiawere to enact legislation permitting the review and possible release of some ofthese individuals, the state would save significant sums. This is true even ifthe alternative sentence is lengthy. For example, if each year just 10 of theseindividuals were released after serving 25 years in prison, over a 25 yearperiod the state would save an estimated $301 million.Click to expand ImageNick V. in a photo taken when he was16,thesame age he was at the time of his crime. © 2008 PrivateDramatically Changing Legal Perspectives: RecentDecisions about Teens and Criminal LawIn recent years, the US Supreme Court has issued threeopinions about teens and criminal law. Each confirms a fundamental fact:teenagers are different from adults. And each reinforces a fundamental legalprecept: these differences must be recognized in the sentencing and criminaljustice arenas.In 2005 the US Supreme Court held the death penaltyunconstitutional for youth under the age of 18.[31] Then,in 2010, the Supreme Court held unconstitutional the sentencing of juveniles tolife without parole for non-homicide crimes.[32] The following year,the court set a new standard for minors’ consenting to police questioningthat is more protective than that used with adults.[33]“These cases represent a new jurisprudence,” said Barry Krisberg, directorof Research and Policy of the Chief Justice Earl Warren Institute on Law andSocial Policy at the University of California, Berkeley School of Law.“In each case the court made a decision based on the fact that peopleunder the age of 18 have different abilities and needs than adults. These casesstand for the proposition that our laws must change to reflect thatreality.”[34]“Age is areality that courts cannot ignore.”—U.S. Supreme Court in J.D.B. v. North Carolina 2011In the first of these cases, the court noted that under lawthe rights of teens are limited in many legal contexts: “The reasons whyjuveniles are not trusted with the privileges and responsi­bilities of anadult also explain why their irresponsible conduct is not as morallyreprehensible as that of an adult.”[35]The Roperv. Simmons and Graham v. Florida cases both heldthat the characteristics of youth make their culpability different from that ofadults:As compared to adults, juveniles have a “‘lackof maturity and an underdeveloped sense of responsibility’”; they“are more vulnerable or susceptible to negative influences and outsidepressures, including peer pressure”; and their characters are “notas well formed.”[36]People under age 18 cannot buy cigarettes or alcohol, sign arental agreement, or vote in an election. In J.D.B. v. North Carolina,the court declared that age is “a reality that courts cannotignore”[37] andthat “‘[o]ur history is replete with laws and judicial recognitionthat children cannot be viewed simply as miniature adults.”[38]Indeed, the court acknowledged that our society consistently holds youth to adifferent standard in non-criminal cases, but tends to ignore this factor whenit comes to criminal prosecution.[39]Inherent in thesedecisions are two fundamental facts: teenagers are still developing into theadults they will be, and they have potential to change for the better:“[f]rom a moral standpoint it would be misguided to equate the failingsof a minor with those of an adult, for a greater possibility exists that aminor’s character deficiencies will be reformed.”[40]“Societychanges. Knowledge accumulates. We learn, sometimes, from our mistakes.Punishments that did not seem cruel and unusual at one timemay, in the light of reason and experience, be found cruel and unusual at alater time...”—US Supreme Court Justice Stevens concurring in Graham v.Florida, 2010In the case of teenaged defendants, the judgment of lifewithout a parole sentence is made before the individual is fully formed. In Grahamv. Florida, the court held that good judgment may be impossible in thissituation:Tojustify life without parole on the assumption that the juvenile offenderforever will be a danger to society requires the sentencer to make a judgmentthat the juvenile is incorrigible. The characteristics of juveniles make thatjudgment questionable.[41]The court did not reach the question of homicide casesbecause the case facts in Graham v. Florida were that of a non-homicidecrime.[42]A Supreme Court decision in mid-2012 isexpected in the cases of two 14-year-olds sentenced to life without parole.[43]II. Recommendations to CaliforniaLeadersPublic awareness about sentencing youth to life without thepossibility of parole has increased substantially in recent years.[44]Public opinion has shifted, and a growing chorus of bipartisan and diversevoices agree it is time to change the practice.[45] Witha significant number of the country’s youth life without parole cases inits prisons, California has the opportunity to lead the nation by takingimmediate steps to change this unnecessarily harsh sentencing law.Existing California law provides for lengthy sentences withno guarantee of release. California can protect public safety, and ensure therights of victims, while at the same time recognizing that young people differfrom adults.California leaders should take the legislative and policymaking steps necessary to:[46]Abolish the sentence of life without parole for youth who werebelow the age of 18 at the time of offense;Provide periodic review of every youth offender’s eligibilityfor parole and a meaningful opportunity for release; andProvide opportunities for rehabilitation, education, andvocational training.[EC2]III. Parallel Cases, Starkly DifferentResultsIn California the determination of which youth are sentencedto life without parole and which are not is the result of many factors, some ofwhich have little to do with the youth’s level of participation in thecrime and the likelihood he or she will offend again.Christian Bracamontes and Martin Hernandez’s caseshave remarkable similarities: both were 16 at the time of their crimes, neitherplayed an active role in the murder that resulted from the robberies, and bothwere offered parole-eligible sentences if they pled guilty. With hindsight, oneteen made a good decision when he accepted that offer. The other will stay inprison until death.Christian Bracamontes: Sixteenand Facing Life in Prison with No ParoleClick to expand ImageChristian Bracamontes smilesin a portrait taken when he was 16 years old, the same year he committed acrime that resulted in a life without parole sentence. © 2008 PrivateWhenChristian Bracamontes was 16 he made a split-second decision that haddisastrous consequences: he followed a friend into a robbery. “What wasI thinking?” he says now, 13 years later, recalling his teenage selfwith exasperation. “I don’t know why I followed him.”[i]Within minutes the situationturned tragic when his friend shot and killed the victim. Bracamontes sits ina California State prison. He will never get out.At the time of the crime,Bracamontes was living with his father, mother, and three younger sisters ina two-story suburban home down the street from hisschool.He was a good older brother; his sisters looked up to him, his family says.“He loved baseball,” his mother remembers.[ii]His family still lives in the same house, and old baseball trophies sitprominently on a shelf above the front door; gold letters read: 1996, 1997.“He still wanted to be a professional baseball player when he was16,” she told us. The day of the crime, however, he was breaking thelaw, painting graffiti. Now, years later, he is aware of how one thing led toanother.Click to expand ImageArturo and Martha Macedo,Christian Bracamontes's parents, at home in Fontana, October, 2011. ©2011 Patty WilliamsHe and his friend Jose Moralesrode their bikes to a local storm drain area intending to graffiti,Bracamontes explained. Once there, Bracamontes said that Morales opened hisbackpack and showed him he had a gun inside. “I was surprised. I askedhim why he had it,” Bracamontes remembers. Morales, two years olderthan Bracamontes, told him it was for protection.“Jose was doing his thing,painting, and a group of kids came down into the wash and asked if we wantedto buy weed,” Bracamontes remembers. They told them no, and the othersleft. Morales turned to Bracamontes. “He said to me, ‘Do you wantto rob them?’ I said, ‘I don’t care,’”Bracamontes said.[iii]Morales got his gun out of hisbackpack and the two walked over to Thomas Williams, who had offered themarijuana to them earlier. They asked Williams for marijuana, and when hestood up to sell it to them, Morales pulled out his revolver and pointed itat Williams, demanding he hand over the marijuana.[iv]Bracamontes remembers when Morales pulled out the gun, Williams challengedhim, “If you don’t kill me, I’ll kill you.” At thatpoint, Bracamontes thought the bluff had been called. “I turned to pickup my bike, I thought that it was over, we were leaving.” As he bent topick up his bike from the ground shots rang out. Both boys fled. “Ididn’t think he had hit him. My ears were ringing. I was soscared.” Bracamontes said he was sick to his stomach that day and thenext he broke out in a rash on his arms and neck and was sent to thenurse’s office at school.[v]Later he wasarrested. “They told me I was facing murder,” he explained.Charged with murder in the first degree with special circumstances, he faceda sentence of life without parole.[vi]He was offered a lesser charge and a 15-to-life sentence if he pled, but heinsisted on going to trial. He had a difficult time comprehending how hecould plead guilty to a murder he had not committed, he told us. He remembershe simply could not imagine being in prison for even 15 years, let aloneforever: “Taking a deal—it’s like admitting I did themurder.” He was found guilty at trial and sentenced to life withoutparole. Meanwhile, Morales, who actually shot the victim, accepted a pleabargain and got a sentence that will allow him one day to ask the paroleboard for release.With plentyof time to think, and the maturity that comes with the passage of years,Bracamontes now has a sense of clarity about his actions that day: “Ithink about the family who lost the man killed. I think about their pain, andI wish I could take it away, or do something for them. If I could do that dayover, I would have told Jose, ‘No,’ and stopped him from robbingthem.”He is heldin a small, coveted prison unit formerly known as the “HonorYard,” a placement for particularly well-behaved, problem-free inmates.Prior to being moved there he worked in plumbing. Now, he is on thejanitorial crew and hopes to be permitted to be certified again as a plumber.Buthis real hopes are for something that cannot happen. “My dream is to bereleased one day. I just want to go to work each day and be with my family.I’d like to work with kids, and help them not end up in thisplace.”Martin Hernandez: ChanceYields a Different OutcomeClick to expand ImageMartin Hernandez, now 35.Hernandez was 16 when he committed a crime that could have resulted in alife without parole sentence. Instead he served 17 years in prison beforebeing paroled in 2010.© 2011 Patty WilliamsAs a member of a local labor union, MartinHernandez, 35, drives a forklift and manages traffic on a large constructionproject.[vii]Three nights a week he leaves work and goes straight to evening collegeclasses. His life is jam-packed with study, work, church, and volunteering.It was not always this way. At age 16 he faced a future inside prison with nopossibility of parole.Nearly 20 years ago Hernandez was a16-year-old gang member already in trouble for vandalism and loitering withother gang members, failing school, and drifting ever farther from the reachof his single-parent mother. In violation of probation, Hernandez was outdrinking with other gang members one night when police arrived and broke upthe party. Hernandez fled and followed a friend into the back of a truck. Bothof them were very drunk, and his friend passed out almost immediately.Some of those in thetruck decided to commit robberies to get money for beer and gas. In the firstof two incidents, Hernandez was sober enough to get out of the truck when itstopped and followed the others when they ran down the street. Some of themattempted to rob a man and one stabbed the victim. That victim survived theattack. Hernandez did not see the stabbing—he was standing behind theothers—and did not know that it occurred. He went back to the truckwith the others, and when they stopped a second time, he got out to throw up.As he did, the truck drove a few blocks away where a second victim was robbedand stabbed. That victim later died.[viii] Hernandez and the otherswere charged with murder in the first degree with special circumstances. Thepresumptive sentence was life without parole.His lawyer told him he was likely to befound guilty if he went to trial, and he would never leave prison, he said.Hernandez told us he did not believe it at first; he had not intended to killthe man and was not the one who killed him. It was hard to comprehend that hewould be found guilty of murder. But the case dragged on. He remembersreality sank in as he listened to the district attorney talk about him incourt. “He kept saying ‘people like him’…‘people like him,’” Hernandez remembers. “That thistype of sentence is reserved for people like me.” What he understoodthat to mean was:‘He’s uneducated, he’s agang member, he came from,’ you know, ‘a single parent home andhe was involved in this horrible crime. So … let’s lock him upand throw away the key.’ I was and would always remain a failurebecause that’s what people like me did.He was offered a lower sentence of 15 yearsto life, and pled guilty. Sent to prison, he made a decision: he decided tostop believing he was worthless and doomed to failure as the prosecutor haddescribed him. “The moment I stopped believing that, everything changeddrastically.” A faith commitment helped steer his new direction. Hechanged his focus. He said, “I earned two associate [college] degreesand graduated with honors.” He embraced a sense of duty toward others:“I became a GED tutor and a college math tutor [for other inmates.] Ihelped graduate over a hundred inmates,” he told us. He described alsoworking with organizations inside prison serving needy people on the outside;for example, raising money to buy school supplies for children whose parentswere overseas soldiers.Click to expand ImageMartin Hernandez works inconstruction by day and at night attends college.© 2011 Chip WarrenSince he had pled to a parole-eligiblesentence, he appeared before the parole board. After serving nearly 17 yearsin prison, he was paroled. Now, three years later, he lives on his own,works, goes to school. His days are busy, he says, but he still makes thetime to speak at schools and juvenile halls, urging young people to stay outof trouble. He says he believes it is important to give to his community, andhe does.IV. Changed LivesDonté Corothers: NoSecond ChanceClick to expand ImageDonté Corothers in a photo taken in prison inFebruary 2009. Corothers was sentenced to life without parole for a crimehe committed when he was 17. He is now 34, and will stay in prison until hedies. © 2011 PrivateIn October 2011 Donté Corothers turned 34 years old. It was abirthday with particular significance: that year marked the point in his lifewhen he had spent as much time locked up as he had free. A lot can change inhalf a lifetime; it has for Corothers.At 17, hewas a gun-carrying gang member who, he says, in a drunken and drugged stupor,killed someone he called his best friend, Damon Dowell.[47]When he was sentenced at 18, anewspaper article described him as young and seemingly unresponsive to whatwas going on around him: “With chains encircling his narrow waist and ablank look on his face, Donte Leon Corothers sat in court yesterday,impassively listening as the door closed on his youth and freedom.”[48]Now 34,Corothers has left illegal behavior long behind, rejecting the negativeinfluences around him in a California Substance Abuse Treatment FacilityState prison.[49]Tears stream down his face when he talksabout what he did. He thinks about how Dowell’s family feels. “IfI could go back, I would change what I did,” he says.His prisonrecord is not what one might expect of a young gang-banger sent to prison forlife without parole. No new crimes, no assaults. Early on, he attemptedsuicide but now seems to be focused on the positive.[50]He works daily in the prisonkitchen and is considered a “critical worker,” he says, whichmeans even when everyone else is locked down, he is permitted to work outsidehis cell. He describes with pride the quality of his work and says hissupervisors like him and even dissuaded him from seeking a different positionin a different area because they did not want to lose him. He tries to livelike he is going to get out one day: “The way I do my time …people ask me when I am getting out” because someone not getting outwould not work as hard, he told us. In his prison files are letters attestingto his “good behavior and great communication.”[51]MelanieWashington: A Survivor’s PerspectiveClick to expand ImageMelanie Washington's son Dee was murdered by Corothers.She believes Corothers has something to offer society and should be giventhe chance to work towards parole. © Diandra JayIn the 14years since Damon Dowell’s tragic death other people have changed too.At the time of Corothers’s sentencing, Dowell’s mother, MelanieWashington, described her pain as her “own private prison.”“Am I a survivor?” she asked, and at the time the answer seemedlike it might be “no.”[52]She describes her son as a lovingyoung man, who was playful but intensely embraced life. “[My son] Deehad a beautiful personality. He wanted to help kids who were in trouble. Hewanted to help Donté … help him get out of the gang. I told Deehe was in over his head.”[53]Dee’s death was almostunbearable. A single mother, she described Dee as the “glue,”“the backbone,” and the love of the family. Washington told thesentencing court, “Donté should never see the streetsagain” and that “[a]s far as I can see, this boy doesn’tcare about himself or the family he has broken.”[54]She left the courtroom satisfiedwith a life without parole sentence, but is not anymore. “I had not aclue what that sentence meant,” she says now, looking back. “Ithought he’d get out when he was 75 or something.” She rememberslooking at Corothers in court throughout the trial, “I kept looking athim. He was so small. I was looking at a little boy.”Herson’s death inspired her to act. “I didn’t want his life tobe gone in vain,” she said. She founded Mentoring—A Touch fromAbove (MATFA), an organization that mentors jailed youth, helping them“take responsibility for their actions and re-enter the community asresponsible young men.” MATFA went on to become an award-winningprogram.[55]She knowsshe has helped change many young people’s lives. That experiencechanged her perspective, too. “I’m dealing with the same kids… kids who, like Donté, killed someone. I see it differently now.Come on. Life without parole for a child? Children do foolish things becausethey are children. When a child commits a crime, there should be a lot moreto it than just throwing him in prison.”She reachedout to Corothers, writing and eventually meeting him in prison. “He wasa kid in court when I saw him [last]. Now he was a man. He laid his head onmy shoulder and cried.” Now years later, she says, “I thinkDonté could come out and give back to the world.” She believesthe possibility of parole should exist if someone can show a repentant heart,remorse, and prove that “they’re getting their life right.”VanceWebster:A Person Changes a Lot in25YearsClick to expand ImageVance Webster, now 47, sits in a conference room at hiswork. Webster would have faced a life without parole sentence for a crimethat occurred when he was 16 if it happened just a few years later whenlaws changed. Instead, he was paroled after 28 years in prison. ©2011 Elizabeth Calvin/Human Rights Watch“Hopefulkids don’t join gangs. It’s what they are running from, notto.”VanceWebster is quoting Father Greg Boyle, the director of an anti-gang program,but Webster’s own life could not more clearly illustrate the words ofthe clergyman who directs a Los Angeles nonprofit.Thirty-fiveyears ago, Webster was 12 years old when he found himself homeless and alonein a neighborhood not known for its safe streets. His mother had kicked himout of the house when an unsympathetic boyfriend moved in. “I went frombeing a straight ‘A’ student to hating the world,” he said.[56]He became a part of a gang and thatsame year he had his first run-in with the law. At age 16 he was charged withmurder in the first degree and robbery and faced a 25-to-life sentence. Itwas 1981. A few years later California law changed, and the penalty couldhave been life without parole.He turneddown a series of plea offers predicated on cooperation with law enforcement,in part due to fear of reprisal from gang members, he said. There was more toit than that, though; he did not really believe he could end up with a lifesentence:Ididn’t understand a lot of what my lawyer was saying. He did say,“You’re going to spend the rest of your life in prison [if youdon’t take this plea deal.]” [As] a kid, though, you tend to think,“No, this is impossible,”…I kept thinking, “Youcan’t give me life.”But thecourt did: he was sentenced to life in prison with the possibility ofparole. He landed in prison and eventually turned his focus to learning. Hefinished high school and enrolled in other programs. “I signed up forwhatever I could,” he said, finding he could learn from anything.“I didn’t have a drinking problem, but I went to AA [AlcoholicsAnonymous].”After 28years and seven months, he was paroled. Forty-seven years old, he has beenout for just about three years. He works by day and goes to school at night.“I’m taking classes in sociology,” he explained. “Ihope to transfer to University of Southern California. I want to finish mydegree.” Earlier this year he ran a marathon for the first time.“That was on my bucket list: 26.2 miles. It rained the wholeway,” he said laughing.[57]Click to expand ImageVance Webster stands with a volunteer organizing aclothes closet for needy people in Los Angeles. Webster works full-time ata non-profit organization and takes college classes at night.©2011 Elizabeth Calvin/Human Rights WatchWebster nowworks as a member of the management team of Homeboys, a large nonprofitorganization in Los Angeles with an operating budget of over $8 million a year.[58]He started out as a security guardand was promoted.[59]He now wears many hats at Homeboys,including that of a motivational speaker on gang prevention, talking widelyto colleges, high schools, and others. He co-facilitates classes in publicspeaking and alternatives to violence.Father GregBoyle is the director of Homeboys and said he feels fortunate to have Websteras an employee. He describes Webster as steady, wise, an excellent worker andinstrumental member of the organization’s security team. He relies onhim to deal with particularly difficult situations, which he says Webster isadept at resolving “with great reconciliation.” “He is aremarkable man who does not waste time lamenting what he was denied, but[instead is] fully alive and grateful.”[60]V. Arbitrary OutcomesMurder is a terrible crime. Pain and suffering changefamilies, friends, and communities permanently. The fact the perpetrator isunderage does nothing to alleviate the loss. But societies do make decisionsabout what to weigh when determining punishment. Federal law increasinglyrecognizes that people under the age of 18 are different from adults, and criminallaw should reflect that fact.[61]Current California law fails to take this into account in criminal sentencing.People who cannot buy cigarettes or alcohol, sign a rental agreement, or voteare nevertheless considered culpable to the same degree as an adult when theycommit certain crimes. They then face adult penalties. California laws andcourtroom practices do not fairly and accurately take into consideration therealities of youth, and the results can be unjust.Click to expand ImagePatricia L., in a photo taken when she was 15 years old.She was 16 at the time of her crime. © 2008 PrivatePlea Bargaining with a TeenagerChristian Bracamontes and Martin Hernandez’s cases (seeParallel Cases above) share similarities. Yet today, years later, onesits in prison and will be there until he dies and the other served time and isout, working and going to school. “This is a capricious result,”concludes Sue Burrell, a staff attorney with the Youth Law Center inCalifornia.[62]“These dramatically different outcomes are the result of decisions madeby teenagers about whether to take a deal or not. It is not a reflection of whodeserves to be in prison for the rest of their lives.”Prosecutors may take into consideration a defendant’sage and role in a crime when determining what type of plea to offer. However,this means that the freighted, irrevocable decision about whether to accept theoffer rests with those who are least prepared: young people facing seriouscriminal charges who may have been offered the deal in the first place in partbecause of their lack of maturity. Some youth turn down offers because they donot understand the implications. “For the system to really work, anattorney must carefully explain the process to a client. When that client is ateenager, it adds a whole other dimension,” explains Cyn Yamashiro,director of Loyola Law School’s Center for Juvenile Law and Policy in LosAngeles. “The attorney has to know how to explain things and help a youngclient in decision-making in a developmentally appropriate manner. Mostattorneys in this state representing youth under these circumstances do nothave training to address the specialized needs of young clients.”[63]Click to expand ImageSaul Paul G., in a photo taken when he was 16 years old -the same age he was at the time of his crime. © 2008 PrivateProsecutor John Davis offered Bracamontes a deal to plead toa lower charge and receive a sentence of 15 years-to-life. Bracamontes turnedit down and was sentenced to life without parole. Davis alluded to the factthat Bracamontes may not have fully understood that his ancillary role in arobbery that ended up in a murder made him just as responsible as thetriggerman under California law. “A lot of kids don’t understandaiding and abetting,” he told the Press Enterprise aftersentencing.[64]Martin Hernandez agrees. At the age of 16, he said, “it was verydifficult to digest what was happening in court and understand” thethings his lawyer told him. Vance Webster remembers how “I used to sitthere [while my lawyer talked to me] … saying ‘yes, yes,yes’…but what he said was going in Chinese and coming out Japanese,and I don’t understand either one of those languages.”[65]Hernandez said he is grateful for the counsel of a juvenilehall chaplain and his lawyer who worked hard to ensure he understood thereality of a life without parole sentence. “My attorney … he seemedto have cared about my situation a lot more than I did at the time.”But both Webster and Hernandez remember other, lessconstructive adult influences, too: adults they met in jail who encouraged themto challenge the system and push their cases to trial. “You’d besitting with them in the van to the courthouse, and they’d all say,‘Don’t plead guilty! Take it to trial; make them work for it. Youwon’t get that long sentence,’” Hernandez says.[66]At an age when few things are clear, those conflicting voices reinforced theirconfusion and, ultimately, for many, their poor choices too.Click to expand ImageMichael A., in a photo taken when he was 16 years old. Hewas 17 at the time of his crime. © 2008 PrivateTeens Can Perceive Time DifferentlyYoung people do not justhave a hard time grasping the legal issues surrounding their cases, they alsohave trouble comprehending the sheer length of the sentences. Some youthsentenced to life without parole in California told Human Rights Watch they didnot absorb the significance of plea deals because they could not fathom thelength of the prison term. Robert D. described why he turned down an offer: “Whenthey offered [my codefendant and me] 30 years, a flat 30 years, not 30 tolife—we were 17 [years old.] We didn’t understand. Thirty years? Iwas 17 and in 30 years I’d be 47. That seemed like forever to me.”[67]No One Can Predict Who a Teenager Will Be At Age 40People in their late teens are still developing, and thedirection of that development is not one that can be predicted withreliability. In 2005 the US SupremeCourt noted, “It is difficulteven for expert psychologists to differentiate between the juvenile offenderwhose crime reflects unfortunate yet transient immaturity, and the rarejuvenile offender whose crime reflects irreparable corruption.”[68]Jonathan Laba, deputy director of the Pacific JuvenileDefender Center, says that it is difficult, if not impossible, for a court toaccurately judge a youth and predict the type of person that he or she willbecome. “They are just starting out in life. In most cases theycannot provide the court with a record of a successful workexperience, a high school or college degree obtained, or other indicatorsof adult success. As a result, the crime itself and factors such as ganginvolvement can take on a heightened importance in the sentencing process.These things do not tell the whole story.”[69]In fact, at the time of sentencing, Bracamontes, who is nowserving life without parole, would have likely looked like the better candidatefor possibility of release than either Martin Hernandez or Vance Webster, bothof whom are now out. Bracamontes was not gang-involved, Hernandez and Websterwere; Bracamontes was attending school, and passing, while Hernandez andWebster were doing poorly; Bracamontes’s family was intact, with twoparents involved in their son’s life of baseball games and school, while Hernandez’sfamily was struggling to get by on his mother’s sole income, and Websterwas on his own.Years passed, however, and Hernandez and Webster both provedto be much more complex and promising individuals than would be suggested bythe simple facts of their teen lives and the crimes for which they were convicted.Twenty years after Hernandez’s conviction and nearly 30 afterWebster’s, both men are living purposeful lives and giving back to theircommunities. Yet for the 301 people sentenced to life with no possibility ofparole as youth, there is no opportunity to review the cases years or evendecades later. “When I die, that’s when they’ll send mehome,” said Charles T., a young man serving life without parole.[70]Other Existing Sentencing Law Provides for Public SafetyThere is no question that young people who commit seriouscrimes must be punished. The parents of youth offenders serving life withoutparole whom we interviewed and the young people themselves agree.“[There’s] no doubt in my mind that he should be where he is, [inprison],” the mother of a 17-year-old who was sentenced to life withoutparole told us. “Just not forever.”[71]Click to expand ImageWilliam R. when he was 16 years old. He was 17 at the timeof his crime. © 2008 PrivateIt is important to note that, were California to eliminatelife without parole sentencing for youth offenders, the law would still provideample protection for public safety. Existing California law requires lengthysentences and mandatory minimums. Coupled with California’s restrictiveparole review process and practice, release from prison is distant and unlikelyfor all but those who can unequivocally prove they merit a chance to be paroled.For example, California’s next harshest penalty for murder is25-years-to-life in prison, with no reductions for the minimum time served. Inother words, offenders receiving this sentence must serve 25 years before theirfirst parole hearing. In addition, current law requires mandatory, consecutivesentencing enhancements that add years, and in many cases, decades to the basesentence of 25-to-life.[72]In addition, those who are ultimately released are notlikely to commit new crimes, according to the US Department of Justice.Overall, prisoners who serve a sentence for homicide and are released are theleast likely of any type of offender to commit new crimes. After release,convicted homicide offenders are less than half as likely to be convicted ofany new crime than released assault, burglary, or drug offenders.[73]Changes in California Law Have ReducedChecks and BalancesChanges in California law have removed many safeguards andpoints for review that once existed for youth who are charged in these cases.Judicial discretion and decision-making have been severely limited. Laws mandatethe automatic filing of many juvenile cases in adult court, resulting in youthbeing tried as adults and facing adult penalties. In addition,California’s juvenile life without parole statute restricts thediscretion of judges, limiting their ability to impose a lesser sentence. Keyfactors in the process include:Judgesno longer determine whether a youth is tried in juvenile court in these cases.Once chargesare filed in these cases, there is no point at which a judge can decide whethera young person should be in juvenile court or adult court.[74]Prosecutorsdecide whether to file the case with “special circumstances” andjudges cannot alter this.Prosecutorialcharging decisions are made early in a case, and prosecutors have no mandate toinvestigate the defendant’s social history, maturity, or amenability torehabilitation.[75]Once filed with the special circumstance allegation, a trier of fact mustdetermine whether the allegation is true and, if it is, then the presumptivesentence in these youth offender cases is life without parole.Juriesplay no role in determining the sentence and do not know life without parole isa possibility.Juries do notknow—and are instructed to not consider—what kind of punishment isto be meted out.[76]Californiacase law makes life without parole the presumptive sentence for judges toimpose in these cases.Once foundguilty, the default sentence in these cases is life without parole unless thejudge finds “good reason” to impose 25-years-to-life.[77]California appellate attorneys with experience in youth offender cases believejudges rarely exercise the discretion they do have in these cases.[78]Afterthe typical criminal appeals, there is no other regulated, open process forreview of these cases. The life without parole sentence is final.Criminalappeals succeed only when there has been a prejudicial error by a lower court.Just 4 percent of decisions are reversed on appeal, and the average criminaldefendant has exhausted his or her state appeals a year and three months afterbeing sentenced.[79]In the case of a youth life without parole sentence, this means it becomesfinal while the youth offender is still quite young. After that, onlyextraordinary appeals are available and then under very limited circumstances.Clemency, pardon, and commutation can only be granted by the governor. NoCalifornia governor has ever granted a pardon to an individual serving lifewithout parole. In fact, never in California history has a person sentencedlife without parole been granted parole.[80]AcknowledgmentsThis report was written and researched by Elizabeth Calvin, senioradvocate with the Children’s Rights Division of Human Rights Watch, withhelp from Annie Weir, legal fellow with the Children’s Rights Division,and Dana Nahoray, legal volunteer. Additionalassistance was provided by Austen Breen, intern.We thank the individuals serving life without parole andtheir families who shared their experiences for this report. We also thank thefamily members of victims who shared their experiences and opinions with us.Finally, we thank those individuals who had been, as a youth, sentenced to a lifesentence with parole and are now outside of prison who agreed to be interviewedfor this report. We are grateful for the willingness of these individuals todiscuss what were often deeply personal and painful matters.Many volunteers have provided assistance and other supportfor our research on juvenile life without parole undertaken since 2004.Theyinclude the members of the Human Rights Watch Network in Los Angeles and SanFrancisco.Soomi Lee,Ph.D., provided expertise in economic analysis. In addition, Richard Braucher,First District Appellate Project ; Sue Burrell, Youth Law Center; SteveChurchwell, DLA Piper; Miriam Krinsky, lecturer, UCLA School of Public Affairsand member, ABA Youth at RiskAdvisory Council; attorney Jonathan Laba, Pacific JuvenileDefender Center; Patricia Soung, National Center for Youth Law; providedreview, legal research, and guidance.The California Human Rights Watch staff, including JustinConnolly, Andrea Dew Steele, Hava Manasse, and Caitlin McAdam provided invaluablehelp.Zama Coursen-Neff, deputy director, Children’s RightsDivision, and Alison Parker, director of the US Program of Human Rights Watchedited the report. General Counsel Dinah Pokempner and Senior Editor DanielleHaas provided legal and program review.Production assistance was provided by Noah Beaudette,associate in the Children’s Rights Division; Grace Choi, PublicationsDirector ;Anna Lopriore, Creative Manager; and Fitzroy Hepkins, mailmanager.[1]HumanRights Watch interview with Charles T., serving life without parole, August 17,2007. This name is a pseudonym. Unless otherwise stated in this report,pseudonyms are used for California inmates and the location where they arehoused is not identified. These and other measures are taken to protect themfrom reprisals.[2]In thisreport the words “youth,” “teen,”“juvenile,” “youth offender,” and “child”are used to refer to someone under the age of 18.[3]California is among the top four states with the highest numbers of youthsentenced to life in prison without parole. The others are Florida, Michigan,and Pennsylvania.[4]HumanRights Watch interview with Robert D., serving life without parole inCalifornia, July 13, 2007.[5] Somehave argued that clemency, pardons, and commutation providea viable review process. These can only be granted bythe governor, and involve a process neither conducted in open court nor withthe benefit of open review. It is a decision made in large part, behind closeddoors, and one not immune to political influence. Moreover, it is extremelyrare: in the history of the state no California governor has ever grantedclemency/pardon to an individual serving life withoutparole, and only one youth sentenced to life without parole has had her casecommuted to a lesser sentence. See footnote 88 in thisreport. Governor of California, Annual Reports on Acts of Clemency for theState of California, 1993-2010, obtained from the Office of the Governor ofCalifornia, November 28, 2011 (copies on file with Human Rights Watch).[6]HumanRights Watch, When I Die, They’ll Send Me Home: Youth Sentenced toLife without Parole in California, January, 2008,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2008/us0108/.[7] Thisdocument updates that report and describes additional issues. For a thoroughdescription of our research methodology, please see the 2008 report, pps. 7-10. This report draws from research that Human Rights Watchconducted between 2004 and 2011 on youth offenders serving life without parolesentences in the United States. Our data from 2006 to the present includesrecords obtained from the California Department of Corrections andRehabilitation and independent research using court recordsand press reports. Wecomposed a survey that yielded over 130 responses in 2007, more than half ofall youth serving life without parole in California. Finally, we conductedin-person interviews with approximately 35 individuals serving life withoutparole for crimes committed as youth. We have basic information on every personserving the sentence in the state, and more than that in most cases. Althoughpress accounts and court documents have shed more light on many of theprisoners’ stories, Human Rights Watch has not tried to verify eachspecific allegation made and recognizes that some may be embellished or alteredin the telling. In addition, we have interviewed victims’ family membersand victims’ rights advocates for their perspectives. See p.63 of the2008 report for a summary of some of those interviews.[8]TheUniversity of San Francisco Law School Center for Law & Global Justiceconducted international research on the use of the sentence of life withoutparole for juveniles and continues to monitor international juvenile sentencinglaws and practices. It has found no cases of juvenile offenders serving thesentence outside the US. While several countries other than the US have lawsthat may permit sentencing of child offenders to a life without parolesentences, the Center for Law & Global Justice has found no cases outsidethe US in which the sentence is actually imposed on juveniles. Countries thathave juvenile life without parole laws but do not in practice impose thesentence are: Antigua & Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Belize, Brunei,Cuba, Dominica, Saint Vincent & the Grenadines, The Solomon Islands, andSri Lanka. C. de la Vega & M. Leighton, “Sentencing our Children toDie in Prison: Global Law and Practice,” University of San FranciscoLaw Review, vol. 42, Spring 2008, p. 989. This updated study of a 2007report of the same name clarified that Tanzania, South Africa, and Israel nolonger allow juvenile life without parole sentences.[9]HumanRights Watch estimates that there are currently about 2,570 youth offendersserving life without parole in the US. Human Rights Watch, World Report 2009(New York: Human Rights Watch, 2009), United States Chapter,http://www.hrw.org/world-report-2009/united-states/, p. 538.[10]Thenumber cited forthose serving life without parole for crimes committed under theage of 18 is based on several sources: data obtainedby Human Rights Watch from theCalifornia Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation; research conducted byHuman Rights Watch on individual cases in California; and data obtained by theAmerican Civil Liberties Union of Michigan from the California Department of Correctionsand Rehabilitation. (Documents on file with HumanRights Watch).[11]Grahamv. Florida, 130 S. Ct. 2011, 2034 (2010) (concluding that a lifewithout parole sentence for juveniles is unconstitutional for non-homicide crimes.).[12]Since2006, 16 states have had legislation introduced:Alabama, Arkansas, California,Colorado, Florida, Iowa, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan,Missouri, Nebraska, Nevada, Pennsylvania, Texas, and Washington. Coloradooutlawed life without parole sentences for people under the age of 18 in 2006and Texas eliminated the sentence for minors in 2010. Colorado Revised Statute§18-1.3-401(4)(b) (2009). Colorado’s new law was not retroactive.However, later, at the insistence of state lawmakers, the governor establisheda juvenile clemency advisory board in order to provide a process for review oforiginal cases. Governor Bill Ritter, Jr., Governor of Colorado, ExecutiveOrder B-009-07, The Juvenile Clemency Board, August, 2007, http://www.njjn.org/uploads/digital_library/coclemency.pdf(accessed November 29, 2011). See also, Jessica Peck, “Colorado Voices:Second chance for teen killers?” Denver Post, November 26, 2011.Texas Penal Code Annotated §12.31(a)(1) (Vernon 2009).[13]HumanRights Watch and Amnesty International, The Rest of Their Lives: LifeWithout Parole for Child Offenders in the United States, October 2005,http://hrw.org/reports/2005/us1005/index.htm, pp. 27-28. As of 2005, anestimated 59 percent of youth sentenced to life without parole were first-timeoffenders.This figure isbased on national research. We do not have California-specific data. Californialaw does not prohibit trying first-time offenders as adults and imposing adultsentences for murder, including life without parole. By “first-timeoffender” we mean a person without a single adult or juvenile offense.[14]HumanRights Watch, When I Die, They’ll Send Me Home: Youth Sentenced toLife without Parole in California, January, 2008,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2008/us0108/, p. 36. As of 2008, an estimated 45percent of youth sentenced to life without parole did not actually commit themurder.[15]CaliforniaPenal Code §190.2(d) states that a person who is not the actual killer butone who acts with reckless indifference to human life and as a majorparticipant, aids, abets, counsels, commands, induces, solicits, requests, orassists in the commission of a felony which results in the death of someone,will face the same penalties as if he or she had been the actual killer.[16]Whilethese teenagers are certainly criminally culpable, they cannot be classified asthe most culpable. Other studies have found similar rates for juvenilesconvicted of felony murder and aiding and abetting. For example, nearly half ofyouth sentenced to life without parole surveyed in Michigan were sentenced forfelony murder or aiding and abetting, and 33 percent of youth life withoutparole cases investigated in Colorado had convictions based on the felonymurder rule. See American Civil Liberties Union of Michigan, “SecondChances, Juveniles Serving Life without Parole in Michigan’sPrisons,” 2004, http://www.aclumich.org/pubs/juvenilelifers.pdf (accessedNovember 6, 2007), p. 4; Human Rights Watch, Thrown Away: Children Sentencedto Life without Parole in Colorado, February 2005,http://hrw.org/reports/2005/us0205/, pp. 18-19. For more information, pleasesee the Methodology section of the 2008 report, When I Die, They’llSend Me Home, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2008/us0108/, p. 7.[17]HumanRights Watch, When I Die, They’ll Send Me Home: Youth Sentenced toLife without Parole in California, 2008, p.35.[18] Ibid,p. 36. As of 2008, in an estimated 56 percent of thecases in which there was anadult co-defendant, the adult received a lower sentence than the young personwho was sentenced to life without parole.[19]Ibid,pp. 24-29. If just arrest data is examined, the disparity remains significant:African American youth arrested for murder are sentenced to life without parolein California at a rate that is 5.83 times that of white youth arrested formurder. Overall, in the 25 states where data is available, African Americanyouth arrested for murder are sentenced to life without parole at a rate thatis 1.56 times that of white youth arrested for murder.[20]Ibid,pp. 37 & 40. “I didn’t even know I got [life without parole]until I talked to my lawyer after the hearing,” one young man said. Surveyresponse from Jeff S., serving lifewithout parole in California, to Human Rights Watch, July 26, 2007.In nearly half the California cases surveyed, the youth’s own attorneydid not ask the court for a lower sentence. These attorneys failed to perform amost fundamental duty of defense and stood by while a client, a minor, wassentenced to life in prison with no possibility of parole.[21]C. dela Vega & M. Leighton, “Sentencing our Children to Die in Prison:Global Law and Practice,” University of San Francisco Law Review,vol. 42, Spring 2008, p. 989.[22]Grahamv. Florida, 130 S. Ct. 2011, 2034 (2010) (concluding that juvenilelife without parole sentence is unconstitutional for non-homicide crimes).[23]Thefirst major human rights treaty ratified by the US, the International Covenanton Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), has been interpreted to prohibit thissentence. The oversight body created under the ICCPR, the Human RightsCommittee, instructed the US to: “Ensure that no such child offender issentenced to life imprisonment without parole,” and to “adopt allappropriate measures to review the situation of persons already serving suchsentences.” United Nations Human Rights Committee (HRC),“Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Parties under Article 40 ofthe Covenant, Concluding observations of the Human Rights Committee, UnitedStates of America,” CCPR/C/USA/CO/3/Rev.1, December 18, 2006,http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G06/459/61/PDF/G0645961.pdf?OpenElement(accessed December 20, 2011), para. 34. In addition, the Convention on theRights of the Child has also been interpreted as prohibiting the use of lifewithout parole for children, and its oversight body, The Committee on theRights of the Child, is urging governments to ban all life sentences forjuveniles. Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), adopted November 20,1989, G.A. Res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc.A/44/49 (1989), entered into force September 2, 1990, signed by the US onFebruary 16, 1995, art. 37(a). Although the US has not ratified the Conventionon the Rights of the Child, it has signed the treaty and is obliged to refrainfrom actions which would defeat the treaty’s object and purpose. SeeVienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, concluded May 23, 1969, 1155 U.N.T.S.331, entered into force January 27, 1980. The US may also be violating itstreaty obligations under the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment whose oversight body, TheCommittee against Torture, told the US that thesentence could constitute “cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment orpunishment.” United Nations Committee against Torture (CAT), “Consideration of Reports Submitted byStates Parties under Article 19 of the Convention, Conclusions and recommendationsof the Committee against Torture, United States ofAmerica,” CAT/C/USA/CO/2, July, 25, 2006,http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G06/432/25/PDF/G0643225.pdf?OpenElement(accessed December 20, 2011), para. 34.[24]Laurence Steinberg et al., “The Study of Developmental Psychopathology inAdolescence: Integrating Affective Neuroscience with the Study ofContext,” in Dante Cicchetti and Donald Cohen, eds., DevelopmentalPsychopathology (Oxford: John Wiley & Sons, 2006), Chapter 18, p. 710.[25]Elizabeth Cauffman and Laurence Steinberg,“(Im)maturity of Judgment in Adolescence: Why Adolescents May Be LessCulpable Than Adults,” Behavioral Sciences and the Law, vol. 18, 2000,p.741. See also Laurence Steinberg, Elizabeth Cauffman, et al, “AgeDifferences in Sensation-Seeking and Impulsivity as Indexed by Behavior andSelf-Report: Evidence for a Dual Systems Model,” DevelopmentalPsychology, 44, 2008, pp.1764-1778; and M. Gardner and Laurence Steinberg,“Peer Influence on Risk Taking, Risk Preference, and Risky Decisionmaking in Adolescence and Adulthood: An Experimental Study,”Developmental Psychology, 41, 2005, pp.625-635.[26]Themalleability of a youth’s brain development suggests that young peoplethrough their twenties may be especially capable of change as they grow olderand attain adult levels of development. Dante Cicchetti and Donald Cohen, eds.,Developmental Psychopathology (Oxford: John Wiley & Sons, 2006),Chapter 18, Laurence Steinberg et al., “The Study of DevelopmentalPsychopathology in Adolescence: Integrating Affective Neuroscience with theStudy of Context,” p. 727.[27]Roperv. Simmons, 543 U.S. 551, 570 (2005).[28]Ibid.[29]Thisfigure is based on the annual cost of incarcerating each prisoner per year inCalifornia of $44,688, California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation,“Corrections: Year at a Glance,” Fall 2010,http://www.cdcr.ca.gov/news/docs/cdcr_year_at_a_glance2010.pdf, (accessedDecember 21, 2011) p. 2.; a population of 301; the exact age of each person inCalifornia currently sentenced to life in prison without parole for a crimethat occurred under the age of 18; and an average life expectancy in Californiaof 78.2 years. There are no publicly available reliable estimates of lifeexpectancy in California’s prisons. CJL Murray, SC Kulkarni, et al.,“Eight Americas: Investigating Mortality Disparities across Races,Counties, and Race-Counties in the United States,” Public Library ofScience Medicine, vol. 3, no. 9, September 12, 2006,www.medicine.plosjournals.org. All of the estimates used here are conservative:They assume no inflation, a scenario that is unlikely and some would sayimpossible, even in a recession. In addition, the estimates do not account forthe increasing medical costs of elderly inmates.[30]Patrick Vinck, Ph.D., director and co-Founder of the Berkeley/Tulane Initiativeon Vulnerable Populations, April 12, 2007. Cost estimates were based on twostate estimates of the cost of incarcerating each prisoner per year inCalifornia: $34,150 per year and $43,000 per year. Compare, CaliforniaLegislative Analyst’s Office, “Criminal Law Primer forCalifornia,” January 1, 2007,http://www.lao.ca.gov/LAOApp/PubDetails.aspx?id=1543 (accessed October 28,2007), p. 66 (estimating the annual cost to incarcerate a prisoner as over$43,000); and California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation,“Facts and Figures,” 4th Quarter 2005, http://www.corr.ca.gov/divisionsboards/aoap/factfiguresarchive/factsfigures4thq2005.html(accessed October 28, 2007), (stating that the annual cost to incarcerate aprisoner in California is $34,000.) As referenced above, the cost toincarcerate inmates in California has increased since 2007.[31]Roperv. Simmons, 543 U.S. 551 (2005).[32]Graham v. Florida, 130 S. Ct. 2011 (2010).[33]J.D.B.v. North Carolina, 131 S. Ct. 2394 (2011).[34]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Barry Krisberg,Director of Research andPolicy, Chief Justice Earl Warren Institute on Law and Social Policy at theUniversity of California, Berkeley School of Law. 11/23/11, Berkeley,California.[35]Roperv. Simmons, 543 U.S. 551, 561 (2005) (citing Thompson v. Oklahoma,487 U.S. 815, 835 (1988)).[36]Grahamv. Florida, 130 S. Ct. 2011, 2026 (2010) (citing Roper v. Simmons543 U.S. 551, 569-570 (2005)).[37]J.D.B.v. North Carolina, 131 S. Ct. 2394, 2406 (2011).[38]J.D.B.v. North Carolina, 131 S. Ct. 2394, 2404 (2011) (citing Eddings v.Oklahoma, 455 U.S. 104, 115-116 (1982)). “The legal disqualificationsplaced on children as a class – e.g. limitations on their ability toalienate property, enter into a binding contract enforceable against them, andmarry without parental consent – exhibit the settled understanding thatthe differentiating characteristics of youth are universal.” J.D.B. v.North Carolina, 131 S. Ct. 2394, 2403 (2011).[39]J.D.B. v. North Carolina, 131S. Ct. 2394, 2404 (2011) (citing Restatement (Third) of Torts § 10,Comment b, p. 117 (2005)). “In negligence suits, for instance,where liability turns on what an objectively reasonable person would do in thecircumstances, ‘all American jurisdictions accept the idea that aperson’s childhood is a relevant circumstance’ to beconsidered.”[40]Roperv. Simmons, 543 U.S. 551, 570 (2005).[41]Graham v. Florida, 130 S. Ct. 2011, 2029(2010).[42] Thecase before the Graham v. Florida court concerned a life without parole sentence for armed burglary with assault andattempted robbery. There were approximately 129 cases nationally in which ajuvenile had been sentenced to life without parole for a non-homicideconviction. As a result of the Graham v. Florida decision, all juvenileoffenders sentenced to life without parole in California were convicted ofhomicide. Those who were not were entitled to be resentenced to a sentence withthe possibility of release.[43]Jackson v. State, 194 S.W.3d 757 (Ark. 2004), cert. granted sub nom. Jackson v.Hobbs, 80 U.S.L.W. 3280 (2011); Miller v. State, 63 So. 3d 676 (Ala. Crim. App.2010), cert. granted sub nom. Miller v. Alabama, 80 U.S.L.W. 3280 (2011).[44]The nationaland California-based news coverage of the issue of life without parole forjuveniles as well as alternatives to extreme sentences for youth has beenextensive in recent years. One indication of changing perspectives on the issueof life without parole for juveniles is the number of major newspapers inCalifornia that published editorials in favor of Senate Bill 9 which, if passed,would permitreview and the possibility of resentencing to a parole-eligible sentence injuvenile life without parole sentences. Editorial examples: “For juvenilelifers, a chance: SB 9 would let youthful offenders request a parole hearing.That’s both sensible and humane,” Los Angeles Times, August 21,2011; "What to do with children who kill," San Diego Union-Tribune,August 22, 2011; "Following up on parole policy for juveniles," SanFrancisco Chronicle, August 16, 2011; “California Juveniles doing life inprison deserve opportunity for a second chance,” San Jose Mercury News,August 24, 2011; and “Giving young lifers a chance at redemption,”Ventura County Star, August 20, 2011.[45]See, forexample, The Right on Crime, “The Conservative Case for Reform: FightingCrime, Prioritizing Victims, and Protecting Taxpayers, Statement ofPrinciples” signed by with national signatories William J. Bennett,former US secretary of education and federal “Drug Czar”; Jeb Bush,former governor of Florida; Ward Connerly, American Civil Rights Institute andformer regent of the University of California; Newt Gingrich, former speaker ofthe US House; Edwin Meese, III, former US attorney general; Grover Norquist,Americans for Tax Reform; and Pat Nolan, Justice Fellowship and former speakerof the California Assembly,http://www.rightoncrime.com/the-conservative-case-for-reform/statement-of-principles,(accessed November 24, 2011). This group’s priorities include oppositionto the use of life without parole for juveniles: “Implement policies thatrequire reviews of sentences given to people convicted of crimes committedunder age 18 to determine whether, years later, they are fit to return tosociety.” See also “Statement in support of elimination of juvenilelife without parole sentencing,” a letter signed by over 35 current andformer prosecutors and judges in support of changing state and federal laws toensure that cases in which life sentences were imposedonthose whowere juveniles at the time of the offense receive meaningful periodic reviews.Undated, (copy on file with Human Rights Watch); Miriam Aroni Krinsky,“Disrupting the Pathway the Pathway from Foster Care to The JusticeSystem—A Former Prosecutor’s Perspective on Reform,” FamilyCourt Review, vol. 48 no. 2, April 2010, pp.322–337.[46]Ourrecommendations have not changed since 2008 when we first reported on thisissue in California, and can be found in full in the original report. HumanRights Watch, When I Die, They’ll Send Me Home: Youth Sentenced toLife without Parole in California, January, 2008,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2008/us0108/, p. 11. The recommendations here are asummary.[47]Human Rights Watch interview with Donté Corothers,Corocoran, California, October 17, 2011. This name is not a pseudonym.[48]Greg Moran, “Teen gets life term for murdering Oceansidepal,” San Diego Union-Tribune, February 7, 1997.[49]Human Rights Watch interview with Donté Corothers,Corocoran, California, October 17, 2011.[50]Prison records show just two “mutual” fights and asuicide attempt as the only arguably violent actions of Corothers sinceentering prison. California Department of Corrections and RehabilitationBehavioral File (C-file) of Donté Corothers, obtained by Human RightsWatch October 17, 2011 (copy on file with Human Rights Watch).[51]For example: Letter signed by Corrections Officer K. Paulo,February 10, 2011, California Department of Corrections and RehabilitationBehavioral File (C-file) of Donté Corothers, obtained by Human Rights WatchOctober 17, 2011 (copy on file with Human Rights Watch).[52]Greg Moran, “Teen gets life term for murdering Oceansidepal,” San Diego Union-Tribune, February 7, 1997.[53]Human Rights Watch interviews with Melanie Washington, in personand via telephone, Long Beach, California, August 13, 2007, October 9, 2007,and October 25, 2011.[54] Letter from Melanie Washington to the District Attorney andProbation Officer, undated (copy on file with HumanRights Watch).[55]“The Founder and MATFA’s History,” Mentoring:A Touch From Above website, 2010, http://www.matfa.org/aboutus.html(accessed November 28, 2011).[56]Human Rights Watch interview with Vance Webster, Los Angeles,California, November 18, 2011.[57]Human Rights Watch interview with Vance Webster, Los Angeles,California, November 18, 2011.[58] Homeboy Industries, Return of Organization Exempt from Income Tax,United States Internal Revenue Service Form 990, 2009,http://dynamodata.fdncenter.org/990_pdf_archive/954/954800735/954800735_200912_990.pdf.(accessed November 29, 2011).[59]Mandalit Del Barco, “Priest’s Answer to Gang LifeFaces Hard Times,” National Public Radio Website, May 21, 2010,http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=127019188 (accessedNovember 28, 2011).[60]Human Rights Watch email communication with Father Gregory Boyle,S.J. Executive Director, Homeboy Industries, Los Angeles, to Human RightsWatch, November 28, 2011.[61]See footnotes 27-29.[62]HumanRights Watch email communication with Sue Burrell, staff attorney, Youth LawCenter, San Francisco, California, November 23, 2011.[63]HumanRights Watch interview with Cyn Yamashiro, director, Center for Juvenile Lawand Policy, Loyola Law School, Los Angeles, November 18, 2011.[64]MikeKataoka, “No-Parole Life Sentence Handed Down in Slaying,” PressEnterprise (Riverside), January 29, 2000.[65]HumanRights Watch interview with Vance Webster, Los Angeles, California, November18, 2011.[66]HumanRights Watch interview with Martin Hernandez, Hawthorne, California, November10, 2011.[67]HumanRights Watch interview with Robert D., serving life without parole inCalifornia, July 13, 2007.[68]Roper v. Simmons, 543 U.S. 551, 573(2005).[69]HumanRights Watch email communication with Jonathan Laba, deputy director of thePacific Juvenile Defender Center, Martinez, California, December 13, 2011. Labais a criminal defense attorney and an adjunct faculty member at Berkeley Lawand Golden Gate University Schools of Law.[70]HumanRights Watch interview with Charles T., serving life without parole in California,August 17, 2007.[71]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with the mother of Brian C., Benicia,California, November 12, 2007.[72]Forexample, the sentence for a first degree murder committed with a firearm mustinclude the firearm enhancement of a second, consecutive 25-to-life sentence,making the sentence 50-years-to-life. California Penal Code Section§12022.53(d) (2011).[73]About21 percent of released prisoners who are convicted homicide offenders areconvicted of a new crime (any felony or serious misdemeanor) within three yearsof release. By contrast, the reconviction rate of released assault offenderswas 44 percent, burglary offenders was 54 percent, and drug offenders 47percent. US Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau ofJustice Statistics, “Recidivism of Prisoners Released in 1994,”June 2002, http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/rpr94.pdf (accessed November30, 2007), p. 7.[74]California Welfare and Institutions Code § 602(b). Prior to 2000, in mostjuvenile cases a judge determined whether a juvenile should be tried as anadult or stay in the juvenile justice system where he or she would have accessto developmentally-appropriate rehabilitative and educational services. Ajudicial decision to send a youth to the adult system is based on evidencepresented to the court and the court’s weighing of factors such as theyouth’s prior criminal history, his or her maturity and amenability torehabilitative services, and the seriousness of the crime.[75]California Welfare and Institutions Code §§ 602(b) and 707(2011).Inaddition, judges were once allowed to strike a special circumstances finding,and now they are not. In the cases of 16- and 17-year-olds, striking thespecial circumstances finding would make the mandated sentence aparole-eligible one. California Penal Code § 1385.1, effective June 6,1990, prohibits a trial court from striking a special circumstance finding inorder to reduce a sentence of life imprisonment without possibility of parole. Peoplev. Ybarra, 166 Cal.App.4th 1069, 1093 (2008).[76]California Criminal Jury Instruction number 706, Special Circumstances: JuryMay Not Consider Punishment: “In your deliberations, you may not consideror discuss penalty or punishment in any way when deciding whether a specialcircumstance, or any other charge, has been proved.” Judicial Council ofCalifornia Criminal Jury Instructions (2011), CALCRIM No. 706,http://www.courts.ca.gov/partners/documents/calcrim_juryins.pdf (accessedNovember 23, 2011). Only in a death penalty case does a jury give input on thenature of the sentence. California Penal Code Section §190.1 (2011).[77]In Peoplev. Guinn, 28 Cal.All.4th 1130 (1994), the court held that the sentence oflife without parolemustbe imposed unless the court finds good reason to choose the lesssevere sentence of 25 years to life in these cases.[78] Forexample: “While a trial court has discretion to sentence a youth to25-years-to-life, rather than a life without parole sentence (California Penal Code Section § 190.5, subd. (b)), the realityis that once a life without parole special circumstance is found true by ajury, judges do not exercise their discretion. While it may happen, I am awareof no case in which a court has reduced an LWOP sentence to a term of25-years-to-life.” Human Rights Watch email communication with L. RichardBraucher, staff attorney with the First District Appellate Project, SanFrancisco, California, November 23, 2012. Braucher has practiced criminalappellate law in California since 1994.[79]In California,the median time for an appeal to be decided is 404 days. Four percent ofcriminal cases appealed in California are reversed on appeal. Judicial Councilof California, 2010 Court Statistics Report, Statewide Caseload Trends,1999–2000 Through 2008–2009, 2010,http://www.courts.ca.gov/documents/csr2010.pdf (accessed November 24, 2011),pp. 17 & 26.[80] In2010 Governor Schwarzenegger did not grant clemency or a pardonbut did commute the sentence of Sarah Kruzan from lifewithout parole to 25-years-to-life. Kruzan was serving life without parole forkilling the man who had raped here when she was 12 years old, afterwards usingher as his prostitute. She was 16 years old at the time of the crime. Althoughher sentence was commuted, she has not yet been reviewed for parole. Governorof California, Annual Reports on Acts of Clemency for the State of California,1993-2010, obtained from the Office of the Governor of California, November 28,2011 (copies on file with Human Rights Watch).[i]Human Rights Watch interviews with Christian Bracamontes, Imperial,California, and Lancaster, California, July 17, 2007 and September 24, 2011.This name is not a pseudonym.[ii]Human Rights Watch interview with Martha Macedo, Fontana,California, November 18, 2011.[iii]HumanRights Watch interviews with Christian Bracamontes, Imperial, California, andLancaster, California, July 17, 2007 and September 24, 2011.[iv]GroverTrask, District Attorney, County of Riverside; “Statement of DistrictAttorney Under Penal Code Section 1203.1, Crimes for which the Defendant wasConvicted and Sentenced,” September 6, 2002, filed with the SuperiorCourt, County of Riverside. This document is the District Attorney’spost-trial summary of facts (copy on file with Human Rights Watch).[v]Human Rights Watch interviews with Christian Bracamontes, Imperial,California, and Lancaster, California, July 17, 2007 and September 24, 2011.[vi]At this time we believe that all youth serving life without parolein California have been convicted of murder with special circumstances. TheCalifornia Penal Code delineates the circumstances which increase the seriousnessof a murder conviction, including a murder committed during the course of afelony, a murder related to gang activity, murder for financial gain, andmurder by means of lying in wait, among 22 total special circumstances.California Penal 190.2. Bracamontes’s charge was based on the specialcircumstance of “in the course of a felony,” which was the robberythat Morales initiated.[vii]Human Rights Watch interview with Martin Hernandez, Hawthorne,California, November 10, 2011. This name is a pseudonym.[viii]Transcript of Parole Consideration Hearing, State of California,Board of Parole Hearings, August 12, 2008 (copy on file with Human RightsWatch) and Human Rights Watch email communications with Barbara Dunn, Attorneyat Law, Arcadia, California, to Human Rights Watch, December 12 through28,2011. Ms. Dunn represents the individual known here as MartinHernandez.Related ContentFebruary 29, 2012News ReleaseCalifornia: Over 300 Youth Face Life Without ParoleLegislature to Vote on Bill for Possible Review of These SentencesFebruary 29, 2012News ReleaseCalifornia: Over 300 Youth Face Life Without ParoleRegion / CountryUnited States Criminal JusticeProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch