Impairing Education: Corporal Punishment of Students with Disabilities in US Public Schools | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload reportDownload report with coverDonate NowDownloadsDownload reportDownload report with coverAugust 10, 2009Impairing EducationCorporal Punishment of Students with Disabilities in US Public SchoolsImpairing EducationCorporal Punishment of Students with Disabilities in USPublic SchoolsI. SummaryCorporalPunishment of Students with DisabilitiesLastingInjuries and Barriers to EducationAggravatingMedical Conditions for Students with DisabilitiesPunishmentfor DisabilitiesDisproportionalityand Lack of InformationParents'Inability to Protect Their ChildrenBestPractices and Success StoriesII.RecommendationsIII.MethodologyIV. CorporalPunishment in US Public SchoolsPaddlingOtherPhysical Force Used Against StudentsStudents Hitwith Other ObjectsStudentsSpanked, Pinched, Grabbed and Bruised, or BeatenDragging,Throwing, or Pulling ChildrenChildrenBruised or Injured During RestraintFace-Down orProne RestraintOtherRestraintV. CorporalPunishment by the NumbersDisproportionatelyHigh Rates of Corporal Punishment among Students with DisabilitiesUndercountingof Data on Corporal PunishmentLack ofInformation on Violence against Students with DisabilitiesVI.Behaviors Leading to BeatingsMisbehaviorsLeading to Corporal PunishmentCorporalPunishment for Serious Offenses, including ViolencePunishmentfor Consequences of DisabilityStudentswith Conditions on the Autism SpectrumVII. Impactof Corporal PunishmentLastingInjuries and Barriers to EducationDepressionand AngerAcademicDisengagement and Drop-OutAggravationof ConditionStudentswith Conditions on the Autism SpectrumVIII.Parents' Inability to Protect ChildrenLack ofInformationStruggleswith the School SystemImpact onFamily LifeGuilt andResilienceIX. BestPractices: Effective Discipline for Students with DisabilitiesPositiveBehavior Interventions and SupportsSuccessfulExperiences with School DisciplineX. InternationalHuman Rights Law Protecting Students with DisabilitiesInternationalHuman Rights LawFreedom fromCruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or PunishmentThe Right toFreedom from Physical ViolenceThe Right toan Inclusive EducationNon-Discriminationand EqualityParents'RightsThe UnitedStates and International Human Rights LawUS LawPermitting Corporal PunishmentIncompleteProtection under US Federal Law for Students with DisabilitiesImmunity forEducatorsXI.ConclusionAcknowledgmentsI. SummaryLandon K., a six-year-old boy with autism, was in firstgrade at his Mississippi elementary school when his assistant principal, "abig, 300-lb man, picked up an inch thick paddle and paddled him [on thebuttocks]." His grandmother, Jacquelyn K., reported, "my child just lost it ...he was screaming and hollering ... it just devastated him." Jacquelyn knew thatpaddling was harmful for children with autism: "I had already signed a formsaying they couldn't paddle. I sent that form in every year ... When a childwith autism has something like that happen, they don't forget it. It's alwaysfresh in their minds."Landon was traumatized and became terrified of school. "Hewas a nice, quiet, calm boy," noted Jacquelyn, but after the paddling, "he wasscreaming, crying, we had to call the ambulance, they had to sedate him ... Thenext day, I tried to take him to school, but I couldn't even get him out of thehouse. He was scared of going over there, scared it would happen again ... Wecarried him out of the house, he was screaming. We got him to school but had tobring him back home ... Now he has these meltdowns all the time. He can'tfocus, he cries."Jacquelyn withdrew Landon from school, fearing for hisphysical safety and mental health. She was threatened by truant officers: "[They]said I'd go to jail if I didn't send him back to school ... If I felt he wouldhave been safe in school, he would have been there. I'm sure they would havepaddled him again. I don't trust them. If they don't know what they're dealingwith, how can they teach a child? And the sad thing about it, he can learn. Hecan learn."[1]*              *              *Jonathan C., a 15-year-0ld boy with autism, was repeatedlysubjected to corporal punishment at his Florida school. On October 2, 2008, forexample, he was picked up by a male staff member and thrown "into the tilefloor, face-first," after screaming in the cafeteria and running away from astaff member. Staff members dragged him to a meeting room, where the male staffmember "put him in a chokehold. Other staff members [came] running. Three orfour of them tackle[d] him, and he [was] thrown to the floor again." The staffmembers used their strength and body weight to pin Jonathan, face-down, to thefloor.After Jonathan sustained injuries, including a deep cut tothe bridge of his nose and bruises to his forehead, Rose C., Jonathan's mother,was able to obtain video of her son's treatment at school. She was shocked. "Theyhad been picking him up, throwing him into the tile floor like a wrestler. They'd... pick him up by all four limbs. You can see where they're dragging him ...They're carrying him like a wild animal."Jonathan started to get more and more agitated during themonths he was subjected to physical abuse. He was "having aggressive episodes,he was knocking people over ... I asked him, what was wrong." Jonathan, likemany children with autism, has limited communication abilities. "He can'texplain ... Every time he got upset, he would scream at the top of his lungs ...He was throwing fits because he was getting hurt."Ultimately, Rosewithdrew her son from school and enrolled him in a different program.Nonetheless, she feels considerable guilt. "I trusted the school, I trustedthem to do the right thing ... All this abuse happened on my watch. It nevershould have happened. I feel so guilty."[2]**             *A 2008 American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU)/Human RightsWatch report found that corporal punishment in public schools is routine inmany parts of the US, and that almost a quarter-of-a-million school childrenwere subjected to this violent, degrading punishment in the 2006-2007 schoolyear.[3]Twenty states permit corporal punishment; in states where the practice ispermitted, hundreds of school districts make routine use of it. Corporalpunishment comes with risk of serious physical injury and lasting mentaltrauma. Studies show that beatings can damage the trust between educator andstudent, corrode the educational environment, and leave the student unable tolearn effectively, making it more likely that she will drop out of school.Students with disabilities-who are entitled to appropriate, inclusiveeducational programs that give them the opportunity to thrive-are subjected toviolent discipline at disproportionately high rates. Students with disabilitiesmake up 19 percent of those who receive corporal punishment, yet just 14percent of the nationwide student population. Human rights law protectsstudents with disabilities from violence and cruel and inhuman treatment, andguarantees them non-discriminatory access to an inclusive education. Furthermore,as President Obama noted when signing the UN Convention on the Rights ofPersons with Disabilities on July 24, 2009, US law has attempted to ensure that"children with disabilities were no longer excluded ... and then no longerdenied the opportunity to learn the same skills in the same classroom as otherchildren."[4]Yet in countless US public schools, students with disabilities-who already facebarriers to attaining a quality education-face physical violence that furtherdiscourages them from reaching their full potential.Corporal Punishment of Students with DisabilitiesMuch of the corporal punishment in US public schools takesthe form of paddling. This report focuses on public schools, includingmainstream schools (some of which have special education classrooms withinthose schools) and alternative schools.[5]Some students are paddled, or, in other words, hit on the buttocks severaltimes with a wooden board resembling a shaved-down baseball bat. The punishmentcauses immediate pain, and in some cases, lasting injury and mental trauma.Paddling, which is legal in 20 states, is routinely used at disproportionatelyhigh rates against students with disabilities.Students with disabilities are routinely subjected to otherforms of physical discipline in addition to paddling, impeding their rights toeducation.[6]Corporal punishment is defined as "any punishment in which physical force isused and intended to cause some degree of pain or discomfort."[7]According to interviews conducted for this report, students with disabilitieshave been subjected to a wide range of corporal punishment, including hittingchildren with rulers; pinching or striking very young children; grabbingchildren with enough force to bruise; throwing children to the floor; andbruising or otherwise injuring children in the course of restraint.Under human rights law, physical force may only be usedagainst students where it is absolutely necessary to protect a child or others,and even then the principle of the minimum necessary amount of force for theshortest period of time must apply. Physical force with intent to punish isnever acceptable, and is especially abusive when used to punish students for conductrelated to their disabilities.Lasting Injuries and Barriers to EducationCorporal punishment can cause deep bruising or other lastingphysical or mental injury. Furthermore, it creates a violent, degrading schoolenvironment in which all students-and particularly students with disabilities-maystruggle to succeed. Research indicates that corporal punishment is rarelyeffective in teaching students to refrain from violent behavior, and that itcauses students to become disengaged and reluctant to learn.The Society for Adolescent Medicine has documented seriousmedical consequences resulting from corporal punishment, including severemuscle injury, extensive blood clotting (hematomas), whiplash damage, andhemorrhaging. Many children whose stories are documented in this reportsustained serious injuries from paddling. Deena S.'s middle school son, who hasattention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), was badly bruised from paddling:"They were deep bruises. Not marks. They measured three inches by four inches.In the center of the bruises it was kind of clear. They ended up turning realdark. This wasn't just a little red mark, this was almost black."[8]Some students were taken to hospital after severe episodesof corporal punishment. Theresa E.'s five-year-old granddaughter with autismwas physically punished at her Georgia elementary school: "You could see thebruising. Her whole arm was swollen by the time she got to the emergency room.Her right arm. The doctor said it looked like she'd been hit by a baseball bator had been in a motorcycle accident."[9]All corporal punishment, whether or not it causessignificant physical injury, violates students' rights to physical integrity, andprevents students from attaining a decent education. As a consequence of thehelplessness and humiliation felt by those who experience corporal punishment,some students become angry or depressed. Several parents of students withdisabilities reported that their children became more aggressive, more likelyto lash out at peers or family members, and more likely to injure themselves.Students may become withdrawn and deeply reluctant to go back to school.Aggravating MedicalConditions for Students with DisabilitiesCorporal punishment, which isnever appropriate for any child, is particularly abusive for students withdisabilities whose medical conditions may be worsened as a consequence of thepunishment itself. For instance, one advocate we interviewed drew a connectionbetween pain crises and paddling in her students with sickle cell anemia:[10]"any kind of mental or physical stress can be a pain trigger for these studentsfor a pain crisis ... If they're paddled, it's an immediate trigger for apossible moderate to severe pain crisis."[11]Among families we interviewed, episodes of corporalpunishment directly preceded children's regression in developmental terms, particularlyfor children with autism. Several students with autism became self-injurious followingepisodes of corporal punishment, though they had previously not exhibitedself-injurious behavior; others became more aggressive. Anna M.'s seven-year-oldson with an autism disorder who was physically punished now "struggles withanger. Right after the incidents, he'd have anger explosions. I still can'tcome up behind him and hug him. It's changed him."[12]Punishment for DisabilitiesAccording to our interviews, students with disabilities wereroutinely punished for behaviors related to their disabilities, such asTourette Syndrome or obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD). Students with autismare particularly likely to be punished for behaviors common to their condition,stemming from difficulties with appropriate social behavior. For instance, Landon,the six-year-old with autism in Mississippi, was punished because he had amelt-down when his routine was changed. Educators may not have access tosufficient training on the nature of their students' disabilities or on bestpractices for responding to behavior connected to those disabilities. As KarenW., an Arkansas mother, noted of her son's school: "not one person in thatwhole building had one day's training in autism."[13]Students with disabilities-like all students-can thrive withappropriate discipline. When students with disabilities are beaten for theconsequences of their disabilities, their rights to education andnon-discrimination are violated. Students with disabilities face considerablebarriers to success as it is; corporal punishment makes those barriers evenhigher.Disproportionality and Lack of InformationNationwide, students with disabilities receive corporalpunishment at disproportionately high rates. In Tennessee, for example,students with disabilities are paddled at more than twice the rate of thegeneral student population. These statistics may seem high, but they likelyundercount the full extent of violence against students with disabilities;there is no mandated reporting for many types of corporal punishment that takeplace. Some students with disabilities may exhibit behavioral problems in theclassroom, but that does not justify use of force.Parents repeatedly voiced concerns that they were unaware ofthe full extent of the violence used against their children, either because theschool district did not report it to them or because their children were unableto verbalize what had happened. As Karen W., the mother of an Arkansas boy withautism, commented, "it took [my son] a long time to tell me what happened. ButI'm a lot more fortunate than some of these parents."[14]Where parents do not have access to information about abuse against theirchildren, they face obstacles to protecting their children from harm.Parents' Inability to Protect Their ChildrenParents may struggle to protect their children from violentschool discipline. Parents found that school districts did not respondadequately to their complaints or requests to use more appropriate disciplinewith their students. "We went to war, we really did,"[15]commented Karen W. After seeing their children injured in school, parentsfeared for their child's physical safety. Anna M. observed, "I was afraid forhis life, to be honest. He was 52 pounds, or maybe even less, at this point."[16]Ultimately, many parents felt they had no choice but towithdraw their children from public school, despite the impact on family lifeand the child's education. Theresa E. explained the dilemma, "We thought [ourgranddaughter] needed school for socialization. I didn't think I could home schoolher. Jessie's autistic ... I'm not sure I can educate her."[17]Some parents were forced to stop working, like May R.: "I can't even get a job ...I had to keep [my seven-year-old daughter with autism] safe. She had taken ahuge downturn."[18]Many parents were left with a lingering sense of guilt andresponsibility. As Jacquelyn K. said of Landon, "I can imagine my little childwas just screaming and hollering, and I wasn't there to help him."[19]Karen W. echoed this sentiment: "Oh, the guilt I live with.... I blame myselffor my ignorance. I didn't touch him or hurt him ... but if parents knew thatschools do this, the kids wouldn't be hurt."[20]Best Practices and Success StoriesThough children are protected from corporal punishment inmost US juvenile detention centers and mental health facilities, they are stillvulnerable in US public schools. Yet there are positive, nonviolent approachesto school discipline that have been proven to lead to safe environments inwhich children can learn. Positive behavioral supports (PBS) teach children whywhat they did was wrong and give them tools to improve their behavior. Schooldistricts across the US have implemented PBS, and have seen substantialdeclines in disciplinary referrals and improvements in school-wide safety.International instruments, including the UN Convention onthe Rights of the Child, the UN Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel,Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and the UN Convention on theRights of Persons with Disabilities, prohibit the use of cruel, inhuman, ordegrading treatment, regardless of circumstance. Corporal punishment alsoviolates other human rights, including the right to security of person and theright to non-discrimination. Corporal punishment infringes on the right toeducation. The UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, in GeneralComment 13 (on the right to education), not only describes corporal punishmentas "inconsistent with the fundamental guiding principle of human rights law"but "welcomes initiatives taken by some States parties which actively encouragethe schools to introduce 'positive,' non-violent approaches to schooldiscipline."[21]Positive behavioral supports allow for individualizedresponses that can be particularly effective for students with disabilities.One teacher in Mississippi mentioned her success stories, noting that the staff"would talk to [students with disabilities] about the way they were behaving,and set up incentives and goals to see if they could change their behavior.This was a successful way to intervene."[22] Some parentsreported happily that their children were thriving in settings with positive behavioralsupports. Karen W. said of her son with autism, "He's now on the honor roll,straight A student, in a mainstream school. This is remarkable. A year ago orso, they were saying he could never, ever go back to public school."[23]US federal and state governments can uphold children'srights by banning corporal punishment and implementing PBS. With appropriate funding,training, and support, educators can implement discipline systems that respondto the fundamental needs of even the most vulnerable students, thus helpingproduce environments in which every student can maximize his academicpotential.II. RecommendationsThe ACLU and Human Rights Watch recommend a completeprohibition on the use of corporal punishment against all students in USschools.[24]Until that point, we recommend that federal and state governments and/or allrelevant school districts implement an immediate moratorium on the use ofcorporal punishment against students with disabilities.To the US CongressProhibit the use of corporalpunishment against students with disabilities, as defined by theIndividuals with Disabilities Education Act and Section 504 of theRehabilitation Act of 1973. Define corporal punishment as any punishmentin which physical force, however light, is used with intent to discipline.In particular, immediatelyprohibit the use of corporal punishment to discipline students forbehaviors that are the consequences of their disabilities.Prohibit the use of prone or "face-down"restraint in schools.Increase funding to states andschool districts to train all staff, including teachers andpara-professionals, on effective methods of school discipline (includingpositive behavioral supports), and to provide for behavioral analysts andcounseling staff to improve the delivery of appropriate discipline tostudents with disabilities.Support measures to improveschool discipline through the implementation of positive behavior systemsby passing the Positive Behavior for Safe and Effective Schools Act (HR2597).Increase funding to Protectionand Advocacy programs to provide parents with resources to protect theirchildren, and to investigate allegations of abuse or neglect in schools.(To the Senate): Ratify theConvention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Rights ofPersons with Disabilities without reservation.To the President of the United StatesPropose and urge Congress toban corporal punishment against students with disabilities in US schools.Submit the Convention on theRights of Persons with Disabilities and the Convention on the Rights ofthe Child to the US Senate for its consent to ratification.To the US Department of Education, Office for Civil RightsRevise and expand thecollection of data on corporal punishment:Direct all school districts in all states to report anyviolence used by a staff member against a student.Mandate that school districtsreport all instances of restraint, and document whether that restraintwas used to respond to the immediate needs of safety for the child orothers, or whether it was used in order to discipline.Promulgate national standardslimiting the use of force in public schools. Mandate that force be usedonly when needed to protect a child or others, and that the principle ofthe minimum necessary use of force for the shortest necessary period oftime must always apply.Use the Office's investigativemandate to:pursue vigorously individual complaints of corporalpunishment that allege violations of the prohibition on discrimination inSection 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973; andrelying on statistical data andother sources, initiate and complete compliance reviews for schooldistricts that demonstrate systemic issues in disparate rates of corporalpunishment for students with disabilities.To State LegislaturesProhibit the use of corporalpunishment against students with disabilities. Define corporal punishmentas any punishment in which physical force, however light, is used withintent to discipline.In particular, prohibit theuse of corporal punishment to discipline students for behaviors that arethe consequences of their disabilities.Prohibit the use of prone or "face-down"restraint in schools.Repeal or modify existinglegislation that grants educators who use corporal punishment immunityfrom civil lawsuits or criminal prosecution; permit civil lawsuits andcriminal prosecution for assault in schools.Enact legislation requiringschool boards to incorporate positive behavior systems into individualschool district discipline policies and codes of conduct.Increase funding to schooldistricts to train all staff, including teachers and para-professionals,on effective methods of school discipline (including positive behavioralsupports), and to provide for behavioral analysts and counseling staff toimprove the delivery of appropriate discipline to students withdisabilities.To State Governors and Departments of EducationPropose and implement animmediate and complete ban on the use of corporal punishment againststudents with disabilities. Define corporal punishment as any punishmentin which physical force, however light, is used with intent to discipline.Promulgate state-widestandards limiting the use of force in public schools. Mandate that forcebe used only when needed to protect a child or others, and that theprinciple of the minimum necessary use of force for the shortest necessaryperiod of time must always apply.Promulgate state-widestandards requiring training of all staff, including teachers andpara-professionals, on effective methods of school discipline (includingpositive behavioral supports). Ensure that staff are trained on the strictlimits on permitted use of force in exceptional situations.Implement a statistical reviewsystem that tracks every instance of corporal punishment of any kind inpublic schools. Authorities should be required to record each instance offorce used against a child, including use of restraint.To School Boards, Superintendents, Principals, and TeachersRevise discipline policies toensure that students with disabilities do not receive corporal punishment.Institute alternativediscipline systems such as positive behavioral support systems.Increase training programs toensure that all staff, including teachers and para-professionals, can useeffective methods of school discipline (including positive behavioralsupports). Ensure that all staff members are conscious of best practicesin responding to their students' individualized needs, including byreaching out to local medical professionals who can assist in training.Ensure that staff are trained on the strict limits on permitted use offorce in exceptional situations.Provide for behavioralanalysts and counseling staff to improve the delivery of appropriatediscipline to students with disabilities.Better utilize professionallyconducted behavioral assessments for students with disabilities; ensurethat those assessments include an evaluation of what individualized,positive interventions can be used to provide effective incentives forappropriate conduct.III. MethodologyThis report is based on 202 in-person and telephoneinterviews conducted by Human Rights Watch and the American Civil LibertiesUnion between December 2007 and June 2009. Some of these interviews were usedfor a 2008 ACLU/Human Rights Watch report, A Violent Education: CorporalPunishment of Children in US Public Schools. Telephone interviews wereconducted from Human Rights Watch or ACLU offices in New York.We conducted interviews with experts and individualsdirectly affected by corporal punishment, including parents, students,teachers, administrators, and special education professionals. We interviewed32 parents of students with disabilities, 18 teachers who have relevantexperience, and 15 officials (including current and former school boardmembers, superintendents, principals, and assistant principals). Inaddition, we spoke with lawyers, advocates for students with disabilities, andeducational experts to obtain information on all sides of the issue.We spoke directly with students who had been subjected tocorporal punishment, including students with and without disabilities. Wherestudents were too young, had disabilities that impeded their ability toparticipate comfortably in an interview, or faced possible trauma, we spokeinstead with their parents.This report incorporates data from the US Department of Education's Office forCivil Rights (OCR), which measure prevalence of corporal punishment (and otherschool discipline and educational tracking data) by school district, race,gender, and enrollment in special education programming, among other criteria.The OCR data provide the most reliable numbers presently available on the useof corporal punishment in US public schools. However, as discussed in thisreport, those numbers are likely undercounted, in part because routine violenceagainst students with disabilities is not always reported to OCR.Before interviewing any subject, we obtained written or oral consent to use theinformation obtained in the interview, and we determined whether theinterviewee wished to remain anonymous. We obtained written consent from allin-person interviews, oral consent from those interviewed by telephone, andparental consent to speak to minors aged 16 or younger. Participants did notreceive any material compensation in return for speaking with us. Allparticipants were informed of the purpose of the interview, its voluntarynature, and the ways in which the data would be collected and used.All children interviewed or discussed in this report are identified withpseudonyms to safeguard their privacy and ensure there is no retaliationagainst them. Because parents' names could be used to identify children,parents are referred to only by first name and first initial of the last name.In addition, all parents, teachers, administrators, school board members, orother adults who requested confidentiality are identified by pseudonyms, andthis is indicated in the relevant citations. In some cases, certain otheridentifying information such as school, town, or grade level also has beenwithheld for the same reasons.IV. Corporal Punishment in US Public SchoolsCorporal punishment is routinely used against students with and withoutdisabilities in US public schools. Corporal punishment most often takes theform of paddling: a wooden board swung repeatedly against the child's buttocks,causing immediate pain and sometimes lasting injury. According to the mostrecent data available from the US Department of Education, Office for CivilRights, 223,190 students nationwide were paddled at least once in the 2006-2007school year, including at least 41,972 students with disabilities. Studentswith disabilities are paddled at disproportionately high rates, given theirpercentage of the student population.In addition to paddling, other forms of violent disciplineare often used against students with disabilities. Corporal punishment isdefined under human rights law as "any punishment in which physical force isused and intended to cause some degree of pain or discomfort";[25]there is no comprehensive definition of corporal punishment under US state orfederal law. The ACLU and Human Rights Watch documented cases of corporalpunishment including hitting children with a belt, a ruler, a set of rulerstaped together, or a toy hammer; pinching, slapping, or striking very youngchildren in particular; grabbing children around the arm, the neck, orelsewhere with enough force to bruise; throwing children to the floor; slamminga child into a wall; dragging children across floors; and bruising or otherwiseinjuring children in the course of restraint.[26] Corporalpunishment is prohibited under international law and in many US settings, including most juvenile correction facilities,[27] yet it continuesin public schools.As discussed later in this report, educators may use force under limitedcircumstances to ensure a safe environment for their students, includingthrough physical restraint.  Yet this must be strictly limited: internationalhuman rights standards state that the use of force against students is onlypermissible in exceptional circumstances, and even then only to a minimaldegree.[28]Educators must be trained to respond to dangerous behavior, "both to minimizethe necessity to use restraint and to ensure that any methods used are safe andproportionate to the situation and do not involve the deliberate infliction ofpain."[29]Any force with intent to punish is prohibited,[30]meaning that the vast majority of the violent techniques used in US publicschools amount to corporal punishment and violate human rights law.PaddlingPaddling (also commonly called "swats," "pops," or "licks")usually means hitting a student three or more times on the buttocks and upperthighs with a wooden paddle.[31]Charles B., the father of an 11-year-old Texas boy with attention deficit hyperactivitydisorder and dyslexia, described a paddling his son received in early 2009:The first swat knocked [my son] down ... when he fell, theprincipal said he had five seconds to get back up, or he'd start all over again... it probably took him a minute and a half to get up again. They gave him twomore swats. Then the principal had to go to the nurse's office to get theasthma inhaler, [my son] couldn't breathe ... When he came home from school, mywife found the marks on him. When I came home at 8 [p.m.], we went to thesheriff's office. He had severe bruising on his buttocks and on his lower back.His butt was just covered.[32]The paddle used to hit children is typically around 15inches long, between two and four inches wide, and one-half inch thick, with asix-inch handle at one end. One former teacher in Texas told the ACLU and HumanRights Watch that he found shaved down baseball bats that were being used aspaddles, similar to those depicted below.[33]Click to expand ImageClick to expand ImagePaddles made from baseball bats (keysindicate size) and standard paddle. © 2008 Alice Farmer/Human Rights Watch.Students are typically beaten by administrators(principals, vice principals, or assistant principals) or teachers.[34]The majority of paddlers in incidents described by our interviewees were male.One Mississippi teacher and mother noted that the "swats are given by grownmen; some of them [are] good swingers."[35] Jacquelyn K., a Mississippi grandmother, commented, "[My grandson, who has autism], was in first grade ... ThisAP [assistant principal], a big, 300 pound man, picked up an inch-thick paddleand paddled him. My child just lost it."[36] According to ourinterviews, students with disabilities were also struck by teacher's aides orother para-professionals.[37]When a student is paddled, she is typically told to stand with her hands on adesk or a chair, so that the student is bent over.[38] Thesestances are submissive, placing the student in a position with no opportunityfor self defense, even though he is being subjected to violent blows. Studentstake steps to mitigate the blows, well aware of the pain they may face.OneTexas boy, who has ADHD and dyslexia, "wore extra clothing because he hadheard the coach hit hard."[39]Other Physical Force Used Against StudentsPhysical force used to punish is never acceptable, yetaccording to our interviews, a wide variety of violent tactics were used todiscipline students with disabilities. Under human rights law, the minimum useof force for the shortest necessary period of time may be used where there is aneed to protect a child or others.[40]Yet the instances of physical force documented by the ACLU and Human RightsWatch were used to punish, not protect, the child, and go far beyondpermissible levels of force.Students Hit with Other ObjectsThe ACLU and Human Rights Watch received reports of studentsbeing struck with objects other than a paddle. Theresa E., a Georgia grandmother and primary caretaker of a girl with autism, learned that her five-year-oldgranddaughter had been hit with a toy hammer, which the teacher allegedly usedto "tap [kindergarteners] on the forehead" but which did far more damage to hergranddaughter: "Jessie has a tactile sensory disorder. The school was aware shehad this problem ... I said to her, what feels like a tap to you feels likesomething entirely different to this girl."[41]We heard multiple reports of students being hit by teacherswith rulers, especially among younger children. A Mississippi middle school boywas hit in fifth grade with a set of rulers taped together: "I was talking, itwas a group of students and she [the teacher] told us to come up to her deskand she popped us on our palms ... this was with four rulers taped together."[42]Theresa E. knows that her granddaughter was hit with anotherobject, but her granddaughter, who at the time was non-verbal (unable tocommunicate as a symptom of her disability),[43]couldnot tell her grandmother what that object was:I was picking her up under her armpits, that's when shestarted crying. You could see the bruising. Her whole arm was swollen by thetime she got to the emergency room. Her right arm. The doctor said it lookedlike she'd been hit by a baseball bat or had been in a motorcycle accident.That's the only time he'd seen injuries like that ... To this day, I have noidea what they hit her with ... The human hand doesn't have that kind ofstrength.[44]Students Spanked, Pinched, Grabbed and Bruised, orBeatenMany students in families we interviewed were subjected toviolence in school without the use of an implement. This can constitutecorporal punishment; the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child lists examplesof corporal punishment as including "hitting ('smacking,' 'slapping,' 'spanking')children, with the hand[.]"[45]Punishments reported to us include spanking, pinching,grabbing and bruising, and beating. Tom R.'s son, a boy with OCD, TouretteSyndrome, and bipolar disorder, was in first grade when he was "spanked on hisbehind. With an open hand. The teacher hit him. The times he told us about it-ithappened at least five or six times ... within a three month period of timethat he was there in first grade."[46]One mother, Cynthia C., reports that her son, who hassignificant congenital brain abnormalities and developmental delays, came homefrom school with "pinch marks on him ... It kept going on, it started inkindergarten. The marks were on his arms, usually on the top by the bicep,sometimes by the wrist ... They would stay on his body, it was bruising."[47]Cynthia reports that when she asked her son's teacher about these marks, theteacher "would say that he had been screaming and kicking, so he needed to bepunished."[48]In a separate incident when he was six, Cynthia's son was bruised in school;her son is non-verbal and unable to tell her what happened: "I'm sure they hithim. There was a handprint, a handprint on his back during the 2006-2007 schoolyear. On the middle of his back ... It was clearly an adult handprint, not achild's handprint."[49]Some students were injured when they were grabbed or beatenby their caretakers. Anna M.'s son, who has an autistic spectrum disorder, was sevenyears old when he was beaten, scratched, and bruised in school, sustaininginjuries to his arms, torso, and lip.[50]Theresa E., the grandmother of a girl on the autism spectrum[51]describes two incidents that happened in kindergarten:Third week of school, she came home with bruises on herarm. It was a handprint. You could see the finger marks, extended on her arm,between the elbow and the wrist ... either the teacher grabbed her hard, or hither with excessive force.[52]In the second incident, the five-year-old girl sustainedcontusions on her neck:She had bruises, a couple inches, from side-to-side, on thefront portion of her neck. To be honest with you, it looked like a belt. It wasmaybe two-to-three inches from side to side. I thought, maybe she got tangledin a swing. Jessie said, "no mommy." She said "the teacher got mad. I couldn'tbreathe."[53]Dragging, Throwing, or Pulling ChildrenMany families we interviewed reported that physical forcewas used in order to drag or pull children to another part of the school. Somechildren were thrown to the floor or into a wall by teachers or teachers'aides. When used to discipline, these incidents also constitute corporalpunishment, which as the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child observes, caninvolve "kicking, shaking, or throwing children."[54]Brian, Karen W.'s son with autism, was dragged from underhis desk by an aide when he was 10 years old:He was under the desk, crying ... He finally bolted up fromunder his desk and grabbed the man [the aide]'s hand. He [my son] wasn't athreat to him. But in their mind, they saw that as physical aggression toward astaff. [Another staff member] helped [the aide] drag out Brian ... he came homewith bruises. Bruises to the back of his neck from being held down. This is theday when we started saying, "you've got to make accommodations, you cannot dothis to him."[55]Theresa E. had gone to pick up her granddaughter at kindergarten,when she saw another student in her daughter's small special education classthrown across the room: "Amanda, a non-verbal child, started rocking andspinning at the same time. The TA [teacher's aide] walked over and grabbed her,and threw her into the wall. She gave her no warning."[56]Anna M.'s son, who has a developmental disorder, was seven years old when hewas thrown across his Florida classroom:An ESC [Exceptional Students Center] coordinator ... saysshe "gently placed him" on his "safe space" mat, but my son had a contusion onhis head. He says they threw him into a stack of chairs. They didn't call me.They just sent him out like the end of a regular day. He had red marks acrosshis face when he came to the car. I asked him what was going on. He wouldn'tsay, he was quiet. I gave him time to calm down. But another parent called meat 6 [p.m.], and said, is he OK? So I asked him again, and he startedscreaming. I checked his head, and he had a big bump on his temple, under hishairline. So I took him to the emergency room, they noted contusions....[57]Rose C.'s son, who has autism and cognitive delays, was 15when he was dragged across campus and thrown onto a tile floor, and on anotherday thrown into a stack of chairs. Rose obtained videotape of the firstincident and described it as follows:[My son] is sitting with a female student ... My son getsmad, he screams ... My son starts running away. Then a male staff member-we don'tknow who he is-picks him up and throws him into the tile floor, face first.They're all on him now, on the tile floor in the cafeteria. Eventually they ...pick up my son by his limbs ... They took him to room 119, it's a meeting room ...My son threw a pencil across the room and knocked over the table. The male staffmember picked him up, and put him in a chokehold. Other staff members comerunning. Three or four of them tackle him, and he's thrown to the floor again.[58]Children Bruised or Injured During RestraintSchools throughout the United States use restraints[59]in response to students with disabilities, and allegations of abusiverestraints have been raised across the nation.[60] The ACLU and HumanRights Watch documented numerous cases in which students were bruised or moreseriously injured in the course of restraints or holds.Educators may use force under limited circumstances toensure a safe environment for their students. Under international law, in "exceptionalcircumstances ... dangerous behavior [may] justif[y] the use of reasonablerestraint," but that force must be the minimum amount necessary for theshortest period of time, and must never be used to punish.[61]Educators must be trained to respond to dangerous behavior, "both to minimizethe necessity to use restraint and to ensure that any methods used are safe andproportionate to the situation and do not involve the deliberate infliction ofpain."[62]Face-Down or Prone RestraintSeveral families we interviewed reported that their childrenwere subjected to prone restraint, in which a child is pinned face-down to thefloor, often with his hands pulled behind his back. Prone restraint is "one ofthe most lethal school practices":[63]sudden fatal cardiac arrhythmia or respiratory arrest can occur through pronerestraint.[64]Non-lethal consequences of prone restraint can include cerebral and cerebellaroxygen deprivation, lacerations, abrasions, injury to muscles, contusions orbruising, blunt trauma to the head, neck injury, dislocation of shoulder andother joints, hyperextension of the arms, and decrease in circulation to theextremities.[65]The National Disability Rights Network has documented three cases in whichstudents died following prone restraint.[66]Tom R.'s son weighed just 40 pounds when he was pinned tothe floor, face-down, by his assistant principal: "[he] had huge bruises acrosshis chest ... on his upper ribs, across both his arms, down both of his legs."[67]Rose C. described her son's face-down restraint:All different teachers come in, they hold him down. One ofthe girls [women teachers], she's a heavy girl, she's on his back. He has asore neck, he can't breathe. He's about 15, he's the skinniest boy you've everseen. He's 5'7", about 125 pounds ... When he was released, the first thing myson did is go for his neck [because it was hurt].[68]Karen W.'s son, who has autism, was only able to describeprone restraint years later: "Later, now, he's been able to tell me about facedown restraints. He showed me on the floor. One person on his back, one personon his feet. If he would raise his head, they'd force it back down. I thinkthey were trying to break his spirit."[69]Face-down restraint is extremely dangerous and neverappropriate.[70]It does not meet international standards requiring the minimum use of force forthe shortest period of time, and it should be absolutely prohibited in schools.Other RestraintMany families we interviewed described other forms ofrestraint used against their children, including "holds" or verticalrestraints, which can amount to corporal punishment when used with intent todiscipline and cause pain and discomfort. Families reported that their studentswere bruised or even more severely injured in the course of restraints. Again,international standards mandate that force can only be used to protect a childor others, and then the force used must be to the minimum degree possible forthe shortest period of time. The restraints reported to us far exceed humanrights standards.May R.'s daughter, who has bipolar and anxiety disorders,was seven when "she was placed in a hold for 30-45 minutes [causing bruisingfrom shoulder to wrist, and broken blood vessels under her armpits]. Theteacher told me a new technique was used on her to place her in a hold thatwould intentionally cause discomfort in order to deter future misbehavior."[71]The use of force with the intent to cause discomfort amounts to corporalpunishment, not permissible restraint.Cynthia C.'s son developed chest pains following repeated "basket"holds. The teacher repeatedly approached her son, English, from behind andpicked him up as if he were in a basket. Cynthia reported that "she [theteacher] would say that he had been screaming and kicking, so he needed to bepunished."[72]English's cardiologist directed that the basket holds be discontinued, as his "heartmuscle is at the upper limit of normal."[73]V. Corporal Punishment by the NumbersData from the Office for Civil Rights at the US Departmentof Education demonstrate that at least 41,972 students with disabilities weresubjected to corporal punishment at least once in the 2006-2007 school year,the most recent year for which data exist.[74]Ofthese, 39,093 students are defined as disabled under the Individuals withDisabilities Education Act,[75]and the additional 2,879 students receive assistance under Section 504 of theRehabilitation Act.[76]These numbers likely undercount the extent of violence against students withdisabilities, in part because schools are not required to report all forms ofviolent discipline.The total number of students, with and without disabilities,who were subjected to corporal punishment in the 2006-2007 school year was223,190.[77]Students with disabilities, therefore, made up 18.8 percent of those whoreceived corporal punishment,[78]even though they constitute just 13.7 percent of the nationwide studentpopulation.[79]This disparity suggests that the most vulnerable students are receivingbeatings at disproportionately high rates.Number of Students Paddled in the 2006-2007 School Year, by StateClick to expand Image© 2008 Human Rights WatchDisproportionately High Rates of CorporalPunishment among Students with DisabilitiesCorporal punishment is legal under domestic law in 20states, though in these states many individual school districts choose not touse corporal punishment.[80]In each of those states, corporal punishment of students with disabilities-regardlessof the type or degree of disability-is permitted. The vast majority of statelaws permitting paddling do not distinguish between students with disabilitiesand students without disabilities,[81]despite the fact that corporal punishment is prohibited in some states'psychiatric institutions.[82]The Kentucky statute permitting corporal punishment allows corporal punishmentof "mentally disabled persons."[83]Texas prohibits certain types of confinement for students with disabilities,but allows them to be paddled.[84]Some states with legal corporal punishment use it more thanothers; states that paddle all students at high rates also paddle students withdisabilities at high rates. For instance, Texas paddles the most students inthe nation, as well as the most students with disabilities: OCR data show that10,222 students with disabilities were subjected to corporal punishment in the2006-2007 school year, more than in any other state.[85]Table 1: The Ten States with the Highest Rates of Corporal PunishmentStateNumber of Students with Disabilities Receiving CorporalPunishmentNumber of All Students Receiving Corporal PunishmentTexas10,22249,157Mississippi5,83138131Alabama5,11133,716Arkansas4,08222314Georgia3,90318,249Tennessee3,61814,868Louisiana2,46311,080Oklahoma2,24914,828Florida1,3317,185Missouri1,1915,129Source: OCR Civil Rights Data Collection, 2006.Students with disabilities are corporally punished atdisproportionately high rates in almost every state that uses paddling heavily.In Tennessee, for example, students with disabilities are 2.1 times as likelyto be paddled as all students.[86]Likewise, in Georgia, students with disabilities are 1.7 times as likely to bepaddled as all students.[87]Of these states that use corporal punishment heavily, only Oklahoma paddlesstudents with and without disabilities at roughly the same rate.[88] While some students with disabilities may have particular behavioralproblems, this does not justify the disproportionate use of violence againstthese students. As discussed below, there are more effective methods ofdiscipline that provide safe environments in which all students can learn.[89]Table 2: Disproportionality for Students with Disabilities in the TenStates with the Highest Rates of Corporal PunishmentStatePercentage of students in general population receivingcorporal punishmentPercentage of students with disabilities receivingcorporal punishmentDisproportionalityMississippi7.509.241.23Arkansas4.676.381.37Alabama4.545.691.25Tennessee1.473.082.10Louisiana1.692.401.42Oklahoma2.332.260.97Georgia1.121.911.71Texas1.081.851.71Missouri0.550.871.58Kentucky0.330.471.42Florida0.260.311.19Source: OCR Civil Rights Data Collection, 2006.Undercounting ofData on Corporal PunishmentWhile these figures and ratesmay already appear high, they likely undercount and therefore do not reflectthe full extent of corporal punishment against students with disabilities in USpublic schools. First, the data record the number of students hit each year,not the number of incidents.[90]In other words, the data show that 41,972 individual students with disabilitieswere beaten in the relevant school year, but do not show on how many occasionscorporal punishment occurred. Because many students likely were beaten morethan once in the school year-a reasonable assumption given the evidencecollected from our interviewees-the overall number of beatings administeredeach year is undoubtedly higher.The data also very likely undercount the number of studentspaddled each year because some school districts fail to report all incidents tothe federal government. A parent and advocate for students with disabilities inMississippi told us "most schools don't know they have to report paddling."[91]One superintendent of a major Mississippi school district told us the reportednumbers were low: "[W]e probably do it twice as much as reported.... [T]here isno documentation you have to send to the central office to say that you did it."[92]Furthermore, the OCR data likely do not incorporate twomajor categories of violent discipline against special education students.First, violent discipline which might not be considered "corporal punishment"by the school district, yet nonetheless meets the definition of corporalpunishment under human rights law, would not be reported.[93]Our interviews suggest that many incidents of corporal punishment outside ofpaddling take place, yet are not reported.Second, school districts in states without legal corporalpunishment may nonetheless use violent techniques against students withdisabilities;[94]such instances are not reported to OCR.[95] For instance, in thecourse of restraint in states throughout the US, students are subjected toviolent discipline that can amount to corporal punishment.[96]Furthermore, there is no federal reporting requirement for the use ofrestraint, and only two states (California and Connecticut) require annualreporting on the use of restraints.[97]Lack of Information on Violence against Studentswith DisabilitiesAccording to our interviewees, students with disabilitiesare routinely and repeatedly subjected to physical force in schools. Yetparents-who have particularly strong interests in knowing what happens to theirchildren-report that they were unable to get information on the forms ofpunishment used against their children. If parents themselves are unable togather information, any more general data or systematic reporting is surelylacking, suggesting chaotic, haphazard record-keeping at best.Parents repeatedly reported that the school did not tellthem when force was used against their children. May R., the mother of a then seven-year-oldgirl with bipolar disorder in Florida, noted that "most of the time, they didn'tcall me if they restrained or secluded her."[98] Sarah P., who isthe grandmother of a then five-year-old boy with Asperger's Syndrome in Oklahoma, reported, "No-one called me, no-one told me anything. The principal really doesn'twant parents to know about anything."[99]Parents are left with an incomplete picture of the abuseagainst their children. A 2009 study on restraint and other abusive practicesused against students with disabilities found that 71 percent of the 185 setsof parents interviewed did not consent to the use of these practices.[100]An Arkansas mother, Karen W., reported to us, "You've got to understand,there's no law here that says they have to tell us when they do this. I'm justtelling you the ones [the incidents] I saw. [My son, who has autism] wasprobably restrained 20 or 30 times during this period, from August to October."[101]Anna M., the mother of a Florida boy with autism, struggled to find out whathappened to her son: "I had to hire attorneys, I still don't know everything.No one will tell me everything."[102]Children who have disabilities that hinder verbalcommunication may often be unable to tell their parents what happened to them.Sharon H., a Georgia mother of a now nine-year-old girl with autism, regretsthat she does not know the extent of her daughter's beatings at the age of five:"I'm afraid I don't know [all that happened.] Brianna was afraid to talk. Shewas grabbed, yanked, pulled. But I don't know all that happened. She wasn'tvery verbal."[103]Anna M., a Florida mother, observed that "sometimes it took my son [who hasautism] weeks to come out with things-I don't know if he couldn't process it,or find words. He's much better now [since moving from the abusiveenvironment]."[104]Some parents find out years later the extent of the abuseagainst their children. Sharon H., the mother of the now nine-year-old girlwith autism, reported that her daughter has begun to tell her more about whathappened at school: "Brianna is still coming out with things. It took her awhole year to tell me the other stuff."[105] Karen W., whoseson with autism was physically punished between the ages of 8 and 10, found outmore details now that he is 13 years old:He wasn't very verbal back then ... It took him a long timeto tell me what happened. But I'm a lot more fortunate than some of theseparents. My son could at least tell me, he couldn't explain, but he could tellme.[106]VI. Behaviors Leading to BeatingsStudents are beaten in schools for infractions ranging fromminor misbehavior like speaking out in class to major violations such asfighting. While corporal punishment is never appropriate, it is particularlyillegitimate when used as a disproportionate, angry response to minorinfractions that might be expected from any child. Even in cases where studentscommit serious infractions, corporal punishment is not an effective method ofredressing the problem.Students with disabilities are also punished for behaviorthat stems from their disability itself. Students with disabilities-like allstudents-deserve tailored discipline programs that teach them appropriatebehaviors and allow them to thrive. When they are punished for behaviorsconnected to their disabilities, they are subjected to particularly harshdiscipline and unfairly denied access to quality education.Misbehaviors Leading to Corporal PunishmentMost instances of corporal punishment reported to the ACLUand Human Rights Watch were for minor infractions, such as having a shirtuntucked, being tardy (late to class or to school), or talking in class or inthe hallway.[107]A superintendent in a district that uses corporal punishment noted that thepractice is particularly egregious if used for minor misbehavior: "I hate tothink that a child gets three or five swats for being late to class, I hate tothink that a child gets three or five swats for running in the hall-those areminor infractions."[108]Students in the early grades receive corporal punishment forbehavior typical among young children. This is especially problematic for somestudents with disabilities, who can have trouble learning appropriate socialbehaviors.[109]Cynthia C., the mother of a boy with congenital brain abnormalities and developmentaldelays, noted that when he was six and seven, her son received corporalpunishment at his Georgia elementary school for "screaming and kicking."[110]Young students with sickle cell anemia in Tennessee were paddled for forgettingforms or avoiding classwork.[111]Corporal Punishment for Serious Offenses, includingViolenceSome students we interviewed were subjected to corporalpunishment for serious infractions, including fighting.[112] Aserious disciplinary response is clearly appropriate in such circumstances, andvery limited force may be used solely to protect the child or others.[113]Corporal punishment goes far beyond permissible force; it uses a violenttechnique to respond to violent misbehavior, ultimately reinforcing rather thanchanging the student's behavior. Research suggests that corporal punishment islinked to increased rates of aggression in school in the months and yearsfollowing the punishment.[114]The ACLU and Human Rights Watch found that students with disabilities wereamong those beaten for violent misbehavior. One special education teacher in Mississippi observed, "I see these autistic children who get in fights and then getpaddled. So you're supposed to teach them not to hit by hitting them."[115]Andrea N., the mother of a 10-year-old with ADHD, reports that her son waspaddled for fighting, in violation of her expressed wishes.[116]Corporal punishment as a response to violence can beparticularly ineffective for certain students with disabilities, especiallywhere those students learn to model violent or self-protective behavior as aconsequence of being beaten themselves. Tom R. noted that his son, a Mississippi boy with obsessive compulsive disorder and bipolar disorder, does not seecorporal punishment as a deterrent: "With my son, it's not 'I did this, this ismy consequence so I better correct my behavior.' It's 'I did this and it'swrong and now they hate me. Now they're going to beat me and I'm going toprotect myself.'"[117]Johnny McPhail, the father of a Mississippi girl with autism, feltpaddling was extremely detrimental: "An autistic child never forgets apaddling. They have total recall, programming needs to be the same. If you hither, she'd be hitting, it's hard to talk her out of it."[118]Punishment for Consequences of DisabilityThe ACLU and Human Rights Watch received numerous reports ofstudents who were punished for the consequences of their disability. Many ofthe cases involved students with autism, who were physically punished forexhibiting behaviors common to children on the autism spectrum. Some parentsreported that school staff did not take their children's conditions underconsideration when administering discipline. Students are being beaten forbehavior they simply cannot control, or cannot reasonably be expected to control,a grossly disproportionate and fundamentally demeaning response to the child'scondition.For instance, students with Tourette Syndrome, a conditionthat causes involuntary vocal and physical tics,[119]may be punished in part because of those tics. Anna M., whose son with autismand Tourette Syndrome was repeatedly punished, observed that "[My son] foughtback, he had loud vocalizations, those were his tics. They kept restraininghim. They dragged him down the hallway."[120]MichelleR. noted that her son's Tourette Syndrome induces physical tics:One of his tics was balling up his fists ... that was seenas aggression and he would get in trouble with it ... He would try to explainthat it was a tic, and he couldn't control it, but they see that as him escalatingit. So now they have him in restraints and then they're giving him sedativesand calling for me to come pick him up. They had a closet and he would go inthere and that's where he was hit.[121]Jennifer Parker, an advocate who works with more than 750school-age sickle cell patients in Mississippi, Tennessee, and Arkansas through a hospital clinic, observed that many of her patients are paddled forminor infractions directly related to their disability:[122]Our kids [with sickle cell anemia] are at higher instancesof having to repeat grades, or have difficulty with language or processingspeed. A lot of our patients can't read, or can't read at grade level. Withprocessing speed, once a teacher gives a direction, the kid might need to hearit multiple times or in different ways. The teacher might get angry when thekid doesn't follow the instructions, and paddles them.[123]Students were punished for behaviors related to obsessivecompulsive disorder and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Tom R. reportedthat his son with OCD "would erase through a paper and get in trouble for that.It was a manifestation of his obsessive compulsive disorder, and they werepunishing him for it."[124]One very young student in Texas, a three-year-old boy with ADHD attending apublic pre-kindergarten program, was beaten and bruised during paddling.[125]He was paddled for taking off his shoes and for playing with an airconditioner.[126]The child sustained bruises to his hips that reached around to his navel.[127]US federal law is not clear as to whether corporalpunishment administered for conduct resulting from a student's disabilities ispermissible.[128]The Rehabilitation Act of 1973[129]and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)[130]prohibit discrimination against people with disabilities, including students;discipline for conduct that is a manifestation of disability may rise to thelevel of discrimination.[131]However, the Office for Civil Rights at the US Department of Education, whichenforces the Rehabilitation Act and the ADA, has issued regulations which donot expressly prohibit corporal punishment.[132]Students with Conditions on the Autism SpectrumAccording to our interviews, students with autism,especially very young students, were physically punished for exhibitingbehaviors commonly manifested by children on the autism spectrum. Students withautism often have difficulty with "normal" school behavior or socialization, as"[t]he regression, or failure to progress, affects language, play, and socialinteraction and occasionally other skills."[133] Common behaviorsstemming from the condition may include physical and verbal aggression,repetitive talking on a favorite theme, stubborn resistance, and the constantasking of the same questions.[134]The Committee on Educational Interventions for Children With Autism of theNational Research Council notes that "[s]ocial dysfunction is perhaps the mostcentral defining feature of autism and related conditions, so it is criticalthat the effects of a child's social disability on behavior be considered."[135]Despite this medical and scientific evidence, the ACLU andHuman Rights Watch received numerous reports of children with autism who werepunished because of their behavior. Sharon H., the mother of a girl with autismin Georgia, described her daughter's experience: "One time, she was justsitting, rocking side-by-side in the gym. That's what autistic kids do. She wasfive at the time. The fourth-grade teacher grabbed her and dragged her acrossthe floor."[136]Another kindergarten girl with autism in Georgia was thrown into a wall aftershe started rocking and spinning at the same time.[137]An Oklahoma boy with Asperger's Syndrome, a form ofhigh-functioning autism, was paddled when he was five years old. Hisgrandmother observed that the punishment was meted out as a direct result ofher grandson exhibiting behavior normal for his condition:Kids on the autism spectrum are very sensitive to noise andexternal stimulation. He was spinning, turning around in the middle of thefloor with his arms out. A little girl walked into his hands. The principalsaid he'd hit her, and spanked him for it.[138]When Karen W. went to collect her son Brian-a boy withautism-from his first day at a new school in Arkansas, she found him outsidescreaming, being held down by two staff members, with injuries includingscratches and a split lip. Brian, who was eight years old at the time, had beenrestrained following minor misbehaviors associated with his condition: "the school saidhe wouldn't keep his shoes on, wanted to play outside, wouldn't stay where hewas supposed to stay. This is a child with autism, completely outside of hisnormal routine."[139]Parents reported that their students' conditions were nottaken into account when educators meted out discipline, despite the fact thatthose disabilities were routinely discussed with the schools in question. MayR., whose daughter with autism was injured during corporal punishment, notedthat her teachers "didn't look at her disability, they looked at her behavior."[140]Anna M., whose son with autism was physically punished repeatedly when he wasseven years old, noted, "The teacher felt he was doing some stuff on purpose.If you met him, you wouldn't know he was autistic straight away. People thoughtwe were making an excuse for him."[141]Educators, who face the difficult task of maintaining orderin the classroom, may resort to corporal punishment because it is quick toadminister, or because the school lacks resources and training for alternativemethods of discipline. One teacher pointed out that corporal punishment can beconsidered "cost-effective. It's free, basically. You don't have to beorganized. All you need is a paddle."[142] Logistical orfinancial obstacles may prevent teachers from using other methods ofdiscipline. One 18-year-old student who was critical of the use of corporalpunishment in his rural school district stated that "we couldn't have afterschool detention. There was no busing. Kids who got detention would have tofind another way home."[143]Yet despite the "convenience" of corporal punishment, teachers we interviewednoted that it was ineffective. As a middle school teacher stated: "theimmediate impact is to get that student to stop that behavior, but there is noguarantee that it [won't] continue."[144]Educators may use corporal punishment against students withdisabilities in part because they have little to no understanding of theconsequences of those disabilities.[145]Parents emphasized that educators lacked the training needed to understandstudents' disabilities. For instance, Tom R., a Mississippi father of a boywith disabilities, noted that "there's a total lack of regulation regardingtraining, and a lack of connection."[146] Jennifer Parker,an advocate who works with students with disabilities, found that training canhelp: "We do some educational outreach. We provide the school with brochures,and with documents from [the hospital], medical records, clinic notes, etc. ...We're exchanging a lot of information between school districts and thehospital. I think this helps teachers understand."[147]VII. Impact of Corporal PunishmentCorporal punishment harms all children, damaging their education and making itharder for them to thrive. Corporal punishment causes immediate pain and canresult in lasting physical injury and ongoing mental trauma. It humiliates anddegrades students, and may leave them depressed or withdrawn. Corporalpunishment teaches students that violence is acceptable: it can make studentsaggressive, angry, and more likely to lash out in school. Students can becomeless engaged in school, less motivated to succeed, and may become more likelyto drop out. Students with disabilities, who are already marginalized inacademic settings, may find that corporal punishment establishes additionalbarriers to inclusive education.For many students with disabilities whose stories aredocumented in this report, physical punishment made their medical situationworse, for instance by exacerbating conditions such as autism, and triggeringpain crises in sickle cell patients. The fact that corporal punishment canexacerbate students' disabilities further accentuates the inappropriate andabusive nature of the punishment.Lasting Injuries and Barriers to EducationMany victims of corporal punishment in schools sustainserious injuries. The Society for Adolescent Medicine notes that injuries caninclude including severe muscle injury, extensive bruising, and whiplashdamage.[148]A middle school student in rural Mississippi was severely bruised when paddlingescalated. His mother found his buttocks were black from bruising.[149]It took more than a week for the bruises to heal, and during this period "hecouldn't sit down."[150]A mother in Texas had a similar experience:When I picked him up that afternoon, he was just kind ofquiet. And then later I took a look. They were deep bruises. Not marks. Theymeasured three inches by four inches. In the center of the bruises it was kindof clear. They ended up turning real dark. This wasn't just a little red mark,this was almost black. I ended up bringing him to the hospital, to the ER andeverything.[151]May R.'s seven-year-old daughter was badly bruised duringrestraint: "She came home with bruises from her shoulders to her wrists ... Icalled the school, what happened, where's the note? That's when the teachertold me about her armpits. I hadn't even realized that her armpits were bruisedbefore then."[152]Rose C.'s son was injured when he was thrown into a tile floor and a stack ofchairs: "the bridge of his nose was cut, and he had bruises on his forehead."[153]Anna M.'s son was seven years old when he was punished in school:I'm in the front office ... They bring [my son] into theroom. His nose is beet red. He lifts up his shirt sleeve, I get a glimpse ofscratches all up his arm. I got overwhelmed, I couldn't focus ... I wanted toget my son to the doctor. I get him home and I take off his clothes. He wasmarked, top of his arms, under his arms, down his torso. He had a busted lip,which I hadn't noticed at first. He said, "they made me wash the blood offbefore I saw you."[154]Depression and AngerCorporal punishment is humiliating and degrading, may makestudents angry and ready to lash out at their peers or at educators, and maymake them less inclined to engage in learning.[155]According to the Society for Adolescent Medicine, victims of corporalpunishment may endure psychological harm, including difficulty sleeping,suicidal thoughts, anxiety, increased anger, feelings of resentment, and outbursts of aggression.[156]The American Academy of Pediatrics, in taking a position against corporalpunishment, observes that "corporal punishment may adversely affect a student'sself-image and school achievement and that it may contribute to disruptive andviolent behavior."[157]Michelle R., a special education teacher in Mississippi, notes that one of her students fell apart when he was paddled: "He startedcrying and this is a kid you just wouldn't imagine being that way ... It wasactually an adverse reaction. He was just crying and just broke down, kind of ahelplessness, 'I don't know what to do.'"[158] Anna M., themother of a boy with autism in Florida, observed, "He's an avoider by nature,before he was never aggressive. Now, he struggles with anger; right after theincidents he'd have anger explosions."[159]Academic Disengagement and Drop-OutStudents with disabilities, who already face barriers toeducation, can be further excluded from the educational process through the useof physical punishment.[160]The Society for Adolescent Medicine notes that corporal punishment is linked toa tendency for school avoidance and school drop-out.[161]According to Dr. Daniel F. Whiteside, assistant surgeon general under PresidentRonald Reagan, "corporal punishment of children actually interferes with theprocess of learning and with their optimal development as socially responsibleadults."[162]A statistical study of public education in Alabama found a correlation betweencorporal punishment and drop-out rates.[163]Students in schools with corporal punishment are constantlyaware of the possibility of being beaten, a threat that discourages an open,trusting relationship between students and educators. A teacher in Louisiana noted that her elementary school students constantly heard paddling: "we'd be inthe middle of math class and we'd hear a crack."[164]An 18-year-old remembered high school paddlings: "I didn't see it but I couldhear it. Licks would be so loud and hard you could hear it through the walls.You could hear the moans and yelling through the walls."[165]One fifth-grade boy in special education classes recalled that his principalthreatened him: "[he] told me that 'if I could paddle you I would beat youblack and blue.'"[166]This violent, threatening environment can be particularlycorrosive for some students with disabilities. Jennifer Parker, an advocate forstudents with sickle cell anemia[167]in Mississippi, Arkansas, and Tennessee, commented that the violent atmospherecan be harmful to her students: "If they're in a school where the atmosphere isconstant corporal punishment, you can see an indirect stress effect that causespain crises, even if that child isn't touched."[168]Students with disabilities, who already face barriers toeducation, may disengage from school when faced with a violent environment.Sarah P. reported that her grandson with Asperger's Syndrome was traumatized bythe paddling that took place at his elementary school: "It made him much moreintroverted. He very much didn't want to go to school ... No one's supposed togo to school to be tortured, school is supposed to be fun."[169]Rose C.'s then 15-year-old son, who has autism, "started getting agitated, keptsaying, 'no school, no school.' I assumed that he was just a teenager, that hedidn't like school ... But he was throwing fits because he was getting hurt."[170]Aggravation of ConditionFor some students with disabilities, physical punishment canaggravate their medical conditions.[171]Furthermore, corporal punishment can cause some children to regress indevelopmental terms, particularly for children on the autism spectrum. Corporalpunishment, which is never appropriate for any child, is particularly abusivefor these children.Students with sickle cell anemia, for example, may beparticularly affected by paddling. Sickle cell anemia is a condition that ischaracterized by "unpredictable episodes of severe and sometimes excruciatingpain"[172]that can affect the bones, lungs, abdomen, and joints.[173]Jennifer Parker, the advocate who works with more than 750 school-age sicklecell patients in Mississippi, Tennessee, and Arkansas through a hospitalclinic, described how physical punishment can affect her patients:Any kind of mental or physical stress can be a pain triggerfor these students, for a pain crisis. Not only do I believe that [paddling]makes our kids' behavior worse, it also makes them medically more fragile. Wegive our kids pain rating scales. They range from mild to moderate to severe(moderate means they stay home from school, severe means they go to hospital).If they're paddled, it's an immediate trigger for a possible moderate to severepain crisis ... we've had children end up in the hospital, later that day orthe next day, depending on when the paddling occurred. The parents tend to begood about following that. Pain episodes can also be really random. We can'tsay with certainty, but we think it's so often about paddling.[174]A student with serious congenital brain abnormalities anddevelopmental disabilities was also particularly affected by physicalpunishment. English, a boy in Georgia, was physically punished on numerousoccasions during elementary school, including by excessive force used during "basket"holds. His mother described how he regressed after the trauma:At home ... I would stand behind him [like the teacher hadduring the basket holds]. He would flinch, and holler, and say no. He wasafraid, he was jumping. He had nightmares. Even others, just trying to hug him,he wasn't able to tolerate it, it was overwhelming ... He learned that traumafrom the basket holds. He didn't want anyone to touch him ... He wasregressing. He started to need pull-ups again, whereas [before] he was OK, notneeding pull-ups.[175]Students with Conditions on the Autism SpectrumPhysical punishment can be especially traumatic for studentson the autism spectrum. All children on the autistic spectrum demonstrate somedegree of qualitative impairment of communication and reciprocal socialinteraction.[176]Parents we spoke with felt physical trauma caused their children to regressdevelopmentally.Among the families we interviewed, several students on theautism spectrum who received corporal punishment in the early grades regressedin toilet training. Theresa E.'s granddaughter with autism was physicallypunished in kindergarten: "In the second week, I'd go to school, she'd besoaking, she'd have peed herself over and over ... by the third week, we'd seefeces in her clothes ... and Jessie had been potty trained since she was two."[177]Sharon H., the mother of a girl with autism who was five years old when she wasphysically punished, had a similar experience: "She was fully potty trained butall that went away. Nighttime bedwetting started. And during the day. Shesoiled herself."[178]Some parents observed that their children with autismexhibited self-injurious behavior after single or repeated episodes of corporalpunishment, whereas previously these children had not injured themselves.[179]As Theresa E. noted, "after two months in the school, [my granddaughter's]behavior had changed ... she'd bite herself, teeth marks on her arms ... she'dsit and bang her head up against the wall, 'til she had bruises on herforehead."[180]Jacquelyn K. commented, "From that day on [after paddling], it was harder todeal with anything that upset [my grandson]. He would scream, cry, throwthings, hit himself upside the head. You had to always watch him, he couldn'tbe alone ... Before this he hadn't hit himself ever."[181]Many parents noted that their children with autism becamemore fearful after receiving corporal punishment, especially around their schools.Anna M.'s seven-year-old son changed after he was restrained and beaten: "Hewould never leave my side. He had major nightmares, screaming. He wouldn't goto Walmart, anywhere. He'd say 'we're going to run into him [the person whoadministered physical punishment].'"[182]Jacquelyn K. told us that her grandson became terrified of school: "He wasscared of going over there, scared it would happen again. When a child withautism has something like that happen, they don't forget it. It's always freshin their minds."[183]Some students with autism became more aggressive followingepisodes of physical punishment. Jacquelyn K. commented:When he started the school he didn't have a disciplineproblem. It's what they did to him that escalated his symptoms. He's moreaggressive now, it's on a higher level. Everything was escalated ... When youhave a child with autism go through a traumatic experience, it takes it toanother level ... He was a nice quiet, calm boy ... now he has these meltdownsall the time. He can't focus, he cries.[184]VIII. Parents' Inability to Protect ChildrenAccording to our interviews, parents of students withdisabilities faced numerous challenges when trying to protect their childrenfrom violent school discipline. Often, parents did not know-or still do notknow now-the full extent of the violence used against their children becausethe school did not disclose or because the child was unable to tell. Parents weinterviewed repeatedly struggled with their school districts while trying to obtainappropriate services for their children. Corporal punishment led todeterioration in family life, as parents were forced to withdraw children fromschool, resort to homeschooling, and give up jobs. Parents felt these moveswere necessary in order to secure their child's physical safety, yet took ahigh toll on the family.Lack of InformationParents were frequently unaware that their child receivedphysical punishment in school because the school did not tell them or theirchild was unable to describe the incidents. May R., the mother of a Floridagirl with bipolar disorder who was repeatedly injured at school, commented, "Mostof the time, they didn't call me if they restrained her ... We had requested,many, many times, but we never got that information [on how many times she wasrestrained]."[185]Students with severe disabilities may have troublecommunicating to their parents the traumatic events at school. Brianna, afive-year-old with autism in Georgia, was repeatedly abused. Her mother, SharonH., noted, "She was grabbed, yanked, pulled. But I don't know all thathappened. She wasn't very verbal."[186]Rose C. added:My son couldn't explain this. He couldn't explain what hadhappened to me. They [the school staff] had been picking him up, throwing himinto the tile floor like a wrestler. They'd drag him, pick him up by all fourlimbs. You can see [on security video tape] where they're dragging him on theground. They're carrying him like a wild animal. They grabbed him, they throwhim like a bag of potatoes ... They put him in a choke hold ... I asked him,what was wrong. He can't explain.[187]Struggles with the School SystemMany families we interviewed reported that they had troubleworking with school systems to secure their child's safety. Deena S., a Texas mother, described her experience:We went to the superintendent first. We asked him, "whatwas his definition of corporal punishment-at what point does it cross the line?"He looked at us, said "when we start getting into bruising and blistering." Welooked at him, said, "we're already at that point." But he didn't do anything.Just acted like it was no big deal.[188]Many parents described prolonged struggles with their schooldistricts. Karen W. fought repeatedly for her son: "We went to war, we reallydid. [After he was bruised] I demanded a new IEP [individual education program]... I requested a qualified teacher, I requested training for the staff inautism."[189]Tom R.'s son with Tourette Syndrome and bipolar disorder was repeatedly injuredin school. Tom commented, "It was a seven year fight to get him in thatsituation where he can succeed."[190]Parents reported that they needed considerable legalknowledge to fight for their children. Karen W. regretted the lack ofinformation she had when her child was first restrained: "My ignorance of what theschools could do ... you don't have any choice if you don't know what the lawis. There are so many things that parents can do if they have parent trainingin IDEA [Individuals with Disabilities Education Act] and they know."[191]Michelle R. added, "Being a special education teacher, I know what they can andcannot do. I told the attorneys and everyone else that I can't imagine being aparent who does not know their rights."[192]Some parents were able to find help through support groupsor advocacy centers. As Anna M., a Florida mother of a boy with autism, noted, "Ihad to hire attorneys ... The school never told me my options ... I foundsupport groups, that was such a blessing. I try to help people so they don't haveto go through what I did. I learned the hard way."[193]Rose C. agreed: "The advocacy center helped me collect the information. If Ihadn't had that help, nothing would have been done."[194]Impact on Family LifeMany parents who saw their children physically punished feltthey had to withdraw their children from school to protect their safety. Yetthis choice can come with considerable hardship, including lack of educationalservices for the child, job loss for a parent, and charges of truancy. TheresaE. described the dilemma she and her husband faced after their granddaughterwas physically punished: "We thought she needed school for socialization. Ididn't think I could home school her. Jessie's autistic. I know how to workwith her. I'm not sure I can educate her."[195] Anna M. faced asimilar dilemma when her son with autism was physically punished as a seven-year-old.She ultimately found a new placement for her son:I wouldn't let him go to school. I was afraid for his life,to be honest. He was 52 pounds, or maybe even less, at this point ... I wantedto keep him home, but that's not good for him either. He needed to be inschool. At his new school, he's so comfortable. He's a social butterfly.[196]Some parents we interviewed were forced to resort to homeschoolingtheir children. As Brian W., the father of a boy with autism in Arkansas, said, "once [my son] was injured, we pulled him out of school and startededucating him ourselves."[197]Deena S. followed the same course after her teenage son was paddled and bruisedin Texas: "we did what we could at home with him, but he was already behind."[198]In order to home school their children, several parents weinterviewed had to stop working. Jacquelyn K.'s grandson was paddled at sixyears old. His anxiety disorder and autism worsened, and she withdrew him fromschool: "What kills me, I have another child here at home. I can't work. I'vetried to locate something I can do at home. But I don't have a choice....Before he was sick, I worked every day."[199] May R. withdrewher daughter from her Florida elementary school after she was severely bruised,and stopped working: "I can't even get a job. She was on hospital/homebound. Ihad to keep her safe. She had taken a huge downturn."[200]Several families were accused of truancy or feared thoseaccusations once they withdrew their children from school.[201]Cynthia C. noted, "Retaliation is horrible in this county [in Georgia]. If I kept [my son] out, they'd write me up for truancy."[202]Jacquelyn K. described her situation in Mississippi:When [my grandson] was seven, they sent truant officers.They said I'd go to jail if I didn't send him back to school. But they didn'thave anyone qualified to teach him ... if I felt he would have been safe inschool, he would have been there. I'm sure they would have paddled him again. Idon't trust them ... Then they turned around and tried to point the finger atme, saying I was interfering with his education.[203]Guilt and ResilienceMany parents we interviewed expressed guilt, feeling theyhad failed to protect their children from harm. Jacquelyn K. commented, "I canimagine my little child was just screaming and hollering, and I wasn't there tohelp him."[204]Karen W., whose son with autism was abused in school, noted, "I wasignorant. I am a registered nurse, but I was still stupid ... Oh, the guilt Ilive with ... I blame myself for my ignorance."[205] RoseC.'s son was unable to tell her that he was repeatedly punished in school, butshe learned of some of the abuse after watching a security video. She said,I don't trust my own eyes anymore, I didn't see the abuse ...I trusted the school, I trusted them to do the right thing. I didn't see thatthey would hurt him, I didn't believe it. But eventually I saw the video ...All this abuse happened on my watch. It never should have happened. I feel soguilty. I cannot afford to miss this again, I can't trust anyone again.[206]Some parents started to fight back, organizing or joiningsupport groups, and conducting legal research. Anna M. observed, "I trusted them[the school staff], I didn't even know they were allowed to put their hands onyour kid. I feel so stupid. I started doing some legal research ... It's a veryscary word, special ed. A lot of things parents just don't know. You justblindly trust. It was a very bad experience-and having to find out there'shundreds of us."[207]Karen W. observed, "If parents knew that schools do this, the kids wouldn't behurt. You try to tell them, you all have rights. That's why we started thissupport system. That's when [the abuse against my son] stopped."[208]IX. Best Practices: Effective Discipline forStudents with DisabilitiesStudents with disabilities-like all students-need safe,secure school environments in which they can effectively learn. Corporalpunishment cannot function as part of that environment: it causes pain, injury,and degradation of the student's medical condition, and it is ineffective. Bestpractices for school discipline for students with disabilities incorporate manyof the same techniques as best practices for students without disabilities.[209]Positive behavioral interventions and supports (PBIS) are proven to alloweducators to respond to each child, teaching them why what they did was wrongand how they can correct their behavior.Positive Behavior Interventions and SupportsNationwide, educators are moving toward positive behavioralinterventions and supports  for students with and without disabilities as a wayof creating effective school cultures.[210] These practicesrespond to the underlying reasons for the child's misbehavior, and areconsistent with the school's mission of education.[211]Within this structured environment, children can change their behavior andreturn to class ready to learn.[212]Students with disabilities can benefit from PBIS and otherbest practices.[213]As reviewed in a recent report by the Congressional Research Service, the IDEAprovides that when the behavior of a child with a disability impedes the child'slearning or the learning of others, the IEP team must consider "the use ofpositive behavioral interventions and supports, and other strategies, toaddress that behavior."[214]Positive behavior systems create environments where rules and expectations areclear and consistent, are understood and accepted by everyone in the school, andare reliably enforced.[215]In 46 states around the US, there are schools currentlyusing the school-wide positive behavioral support model, implementing threelevels of positive behavior supports:[216]Universal: rules, routines, and physical arrangements forall students developed to prevent initial problem behavior;Secondary: small group or individual responses forstudents at risk of problem behaviors, such as mentoring programs andstaff support teams for students; andTertiary: more intensive interventions tailored to meetthe specific needs of individual students with patterns of problembehaviors.The PBS approach has been proven to be a highly effectivemethod to reduce problem behaviors and disciplinary referrals.[217]The Centennial School of Lehigh University, which provides educational servicesfor children classified under the IDEA as emotionally disturbed or autistic,implemented PBS and went from having over 1,000 restraint incidents per year tohaving zero restraint incidents and zero "seclusionary time-outs."[218]Positive behavior systems can also improve academic achievement and teacher jobsatisfaction. For instance, use of a PBS framework has been correlated withimprovements in both math and reading performance.[219]Formal evaluations of PBS have found increased satisfaction among teachers;they feel more effective in their teaching and management of student behavior.[220]The National Disability Rights Network suggests bestpractices for implementing PBS and reducing the use of restraints and seclusionsin schools.[221]These include: first, leadership and commitment at the highest administrativelevels to establishing and actively supporting clear policies with respect tothe PBS framework. Second, continuous training of staff, so that all staffworking with students with emotional or behavioral disorders are trained inbehavioral management that emphasizes crisis prevention and de-escalation.Third, the development of individualized, comprehensive, and relevant behaviorintervention plans for individual students, relying on involvement of parents.The goal of PBS and interventions is more than control of problem behavior; italso includes the enhancement of each student's living and learning choices.[222]Successful Experiences with School DisciplineMany of our interviewees felt that corporal punishment wasdeeply inappropriate for children with disabilities, and that alternativesexist that allow children to thrive. For instance, one special educationteacher in Mississippi described her success with positive, individuallytailored discipline responses:If one of my students gets in trouble in the classroom,typically the teachers send them to me rather than send them to the office [tobe paddled]. Typically I let them calm down and send them back to class. Ifthat doesn't happen or it gets to the point where it escalates and it needs toinvolve an administrator then 99 percent of the time I would say I am in therewith the administrator helping him make a decision as to what happens to thestudent ... We might look at schedule changes, or sitting down with the teacherand the student.... We try a wide variety. Each kid is different.[223]A teacher in another Mississippi district agreed thatpositive, individualized alternatives helped in her classroom:There was a social worker as well, someone we could turn toas an intermediary before sending them to the office, especially if you knewcorporal punishment was going to be used there. She would talk to them aboutthe way they were behaving, and set up incentives and goals to see if theycould change their behavior. This was a successful way to intervene.[224]Several parents we interviewed reported that their students,who had been corporally punished previously, responded much better when theschool reacted to the child's individual needs. Sharon H.'s elementary-schoolaged daughter thrived when removed from an abusive environment: "The [new]school district is working with me as a parent to get Brianna what she needs.She has a calming down area, for instance."[225] Rose C., themother of a boy with autism who was repeatedly beaten, reported that her sonresponded better to positive behavior interventions at a new school: "thepara-professionals redirected him by speaking to him. This de-escalated him.And that made it better, then it was fine ... He gets consistency."[226]Some parents emphasized the need for training of staffmembers regarding students' disabilities. May R. spoke of harsh restraints usedagainst her nine-year-old daughter with bipolar disorder: "It's inappropriate,the techniques, the length of time. It could have been avoided by redirection.They didn't have the support, the knowledge, the training, the staff to dealwith severely disabled kids."[227]Karen W., the mother of an Arkansas boy with autism, commented, "I begged themto get training. I tried to show them the things that the OT [occupationaltherapist] had taught me, to get him to calm down ... not one person in thatwhole building had one day's training in autism."[228]Ultimately, some parents reported happily that theirchildren were thriving in settings with positive behavior systems. Karen W.said of her son, "He's now on the honor roll, straight A student, in amainstream school. This is remarkable. A year ago or so, they were saying hecould never, ever go back to public school."[229] Rose C.'s son nowattends a different public school in Florida with more support for studentswith disabilities: "It's like a therapy for him. He's much less aggressive.They're all around an oval table, they're all interacting. They're constantlygiving instructions as a group. He's thrived. He's doing very well."[230]X. International Human Rights Law ProtectingStudents with DisabilitiesCorporal punishment violates human rights to freedom fromcruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment or punishment, and freedom fromphysical violence. In many instances, it violates the prohibition ondiscrimination and impinges on children's right to education. Corporalpunishment is also contrary to respect for human dignity, a deep-seated guidingprinciple of human rights law enshrined in the Universal Declaration of HumanRights. Numerous human rights treaty bodies, including the United Nations HumanRights Committee, the UN Committee against Torture, and the UN Committee on theRights of the Child have spoken out against corporal punishment in schools.[231]Corporal punishment against students with disabilitiesviolates additional rights to education and non-discrimination, in addition tothe general principles articulated above. The US has recently signed the UNConvention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), and is thereforeobliged to adhere to the object and purpose of the treaty.[232] TheCRPD, which entered into force in May 2008, provides for the right to aninclusive education, protects people with disabilities from violence and abuse,and prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability. In signing the CRPD,President Obama stated that the treaty "reaffirms the inherent dignity andworth and independence of all persons with disabilities[.]"[233]Corporal punishment, when applied to students with disabilities, violates theserights and denies these students the education to which they are entitled.International Human Rights LawWith a handful of exceptions, children have the same humanrights as adults. In addition, "the child, by reason of his physical and mentalimmaturity, needs special safeguards and care, including appropriate legalprotection," and governments and governmental institutions such as schools haveadditional responsibilities to protect children.[234]Children with disabilities are doubly vulnerable, and thusentitled to special care.[235]The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child has recognized that children withdisabilities are more vulnerable to violence, abuse, and neglect in allsettings, including schools.[236]Article 7 of the CRPD mandates that states party are to take all necessarymeasures to ensure children with disabilities' full enjoyment "of all humanrights and fundamental freedoms on an equal basis with other children."[237]Freedom from Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatmentor PunishmentChildren with disabilities are protected from corporalpunishment by numerous provisions prohibiting cruel, inhuman, and degradingtreatment. For instance, article 15 of the UN Convention on the Rights ofPersons with Disabilities requires states party to take "alleffective legislative, administrative, judicial, or other measures" to protectpersons with disabilities from being subjected to such treatment.[238]The United States has signed and ratified the Convention against Tortureand Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Conventionagainst Torture) and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights(ICCPR). Each of these treaties prohibits the use of cruel, inhuman, ordegrading treatment or punishment.[239]International human rights bodies have repeatedly emphasizedthat corporal punishment is incompatible with these provisions. For instance,the Human Rights Committee (HRC), which offers the authoritative interpretationof the ICCPR, emphasizes that the prohibition on the use of cruel, inhuman, ordegrading treatment or punishment "must extend to corporal punishment,including excessive chastisement ordered ... as an educative or disciplinarymeasure."[240]Manfred Nowak, the UN Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman ordegrading treatment or punishment, observes:Since corporal punishment in all its forms ... whetherimposed by State authorities or by private actors, including schools andparents, has been qualified by all relevant intergovernmental human rightsmonitoring bodies as cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment, it follows that,under present international law, corporal punishment can no longer bejustified, not even under the most exceptional situations.[241]The Right to Freedom from Physical ViolenceVarious international instruments protect the child's rightto be free from any form of physical violence.[242]The Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), the world's most universallyratified human rights treaty, recognizes the child's right to be free from anyform of physical or mental violence. Article 16 of the CRPD provides for the right of children with disabilities to be free from violence andabuse;[243] this article extends the protections granted by the CRC.The United States is a signatory to the CRC and the treaty'sprovisions should be treated as authoritative guidance (as discussed below).Article 19 states:States Parties shall take all appropriate legislative,administrative, social and educational measures to protect the child from allforms of physical or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect or negligenttreatment, maltreatment or exploitation[.][244]In 2006 the Committee on the Rights of the Child, theinternational body charged with monitoring compliance with the CRC, issuedGeneral Comment No. 8, discussing the right of the child to protection fromcorporal punishment. The committee found that article 19 "does not leave roomfor any level of legalized violence against children," and that "[c]orporalpunishment and other cruel or degrading forms of punishment are forms ofviolence and States must take all appropriate legislative, administrative,social and educational measures to eliminate them."[245]The Right to an Inclusive EducationChildren with disabilities have the right to an inclusiveeducation-based on the principle that all children should learn together,wherever possible, regardless of difference.[246] The CRPD requiresstates to ensure that "[p]ersons with disabilities can access an inclusive,quality and free primary and secondary education on an equal basis with othersin the communities in which they live."[247] As discussed byVernor Munoz, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Right to Education,schools with an inclusive orientation are the most effective means of combatingdiscrimination, and are thus essential to securing the full right to educationfor children with disabilities.[248]US law mirrors this commitment, as President Obama noted when speaking of theAmericans with Disabilities Act, an historic piece of legislation thatattempted to ensure that "children with disabilities were no longer excluded ...and then no longer denied the opportunity to learn the same skills in the sameclassroom as other children."[249]Corporal punishment undermines the right to education forall children,[250]including children with disabilities. The Committee on Economic, Social andCultural Rights, the body charged with overseeing the International Covenant onEconomic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), states in General Comment No. 13(on the right to education) that "corporal punishment is inconsistent with thefundamental guiding principle of international human rights law enshrined inthe Preambles to the Universal Declaration and both Covenants: the dignity ofthe individual."[251]The Convention on the Rights of the Child recognizes the "rightof the disabled child to special care" which should "ensure that the disabledchild has effective access to and receives education ... in a manner conduciveto the child's achieving the fullest possible social integration and individualdevelopment."[252]Corporal punishment excludes children with disabilities, especially when usedat disproportionate rates, creating barriers to their full integration into theclassroom.Non-Discrimination and EqualityThe use of corporal punishment in US public schools can alsoviolate children's rights to non-discrimination, a fundamental principle ofhuman rights law. The CRPD mandates that states party "undertake to ensure andpromote the full realization of all human rights and fundamental freedoms forall persons with disabilities without discrimination of any kind on the basisof disability."[253]The CRC, the most widely ratified international human rights treaty inexistence, also expressly prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability.[254]Fundamental rights protecting children from corporal punishment apply withequal force to protect the rights of children with disabilities as well asthose of children without disabilities. Yet as a consequence of seeking publiceducation, students with disabilities find their rights to security of personviolated at disproportionate rates.Parents' RightsParents have "the prior rightto choose the kind of education that shall be given to their children."[255]Furthermore, as guardians of their children, they must be able to uphold anddefend their children's rights. The preamble of the Convention on the Rights ofthe Child affirms that precisely because of their "physical and mentalimmaturity," children need "special safeguards and care, including appropriatelegal protection."[256]Children cannot defend their rights on their own; parents have a duty toaid them in exercising those rights.[257] Parents of studentswith disabilities-who are doubly vulnerable and entitled to special care-mustbe given the tools with which to protect their children's rights.The United States and International HumanRights LawThe United States is obliged to follow the internationalnorms articulated above.[258]For instance, the United States is party to the ICCPR and the Conventionagainst Torture. US constitutional law requires both individual states and thefederal government to uphold human rights treaties made under the authority ofthe United States. The US Constitution states:[A]ll treaties made, or which shall be made, under theauthority of the United States shall be the Supreme Law of the Land; and theJudges in every State shall be bound thereby, anything in the Constitution orLaw of any State to the contrary notwithstanding.[259]Upholding this constitutional principle, the US SupremeCourt has stated, "[I]nternational law is part of our law, and must beascertained and administered by the courts of justice of the appropriatejurisdiction[.]"[260]Treaties of the United States-including human rightstreaties-are binding on states independent of the will and power of statelegislatures.[261]While the United States is a federal system in which considerable power overeducation rests with state and local officials, the federal government hasobligations and authority to secure compliance with human rights laws among itsconstituent states.[262]Not only should state officials adhere to the prohibition on corporalpunishment, but the federal government should support those states thateliminate the practice, thus bringing their laws and policies into compliancewith human rights law.As well as upholding its obligations under the ICCPR and theConvention against Torture, the United States must adhere to standardsarticulated in the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention onthe Rights of Persons with Disabilities. The CRC is nearly universallyaccepted: as of 2005, 192 countries were party to it. Singapore is the only party that has issued a declaration on the use of corporal punishment in thecontext of its obligations under the CRC.[263] The United States and Somalia are the only two countries in the world that have failed to ratify theCRC, although both have signed it.[264]As a signatory to both the CRC and the CRPD,  the United States must not takeactions that would defeat either treaty's object and purpose.[265]In fact, the Supreme Court has explicitly acknowledged the CRC's authority asan expression of "the overwhelming weight of international opinion" ininterpreting domestic legal standards.[266]US Law Permitting Corporal PunishmentDespite the federal government's obligations to securecompliance with binding human rights norms among the states, federal law failsto live up to the international standards protecting children from corporalpunishment.[267]In the 1977 case, Ingraham v. Wright, the US Supreme Court ruled thatroutine corporal punishment is not considered cruel and unusual punishment, anddoes not per se violate procedural due process.[268]Since then, however, a majority of the states have enacted legislationoutlawing the use of corporal punishment in public schools.[269]The federal standards that continue to permit corporal punishment wereestablished decades ago; it is incumbent on the US government to bring its lawinto line with international commitments.In Ingraham the Supreme Court held that the cruel andunusual punishments clause of the Eighth Amendment to the US Constitution doesnot apply to disciplinary corporal punishment in public schools, because thatclause was designed to protect those convicted of a crime, not those inschools.[270]The ruling in Ingraham was supported by only a narrow majority of theCourt.[271]The dissent notes that "the constitutional provision is against cruel andunusual punishments; nowhere is that prohibition limited or modified by thelanguage of the Constitution.... No one can deny that spanking ofschoolchildren is 'punishment' under any reasonable reading of the word."[272]Ingraham establishes that children have the right topersonal security that is jeopardized when corporal punishment is administered,[273]and that the child "has a strong interest in procedural safeguards thatminimize the risk of wrongful punishment."[274] Nonetheless, theSupreme Court held that imposing additional safeguards-such as prior notice anda hearing before corporal punishment is administered-would be costly and wouldintrude on the decision-making of the public school authorities.[275]Other federal courts have ruled that adequate state tort law or common lawremedies exist for excessive corporal punishment.[276]Yet these remedies are often illusory. The dissent in Ingraham arguesthat more process is needed: "even if the student could sue for good faitherror in the infliction of punishment, the lawsuit occurs after the punishmenthas been finally imposed. The infliction of physical pain is final andirreparable; it cannot be undone[.]"[277] US courts shouldbring this jurisprudence into line with international standards and protectchildren from all forms of corporal punishment.Incomplete Protection under US Federal Law forStudents with DisabilitiesThe Individuals with Disabilities Education Act is theprimary federal statute requiring provision of education to students withdisabilities.[278]Students who qualify for assistance under IDEA receive an individualeducation program spelling out the specific educational and related services tobe provided to meet their needs.[279]IDEA does not directly address discipline unless it amounts to a change inplacement-that is, a significant suspension (typically for 10 or more days) orexpulsion.[280]During the George W. Bush administration, the Office ofSpecial Education Programs-the relevant federal administrative body within theDepartment of Education-informally took the position that IDEA does notexpressly prohibit the use of physical restraints on students withdisabilities.[281]If restraint is permitted by state law, the IEP team must consider whether itsuse is consistent with the terms of a given IEP, and "should" consider the useof positive behavioral interventions regardless of whether the state lawpermits the use of restraint.[282]Though there is not substantial case law, courts have held that corporalpunishment is "in-class" discipline and is not prohibited or regulated by theIDEA.[283]Immunity for EducatorsStates that permit school corporal punishment provide legalimmunity for paddlers.[284]In Mississippi, for example, the only way to prevail in a lawsuit against aneducator for corporal punishment is if the educator's conduct constitutes acriminal offense, or if she acted with a "malicious purpose."[285]These immunity laws make it extremely difficult for parents to pursue legalaction against school officials who have injured children in their care.XI. ConclusionCorporal punishment is abusive, ineffective, and violatesinternational human rights law: it should be immediately abolished in the US. Children like Landon and Jonathan, profiled at the beginning of this report, suffer theconsequences of these abusive practices on a daily basis. Given the particularvulnerability of students with disabilities, they must receive immediateprotection from all forms of physical violence in schools, including but notlimited to paddling, beating, and excessive restraint. Corporal punishmentviolates children's right to freedom from cruel, inhuman, or degradingtreatment, and contributes to a hostile school environment in which studentsstruggle to learn. Landon, Jonathan, and their peers already face enormousobstacles to obtaining an inclusive education: they deserve a safe schoolenvironment in which they can learn, grow, and reach their full potential.Corporal punishment is abusive for all children, but it hasparticularly severe effects for students with disabilities. Not only is itineffective in teaching them appropriate behaviors, it can cause lasting mentaland physical injury, and it can make students aggressive and unable to learn.For students with disabilities, corporal punishment can be followed directly bya decline in their medical conditions.Despite their particular vulnerability to harm from corporalpunishment, and their special need for care and guidance in the public schoolsystem, students with disabilities are subjected to these practices atdisproportionately high rates. This affects these students' rights tonon-discrimination and an inclusive education. When parents try to defend theirchildren's rights, they can face serious obstacles even to obtaining basic information.These discriminatory, abusive, and ineffective practicesshould be abolished in US schools. There are better methods of providingeffective school discipline, including positive behavioral support systems thatenable educators to respond to children's individual needs. It is past time forUS states to ban paddling and all other forms of physical punishment, andprovide adequate protection and a decent education for students withdisabilities.AcknowledgmentsThe American Civil Liberties Union and Human Rights Watchthank all of the students, parents, family members, teachers, administrators,superintendents, school board officials, advocates, and others who shared theirviews and experiences with us for this report.This report was researched and written by Alice Farmer,Aryeh Neier fellow at the American Civil Liberties Union and Human RightsWatch. Additional legal research and drafting was conducted by James Felakos, disability rights fellow at the American Civil Liberties Union, and Kate Stinson,intern with the American Civil Liberties Union. This report was edited by Jamil Dakwar, director of the Human Rights Program at the American Civil Liberties Union; DavidFathi, director of the US Program at Human Rights Watch; Iain Levine, program directorat Human Rights Watch; and Clive Baldwin, senior legal adviser at Human RightsWatch. Additional review was provided by James Felakos; Chris Hansen, attorneywith the American Civil Liberties Union; Lois Whitman, director of theChildren's Rights Division at Human Rights Watch; Joseph Amon, director of theHealth and Human Rights Program at Human Rights Watch; Jane Hudson of theNational Disability Rights Network; and Jennifer Leach, Head of Psychology atthe McCarton Center for Developmental Pediatrics.Abigail Marshak, US Program associate at Human Rights Watch,provided research and production assistance. Additional research assistance wasprovided by Anjali Dalal, Greer Feick, Lindsey Kaley, Joe Pace, Brian Ward, andNate Freed Wessler, interns with the American Civil Liberties Union.Grace Choi, publications director, Fitzroy Hepkins, printand mail manager, and Xabay Spinka, communications coordinator at Human RightsWatch provided layout and production for this report.We express our deep appreciation to the leaders, staff, andvolunteers of non-profit organizations, after-school programs, communitygroups, and other organizations who assisted enormously with our research.The American Civil Liberties Union and Human Rights Watchare grateful to the Open Society Institute for its support of the Aryeh Neierfellowship.[1]American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) telephone interview with Jacquelyn K., Mississippi, April 14, 2009.[2]ACLU telephone interview with Rose C., Florida, May 18, 2009.[3]Human Rights Watch/ACLU, A Violent Education: Corporal Punishment ofChildren in US Public Schools, August 2008, http://www.hrw.org/en/content/a-violent-education.A Violent Education focuses on corporal punishment in general; thisreport focuses on corporal punishment of students with disabilities.[4]The White House, "Remarks by the President on Signing of UN Convention on theRights of Persons with Disabilities Proclamation," July 24, 2009, http://www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/Remarks-by-the-President-on-Rights-of-Persons-with-Disabilities-Proclamation-Signing/(accessed July 31, 2009).[5]This report does not examine corporal punishment in residential treatmentfacilities or other psychiatric facilities.[6]Some physical force is permitted under international law, but only where it isneeded to protect "a child or others" and not to punish. "The principle of theminimum necessary use of force for the shortest necessary period of time mustalways apply." UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 8,The Right of the Child to Protection from Corporal Punishment and Other Cruelor Degrading Forms of Punishment, UN Doc. CRC/C/GC/8 (2006), para. 15.[7]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 8, para. 11.[8]ACLU telephone interview with Deena S., Texas, May 22, 2009.[9]ACLU telephone interview with Theresa E., Georgia, March 5, 2009.[10]Sickle cell anemia is a condition which is characterized by pain crises, or"unpredictable episodes of severe and sometimes excruciating pain." Section onHematology/Oncology, Committee on Genetics, "Health Supervision for ChildrenWith Sickle Cell Disease," Pediatrics, vol. 109, March 2002, pp.526-535.[11]ACLU telephone interview with Jennifer Parker, advocate for children withsickle cell anemia, Tennessee, March 10, 2009.[12]ACLU telephone interview with Anna M., Florida, March 9, 2009.[13]ACLU telephone interview with Karen W., Arkansas, May 22, 2009 (interviewedwith spouse).[14]Ibid.[15]Ibid.[16]ACLU telephone interview with Anna M., Florida, March 9, 2009.[17]ACLU telephone interview with Theresa E., Georgia, March 5, 2009.[18]ACLU telephone interview with May R. (pseudonym), Florida, April 16, 2009.[19]ACLU telephone interview with Jacquelyn K., Mississippi, April 14, 2009.[20]ACLU telephone interview with Karen W., Arkansas, May 22, 2009.[21]UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment 13, Article13, The Right to Education, UN Doc. E/C.12/1999/10 (1999), para. 41.[22]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Charlotte M. (pseudonym), formerteacher in the Mississippi Delta, New Haven, Connecticut, November 16, 2007.[23]ACLU telephone interview with Karen W., Arkansas, May 22, 2009.[24]Human Rights Watch/ACLU, A Violent Education, Conclusion andRecommendations.[25]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 8, para. 11. TheCommittee on the Rights of the Child offers the authoritative interpretation ofthe UN Convention on the Rights of the Child in addition to its role as thebody charged with overseeing governmental implementation of the treaty.[26]"Restraint" is defined as any manual method, physical or mechanical device,material, or equipment that immobilizes or reduces the ability of an individualto move his or her arms, legs, body, or head freely. US GovernmentAccountability Office (GAO), "Seclusions and Restraints: Selected Cases ofDeath and Abuse at Public and Private Schools and Treatment Centers,"GAO-09-719T, May 19, 2009, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d09719t.pdf (accessedJuly 29, 2009), p. 1.[27]American Correctional Association, "Standards for Juvenile CorrectionalFacilities," 3-JTS-3A-31, February 2003 ("Use of Force: Written policy,procedure, and practice restrict the use of physical force to instances ofjustifiable self-defense, protection of others, protection of property, andprevention of escapes, and then only as a last resort and in accordance withappropriate statutory authority. In no event is physical force justifiable aspunishment[.]").[28]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 8, para. 15(commenting on the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), adoptedNovember 20, 1989, G.A. Res. 44/25, annex, 44 UN GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, UNDoc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into force September 2, 1990, signed by the United States February 16, 1995, arts. 19, 28(2), and 37) ("The Committee recognizes thatthere are exceptional circumstances in which teachers and others … may beconfronted by dangerous behavior which justifies the use of reasonablerestraint to control it. Here too there is a clear distinction between the useof force motivated by the need to protect a child or others and the use offorce to punish. The principle of the minimum necessary use of force for theshortest necessary period of time must always apply.").[29]Ibid.[30]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 8, para. 11(defining corporal punishment as "any punishment in which physical force isused and intended to cause some degree of pain or discomfort, however light….In the view of the Committee, corporal punishment is invariably degrading.").[31]For a thorough discussion of the mechanics of paddling, see Human RightsWatch/ACLU, A Violent Education.[32]ACLU telephone interview with Charles B., Texas, March 5, 2009.[33]Human Rights Watch interview with Jimmy Dunne, former teacher in Houston, Texas, February 19, 2008.[34]Human Rights Watch/ACLU, A Violent Education, "V. Corporal Punishment inUS Public Schools."[35]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharrie L. (pseudonym), Indianola, Mississippi, December 4, 2007.[36]ACLU telephone interview with Jacquelyn K., Mississippi, April 14, 2009.[37]ACLU telephone interview with Theresa E., Georgia, March 5, 2009 (studentphysically punished by teacher's aide); ACLU telephone interview with Anna M.,Florida, March 9, 2009 (student physically punished by Exceptional StudentCenter coordinator); ACLU telephone interview with Rose C., Florida, May 18,2009 (student physically punished by trainer); ACLU telephone interview withKaren W., Arkansas, May 22, 2009 (student physically punished by a case managerand aide).[38]Human Rights Watch interview with Gerardo H., who recently left high school, Midland, Texas, February 25, 2008 ("This one time, like the other times, I had to stand up,and put my hands on the chair … and then, 'pop, pop.'")[39]Email from Deena S., mother of boy who was paddled, to ACLU, May 20, 2009.[40]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 8, para. 15(commenting on the Convention on the Rights of the Child, arts. 19, 28(2), and37).[41]ACLU telephone interview with Theresa E., March 5, 2009.[42]Human Rights Watch interview with Ryan A., a seventh-grade boy in rural Mississippi, December 12, 2007.[43]Children on the autism spectrum may be "non-verbal" or unable to communicate:"All children with autism demonstrate some degree of qualitative impairment… ofcommunication." American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Children withDisabilities, "The Pediatrician's Role in the Diagnosis and Management ofAutism Spectrum Disorder in Children," Pediatrics, vol. 107, 2001, pp.1221-1226; see alsoMelanie Manning, MD, et al., "Terminal 22q DeletionSyndrome: A Newly Recognized Cause of Speech and Language Disability in theAutism Spectrum," Pediatrics, vol. 114 no. 2, 2004, pp.451-457.[44]ACLU telephone interview with Theresa E., Georgia, March 5, 2009.[45]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 8, para. 11(commenting on the Convention on the Rights of the Child, arts. 19, 28(2), and37).[46]Human Rights Watch interview with Tom R. (pseudonym), Hinds County, Mississippi, December 8, 2007 (interviewed with Michelle R. (pseudonym), spouse).[47]ACLU telephone interview with Cynthia C., Georgia, May 22, 2009.[48]Ibid.[49]Ibid.[50]ACLU telephone interview with Anna M., Florida, March 9, 2009.[51]The term "autism spectrum" refers to a set of five specific syndromes (RettSyndrome, childhood disintegrative disorder, autism, pervasive developmentaldisorder not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS), and Asperger's Syndrome) which arecharacterized by neurological impairments in three major categories ofbehavior, including social skills, communication, and repetitive andstereotyped behaviors. Johnny Matson and Santino LoVullo, "A Review ofBehavioral Treatments for Self-Injurious Behaviors of Persons with AutismSpectrum Disorders," Behavior Modification, vol. 32 no. 1, January 2008,pp. 61-62.[52]ACLU telephone interview with Theresa E., Georgia, March 5, 2009.[53]Ibid.[54]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 8, para. 11(commenting on the Convention on the Rights of the Child, arts. 19, 28(2), and37).[55]ACLU telephone interview with Karen W., Arkansas, May 22, 2009.[56]ACLU telephone interview with Theresa E., Georgia, March 5, 2009.[57]ACLU telephone interview with Anna M., Florida, March 9, 2009.[58]ACLU telephone interview with Rose C., Florida, May 18, 2009.[59]"Restraint" is defined as any manual method, physical or mechanical device,material, or equipment that immobilizes or reduces the ability of an individualto move his or her arms, legs, body, or head freely. US GovernmentAccountability Office, "Seclusions and Restraints," p. 1. As analyzed by theNational Disability Rights Network (NDRN), there are no explicit federalrequirements, and only a patchwork of incomplete state laws, governing the useof restraint in schools. National Disability Rights Network, "School is NotSupposed to Hurt: Investigative Report on Abusive Restraint and Seclusion inSchools," January 2009, pp. 10-11 and Appendix 1.[60]US Government Accountability Office, "Seclusions and Restraints," p.5;National Disability Rights Network, "School is Not Supposed to Hurt," pp.13-27.[61]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 8, para. 15(commenting on the Convention on the Rights of the Child, arts. 19, 28(2), and37).[62]Ibid.[63]National Disability Rights Network, "School is Not Supposed to Hurt," p. 13.[64]Ibid. See also US Government Accountability Office, "Seclusions andRestraints," p. 7 ("facedown or other restraints that block air to the lungscan be deadly").[65]National Disability Rights Network, "School is Not Supposed to Hurt," pp.13-14.[66]Ibid., pp. 14-15 (The allegations documented by NDRN: A Michigan boy withautism died while being physically restrained at school by four employees whopinned him face-down for 60-70 minutes; the boy became non-responsive after 45minutes but the restraint was continued. A Texas middle school student diedafter his teacher held him down, despite the student's assertion "I can't breathe."A Wisconsin girl was suffocated and killed at a mental health day treatmentfacility when several adult staff pinned her to the floor in prone restraint.)See also US Government Accountability Office, "Seclusions and Restraints," p. 8(referring to cases of death following prone restraint).[67]Human Rights Watch interview with Tom R. (pseudonym), Mississippi, December 8,2007.[68]ACLU telephone interview with Rose C., Florida, May 18, 2009.[69]ACLU telephone interview with Karen W., Arkansas, May 22, 2009.[70]Colorado, Connecticut, Iowa, Michigan, and Pennsylvania all have bans on prone restraint.National Disability Rights Network, "School is Not Supposed to Hurt," pp.11-13; see also US Government Accountability Office, "Seclusions and Restraints,"p. 7.[71]ACLU telephone interview with May R., Florida, April 16, 2009.[72]ACLU telephone interview with Cynthia C., Georgia, May 22, 2009.[73]Letter from English's cardiologist "To Whom it May Concern," March 26, 2007 (onfile with ACLU).[74]USDepartment of Education, Office for Civil Rights (OCR), "Civil Rights DataCollection 2006," March 26, 2008,http://ocrdata.ed.gov/ocr2006rv30/xls/2006Projected.html (accessed August 8,2008). The US Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights, has beenconducting a biennial survey of the nation's public elementary and secondaryschools since 1968. The Civil Rights Data Collection is conducted pursuant to34 C.F.R. Section 100.6(b) of the Department of Education regulationimplementing Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Information is collectedon enrollment and discipline, among other topics, by race and by gender. Thedata collection is a rolling stratified sample of approximately 6,000 districtsand 60,000 schools within those districts, which facilitates state and nationalprojections of data. The 2006 Civil Rights Data Collection contains informationon 5,929 public school districts and 62,484 schools in those school districts,and provides information reflecting the 2006-2007 school year. OCR, "Civil RightsData Collection 2006," "About the Data," http://ocrdata.ed.gov/ocr2006rv30/aboutdat.html(accessed August 8, 2008); OCR, "Civil Rights Data Collection 2006," "DataCollection," http://ocrdata.ed.gov/ocr2006rv30/wdscoll.html (accessed August 8,2008); Human Rights Watch telephone interview with an official at the USDepartment of Education who chose to remain anonymous, Washington, DC, April15, 2008.[75]Defined here (and by the OCR) as students who qualify for federal servicesunder the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) of 2004, sec. 602(PL 108-446) (20 U.S.C. 1400) ("(A) In general. The term 'child with adisability' means a child (i) with mental retardation, hearing impairments(including deafness), speech or language impairments, visual impairments(including blindness), serious emotional disturbance (referred to in this titleas 'emotional disturbance'), orthopedic impairments, autism, traumatic braininjury, other health impairments, or specific learning disabilities; and (ii)who, by reason thereof, needs special education and related services. (B) Childaged 3–9 - The term 'child with a disability' for a child aged 3 through 9 (orany subset of that age range, including ages 3 through 5), may, at thediscretion of the State and the local educational agency, include a child - (i)experiencing developmental delays, as defined by the State and as measured byappropriate diagnostic instruments and procedures, in 1 or more of thefollowing areas: physical development; cognitive development; communicationdevelopment; social or emotional development; or adaptive development; and (ii)who, by reason thereof, needs special education and related services.").[76]Defined here (and by the OCR) as students who qualify for federal servicesunder the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, sec. 504 (29 USCA Section 701 et seq.)("The term 'disability' means (A) except as otherwise provided in subparagraph(B), a physical or mental impairment that constitutes or results in asubstantial impediment to employment; or (B) for the purposes of sections 701,711, and 712 of this title and subchapters II, IV, V, and VII of this chapter,a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more majorlife activities") .[77]OCR,"Civil Rights Data Collection 2006."[78]Ibid.(figure derived by calculating 41,972 students as a percentage of 223,190students).[79]OCR,"Civil Rights Data Collection 2006."[80]Corporal punishment is permitted in some form in Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, New Mexico, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, and Wyoming. Human RightsWatch/ACLU, A Violent Education, "V. Prevalence of Corporal Punishmentin US Public Schools."[81]Alabama: Ala. Code sec. 16-28A-1. See also ibid., sec. 16-28A-2; sec.16-28A-5; sec. 13A-3-24(1); Arizona: Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. sec. 15-843(B). Seealso ibid., sec. 13-403(B). Arkansas: Ark. Code. Ann. sec.6-18-503(b)(1). See also ibid., sec. 6-18-505(c)(1); Florida: Fla. Stat.sec. 1003.32(1)(k); Georgia: Ga. Code Ann. sec. 20-2-730; Idaho: Idaho CodeAnn. sec. 33-1224; Indiana: Ind. Code sec.31-34-1-15; Kansas: Kan. Stat. Ann. sec. 21-3609; Louisiana: La. Rev. Stat. Ann. sec.17:223(A); Mississippi: Miss. Code Ann. sec. 37-11-57(2); Missouri: Mo. Rev.Stat. sec. 160.261(1); New Mexico: N.M. Stat. sec. 22-5-4.3(B); North Carolina:N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 115C-391(a). See also ibid., sec. 115C-390; Oklahoma: Okla. Stat. tit.21, sec. 844. See also ibid., tit. 70, sec. 24-100.4 ("Except concerningstudents on individualized education plans (IEP) pursuant to the Individualswith Disabilities Education Act, the State Board of Education shall not haveauthority to prescribe student disciplinary policies for school districts or toproscribe corporal punishment in the public schools.") (internal citationomitted); South Carolina: S.C. Code Ann. sec. 59-63-260; Tennessee: Tenn. CodeAnn. sec. 49-6-4103. See also ibid., sec. 49-6-4104; Wyoming: Wyo. Stat. Ann. sec. 21-4-308.[82]See, for example, Colo. Rev. Stat. sec. 27-10.5-115(1); N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 122C-59; S.C. Code Ann. sec.44-24-280 ("No child in an inpatient treatmentfacility of the department may be subjected to corporalpunishment.").[83]Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann. sec. 503.110(1).[84]Tex. Educ. Code Ann. sec. 37.0021(a) (preventingstudents with disabilities from being confined in locked spaces); Tex.Penal Code Ann. sec. 9.62 (permitting corporal punishment).[85]OCR,"Civil Rights Data Collection 2006."[86]Ibid.[87]Ibid.[88]Ibid.[89]See below, "IX. Best Practices."[90]OCR, "Civil Rights Data Collection Individual School Report: ED102, ReportingRequirement," March 31, 2005,www.ed.gov/about/inits/ed/pbdmi/surveytool/crdcollection/ed102_inst.pdf(accessed August 8, 2008), p. 4 ("Enter the number of students who … receivedcorporal punishment. Count each student only once regardless of the number oftimes punished."); Human Rights Watch telephone interview with an official atthe US Department of Education who chose to remain anonymous, Washington, DC,April 15, 2008 (reporting that the OCR does not have the resources to performexternal audits of the school districts' reports, but noting that they do checkthat a district does not report more corporal punishment than enrollment, whichwould indicate that a school district reported number of instances, as opposedto number of students).[91]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Mandy R., Mississippi, October 26,2007.[92]Human Rights Watch interview with a superintendent of a mid-sized urbandistrict in the Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[93]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 8, para 11.[94]See, for example, US Government Accountability Office, "Seclusions andRestraints"; National Disability Rights Network, "School is Not Supposed toHurt."[95]Email to the ACLU from an official at the US Department of Education who choseto remain anonymous, June 23, 2009, (stating that OCR does not make dataprojections for states without legal corporal punishment, and they do not lookat reported data for those states).[96]See, for example, US Government Accountability Office, "Seclusions andRestraints"; National Disability Rights Network, "School is Not Supposed toHurt."[97]US Government Accountability Office, "Seclusions and Restraints," p. 4.[98]ACLUtelephone interview with May R. (pseudonym), Florida, April 16, 2009.[99]ACLUtelephone interview with Sarah P. (pseudonym), Oklahoma, May 22, 2009.[100]Council of Parent Attorneys and Advocates, "Unsafe in the Schoolhouse: Abuse ofChildren with Disabilities," May 27, 2009, p. 4.[101]ACLU telephone interview with Karen W., Arkansas, May 22, 2009.[102]ACLU telephone interview with Anna M., Florida, March 9, 2009.[103]ACLUtelephone interview with Sharon H., Georgia, March 9, 2009.[104]ACLU telephone interview with Anna M., Florida, March 9, 2009.[105]ACLU telephone interview with Sharon H., Georgia, March 9, 2009.[106]ACLU telephone interview with Karen W., Arkansas, May 22, 2009.[107]Human Rights Watch/ACLU, A Violent Education, "IV. Offenses Leading toCorporal Punishment."[108]Human Rights Watch interview with a superintendent of a mid-sized urbandistrict in the Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[109]For example, students with autism often have trouble with "normal" schoolbehavior or socialization, as "[t]he regression, or failure to progress,affects language, play, and social interaction and occasionally other skills."Lorna Wing, "The Autistic Spectrum," The Lancet, vol. 350 no. 9093,December 13, 1997, pp. 1761-1766.[110]ACLU telephone interview with Cynthia C.,Georgia, May 22, 2009.[111]ACLU telephone interview with Jennifer Parker, Tennessee, March 10, 2009.[112]Human Rights Watch/ACLU, A Violent Education, "IV. Offenses Leading toCorporal Punishment."[113]Under human rights law, in "exceptional circumstances ... dangerous behavior[may justify] the use of reasonable restraint," but that force must be theminimum amount necessary for the shortest period of time, and must never beused to punish.UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, GeneralComment No. 8, para. 15 (commenting on the Convention on the Rights of theChild, arts. 19, 28(2), and 37).[114]"Corporal Punishment in Schools: Position Paper of the Society for AdolescentMedicine," Journal of Adolescent Health, vol. 32, 2003, p. 388("punished children become more rebellious and are more likely to demonstratevindictive behavior"); UN General Assembly, Report of the independent expertfor the United Nations study on violence against children, World Report onViolence against Children,Paulo Pinheiro, Independent Expert,A/61/299, August 29, 2006, http://www.violencestudy.org/IMG/pdf/English.pdf(accessed July 31, 2009) , p.132 (reviewing North American studies that havefound a direct correlation between abusive behavior from educators and theprevalence of violence or bullying among children).[115]Human Rights Watch interview with Michelle R. (pseudonym), Hinds County, Mississippi, December 8, 2007 (interviewed with Tom R. (pseudonym), spouse).[116]Human Rights Watch interview with Andrea N. (pseudonym), Grapeland, Texas, February 28, 2008.[117]Human Rights Watch interview with Tom R. (pseudonym), December 8, 2007.[118]Human Rights Watch interview with Johnny McPhail, Oxford, Mississippi, December14, 2007.[119]National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes ofHealth, "Tourette Syndrome Fact Sheet,"http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/tourette/detail_tourette.htm (accessed June10, 2009) ("Tourette Syndrome (TS) is a neurological disorder characterized byrepetitive, stereotyped, involuntary movements and vocalizations calledtics.").[120]ACLU telephone interview with Anna M., Florida, March 9, 2009[121]Human Rights Watch interview with Michelle R. (pseudonym), Mississippi,December 8, 2007.[122]The University of Maryland Medical Center notes that a complication in sicklecell patients is that "the misshapen cells can block the major blood vesselsthat supply the brain with oxygen.Any interruption in theflow of blood and oxygen to the brain can result in devastating neurologicalimpairment." University of Maryland Medical Center, http://www.umm.edu/blood/sickle.htm(accessed June 2, 2009).[123]ACLU telephone interview with Jennifer Parker, Tennessee, March 10, 2009.[124]Human Rights Watch interview with Tom R. (pseudonym), Mississippi, December 8,2007.[125]The program was run at the local elementary school and governed by the schooldistrict policy on discipline. Early Childhood Center, "Student-ParentHandbook, 2007-2008," [name of location withheld], on file with Human RightsWatch (referring to the [name withheld] School District Student Code ofConduct, on file with Human Rights Watch).[126]ADHD includes three groups of behavior symptoms: inattention, hyperactivity,and impulsivity. Symptoms of ADHD include having a very hard time payingattention; inability to stay seated; squirming and fidgeting; and acting andspeaking without thinking. American Academy of Pediatrics, "Parenting CornerQ&A: ADHD," http://www.aap.org/publiced/BR_ADHD.htm (accessed June 10,2009) (listing symptoms of ADHD).[127]Human Rights Watch interview with an attorney in private practice representingHeather P. (mother of the three-year-old boy), rural Texas, February 26, 2008.[128]The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act prohibits expulsions or significantsuspensions ("changes of placement") for conduct that is a manifestation ofdisability. 20 U.S.C. 1415 (k), 34 C.F.R. sec. 300.530. However, IDEA does notnecessarily apply to in-class discipline or other discipline that does notamount to a change in placement. It therefore does not effectively prohibitcorporal punishment for conduct that is a manifestation of a child'sdisability. See, for example, Cole by Cole v. Greenfield-Central CommunitySch., 657 F.Supp. 56, 58-59 (S.D. Ind. 1986) (student with disabilities "isnot entitled to any unique exemptions or protections from a school's normaldisciplinary procedures regarding corporal punishment because of hishandicap."); B.A.L. v. Apple, No.00-0068-C-B/G, 2001 WL 1135024, *6(S.D. Ind. Sep. 21, 2001) (Same).[129]Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, 29 U.S.C. sec.794, states: "No otherwisequalified individual with a disability in the United States ... shall, solelyby reason of her or his disability, be excluded from participation in, bedenied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program oractivity receiving Federal financial assistance."[130]42 U.S.C. secs. 12131 et seq.[131]Courts are mixed in their analysis of whether adverse actions directed againstindividuals for manifestations of their disabilities are prohibiteddiscrimination (1) "because of" disability (disparate treatment), (2) a failureto accommodate the known aspects of a disability, or (3) application of neutralpolicies that have the effect of discriminating against individuals withdisabilities (disparate impact). The majority of cases considering the issueoccur in the employment area. Some have concluded that adverse action formanifestations are prohibited under one or more of these theories. SeeTeahan v. Metro-North Commuter Railroad, 951 F.2d 511, 516 (2d Cir. 1991)(a plaintiff satisfies the "solely by reason of" handicap requirement of theRehabilitation Act by showing that the employer "justifies termination based onconduct caused by the handicap."); Den Hartog v. Wasatch Academy, 129F.3d 1076, 1087 (10th Cir. 1997) (under disparate impact theory under the ADA,"certain levels of disability-caused conduct [] have to be tolerated oraccommodated.") The majority view in US federal courts, however, holds thatpeople with disabilities can be subjected to adverse action, sometimesconcluding that the action was taken not because of the disability but due tothe conduct, or that in light of the conduct, in the employment realm, theemployee was not qualified for the position because of the conduct. SeeCherylL. Anderson, "What Is 'Because of the Disability' under the Americans withDisabilities Act? Reasonable Accommodation, Causation, and the WindfallDoctrine," Berkeley Journal of Employment and Labor Law, vol. 27, 2006,p. 323; Kelly Cahill Timmons, "Accommodating Misconduct Under the Americanswith Disabilities Act," Florida Law Review, vol. 57, 2005, p. 208(noting the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, FourthEdition (DSM-IV) as defining certain mental impairments as "likely to manifestthemselves in the form of [mis]conduct", and discussing cases).[132]See34 C.F.R. sec. 104.33 (the regulations focus on denial of a freeappropriate public education (FAPE) as the discrimination prohibited by thesestatutes). Courts interpreting the Rehabilitation Act and the ADA haveconcluded that manifestation determinations are not required for disciplineunder these statutes.See M.G. et al. v. Chrisfield, et al., 547F.Supp.2d 399, 419-20 (D.N.J. 2008); Centennial Sch. Dist. v. Phil L. andLori L., ex rel. Matthew L., 559 F.Supp.2d 634 (E.D. Pa. 2008) (Parentsfailed to exhaust administrative remedies under IDEA, and Rehabilitation Actdid not mandate that district provide student pre-expulsion manifestationhearing).  "A manifestation determination is a creature of statute;specifically, the IDEA, not the Rehabilitation Act." Ibid., 559 F. Supp.2d at645. But see Ron J. ex rel. R.J. v. McKinney Indep. Sch. Dist., No.05-257, 2006 WL 2927446, at *4 (E.D. Tex. Oct. 11, 2006) (comparing aRehabilitation Act hearing and a manifestation determination under IDEA andfinding that "there is little difference in what would have been presented").[133]Wing, "The Autistic Spectrum," The Lancet, pp. 1761-1766.[134]Ibid.[135]National Research Council, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences andEducation, Committee on Educational Interventions for Children With Autism,Catherine Lord and James McGee, eds., Educating Children With Autism (Washington,DC: National Academy Press; 2001) p. 27.[136]ACLU telephone interview with Sharon H., Georgia, March 9, 2009.[137]ACLU telephone interview with Theresa E., who observed the incident, Georgia, March 5, 2009.[138]ACLU telephone interview with Sarah P. (pseudonym), Oklahoma, May 22, 2009.[139]ACLU telephone interview with Karen W., Arkansas, May 22, 2009.[140]ACLU telephone interview with May R. (pseudonym), Florida, April 16, 2009.[141]ACLU telephone interview with Anna M., Florida, March 9, 2009.[142]Human Rights Watch interview with Elizabeth Savage, former teacher in theMississippi Delta, New Orleans, Louisiana, December 9, 2007.[143]Human Rights Watch interview with Sean D. (pseudonym), Oxford, Mississippi, December 14, 2007.[144]Human Rights Watch interview with Brad G. (pseudonym), middle school teacher,Mississippi Delta, December 12, 2007.[145]Similar scenarios have been studied in the context of parental physicalpunishment, where research suggests that parents of children with communicationproblems may resort to physical discipline because of frustration over whatthey perceive as intentional failure to respond to verbal guidance, or wherechildren's behavioral characteristics may become frustrating. Roberta Hibbard,Larry Desch, American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Child Abuse and Neglect,and American Academy of Pediatrics Council on Children With Disabilities, "Maltreatmentof children with disabilities," Pediatrics, vol. 199 no. 5, May 2007, p.1020.[146]Human Rights Watch interview with Tom R. (pseudonym), Mississippi, December 8,2007.[147]ACLU telephone interview with Jennifer Parker, Tennessee, March 10, 2009.[148]"Corporal Punishment in Schools: Position Paper of the Society for AdolescentMedicine," Journal of Adolescent Health, p. 389 ("Medical complicationsmay prevent students from returning to school for days, weeks, or even longer.Reported medical findings include abrasions, severe muscle injury, extensivehematomas, whiplash damage, life-threatening fat hemorrhage, and others.").[149]Human Rights Watch interview with Rhonda H. (pseudonym), rural east Mississippi, December 11, 2007.[150]Ibid.[151]ACLU telephone interview with Deena S., Texas, May 22, 2009.[152]ACLU telephone interview with May R. (pseudonym), Florida, April 16, 2009.[153]ACLU telephone interview with Rose C., Florida, May 18, 2009.[154]ACLU telephone interview with Anna M., Florida, March 9, 2009.[155]Human Rights Watch/ACLU, A Violent Education, "VI. Impact of CorporalPunishment."[156]"Corporal Punishment in Schools: Position Paper of the Society for AdolescentMedicine," Journal of Adolescent Health, p. 388.[157]American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on School Health, "CorporalPunishment in Schools," Pediatrics, vol. 106 no. 2, August 2000,http://aappolicy.aappublications.org/cgi/content/full/pediatricspercent3b106/2/343 (accessed August 8, 2008), p. 343.[158]Human Rights Watch interview with Michelle R. (pseudonym), Mississippi,December 8, 2007.[159]ACLU telephone interview with Anna M., Florida, March 9, 2009.[160]Human Rights Watch/ACLU, A Violent Education, "VI. Impact of CorporalPunishment."[161]"Corporal Punishment in Schools: Position Paper of the Society for AdolescentMedicine," Journal of Adolescent Health, p. 388. In the United NationsSecretary-General's worldwide Study on Violence against Children, physicalpunishment in schools is noted as one factor that contributes to absenteeism,dropping out, and lack of motivation for academic achievement. Pinheiro, Reportof the independent expert for the United Nations study on violence againstchildren, p. 130.[162]End Physical Punishment of Children (EPOCH), "Newsletter," vol. 1, issue 11,Fall 2007, http://www.stophitting.com/disathome/newsletter/EPOCH_Newsletter_2007v1Iss11.pdf(accessed August 8, 2008). Whiteside continues, "We feel it is important forpublic health workers, teachers, and others concerned for the emotional andphysical health of children and youth to support the adoption of alternativemethods for the achievement of self-control and responsible behavior inchildren and adolescents."[163]Sandra de Hotman, "Dissertation: A Comparison of School Systems in AlabamaUsing Corporal Punishment and Not Using Corporal Punishment on SelectedDemographic Variables," 1997, unpublished document on file with Human RightsWatch (finding a statistically significant correlation between districts thatuse corporal punishment and districts with higher drop-out rates).[164]ACLU telephone interview with Rebecca K. (pseudonym), Louisiana, May 26, 2009.[165]Human Rights Watch interview with Sean D., recent high school graduate, Oxford, Mississippi, December 14, 2007 (referring to events in a small school district inthe Mississippi Delta).[166]Human Rights Watch interview with Zack T., rural Mississippi, December 10,2007.[167]Sickle cell anemia is a condition which is characterized by pain crises, or"unpredictable episodes of severe and sometimes excruciating pain." Section onHematology/Oncology; Committee on Genetics, "Health Supervision for ChildrenWith Sickle Cell Disease," Pediatrics, pp.526-535.[168]ACLU telephone interview with Jennifer Parker, Tennessee, March 10, 2009.[169]ACLU telephone interview with Sarah P. (pseudonym), Oklahoma, May 22, 2009.[170]ACLU telephone interview with Rose C., Florida, May 18, 2009.[171]The ACLU and Human Rights Watch are unaware of any medical studies directly addressingthe impact of corporal punishment on students with disabilities. However,comparable research on maltreatment (including physical abuse) of people withintellectual disabilities suggests profound effects: "Among the generalpopulation, exposure to maltreatment has been shown to produce a range ofsequelae, including compromised psychological health … In addition to theseconsequences, people with disabilities may develop secondary disabilitiesand/or suffer loss of independence … For example, a person with an intellectualdisability may develop … a secondary mobility disability as a result ofphysical abuse." Willi Horner-Johnson and Charles Drum, "Prevalence ofMaltreatment of People with Intellectual Disabilities: A Review of RecentlyPublished Research," Mental Retardation and Developmental DisabilitiesResearch Reviews, vol. 12 no. 1, 2006, p. 57.[172]Sectionon Hematology/Oncology Committee on Genetics, "Health Supervision for ChildrenWith Sickle Cell Disease," Pediatrics, pp. 526-535.[173]A sickle cell crisis occurs when sickled red blood cells form clumps in thebloodstream. (Other cells also may play a role in this clumping process.) Theseclumps of cells block blood flow through the small blood vessels in the limbsand organs. This can cause pain and organ damage. National Heart Lung and BloodInstitute: Diseases and Conditions Index (available at http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/dci/Diseases/Sca/SCA_SignsAndSymptoms.html(accessed July 31, 2009)).[174]ACLU telephone interview with Jennifer Parker, Tennessee, March 10, 2009.[175]ACLU telephone interview with Cynthia C., Georgia, May 27, 2009.[176]American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Children with Disabilities, "ThePediatrician's Role in the Diagnosis and Management of Autism Spectrum Disorderin Children," Pediatrics, pp. 1221-1226; Isabelle Rapin, MD, "AutisticChildren: Diagnosis and Clinical Features," Pediatrics, vol. 87, May1991, pp. 751-760.[177]ACLU telephone interview with Theresa E., Georgia, March 5, 2009.[178]ACLU telephone interview with Sharon H., Georgia, March 9, 2009.[179]Some children with autism exhibit insensitivity to pain, for instance, "somechildren will bang their heads until they have a lump on each temple or bitetheir hands until they are permanently scarred." Children with this reducedresponsiveness to pain in some cases do not cry even when severely hurt.Isabelle Rapin, MD, "Autistic Children: Diagnosis and Clinical Features," Pediatrics,pp. 751-760.[180]ACLU telephone interview with Theresa E., Georgia, March 5, 2009.[181]ACLU telephone interview with Jacquelyn K., Mississippi, April 14, 2009.[182]ACLU telephone interview with Anna M., Florida, March 9, 2009.[183]ACLU telephone interview with Jacquelyn K., Mississippi, April 14, 2009.[184]Ibid.[185]ACLU telephone interview with May R. (pseudonym), Florida, April 16, 2009.[186]ACLU telephone interview with Sharon H., Georgia, March 9, 2009.[187]ACLU telephone interview with Rose C., Florida, May 18, 2009.[188]ACLU telephone interview with Deena S., Texas, May 22, 2009.[189]ACLU telephone interview with Karen W., Arkansas, May 22, 2009.[190]Human Rights Watch interview with Tom R. (pseudonym), Mississippi, December 8,2007.[191]ACLU telephone interview with Karen W., Arkansas, May 22, 2009.[192]Human Rights Watch interview with Michelle R. (pseudonym), Mississippi,December 8, 2007.[193]ACLU telephone interview with Anna M., Florida, March 9, 2009.[194]ACLU telephone interview with Rose C., Florida, May 18, 2009.[195]ACLU telephone interview with Theresa E., Georgia, March 5, 2009.[196]ACLU telephone interview with Anna M., Florida, March 9, 2009.[197]ACLU telephone interview with Brian W., Arkansas, May 22, 2009 (interviewedwith spouse).[198]ACLU telephone interview with Deena S., Texas, May 22, 2009.[199]ACLU telephone interview with Jacquelyn K., Mississippi, April 14, 2009.[200]ACLU telephone interview with May R. (pseudonym), Florida, April 16, 2009.[201]Most states require compulsory enrollment in school for school-age children; ifa child does not enroll or attend, a truancy officer may petition a youth courtor other supervisory jurisdiction to bring about the child's attendance. See,for example, Miss. Code Ann. sec. 37-13-91(6)-(7) and sec. 37-22-53(2)(b)-(c)(specifying Mississippi laws on truancy); S.D. Codified Laws sec. 13-27-19(specifying South Dakota law on truancy); 105 Ill. Comp. Stat. 5/26-5(specifying Illinois laws on truancy). See generally, National Center forSchool Engagement, "Guidelines for a National Definition of Truancy andCalculating Rates," August 2006 (available at http://www.schoolengagement.org/TruancypreventionRegistry/Admin/Resources/Resources/GuidelinesforaNationalDefinitionofTruancyandCalculatingRates.pdf(accessed July 31, 2009)). Most educators and court personnel who deal withtruancy define it as an unexcused absence from school; however, beyond thisgeneral understanding lie state and local definitions that qualify and quantifytruancy through statutes, policies, regulations, and even school building codesof student conduct. Variation in different elements of truancy includes: (1)whether or not an absence that is excused by a parent but not by schoolofficials is still a truancy; (2) whether truancy applies even if only part ofthe day is unexcused; (3) whether truancy is determined only if a case isreviewed; (4) whether truancy is a term reserved for cases that are referred tocourt; (5) whether truancy only applies to students within the ages ofcompulsory school attendance. Ibid., p. 1.[202]ACLU telephone interview with Cynthia C., Georgia, May 27, 2009.[203]ACLU telephone interview with Jacquelyn K., Mississippi, April 14, 2009.[204]Ibid.[205]ACLU telephone interview with Karen W., Arkansas, May 22, 2009.[206]ACLU telephone interview with Rose C., Florida, May 18, 2009.[207]ACLU telephone interview with Anna M., Florida, March 9, 2009.[208]ACLU telephone interview with Karen W., Arkansas, May 22, 2009.[209]National Disability Rights Network, "School is Not Supposed to Hurt," pp.35-38.[210]Major school districts have initiated such changes. For examples, see LosAngeles Unified School District (LAUSD), "Discipline Foundation Policy:School-Wide Positive Behavior Support," March 27, 2007, http://notebook.lausd.net/pls/ptl/docs/PAGE/CA_LAUSD/FLDR_ORGANIZATIONS/STUDENT_HEALTH_HUMAN_SERVICES/SHHS/DISCIPLINE_POLICY/BUL-3638.0.PDF(accessed August 8, 2008) (requiring every school in the district to adopt andimplement a school-wide positive behavior support discipline plan); KentuckyGeneral Assembly, "Legislative Declaration on Goals for Commonwealth'sSchools-Model Curriculum Framework," July 14, 2000, http://www.lrc.ky.gov/krs/158-00/6451.PDF(accessed August 8, 2008) (providing a framework for schools to incorporatecharacter education into curriculum to eliminate barriers to achievement);Chicago Public School Board, "Chicago Public Schools Policy Manual: StudentCode of Conduct for the Chicago Public Schools for the 2007-2008 School Year,"June 27, 2007, sec. 705.5, http://policy.cps.k12.il.us/documents/705.5.pdf(accessed August 8, 2008) (revising the "Student Code of Conduct" to reflect acomprehensive approach to student discipline and including components ofrestorative justice, alternatives to out-of-school suspension, and othermeasures aimed at creating a safe and positive environment for students andschool personnel).[211]US Department of Education, Office of Special Education Programs (OSEP),Technical Assistance Center on Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports,"School-Wide PBS," http://www.pbis.org/schoolwide.htm (accessed August 8, 2008)(giving definitions and details of positive behavior support).[212]US Department of Education, Office of Special Education and RehabilitativeServices, "Safeguarding our Children: An Action Guide," April 21, 2000,http://www.ed.gov/admins/lead/safety/actguide/action_guide.pdf (accessed August8, 2008), p. 12 (noting that positive behavior support is based on threeimportant characteristics: "[a]n explanation of why the behavior is a problem,an explanation of which rule was violated, and the provision of opportunitiesto learn appropriate behaviors and to correct mistakes").[213]See, for example, Council of Parent Attorneys and Advocates, "Unsafe in theSchoolhouse," p. 3 ("Positive behavioral supports used research-basedstrategies that combine behavioral analysis with person-centered values tolessen problem behaviors while teaching replacement skills. These proactivepractices teach children to build social relationships and skills they need toprogress to adulthood….").[214]Nancy Jones and Jody Feder, "The Use of Seclusion and Restraint in PublicSchools: The Legal Issues," Congressional Research Service, 7-5700, April 14,2009, p. 8.[215] David Miller, Michael George, and Julie Fogt, "Establishing andsustaining research-based practices at Centennial School: A descriptive casestudy of systemic change," Psychology in the Schools, vol. 42 no. 5, pp.553-567 (2005); Sandy Washburn et al., "Improving school climate and studentbehavior: A new paradigm for Indiana schools,"Education PolicyBriefs, vol. 5 no. 2, Fall 2007 (Indiana Institute on Disability and Community,Center for Evaluating & Education Policy Studies, Bloomington, IN).[216]OSEP, "School-Wide PBS."[217]Stephen Lassen, Michael Steele, and Wayne Sailor, "The relationship ofschool-wide positive behavior support to academic achievement in an urban middleschool," Psychology in the Schools, vol. 43, 2006, pp. 701-712.[218]Miller, George, and Fogt, "Establishing and sustaining research-based practicesat Centennial School: A descriptive case study of systemic change," Psychologyin the Schools, pp. 553-567.[219]See, for example, Lassen, Steele, and Sailor, "The relationship of school-widepositive behavior support to academic achievement in an urban middle school," Psychologyin the Schools, pp.701-712; James Luiselli et al., "Whole-schoolpositive behavior support: effects on student discipline and academicperformance," Educational Psychology: An International Journal ofExperimental Educational Psychology, vol. 25, issue 2, 2005, pp. 183-198. Seealso Carol Metzler et al., "Evaluation of a comprehensive behavior managementprogram to improve school-wide positive behavior support," Education &Treatment of Children, vol. 24, pp. 448-449 (2001) (PBS creates a greaterperception of school safety).[220]US Department of Education, "Safeguarding our Children," p. 13.[221]National Disability Rights Network, "School is Not Supposed to Hurt"; see alsoIan Arthur, "Literature Review: Time-Out, Seclusion, and Restraint in IndianaPublic-Schools," March 2008, http://www.in.gov/ipas/files/SR_Lit_Review_Final_AA.pdf(accessed July 31, 2009) (discussing best practices on PBS).[222]National Disability Rights Network, "School is Not Supposed to Hurt."[223]Human Rights Watch interview with Michelle R. (pseudonym), Mississippi,December 8, 2007.[224]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Charlotte M. (pseudonym), Connecticut, November 16, 2007.[225]ACLU telephone interview with Sharon H., Georgia, March 9, 2009.[226]ACLU telephone interview with Rose C., Florida, May 18, 2009.[227]ACLU telephone interview with May R. (pseudonym), Florida, April 16, 2009.[228]ACLU telephone interview with Karen W., Arkansas, May 22, 2009.[229]Ibid.[230]ACLU telephone interview with Rose C., Florida, May 18, 2009.[231]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 8, para. 18; UNHuman Rights Committee, General Comment No. 20, Article 7, Replaces GeneralComment 7 Concerning Prohibition of Torture and Cruel Treatment or Punishment,UN Doc. CCPR/C/GC/20* (1992), para. 5; CAT, Report of the Committee againstTorture, UN GAOR, UN Doc. A/50/44 (1995), para. 169.[232]See Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, concluded May 23, 1969, 1155U.N.T.S. 331, entered into force January 27, 1980, art. 18. Although the United States has signed but not ratified the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, itregards this convention as "the authoritative guide to current treaty law andpractice." S. Exec. Doc. L., 92d Cong., 1st sess. (1971), p. 1.[233]The White House, "Remarks by the President on Signing of UN Convention on theRights of Persons with Disabilities Proclamation."[234]UN General Assembly, Declaration on the Rights of the Child, Resolution 1386(XIV), November 20, 1959. The United States was one of the then 78 members ofthe UN General Assembly, which voted unanimously to adopt the declaration. WhileUnited Nations General Assembly resolutions do not in and of themselvesconstitute binding international law, passage of resolutions by unanimousconsent is strong authority for asserting their status as customaryinternational law. Stephen Schwebel, "The Effect of Resolutions of the U.N.General Assembly on Customary International Law," American Society ofInternational Law Proceedings, vol. 73, 1979, p. 301. Furthermore, article19 of the American Convention on Human Rights states that "[e]very minor childhas the right to the measures of protection required by his condition as aminor on the part of his family, society, and the state." American Conventionon Human Rights ("Pact of San José, Costa Rica"), adopted November 22, 1969,O.A.S. Treaty Series No. 36, 1144 U.N.T.S. 123, entered into force July 18,1978, reprinted in Basic Documents Pertaining to Human Rights in theInter-American System, OEA/Ser.L.V/II.82 doc.6 rev.1 at 25 (1992), art. 19.[235]The UN Declaration on the Rights of the Child requires that "[t]he child who isphysically, mentally or socially handicapped shall be given the specialtreatment, education and care required by his particular condition." UnitedNations Declaration on the Rights of the Child, Principle 5, G.A. Res. 1386(XIV), 14 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 19, U.N. Doc. A/4354.[236] Committee on theRights of the Child, General Comment No. 9, The Rights of Children withDisabilities, UN Doc. CRC/C/GC/9 (2006), para. 42.[237]CRPD, art. 7.[238]Ibid., art. 15.[239]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 UN GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, UN Doc.A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23, 1976, ratified bythe United States June 8, 1992, art. 7; Convention against Torture and OtherCruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Convention againstTorture), adopted December 10, 1984, G.A. res. 39/46, annex, 39 UN GAOR Supp.(No. 51) at 197, UN Doc. A/39/51 (1984), entered into force June 26, 1987,ratified by the United States October 21, 1994, art. 16.[240]UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 20, para. 5. See also Report ofthe Committee against Torture, UN GAOR, UN Doc. A/50/44 (1995), para. 169(declaring that the "continuing application" of corporal punishment "couldconstitute in itself a violation of the Convention").[241]Report of the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman ordegrading treatment or punishment, UN GA A/HRC/10/44, 14 Jan. 2009, para. 37.[242]For a more detailed legal analysis of the human rights laws at issue in thiscontext, see Human Rights Watch/ACLU, A Violent Education, pp. 104-105.[243]Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), adopted December13, 2006 by G.A. Res. 61/106, Annex I, U.N. GAOR, 61st Sess., Supp. No. 49, at65, U.N. Doc. A/61/49 (2006), entered into force May 3, 2008, U.N. Doc.A/61/611, art. 16(1).[244]Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, G.A.Res. 44/25, annex, 44 UN GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, UN Doc. A/44/49 (1989),entered into force September 2, 1990, signed by the United States February 16,1995, art. 19 (emphasis added).[245]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 8, para. 18.[246]Vernor Munoz, United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Right to Education,Human Rights Council, Report: The Right to Education of Persons withDisabilities. UN Document SA/HRC/4/29 (19 February 2007).Available at: www.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/4session/A.HRC.4.29.pdf(accessed July 31, 2009).[247]CRPD, article 24(2)(b). Similarly, the U.S. Individuals with DisabilitiesEducation Act grants persons with disabilities the right to a "free appropriatepublic education." 20 U.S.C. sec. 1400(d)(1)(A) (2005).[248]Vernor Munoz, United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Right to Education,Human Rights Council, Report: The Right to Education of Persons withDisabilities, para. 22; see also, UNESCO and Ministry of Education and Scienceof Spain, "Salamanca Statement and Framework for Action on Special NeedsEducation," adopted by the World Conference on Special Needs Education: Accessand Quality, Salamanca, Spain, June 7-10, 1994, para. 2.[249]The White House, "Remarks by the President on Signing of UN Convention on theRights of Persons with Disabilities Proclamation."[250]For a more detailed legal analysis of the human rights laws at issue in thiscontext, see Human Rights Watch/ACLU, A Violent Education, pp. 105-107.[251]UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 13,Article 13, The Right to Education, UN Doc. E/C.12/1999/10 (1999), para. 41.[252]CRC, art. 23.[253]CRPD, art. 4. Discrimination is defined broadly to include "distinction,exclusion or restriction on the basis of disability which has the purpose oreffect of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on anequal basis with others, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms in thepolitical, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field." Ibid.,art. 2.[254]CRC, art. 2. Furthermore, students with disabilities have the right tonon-discriminatory access to education. Convention Against Discrimination inEducation, UNESCO, adopted 14 Dec. 1960, Articles 1, 4.[255]UDHR, art. 26(3).[256]CRC, preamble.[257]CRC, art. 5 ("States Parties shall respect the responsibilities, rights, andduties of parents … to provide, in a manner consistent with the evolvingcapacities of the child, appropriate direction and guidance in the exercise bythe child of the rights recognized in the present Convention.").[258]For a more detailed legal analysis of the laws at issue in this context, seeHuman Rights Watch/ACLU, A Violent Education, pp. 109-113.[259]US Constitution, art. VI, clause 2.[260]The Paquete-Habana, 175 U.S. 677, 700 (1900). See also Murrayv. The Charming Betsy, 6 U.S. (2 Cranch) 64, 118 (1804) (statutes "cannever be construed to violate … rights … further than is warranted by the lawof nations"); Harold Hongju Koh, "Is International Law Really State Law?" HarvardLaw Review, vol. 111, 1998, p. 1824 (noting that customary internationallaw is federal common law and preempts inconsistent state practices).[261]Asakura v. City of Seattle, 265 U.S. 332 (1924) (holding that a treatymade under the authority of the United States stands on the same footing ofsupremacy as do the provisions of the Constitution and laws of the UnitedStates and "operate[s] of itself without the aid of any legislation, state ornational; and it will be applied and given authoritative effect by thecourts"). See also Maiorano v. Baltimore & Ohio R. R. Co., 213 U.S. 268, 272 (1888); Baldwin v. Franks, 120 U.S. 678 (1887); Head Money Cases, 112 U.S. 580, 598 (1884); Chew Heong v. United States, 112 U.S. 536, 540 (1884); Foster v.Neilson, 2 Pet. 253, 314 (1829).[262]ICCPR, art. 50.[263]Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),"Convention on the Rights of the Child,"http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/ratification/11.htm (accessed August 8,2008) Singapore's declaration reads: "The Republic of Singapore considers thatarticles 19 and 37 of the Convention do not prohibit-(a) the application of anyprevailing measures prescribed by law for maintaining law and order in theRepublic of Singapore; (b) measures and restrictions which are prescribed bylaw and which are necessary in the interests of national security, publicsafety, public order, the protection of public health or the protection of therights and freedom of others; or (c) the judicious application of corporalpunishment in the best interest of the child." A number of states haveinterpreted Singapore's declaration as a reservation and objected to it ascontrary to the object and purpose of the Convention. "UN Treaty CollectionDatabase," (Germany: September 4, 1996; Belgium: September 26, 1996; Italy:October 4, 1996; The Netherlands: November 6, 1996; Norway: November 29, 1996;Finland: November 25, 1996; Portugal: December 3, 1996).[264]The United States signed the CRC on February 16, 1995 and Somalia signed on May 2, 2002.[265]See Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, art. 18 (the United States,though not a signatory to the Vienna Convention, regards it as "theauthoritative guide to current treaty law and practice." S. Exec. Doc. L., 92dCong., 1st sess. (1971), p. 1); Theodor Meron, "The Meaning and Reach of theInternational Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of RacialDiscrimination," American Journal of International Law, vol. 79, 1985,p. 283. The US government has also accepted that it is bound by customaryinternational law not to defeat a treaty's object and purpose. "Albright SaysU.S. Bound by Nuke Pact; Sends Letters to Nations Despite Senate Vote,"Washington Times, November 2, 1999 (describing the Clinton administration'sacceptance of obligations under the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty despite theSenate's failure to ratify).[266]Roper v. Simmons, 543 U.S. 551, 578 (2005).[267]For a more detailed legal analysis of the laws at issue in this context, seeHuman Rights Watch/ACLU, A Violent Education, pp. 113-116.[268]Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S. 651 (1977). At the circuit court level,corporal punishment has also been considered under the US Constitution'ssubstantive due process clause (Hall v. Tawney, 621 F.2d 607, 611 (4thCir. 1980), Garcia v. Miera, 817 F.2d 650, 656 (10th Cir. 1987), Saylorv. Board of Education of Harlan County, 118 F.3d 507, 514-515 (6th Cir.1997)), as well as the equal protection clause (Cunningham v. Beavers,858 F.2d 269, 273 (5th Cir. 1988) (holding that intermediate scrutiny underequal protection jurisprudence does not apply to corporal punishment casesbecause children are not viewed as a "suspect class.")).[269]Global Initiative to End All Corporal Punishment of Children, "North America: Summary of legal status of corporal punishment of children," June 2007,http://www.endcorporalpunishment.org/pages/pdfs/charts/Chart-NorthAmerica.pdf(accessed August 8, 2008). Compare to Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S. 651, 660-661 (1977) (the majority, writing in 1977, observed that corporal punishment"continues to play a role in the public education of school children in mostparts of the country…. We can discern no trend toward its elimination.").[270]Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S. 651, 664-670 (1977).[271]The nine-member court divided, with five members in the majority and fourdissenting.[272]Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S. 651, 685 (1977) (White, J., dissenting).[273]Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S. 651, 673-674 (1977) (noting that theliberty interest in personal security is implicated where public schoolauthorities, acting under color of state law, deliberately punish a child formisconduct by restraint and infliction of appreciable pain).[274]Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S. 651, 676 (1977).[275]Ibid., p. 682.[276]Cunningham v. Beavers, 858 F.2d 269, 272 (5th Cir. 1988) (citing to Tex.Penal Code Ann. sec. 9.62(Vernon 1986), Texas Educ. Code Ann. sec. 21.912 (Vernon 1986), among others,to support the contention that common law remedies exist); Woodward v. LosFresnos, 732 F.2d 1243, 1245 (5th Cir. 1984) (citing to older cases).[277]Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S. 651, 693 (1977) (White, J., dissenting).[278] 20 U.S.C. Section 1400 et seq.[279]US Government Accountability Office, "Seclusions and Restraints," p. 4.[280]See 20 U.S.C. 1415 (k), 34 C.F.R. sec. 300.530.[281]Letter to Anonymous, OSEP, March 17, 2008, 50 IDELR 228. ("While IDEAemphasizes the use of positive behavioral interventions and supports to addressbehavior that impedes learning, IDEA does not flatly prohibit the use ofmechanical restraints or other aversive behavioral techniques for children withdisabilities.")[282]Ibid.[283]See B.A.L. v. Apple, No. 00-0068-C-B/G, 2001 WL 1135024, *6 (S.D. Ind.Sep. 21, 2001); Cole by Cole v. Greenfield-Central Community Sch., 657F.Supp. 56, 58-59 (S.D. Ind. 1986) (student with disabilities "is not entitledto any unique exemptions or protections from a school's normal disciplinaryprocedures regarding corporal punishment because of his handicap.").[284]State employees are typically shielded from liability for official actionstaken within the scope of their employment duties, under their state's"sovereign immunity" statute. In states that use corporal punishment, thismeans that the administration of physical punishment, as long as it is"reasonable" and in conformity with the school district's policies, may beconsidered an official act of maintaining order and discipline, and thereforeprotected. Such is the case in Kentucky, Arizona, Oklahoma, and Louisiana. See, for example, in Kentucky, Carr v. Wright, 423 S.W.2d 521 (Ct. App.Ky., 1968), Wood v. Bd. of Educ. of Danville, 412 S.W.2d 877 (Ct. App.Ky., 1967); in Arizona, A.R.S. sec. 15-341(E), LaFrentz v. Gallagher,462 P.2d 804 (Ariz. 1969); in Oklahoma, 21 O.S. 1981 sec. 844, Holman v.Wheeler, 677 P.2d 645 (Okla. 1983) (overturned on unrelated grounds); inLouisiana, Roy v. Continental Ins. Co., 313 So.2d 349 (La. Ct. App.1975), Setliff v. Rapides Parish School Bd., 888 So. 2d 1156 (La. Ct.App. 2004). Some states that use corporal punishment provide an extra layer ofprotection for school employees by addressing disciplinary acts explicitlywithin the state's law, rather than relying on general sovereign immunity.These states include Missouri, North Carolina, Indiana, Wyoming, Florida, Georgia, Arkansas, Alabama, Colorado, Tennessee, and New Mexico. See, for example,in Missouri, V.A.M.S. sec. 160.261, see also Streeter v. Hundley, 580S.W.2d 284 (Mo. 1979); in North Carolina, N.C.G.S.A. sec. 115C-391(h); inIndiana, Ind. Code Ann. sec. 13-3-3(20); in Wyoming, W.S. 1977 sec. 21-4-308;in Florida, F.S.A. sec. 1006.11; in Georgia, Ga. Code Ann. sec. 20-2-732; inArkansas, A.C.A. sec. 6-17-112; in Alabama, Ala. Code Ann. 1975 sec. 16-28A-1;in Colorado, C.R.S.A. sec. 22-32-109.1; in Tennessee, T.C.A. sec. 49-6-4105; inNew Mexico, N.M.S.A. 1978 sec. 22-5-4.3.[285]Mississippi Torts Claims Act, Miss. Code Ann. Section 11-46-7 and Miss. Code Ann. Section 11-46-9(1)(x).Related ContentAugust 10, 2009News ReleaseUS: Students With Disabilities Face Corporal Punishment at Higher RatesACLU and Human Rights Watch Seek Ban on Physical Discipline at SchoolAugust 10, 2009News ReleaseUS: Students With Disabilities Face Corporal Punishment at Higher RatesRegion / CountryUnited StatesProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch