No Place for Children: Child Recruitment, Forced Marriage, and Attacks on Schools in Somalia | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload the summary and recommendations in SomaliDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload the summary and recommendations in SomaliFebruary 20, 2012No Place for ChildrenChild Recruitment, Forced Marriage, and Attacks on Schools in SomaliaChildren recruited by the Islamist armed group al-Shabaab, at a training camp in the Afgooye Corridor, west of Mogadishu, southern Somalia, in February 2011.© 2011 PrivateNo Place for ChildrenChild Recruitment, Forced Marriage, and Attacks on Schoolsin SomaliaMap of SomaliaSummaryKeyRecommendationsTo theTransitional Federal Government of Somalia, and Transitional  FederalInstitutionsToal-ShabaabTo ForeignParties to the Conflict: AMISOM and the African Union, Kenya, and EthiopiaTo AllStates and the Donor Community in SomaliaTo the UNSecurity Council and the UN Human Rights CouncilTo theUnited Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and Other Child ProtectionAgencies in Somalia and KenyaMethodologyI.BackgroundBriefSummary of Somalia’s ConflictMajorParties to the ConflictDrought,Famine, and al-Shabaab’s Restrictions on Humanitarian AccessChildren inthe Somali ConflictII.Recruitment and Use of Children as SoldiersAl-ShabaabChildren inTFG Forces and in TFG CustodyTFG Commitmentsto End Recruitment and Use of ChildrenIII. ForcedMarriage and Rape of Girls by al-ShabaabForced andEarly Marriage by al-ShabaabRape byal-ShabaabIV.Al-Shabaab Attacks on Schools, Teachers, and StudentsLaws-of-WarViolations Involving SchoolsRecruitmentof Children from SchoolsAbusesagainst TeachersControl ofCurriculum and Restrictions on GirlsImpact ofAttacks on Students and TeachersV. Role ofInternational ActorsVI.International Legal StandardsChildRecruitmentTreatment ofCaptured ChildrenForcedMarriage and RapeRapeRight toEducationRecommendationsTo theTransitional Federal Government:Toal-ShabaabToTFG-Affiliated MilitiasTo ForeignParties to the Conflict: AMISOM and the African Union, Kenya, and EthiopiaTo AllStates and the Donor Community in SomaliaTo the UNSecurity Council and the UN Human Rights CouncilTo theSomalia Country Task Team of the UN-led Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism onChildren and Armed Conflict in SomaliaTo theUnited Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and Other Child ProtectionAgencies in Somalia and KenyaTo the UNPolitical Office for Somalia and the UN Office of the High Commissioner forHuman RightsTo the UNSpecial Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed ConflictTo the EU,UNHCR, and UNICEF in UgandaTo theUnited States CongressTo UNHCR,UNICEF, and Other UN Agencies Working in Kenya and EthiopiaAcknowledgementsMap of SomaliaClick to expand ImageSummaryI was with al-Shabaab for three months in 2010…. Theywanted to train us to fight and I was afraid. I didn’t want to killpeople. I wanted to go back to school and learn.—Amare A. (not his real name), 10-year-old boy fromMogadishu, living in Kenya, June 2, 2011Children in war-torn Somalia face horrific abuses, includingforced recruitment as soldiers, forced marriage and rape, and attacks on theirschools by the parties to the conflict. Those responsible are never held toaccount.Children, defined as anyone under age 18, have suffereddisproportionately from the ongoing conflict. Fighting between the TransitionalFederal Government (TFG), the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), andTFG-aligned militias on one hand and al-Shabaab, the Islamist armed group thatnow controls much of the country, on the other, intensified in the capital,Mogadishu, and other parts of south-central Somalia in mid-2010 and early 2011.In October 2011 the conflict in the southern regions escalated further with theincursion of Kenyan armed forces against al-Shabaab, followed shortly after bythe arrival of Ethiopian forces.Children are often the main victims of the indiscriminate artilleryand small arms fire that has long characterized the fighting in Mogadishu. Theyare also the most affected by the ongoing humanitarian crisis, which isunderpinned by a UN-declared famine through the south-central region of Somaliaas well as the ongoing conflict between al Shabaab and the TFG.This report documents al-Shabaab’s targeting of childrenfor recruitment as soldiers, forced marriage, and rape, with a focus on abusesin 2010 and 2011. In addition, it documents how the group has targetedstudents, teachers, and school buildings for attack. Al-Shabaab fighters havealso used schools as firing positions, and the students inside as “humanshields,” placing children at risk of injury or death from indiscriminateor disproportionate return fire from TFG or AMISOM forces.Children have served within TFG forces and TFG-alignedmilitias, although Human Rights Watch has not been able to independentlyconfirm how widespread children’s participation is.For this report, Human Rights Watch interviewed 164 newly arrivedSomali refugees in the Dadaab refugee camps and in Nairobi in May and June 2011.Interviewees included more than 81 girls and boys who were under age 18 at thetime. Human Rights Watch also interviewed TFG officials, officials of United Nations(UN) agencies and the African Union, members of nongovernmental organizations,and members of the diplomatic community.While the presence of children in fighting forces in the 21-year-longSomali conflict is not a new phenomenon, there has been an unprecedented upsurgeof al-Shabaab forced recruitment of children since mid-2010; attacks on students,teachers, and schools have also been prevalent in the last two years.Although al-Shaabab has long relied on spreading extremist propagandaand material rewards to coerce children to join, since mid-2010 it hasincreasingly recruited children forcibly to replenish its dwindling ranks.Children have nowhere to hide. Al-Shabaab has abducted themwherever they congregate: schools, playgrounds, football fields, and homes. Schoolsin particular have been attractive targets—14 of the 21 child escapeesfrom al-Shabaab whom Human Rights Watch interviewed were taken from schools oron their way to school.Life for children in al-Shabaab training camps is harsh: boysundergo grueling physical combat training, weapons training, and religious andpolitical teaching during which some describe being forced to watch videos ofsuicide bombings. Boys also described witnessing brutal physical punishmentsand executions of those accused of spying for the TFG, and those attempting toescape or merely failing to obey orders.Al-Shabaab militants send children to the front lines, oftenwith little training. Several witnesses spoke of children serving effectively as“human shields” for more experienced fighters during some of themost intense fighting in Mogadishu. Others, including children too young tocarry military weapons, were aggressively coerced and threatened into servingas suicide bombers. Besides participating in active combat, al-Shabaab uses childrenin a multitude of support roles, including carrying ammunition, water, milk,and food to the front lines; removing the wounded and killed; and working asspies, guards, and porters.Abducted girls are assigned cooking, cleaning, and otherdomestic duties in the camps. Al-Shabaab uses girls and young women not only forsupport for combat operations, but also for rape and forced marriage tofighters.Children, their families, and their teachers who try toprevent recruitment and abduction or who attempt to escape face severeconsequences. Al-Shabaab has killed or injured parents who intervened toprotect their children although, on occasion, parents and community leadershave successfully negotiated the release of abducted children with localal-Shabaab leaders.When children “defect” or escape from al-Shabaabinto the hands of the TFG or AMISOM, or are captured on the battlefield, theyface interrogation by the TFG security services, detention, and an uncertainfuture instead of being protected as children.While the available information suggests that the TFG itselfdoes not forcibly recruit children, children have found their way into itsranks, often by volunteering for TFG forces or those of aligned militias,manning checkpoints, and taking part in combat.The TFG has to date failed to ensure that stringent andsystematic age screening procedures and standards are in place to screen allits recruits and forces. Recruits who have not attended a training funded bythe European Union (EU) in Uganda and have been directly recruited frommilitias are particularly likely to escape screening. Human Rights Watch is notaware of any member of the TFG forces being held to account for the recruitmentand use of children.Schools have featured heavily in al-Shabaab’s combat operationsas well as its efforts to control Somalis’ everyday lives. Many Somalichildren are no longer in or have never been to school. Somalia has one of thelowest rates of enrollment in the world; however, children and young people whohave persisted in attending school have found themselves, their teachers, andtheir school buildings intentionally targeted for attack by al-Shabaab.Al-Shabaab forces have turnedschools into battlegrounds, firing at TFG and AMISOM forces from functioning schoolbuildings and compounds, deliberately placing students and teachers inharm’s way from often indiscriminate return fire by TFG and AMISOM forces.Al-Shabaab has in some cases bombed school buildings, killing students,teachers, and bystanders. The group has used schools to recruit students asfighters and to abduct girls and young women for rape and forced marriage.Al-Shabaab has imposed their harshinterpretation of Islam on schools in areas that they control, prohibitingEnglish, the sciences, and other subjects deemed improper, and enforcing severerestrictions on girls’ dress and interactions with male students. Theyhave threatened and even killed teachers who resist their methods, lecturedstudents on jihad and war as a recruitment tool, and placed their own teachersin schools. Lessons have been left devoid of substance, teachers have fled,and, where schools have not shut down entirely, children, deprived of anymeaningful education and afraid for their safety, have dropped out in largenumbers. Girls have dropped out disproportionately.There remains no accountability in Somalia for violations ofinternational human rights and humanitarian law. The TFG and AMISOM have nottaken action against commanders responsible for laws-of-war violations or theconscription of children. Al-Shabaab has to date been impervious to all callsto end human rights abuses. Governments supporting the TFG and AMISOM havelargely failed to recognize that al-Shabaab atrocities are counterproductiveand no excuse for abuses by the Somali government.The TFG initially denied the presence of children within itsforces but has more recently publicly acknowledged the need for action to betaken to end their presence and use. In November 2011 the TFG reiterated acommitment to enter into a formal UN action plan to end its use of childsoldiers. To date this commitment has not translated into necessary changes andconcrete measures on the ground, notably ensuring stringent and systematicscreening of all TFG recruits to prevent child recruitment and holdingaccountable those responsible for the recruitment and use of children in itsforces. For the planned integration of militia groups into the TFG forces,effective vetting measures are essential.The TFG has come under too little pressure to improve itsrecord on children’s rights, or human rights more generally, by keyinternational actors who, by offering political and financial support toSomalia, are in a position to demandprogress.These include the UN, the United States (US), and the EU. The“Roadmap” signed in September 2011 under the auspices of the UN PoliticalOffice for Somalia (UNPOS), which is seen by international partners of the TFGas the main instrument through which to hold the TFG to account, vaguely refersto ending recruitment of children but fails to include clear benchmarks thatwould enable monitoring compliance. While the UN and US have recently called onthe TFG to end the use and recruitment of children, to date they have not soughtto condition support to TFG forces on this basis.There is no easy solution to the dire reality facing Somalichildren, many of whom have known nothing but war. But parties to the conflict andother key actors involved in Somalia should begin to prioritize the issue ofchildren’s rights, child protection, and education on the political andsecurity agenda. The risks of continuing to fail to protect and provide safeand accessible education to Somalia’s children will result in yet anothergeneration lost to conflict, with few options for the future.Human Rights Watch urges all warring parties in Somalia toimmediately end violations of the laws of war, in particular indiscriminateattacks against civilians. On children specifically, we call upon al-Shabaab, theTFG, and TFG-aligned militias to end the recruitment and use of children withintheir ranks. Al-Shabaab should publicly order its commanders to end therecruitment and use of children, and immediately hand over children within itsforces to a civilian protection body, cooperating with the United NationsChildren’s Fund (UNICEF) and child protection actors to ensure their saferelease. It should also immediately end targeted attacks on students, teachers,and schools.The TFG with international assistance should immediatelyensure that stringent and systematic age screening procedures and standards areput in place for all its recruits. It should also hold to account thoseresponsible for violations of child’s rights, including the recruitmentand use of children and unlawful attacks on schools. It should also ensure thatcaptured children alleged to have been formerly associated with al-Shabaab are promptlytransferred to civilian rehabilitation and reintegration programs. Childrenshould not be detained solely for their association with armed oppositiongroups.International partners of the TFG should press the TFG tofulfill its commitments to develop and implement a national action plan to endthe recruitment and use of children during the remaining transitional period.And they should impose concrete consequences on the TFG for failing to do so. TheTFG’s partners, notably the US, should also ensure that the TFG meetsinternational standards regarding the treatment of children formerly associatedwith al-Shabaab.Monitoring and reporting on human rights violations, notablyviolations of children’s rights, should be reinforced. To this end, donorsshould politically support and fund the Office of the High Commissioner forHuman Rights (OHCHR) to reinforce its capacity to carry out its human rightsmonitoring and reporting mandate on Somalia and appoint a child rights expertwithin the OHCHR Somalia structure. The UN Security Council should enhance thecapacity of the UN Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea to enable it tofulfill its extended human rights mandate.AMISOM and the TFG should, where feasible, map key civilianinfrastructure, including schools, and use this map to identify and protect schoolsin areas of AMISOM and TFG military operations.International support for child protection activities, includingthe provision of medical and psycho-social support for survivors of sexualviolence, education, and vocational training activities should be significantlyincreased both inside Somalia and in refugee receiving countries, namely Kenyaand Ethiopia.Finally, addressing the human rights crisis that underpinsthe conflict in Somalia also means tackling longstanding impunity. The TFG andits international partners should call for the establishment of a UN Commissionof Inquiry—or a comparable, appropriate mechanism—by the UN todocument serious international crimes committed in Somalia and recommendmeasures to improve accountability.Key RecommendationsTo the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia,and TransitionalFederal InstitutionsEnd all recruitment and use of children under age 18 byTFG forces and aligned militias by developing and adopting a nationalaction plan that establishes rigorous and systematic screening procedures,and by holding to account anyone found to be conscripting or usingchildren, consistent with widely accepted international standards.Develop procedures to transfer captured children promptlyto civilian rehabilitation and reintegration programs. Children should notbe detained solely for their association with armed forces and groups.Map key civilian infrastructure, including schools, withthe assistance of relevant agencies including the Education Cluster. Usethis map to identify and protect schools in areas of TFG militaryoperations.Ensure that all credible allegations of violations ofinternational human rights and humanitarian law by TFG forces and alignedarmed groups are promptly, impartially, and transparently investigated,and that those responsible for serious abuses, regardless of rank, are heldto account.To al-ShabaabImmediately cease recruitment of children under 18 yearsold and release all children currently in al-Shabaab forces who are under18.Immediately end theabduction of girls and women, and release all girls and women abducted forforced marriage or other purposes.Ensure that schools areidentified and protected and that students, teachers, and schooladministrators are able to safely leave school buildings during militaryoperations where they may be at risk.To Foreign Parties to the Conflict: AMISOM and theAfrican Union, Kenya, and EthiopiaMap out key civilian infrastructure, including schools,with the assistance of relevant agencies, including the Education Cluster,in order to ensure that schools in areas of military operations areidentified and protected.To All States and the Donor Community in SomaliaProvide the TFG with the necessary support and capacity tosystematically and effectively screen all its recruits by age in order toprevent the recruitment and use of children within its forces.Ensure that trainings provided to the TFG forces and personnelinclude appropriate training in international humanitarian law, includingthe protection of civilians and civilian objects and protection ofchildren’s rights.Support and fund anincrease in the capacity of the Office of the High Commissioner for HumanRights (OHCHR) to monitor rights violations.To the UN Security Council and the UN Human RightsCouncilIntensify pressure on the TFG to immediately adopt andpromptly implement a time-bound UN action plan to end the recruitment anduse of children, one that includes screening procedures to ensure thatchildren are not recruited into the TFG or included in aligned militiasthat are integrated into the TFG armed forces.To the United Nations Children’s Fund(UNICEF) and Other Child Protection Agencies in Somalia and KenyaGreatly expand demobilization, rehabilitation, andreintegration programs for children formerly associated with fightingforces and children recruited for forced marriage.MethodologyThis report documents violations of international humanrights and humanitarian law affecting children by all parties to the conflictin south-central Somalia in 2010 and 2011. Violations include the recruitmentand use of children by the parties to the conflict, rape and forced marriage ofchildren, and attacks on education, namely the targeting of students, teachers,and schools. While children are among the most vulnerablegroups of conflict-affected populations, for both protection and health reasons,throughout 2010 and 2011 increasing anecdotal reports that children were beingspecifically targeted began to emerge from those fleeing the fighting inSomalia.This report is based in large part on interviews with Somalirefugees in Kenya. In May and June 2011, three Human Rights Watch researchersinterviewed more than 164 Somali refugees in the Dadaab refugee camps and inNairobi. Interviewees included more than 81 boys and girls and who were underage 18 at the time. We also interviewed young adults who had experienced abusesin 2010 and 2011 while under age 18 or who had recently studied in primary andsecondary classes as over-age students and had information about abuses againstchildren in schools during this period, as well as parents of child victims,and teachers. Many of those interviewed arrived in Kenya from Somalia’scapital, Mogadishu, in mid-2010 or later when fighting became particularlyintense. Two Human Rights Watch researchers previously interviewed 82 Somalirefugees—men, women, and children—in November 2010 followingal-Shabaab’s “Ramadan offensive” of 2010.Relying primarily on the accounts of individuals who were ableto flee Somalia made it easier for them to speak more freely but also skewedthe reporting towards people of certain backgrounds and from certain geographicareas. For example, despite secondary reports of significant recruitment ofchildren by al-Shabaab in the Bay and Bakool areas, many of the childreninterviewed were from Mogadishu and had more often than not been able to drawon some sort of family or clan support in Mogadishu to assist their flight.Human Rights Watch also carried out interviews betweenAugust 2011 and January 2012 documenting abuses against IDPs in Mogadishu.For security reasons, Human Rights Watch was not able tovisit any of the camps and detention facilities in Mogadishu where the TFG hasbeen holding children formerly associated with its own forces or withal-Shabaab.Refugees andasylum seekers identified as recent arrivals to Kenya participated involuntary, open-ended interviews. Intervieweeswere asked to relate events that they personally experienced or witnessed. Interviews with refugees were conductedin Somali with the assistance of interpreters. All of the interviews wereconducted on a one-on-one basis, unless otherwise indicated in the footnotes. The names of interviewees and all victims of abuses havebeen changed and the exact location of interviews omitted for security reasons.Many requested anonymity, indicating their deep and persistent fear ofal-Shabaab and others, even within Kenya. Other identifying details of the intervieweeshave, in some cases, also been withheld to preserve anonymity. Given the lackof birth registration in Somalia and the fact children and young adults are notalways aware of their age, Human Rights Watch researchers asked a range ofquestions to seek to confirm the age of the interviewees and asked parents whenthey were available.Human Rights Watch also spoke in person and by phone with TFGofficials; officials of UN agencies and the African Union; members of Somaliand international nongovernmental organizations working on human rights, childprotection, and education; and members of the diplomatic community. Theseinterviews were conducted through December 2011, in order to ensure the mostup-to-date information prior to publication.In this report “child” and“children” are used to refer to anyone under the age of 18,consistent with usage under international law.I. BackgroundCivilians, including children, have borne the brunt of theongoing civil armed conflict in Somalia. Children have suffered both from theconflict generally and because they have been specifically targeted forrecruitment, rape, forced marriage, and other grave violations of internationallaw by the parties to the conflict. In addition, Somalia currently faces one ofthe world’s worst humanitarian crises as a result of ongoing fighting,drought, and the blocking of humanitarian assistance by al-Shabaab forces. FromJuly 2011 to February 2012, famine was declared by the UN in six regions ofsouth-central Somalia, a number later reduced to three. As statisticsdemonstrate, children are most affected by famine.Brief Summary of Somalia’s ConflictThe current armed conflict in Somalia began with the fall ofthe Siad Barre regime in 1991 and intensified following the overthrow of theIslamic Courts Union (ICU), which was an alliance of sharia courts that aligneditself to rival the administration of Somalia’s Transitional FederalGovernment (TFG) in December 2006. The ICU gained control of Mogadishu andother parts of south-central Somalia in mid-2006 and brought a temporarysemblance of stability to Mogadishu but was seen as a security threat byEthiopia, which subsequently intervened militarily, driving out the ICU in late2008.[1]For two years following the Ethiopian intervention inDecember 2006, Ethiopia and the weak TFG of Somalia (set up in 2004)[2]were involved in intense fighting against Islamist armed groups, includingal-Shabaab.[3] Thefighting focused on Mogadishu, where Ethiopian forces with TFG support wereresponsible for frequent indiscriminate artillery attacks causing high civiliancasualties in violation of the laws of war. These forces and Islamist armedgroups were also responsible for unnecessarily placing civilians at risk,unlawful killings, rape, torture, and looting.[4] None ofthe warring parties made any effort to hold those responsible for war crimes toaccount. Nor did the international backers of the TFG and Ethiopian forces,namely the US, the UN, and the EU, acknowledge the level of abuses or takeaction to end them.In January 2009 the Ethiopian armed forces withdrewfollowing the UN-led Djibouti peace agreement.[5] Thisagreement also yielded a new and expanded Somali administration and led to theelection of Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, the former head of the ICU, as the new TFGpresident.Many ordinary Somalis were optimistic that the conflict andmassive rights abuses that had become part of their daily lives would end withthe Ethiopian withdrawal. However, within months they once again faced openwarfare, this time between the TFG, now backed by the African Union Mission inSomalia (AMISOM), and Islamist armed groups, including the increasinglypowerful al-Shabaab. This fighting was once again characterized byindiscriminate attacks and abuses committed with complete impunity. Whilemandated by the UN Security Council to protect TFG institutions, AMISOMincreasingly became seen as a party to the conflict, as they began to activelyengage in running battles with al-Shabaab fighters.Fighting intensified in May 2010 with laws-of-war violations being committed by all warring parties.[6] During the Islamicholy month of Ramadan in August and September 2010, al-Shabaab called for afinal offensive to topple the TFG, and fighting escalated. In response, in Septemberthe TFG launched an offensive, with AMISOM’s support, to reclaim areas ofMogadishu under al-Shabaab control. Serious violations of the laws of war werecommitted by both sides during these offensives, including the indiscriminate shelling of civilian areas andinfrastructure with rocket and mortar fire that resulted in high civiliancasualties and the displacement of tens of thousands of people.[7]Between February and April 2011 the TFG, again supported byAMISOM, launched a series of offensives in Mogadishu and further afield againstal-Shabaab forces,[8] capturing several parts of the capital. The TFG andpro-TFG militias, including Ahlu SunnaWal Jama’a (ASWJ) and Raskamboni, primarily supported by Ethiopia andKenya respectively, also gained control of small areas in the Gedo and LowerJuba region, along Somalia’s Kenyan and Ethiopian borders.In August 2011 the TFG and AMISOM launched a new offensiveagainst al-Shabaab in Mogadishu, reportedly to preempt another possible Ramadanoffensive. On August 6, al-Shaabab declared that it was pulling out its forcesfrom Mogadishu. On October 16, Kenyan military forces entered borderareas in Somalia and indiscriminately bombed several towns in which al-Shabaabforces were allegedly deployed. Despite its withdrawal from Mogadishu, at the time of writing, al-Shabaab continues to controlmore of southern Somalia’s territory than any other faction and retainsthe ability to carry out attacks in Mogadishu.The ability of the TFG tostabilize zones that have come under the government’s control has beenhampered by the longstanding political crisis between President Sheikh Sharifand the speaker of the parliament, Sharif Hassan Sheikh Aden, who haspresidential ambitions.In June 2011 the TFG extendedits mandate and the transitional period, scheduled to end in August 2011, foranother year. The “Kampala Accord,” signed on June 9, 2011, by PresidentSheikh Sharif and Speaker Sharif Hassan, called for the resignation of thepopular prime minister, Mohammed Abdullahi Mohammed, and postponed elections to2012. It also called for the development of a “roadmap” with clearbenchmarks to guide the implementation of priority transitional tasks: theconstitution, a security and stabilization plan, and reconciliation andanti-corruption efforts.Major Parties to the ConflictThe following is an overview of the major parties to thearmed conflict in Somalia as of late 2011.[9]Transitional Federal Government (TFG)Somalia’s Transitional Federal Government (TFG),set-up in 2004, is recognized by the UN and almost all key foreign governments(with the notable exception of Eritrea) as the legitimate government ofSomalia. Until 2011, it controlled only a small section of southern Mogadishu,but extended its control over several areas of the city in the course of 2011.The embattled TFG depends on the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) forits survival and security, and on donor funds. It has proved unable to assertpolitical control, build key government sectors, or provide the essentialservices that would build its credibility. Infightingbetween different factions and components of the Transitional FederalInstitutions (TFIs), of which the TFG is a component, has significantlyhampered political developments.Al-ShabaabAl-Shabaab is a militantIslamist group that began as part of the armed wing of the Islamic Courts Union(ICU) when the courts rose to power in Mogadishu in 2006. Al-Shabaab is not a monolithic entity but rather analliance of factions that initially rallied under its banner with the aim offorcing the Ethiopian troops to leave Somalia. These groups retain a limitedcommon agenda of defeating AMISOM and the TFG and extending its extremeinterpretation of Sharia (Islamic law) across Somalia. Al-Shabaab currently controls more territory in southernSomalia than any other faction and became the largest armed insurgent group inDecember 2010 following its merger with Hizbul Islam, another Islamist armed groupled by former ICU member Hassan Dahir Aweys. Al-Shabaab withdrew from Mogadishuin August 2011 but continues to carry out attacks in the war-torn capital.Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’aAhlu Sunna Wal Jama’a(ASWJ) is a moderate Sufi Islamist group that has on paper been officiallyaffiliated with the TFG since March 2010. Thegroup exists primarily in central Somalia, where it has managed to maintaincontrol over large swathes of territory, predominantly in Galgadud and Hiraanregions of central Somalia. It has more recently captured small areas ofterritory in the Gedo region along the Ethiopian border from al-Shabaab. It receives financial and military support from Ethiopia.African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)Initially deployed to Mogadishu in 2007, AMISOM is mandatedby the African Union Peace and Security Council and the UN Security Council toprovide protection to the Somali transitional institutions, including the TFGand Parliament. However, since 2009, and especially since coming under attackfrom al-Shabaab, it has increasingly taken part in the conflict.[10] AMISOMhas as yet not approached its authorized troop strength of 12,000; its current contingentat least 10,000 Burundian, Ugandan, and more recently Djiboutian forces.[11]Drought, Famine, and al-Shabaab’sRestrictions on Humanitarian AccessCompounding the dire effectof ongoing fighting on civilians is unrelenting drought, famine, al-Shabaab’ssevere restrictions on humanitarian aid and ongoing diversion of aid inTFG-controlled areas.Severe drought insouth-central Somalia worsened from October 2010 onwards. By August 2011, theUN had declared six regions—primarily in southern Somalia—to be ina state of famine. An estimated four million people, more than half of theSomali population, were in crisis as of that month, around three million of whomwere in the south in predominantly al-Shabaab-controlled areas.[12] As of January 2012, according to the UN, four millionSomalis remain in need of humanitarian assistance.[13] The Somali population of internally displaced personsand refugees—already one of the largest in the world—has furtherescalated: one-quarter of Somalia’s estimated population of 7.5 million waseither internally displaced or lived outside the country as refugees as of December2011.[14]Aid agencies have beenlimited not only by conflict and insecurity but also by al-Shabaab, which has restrictedsome agencies’ work. The group has imposed a ban on over a dozen individualagencies since 2009, placed significant financial and logistical burdens onorganizations that are working in areas under their control, and threatened andattacked humanitarian workers. In early July 2011 al-Shabaab declared that itwas lifting the ban it had imposed on certain foreign aid agencies in areasunder its control as long as the distribution of aid was their only objective.[15] But the ban has yet to be lifted and by Novemberal-Shabaab had proclaimed a fresh ban on 16 aid organizations, including UNagencies.[16] Al-Shabaab also continues to severely restrict thefreedom of movement of those seeking access to humanitarian assistance in areasunder its control.Access to humanitarianassistance in areas under TFG control has also been hampered by diversion andlooting of humanitarian aid.[17] Media reports in August 2011 suggested that food aiddiversion in Mogadishu was occurring on a large scale.[18]Counterterrorism legislation,and most notably the US Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) sanctions thatseek to prevent support reaching designated terrorist organizations, have alsonegatively impacted humanitarian operations in Somalia, resulting both in asignificant decrease in US funding of humanitarian organizations since 2008 andthe imposition of burdensome measures on those receiving US support.[19]Children in the Somali ConflictChildren continue to be killed or maimed asa result of indiscriminate shelling, gunfire, widespread insecurity, and thetargeting of schools. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)reported that in 2010, 43 percent of patients admitted to the two main referralhospitals in Mogadishu with war-related injuries were women and children.[20]Thedifficulties that humanitarian agencies face trying to access south-centralSomalia further aggravates the situation of children, who are particularlyvulnerable to food insecurity and disease. Severe acute malnutrition ratesamong children doubled between March and July 2011.[21] By August the number of children suffering from acute malnutritionwas estimated to be in the hundreds of thousands.[22] Half of the tens of thousands of individuals who havedied as a result of the famine are reported to be children.[23]The destruction of livelihoods, traditionalprotection structures, and separation or destruction of families as a result ofthe length of the conflict, the humanitarian crisis, the number of civiliancasualties, and repeated displacement of a significant proportion of thepopulation has left children particularly vulnerable. The numbers of abandoned,orphaned, or separated children and children living and working in the streetshas skyrocketed over the course of the last four years. While child labor has longbeen a part of Somali culture, children are now often the sole source of incometo their families or siblings.Children are also among the most vulnerablegroups of internally displaced persons and refugees for both protection andhealth reasons. The number of unaccompanied minors and child-headed householdsamong the displaced person and refugee population has increased over the courseof the conflict, particularly since 2007.[24]Children’s Access to Education in SomaliaChildren’s right to education in Somalia is severelyrestricted.[25]According to UNICEF, Somalia has one of the lowest rates of school enrollmentin the world, with a net primary school enrollment rate of around 23 percent in2010.[26] Disparity between levels of enrollmentbetween girls and boys even at the lower levels of primary school is alarming:according to the latest available data, the gross primary enrollment ratio wasonly 23 percent of girls, compared with 42 percent of boys.[27]Enrollment in secondary schools is minimal: gross secondary enrollment was only11 percent for boys and 5 percent for girls in the late 2000s.[28]School dropout rates reportedly reached 50 percent following the Ramadanoffensive in 2010 and 38 percent in the first four months of 2011.[29]There are only five government-run schools in all ofsouth-central Somalia, all located in Mogadishu. Other schools are financedprimarily by parents, communities, or private individuals either in Somalia orin the diaspora, or by national or international donor and developmentorganizations. While the total number of schools in south-central Somalia isunknown, agencies involved in the Education Cluster—the UNICEF- and Savethe Children-led entity that coordinates organizations and agencies working inthe education sector—funds 4,822 schools in these regions.[30]Secondary schools are scarce and found mainly in Mogadishu.While not clearly standardized, there are generally fourcategories of schools in Somalia: primary and secondary schools employing Arabic,Somali, or Kenyan curriculum, as well as non-formal duqsi (Quranicschools). There is no unified national curriculum.Despite the dire situation of the education system insouth-central Somalia, the sector remains inadequately funded. As of November2011, of the US$29 million requested under the Consolidated Appeals Process(CAP) for the education sector, only $18 million—62 percent—hadbeen funded, in large part via UNICEF funding.[31]It is within this already terribly restricted environment that children arestruggling to go to school.II. Recruitment and Use of Children as SoldiersThe recruitment and use of children in the Somali civil waris not a new phenomenon: children have been used throughout the conflict byclan and warlord militias for the defense of the home and the clan. However,the level of recruitment and involvement of children in the conflict hassubstantially increased since early 2007 when recruitment became morewidespread and targeted.[32]All the current Somali parties to the conflict in Somalia—including theTFG forces, al-Shabaab, Hizbul Islam, and Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a—haverecruited or used children for military service.HumanRights Watch interviews with Somalis who have fled Somalia since early 2010indicate that forced recruitment and abductions have intensified in line with anupsurge in fighting. A significant proportion of children interviewed said theywere forcibly taken from their schools, though many others recounted beingabducted from playgrounds, football (soccer) fields, markets, and homes,primarily by al-Shabaab militants. Girls and boys have both been targeted, withgirls taken primarily for domestic duties and boys taken to be trained forcombat or other work on the front lines. The ever-present reality of forcedrecruitment and abduction has caused children to leave school, often fleeingthe country with their families.Children are affordedmultiple special protections under the international human rights andhumanitarian law framework.[33] All parties tothe conflict in Somalia have an obligation to afford special protection tochildren and to ensure that children do not take part in hostilities.[34]Human Rights Watch spoke with19 boys and 4 girls who had been recruited by armed groups, and almost 50parents, relatives, and others who were witnesses to child recruitment. Withone or two exceptions, all of the recruited boys and girls with whom HumanRights Watch spoke said they had been recruited by al-Shabaab. Our researchalso found that children continue to be associated with the TFG and TFG-alignedmilitias, largely as a result of a lack of stringent age screening procedures.Al-ShabaabI tried to refuse but I couldn’t. I just had to gowith them [al-Shabaab]. If you refuse, maybe sometimes they come and kill youor harm you, so I just went with them. One of my friends who was older than me,they came and started with him the same as they did to me and he refused, andthey left him but another day they found him on the street and shot him.—14-year-old boy, Kenya, May 29, 2011Former child recruits and child and adult witnessesdescribed to Human Rights Watch how al-Shabaab forces took children to theirtraining camps throughout 2010 and 2011.  Most of the children werereportedly between ages 15 and 18 but some were as young as 10 years old. Fromthe camps they were sent to the front lines or forced to act as porters, spies,and suicide bombers. Children have been injured, maimed, and killed.Al-Shabaab’s recruitment of children has been widelyreported.[35] Forcedrecruitment of children became common practice in 2009, but by April 2010anecdotal reports indicated that child recruitment increased significantly andhas shown no signs of reducing. While exact numbers of children recruited byal-Shabaab is unknown, in April 2011 a report from the UN secretary-generalcited military sources stating that al-Shabaab abducted an estimated 2,000children for military training in 2010.[36]Fourteen of the twenty-three children whom Human RightsWatch interviewed who were recruited said that al-Shabaab recruited them fromschool or while they were traveling to and from school. The other childrenrecruited by al-Shabaab said that al-Shabaab took them from parks and playingfields, or even in their own homes. For example, Galaal Y., a 14-year-old boyfrom Hamar Weyne district in Mogadishu, described how in December 2010 two ofhis primary school classmates lured him to a field to play football where hewas ultimately taken by al-Shabaab and forced to become a fighter:Two of my classmates, who I later realized were workingwith al-Shabaab, ages 16 and 18, had written our names down on a list to form afootball team. The next day we went along to a field to play, thinking thatanother team would come along, but when we arrived at the field, al-Shabaabarrived instead. They came in a vehicle and were wearing khamis andheadscarves.[37] Theywere armed with AK-47’s [military assault rifles] and told us thatplaying football was not helpful and they would turn us into jihadis [Islamicfighters]. They took 16 of us between the ages of 10 and 16.[38]Children said that al-Shabaab regularly uses children asintelligence gatherers or intermediaries to identify other children of fightingage, and then uses these children to pressure or force their peers to joinal-Shabaab. A 16-year-old boy from Mogadishu told Human Rights Watch how he wasapproached and forced to join al-Shabaab in the mosque while attending eveningprayers:I was a student and al-Shabaab forced me to fight againstthe TFG…. They came to the mosque when we went for prayers. They pretendthey are an imam [preacher] and use Islamic teaching to try and make youjoin. If you refuse to join they will kill you.The guy who spoke to me had staff all around him. They weremerged into the crowd of the mosque. He spoke to me directly. They wereapproaching everyone, even teenagers…. He used the words of the Quran andsaid the government was not concerned with religion.They tell you to join, and if not, the boys around him (theones in the crowd) who were 13 and 14 years old will come and kill you. Theyhad guns with them and a grenade attached to the side of their pants.[39]Despite some territorial gains by TFG and AMSIOM forces inlate 2010 and early 2011 in Mogadishu, as of July 2011 al-Shabaab stillcontrolled eight of the sixteen districts of the capital.[40]In al-Shabaab-controlled areas, there was virtually nowhere that children couldbe assured of their safety. While families sought shelter in their homes duringperiods of intense fighting between al-Shabaab and AMISOM forces, homes offeredno protection from the ongoing forced recruitments by al-Shabaab.[41]Children told Human Rights Watch how al-Shabaab approached homes where familieswere known to have boys considered old enough to fight and demanded thatfamilies hand them over to join their forces.Several children told Human Rights Watch that they wererecruited by their own family members—fathers, brothers, and cousins—whohad joined al-Shabaab. A mother described how her husband took their10-year-old son to battle:My husband was in al-Shabaab. He came and said to my eldestson [who was 10 years old], “You must also join.” He overpowered meand took my son. Later I heard my son died in the war. I went to where myhusband was, Horera mosque, and I said, “I heard my son died.” Hesaid, “I am pleased to inform you that our son died a martyr. He wentstraight to paradise.” He showed me footage he took of my son beingkilled in the war. His blood. His body. I cried.[42]While almost all of the 23 children interviewed by HumanRights Watch were forcibly recruited, there were also reports of some childrenwho joined al-Shabaab “voluntarily,” particularly after intensivecampaigns of recruitment. The very notion of voluntariness of any child’sdecision, particularly in a context of extreme poverty, hunger, andal-Shabaab’s well-known violence against those who refuse, to join anarmed group is questionable.[43]Al-Shabaab has put various forms of pressure on children tojoin their forces. Children spoke of multiple tactics to entice them to join,including offering cash and mobile phones and forcing children to studyreligious propaganda as part of their schooling. Baashi M. described how his12-year-old brother joined al-Shabaab:They gave him $100 and convinced him at school that if hebecame a martyr he would go to paradise. They also bought him clothes. He nevertold my parents he was going, he just disappeared. He wanted to be a driver andal-Shabaab said they would send him to driving school.[44]Other children were offered cashincentives to recruit other children, as one 15-year-old witness recounted:Many of my friends were given incentives—money toenroll others. Depending on how many you enroll you would be given more or lessmoney. Many boys enrolled. If you refused to enroll you were forced to.[45]A teacher explained how effective these incentives are:“80 percent [of my students] are so poor. They have no money so when theygive them money they will join…. A whole generation—95percent—they join the armed groups because of hunger. There is nowhere togo, just to get a gun and fight. Daily they get money. If they don’tjoin, they don’t get food.”[46]Several children told Human Rights Watch that al-Shabaabbrought their members into schools to teach subjects such as“jihad,” where children were lectured on their duty to join thejihad and promises of “entry into paradise” if a child died as amartyr. The classes, which ranged from daily to weekly classes, were also usedas a way for al-Shabaab to gain entry into the school and recruit children.Children described being lectured on the virtues of jihad, shown Islamistpropaganda videos, and given weapons demonstrations. Sometimes these methodsconvinced girls and boys to join. One young woman said that about 15 of her 40to 45 classmates—5 girls and 10 boys—decided to join after a jihadclass.[47] Otherchildren also described a mix of propaganda and force that led them and theirclassmates to join. For example, Iskinder P., age 15, said he decided to joinboth because he was “being forced” and “because the majorityof my teachers were al-Shabaab and they used to lecture us and tell us ‘Al-Shabaabis good, let’s defend our country. These are foreigners who are fightingour country.’”[48]Baashi M., a 27-year-old student who was attending the JubaPrimary School in the southern port city of Kismayo, described how al-Shabaabwould come into the school and use the classes as a precursor to forciblytaking students to fight:Al-Shabaab used to come to my school often, sometimes theywould come two to three times a day. They came and picked up kids between 12and 20 years old and would take them to a building in the school and play DVDsof jihadis on the battlefield on a laptop. They would also preach aboutreligion. They took me there in February 2010.[49]Similarly, an over-age student in primary school from SuuqaXoola, Mogadishu, said: “Initially they preached ideology, but when theyrealized that they were not recruiting they decided to recruit forcefully. Thisis what made me flee.”[50]Retaliation against Children and Families Who RefuseAl-Shabaab said to my elder brother,“Come with us.” He refused and they beheaded him. He was 16. Theytook him and put his head in front of our house.—Deka R. (not her real name),13-year-old girl whose brother was killed in El Ashabiya, Somalia, aroundRamadan 2010, June 5, 2011Children repeatedly told Human Rights Watch that they feltpowerless to resist recruitment by al-Shabaab. Witnesses spoke of“children who had refused recruitment having their hands cut off”or in some instances beheaded.[51] Knowingthat refusal would mean being taken by force or possibly killed, childrenrecounted the fear they felt as al-Shabaab fighters entered their schools andhomes and the desperate measures they would take to escape detection. Onewitness said that at his school, children would “stampede” and“scramble out of windows,” jumping from second and third floorwindows and landing on top of each other in desperate bids to escape.[52]Parents other family members regularly attempt to protectboth girls and boys from being recruited by al-Shabaab, according to witnesses.Al-Shabaab has killed and injured relatives, and in some cases school teachers,who get in their way. Human Rights Watch documented half a dozen such cases. Intwo cases mothers said they personally intervened to prevent their childrenfrom being recruited.[53]One mother told Human Rights Watch how she tried to defendher four youngest children from recruitment. After she pled and physicallytried to prevent the children from being taken, her husband, an al-Shabaabmember, shot her in the ankle.[54] Inanother incident, in December 2009, al-Shabaab entered the Shabelle PrimarySchool in Mogadishu and forced parents to sign an agreement allowing theirchildren to join al-Shabaab. An eyewitness told Human Rights Watch:Two fathers who refused to sign were threatened in themeeting and told they would not survive this. They were shot a day later in theBakara market with letters pinned on their bodies saying this is what wouldhappen to any parent who refused to allow their children to join al-Shabaab.[55]Abuses in Training CampsOnce recruited, children are typically taken to anal-Shabaab training camp.[56] Almostall of the children Human Rights Watch interviewed whom al-Shabaab hadrecruited said that they had spent time in a training camp for durationsranging from several weeks to three years before they escaped.[57]In many instances they were unable to give the exact locations, often becausethey were blindfolded on the way, but most said they were held somewhere aroundthe outskirts of Mogadishu. Others said they were held in and around formergovernment installations in al-Shabaab-controlled areas in the city,surrounding Kismayo, and in and around the southern Shabelle regions.Camps varied in their descriptions, ranging from physicalstructures, including former government buildings, where children were detainedin cells with minimal food and poor sanitary conditions, to open, camp-likesettings with children sleeping on open ground. Omar A., 17, described thetraining camp on the outskirts of Mogadishu where he was held for two months:The place looked like the bush, and there were tents andvehicles. There were many people there, maybe 300. There were adults and childrenbut we didn’t speak much to them. Al-Shabaab said, “You will workwith us, you will fight, and we will train you.” You can’t say youdon’t want to because they force you and they have weapons and if yourefuse they will kill you.[58]A 17-year-old boy who was kept in one such facility toldHuman Rights Watch:There was no good food. Sometimes theybeat me. I couldn’t see anyone. Sometimes they threatened to slaughterme. They tied my hands and legs. They threatened that if I identified theirplace and they released me they will get me again and cut me to pieces.Sometimes they took me outside the room and put cold water on my body…..I was in the dark the whole time. I couldn’t see anyone, seated there, nosleep, they come and tell you they’ll slaughter you.[59]Girls were reportedly brought to some of the camps to clean,cook, and serve food. They were also forced to marry fighters and raped (seebelow).The training camps prepared boys to fight. There wereconsistent reports from inside the camps of children being trained for combatas well as being given a variety of other domestic and logistical tasks.Training, they said, lasted from one week to several months.[60]At minimum, children told us that training included basic physical and lightweapons training with AK-47 assault rifles and pistols. The training followed aregular routine. A 13-year-old boy from Mogadishu explained:In themorning they told us we were going for training. They told us to jump in holes,climb over piles of trees. It was a hectic training and difficult for my age.At times they told us to crawl or roll on the ground or crawl between metalpoles without touching them. It was difficult. We had to do push-ups, walk in afunny style. It was so difficult. After two weeks training, they gave uspistols and a card, made us mark it, put it at a distance, and told us to shootthat mark.[61]Children described harshphysical conditions, including being forced to sleep in the open, given littlefood to eat, and forced to undertake grueling physical training schedules toprepare them for combat. If children refused, they said they received harshphysical punishments. As one 14-year-old boy told us: “We traineduntil 1 p.m. They made us to do sit-ups and walk on our knees. I was saying,‘I am exhausted, I can’t do anymore,’ and they cut me with abig knife. A big knife that you use to slaughter animals.”[62]Another boy showed a four- to five-inch scar on his upper arm he said he hadgotten from being whipped, recounting: “On the first day I shot [anAK-47] three or four times but they found me shaking. When they saw metrembling they encouraged me and said, “You are doing this for religionand you must carry it.”[63]A majority of children interviewed by Human Rights Watchalso reported being given religious education that stressed the importance ofparticipating in the jihad. This sometimes included watching video footage ofjihadist groups fighting in other countries.[64] Thechildren also said they conducted regular prayer and religious practice.Punishment and ExecutionsAnyone found escaping will be killed. Even at night when wewere sleeping and in the morning they would cane us. They wouldn’t tellus why, they would just beat us.—Amare A. (not his real name), 10-year-old boypreviously held in an al-Shabaab training camp, Kenya, June 2, 2011Several children said they witnessed brutal physicalpunishments and executions at thecamps, sometimes involving other children. The reasons forexecution varied from not obeying orders and attempting to escape toaccusations of being a TFG spy.A 16-year-old boy described how he and other children wereforced to watch executions of “enemies of al-Shabaab”:I was made to watch an execution of a group of people whowere considered to be al-Shabaab enemies, as they were accused of supportingthe TFG or rejecting al-Shabaab. About 20 people were killed that day. I didnot see any children being killed. It was the older recruits who were around 25and up who were made to execute the people.[65]In another example, an eyewitness said that he and hisclassmates were taken to a camp from their Mogadishu primary school, and thosewho refused to participate in training were executed in front of their peers:Out ofthe fifteen abducted, five died in training school. The five never agreed tojoin al-Shabaab and hid. They [al-Shabaab] brought them and paraded them infront of us and shot them. They were 10, 14, 15, 16, and 17 years old.[66]Children also said they were forced to hand out violentpunishments to people found to be breaching al-Shabaab’s rules. HumanRights Watch interviewed seven children who had been forced to take whips andpatrol the town looking for businesses that remained open during prayer time,women wearing clothes al-Shabaab deemed inappropriate, or young peoplelistening to music on their telephones. A 15-year-old boy from Middle Jubaexplained:I was given two jobs, to whip women and to punish boys whohad music on their mobile phones. I would make them swallow the memory card. Imade 20 youth swallow the cards and I must have whipped 50 women. I would gowith older men backing me up. They were about 30 years old and there were fiveof them. They would stand with me and force me. I felt bad to whip someone mymother’s age. Other children were given similar jobs.[67]Some children said they were sent to patrol towns underal-Shabaab control and identify to catch adults and children who had escapedfrom training camps. Iskinder, age 15, told us:Some people escaped with vehicles and I had to catch them.We would shoot the vehicles’ tires so they couldn’t move and takethem back. We used to identify the people who escaped. I didn’t want todo it but we were forced many times. We were told to go and stand on the streetand identify escapees. We used to beat them and take them to jail. I had a caneand a weapon.[68]Fighting on the BattlefieldChildren, mostly boys, said they were sent to the frontlines from the training camps, often with minimal training. There, witnessessaid, al-Shabaab uses children for a range of activities, from supplyingfighters to serving as “human shields” to protect more experiencedfighters.Fighting between al-Shabaab and the TFG and AMISOMintensified in August 2010, during what was referred to as the “RamadanOffensive 2010.”[69] Duringthis period and the months to follow, al-Shabaab was engaged in sustainedclashes with government forces and African Union (AU) troops in Mogadishu.A witness told Human Rights Watch that children of all agescould be seen on the front lines during these intense periods of fighting.[70]Children too small to carry large firearms, such as AK-47s, were given pistolsand smaller weapons, as well as grenades to throw.[71]A 21-year-old fighter described such a scene: “We would fight early inthe morning. I saw small kids, maybe 10 or 11 years old, with pistols, andthose who could carry got AK-47s, and a lot of kids between 10 and 18 years oldwere given whips.”[72]Before going into battle children were often lectured andencouraged to fight to the death. Al-Shabaab continued to use the promise ofmartyrdom, as was described to Human Rights Watch by 14-year-old Ali F.:I participated in a fight. They told me that if I diedthere, I was going to become a martyr. We were lectured for four to five hourson religion and told not be cowards. There were about a hundred of us in thecamp and 20 of us were under 18. The youngest was between eight and ten yearsold. The smaller ones were taught how to use a pistol and how to throwgrenades. They also used them as suicide bombers. They said, “If youparticipate in suicide bombings you will become a martyr.” They said,“A martyr is rewarded by going to paradise.”[73]Omar A., 18, described what happened when he was sent to thefront lines at age 17:In the camp there were some previoustrainees and they took them to fight in battle and only half came back…. Theytold us, “You will go and fight for two days and then come back to thecamp”…. The place was just before [outside of] Mogadishu, just onthe outskirts. They gave us automatic weapons [AK-47s]. As we were driving in,the fighting started. They dropped us and started to fight. We could not seethem. There were 15 of us and immediately 10 of us were shot. I dropped my gunand I ran. The ones who were shot were 15, 18, and 19 years old. They were allinjured. Al-Shabaab leaves the wounded and they leave and they continuefighting.[74]Mediareports also describe children’s bodies being seen on the battlefields.[75]A number of children explained to Human Rights Watch thatthey were sent to the front lines with experienced al-Shabaab fighters behindthem using the children as a kind of “human shield.”[76]Abdikarim K., 15, told Human Rights Watch:Then they took us to fight. It wasbetween al-Shabaab and the TFG. The fighting started at about 5 a.m. All theyoung children were taken to the first row of the fighting. I was there. Wewere defeated. Several of the young children there were killed, includingseveral of my classmates. Out of all my classmates—about 100 boys—onlytwo of us escaped, the rest were killed. Other children were also there on thefront lines, about 300. The children were cleaned off. The children all diedand the bigger soldiers ran away.[77]Another 15-year-old boy, Iskinder P., said:When the two months of training were over, there was afight between al-Shabaab and the Marehan Clan. Al-Shabaab said it needed 300fighters and I was among them. We were on the front lines. The heads alwaysstayed behind us. Sometimes when I was firing the gun I would avoid shootingpeople and the person behind me would hit me.I have seen someone shot in the head. His brain went allover. I was really shocked, mentally upset. They saw me turning my gun off andon, very upset. Someone said, “This boy is not normal,” and helpedme into a vehicle. They took the gun from me. I was shocked and crying.[78]Besides actually fighting, children, including girls, arealso used to serve in a multitude of support roles during combat, includingcarrying bullets, water, milk, and food to the front lines, and bodies andwounded fighters from the battlefield.[79] Some ofthese activities, such as carrying ammunition during battle, would beconsidered direct participation in hostilities under international humanitarianlaw, making them liable to attack.[80]A 14-year-old boy described his experience:You go in a “technical” [a civilian vehiclemounted with anti-aircraft gun] when they take you to war. We were just helpingto carry bullets. They show you your partner who carries the weapon and you gowith him. We were trained how to carry bullets, how to be on the front lines.You stay with them; you sleep with them … up to five days, but usuallytwo days. I used to see wounds and even I had seen someone shot. Sometimes boyswere wounded and killed.Sometimes when they pulled back we would run and give themwater. When the fighting would start we would run back and we would pull the woundedand dead bodies to the vehicle. We used to carry and wash the bodies and helpbury them.[81]Ridwan R., 10, also said he supported fighters on thebattlefield:Strong children were asked to carry injured fighters. Iwent with them.… Sometimes I was collecting the wounded, sometimesserving food…. I saw some 7-year-olds. When I talked to them they told methey were used as a shield. They had bullet wounds and metal in their body.[82]Suicide BombersThe youngest [in the camp] was between eight and ten yearsold. The smaller ones were taught how to use pistols and how to throw grenades.Al-Shabaab also used them as suicide bombers. I saw these kids hurlinggrenades. I heard them talking about suicide bombings. They said, “If youparticipate in suicide bombings you will become a martyr.” We were toldnot to discuss this issue with adults as they would discourage us. The ones whotalked to us about it had their faces covered. They said, “A martyr isrewarded by going to paradise.”—Yusuuf J. (not his real name), 16-year-old boyforcibly recruited in Mogadishu in 2010, June 3, 2011In addition to using children in its more conventionalcombat operations, al-Shabaab has also used children as suicide bombers.Al-Shabaab’s use of suicide bombers to target TFG ministers andinstallations as well as AU peacekeepers has been documented in various mediareports.[83] HumanRights Watch interviewed one young man who was used in an attempted suicidebombing near an AMISOM base in February 2011 when he was 17 years old, and ateacher who witnessed the killing of eight students when an eleven-year-oldsuicide bomber disguised as a food vendor detonated explosives on the schoolgrounds in October 2009.[84]Al-Shabaab seeks out childrenfor use in suicide missions in training camps, and in primary schools. Fourchildren told Human Rights Watch that they saw other children, being preparedand sometimes taken from the training camps to become suicide bombers.[85]This fear of being forced to carry out suicide bombings drove some to makedangerous and often life-threatening attempts to escape. The consequences forfailing to carry out a suicide bombing or trying to escape, however, weregrave.Feysal M., who was 12 when al-Shabaab took him with hisclassmates from school in early 2011, said that al-Shabaab executed some of theboys because they refused to become suicide bombers: “Some of the boyshad parents in the TFG so al-Shabaab wanted to use them as suicide bombers. Sothey gave them a choice to be killed or explode themselves. So they said,‘Either way we die so just kill us so we don’t killothers.’” Feysal said he was with the boys when al-Shabaab gavethem the choice: “I saw them with their hands bound, taken to thebush.” He said he was ordered to watch the execution but he refused:“One was my close cousin…. I didn’t want to see my cousin andmy friends butchered. So they started whipping me with a shamut [whip].Later I was forced to see the bodies. I ran out of words I was so shocked andterrified…. When I remember it, it’s hell.”[86]The Story of an Escaped ChildSuicide BomberA 17-year-old boy, fleeing from a suicide bombing missionin Mogadishu, told Human Rights Watch:In February 2011, I was in Dhobley [near the KenyanBorder]. I was recruited by al-Shabaab and taken back to Medina. The job Iwas given was a suicide bomber or to place bombs. There were eight of usselected for suicide bombings. I was so scared. I knew I was going to take mylife. The eight of us were divided into four groups of two. Each day twowould go and bomb. The others were between 18 and 20 years old. They trainedus how to drive and gave other training for 10 days. The trainer wasPakistani, but his face was covered.The first group of two was taken to the livestock market,to a TFG office, and six remained. Next were me and Ali [not his real name],who was 19 years old. We were sent to a place called Kilometer 4 near theAMISOM base. We were given a Toyota Prado [automobile]. There were othervehicles sent to follow us to see that we did the job. We parked and decidedto disappear and flee. We didn’t know al-Shabaab were following us. Wewere meant to take a specific route but we turned off on a side road. Thenthere were four vehicles which barricaded us in. They asked why we turned offand then started to beat us with the butt of their guns. There were sixal-Shabaab beating us.We were arrested by al-Shabaab and taken to a cell inMedina, Bulaqaraa. It was where the top officials were who would decide ourfate. It is the place that in 2008 AMISOM was hosted. They had discussionsfor four or five days. On the sixth day an official said that we had betrayedal-Shabaab and that we were TFG spies and that we should be killed. We weretold that tomorrow at 8 a.m. we would be taken from our cell and would facethe knife. We were given cell phones to call our parents and say that we willbe killed the following day.My partner’s father was with the TFG, but he wasnot from Medina, but I knew everyone in Medina. My colleague was given aphone and called his father and explained. It was a short conversation. Hehanded the phone to me and I didn’t know who to call … my mother,father, or brother. My mother was in Medina at the time, so I phoned mybrother. Al-Shabaab arrested him twice. My brother went to the clan elders.The elders came and pleaded with al-Shabaab to release us but they refused.It was on the second day of talks that a guy said we hadfour hours left and then we would be taken to the killing area. We pleadedand explained we had not done anything. This man showed us the way out. Ilistened to his instructions and the other boy didn’t believe it wastrue—he thought it was a trap. For me it was do or die, so I tried toescape. My friend stayed behind. I thought the worst case was we will both bedead … but best case, I escape. I followed the escape route. I waslucky.—Tahlil D. (not his real name), Kenya, June 2, 2011Role of GirlsAl-Shabaab has frequently taken girls for cooking, cleaning,and other support roles, as well as for rape and forced marriage. Girls andother eyewitnesses told Human Rights Watch that al-Shabaab has targeted girlson the street, at schools, and en route to school, and taken them directly fromtheir homes. This section addresses al-Shabaab’s use of girls to providesupport for the fighters. Rape and forced marriage are discussed in a latersection.As described in interviews, the girls and young womentargeted ranged in age from around 11 to the early 20s.[87]Girls were often abducted in the same sweeps as boys. A 10-year-old boy fromMogadishu taken by al-Shabaab in late 2010 described how he was abducted alongwith a group of schoolmates that included girls, en route from school:We were coming from school with our friends. Al-Shabaabpulled up and dragged us to their vehicle. They had covered heads and faces butthey weren’t in uniform. Many children were taken, even girls. They said,“The girls will cook for us, the small boys we’ll send to themarkets and the bigger boys will fight.” They took us to a place thatlooked like the bush. They took the girls to a different place and wedidn’t see them after that.”[88]Similarly, girls are taken from school. A 15-year-old boyfrom Al Abadir primary school in Mogadishu recounted one incident duringRamadan 2010: “They [al-Shabaab] moved from class to class and tookstudents aged 14, 16, 18, both boys and girls. They took eight girls andfifteen boys. The girls were to cook and carry water to fighters.”[89]Human Rights Watch interviewed five girls between the agesof 11 and 22 who described the differing roles girls were forced to play in thetraining camps. These included “being made to clean, cook, and wash their[al-Shabaab’s] clothes.”[90]Boys and men who had been in training camps said that theyregularly saw girls brought to the camps. A 10-year-old boy held at a trainingcamp on the outskirts of Mogadishu described girls in the camp cooking andserving food to fighters.[91]Similarly, a 20-year-old student recalled an incident in which he witnessed thearrival of a group of girls into the training camp where he was being he held.He said, “There were six girls. They had been taken from houses. Theywere locked in different rooms and we could hear them crying.”[92]The girls we interviewed also described being kept locked inrooms or houses and only allowed out to work. While the girls we interviewedwho were taken for domestic duties said they were not sexually assaulted at thecamps, Human Rights Watch received several reports of violence against girlsduring their detention. As Farax K., 17, told Human Rights Watch:We would wash their clothes and cook for them. They werenot harassing us sexually, but they were beating us. They gave us only one setof clothes and it was very heavy. We used to cook and sometimes the girls wouldshed tears remembering their freedom. That’s when they would beat us withguns. One day they hit me so hard I fell on the ground.[93]Girls who were taken to perform domestic duties often saidthey were kept for shorter periods of time than children recruited for combattraining. The girls we interviewed told Human Rights Watch that they were takenfor periods ranging from two days to two weeks, and then were released orescaped.[94]Aamina M., 13, told Human Rights Watch how she and herfriends escaped in 2010 after being held for three days by al-Shabaab:Al-Shabaab went to eat and the girls forced the lock [onthe door]. We pushed and pushed and then when it opened we ran away. When weran, they saw us and opened fire. Four girls were caught by al-Shabaab andanother 10 who had been fired upon, we think they got shot. One girl out of thefour of us who [successfully] escaped knew the route well and she got us to Medina.[95]Fear of Re-RecruitmentIf children manage to escape from al-Shabaab forces, theyremain at risk. Children told us they feared re-recruitment and would hide inremote areas or other towns waiting to flee to Kenya.[96]Other children who escaped from al-Shabaaband managed to return home said they were too fearful to go outside. As16-year-old Maahir D. explained after his escape from a training camp: “Iwas scared to be recaptured as the trainers in the camp told us we would bekilled if we tried to escape…. I stayed home for 15 days, never leavingthe house, and then I travelled to Dhobley.”[97]Another 14-year-old boy described a similar experience of confining himself tohis home for three months in order to protect himself from re-recruitment.[98]The risk of reprisal for escaping was genuine and not onlylimited to the children themselves. In several cases children’s familymembers who had remained behind in Somalia were threatened and some killed asal-Shabaab forced the family to inform them of the whereabouts of the child whoescaped.Ibrahim K. of Baidoa,northwest of Mogadishu, told Human Rights Watch that after hiding fromal-Shabaab, he returned home to see his family to find that al-Shabaab had gonethere to look for him:They went to my house to my parents and said, “Wewant your child.” My parents refused. They killed my parents, my fourbrothers, and three of my four sisters. The girls were crying and then theother boys tried to defend my parents. Only my 10-year-old sister and Isurvived. I wasn’t there. I came and found my sister crying and thebodies only. My sister was crying and saying, “Go away. They will killyou and I can’t live alone if they kill you.” I just got my sisterand fled…. We left the bodies and my sister and I ran away.[99]Similarly, a 13-year-old boy who was recruited by al-Shabaabin 2011 described how, following his escape from the training camp, al-Shabaabcame looking for him: “Al-Shabaab came looking for us at home. My fatherwas asked to bring me. He said he didn’t know where I was. There was ascuffle and they shot my father dead.… With that I decided to go toKenya. It’s painful that my father died.”[100]Al-Shabaab’s relentless campaign against children hascontributed to many families and children on their own seeking refuge inneighboring Kenya or in other towns across Somalia. Many children and theirrelatives told Human Rights Watch that fears of recruitment or re-recruitmentwere one of the primary reasons they fled. Children described being“afraid” and “haunted” by what al-Shabaab had done and found leaving Somalia their only remainingoption.[101]However, even escape to Kenya does not end thechildren’s fear of re-recruitment or abduction.[102]In Kenya both parents and children described daily fear of the children beingseen and taken by al-Shabaab. Parents andchildren told Human Rights Watch that they felt al-Shabaabhad the ability to continue to look for them.[103]A number of interviewees said that al-Shabaabcontinued to have a presence in Kenya and in the camps in Dadaab.[104]Iskinder P., 15, said: “I am relieved [to be in Kenya] but I am afraidthey might come for me here and return me there.”[105]Other children described bumping into al-Shabaabmembers they had met in their trainings in Kenya and feared direct recruitmentupon being recognized, only compounding the constant sense of fear whichsometimes stopped them from moving freely.Children in TFG Forces and in TFG CustodyThe TFG officially does not recruit children under the ageof 18 into its security forces. However, boys have continued to be found in TFGforces and those of TFG-affiliated militias. While the TFG is not known toforcibly recruit children, it lacks systematic and stringent screeningprocedures and standards to determine the age of all its recruits and thusensure children are excluded. The TFG security forces continue to lack formalcommand and control mechanisms and are, instead, made up of an array of groups,including allied militia and militia linked to TFG officials that are recruitedand integrated in different ways. While recruits for TFG forces who undergoEU-funded training in Uganda are formally screened for age by several actors,recruits who are not trained in Uganda or who have been directly recruited frommilitias typically have not been. Somalia’s Transitional Federal Charter128 of February 2004 contains an explicit prohibition on the use of childrenunder 18 years of age for military service.[106] Inmeeting its obligations under international law, the TFG has a positive duty toensure that all its military units or militias under its control prohibit therecruitment and use of children in fighting forces under the age of 15. Toavoid complicity in violations, the TFG cannot allow allied militias to usechildren under 15.Use of Children by the TFG and TFG-aligned MilitiasThe presence of children within the TFG forces, TFGmilitias, and its allied militias continues to be reported. The UN secretary-generalin his April 2011 annual report to the Security Council on children and armed conflictlisted the TFG as responsible for the recruitment and use of child soldiers.[107]While Human Rights Watch interviewed only one child who had himself beenrecruited and served under the TFG, we spoke to several people with firsthandknowledge of children joining TFG forces in 2010. For example, one formerHizbul Islam fighter whose militia group later joined the TFG said he saw childrenas young as 13 in TFG forces in 2010: “There are children in the TFG, aged13 to 15 years. There were 80 to 90 in my group of 300 who were between 13 and16 years old.”[108]Similarly, Yusri A., a 21-year-old man from Mogadishu,said two of his friends, aged 16, joined the TFG: “I have many friendswho have joined the TFG and many of them were under 18. Some are soldiersguarding the presidential palace and some participate in the fighting.”[109]Neither children nor their families interviewed expressedconcerns about forced recruitment of children by the TFG. “I have neverheard of the TFG [forcibly] recruiting children,” said an 18-year-oldyoung man from Suuqa Xoola in Mogadishu who knew several boys who had voluntarilyjoined the TFG forces.[110]Instead, enlisting by children into the TFG forces appearsto be a means of survival. Interviewees spoke to Human Rights Watch ofchildren—classmates, friends, or relatives—joining the TFG in orderto earn money and provide for their families. The desire to seek revengeagainst al-Shabaab for abuses committed against their families also influencedchildren’s decision to enlist. More vulnerable groups of children who arewithout care and protection, such as orphans, appear particularly likely tojoin the TFG. For example, the 21-year-old above said of his underage friends:“They were hungry and were orphans so they joined the TFG. Others whojoined were just angry against al-Shabaab. I spoke to them and they told methey have nowhere else to go. The TFG supported them.”[111]A 15-year-old from El Ashabiya described how boys alsojoined the TFG in order to escape recruitment from al-Shabaab:I have friends who joined the TFG because al-Shabaab wasthreatening them to get them to join. Some didn’t like al-Shabaab so theyjoined the TFG. I have two classmates, ages 15 and 16, who joined the TFG.[112]However, the one child Human Rights Watch spoke to who hadbeen recruited by the TFG told a different story. Jaman K., a 16-year-old boyfrom Mogadishu, described being forcibly taken from his home by seven mendressed in military uniform in late 2010. He was taken to a TFG camp near theseaport where he was trained for 8 months before being sent to Bakara market tofight during Ramadan 2011:I was given an AK-47 and sent to Baraka market. It wasaround Ramadan [2011]. They just told me to fire. We fought for six days. ThenI was wounded in my leg. Some soldiers bandaged up my leg and then forced me togo back and fight. That night I escaped.[113]Human Rights Watch spoke to one 15-year-old boy fromWardigley in Mogadishu whom ASWJ forcibly recruited from his home in 2010 andused both as an informant and for fighting on the front line in late 2010 andin early 2011.[114] Wealso received credible reports from local and international contacts ofchildren within TFG-affiliated militias, including ASWJ and clan militias.[115]The UN secretary-general reported on the presence of children in ASWJ forces in2011.[116]Similarly, in late 2009, Human Rights Watch reported on the recruitment ofethnic-Somali Kenyan and Somali refugee boys from Dadaab and other areas ofnortheastern Kenya to fight in a militia backed by Kenya in southern Somalia. [117]Children associated with the TFG are often used to mancheckpoints. A high-level TFG government official told Human Rights Watch that heand his colleagues regularly see children manning TFG checkpoints.[118]Witnesses also described children fighting for the TFG in2010. A man who escaped from Mogadishu following the 2010 Ramadan offensivedescribed seeing children on all sides during the offensive both at checkpointsand fighting:Ramadan witnessed heavier fighting between the groups. Ileft because I have small children and I was scared. I saw so many childrenfighting with both sides. The difference is al-Shabaab boys are controlled bytheir seniors. The TFG children can decide if they want to kill you. I sawchildren at checkpoints in Afgooye with Hizbul Islam and at the Medina basewith the TFG.[119]Similarly, Xarid M., an 18-year-old student from SuuqaXoola, described his classmates, including boys under age 18, fighting with theTFG forces:Some of my classmates joined the TFG. Many were killed orlost limbs fighting al-Shabaab. I know five boys who joined the TFG in July2010. One was 10 and the others 15, 20, and two were 18. They were angry as allof their parents had been killed. The 10-year-old buys food and lives at thePresidential Palace. He is an orphan. Both his parents were killed byal-Shabaab so he went to the TFG. Anger drove him. He is my cousin. I spoke tohim by phone but he refused to come with me to Kenya.[120]Human Rights Watch also received credible reports of thepresence of children on the front lines in Mogadishu with TFG-affiliatedmilitias during fighting in 2011.[121]Lokhman, the 15-year-old boy recruited by ASWJ mentioned above, said he wassent twice to the front lines, first in Wardigley in late 2010 and two monthslater near Bakara Market. “After months of training I was given an AK-47and sent to fight. There were many other children. Around 20 children died inthe fighting around Bakara market.” The boy also described being used asan informant and sent into al-Shabaab controlled areas to gather informationfor ASWJ on at least three occasions.[122]TFG Commitments to End Recruitmentand Use of ChildrenThe TFG has on several occasions publicly committed to endingthe use of children by its forces but has to date not sufficiently acted on allthese commitments.In November 2010, then-Prime Minister Mohamed AbdullahiMohamed committed to developing a plan of action to eradicate child soldieringin Somalia and to designate a focal person to work on this plan with the UN.[123]A State Minister for Child Protection and Human Rights was appointed bythen-Prime Minister Mohamed Abdullahi in December 2010, but this position wasnot renewed within the new Cabinet in September 2011. During the UniversalPeriodic Review session at the UN Human Rights Council in May 2011, the TFGdelegation committed again to eradicating the practice of child soldiering.[124]On November 23, 2011 the TFG president and the new prime minister, Abdiweli Mohamed Ali, reiteratedprevious commitments to adopt and implement an action plan when they met withthe special representative of the secretary-general for children and armedConflict in Mogadishu.[125]Furthermore, on July 15, 2011, the TFG military chief of staff,Gen. Abdulkadir Sheikh Ali Dini, issued a general order to all TFG commanderscalling on them to identify cases of human rights abuses, including the recruitmentand deployment of child soldiers, and bring the perpetrators to account either throughdisciplinary action or, if necessary, court martial.[126]The TFG has taken some concrete measures to address theproblem. According to a UN source, a number of underage recruits wereidentified and separated during a recruitment drive following the release ofGeneral Dini’s order, but the exact numbers and fate of these children isnot known.[127]A focal point on child protection has reportedly recently been appointed withinthe Ministry of Defense.[128]However, as of December 2011, the TFG had not developed anaction plan for the prevention of child recruitment, despite its publiccommitments and pressure by international actors and partners of the TFG, mostnotably the US and the UN, to do so.[129]The development and implementation of such a plan will determine whether theTFG and its allied militias can be de-listed from the UNsecretary-general’s list of all parties responsible for the recruitmentand use of child soldiers. Furthermore, Human Rights Watch is not aware of anymember of the TFG forces being held to account to date for the recruitment anduse of children.[130]Lack of Stringent Screening and Demobilization of ChildrenStringent and standardized age screenings are crucial forremoving children from the TFG’s ranks and preventing new recruitment. HumanRights Watch received several reports of underage recruits enrolling with theTFG merely by lying about their age. A young man told Human Rights Watch:“I know eight schoolmates who joined the TFG in 2010. The TFG asks if youare over 18 but my friends just lied.”[131]Although the TFG officially requires recruits to be 18, andwhile some level of screening is reported to have taken place (particularysince the issuance of the July 2011 general order), a significant proportion ofTFG forces are, to date, not known to have been formally screened, leavingsignificant gaps. The TFG’s backers, including the UN and the US, haveoften called on the TFG to screen its recruits.[132]The only formalized age screening process of TFG recruitsthat Human Rights Watch identified were for recruits being trained outside ofSomalia in Bihanga, Uganda, at a training that is funded by the EU. TFGrecruits sent to Bihanga for training reportedly undergo several screenings,including age screening by AMISOM, more recently with the assistance ofIntergovernmental Authority for Development (IGAD) representatives, and the EU.[133]In Mogadishu, AMISOM/IGAD first carry-out a medical and fitness screening. Asof 2011 the EU started to carry out a second medical screen in Bihanga, Uganda,which in that year identified at least 46 children among the recruits.[134]It is critical that this increased vigilance is applied toall recruitments, including past recruits who have, to date, not been formallyscreened. Most soldiers who currently make up the TFG forces, including TFGsoldiers being paid stipends by the US and Italian governments, have not gonethrough the Uganda-based training and therefore were not subjected to the samescreening standards.[135]According to one report, only 1,900 of the current 10,000-strong TFG forceshave undergone training at Bihanga.[136]Diplomats involved in the Uganda training and in capacity building of the TFGforces confirmed that recruits integrated into TFG forces from militia groupsor who otherwise have not undergone the EU training are less likely to be subjectedto stringent screening.[137]More recently, informal measures have reportedly been takenby actors involved in one way or another with the TFG forces to identify andseparate children. Those involved in the distribution of monthly stipends tothe TFG forces in Mogadishu are reportedly seeking to identify children duringthe distribution. Similarly, actors involved in the inclusion of TFG soldiersonto a biometric database system are reportedly seeking to identify children.[138]However, the identification of children among the recruitssent to Uganda in early 2011, despite the fact that the TFG is expected torequest at least three references and dates of birth from each recruit forthese trainings,[139]suggests that additional efforts are required by the TFG itself during thefirst stages of recruitment to strengthen its age screening measures. Thisincludes ensuring that all its recruits—including those recruiteddirectly from clan militias and those posted outside of Mogadishu—facethe same screening standards and processes as new recruits sent to Bihanga, andto ensure that all children are removed from its ranks.The ongoing lack of a clear and consolidated commandstructure within the TFG forces is clearly a challenge to ensuring stringentscreening. Other difficulties include the lack of TFG control over clanmilitias,[140] aswell as the complexity of age screening in Somalia, given the lack of birthcertificates and the impact of malnutrition on children’s growth.However, these challenges do not negate the need for formal and systematicscreening standards and procedures. Governments and others have attempted toaddress these complexities in other contexts,with Nepal cited as a relevant example.[141]Especially in light of ongoing calls for integration of TFG-aligned militiasinto the TFG forces, putting in place systematic screening procedures beforefurther recruitment or integration of militia forces is crucial if the use ofchild soldiers is to cease.TFG Treatment of Children who are Former al-ShabaabChildren from al-Shabaab who escape to or who are capturedby TFG or AMISOM forces have had few options for protection or rehabilitation.As Somalia is a signatory to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC)and CRC Optional Protocol on children in armed conflict, the TFG should refrainfrom acts that would defeat these treaties’ object and purpose.[142]It should provide for the “rehabilitation and social reintegration”of child soldiers who come into their control,[143]and ensure that they “are demobilized or otherwise released from service.”[144]The TFG should also refrain from detaining or imprisoning children except in conformitywith the law and only as a measure of last resort, for the shortest appropriatetime, and separately from adults.[145] Otherinternational standards provide that the release and reintegration of childrenremains a priority, that children are handedover to “an appropriate, mandated, independent civilian process,”and that all appropriate measures be taken to promote the physical andpsychological recovery and social reintegration of the child and to ensure andreestablish family unity.[146]Child “Escapees” and Captured ChildrenIn 2011 the TFG began to report instances of individuals,including children, either escaping from al-Shabaab to the TFG and AMISOM orbeing captured by the TFG or AMISOM on the battlefield.[147]Some of these children reportedly escaped or handed themselves over to AMISOMwhile others had been taken from al-Shabaab during or following fighting byAMISOM. AMISOM reportedly handed over such children to the TFG. As of lateNovember 2011, there was no standard procedure in place to regulate thetreatment of children handed over to TFG custody.[148]Some, if not most, of the children who escape or arecaptured from al-Shabaab are initially interrogated and screened by the TFG’sNational Security Agency (NSA).[149]The NSA carries out a security screening. Human Rights Watch spoke to only onechild who had been detained by the TFG and undergone such a process. The child,a 14-year-old boy from Bardhere, told Human Rights Watch that the TFG pickedhim up in late 2010 when it took over the al-Shabaab training camp to which hewas forcibly recruited. He described how TFG forces took him and other capturedchildren to Villa Somalia, the TFG government compound in Mogadishu, forinterrogation and then released him:We were taken in vehicles to the presidential palace inMogadishu after an eight-hour drive. I knew the presidential palace. AMISOM wasthere. We were taken inside the palace—taken to a room with bedding—butwe could walk around the compound. We had a lot of freedom. We spent eight daysthere. I was interrogated by the TFG on three occasions. They took me to a separateroom. It was soldiers who interrogated me—they were wearing militaryuniforms but they were not armed. I was not scared when I was being askedquestions as I knew I was in the hands of the right people. I was askedquestions about the food I had received and the training I had undergone. Afterthis they located my parents who came to pick me up. I was taken home andstayed indoors for three months.[150]Key actors, including agencies involved in child protection,have limited information on the process or even access to the children. Reportssuggest that a proportion of escaped and captured children are sent to differentTFG camps and detention facilities that fail to meet basic internationalstandards. This has raised concerns as to whether the TFG is taking intoaccount the best interests of the children, including how to rehabilitate and reintegratethem into society.One example concerns a group of al-Shabaab “escapees”who have been held at a TFG training facility known as Marino camp. Accordingto UN staff, as of May 2011, the TFG was holding 136 escapees from al-Shabaab,of whom 40 percent were reported to be children, in this camp.[151]Initially detained by the TFG in cramped facilities at the Villa Somaliacompound, these children were moved in June to Marino camp.[152]Human Rights Watch was not able to confirm the exact numbers of children held atthe camp, as movement into the camp is reportedly fluid. Despite reportedclaims by the TFG authorities that basic protection measures, including theseparation of adults and children in the camp, were being taken, both childprotection agencies and diplomats expressed concerns to Human Rights Watch aboutthe appropriateness of this facility for children and whether basic standardswould be met.[153] HumanRights Watch also received several reports that the children in the camp werebeing used as sources of military intelligence and had been given cell phonesin order to collect information for the TFG.[154]Informal commitments made in June 2011 by then TFG officialsregarding the transfer of children to civilian-controlled facilities have nottaken place as of November 2011.[155]In comparison to the reported large number of childrenrecruited by al-Shabaab, the number of child “escapees” held by theTFG in Mogadishu is few. AMISOM staff and Somali civil society activists toldHuman Rights Watch that the general lack of trust in the TFG is an importantreason why many who escape do not turn to the TFG for protection.[156]The TFG has reportedly sent a number of captured childrenwho were allegedly linked to al-Shabaab to Mogadishu Central Prison.[157]According to a Somali nongovernmental organization, these children have notbeen convicted and the detention conditions are dire: some children are malnourishedand others are held alongside adults.[158]Unconfirmed reports suggest that captured children are also held in other TFGfacilities, including the NSA detention facility near Villa Somalia.[159]However, the number of children held in TFG detentionfacilities is unknown, in part due to limited access and lack of independentmonitoring of the prisons. Human Rights Watch has knowledge of only one Somaliorganization that has been given clearance to access Mogadishu Central Prison.Access to the NSA detention facilities is severely restricted and media reportspoint to the presence of the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) within NSAfacilities.[160]To date there has been no formal or regular international access to monitor andassess the protection-related issues associated with the detention of childrencaptured by AMISOM or TFG forces.Similarly, while Human Rights Watch was unable to speak toany child who had been detained by TFG-affiliated militias, in March 2011UNICEF expressed concern about the detention of children at an unknown locationby TFG-affiliated militias in the town of Belet Hawa following fighting in Gedoregion.[161]In light of the intensified fighting between the TFG and TFG-affiliatedmilitias against al-Shabaab in areas outside of Mogadishu since late 2011,unlawful secret detention of children captured from al-Shabaab could increaseif regular independent monitoring does not take place.The TFG has legitimate security concerns regarding capturedal-Shabaab fighters, including those who are children. However, it should seekto ensure that its response makes the children’s protection andlonger-term rehabilitation and reintegration a priority. Both the TFG andrelevant child protection agencies should ensure that appropriate and adequatecivilian rehabilitation and reintegration programs are in place, and thatcaptured children are promptly transferred to such programs. Captured childrenshould not be detained solely for their association with al-Shabaab.Limited Child Protection ProgramsChild protection programs are available in Mogadishu forchildren formerly associated with fighting forces. However, individualsfamiliar with these programs say they have been limited due to operational andsecurity constraints. Given the significant number of children who are reportedto have been associated in one way or another with al-Shabaab, the TFG, orTFG-aligned militias, and the ongoing vulnerability of children to recruitment,this poses a challenge both to the successful protection and demobilization ofchildren.[162]Furthermore, such programs do not always respond to theneeds of these groups of children. They provide limited financial support tothe children involved and lack medium and longer-term opportunities. Accordingto NGOs that met with the children held at Jazeera camp following their returnfrom the Bihanga training, a significant number of the children wanted toremain with the TFG forces primarily for financial reasons rather than sign upfor the vocational trainings organized by local Somali NGOs.[163]While recognizing the significant challenges facing child protection andeducation programs in Somalia, such responses will also be crucial to thesuccess of any effective screening procedures.III. Forced Marriage and Rape of Girls byal-ShabaabIn addition to recruitinggirls and young women to provide domestic work and other forms of directsupport for its fighters in camps and on the front lines, al-Shabaab has alsotargeted them for rape and forced marriage.[164] Al-Shabaab members have assaulted girls and youngwomen in schools, public spaces, and their homes. Because perpetratorsof rape and other violence in Somalia enjoy almost total impunity, the victims andtheir families often have very little power to resist, and those who do facegreat risks. Victims of rape and their families rarely have anywhere to turn tofor support and are at times stigmatized and ostracized within their owncommunities. Flight is often the only form of protection that remains: many refugeefamilies told Human Rights Watch that one of the main reasons they left Somaliawas fear of forced marriage.Rape by al-Shabaab occurs both within the context of suchforced marriages and outside. Sexual and gender-based violence in Somalia isbelieved to be widespread but significantly underreported and committed both bycombatants and civilians.[165]International human rightslaw places significant obligations on states to specify the minimum age ofmarriage and to prevent child marriage.[166] Human Rights Watch opposes all non-consensual, orforced, marriages of women and girls, and calls on states to set the minimumlegal age of marriage at 18.[167] Internationalhumanitarian law and international human rights law both prohibit rape andother sexual violence.[168] When crimes of sexual violence are committed as partof armed conflict, they can be prosecuted as war crimes.[169]Forced and Early Marriage by al-ShabaabAl-Shabaab has imposed forced and early marriage as part ofthe group’s effort to impose its harsh version of Sharia on every aspectof the personal lives of women and girls. The practices described to HumanRights Watch were not simply the actions of individual fighters takingadvantage of impunity to impose marriage on individual girls. Rather, bothgirls who were targeted and other eyewitnesses consistently described a moreorganized practice in which al-Shabaab preached marriage with fighters to girlsstill in school (see below), and abducted and detained girls under thegroup’s auspices for this purpose. Human Rights Watch did not interviewany girls forced to marry fighters in 2010 and 2011, but did intervieweyewitnesses, girls who had been repeatedly threatened by al-Shabaab withforced marriage, and a young woman who escaped after being abducted but beforebeing forcibly married. According to the children interviewed, escape fromal-Shabaab is difficult, and likely more so once married. The forced marriageof girls and young women to al-Shabaab fighters has also been widely reportedby others.[170]The Story of a Girl Taken by al-ShabaabIt was around 8 a.m. in January 2011. It was the openingof school and it happened just after the first lesson. Several men came tothe school by car and asked all ladies and boys to assemble and took all theolder boys 17 plus and all the girls who could be wives (were considered mature).They had two vehicles. They had one for the ladies with closed doors and theytook us to the camp. We were taken and paraded in front of old al-Shabaab menwho were masked. One old man said, “Welcome.” We were taken to aroom and given water to sprinkle around the compound to cool it down. Once wefinished that we were taken back to our house.They put a padlock on the door, but it was not strong.And when al-Shabaab went to eat, the girls forced the lock. We pushed andpushed and then when it opened we ran away. When we ran, they saw us andopened fire. Four girls were caught by al-Shabaab and ten who were fired at,we think, got shot. One girl out of the four of us who escaped knew the routewell and she got us to Medina. I was the youngest; the other girls were allolder. After several hours I got home.But al-Shabaab came the next day and said they wanted meback. My father said no, so they took my father and my five-year-old brother.My other siblings and I were at the market, they took the ones that theyfound.—Aamina M. (not her real name), 13-year-old girl,Kenya, June 1, 2011The difference between forced marriages by al-Shabaab andmarriages that might have been somewhat more voluntary in nature were notalways clear, particularly in witness accounts. However, the context underwhich these marriages are taking place—under al-Shabaab’s brutalrepression and often direct threats—and the involvement of children under18 makes the very notion of voluntariness questionable. As a 17-year-old boyfrom Mogadishu pointed out: “Usually they [al-Shabaab] were in town andwhen they would see girls from school they would find one, confront her, saythey want to marry her. Sometimes they would go to the parents but if theparents refuse they just take her. I saw it all the time. If she accepts, good.If she refuses, she’s kidnapped. Either way, it’s better to takethe option of agreeing.”[171]Al-Shabaab abducted girls from school, en route, in publicplaces, and from their homes, often through threats and violence against themand their family members. A teacher, 46, from Mogadishu described howal-Shabaab rounded-up girls from his school in January 2010:It was tea break, exactly at 10 a.m. The girls and boyswere separated [by al-Shabaab] at break and they were not allowed to play. Theyasked the girls to stand and paraded them. They looked and picked 15- and16-year-old girls, one was 17 years old. They took 12 girls in total. Thesegirls were taken to be wives. They were told they should join. They said… the girls were to become al-Shabaab wives. After this incident all thegirls over age 15 ran away or dropped out of school. One hundred fifty girlsdropped out of school.[172]The mother of a young woman from Hawlwadaq in Mogadishu saidthat four al-Shabaab fighters approached her one evening in early 2010 at hertea kiosk and told her that they wanted to marry off her daughter, who was 17-years-oldat the time: “They told the girl that they had fallen in love with her. Icomplained that she was too young. But they said, ‘If you don’taccept our demand, we will slaughter you in front of her.’ We locked thekiosk and fled to Afgooye right then.”[173]A 19-year-old student from Bakara in Mogadishu described howgirls were taken from his school:They came and took many girls from my school. If theyrefused they were taken by force. I saw three girls taken by force. They werearound 14 or 15 [years old] and it was on the seventh day of Ramadan 2010 [whenthere was heavy fighting]. Girls were taken at gunpoint and forced to becomewives of combatants. One parent who protested was killed. One girl said shecould not go and al-Shabaab shot her in the forehead in front of my class. Whenthe school asked why they did that, al-Shabaab said that she was a spy for thegovernment. She was 19 years old.[174]Girls may be targeted both by unknown al-Shabaab fighters aswell as by people very close to them. The wife of an al-Shabaab fighterdescribed the anxiety of seeing her son taken away to fight by her husband andthen facing attempts by her husband to marry-off their 14-year-old daughter toan al-Shabaab member:Then he started talking about marrying off my daughter. Ipleaded with him, telling him he had taken my son, at least leave me and sparemy daughter. She was 14 years old. One day he brought a man back to the house.He was 30 and Somali. I think he was part of the group who had come to my housewhen they took [my son]. My daughter was there when he came. The man then left.A few days later two men came inside the house and one came inside the houseand started hitting me with a rifle butt and told me to go to the bedroom. ButI refused. Then they left. I left the following day with six of my children.[175]The risk of repercussions forgirls or their families who resist marriage is serious and very real. An18-year-old woman from Karan, Mogadishu, described how, shortly before Ramadanin 2010, her brother was stabbed in the eye when he tried to stop threeal-Shabaab fighters from taking her from their home, saying they wanted tomarry her off. She fled Mogadishu the following day, leaving her brother, whowas still in the hospital, behind.[176]The 46-year-old teacher fromMogadishu quoted above described the fate of one girl they took from the schoolwho resisted a forced marriage:She was given to a commander. He was an old man. She wastaken to El Ashabiya. He told his men to kill her and they filmed it and sentit to mobile phones. My students saw it. They saw the mutilation. They broughtback her head to the school and assembled all of the girls and said, “Thisis an example of what will happen if you misbehave.” The girl was 16years old.[177]While Human Rights Watch primarily heard cases of girls 15and above taken by al-Shabaab for marriage, a 17-year-old boy from Jilibdescribed how the wife of a local al-Shabaab leader in Jilib, Middle Juba,prepared his friend, a 13-year-old girl, to become the wife of a combatant:There is a new district commissioner now and he is anal-Shabaab boss. His wife has a big building and girls are brought there andthey learn about jihad. They go there and then learn about jihad and aremarried to fighters. There are girls as young as 15 years old. They go everyFriday to her house. Salima [not her real name] went, she is 13 and she toldme.[178]Human Rights Watch received several reports of girls andyoung women being prepared for or already married off to al-Shabaab fightersbeing kept in al-Shabaab camps or houses of combatants. Several boys recruitedby al-Shabaab spoke of the presence of girls and young women married tocombatants in the camps. Girls are also kept in specific houses for combatants.A 17-year-old boy from Wardigley in Mogadishu explained how al-Shabaab buyshouses and furnishes them and then combatants use them: “If one combatantdies another uses it.”[179]A 16-year-old girl fromBondhere, Mogadishu, who was to be forcibly married off to an al-Shabaabfighter, described her ordeal and being locked up:In mid-2010 al-Shabaab took me from my house. They werecontrolling the entire neighborhood and locked me in a house. They told me,“We will marry you to our leader.” I was in that house for a month.I was crying day and night. Then I said they should go and ask my father. Myfather said, “I will discuss it with my daughter, let her come to mefirst.” They released me. I told my mother I didn’t want it. Afterthat I went to live with my grandmother in a different neighborhood controlledby the TFG, Hamer Wayne. After that when they came to our house, they took mytwo brothers.[180]Girls and their families have very limited means ofprotection against abduction for forced marriage. Some girls drop out of schooland are often then confined to the home. Girls also move, although generallytemporarily, to their extended family or acquaintances in the TFG controlledareas.Fleeing to Kenya or anotherpart of Somalia is often the only choice families have to protect theirdaughters. Human Rights Watch spoke to 12 parents and children who said theyfled Somalia either out of fear of seeing their daughters or sisters forciblymarried or after al-Shabaab visited their homes threatening to do so.A 48-year-old mother fromYaqshiid, Mogadishu, for example, explained why her family fled Mogadishu inNovember 2010: “Al-Shabaab came directly to my husband and said, ‘Youbring your two boys to fight for us and the two girls to marry fighters andbring two machine guns.’ My husband is a businessman and is wealthy.Because of this scenario we ran. Up until now we have been running. How can Igive my girls?”[181]Rape by al-ShabaabThe issue of rape in Somalia is taboo. There is profoundstigma associated with sexual violence and, therefore, victims and theirfamilies rarely speak out. Human Rights Watch interviewed one girl and oneyoung woman in the course of this research who described their rape byal-Shabaab members, the former the victim of a gang rape, the latter in thecontext of a planned forced marriage. A handful of Somali refugees also spoketo us about other incidents of rape perpetuated by al-Shabaab forces, and HumanRights Watch and others have documented sexual violence by TFG forces andTFG-affiliated militias.[182] Ourindividual interviews, as well as secondary evidence, raise grave concerns thatsexual and gender-based violence in Somalia is widespread and perpetuated notonly by combatants but also by civilians.[183]A 17-year-old girl fromMogadishu described to Human Rights Watch how al-Shabaab fighters raped her oneevening as she went to buy food:My younger sister and I were sent one night to go to thestore to buy things. Then al-Shabaab appeared in front of us. There were verymany. They caught us. They beat us but my sister managed to escape from them.They told me, “You will be taken to the station. Why are you walkingaround at this hour? We will arrest you.” But they didn’t take meto the station. They raped me. I got pregnant and have this small baby. Therewere six but I went unconscious after two so I don’t know if all sixraped me. They used the butt of the gun to pierce my eye [indicating her lefteye which was obviously damaged and which she said was blind]. Then they justleft me.[184]The girl became pregnant from the attack and her 16-year-oldsister, who was severely beaten, became mentally unstable. Both girls dropped outof school after that.[185]A 16-year-old boy fromYaaqshiid, Mogadishu, who was forcibly recruited and sent to an al-Shabaabtraining camp, described seeing fighters rape girls who came into the camp insearch of food:There were ladies in the camp. Al-Shabaab fighters rapedthem. They were teenagers, they don’t like older ladies. I saw it when Iwas in the camp. There were girls who went to the camp to look for food, andthey are kept there and then released. I saw 20 girls that this happened to. Iwas providing food to them. The girls I saw were all between 15 and 20 yearsold.[186]Given the situation of widespread violence and impunity inwhich rape takes place, girls, young women, and their families often have verylittle power and means, notably in al-Shabaab controlled areas, to resist rapeor to speak out against the violation. One woman from Bakara, Mogadishu, forexample, described attending the funeral of a girl who had been shot dead by anal-Shabaab fighter after he tried to rape her and she resisted.[187]Victims of rape and, at times,their families may also face severe stigma and repercussions in theircommunities. The mother of the 17-year-old victim of rape told Human RightsWatch how she was attacked after speaking out about the rape of her daughter:Women who sympathized with al-Shabaab threatened me andsaid, “We will beat you for saying that al-Shabaab raped your daughter.”They cut me with a knife. They even told me that if I didn’t leave theywould kill me for saying al-Shabaab raped my daughter.[188]The girl herself spoke of thestigma that she faced after becoming pregnant as a result of the rape:I was going to a private school, class 1 [before the rape].I stopped after that when people heard my story. I had many problems with thecommunity. Some people told me to abort the child and I feared for my life.Some were laughing at me and I said that it was not my fault. That it hadhappened accidentally and I didn’t wish to get pregnant. After Idelivered the baby I was hiding so I didn’t go to school.[189]Facing stigma, insecurity,and lack of access to the necessary health facilities, flight is often the onlyoption. The girl left Mogadishu and fled to Kenya as a result:I came to Kenya six months ago with the baby. The baby wassick and also because of the stigma and discrimination in the community. Andseeing al-Shabaab made me even more traumatized.[190]IV. Al-Shabaab Attacks on Schools, Teachers, and StudentsSchools have featured heavily in al-Shabaab’s combat operationsas well their attempt to control Somalis’ everyday activities. The grouphas literally turned schools into battlegrounds, using them as places fromwhich to fire on AMISOM and TFG forces, intentionally placing students andteachers in harm’s way from return fire, and in some cases directlyattacking students and education buildings. It has used schools to recruitstudents and teachers as fighters and to abduct girls for rape and forcedmarriage. It has aggressively interfered with teaching, prohibiting English andother subjects deemed contrary to their version of Islam, threatening and attimes killing teachers, using classroom lectures on jihad to recruit studentsinto their forces, replacing teachers with their own members, and imposing harshand unwelcome Islamic restrictions on girls’ dress and interactions withmale students. Classes have been left bereft of educational content, teachershave fled, and, where schools have not shut down entirely, children—deprivedof any meaningful education and afraid for their safety—have dropped outin large numbers.Many schools in Mogadishu have been destroyed or closed. Ahandful of schools—along with teachers and a number of pupils—haverelocated, for example to El Ashabiya, in order to escape the fighting inMogadishu, but even there have come under threat. The teaching profession hasbeen decimated as many teachers have fled the country. This section focuses onattacks on students, teacher, and schools in 2010 and 2011.Under international humanitarian law (the laws of war), allcivilians, including students and teachers, are protected from attack.[191]Acts or threats of violence whose primary purpose is to spread terror among thecivilian population are prohibited.[192] Thelaws of war also forbid attacks directed at civilian objects, includingschools, except and only for such time as they are being used by warringparties for military purposes.[193] Usingstudents and teachers as “human shields”—the deliberate useof civilians to protect one’s forces against attacks—is a warcrime.[194] Returnfire in such situations may violate the prohibitions against indiscriminateattacks or attacks that cause disproportionate civilian harm.[195]The Story of a Teacher Forced to Flee Somalia“Al-Shabaab has killed teachers, threatenedteachers, and taken students,” a geography, mathematics, and Arabicteacher from Medina, Mogadishu, told Human Rights Watch.[196] InDecember 2009, six al-Shabaab fighters came to this teacher’s class:I was teaching … a geography lesson and they toldme, “We warned you not to teach these subjects.” They took abayonet and stabbed me in the right upper lip…. They did it in front ofthe students.… They picked a female teacher as she was not wearing ahijab [headscarf]. They came to her class and said, “Why don’tyou have a hijab and veil?” They took her in a Toyota vehicle and herbody was found … near the mosque.The teacher changed schools after that, but things did notimprove. He said that in the first months of 2010, “I had students whowere killed for practicing English as they were walking home. They werebetween 10 and 17 years old. An al-Shabaab fighter asked, ‘Are youspeaking English…. You don’t want to be Muslim?’ He thenshot them.”In late 2010, al-Shabaab “came to the school andpicked 20 students between 15 and 17 years…. They took 3 girls—a12-year-old and two 14-year-olds. No one tried to stop them … it wasimpossible.” They continued coming to the school after that, he said:When al-Shabaab came into the school, children wouldstart jumping from windows. Some would end up with broken arms and legs andteeth as a result. The windows were high and they would scramble over thelockers to try and jump out, others would pull others down trying to escape.One day al-Shabaab stopped a child from jumping by pulling his legs and hefell and lost all of his front teeth…he was nine, unconscious.At that time, al-Shabaab started “to influence thecurriculum. They said English could not be taught. They said besides Arabicand religious subjects everything else was banned.” By that point, hesaid, “I always wondered if I would come home at the end of theday.”The teacher arrived as a refugee in Kenya in May 2011.“What forced me to leave was that the deputy and headmaster were shot.They were killed because they refused to follow instructions and stopteaching certain subjects. This is what forced me to flee.”Laws-of-War ViolationsInvolving SchoolsAl-Shabaab has deliberately attacked students, teachers, andeducation buildings.[197] It hasalso has used school grounds to launch artillery attacks on opposing forces,sometimes with students and teachers still inside, drawing return fire from TFGand AMISOM forces. Such attacks have resulted in the damage and destruction ofschool buildings, the death of students in or near school compounds, and theclosure of schools. In some instances, al-Shabaab has used schools for weaponstraining and weapons’ storage and has taken over school buildings aftertheir closure.On October 4, 2011, a car bomb exploded outside a compound housing severalgovernment ministries, including the Ministry of Education, at the strategicjunction of Km4 (Kilometer 4) in Mogadishu. At least 100 people died and 90were wounded. Many of the casualties were students and their parents awaitingexam results and students seeking scholarships abroad.[198] Al-Shabaab spokesman Ali Mohamed Raghe claimedresponsibility for the attack, warned civilians to stay away from TFG institutions,and threatened further attacks. Bashar Abdullahi Nur, the suicide bomber, tapedan interview before the attack that was later aired on a militant-run radiostation. “Now those who live abroad are taken to a college and neverthink about the hereafter. They never think about the harassed Muslims,"he said. "He wakes up in the morning, goes to college and studies andaccepts what the infidels tell him, while infidels are massacringMuslims."[199] The attack echoed al-Shabaab’s suicide bombingof a medical school graduation ceremony in Mogadishu that killed at least 19 peoplein 2009.Several students told Human Rights Watch that al-Shabaabdeliberately attacked their school buildings in 2010 and 2011.Ibrahim K., 14, said that in late 2010 he was on his way toschool in Baidoa, in south-central Somalia, when he saw al-Shabaab fightersdriving towards the school. “I ran to my class and told people torun,” he told Human Rights Watch. “There were many [fighters],planning to come to classes and take away teachers and students. When studentsshouted and some ran away, then al-Shabaab shelled [the school with fourshells] … from the vehicle.” Ibrahim said he “saw the bodiesof his teachers.”[200]Khorfa S., 16, said that al-Shabaab shelled his school inMogadishu during the 2010 Ramadan offensive. “I think they were targetingmy school,” he explained. “Why else would they continually attackthe school? In one incident one of the neighboring classrooms wasshelled…. Sometimes you would hear reprisals from the TFG but they wouldfire beyond the school.”[201]Daahir J., 15, told Human Rights Watch that he believed asuicide bomber detonated explosives inside his primary school around the sametime:There was a big explosion in one classroom in my school.The explosion killed my 13-year-old brother…. I think it was a suicidebomber. Not only there was no sound before the explosion and generally whensomething is launched you hear some sort of movement and whistling but also itaffected just one room, which is not always the case with artilleryfire…. We don’t know who detonated the bomb as everyone in the classroomdied.[202]Another 14-year-old boy said that al-Shabaab “placedmines at the school gate” after the school refused to allow the group torecruit there, including just before Ramadan in 2009, when TFG forces wereexpected to pass. It was not clear whether the mines were directed at the TFGor the school but, either way, a mine exploded while “students wereexiting the school at break time.” Sixteen students died from theexplosion, he said, including four of his classmates, ranging in age from 10 to21.[203]It was not possible to corroborate these accounts as thereis no systematic monitoring and reporting of attacks on schools in Mogadishu.But direct attacks aside, equally terrifying and more common in witnessaccounts is al-Shabaab’s practice of trapping students and teachers ashuman shields inside schools and firing on TFG/AMISOM forces from within orfrom just behind schools, while frightened children and adults held in theschool await return fire. “Theyuse the school as a shield,” said one Mogadishu teacher. “Theystand outside the school and fire, and then the fighters just melt into theschool as students.”[204]An older student described what happened at his primaryschool:In November 2010 on a Sunday at around 4 p.m., my schoolwas hit one day after fighting broke out. Al-Shabaab started firing from justbehind my school compound—just behind the back of the classes. They werefiring I think towards Villa Somalia. There had been sporadic fighting in thearea for some time. Al-Shabaab were firing artillery that seemed to be rockets.Often foreign fighters are manning these weapons. I was in class when I startedhearing the fighting and firing from al-Shabaab. I ran outside. Afteral-Shabaab fires, we generally run away as we know that AMISOM replies….AMISOM/TFG started responding…. The school was hit bya weapon that sounded like a thunder when coming and then made a big explosion.The reprisal hit an empty classroom. A lot of the pupils were outside of theclassrooms. The debris and shrapnel from the explosion hit some children whowere outside in the compound fetching water. Three children were killed in thisincident and six were injured….My school was shut down after this. [Another] school wasalso shut down soon after, after it was hit in fighting.[205]An 18-year-old student from Hawlwadag, Mogadishu, relatedanother incident from October 2010:One day al-Shabaab entered the school and went up to thefirst floor. They were shooting big guns from the school…. 15 to 20al-Shabaab entered the first floor and fired. They closed the door and westayed in the class. We were locked in from 10 or 11 a.m. to 6 p.m.—therewas continuous fighting. We heard return fire but it did not hit the school, ithit all around us.[206]Another Mogadishu student, age 18, described what happenedin his school during Ramadan 2010:Al-Shabaab came into the compound of the school and told usto stay in class. It was noon and they set up a Hobiye [a surface to air rocketlauncher] and they started launching from inside the school compound. They setit up in the “playing” area…. Some students tried to get outof the compound but they were turned back by al-Shabaab. We were trapped fortwo hours and they were firing in the direction of K-4 [TFG/AMISOM-held territory].There was incoming fire coming back at our direction. There were five rocketshitting around the school compound. One landed as we were released and itkilled eight students who were walking home. They came in a series of fourrockets. The students killed were 17, 16, 18, and 19 years old.[207]Another student said al-Shabaab held him and his classmatesin the school compound in Al Baraka, Mogadishu, for a whole day during Ramadan2010: “We were told to sit. We were there from 7 a.m. to 6 p.m. They werefiring rockets at the TFG. The TFG returned fire and it landed outside theschool compound…. We found limbs and blood in the school compound after.There were about 200 al-Shabaab fighters in the compound. This happened severaltimes. The school was only separated by a road from AMISOM.”[208]Ateacher from Mogadishu said that at his school, al-Shabaab forces:would make a shelter when the students were inside. Whenthey would fire a mortar, they would get retaliated against.One time they brought a big gun into the school. I tried totell them not to fire their mortar from here because the reply will kill us.They refused. I asked them to let the students go. They accepted and we ranaway. They launched as we were running away. They fired five or six mortars,took their gun and left. There was a reply. Two classes were damaged, burned bythe response. The tables and chairs were burned and the walls destroyed.[209]Other students described similar incidents in 2010 and 2009.[210]According to the UN secretary-general’s report on Somalia, attacks onschool buildings have increased since late 2008.[211]Several other students who spoke to Human Rights Watch saidthat their schools were damaged and students and teachers were wounded orkilled from artillery and small arms fire.[212]Two students said that al-Shabaab raised the group’swhite flag over their schools,[213] andothers said the group stored weapons there, which were used among other thingsfor training students,[214]effectively making the school a military target that puts students at graverisk. One student said that at his school al-Shabaab “had hand grenades,guns, and pistols. The school had a big compound and they hid things in bushesand trees and behind books and lockers. Teachers knew but could not sayanything.”[215]When al-Shabaab use of schools and generalized fighting haveshut schools down, al-Shabaab has on occasion taken over the buildings, makingit impossible for school to resume there and placing the structures at furtherrisk of being damaged or destroyed. The older student whose primary school wasshut down (in addition to other schools) after being hit in November 2010,said: “Al-Shabaab took several of these schools as bases afterwards,including Imman Shafiiri and Somalia Youth League school.”[216]A boy who dropped out in August 2010 said by January 2011, al-Shabaab hadoccupied the school: “When I came back I went to the school to see it andit was an al-Shabaab zone. I saw their vehicles—technicals—there.There was no more learning. I saw my classmate there who had become part ofal-Shabaab. I saw him outside the school and he told me they were staying theschool compound day and night.”[217] The UNsecretary-general reported that armed groups occupied at least 34 schools fromearly 2008 to early 2010.[218]While it is not a violation of the laws of war for militaryforces to occupy buildings in a manner that does not put civilians at risk, theprolonged closure of schools without adequate alternative facilities is aviolation of the students’ right to education under international humanrights law.[219]Recruitment of Children from SchoolsI was always worried when they were at school. You alwaysworried when the day ended to see if your boy was recruited or your girl waskidnapped. Every day you get your child back at the end you are thankful. Everyday there were incidents reported from the school.—Maandiq R. (not her real name), mother whose17-year-old daughter was taken by al-Shabaab during a school tea break inBakara, MogadishuAl-Shabaab has used schools to recruit boys and girls, bothby subjecting them to organizational propaganda and by force, as detailedabove. “They target schools as they see them as recruiting grounds, butalso because they see school and education as a waste of time,” said16-year-old Khorfa. “‘Why go to school when you could befighting?’ is their view.”[220] Of the23 children Human Rights Watch interviewed who were recruited or abducted byal-Shabaab in 2010 and 2011, 14 were taken from their schools or en route.Twenty-four other students told us that al-Shabaab took children from theirschools or on the way during this same time period.The methodical manner in which al-Shabaab has used schoolsas recruiting grounds was recounted with meticulous detail by many of thestudents interviewed. They reported that al-Shabaab regularly visited schoolsand forcibly removed children individually, often at gunpoint, from classrooms.On other occasions, they lined up students and faculty en masse in the schoolcompound and selected children they deem fit to serve as fighters, suicidebombers, wives, or for domestic duties who they then take back to theirtraining camps. Witnesses to these sweeps on schools said that the students hadlittle to no chance of refusing without the risk of being beaten or killed.Xarid M.’s description of how al-Shabaab took childrenfrom school was typical:We would see al-Shabaab coming and try and save ourselves.We would disappear through any opening in the classroom. Once it caused astampede. Some children would fall from the windows and others would jump andfall on others. There were many injuries from those trying to escape.They would come to class and look at the ones who were theright age to fight.... They would beat and whip the students and force them togo. They came in looking angry and saying, “You think this is the lastbattle? Why are you youth sitting in class and not trying to help?”No one could challenge them. They brought BMs, RPGs [rocketpropelled grenades], and AK-47s and demonstrated them.[221]Deka R., 13, told Human Rights Watch what happened at herprimary school in Hamar Jabjab, Mogadishu:I was in class three. Al-Shabaab came with a vehicle andthey knocked at the door and we opened and they came in. They said, “Wewant this boy, this girl.” The teacher just kept quiet. The childrenfollowed them. There were two men with wrapped heads, uniforms, differentcolors but a lot of green. They took two boys and three girls who never cameback....The next day I didn’t go to school because I wasafraid of al-Shabaab. I never went back to school after that.[222]Like Deka, many other children said they dropped out becauseal-Shabaab was forcibly recruiting students from school. “When therecruitment started in school, the classes shrunk,” said 15-year-old WaberiB. of his school in El Ashabiya. “In my class there were 40 students, andwhen I left there were only 13 and no girls. There were no girls in the wholeschool by December 2010.[223]Abuses against TeachersAl-Shabaab has forcibly recruited teachers, and threatenedand killed those who try to dissuade children from joining the group or whoteach English and other prohibited subjects. Women teachers have facedadditional threats and violence to stop them from teaching as part ofal-Shabaab’s efforts to ban women from working in public places.Teachers have faced intense pressure to join al-Shabaab.Faaid J., who taught English and mathematics at secondary schools in Mogadishuand then in El Ashabiya, said that al-Shabaab singled out teachers: “Forus teachers they were calling us to join, especially on Friday. On Friday theywould say, ‘You teachers have to join.’ Many times they talked withme personally. I felt very afraid—I was afraid of assassination.”Faaid said he believed he would be killed because he had already seen“several people killed after al-Shabaab came several times and called themto join them.”[224] Faaidfled to Kenya in January 2011.Al-Shabaab tried to recruit Lebna M. in Kismayo throughout2010. When he refused, he said al-Shabaab sent him a message through a relativethat if he did not work with them, he would “pay with his life.”“They started intimidating me on the phone every day,” he told us.In December 2010, al-Shabaab members arrested him at his school and detainedhim. They accused him of being “an infidel who refuses to fight forIslam” and an informer, placing a knife at his neck and threatening tobehead him, and interrogated him while plunging him in and out of the sea.After 25 days captivity he was able to escape and flee to Kenya.[225]Wehliye D. said al-Shabaab forcibly recruited him with allthe students in his duqsi in Buale in October 2010. Al-Shabaab memberswhipped him in front of his students, he said, and assigned him to cook in atraining camp. After some 80 days, he escaped. Wehliye showed us scars on hisneck consistent with whipping.[226]Abdu A., a secondary school teacher, said that in December2009, al-Shabaab fighters who were “very young boys” stopped andthreatened him multiple times in Baidoa. “Leave English, stop workingwith foreign organizations, join our cause,” one ordered him. “Fromthat day I decided to stop my job in the school and planned how toleave.”[227]Human Rights Watch also interviewed five students who saidal-Shabaab had recruited teachers by force from their schools.[228]Two girls said they witnessed al-Shabaab members with wrapped faces, dressed inblack “Pakistani clothes” take all of theirteachers—approximately 10 men—from their school in 2010.[229]Dawo G. described what she saw and heard:Al-Shabaab came in a full vehicle. They came upstairs andcalled everyone down.... They said, “Come and be part of jihad.”They told the teachers, “We will take the students or we will takeyou.” The teachers said, “Instead of taking the Somali children, itis better you take us.”... Then they took the teachers and the school wasclosed.[230]In addition to their own recruitment, teachers who try toprotect their students have faced threats and violence. A visibly traumatizedsecondary school teacher from Mogadishu told Human Rights Watch that inSeptember 2009 al-Shabaab shot his wife because he urged students not to jointhem and to stay in school. “I saw that day after day I was losing one,two, three students,” he said.I told my students not to join these fucking groups. Isaid, “You are a student.” Then those guys called me and said I hadto stop telling these children not to go to jihad. I said, “I don’tinterfere with private lives. I just tell my students not to go.” Theygave me a last warning, I refused. They tried to kill me and shot my pregnantwife. She delivered the baby dead after 15 days. She died.[231]Waberi B. said he saw his Arabic and science teacher shotfor trying to stop al-Shabaab from taking a classmate in 2010:My 13-year-old friend was in my class. When al-Shabaabtried to take him to the camp, he said he was the only son of his mother. Theysaid he would be killed before he could even explain. They hit him with a gunbutt and forced him out of the class. The teacher intervened and al-Shabaab saidhe was the one telling the kids not to come. They then shot him in front of ourclass.[232]Teachers have also been threatened and killed for teachingsubjects that al-Shabaab objects to. Labaan M., 12, told us al-Shabaab killedhis father in mid-2010 for teaching English: “English is just a normallanguage and they just killed him. He complained several times that he wasthreatened to stop teaching English.... He was killed at the school gate, justas he walked out.”[233]Salaal M. said an al-Shabaab commander in Mogadishuthreatened him in February 2010 for teaching culture and music to primary levelstudents, subjects the commander said were “not important.” Thecommander said, “If you continue to teach, then don’t blame me ifthere are consequences.” Salaal told us that al-Shabaab also ordered theschool management and other teachers to stop teaching certain subjects,including physical education. But al-Shabaab took the science teacher and“beheaded him.” According to the teacher, “They brought thehead back to the neighborhood and put it in the street so people could see.”[234]Although fewer women than men were teaching in Somalia evenbefore the rise of al-Shabaab, al-Shabaab has specifically targeted femaleteachers in order to stop them from working. Ummi N., who, as mentioned below,al-Shabaab whipped for teaching biology, explained that al-Shabaab said“there could be no female teachers.” She said that at her school in2009, “there wereseven female teachers and six of them ran away.”[235] She, and another teacher,Qamar R., also said al-Shabaab threatened them and told them to stop teaching.[236]Ishaar C., who attended primary school in Mogadishu until heleft in March 2011, said that he had female teachers before 2010 but thenal-Shabaab came to the school: “They said, ‘You are supposed to bein your house, not teaching, so don’t come here again.’ Al-Shabaabcame for two days and said that, and then they [the female teachers] stopped.”[237]Ishaar said simply, “there were no female teachers because it was notallowed.”[238] Ibitsaam,17, told us that al-Shabaab took all three female teachers from her school tocook for them in late 2010.[239]Human Rights Watch spoke to a woman from Mogadishu whopersisted in teaching until October of 2011. She said she taught first aid parttime, and in February 2010, four armed al-Shabaab members came to her house andtold her to stop teaching. “They said a woman should not come out and beteaching.... I said I would leave and they left.” However, she did notstop and they returned in October. “I was sitting outside my housecooking,” she explained.They entered my compound and said, “Are you theperson who was meant to stop teaching?” Then one started to kick me in myback, and another kicked the fire where I was cooking. I screamed and cried.They kicked a pot of boiling water, and it splashed and burned me. My husbandcame running out from the house. They shot him.... I ran…. I left himbleeding. I ran away and hid in a bush and then I went into labor because ofthe stress. My mother came looking for me and found me…. [and helped me] deliver.[240]Taliso R. said she fled to Kenya in March 2011“because I got a threat, an anonymous call. They said I was the onlyfemale teacher. In Islam I was not meant to work. They said, ‘If youcontinue you will see the consequences.’ They said they would kill me, soI came with my daughter.”[241]Control of Curriculum andRestrictions on GirlsAl-Shabaab has aggressively interfered with the content ofthe education provided in the schools in areas under its control, banningEnglish and certain other subjects, replacing courses with lectures on jihad, war,and weapons handling to promote recruitment, and imposing arduous and unwelcomerestrictions on girls’ dress and interactions with male students.Al-Shabaab’s interference in the schools beyond its more direct assaultson students and teachers has deprived children of their right to education.In accordance with its strict interpretation of Islam, al-Shabaabhas banned English in schools, both language instruction and subjects taught inEnglish, associating the language with “foreigners,” “theWest,” and “the enemy.” As related above, al-Shabaab hasthreatened and killed teachers of English and other “Western”subjects for politically motivated reasons.A secondary school teacher told us he “faced problemsfrom al-Shabaab” because he taught English: “They said, ‘Youhave to stop the children from learning English. This is a Western language,and you have to encourage the children to do jihad, to fight’….Finally I said, ‘I cannot do this,’ and I went to a safe place[Kenya].”[242]Another teacher told us that after al-Shabaab repeatedly threatened his life atschool for teaching English: “With a few teachers, we went to theal-Shabaab administrative offices—the sort of district office—inBelet Weyne to protest. But they told us that the decision had come from thehead of al-Shabaab.”[243]Many of the students who spoke to Human Rights Watch said thatal-Shabaab banned English in their schools; many of these said the groupregularly monitored their classrooms to ensure it was not taught.[244]Forbidding English carries a greater cost to students inSomalia than simply losing the opportunity to study the language: many schoolsuse an English-based curriculum, alternate books are in short supply, andstudents may not understand and speak Arabic well enough to make an abruptswitch. The secondary school teacher explained why banning English “has ahuge impact on children’s education”: “Most books we have arewritten in English. We use the Kenyan curriculum because we don’t have aSomali curriculum.”[245] Manyof the students we interviewed said that their education was now limited to Arabic,religious studies, and, in some instances, mathematics.[246]A teacher from al-Shabaab-controlled Kismayo said:Mostly this generation has been taught in the Kenyansystem. Some can’t write Arabic or Somali, only English…. [W]henthey told me to change to Arabic, I found it difficult because I don’t knowhow to translate to Arabic…. When we were using English books, I lecturedfrom memory. Then if the students asked a question, I’d check the bookand immediately hide it.[247]Iskinder P., 15, said al-Shabaab stopped English from beingtaught at his school in 2010: “By the time I left, we only studied Arabicand religion.... We were confused because without English everything we werelearning was stopped and we were learning only Arabic. We couldn’t copewith the lessons.”[248]Some students and teachers said that al-Shabaab bannedscience entirely, either because it was taught in English or to preventdiscussion of the human body. “I taught science and biology and that wasforbidden,” Ummi N., a teacher, explained. “I was drawing ovariesand the reproductive system and talking about twins and they told me to kneeland they whipped me.”[249] Ayoung man from Mogadishu who studied as an older student in primary school saidthat, “Al-Shabaab stopped us learning science because it was aboutreproductive health. They said it was unreligious, no male or female organs.School was useless, not to learn English or science.”[250]Others said they were allowed to continue some aspects ofscience but, according to a teacher from Mogadishu, “Nothing on the humanbody…. So, no reproductive health. You had to miss those chapters andthey said it was indecent.”[251]In the place of banned subjects, al-Shabaab, in some schoolsin areas under their control, introduced their version of religious teaching,with an emphasis on jihad and even weapons training, sometimes bringing intheir own instructors. Two students who spoke to Human Rights Watch said thatal-Shabaab fighters gave them weapons training at school. Baashi M., who was anover-age student in class five, said that al-Shabaab regularly requiredchildren ages 12 to over 20 to attend such classes at school:They asked teachers to go to the staff room and not tointerfere. We were given a strip of black cloth to tie around our heads andthen shown the videos. They also brought weapons and explosives. They wouldcome with weapons and powder and give demonstrations on how to make explosivesand how many people they could kill. They were Arabs and Pakistanis and Iraqisand Kenyans. They spoke some Arabic and some Swahili, and there was a Somaliinterpreter.[252]Various other students and teachers described al-Shabaabcoming into their classrooms and preaching about jihad as described above.Al-Shabaab has placed harsh, religion-based restrictions onschoolgirls. Where they have not ordered them to stay home altogether,al-Shabaab has determined their dress, in some cases even beating girls forwearing the school uniform, and urged them to marry fighters. Although girlsand boys already typically sat separately in the classroom, al-Shabaab has alsoforced some schools to establish separate classes for girls, further stressingalready overstretched schools.[253]Some students and teachers told Human Rights Watch thatal-Shabaab told the girls in their schools not to attend school at all. FarxiyoA. said that in 2010, masked, armed al-Shabaab fighters came to her school inMogadishu three days in a row: “[They] said that what we were learningwas not based on religion and that girls should not be learning with boys….They warned us that the girls should not be seen in the school again and wrotedown our names.”[254]Abrihet N., 15, said that groups of around 30 al-Shabaab members came regularlyto her primary school in Mogadishu: “They would round up the girls in theschool—from ages 14 to 20—and tell us that we should not be inschool.” She said that in January 2011, “They spoke to the girls inthe school and told us, ‘You are now big girls so you are not supposed tobe in school anymore. We will marry you off.’”[255]Many students and teachers said that al-Shabaab ordered girlstudents to wear thick, uncomfortable clothing and beat them when they did not.A 17-year-old former student from Lower Juba said he saw al-Shabaab beat hisclassmates: “Al-Shabaab came to school and beat the ones who wore theschool uniform. They beat them with sticks.”[256]Two teachers and other students, including a 13-year-old girl, also said thatal-Shabaab forced girls to wear thick, heavy clothes.[257]Al-Shabaab “assembled all the girls in front of everyone and femaleteachers as well,” said one teacher. “They were searching with a stickto see if they had bras. If they found a bra, they would cut it with a pair ofscissors and humiliate the women and girls.”[258]A few boys also said that boys were threatened or whipped for having long hairor wearing long pants.[259]Impact of Attacks on Students and TeachersMany students dropped out [because of al-Shabaabrecruitment]. Others dropped out because the subjects were cut. At the time Ileft there were no girls attending the school…. Al-Shabaab were coming toschool and taking the boys.... My grandmother said, “You should not go toschool.” Because many children in my neighborhood were taken and she wasafraid.... I stopped school six months before I came here.—Erasto M. (not his real name), 14-year-old boy whosaid his hope for the future was “not to go back to Somalia,” June2, 2011The various forms of attacks targeting students, teachers,and schools in Somalia have severely damaged children’s ability to get aneducation. Although it is not possible to isolate the effect of targeted attacksfrom the general violence and conflict that deeply impairs education inSomalia, students and teachers often point to targeted attacks as the primaryreason they left school, with girls and women often leaving more quickly butall deeply affected. Schools themselves have been displaced or closed. Forstudents who struggle to continue, the quality of their education is severelyeroded. The lingering effects of traumatic experiences can continue to hurtchildren’s ability to get an education even when they reach relativesafety outside Somalia, when they associate schools with violence or simplyfear leaving their homes.Teachers, parents, and students all told Human Rights Watchthat teachers fled following recruitment, threats, and targeted killings. Forexample, a young man who attended primary school in Mogadishu until September2010 said that most of his teachers left after al-Shabaab threatened them,recruited students at the school, and launched a military attack from schoolgrounds: “We only had Arabic and Somali and Islamic religion at the end.The teachers for English and science left.”[260]Baashi M. said that at his school in Baidoa, “Around January or February2010, all the teachers ran away. We were left with one teacher who could justgive one lesson.”[261]Students and teachers described dramatic drops inattendance. For example:A primary school in Mogadishu dropped from 800 students inDecember 2009 to 200 students in February 2010, following the presence ofal-Shabaab at the school.[262]Another school in Mogadishu dropped from around 550students in early 2010 to around 20 to 30 students in November 2010, whenthe school closed after being hit by AMISOM/TFG return fire.[263]A school in Jamaame, Lower Juba, dropped from 100 to 200students per grade to 25 to 35 students per grade, followingal-Shabaab’s forced recruitment of boys and interference with thecurriculum.[264]Children who spoke to Human Rights Watch said that girlstypically dropped out more quickly than boys when al-Shabaab became active inschools, even when girls were not specifically targeted for recruitment, rape,or forced marriage. Hakim A., from Jamaame, Lower Juba, said that he droppedout around Ramadan 2010 when al-Shabaab tried to recruit him, but his sisterdropped out at least a year earlier, “immediately after al-Shabaabstarted coming to school in 2009. My mother said she should stop. When I leftSomalia there were no girls left in my school.”[265]Older girls dropped out of their schools all at once following abductions andrecruitment.[266] AtirsaT. said that she and all the other girls in her class dropped out aroundRamadan 2010 when al-Shabaab took some 20 of her 60 classmates—girls andboys.[267] Otherchildren and parents described similar scenarios of girls dropping out.[268]Many of the students and teachers we interviewed said thatthey were still deeply affected by their experiences in Somalia, includingattacks on schools. Labaan M., 12, who lost classmates when his school wasbombed and whose father was killed for teaching English, told Human RightsWatch: “I felt so afraid from the situation. Even now I’m beinghaunted by what happened.... My father was killed by al-Shabaab. My motherrefused to come to Kenya.... I miss my mother and I’m thinking of mycolleagues who were killed in the school. Life is so horrible.”[269]Some Somali refugee children in Kenya told Human RightsWatch that they were still afraid to go to school because they associatedschools with attacks. Others remained in hiding, afraid that al-Shabaab mightrecruit them even in Kenya if they ventured out to school. Girmer S., 18, whosaw his teacher beheaded by al-Shabaab in his Mogadishu school compound in 2008for challenging the group’s attempt to recruit students, told us:I never went back to school again afterthis as I was afraid of school.... I am not going to school in Kenya either asI fear school. The main reason why my parents encouraged me to come here wasthat they hoped it would help me forget what I had seen. I am living with arelative here; she is encouraging me to go to school but I don’t want to.I don’t have the heart to go to school. I cannot explain my fear, but Ijust keep remembering the teacher whom I loved so much.[270]Sixteen-year-old Khorfa S., who said his school in SuuqaXoola, Mogadishu, was shelled and that al-Shabaab shot and killed severalstudents while trying to recruit them, said: “I do not feel safe here inDadaab [refugee camp in Kenya], and I am scared to go to school. I fear schoolsbecause of what happened in my school.”[271]Recruitment, killings, and the flight of teachers andstudents have contributed to schools shutting down altogether. A young manwhose 13- and 14-year-old brothers were taken by al-Shabaab in July 2010 fromthe school where they all studied told Human Rights Watch: “The secondaryschool closed because teachers were killed and many children kidnapped. Mostparents sent their children to Kenya.”[272]According to a 15-year-old boy who attended a private school in El Ashabiyabefore fleeing to Kenya in early 2011: “As the number of children beingrecruited increased, school enrolment was greatly affected, and so the schoolwas closed.”[273] Andthe mother of three school-age girls told us: “In Medina [Mogadishu]… before 2009 there were 50 duqsis but now all of them have closedand all of the teachers have run away.... We were afraid al-Shabaab would takeour children so we stopped sending them.”[274]According to the UN secretary-general’s report, 52 schools were closed inMogadishu as of March 2010.[275]When children manage to stay in school, fewer teachers,fewer subjects, and psychological stress damage the quality of education theyreceive; this, in turn, can cause students and their parents to calculate thatthe security risk is not worth the benefit of attending. For example, Baashi M.said by the time his school closed in April 2010, fewer than 40 students wereattending, “and even those didn’t come every day,” so theteachers combined all the students, regardless of level, into a single class.[276]This obviously has an impact on students’ achievement.Amadayo D. explained why he had only reached class four by age 16:I kept failing the exam so I repeated several classes. Themain factor was the teacher. For the whole term there was only one teacher.Most teachers ran away so we couldn’t complete the syllabus in full butwe were tested on all. Even teachers are human beings and they had to leave tocome to Kenya. Considering the situation, you don’t have a guarantee thatthe teacher will be there.[277]V. Role of International ActorsKey international actors, including the UN, the US, the EU, and,more recently, Turkey and members of the Organization of Islamic Countries(OIC), have continued their support for the Transition Federal Governmentdespite significant internal political wrangling since late 2010. Priority transitional tasks for the government have not beenachieved, which affects the overall human rights situation.There are many challenges to ensuring that parties to theSomali conflict act in accordance with international law, not least the factal-Shabaab is an armed movement that largely rejects foreign influence andcriticism of its human rights abuses. But even where key international actorshave leverage, such as with the TFG, itspartners and funders have largely failed to put sufficient pressure on the TFGto improve its human rights record. Where discussionsof potential consequences of failing to achieve basic political andtransitional tasks have been initiated among the TFG’s international partners,these have not sufficiently addressed human rights issues.The “Roadmap” adopted under the auspices of the UNPolitical Office for Somalia (UNPOS) in September 2011 is seen by theTFG’s international partners as the main instrument for holding the TFGto account during the final year of the transition period. However, it containslimited reference to human rights issues. The Roadmap refers to ending the recruitmentof children but fails to include clear and concrete benchmarks to monitorcompliance, vaguely refers to compliance with international human rights andhumanitarian law, again with no clear benchmarks, and does not examine widerabuses and related issues.On violations of children’s rights more specifically,UNICEF, the UN special representative of the secretary-general for children andarmed conflict, and more recently the UN Security Council, as well as the US, havecalled on the TFG to end the use and recruitment of children through theimplementation of an action plan. However, these calls and the failure tocomply have not been accompanied by concrete consequences for the TFG, forexample, by the imposition of targeted sanctions or withholding of militaryassistance. And calls for accountability for serious violations ofinternational humanitarian and human rights law, including grave abuses ofchild’s rights, have been perfunctory.In July 2011 the UN Security Council passed a resolutionthat expanded the criteria for sanctionable offenses in Somalia to includegrave violations against children, including the recruitment or use of childsoldiers, killing and maiming, sexual and gender-based violence, attacks onschools, and abduction. The Security Council affirmed that targeted sanctions,including travel bans and asset freezes, can be applied to both individuals andentities for such violations.[278] Whileit also extended the mandate of the UN Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritreato include monitoring and reporting on grave violations of children’srights, including the recruitment of children and attacks on schools, theSecurity Council did not increase staff or resources of the monitoring group,raising doubts as to the effectiveness of the measure. Furthermore, whilechannels for reporting on grave violations ofchildren’s rights in Somalia by all warring parties exist, monitoringmechanisms lack capacity. The Human Rights Unit within UNPOS, for example, hasto date failed to appoint a full-time child rights expert.The policies of key donors, including the EU and the US,have continued to focus on institutional capacity-building and TFG governance.Key sectors including protection and education have often been sidelined. Forexample, funds required under the 2011 Consolidated Appeals Process for Somaliafor both the education and protection sectors were insufficient: only 62percent of requested funds for the former and only 18 percent for the latterwere met.[279]The US Child Soldiers Prevention Act of 2008 prohibitscertain categories of military assistance to governments involved in recruitingor using child soldiers. In June 2011 the US State Department identifiedSomalia as one of six governments implicated in such use. Although StateDepartment-requested assistance for Somalia in fiscal year 2012 included $51million in peacekeeping assistance for militaries participating in AMISOM, thisassistance was not one of the categories prohibited under the Child SoldiersPrevention Act. Pending legislation would amend the law to explicitly prohibitpeacekeeping assistance to governments using child soldiers.The UN and donors should be more robust in their engagementwith the TFG and in particular ensure that key human rights benchmarks areachieved in the final year of the transition period. The drafting, adoption,and implementation of an action plan to end child recruitment that includes theestablishment of stringent, systematic age screening should be among thesebenchmarks.VI. International Legal StandardsInternational humanitarian law (the “laws ofwar”) imposes upon all parties to an armed conflict the legal obligationsto reduce unnecessary suffering and to protect civilians and othernon-combatants. It is applicable to all situations of armed conflict, withoutregard to whether those fighting are regular armies, such as the TFG and AU troops in Somalia, or non-state armedgroups, including al-Shabaab, Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a, and other irregularmilitias.Individuals who commit serious violations of internationalhumanitarian law with criminal intent can be prosecuted in domestic or internationalcourts for war crimes. States have an obligationto investigate alleged war crimes committed by their nationals, includingmembers of the armed forces, and prosecute those responsible.[280]While AMISOM’s mandate asserts that it is not a party to the conflict,such a determination and resulting legal obligations are derived instead froman objective assessment of its participation in military operations.[281]Non-state armed groups also have a legalobligation to respect the laws of war, and thus a responsibility to ensure thatits commanders and combatants abide by its requirements.[282]A fundamental principle of the laws of war is that partiesto the conflict must at all times distinguish between civilians and militaryobjectives. Attacks may only be directed at military objectives.[283]Civilians are only military objectives when and for such time as they aredirectly participating in hostilities. Where there is doubt as to whether aperson is a civilian or a combatant, that person must be considered a civilian.[284]Civilian objects, including schools, are not subject toattack unless they are being used for military purposes.[285]Attacks on valid military targets must be neither indiscriminate nordisproportionate. An indiscriminate attack is one in which the attack is notdirected at a specific military objective or the methods or means used cannotdifferentiate between combatants and civilians. A disproportionate attack isone in which the expected loss of civilian life and property is excessivecompared to the anticipated military gain of the attack.[286]A school is normally protected from deliberate attack,unless, for instance, armed forces are occupying it as a base from which todeploy for military operations. When military forces use a school, it becomes alegitimate target. Thus a school that serves as a military base or anammunition depot becomes subject to attack. A party to the conflict mustendeavor to remove civilians under their control from the vicinity of militaryobjectives. It would be unlawful to use a school simultaneously as an armed strongholdand an education center, since it places children, teachers, educationpersonnel, and other civilians at unnecessary risk. In such instances, militaryforces occupying a school have an obligation to take all feasible precautionsto protect civilians from attack and to remove them from the vicinity.[287]International humanitarian law also provides that childrenare entitled to special respect and attention.[288]This is reflected in the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which requiresstates to “take all feasible measures to ensure protection and care ofchildren who are affected by an armed conflict.”[289]Child RecruitmentInternationalhumanitarian law prohibits any recruitment of children under the age of 15 ortheir participation in hostilities by national armed forces and non-state armedgroups.[290] Such recruitment or use is also considered a warcrime.[291]During its Universal Periodic Review session at the UN HumanRights Council in 2011, the Transitional Federal Government committed toratifying the Convention on the Rights of theChild (CRC) and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of theChild on the involvement of children in armed conflict (CRC Optional Protocol).Somalia has signed both treaties, but has yet to ratify them.[292] The CRC definesa child as a person under the age of 18. TheCRC Optional Protocol prohibits any forced recruitment or conscription ofchildren under 18 by government forces, and the participation of children under18 in active hostilities by any party. It also places obligations uponnon-state armed groups, which include insurgent and militia groups. Article 4of the CRC Optional Protocol states that "armed groups that are distinctfrom the armed forces of a state should not, under any circumstances, recruitor use in hostilities persons under the age of eighteen."[293]The African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child,which Somalia signed in 1991 but has not ratified, also provides that statesparties “shall take all necessary measures to ensure that no child shalltake a direct part in hostilities and refrain in particular, from recruitingany child.”[294]The Charter defines children as all persons under the age of 18.The Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated withArmed Forces or Armed Groups (the “Paris Principles”), a set ofinternational guidelines, sets forth a wide range of principles relating to theprotection of children from recruitment or use in armed conflict, their release,and their successful reintegration into civilian life. The principles alsoaddress the need for long-term prevention strategies in order to definitivelyend child involvement with armed groups.[295]In particular, the Paris Principles, to ensure greater protection, broaden the definitionof child combatant to include “any person below 18 years of age who is orwho has been recruited or used by an armed force or armed group in anycapacity, including but not limited to children, boys, and girls used asfighters, cooks, porters, messengers, spies or for sexual purposes. It does notonly refer to a child who is taking or has taken a direct part inhostilities.”[296]The Paris Principles also call for a child’s right to release from armedforces or armed groups.[297]Beyond the international legal frameworks, Somalia also hasobligations to prevent the involvement of children in its fighting forces asoutlined in Somalia’s Transitional Federal Charter 128 of February 2004,which contains an explicit article forbidding the use of children under 18years of age for military service.[298]Treatment of Captured ChildrenThe CRC Optional Protocol calls on states to provideappropriate assistance for the physical and psychological recovery and socialreintegration for children who have been recruited or used in armed conflictcontrary to the protocol.[299]The Paris Principles also provide relevant guidance forrelease, protection, and reintegration of children who have been associatedwith armed forces or groups. Release and rehabilitation measures should becarried out without any conditions. During release, children should be handedover to “an appropriate, mandated, independent civilian process,”and the majority of children should be returned to their family and communityor a family and community environment as soon as possible after their release.[300]Any prosecution of children for criminal acts should be conducted with theobjective of rehabilitating the child and promoting the child’sreintegration and assumption of a constructive role in society.[301]Forced Marriage and RapeForced marriage includessituations in which women and girls must marry without their consent, facethreats or violence, are abducted, or are traded through informal disputemechanisms, such as to settle a rape case.While CRC does not explicitly address childmarriage, child marriage is viewed as incompatible with a number of thearticles in the convention.Under CRC, achild has the right to express her views freely in all matters affecting her inaccordance with age and maturity, the right to be protected from all measuresof violence and abuse, including sexual abuse, and the rights to education andhealth, all of which are violated by early or forced marriage.[302]The Convention on theElimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), which the TFGhas publicly committed to ratifying,[303] states that marriages of children have “nolegal effect” and calls for state to take all necessary action, including legislation, to specify a minimum age formarriage.[304] The committees that monitor the implementation of theCEDAW and CRC have both taken the position that the minimum age should be 18.[305]The African Charter on Rightsand Welfare of the Child is more explicit—it prohibits child marriage andcalls for effective action, including legislation, to be taken to specify theminimum age of marriage to be 18 years and make registration of all marriagesin an official registry compulsory.[306]Human Rights Watch opposes all non-consensual—that is,forced—marriages of women and girls and also calls on states to set theminimum legal age of marriage at 18.RapeInternational humanitarian law and international humanrights law prohibit acts of sexual violence. International humanitarian law prohibitsboth states and non-state armed groups from committing rape and other forms ofsexual violence.[307]International human rightslaw also contains protections from rape and other forms of sexual abuse throughits prohibitions on torture and other ill-treatment, slavery, forcedprostitution, and discrimination based on sex.[308] The CRC and the African Charter on the Rights andWelfare of the Child contain additional protections for children. [309]Right to EducationAs discussed above, students, teachers, and school buildingsare protected under international humanitarian law. [310]Although there is no ban ininternational humanitarian law on the use of school buildings as military basesor for other deployments, a UN treaty body, the Committee on the Rights of theChild, and the UN Security Council have on several occasions raised concernsabout such use.The UN Security Council has called on armed forces torefrain from using schools formilitary operations because of the impact it can haveon children’s access to education. The UN Security Council said in April2009: “The Security Council … urges parties to armed conflict torefrain from actions that impede children’s access to education, inparticular … the use of schools for military operations.”[311] Although presidential statements are not legallybinding, they require a consensus to be adopted, and they are thus persuasiveindicators of the views of the membership of UN’s principle body for themaintenance of peace and security. In July 2011, in a resolution on childrenand armed conflict, the council again urged “parties to armed conflict torefrain from actions that impede children’s access to education …services” and asked the UN Secretary General to “to continue tomonitor and report, inter alia, on the military use of schools in contraventionof international humanitarian law."[312]Furthermore, international humanitarian law provides afundamental guarantee that children should continue to have access toeducation.[313]The use of school buildings for military purposes andoccupation of schools, when it affects children’s ability to receiveeducation, may also be violating children’s right to education guaranteedunder international human rights law.[314] The right to education is enshrined inthe International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the CRC.[315] The Committee on Economic, Cultural and Civil Rights inits general comment on the right to education notes the need for educationcurricula at all levels to be acceptable to the students, meaning relevant,culturally appropriate, and of good quality.[316] When considering the appropriate application of theseessential features, the best interests of the student shall be a primaryconsideration.[317] Although al-Shabaab and other non-state armed groups arenot bound by international human rights treaties, in areas where they haveeffective control or authority over the population, they should not interferewith the enjoyment of these rights.[318]RecommendationsTo the Transitional Federal Government:Regarding the Presence of Children within TFG Forces and TFG-Aligned MilitiasHold appropriately accountable all individuals found to beconscripting or using children under age 18 in its armed forces,consistent with widely accepted international standards. Continue to issueclear public statements to TFG force commanders and soldiers prohibitingthe forced recruitment and use of children under age 18. End allrecruitment and use of children under age 18 by TFG-aligned militias.Enact legislation that makes the forced recruitment anduse of children under 18 in armed forces (and any recruitment and use byarmed groups) a criminal offense.Develop and adopt a national action plan to end therecruitment and use of children within the TFG forces. Include clear andconcrete steps to be achieved within a limited timeframe including:A halt to all child recruitment;Access to bases, camps, training facilities,recruitment centers, and other relevant installations for ongoing monitoringand verification of compliance; Provision of verifiable informationregarding measures taken to ensure the accountability of perpetrators; andImplementation of an agreed preventionstrategy to address violations.Establish rigorous and systematic screening procedures andstandards to ensure that no children under the age of 18 are conscriptedinto TFG armed forces, and that all recruits are screened according to thesame high level of standards. Do not recruit individuals where there isreasonable doubt that they are not of the lawful recruitment age. Allowindependent monitors to take part in the recruitment process, to monitorage during salary disbursements, and to visit TFG facilities to identifyunderage recruits.Cooperate with UNICEF and other child protection agenciesto demobilize children within TFG forces and TFG-aligned militias andtransfer them to appropriate civilian rehabilitation and reintegrationprograms that include educational and vocational training as well ascounseling, in accordance with the Principles and Guidelines on ChildrenAssociated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups (“ParisPrinciples”) of 2007.Make the absence of children within militia forces aprecondition for integrating these militias into the TFG forces andpolice.Regarding the Capture of Child Soldiers by the TFG or TFG-AffiliatesEnsure that standard procedures are developed to transfercaptured and “escaped” children promptly to civilianrehabilitation and reintegration programs. Children should not be detainedsolely for their association with armed forces.Any children accused of crimes under international ornational law allegedly committed while associated with armed groups shouldbe treated in accordance with international juvenile justicestandards—notably that detention is used only as a measure of lastresort, that children are detained separate from adults, that they haveaccess to legal counsel and that the best interest of the child is theprimary consideration. Provide education and other reintegration andrehabilitation services.Allow independent and unhindered monitoring notably byspecialized child protection services of all TFG detention facilities,including high-security sites.Regarding Schools and Military OperationsCease all attacks that do not discriminate betweencombatants and civilians, and take all feasible precautions in the choiceof means and methods of attack against military objectives to avoid orminimize harm to civilians and civilian objects, including schools.Map key civilian infrastructure, including schools, withthe assistance of relevant agencies, including the Education Cluster. Usethis map to identify and protect schools in areas of TFG militaryoperations.Fully investigate all attacks damaging schools in areasunder TFG control, where feasible, in order to identify and prosecutethose responsible for war crimes.Ratify the Rome Statute of the International CriminalCourt, which, among other things, prohibits as a war crime intentionallydirecting attacks against buildings dedicated to education, provided theyare not military objectives, during armed conflicts.Other Recommendations to the TFGEnsure that all credible allegations of violations ofinternational human rights and humanitarian law by TFG forces and alignedarmed groups are promptly, impartially, and transparently investigated,and that those responsible for serious abuses, regardless of rank, areheld to account.Reinstate the post of State Minister on Child Protectionand Human Rights within the TFG.Ratify the Convention onthe Rights of the Child (CRC) and its three optional protocols, theConvention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women(CEDAW), and the Protocol to theAfrican Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Womenin Africa (“Maputo Protocol”).Ensure that trainings forthe TFG forces and personnel include appropriate and effective training oninternational humanitarian law, including regarding the protection ofcivilians and civilian objects and protection of children’s rights.Call for the establishmentof a UN Commission of Inquiry—or a comparable,appropriate mechanism—by the UN to document serious internationalcrimes committed in Somalia and recommend measures to improveaccountability.To al-ShabaabImmediately cease recruitmentof children under 18 years old and release all children currently inal-Shabaab forces who are under 18, consistent with widely acceptedinternational standards.Cooperate with UNICEF and otherchild protection agencies to hand over children in al-Shabaab forces toappropriate civilian demobilization, rehabilitation, and reintegrationprograms.Ensure that any commander foundto be recruiting children or using children for other purposes in trainingcamps and on the front lines is appropriately held to account.Immediately end the abductionof girls and women and release all girls and women abducted for forcedmarriage or other purposes.Ensure that schools areidentified and protected and that students, teachers, and schooladministrators are able to safely leave school buildings during militaryoperations where they may be at risk.Cease all attacks that do not discriminate betweencombatants and civilians, and take all feasible precautions in the choiceof means and methods of attack against military objectives to avoid orminimize harm to civilians and civilian objects, including schools.Immediately cease all occupation or use of schools andschool compounds where students and teachers are present. Cease usingschools to provide military training and as weapons caches, or to engagein military operations.Immediately issue a public order directing all commandersand forces to cease attacks on schools, teachers, and students, andstating that those responsible for such attacks will be held to account.Uphold the right to education by ceasing to improperlyinterfere in the curriculum of schools or engaging in classroom activitiesdesigned to encourage the recruitment of children into al-Shabaab forces.Halt all measures that discriminate against women andgirls, including restrictions on their work, travel, and attire.Appropriately hold to account all al-Shabaab members andlocal administrators, regardless of rank, who commit serious violations ofinternational humanitarian law and human rights abuses.To TFG-Affiliated MilitiasIssue clear public statements to all commanders and forcesordering the immediate end of all recruitment and use of children under 18in its forces.Cooperate with UNICEF and other child protection agenciesin order to urgently identify and demobilize children under age 18 andtransfer them to appropriate civilian rehabilitation and reintegrationprograms.Ensure that any commander found to be recruiting childrenor using children for other purposes in training camps and on the frontlines is appropriately held to account.Take all feasible precautions to protect civilians fromattacks and otherwise minimize harm to the civilian population.Ensure that schools are identified and protected during militaryoperations and, to the extent that is feasible, seek to ensure thatstudents and teachers are able to safely leave school buildings duringmilitary operations where they may be at risk.Appropriately hold to account all commanders and otherpersonnel, regardless of rank, who commit serious violations of internationalhumanitarian law.To Foreign Parties to the Conflict: AMISOM and theAfrican Union, Kenya, and EthiopiaCooperate with UNICEF and other child protection agenciesto transfer all captured children to civilian rehabilitation andreintegration programs.Cease all attacks that do not discriminate betweencombatants and civilians or are anticipated to cause disproportionatecivilian harm, and take all feasible precautions in attacks againstmilitary objectives to avoid or minimize harm to civilians and civilianobjects, including schools.Map out key civilianinfrastructure, including schools, with the assistance of relevantagencies, including the Education Cluster, in order to ensure that schoolsin areas of military operations are identified and protected.Make efforts to ensure thatstudents and teachers are able to safely leave school buildings duringmilitary operations where they may be at risk.Ensure that all credible allegations of human rights andhumanitarian law violations by armed forces are promptly, impartially, andtransparently investigated and that those responsible for serious abuses,regardless of rank, are held to account. In particular, fully investigateall attacks that damage schools in areas of AMISOM military operations,where feasible, in order to identify and prosecute those responsible forwar crimes.Ensure that all deployedpersonnel receive adequate and appropriate training in internationalhumanitarian law, including the protection of civilians and civilian objectsand the special protections afforded to children during armedconflict.To All States and the Donor Community in SomaliaCall on all parties to immediately end the recruitment anduse of children as soldiers in Somalia, rape and forced marriage, andattacks on students, teachers, and schools.Make clear that thedevelopment and implementation of a national action plan to end therecruitment and use of children within TFG forces is a priority for theremainder of the transitional period.Provide the TFG with thenecessary support and capacity to systematically and effectively vet itsrecruits by age in order to prevent the recruitment and use of childrenwithin its forces.Offer the necessary supportto appropriate child protection activities and demobilization,rehabilitation, and reintegration programs thatinclude vocational training programs, education programs, and medical andpsycho-social counseling activities including forsurvivors of sexual violence, both inside of Somalia, including in IDPcamps, and in refugee camps in neighboring countries.Assist the TFG in ensuringthat the detention of childrencomplieswith international standards—notably that detention is used only asa measure of last resort, that children are detained separately fromadults, that they have access to legal counsel, and that rehabilitationand reintegration and the best interests of the child are prioritized.Call on the TFG to allow independent and unhinderedmonitoring by specialized child protection services of all TFG detentionfacilities, including high-security sites.Increase support to theeducation and protection sectors in Somalia by ensuring that education andprotection funding targets within the forthcoming Consolidated AppealProcess (CAP) are met.Ensure that trainings providedto the TFG forces and personnel include appropriate and effective trainingin international humanitarian law, including the protection of civiliansand civilian objects and protection of children’s rights.Support and fund an increase inthe capacity of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights(OHCHR) to monitor rights violations.Support and fund a UN Commission of Inquiry—or a comparable,appropriate mechanism—by the UN to document serious internationalcrimes committed in Somalia and recommend measures to improveaccountability.To the UN Security Council and the UN Human RightsCouncilIntensify pressure on the TFG to immediately adopt andpromptly implement a time-bound UN action plan to end the recruitment anduse of children, including by establishing effective screening proceduresto ensure that children are not recruited into the TFG or included inaligned militia that are integrated into the TFG armed forces.Through its sanctions committee on Somalia and Eritrea,impose targeted sanctions, including asset freezes and travel bans, onindividuals and entities responsible for violations against children,including the recruitment and use of children, killing and maiming, sexualand gender-based violence, and attacks on schools, in accordance withSecurity Council Resolution 2002 (2011).Request systematic reporting on attacks on schools,students, and teachers and actions by parties to the conflict that impedechildren’s access to education, including the military use ofschools, through the UN-led monitoring and reporting mechanism on childrenand armed conflict.Support an increase in thecapacity of the OHCHR to monitor rights violations and to appoint afull-time child rights expert.Support and fund a UN Commissionof Inquiry—or a comparable, appropriate mechanism—by the UN todocument serious international crimes committed in Somalia and recommendmeasures to improve accountability.Ensure that the UNmonitoring group on Somalia and Eritrea receives adequate support tofulfill its new expanded mandate, notably by allowing the recruitment ofat least two additional human rights experts on the group.To the Somalia Country Task Team of the UN-ledMonitoring and Reporting Mechanism on Children and Armed Conflict in SomaliaIncrease monitoring of attacks on schools, students, andteachers and actions by parties to the conflict that impedechildren’s access to education, including the military use ofschools, and other grave violations committed against children in thecontext of the conflict, as requested by the Security Council inResolution 1998 of July 2011. Ensure that the information gathered is fedinto relevant channels, including the Security Council working group onchildren and armed conflict and program development.Collect information regarding specific individuals andentities responsible for violations against children that may be subjectto targeted sanctions under Security Council Resolution 2002 (2011) andmake this information available to the Sanctions Committee on Somalia andEritrea.To the United Nations Children’s Fund(UNICEF) and Other Child Protection Agencies in Somalia and KenyaGreatly expand demobilization, rehabilitation, andreintegration programs for children formerly associated with fightingforces and children recruited for forced marriage, including education andvocational training programs, alternative livelihood programs, and medicaland psychosocial support both, to the extent possible, inside Somalia andin refugee receiving countries.Hire staff with the expertise to identify and supportchildren who have fled al-Shabaab and other militia groups and in Somaliaand Kenya (Dadaab and Eastleigh).Work with donors in Kenya to secure more dedicatedresources to develop urban child protection programs that support childrenformerly associated with armed groups to obtain safe housing, education,and other skills.Work with the United NationsHigh Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Kenya to develop an outreach campaignto improve the access of children, especially those who are unaccompanied,to UNHCR registration and to psycho-social and education programs.To the UN Political Office for Somalia and the UNOffice of the High Commissioner for Human RightsIncrease the number of human rights officers monitoringand publicly reporting on human rights abuses in Somalia, both withinSomalia and in refugee camps in neighboring countries. Create a full-timeposition focusing on child’s rights violations and call on donors toensure adequate funding.Increase collaboration with the Monitoring Group onSomalia and Eritrea in order to ensure that information regarding graveviolations of child’s rights is systematically gathered and that thesanctions committee holds to account responsible parties.Initiate a historicaldocumentation exercise on Somalia to map and document seriousinternational crimes, and recommend measures to improve accountability.To the UN Special Representative of theSecretary-General for Children and Armed ConflictContinue to call on the TFG to fulfill its commitment todevelop a national action plan to end the recruitment and use of childrenwithin the TFG forces, with clear and concrete steps to be achieved withina limited timeframe.Request that donors developpractical responses to support children who have escaped from fightingforces in Somalia.Call on the UN SecurityCouncil to significantly enhance the resources and capacity available tothe UN Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea.To the EU, UNHCR, and UNICEF in UgandaEnsure that any children identified at the EU-financed Bihangatraining program are offered the opportunity to seek asylum in Uganda.To the United States CongressAmend the Child SoldiersPrevention Act of 2008 in order to include peacekeeping assistance under categoriesof US military assistance prohibited to governments using children assoldiers.To UNHCR, UNICEF, and Other UN Agencies Working inKenya and EthiopiaEnsure that mechanisms are in place to identify childrenformerly associated with armed groups upon arrival in refugee receivingcountries. Ensure that children formerly associated with fighting forcesare engaged in appropriate education and child protection programsalongside other vulnerable children and children from the community.Develop more clinical mental health programs for children withinrefugee camps who require more intensive support than those offered ingeneral community-based psycho-social programs.Significantly increase education and vocational trainingactivities in refugee camps, including by constructing more schools andemploying more teachers.AcknowledgementsThis report was researched and written by Laetitia Bader, Africaresearcher at Human Rights Watch; Zama Coursen-Neff, deputy director of thechildren’s rights division; and Tirana Hassan, emergencies researcher.The report was reviewed by Ben Rawlence, Bede Sheppard, Jo Becker, AgnesOdhiambo, Chris Albin-Lackey, and Philippe Bolopion. James Ross, legal and policydirector, provided legal review. Babatunde Olugboji, deputy program director,provided program review.Vikram Shah and Noah Beaudette provided productionassistance and support. Grace Choi, publications manager, Kathy Mills,publications specialist, Ivy Shen, communications assistant, and FitzroyHepkins, mail manager, provided production support.Human Rights Watch would like to thank donors from the 2011 Tokyo Dinner for their support forthis project.Human Rights Watch wishes to thank the children and other Somalirefugees who shared their experiences, making this report possible. We alsowish to thank the many other individuals who offered information and expertise.Finally we would like to thank those who offered key support in facilitating thisresearch and reviewing sections of the report.[1] From2006 to 2008 Ethiopian troops held a military presence in south-central Somaliain an effort to push out the ICU. The presence of Ethiopian troops wassupported by the then president of Somalia, Abdullahi Youssef.[2] TheTransitional Federal Institutions (TFIs), of which the Transitional FederalGovernment is a component, were established in 2004 as part of a Kenya-brokeredagreement following failure of a first transitional government. The TFIs alsoinclude a Transitional Federal Charter that serves, to date, as an interimconstitution and a Transitional Federal Parliament.[3] Harakatal Mujahadeen al-Shabaab controls much of south-central Somalia and was theradical youth wing of the Islamic Courts Union.[4]For a more detailed account of this recenthistory see: Human Rights Watch, Shell-Shocked: Civilians Under Siege inMogadishu, vol. 19, no. 12(A), August 2007, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2007/08/12/shell-shocked-0; Human Rights Watch, “So Much toFear”: War Crimes and the Devastation of Somalia, December 2008, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2008/12/08/so-much-fear-0; Human RightsWatch, Harsh War, Harsh Peace:Abuses by Al-Shabaab, The Transitional Federal Government and AMISOM in Somalia, April 2010, http://www.hrw.org/node/89646.[5]For a discussion of the Djibouti peace process, see Human Rights Watch,“So Much to Fear,” pp. 20-21.[6]For a more detailed assessment of the human rights and internationalhumanitarian law impact of these offensives, see Human Rights Watch, “YouDon’t Know Who to Blame”: War Crimes in Somalia, August 2011, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2011/08/14/you-don-t-know-who-blame.[7]“Somalia: Stop war crimes in Mogadishu,” Human Rights Watchnews release, February 14, 2011,http://www.hrw.org/news/2011/02/14/somalia-stop-war-crimes-mogadishu.[8]Human Rights Watch, “You Don’t Know Who to Blame.”[9] For amore detailed description of the main actors involved in the conflict, seeHuman Rights Watch, Harsh War, Harsh Peace, pp. 14-19.[10] UnitedNations Security Council, Resolution 1744, S/RES/1744 (2007),para. 4.[11] OnJanuary 5, 2012, the Peace and Security Council of the African Union called forthe number of UN-sponsored AMISOM forces to be increased from 12,000 to 17,731,and to include a Djiboutian contingent, the re-hatted Kenyan troops, as well asan AMISOM police component. See, Peace and Security Council, “Communiqueof the 306th PSC meeting on the Situation in Somalia,”PSC/PR/COMM.(CCCVI), January 6, 2012, http://amisom-au.org/2012/01/commuique-of-the-306th-psc-meeting-on-the-situation-in-somalia/(accessed January 31, 2012). The UN Security Council had not responded to thisrequest at the time of writing.[12] UNOffice for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) Somalia,“Somalia: Famine and Drought, Situation Report No. 12,” September6, 2011, http://reliefweb.int/node/445205 (accessed September 7, 2011); “TheUN declares famine in Somalia,” Office of the UN Resident andHumanitarian Coordinator for Somalia press release, July 29, 2011,http://reliefweb.int/node/426914 (accessed July 29, 2011).[13]OCHA, “Horn of Africa Crisis, Situation Report No. 30,”January 13, 2012, http://www.reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/F_R_537.pdf(accessed January 26, 2012)[14]UNHCR, “Somali Refugees in the Region,” December 21, 2011,http://data.unhcr.org/horn-of-africa/somalia.php (accessed January, 26, 2012).[15] “SomaliaIslamists lift aid ban to help drought victims,” BBC News Online,July 6, 2011, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-14046267 (accessedSeptember 18, 2011).[16] Thebanned agencies and organizations include: UN High Commissioner for Refugees(UNHCR), World Health Organization (WHO), UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF), UNPopulation Fund (UNFPA), UN Office for Project Services (UNOPS), and FoodSecurity and Nutrition Analysis Unit (FSNAU), Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC),Danish Refugee Council (DRC), Concern, Norwegian Church Aid (NCA), GermanAgency For Technical Co-operation (GTZ), Action Contre la Faim (ACF),Solidarity, Saacid, Swedish African Welfare Alliance (SAWA), and CooperazioneInternazionale (COOPI).[17] HumanRights Watch unpublished interviews with internally displaced persons,Mogadishu, August to December 2011.[18] KatharineHoureld, “Somalia Famine: Food Aid Stolen,” Associated Press,August 8, 2011, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/08/15/somalia-famine-aid-stolen_n_927126.html,(accessed January 27, 2012).[19]See, for example, Overseas Development Institute, “Counter-terrorism andhumanitarian action. Tensions, impact and ways forward,” HPG Policy Brief43, October 2011, http://www.odi.org.uk/resources/docs/7347.pdf (accessedJanuary 27, 2012).[20] “Somalia:ever higher numbers of war-wounded in Mogadishu hospitals,” InternationalCommittee of the Red Cross (ICRC) news release, January 27, 2011,http://www.icrc.org/eng/resources/documents/news-release/2011/somalia-news-2011-01-27.htm,(accessed August 1, 2011).[21]“Malnutrition brings children to the brink of death,” ICRC newsrelease, July 13, 2011, http://www.icrc.org/eng/resources/documents/news-release/2011/somalia-news-2011-07-13.htm(accessed July 20, 2011).[22] According to the UN Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit(FSNAU), as of August 2011, 450,000 children in Somalia were malnourished, 190,000of who suffered from severe acute malnutrition (see OCHA,“Horn of Africa Drought Crisis, Situation Report No. 7,” July 29,2011, http://reliefweb.int/node/438038 (accessed September 18, 2011). Somefigures suggest the number to be much higher. According toUNICEF, as of July 29, 2011, an estimated 1.25 million childrenthroughout southern Somalia were in need of life-saving interventions and640,000 children were acutely malnourished. See “Faminespreads into Bay region; 750,000 people face imminent starvation,” FoodSecurity and Nutrition Analysis Unit (FSNAU) press release, September 5, 2011,http://www.fsnau.org/downloads/FSNAU_FEWSNET_050911_press_release.pdf,(accessed September 11, 2011).[23]“Famine spreads into Bay region; 750,000 people face imminentstarvation,” Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit (FSNAU) pressrelease, September 5, 2011,http://www.fsnau.org/downloads/FSNAU_FEWSNET_050911_press_release.pdf,(accessed September 11, 2011).[24] AmnestyInternational, “In the line of fire: Somalia’s children underattack,” Index: AFR 52/001/2011, July 2011, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/AFR52/001/2011/en,(accessed December 12, 2011), p. 52[25] TheTransitional Federal Charter of Somalia that serves as the basis for a futureconstitution in Somalia recognizes education as a basic right for all Somalicitizens and states that all citizens shall have a right to free primary andsecondary education. Transitional Federal Charter of the Republic of Somalia,2004, http://www.so.undp.org/docs/Transitional%20Federal%20charter-feb%202004-English.pdf(accessed September 20, 2011), arts. 24(1) and 24(2).[26] UNICEF, “Somalia,Statistics,”http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/somalia_statistics.html#77 (accessedOctober 19, 2011). Statistics on education in south-central Somalia are rareand unreliable as a result both of the lack of a functioning state and thelimited presence of humanitarian actors on the ground able to ensure systematicreporting.[27] UNICEF,“State of the World’s Children, Adolescence. An age ofopportunity,” February 2011,http://www.unicef.org/publications/files/SOWC_2011_Main_Report_EN_02242011.pdf(accessed August 2, 2011), p. 106.[28]Ibid., p. 106 (figures from the most recent year available from 2005 to 2009).[29]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with UN staff, Nairobi, August 11,2011.[30] HumanRights Watch interview with UNICEF Education Cluster coordinator, Nairobi, June7, 2011.[31]The Consolidated Appeals Process (CAP) is an advocacy tool for humanitarianfinancing, in which projects managed by the United Nations, NGOs, and otherstakeholders coordinate to approach the donor community in funding programactivities in multiple sectors. Financial Tracking Service, ConsolidatedAppeal: Somalia 2011, November 6, 2011, http://fts.unocha.org/reports/daily/ocha_R32sum_A927___6_November_2011_(02_05).pdf(accessed November 6, 2011).[32] Ibid.,para. 22.[33] Internationalhumanitarian law prohibits any recruitment of children under the age of 15 ortheir participation in hostilities by national armed forces and non-state armedgroups. See International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), CustomaryInternational Humanitarian Law (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,2005), rule 136, citing Protocol Additional to the 1949 Geneva Conventionsrelating the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed Conflicts(Protocol II), art. 4(3). The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rightsof the Child (CRC) on children in armed conflict, to which Somalia is asignatory but not a party, prohibits any recruitment by non-state armed groupsof children under the age of 18; any forced recruitment or conscription ofchildren under 18 by government forces; and the participation of children under18 in active hostilities by any party. Optional Protocol to the Convention onthe Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflicts (CRCOptional Protocol), G.A. Res. 54/263, Annex I, 54 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at7, U.N. Doc. A/54/49, Vol. III (2000), entered into force February 12, 2002,arts. 1-4.[34] ICRC, CustomaryInternational Humanitarian Law, rule 137, citing Protocol II, art. 4(3)(c).[35]See for example, UN General Assembly and Security Council, “Report ofthe Secretary-General on children and armed conflict,”A/65/820–S/2011/250, April 23, 2011, http://www.un.org/children/conflict/_documents/S2011250.pdf(accessed September 22, 2011).[36] Ibid.,para. 130.[37] A khamisis a traditional, long, loose-fitting robe worn by Muslim men.[38]Human Rights Watch interview with Galaal Y. (not his real name), 14-year-oldboy from Mogadishu, Kenya, June 6, 2011.[39] HumanRights Watch interview with Hassan M. (not his real name), 16-year-old boy fromMogadishu, Kenya, May 29, 2011.[40] Roundtable on “Enhancing Respectfor International Humanitarian Law (IHL) in the Implementation of the AfricanUnion Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) Mandate,” Kigali, Rwanda, July 6-8,2011, attended by a Human Rights Watch researcher. For a general overview ofal-Shabaab controlled areas during mid-2010, see Katherine Zimmerman,“Mogadishu Map: Al-Shabaab’s Ramadan offensive,” CriticalThreats, September 23, 2010,http://www.criticalthreats.org/sites/default/files/Mogadishu_20110309.pdf(accessed September 22, 2011).[41]For full discussion on the fighting in Mogadishu in 2010, see Human RightsWatch, “You Don’t Know Who to Blame.”[42]Human Rights Watch interview with Nadifa K. (not her real name), mother, Kenya,June 1, 2011.[43] In herlandmark report, “Impact of Armed Conflict on Children,” the UNsecretary-general’s former expert on armed conflict and children,Graça Machel, wrote: “In addition to being forcibly recruited,youth also present themselves for service. It is misleading, however, toconsider this voluntary. While young people may appear to choose militaryservice, the choice is not exercised freely. They may be driven by any ofseveral forces, including cultural, social, economic or politicalpressures.” Report of the Expert of the Secretary-General submittedpursuant to General Assembly Resolution 48/157, A/ 51/306, August 26, 1996,http://www.unhchr.ch/huridocda/huridoca.nsf/(Symbol)/A.51.306.En?Opendocument(accessed January 31, 2012), para. 38.[44] HumanRights Watch interview with Baashi M. (not his real name), 27-year-old man fromKismayo, Kenya, June 4, 2011.[45]Human Rights Watch interview with Mansuur K. (not his real name), 15-year-old boy,Kenya, June 5, 2011.[46] HumanRights Watch interview with Dayax Y. (not his real name), male teacher, Kenya,June 6, 2011.[47] HumanRights Watch interview with Ayan Y. (not her real name), 20-year-old formerstudent, Kenya, June 5, 2011.[48]Human Rights Watch interview with Iskinder P. (not his real name), 15-year-oldboy, Kenya, June 2, 2011. When Iskinder, whose older brother diedfighting for al-Shabaab, told his mother he had decided to join, sheimmediately took him and fled to Kenya in February 2011.[49]Human Rights Watch interview with Baashi M., June 4, 2011.[50]Human Rights Watch interview with Bashiir M. (not his real name), 20-year-oldformer student, Kenya, June 5, 2011.[51] HumanRights Watch interview with Labaan M. (not his real name), 12-year-old boy,Kenya, June 1, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Deka R. (not her realname), 13-year-old girl, Kenya, June 1, 2011.[52] HumanRights Watch interview with Xarid M. (not his real name), 18-year-old young manwho was 16 at the time of the incident, Kenya, June 5, 2011.[53] HumanRights Watch interview with Quman M. (not her real name), mother, Kenya, June1, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with 30-year-old mother, Kenya, June 1,2011.[54] HumanRights Watch interview with Quman M., June 1, 2011.[55] HumanRights Watch interview with Odawa J. (not his real name), 21-year-old man,Kenya, June 6, 2011.[56] The use of training campsby al-Shabaab has been widely documented. See, for example, Chris Harnisch,“The Terror Threat From Somalia: The Internationalization of alShabaab,” Critical Threats, February 12, 2010,http://www.criticalthreats.org/somalia/terror-threat-somalia-internationalization-al-shabaab-feb-12-2010(accessed September 18, 2011). Al-Shabaab has also posted a variety of videosof alleged training camps on You Tube, such ashttp://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E57E1S7nGpo(accessed September 18, 2011).[57] HumanRights Watch interview with Kaariye S. (not his real name), 15-year-old boy,Kenya, June 2, 2011.[58]Human Rights Watch interview with Omar A. (not his real name), 18-year-old boy,Kenya, May 29, 2011.[59]Human Rights Watch interview with Demissie H. (not his real name), 17-year-oldboy, Kenya, May 30, 2011.[60]Human Rights Watch interview with UN staff, Kenya, November 29, 2010.[61] HumanRights Watch interview with Feysal M. (not his real name), 13-year-old boy,Kenya, June 1, 2011.[62]Human Rights Watch interview with Ibrahim K. (not his real name), 14-year-oldboy, Kenya, June 2, 2011.[63]Human Rights Watch interview with Feysal M., June 1, 2011.[64] HumanRights Watch interview with Kaariye S., June 2, 2011.[65]Human Rights Watch interview with Khorfa S. (not his real name), 16-year-oldboy, Kenya, June 2, 2011.[66] Human RightsWatch interview with Kaariye S., June 2, 2011.[67] Ibid.[68]Human Rights Watch interview with Iskinder P., June 2, 2011.[69] See“Somalia: Stop War Crimes in Mogadishu,” Human Rights Watch newsrelease, February 14, 2011, http://www.hrw.org/news/2011/02/14/somalia-stop-war-crimes-mogadishu[70] HumanRights Watch interview with man, Kenya, November 29, 2010.[71] HumanRights Watch interview with Inshaar C. (not his real name), Kenya, June 3,2011.[72] HumanRights Watch interview with Hussein S. (not his real name), 21-year-old man,Kenya, June 2, 2011.[73]Human Rights Watch interview with Ali F. (not his real name), 14-year-old boy,Kenya, June 2, 2011.[74]Human Rights Watch interview with Omar A., May 29, 2011.[75] See CathyMajtenyi, “Aid Workers Say Child Soldiers Involved in Escalating SomaliViolence,” Voice Of America, April 25, 2011,http://www.voanews.com/english/news/Aid-Workers-Say-Child-Soldiers-Involved-In-Escalating-Violence-120595459.html(accessedJanuary 9, 2011); JD, “Al-Shabaab Pushes School Kids to Frontline” SomaliaReport,December 7,2011,http://www.somaliareport.com/index.php/post/2232 (accessed January 9, 2011).[76] Internationalhumanitarian law prohibits the deliberate use of civilians or other protectedpersons to render military forces immune from attack. ICRC, CustomaryInternational Humanitarian Law, rule 97, citing Third Geneva Convention,art. 23; Protocol I, art. 51(7); see also Protocol II, art. 13(1). It would bea war crime to use children in this manner only if they were not directlyparticipating in hostilities, such as by actively carrying weapons.[77]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdikarim K. (not his real name), 15-year-oldboy, Kenya, June 3, 2011.[78] HumanRights Watch interview with Iskinder P., June 2, 2011.[79]In addition to prohibitions on the participation ofchildren in hostilities, the use of children in support roles such as portersor runners contravenes international standards. The Paris Principles andGuidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, endorsedby 76 UN member states, broaden the traditional definition of child combatantto ensure protection includes “any person below 18 years of age who is,or who has been, recruited or used by an armed force or armed group in anycapacity, including but not limited to children, boys and girls, used asfighters, cooks, porters, spies or for sexual purposes. It does not only referto a child who is taking, or has taken, a direct part in hostilities.”The Paris Principles: Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated withArmed Forces or Armed Groups (“The Paris Principles”), January 30,2007, http://www.unicef.org/protection/files/ParisPrinciples310107English.pdf(accessed September 10, 2011), para. 2.1.[80]See ICRC, Customary International Humanitarian Law, rule 6, citingProtocol II, art. 13(3).[81]Human Rights Watch interview with Ali F., June 2, 2011.[82]Human Rights Watch interview with Ridwan R. (not his real name), 10-year-oldboy, Kenya, June 2, 2011.[83] Muyhadin Ahmed Robel,“Confessions of a Would-Be Suicide Bomber,” Somalia Report, June21, 2011,http://www.somaliareport.com/index.php/post/964/Confessions_of_a_Would-Be_Suicide_Bomber(accessed September 18, 2011); Chris Welch, “FBI investigating reportedSomali-American suicide bomber,” CNN Online, June 2, 2011,http://articles.cnn.com/2011-06-02/world/somalia.us.suicide.bomber_1_shabaab-suicide-bomber-somali-american(accessed September 18, 2011); “Somalia MP’s killed in suicide bombattack on Mogadishu hotel,” The Telegraph, August 24, 2010,http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/africaandindianocean/somalia/7961482/Somali-MPs-killed-in-suicide-bomb-attack-on-Mogadishu-hotel.html(accessed September 18, 2011); “2 AU Troops Die in Suicide BombRaid,” ABC News, August 1, 2011, http://abcnews.go.com/International/wireStory?id=14204580(accessed September 18, 2011).[84]Human Rights Watch interview with Tahlil D. (not his real name), 18-year-old man,Kenya, June 2, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Qamar R. (not her realname), 46-year-old school teacher, Kenya, May 31, 2011.[85] HumanRights Watch interview with Zahi J. (not his real name), 16-year-old boy,Kenya, May 31, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Tahlil D., June 2, 2011;Human Rights Watch interview with Yusuuf J. (not his real name), 16-year-oldboy, Kenya, June 3, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Abdikarim K.,Kenya, June 3, 2011.[86] HumanRights Watch interview with Feysal M., June 1, 2011.[87] HumanRights Watch interview with Atirsa T. (not her real name), 20-year-old woman,Kenya, June 4, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Dawo G. (not her realname), 16-year-old girl, Kenya, June 5, 2011.[88] HumanRights Watch interview with Amare A., June 2, 2011.[89] HumanRights Watch interview with Gacir D. (not his real name), 15-year-old boy,Kenya, June 5, 2011.[90] HumanRights Watch interview with Safiyo Y. (not her real name), mother of threedaughters taken by al-Shabaab, Kenya, May 30, 2011.[91] HumanRights Watch interview with Amare A., June 2, 2011.[92]Human Rights Watch interview with Cabaas G. (not his real name), 20-year-oldman, Kenya, June 3, 2011.[93] HumanRights Watch interview with Farax K. (not her real name), 17-year-old girl,Kenya June 3, 2011.[94] HumanRights Watch interviews with Safiyo Y., May 30, 2011; Human Rights Watchinterview with Mariam K. (not her real name), 17-year-old girl abducted byal-Shabaab, Kenya, June 3, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Aamun G.(not her real name), mother whose daughter was abducted and temporarily held,May 31, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Kaafi B. (not his real name),14-year-old boy, Kenya, June 2, 2011.[95]Human Rights Watch interview with Aamina M. (note her real name), 13-year-oldgirl, Kenya, June 1, 2011.[96] HumanRights Watch interview with Ridwan R., June 2, 2011.[97]Human Rights Watch interview with Maahir D. (not his real name), 16-year-oldboy, Kenya, May 30, 2011.[98] HumanRights Watch interview with Galaal Y., June 6, 2011.[99] HumanRights Watch interview with Ibrahim K., June 2, 2011.[100] HumanRights Watch interview with Feysal M., June 1, 2011.[101] HumanRights Watch interview with Labaan M., June 1, 2011.[102] Ibid.[103] HumanRights Watch interview with Aadil K. (not his real name), 19-year-old man,Kenya, June 1, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Taban S. (not his realname), 16-year-old boy, May 29, 2011.[104] Recentmedia reports following a spate of attacks in Dadaab since October 2011 alsomake reference to al-Shabaab in the Dadaab camps in Kenya, seefor example, “Kenya-Somalia: Refugee Leaders Flee after Killings,Threats,” IRIN, January 9, 2012, http://www.irinnews.org/report.aspx?ReportId=94596(accessed January 26, 2012).[105] HumanRights Watch interview with Iskinder P., June 2, 2011.[106]Transitional Federal Charter of the Republic of Somalia, 2004, http://www.so.undp.org/docs/Transitional%20Federal%20charter-feb%202004-English.pdf(accessed October 31, 2011), ch. IV, art. 26 (d), (“Forced labour ormilitary service for children under 18 years shall not be permitted”).[107]UN Security Council, “Report of the Secretary-General on Children andArmed Conflict,” annex I.[108]Human Rights Watch interview with Abshir S. (not his real name), young man,Kenya, November 29, 2010.[109]Human Rights Watch interview with Yusri A. (not his real name), 21-year-oldman, Kenya, June 5, 2011.[110]Human Rights Watch interview with Xarid M., June 5, 2011.[111]Human Rights Watch interview with Yusri A. (not his real name), 21-year-oldman, Kenya, June 5, 2011.[112]Human Rights Watch interview with Waberi B. (not his real name),15-year-old boy, Kenya, June 5, 2011.[113] HumanRights Watch interview with Jaman K. (not his real name), 16-year-old boy,Kenya, February 8, 2012.[114]Human Rights Watch interview with Lokhman M. (not his real name), 15-year-oldboy, Kenya, February 8, 2012.[115] HumanRights Watch interview with UN staff, Nairobi, August, 18, 2011; Human RightsWatch interview with diplomatic mission, Nairobi, June 31, 2011; See also UN GeneralAssembly and Security Council, “Report of the Secretary-General onChildren and Armed Conflict,” para. 131.[116] UN GeneralAssembly and Security Council, “Report of the Secretary-General onChildren and Armed Conflict,” para. 131.[117]“Kenya: Stop Recruitment of Somalis in Refugee Camps,”Human Rights Watch news release, October 22, 2009,http://www.hrw.org/news/2009/10/22/kenya-stop-recruitment-somalis-refugee-camps.[118]Human Rights Watch interview with TFG official, Kigali, July 8,2011.[119] HumanRights Watch interview with Aasim T. (not his real name), father, Kenya,November 28, 2011.[120]Human Rights Watch interview with Xarid M., Kenya, June 5, 2011.[121] HumanRights Watch interview with diplomatic staff, Nairobi, Kenya, June, 29, 2011.[122] HumanRights Watch interview with Lokhman M., Kenya, February 8, 2012.[123] “NewSomali Prime Minister pledges to work towards ‘action plan’ to endrecruitment and use of child soldiers,” Office of the UN SpecialRepresentative of the Secretary General on children and armed conflict pressrelease, OSRSG/201110-18, November 3,2010,http://www.un.org/children/conflict/english/pr/2010-11-03247.html(accessed August 26, 2011).[124] UNGeneral Assembly and Human Rights Council, Draft report of the working group onthe Universal Periodic Review on Somalia, A/HRC/WG.6/11/L.4, May 6, 2011, para.24; Human Rights Watch notes, Universal Periodic Review session on Somalia,Geneva, May 3, 2011.[125]“NewSomali Government commits to ending child recruitment,” UN Office of theSpecial Representative for the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflictpress release, November 23, 2011, http://www.un.org/children/conflict/english/pr/2011-11-23277.html(accessed December 6, 2011).[126]Joint Chief of Staff of Somali National Armed Forces, SAFFAR17/11, July 15, 2011, on file with Human Rights Watch.[127]Human Rights Watch email correspondencewith UN staff, November 29, 2011.[128] HumanRights Watch interview with Gen. Abdulkadir Sheikh Ali Dini, Nairobi, December16, 2011.[129] HumanRights Watch interviews with UN staff, Nairobi, August 18, 2011; Human RightsWatch interview with diplomatic staff, Nairobi, June 1, 2011.[130] HumanRights Watch interview with Gen. Abdulkadir Sheikh Ali Dini, Nairobi, December16, 2011.[131]Human Rights Watch interview with Yusri A., June 5, 2011. The TFG militarychief of staff, General Dini, acknowledged that children might lie about theirage to join TFG forces. Human Rights Watch interview with Gen. AbdulkadirSheikh Ali Dini, Nairobi, Kenya, December 16, 2011.[132] JointSecurity Committee communique, Djibouti, January 20, 2011, on file with HumanRights Watch.[133]Human Rights Watch interview with diplomatic staff, Nairobi, June 29, 2011, andJune 30, 2011. In April 2011 the EU identified 46 children among the TFGsoldiers that had been sent to Bihanga as part of cohort 4; the children weresent back to Mogadishu. They were held at the Jazeera camp, an AMISOM trainingcamp. As of November 2011, some of the children had joined a vocationaltraining program while others have reportedly returned home. Human Rights Watchinterview with UN staff, Nairobi, August 18, 2011; Human Rights Watch emailcorrespondence with Somali NGO, August 21, 2011. Over the summer, an additionalgroup of children were identified at Bihanga from among the same cohort andsent to Jazeera camp. Human Rights Watch interview with UNstaff, Nairobi, August 18, 2011; Human Rights Watchtelephone interview with diplomatic staff, August 26, 2011.[134] HumanRights Watch interviews with diplomatic staff, Nairobi, June, August, andOctober 2011.[135] HumanRights Watch interview with diplomatic staff, Nairobi, June 31, 2011.[136]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with diplomatic staff,November 3, 2011. Only one cohort, known as cohort four, of nine hundredindividuals, completed its training in 2011; in November 2011 a new cohort wassent out to Bihanga.[137]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with diplomatic staff, August26, 2011.[138]Human Rights Watch interviews with diplomatic staff, Nairobi, December 2011.[139]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with diplomatic staff, August 28, 2011.[140] Ibid.[141]HumanRights Watch email correspondence with UNICEF staff, January 31, 2012. Lessonscan also be drawn from age screening conducted for asylum screening andjuvenile justice proceedings for groups with low birth registration. See TerrySmith and Laura Brownlees, UNICEF, "Age assessment practices: a literaturereview & annotated bibliography,”2011, http://www.unicef.org/protection/Age_Assessment_Practices_2010.pdf(accessed February 9, 2012).[142]See Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 1969, entered into force January27, 1980, UNTS, vol. 1155, p. 331, art. 18.[143] CRCOptional Protocol, art. 7(1).[144]CRC Optional Protocol, art. 6.[145]CRC, art. 37(b-c).[146] TheParis Principles, paras. 3.11, 7.6, and 7.21.[147]This group of children is sometimes termed “defectors.” HumanRights Watch has avoided this term because it implies a certain level of choicein the initial recruitment, which does not appropriately apply to childrenassociated with armed forces.[148]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with UN staff, November 29,2011.[149]Human Rights Watch interview with UN staff, Nairobi, June 28, 2011; HumanRights Watch with diplomatic staff, Nairobi, June 31, 2011.[150] HumanRights Watch interview with Galaay Y., June 5, 2011.[151]Human Rights Watch interview with UN staff, Nairobi, May 31, 2011.[152]Human Rights Watch interview with AMISOM Civil Military Cooperation staff,Nairobi, June 8, 2011.[153] HumanRights Watch interview with UN staff, Nairobi, June 28, 2011; Human RightsWatch interview with AMISOM Civil Military Cooperation staff, Nairobi, Kenya,June 8, 2011.[154]Human Rights Watch interview with UN staff, Kenya, June 28, 2011; Human RightsWatch interview with UN staff, Nairobi, Kenya, October 21, 2011.[155]Human Rights Watch interview with UN staff, Nairobi, June 28, 2011;Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Somali NGO, August 21, 2011; HumanRights Watch email correspondence with UN staff, Nairobi, Kenya, November 29,2011.[156]Human Rights Watch interview with Somali civil societyactivist, Nairobi, Kenya, June 10, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview withdiplomatic staff, June, 31, 2011.[157] HumanRights Watch email correspondence with Somali NGO, July 17,2011; UN General Assembly and Security Council, “Report of theSecretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict,” para.133.[158]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Somali NGO, July 17,2011.[159]Human Rights Watch interview with Somali civil society activist,Nairobi, Kenya, June 10, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with diplomaticstaff, Nairobi, December 16, 2011.[160]See for example, Jeremy Scahill, “The CIA’s Secret Sitesin Somalia,” The Nation, July 12, 2011,http://www.thenation.com/article/161936/cias-secret-sites-somalia (accessedAugust 22, 2011).[161] “OngoingSomalia crisis is a children’s crisis says UNICEF,” UNICEF news release,March 11, 2011, http://www.unicef.org/somalia/media.html (accessed August 22,2011).[162]Human Rights Watch interviews with diplomatic staff, Nairobi, June,August, and November 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with UN staff, Nairobi,August 19, 2011.[163]Human Rights Watch interviews with Somali civil societyactivist, Nairobi, June 10, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Somalicivil society activist, Nairobi, July 4, 2011.[164] Therecruitment of girls and young women for forced marriage to al-Shabaab fightershas been reported by others, including by the UN secretary-general in his April2011 report on children and armed conflict in Somalia. UN General Assembly andSecurity Council, “Report of the Secretary-General on children in armedconflict in Somalia,” para. 130.[165] UNGeneral Assembly and Security Council, “Report of the Secretary-Generalon Children and Armed Conflict,” section c, para. 43; Human Rights Watchunpublished interviews with internally displaced persons, Mogadishu,August/September 2011.[166] Conventionon the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW),adopted December 18, 1979, G.A. res. 34/180, 34 UN. GAOR Supp. (No. 46) at 193,UN. Doc. A/34/46, entered into force September 3, 1981,http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/text/econvention.htm (accessed August28, 2011), art. 16(2); African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child,OAU Doc. CAB/LEG/24.9/49 (1990), entered into force November 29, 1999, art.21(2).[167] HumanRights Watch recognizes however that in exceptional cases children ages 16 and17 may be permitted to enter into marriage. To the extent that national systemsprovide for such an exception, the law should require prior authorization by anindependent officer established by law, if and only if, upon application by thecouple wishing to marry, she or he reaches a determination that both intendedspouses have given informed, full, and free consent to the marriage and thatthe marriage would be in the best interests of the child or children.[168] SeeICRC, Customary International Humanitarian Law, citing article 3 commonto the four Geneva Conventions of 1949, and Protocol II, art, 4(2)(e)(explicitly prohibiting rape and "any form of indecent assault").International human rights law prohibits rape as a form of torture and othercruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment. International Covenant on Civil andPolitical Rights (ICCPR), adopted December 16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171,entered into force March 23, 1976, art. 7; Convention against Torture and OtherCruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Convention againstTorture), adopted December 10, 1984, G.A. res. 39/46, annex, 39 U.N. GAOR Supp.(No. 51) at 197, U.N. Doc. A/39/51 (1984), entered into force June 26, 1987.The UN Human Rights Committee, which monitors compliance with the ICCPR, hasstated that: “Women are particularly vulnerable in times of internal orinternational armed conflicts. States parties should inform the Committee ofall measures taken during these situations to protect women from rape,abduction and other forms of gender-based violence.” UN Human RightsCommittee, General Comment No. 28, Equality of rights between men and women,CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.10 (2000), para. 8.[169] See,for example, Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Rome Statute),A/CONF.183/9, July 17, 1998, entered into force July 1, 2002, art. 8(2)(e)(vi).[170] See,for example, UN General Assembly and Security Council, “Report of theSecretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict,” para.130; Geffrey Gettleman, “For Somali Women, Pain of Being a Spoil ofWar,” New York Times, December 27, 2011.[171] HumanRights Watch interview with Baashi M. (not his real name), 17-year-old boy,Kenya, June 4, 2011.[172] HumanRights Watch interview with Qamar R., May 31, 2011.[173] HumanRights Watch interview with Amina G. (not her real name), mother, Kenya, June1, 2011.[174] HumanRights Watch interview with Dahnay K., June 3, 2011.[175]Human Rights Watch interview with Ifrax D. (not her real name), mother, Kenya,June 1, 2011.[176] HumanRights Watch interview with Farxiyo A. (not her real name), 18-year-old woman,Kenya, June 4, 2011.[177]Human Rights Watch interview with Qamar R., May, 31, 2011.[178] HumanRights Watch interview with Khadafi J. (not his real name), 17-year-old boy,Kenya, June 5, 2011.[179] HumanRights Watch interview with Baashi M., June 4, 2011.[180]Human Rights Watch interview with Dawo G., June 5, 2011.[181]Human Rights Watch interview with Aziza D., mother, Kenya, November 29, 2010.[182]See, for example, Human Rights Watch, “So Much to Fear”; HumanRights Watch unpublished interviews with internally displaced persons,Mogadishu, August and September 2011.[183] See,for example, UN General Assembly and Security Council, “Report of theSecretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict,” paras. 42, 43, and135.[184] HumanRights Watch with Amal D. (not her real name), 17-year-old girl, Kenya, June 2,2011.[185] Ibid.;Human Rights Watch interview with Nafiso D. (not her real name), thegirls’ mother, Kenya, June 2, 2011.[186] HumanRights Watch with Rifaci S. (not his real name), 16-year-old boy, Kenya, May30, 2011.[187] HumanRights Watch interview with Maandiq R. (not her real name), 35-year-old mother,Kenya, May 31, 2011.[188]Human Rights Watch interview with Nafiso D., June 2, 2011.[189]Human Rights Watch interview with Amal D., June 2, 2011.[190]Ibid.[191]ICRC, Customary International Humanitarian Law,rules 7 and 9, citing various treaties and other evidence of state practice.See also Human Rights Watch, Schools and Armed Conflict: A Global Survey ofDomestic Laws and State Practice Protecting Schools from Attack and MilitaryUse, July 2011, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2011/07/20/schools-and-armed-conflict.[192]ICRC, CustomaryInternational Humanitarian Law, rule 2, citing Protocol II, art.13(2).[193]Ibid., chapters 1 and 2, citing, forexample, Protocol II, art. 13. See also Protocol I, art. 52(3) on the generalprotection of civilian objects (“In case of doubt whether an object whichis normally dedicated to civilian purposes, such as a place of worship, a houseor other dwelling or a school, is being used to make an effective contributionto military action, it shall be presumed not to be so used.”).[194]Ibid., rule 97, citing Fourth Geneva Convention, art.28; Protocol I, art. 51(7).[195]Ibid., chapters 3 and 4.[196] HumanRights Watch interview with Sadiq M. (not his real name), teacher, Kenya, June4, 2011.[197]The UN secretary-general also found that from May 31, 2008, to March 31, 2010,there were “many instances of parties to the conflict directly targetingschools, in some cases in retaliation for attacks against them by opposingforces, resulting in the killing or wounding of teachers and students.”“Report of the Secretary-General on children in armed conflict inSomalia,” para. 46.[198] “Somalia:Al-Shabaab Attack Indefensible,” Human Rights Watch news release, October5, 2011, http://www.hrw.org/news/2011/10/05/somalia-al-shabaab-attack-indefensible.[199] AbdiGuled, “Somali Bomber Who Killed 100 Slammed Education,” AssociatedPress, October 6, 2011, http://news.yahoo.com/somali-bomber-killed-100-slammed-education-124338489.html(accessed October 7, 2011).[200]Human Rights Watch interview with Ibrahim K., June 2, 2011.[201] HumanRights Watch interview with Khorfa S., June 2, 2011.[202] HumanRights Watch interview with Daahir J. (not his realname), 15-year-old boy, Kenya, June 2, 2011.[203]Human Rights Watch interview with Dalil O. (not his realname), 14-year-old boy, Kenya, June 2, 2011. The boy said he continued toattend until a rocket hit the school grounds while class was in session inSeptember 2010.[204] HumanRights Watch interview with Qamar R., May 31, 2011. In late November2009, she said, a “mortar round fell on a class. All but two studentssurvived, the rest were salvaged from the rubble. It was one of the twostudents who died who lost half of his head.”[205]Human Rights Watch interview with Bashiir M., Kenya, June 5, 2011.[206] HumanRights Watch interview with Omar A., May 29, 2011.[207] HumanRights Watch interview with Xarid M., Kenya, June 5, 2011.[208] HumanRights Watch interview with Dahnay K., June 3, 2011.[209] HumanRights Watch interview with Dayax Y., June 6, 2011.[210] HumanRights Watch interviews with Farah T. (not his real name), 14-year-old boy,Kenya, June 6, 2011; Aseefa D. (not his real name),24-year-old former student, Kenya, June 4, 2011 (stating that 12 studentswere wounded from return fire in February 2009); Salal M. (not his real name),male teacher, Kenya, June 6, 2011 (stating that six students were wounded fromreturn fire in August 2010); Odawa J., June 6, 2011 (stating that two childrenages eight and nine were killed by return fire at his school).[211] “Reportof the Secretary-General on children in armed conflict in Somalia,” para.45.[212] HumanRights Watch interviews with Labaan M., June 1, 2011 (stating that a large partof his school was destroyed and many of his classmates, include two of his bestfriends, killed when his school was hit in 2010); Mohammed J. (not his realname), 16-year-old boy, Kenya, June 2, 2011 (stating that he stopped going toschool after it was hit by a mortar round and students were killed in 2010); IbitsaamL. (not her real name), 17-year-old girl, Kenya, June 1, 2011 (statingthat stray bullets killed some of her friends while they were all in school); FaaidJ. (not his real name), male secondary school teacher, Kenya, May 31, 2011 (statingthat a six- or seven-year-old girl was shot in the leg through the window ofhis school in 2010 and that another day a mortar round took off theschool’s roof).[213] HumanRights Watch interview with Negasa A. (not her real name), 10-year-old girl,Kenya, June 5, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Gacir D., June 5, 2011.[214]Human Rights Watch interview with Dahnay K., June 3, 2011.[215] HumanRights Watch interview with Sacid D. (not his real name), 20-year-old former student,Kenya, May 31, 2011.[216] HumanRights Watch interview with Bashiir M., June 5, 2011.[217] HumanRights Watch interview with Iskinder P., June 2, 2011.[218] “Reportof the Secretary-General on children in armed conflict in Somalia,” para.45.[219] SeeHuman Rights Watch, Schools and Armed Conflict.[220]Human Rights Watch interview with Khorfa S., June 2,2011.[221] HumanRights Watch interview with Xarid M., June 5, 2011.[222] HumanRights Watch interview with Deka R., June 5, 2011.[223]Human Rights Watch interview with Waberi B., June 5, 2011.[224] HumanRights Watch interview with Faaid J., May 31, 2011.[225] Human RightsWatch interview with Lebna M. (not his real name), male teacher, Kenya, June 4,2011.[226]Human Rights Watch interview with Wehliye D. (not his real name), male teacher,Kenya, June 4, 2011.[227]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdu A. (not his real name), male teacher,Kenya, June 4, 2011.[228] HumanRights Watch interviews with Ibitsaam L., June 1, 2011; Cabdalle M. (not hisreal name), 13-year-old boy, Kenya, June 3, 2011; Yenee S. (not her realname), 11-year-old girl, Kenya, June 5, 2011; Tenagne K. (not her realname), 15-year-old girl, Kenya, June 5, 2011; and Dawo G., June5, 2011.[229] Human Rights Watch interview with TenagneK., June 5, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Dawo G., June 5, 2011.[230] HumanRights Watch interview with Dawo G., June 5, 2011.[231] HumanRights Watch interview with Dayax Y., June 6, 2011.[232] HumanRights Watch interview with Waberi B., June 5, 2011.[233] HumanRights Watch interview with Labaan M., June 1, 2011.[234] HumanRights Watch interview with Salal M., June 6, 2011.[235] HumanRights Watch interview with Ummi N. (not her real name), female teacher, Kenya,June 6, 2011.[236] HumanRights Watch interview with Qamar R., May 31, 2011.[237]Human Rights Watch interview with Ishaar C. (not his real name), 20-year-oldformer student, Kenya, June 3, 2011.[238] HumanRights Watch interview with Abdikarim K., June 3, 2011.[239] HumanRights Watch interview with Ibitsaam L., June 1, 2011.[240] HumanRights Watch interview with Taliso R. (not her real name), female teacher,Kenya, June 6, 2011.[241] Ibid.[242] HumanRights Watch interview with Faaid J., May 31, 2011.[243] HumanRights Watch interview with Khadar N. (not his realname), male teacher, Kenya, May 31, 2011.[244] HumanRights Watch interviews with Nadif M. (not his real name), 15-year-old boy, Kenya,June 1, 2011; Ayan Y., June 5, 2011; Odawa J., June 6, 2011; Bashiir M., June5, 2011; Waberi B., June 5, 2011; Erasto M. (not his real name), 14-year-oldboy, Kenya, June 2, 2011; Abdikarim K., June 3, 2011; Hakim K. (not his realname), 17-year-old boy, Kenya, June 5, 2011; Berhun D. (not his real name), 19year-old former student, Kenya, June 5, 2011; Deka R., June 5, 2011; Tenagne K.,June 5, 2011; Abrihet N. (not her real name), 15-year-old girl, Kenya, June 1,2010; Dabir K. (not his real name), 15-year-old boy, Kenya, May 29, 2011;Ridwan R., June 2, 2011; Yusuuf J., June 3, 2011; and Mahdi H. (not his real name),12-year-old boy, Kenya, June 6, 2011.[245]Human Rights Watch interview with Faaid J., May 31, 2011.[246]Human Rights Watch interviews with Hakim A., June 5, 2011; Berhun D., June 5,2011; Yusuuf J., June 3, 2011; Baashi M., June 4, 2011.[247]HumanRights Watch interview with Lebna M., June 4, 2011.[248]Human Rights Watch interview with Iskinder P., June 2, 2011.[249] HumanRights Watch interview with Ummi N., June 6, 2011.[250]Human Rights Watch interview with Bekele Y. (not his real name), 19-year-oldboy, Kenya, June 2, 2011.[251] HumanRights Watch interview with Qamar R., Kenya, May 31, 2011.[252] HumanRights Watch interview with Baashi M., June 4, 2011. Baashi said al-Shabaabtook him from school in February 2011 and that his 12-year-old brother alsojoined. Similarly, Hussein S., whom al-Shabaab took from school in 2009,described what happened in his class:They came and taught jihad Islam at school. It was aone-hour class and was taught by Somali al-Shabaab once a week. They told usabout religious war, light weapons, explosives, and suicide bombs, and how todisobey parents. They would come with weapons into the school and display them.They keep weapons in a special room for demonstrations.Human Rights Watch interview with Hussein S., June 2, 2011.[253] See,for example, Human Rights Watch interview with Assad D. (not his real name),22-year-old former student, Kenya, June 4, 2011; Human Rights Watch interviewwith Bashiir M., June 5, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Lebna M., June4, 2011.[254] HumanRights Watch interview with Farxiyo A., June 4, 2011.[255] Human Rights Watch interview with Abrihet N., June 1, 2011.[256] HumanRights Watch interview with Hakim A., June 5, 2011.[257] HumanRights Watch interview with Deka R., June 5, 2011; Human Rights Watch interviewwith Faaid J., May 31, 2011.[258] HumanRights Watch interview with Qamar R., May 31, 2011.[259] HumanRights Watch interview with Odawa J., June 6, 2011.[260]Human Rights Watch interview with Dahnay K., June 3, 2011.[261]Human Rights Watch interview with Baashi M., June 4, 2011.[262] HumanRights Watch interview with Salal M., June 6, 2011.[263] HumanRights Watch interview with Bashiir M., June 5, 2011.[264] Human RightsWatch interview with Hakim A., June 5, 2011.[265] Ibid.[266] Ateacher told us that after al-Shabaab took 12 girls ages 15 to 17 from theschool grounds: “All the girls over 15 ran away or dropped out ofschool.” Human Rights Watch interview with Salax R. (not her real name), femaleteacher, Kenya, May 31, 2011. A 15-year-old girl said that afteral-Shabaab twice took around 10 girls from her school, “many of the oldergirls left the school because they were scared of recruitment. As a result,most of the pupils left in the school were under the age of 13.” HumanRights Watch interview with Abrihet N., June 1, 2010.[267]Human Rights Watch interview with Atirsa T., June 4,2011.[268]Human Rights Watch interviews with Ibitsaam L., June 1, 2011; 18-year-oldformer student, Kenya, June 6, 2011; Waardi M. (not his real name), 16-year-oldboy, Kenya, June 2, 2011; Erasto M., June 6, 2011; and Xarid M., June 5, 2011.[269] HumanRights Watch interview with Labaan M., June 1, 2011.[270] HumanRights Watch interview with Girmer S. (not his real name), 18-year-old former student, Kenya, June 6, 2011.[271] HumanRights Watch interview with Khorfa S., June 2, 2011.[272] HumanRights Watch interview with Dalmar J. (not his real name), 20-year-old formerstudent, Kenya, June 6, 2011.[273]Human Rights Watch interview with Mansuur K., June 5,2011.[274]Human Rights Watch interview with Nuuro M. (not her real name), mother, age 26,Kenya, May 30, 2011.[275] “Reportof the Secretary-General on children in armed conflict in Somalia,” para.45.[276] HumanRights Watch interview with Baashi M., June 4, 2011. Similarly, a teacher fromHiran, who left in late 2010 after al-Shabaab threatened him for teachingEnglish, explained what happened at his school: “There were 40 teachersin 2009 and today there are 20. As a result teachers have to teach subjectsthat are not theirs.” Human Rights Watch interview with Khadar N., May31, 2011.[277] HumanRights Watch interview with Amadayo D. (not his real name), 16-year-old boy,Kenya, June 6, 2011.[278] UN SecurityCouncil, Resolution 2002 (2011), S/RES/2002 (2011), http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N11/439/03/PDF/N1143903.pdf?OpenElement(accessed February 9, 2012).[279] FinancialTracking Service, “Consolidated Appeal: Somalia 2011,” February 12,2012, http://fts.unocha.org/reports/daily/ocha_R32sum_A927___12_February_2012_(02_05).pdf(accessed February 12, 2012).[280] See ICRC,Customary International Humanitarian Law, rule 158, citing the 1949 GenevaConventions, including Convention (I) for the Amelioration of the Condition ofthe Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field, art. 49; Convention (II) forthe Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members ofArmed Forces at Sea, art. 50; Convention (III) relative to the Treatment of Prisonersof War, art. 129; Convention (IV) relative to the Protection of CivilianPersons in Time of War, art. 146. See also the preamble to the Rome Statute ofthe International Criminal Court (recalling “the duty of every State toexercise its criminal jurisdiction over those responsible for internationalcrimes”).[281] SeeArticle 2 common to the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 on the“Application of the Convention” (“[T]he present Conventionshall apply to all cases of declared war or of any other armed conflict whichmay arise between two or more of the High Contracting Parties, even if thestate of war is not recognized by one of them” [emphasis added]); seealso ICRC, Commentary on the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 (Geneva:ICRC, 1952), vol. 1, p. 32. With respect to the application of the laws of warto UN forces, see generally the statement by the UN secretary-general, “Observanceby United Nations forces of international humanitarian law,” United NationsSecretary-General's Bulletin, ST/SGB/1999/13, August 6, 1999, http://www.icrc.org/eng/resources/documents/misc/57jq7l.htm(accessed February 12, 2012).[282] See ICRC,Customary International Humanitarian Law, rules 139 and 149.[283] Ibid.,rule 1, citing Protocol I, arts. 48 and 51(2); Protocol II, art. 13(2).[284] Ibid.,rule 16 ("Each party to the conflict must do everything feasible to verifythat targets are military objectives"), citing Protocol I, art. 57(2)(a). Seealso Protocol I, art. 52(3) on the general protection of civilian objects:“In case of doubt whether an object which is normally dedicated tocivilian purposes, such as a place of worship, a house or other dwelling or aschool, is being used to make an effective contribution to military action, itshall be presumed not to be so used.”[285]Ibid., rule 7, citing Protocol I, arts. 48 and 52(2).[286]Ibid., rules 11, 12, and 14, citing Protocol I (1977), arts. 51(4)-(5).[287]Ibid., rule 22, citing Protocol I, art. 58(c); and rule 24, citingProtocol I, art. 58(a).[288] Ibid.,rule 135, citing Protocol II, art. 4(3).[289] CRC,art. 38.[290]SeeProtocol II, art. 4(3)(c). Although Somalia is a not a party to Protocol II,this provision, art. 77(2) of Protocol I concerning international armedconflicts, and article 38 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, areconsidered reflective of customary international humanitarian law. See ICRC, CustomaryInternational Humanitarian Law, rule 138. The Rome Statute of theInternational Criminal Court lists “conscripting or enlisting childrenunder the age of 15 years” into “armed forces or groups” or“using them to participate actively in hostilities” as war crimes(arts. 8(2)(b)(xxvi) and 8(2) (e) (vii). It also prohibits children’sactive participation not only in combat but also in scouting, spying, anddirect support functions. Rome Statute. Several UN Security Council resolutionscondemn the recruitment and use of children in hostilities, includingResolutions 1261 (1999), 1314 (2000) 1379 (2001), 1460 (2003), 1539 (2004),1612 (2005), 1882 (2009), and 1998 (2011) on children and armed conflict. SeeUnited Nations Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-Generalfor Children and Armed Conflict, “Resolutions by the Security Council onChildren and Armed Conflict,” undated, http://www.un.org/children/conflict/english/resolutions.html(accessed September 11, 2011).[291]See ICRC, Customary International Humanitarian Law, rule 156.[292] Governmentof Somalia, National report submitted in accordance with paragraph15 (a) of theannex to Human Rights Council resolution, A/HRC/WG.6/11/SOM/1, April 11, 2011,para. 46; CRC, arts. 1, 12, 19, 24,and 28.[293] Somaliasigned the CRC on May 9, 2002, but has not ratified it. The OptionalProtocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement ofchildren in armed conflict raised the standards set in the CRC by establishing18 as the minimum age for any conscription, forced recruitment, or directparticipation in hostilities. Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rightsof the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, adopted May 25,2000, G.A. Resolution 54/263, Annex I, 54 U.N. GAOR Supp. (no. 49) at 7, U.N.Doc. A/54/49, vol. III (2000), entered into force February 12, 2002. Somaliasigned the Optional Protocol in 2005.[294] The AfricanCharter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child provides that states parties“shall take all necessary measures to ensure that no child shall take adirect part in hostilities and refrain in particular, from recruiting anychild.” African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child, arts. 2and 22(2). Somalia signed the Charter in 1991.[295]Paris Principles.[296]Paris Principles, para. 2.1.[297]Ibid., paras. 3.11, 3.12, and 3.13.[298] TransitionalFederal Charter of the Republic of Somalia, ch. IV,art. 26(d).[299]CRC Optional Protocol, art. 6(3).[300]Paris Principles, paras. 3.11, 7.21, 7.45, 8.7, 8.8, and 8.9.[301]CRC, art. 40 (1).[302]CRC, arts. 12, 19, 24, 28, and 29.[303] Governmentof Somalia, National report submitted in accordance with paragraph 15(a) of theannex to Human Rights Council resolution, A/HRC/WG.6/11/SOM/1, April 11, 2011,para. 46.[304]CEDAW.[305]Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, GeneralRecommendation No. 21, Equality in Marriage and Family Relations,(Thirteenth Session, 1994, para. 36; UNCommittee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 4, Adolescent Healthand Development in the Context of the Convention on theRights of the Child, (Thirty-third session, 2003), para. 20.[306]African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child,art. 21(2); Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights on theRights of Women in Africa, adopted by the 2nd Ordinary Session of the Assemblyof the Union, Maputo, September 13, 2000, CAB/LEG/66.6, entered into forceNovember 25, 2005, article 6 (b),http://www.achpr.org/english/women/protocolwomen.pdf ( accessed January 11,2012).[307]Art. 3, common to the four Geneva Conventions of 1949. Protocol II, art.4(2)(e), explicitly prohibits rape and “any form of indecentassault.”[308]The ICCPR prohibits torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment(art. 7) and protects women's right to be free from discrimination based on sex(arts. 2(1) and 26). ICCPR; Convention against Torture (The UN specialrapporteur on torture has long characterized rape as torture; UN DocsE/CN.4/1986.15, para 119; E/CN.4/1992/SR.21, para 35; E/CN.4/1995/34,para 19.); CEDAW; African [Banjul] Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights,adopted June 27, 1981, OAU Doc. CAB/LEG/67/3 rev. 5, entered into force October21, 1986, ratified by Somalia in 1985, arts. 2, 5, and 18(3).[309] CRC,arts. 2, 34, 37, and 43; African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of theChild, arts. 16 and 27.[310] ICRC, CustomaryInternational Humanitarian Law, chapters 1 and 2, citing, for example,Protocol II, art. 13.[311]Statement by the President of the Security Council, 6114th meetingof the Security Council, S/PRST/2009/9, April 29, 2009.[312]UN Security Council, Resolution 1998 (2011), S/Res/1998 (2011), para. 4.[313]See Optional Protocol II, art, 4(3) (a) stating that children “shallreceive an education, including religious and moral education, in keeping withthe wishes of their parents, or in the absence of parents, of those responsiblefor their care.”[314]See CRC, art. 28(a); International Covenant onEconomic, Social, andCultural Rights (ICESCR), adopted December 6, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 49, U.N. doc. A/6316 (1966), 993 U.N.T.S. 3,entered into force January 3 1976. See also See African Charter on Human andPeoples’ Rights, art. 17; and African Charter on the Rights and Welfareof the Child, art. 11.[315]ICESCR, art. 13; CRC, art. 28.[316] Committeeon Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment 13, The right toeducation (Twenty-first session, 1999), U.N. Doc. E/C.12/1999/10 (1999),reprinted in Compilation of General Comments and General RecommendationsAdopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, U.N. Doc. HRI/GEN/1/Rev.6 at 70 (2003),para. 6.[317] Ibid.,para. 7.[318] AnnyssaBellal et al. suggest that, “The content of the [non-state armedgroup’s] obligation would be determined by the level of control of thearmed group. For example, in determining [non-state armed group’s] scopeof obligations it could be argued that, as a minimum, the armed group shouldrefrain from interfering directly or indirectly with the enjoyment of rights byevery individual under its control (obligation to respect). Thus, the Taliban[in Afghanistan], depending on their level of control of territory, would beobliged to respect the right to education of children and not discriminateagainst women. The scope of obligations would be proportionate to the[non-state armed group’s] actual level of control, thus not excluding theobligation to ensure or secure human rights, although it might be questionableas to whether such an entity would have any responsibility to deliver educationor enact legislation on gender equality. Annyssa Bellal, Gilles Giacca, andStuart Casey-Maslen, “International law and armed non-state actors inAfghanistan,” International Review of the Red Cross, March 2011,pp. 25-26.Related ContentFebruary 21, 2012News ReleaseSomalia: Warring Parties Put Children at Grave RiskAl-Shabaab Rebels Impose Forced Marriages, use Students as ‘Human Shields’February 21, 2012News ReleaseSomalia: Warring Parties Put Children at Grave RiskRegion / CountryAfrica SomaliaProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch