Needless Pain: Government Failure to Provide Palliative Care for Children in Kenya | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload reportSeptember 9, 2010Needless PainGovernment Failure to Provide Palliative Care for Children in KenyaNeedless PainGovernment Failure to Provide Palliative Care for Childrenin KenyaSummaryKey RecommendationsMethodologyI.BackgroundTheImportance of Palliative Care and Pain TreatmentPalliativeCare for Children in AfricaThe KenyanContextII. Livingwith Pain: Children’s Suffering Due to Lack of Palliative CareThe PositiveEffect of Palliative Care on Children’s LivesIII.Barriers to Pain Treatment and Palliative Care for Children in KenyaPalliativeCare and Pain Treatment on the MarginsAbsence of aGovernment Policy on Palliative CareLack of Availability of Pain DrugsHealth Workers: Lack of Palliative Care Training and SkillsParents’ and Caregivers’ ResponsibilitiesEconomic Barriers to Pain Treatment and Palliative CareIV.Kenya’s Legal Obligations Regarding Palliative Care and Pain TreatmentV. The Crucial Role of Kenyan Civil SocietyVI.International Donors’ Lack of Attention to Palliative CareVII. Providing Pain Treatment and Palliative Care withLimited ResourcesThe Exampleof UgandaDetailed RecommendationsTo TheGovernment of KenyaTo the WorldHealth Organization (WHO), the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF),the US President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), and OtherHealth DonorsAcknowledgmentsSummaryPeoplehave no problems with relieving pain in adults with morphine, but when it comesto children, there is always some reservation. Putting a child on morphine isalways a big issue … Morphine is underutilized.—Doctor treating children with cancer, Nairobi,February 25, 2010[Myson] had severe pain sometimes, especially some abdominal pains… Therewere times that he would use those pain killers paracetamol and Brufen[ibuprofen] and the pain would … just persist … I could tell he wasin a lot of pain because he was just stiffened and you could see he was reallystruggling because there were sounds he was making. So I could say that he diedin pain.—Mother of Gerard K., who died of complicationsassociated with HIV/AIDS at age five, the Kibera slum in Nairobi, March 9, 2010Kenya hashigh and increasing rates of childhood disease and child mortality. Hundreds of thousands of children sufferfrom AIDS, cancer,sickle cell disease, and other chronic, often fatal, or otherwise life-limitingillnesses, and they often experience severe, debilitating pain.Almostall of this pain can be easily alleviated. Morphine, the mainstay medicationfor treating severe pain, is inexpensive and easy to administer—butwidely unavailable in Kenya, especially for children. Palliative care—a field of medicinethat seeks not to cure disease but to prevent suffering and improve quality oflife—can be delivered at home, in a hospice, or a hospital. It focuses on treating pain and otherphysical symptoms, and providing psychosocial support, complementing curativetreatment. The two should be provided in parallel from the moment of diagnosis.Palliative care can even help curativetreatment to succeed, for example, by enabling a child to eat, exercise,communicate, or adhere to a medication regimen.Whilemuch of this report focuses on sick children’s access to morphine andother pain medicines, because simple reforms could dramatically improve theiravailability and alleviate enormous suffering at low cost, palliative care forchildren means much more than morphine. It should include age-appropriatecounseling for anxiety and other common psychological symptoms, play anddistraction to ease pain and depression, and support for the entire family. Itis essential that the Kenyan government not just improve pain treatment forchildren, but better integrate the full range of pediatric palliative careservices into its health system.InKenya, pain medicines are not widely available to alleviate sickchildren’s suffering. The World Health Organization (WHO) classifies oralmorphine as an essential medicine and regards it as the drug of choice to treatmoderate to severe chronic pain. Kenya’s national medicines policy, too,calls oral morphine essential, meaning it should be a priority for publicprocurement and available in all national referral, provincial, and districthospitals. Yet the Kenya Medical Supplies Agency (KEMSA) does not procure oralmorphine as it does other essential medicines, and this makes it more difficultfor public hospitals to obtain it.In fact, theKenyan government has erected legal and regulatory barriers to using morphineto treat severe pain. The Kenyan narcotics law focuses on the illegal uses of morphineand other opioids and makes illicit possession punishable by life imprisonmentand a heavy fine. There are exceptions for medical use, but no detailedguidelines about lawful possession by patients and health care workers, andsome doctors and nurses perceive the current legislation to prohibit morphine. Kenya is also one of the fewcountries worldwide to levy an import tax on morphine powder.Consequently,the medicine is unavailable at the vast majority of public hospitals in Kenya,in contravention of the country’s international legal obligations. Only seven of approximately two hundredand fifty public hospitals have palliative care services and oral morphine for moderateto severe chronic pain.Medicines to treat neuropathic pain, caused by damaged nerves andcommon in AIDS and cancer patients, are also largely unavailable.In Kenya,morphine is widelyviewed not as an essential, low-cost tool to alleviate pain, but as dangerous. Healthcare professionals are rarely trained to treat pain and are often unaware thatmorphine can dramatically improve a sick child’s well-being. Untilrecently, medical and nursing schools taught that morphine must only beadministered to the terminally ill, because of unwarranted fear that it wouldcause addiction, and hospitals often only offer the drug when curativetreatment has failed. Health workers do not routinely assess or effectivelytreat pain in children. Even at the seven public hospitals where morphine isavailable, doctors and nurses are sometimes reluctant to give it to a child, because they believe it amounts to giving up on the fight to save thechild’s life, and because unwarranted fears of addiction remain.Healthworkers rarely communicate effectively with sick children and their familiesabout the illness. They often fail to inform parents—and children who areold enough to understand—of the child’s diagnosis, share basicfacts regarding treatment, or make the prognosis clear. They rarely talk with childrenor their parents about their concerns and fears.Althoughthe majority of critically ill children in Kenya are cared for at home, the healthsystem does little to support home-based palliative care. Parents are oftenunaware of the existence of strong pain medicines and therefore do not seekthem for their children. The prevalence of HIV means that many sick childrenare orphans living with relatives or other caregivers, making them especiallyvulnerable. While most caregivers do their best to care for sick children, somemistreat and neglect them; the weak and overburdened child protection systemoften fails to reach these children.Thefew focused palliative care services available in Kenya mostly serve adults. Around15 private hospices provide important palliative care services, including somehome-based care, but they serve mainly adults with terminal cancer. Someparents perceive hospices as places for adults dying of terminal disease, andare understandably reluctant to expose children to that environment. Withoutefforts to make hospices child-friendly environments—for example, bytraining staff to communicate well with children and providing toys and spacesfor play—this situation is likely to remain unchanged.Systemic problems in the health care system createconditions that stymie sick children in need of pain treatment. Many sick children lack accessto health care adequate to get a basic diagnosis or curative treatment, muchless palliative care. Local dispensaries and health centers are unable todiagnose or treat many conditions, and frequently refer children to district,provincial, and national hospitals—but rarely provide transportation tofamilies that cannot afford the travel costs. This means that health care oftenstops before it really begins. Many children lack a name for what pains them orany hope of finding a way out of their distress.Kenya has the highestper capita income in East Africa and is sometimes described as the economicpowerhouse of the region. Yet its child healthindicators are poor. Over the last twodecades, Kenya’s under-five mortality rate rose from 105 to 128 deathsper 1,000 live births, while other, poorer, East African countries such asUganda, Rwanda, and Ethiopia managed to reduce child mortality. Despitegovernment efforts to subsidize child health, many children cannot accessmedical care because of prohibitive costs. In some cases, public hospitals have refused todischarge children when their families cannot pay hospital bills, and have detainedthem for months.Underinternational law, the Kenyan government must progressively realize the rightto the highest attainable standard of health. It is also obliged to fulfillcertain minimum core obligations, including the non-discriminatory provision of access to healthfacilities, goods, and services; the provision of child health care; and the provision of drugs such asmorphine that WHO classifies as essential medicines. The government must protectchildren from neglect, and from cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment, which caninclude unreasonable denial of pain treatment. International law alsoemphasizes the essential role of international cooperation to fullyrealize the right to health.Palliative care can be provided ata relatively low cost; for example, morphine is cheap to produce. WHO has recommended that governments developnational policies on palliative care, integrate palliative care into healthservices, ensure the availability of opioid pain medicines, and educate healthprofessionals and the public about palliative care. For resource-poor countries,WHO has emphasized the importance of community-based palliative care, which canbe provided at relatively low cost.Some healthprofessionals and health planners in Kenya fear that increased support forpalliative care would diminish support for curative treatment. But palliativeand curative treatment should go hand in hand. In recent years, the Kenyangovernment and donors have focused on scaling up anti-retroviral treatment(ART) for HIV, and they have made impressive progress. But they have failed to addressthe continued suffering of tens of thousands of children who still lack accessto anti-retroviral drugs; who lack food to eat to help tolerate the drugs; orwho develop resistance to the drugs. And many children, including those on ART,experience serious pain and other distressing symptoms, and are in need ofpalliative care.Accessto pain treatment and palliative care is poor in many African countries. Somehave no palliative care services at all. Uganda, a neighbor of Kenya, is anotable exception. It has made progress in improving the availability ofpalliative care. New policy and training has resulted in significantly improvedaccess to palliative care services, including for children treated at home. Inworking towards improved palliative care services, the Kenyan government couldlearn from the Ugandan experience and adapt it to the Kenyan situation.Key RecommendationsTo The Government of KenyaUrgently increase the availability ofdrugs for moderate to severe pain, in particular by making morphine tablets and morphine powder for oral solutionavailable at all district, provincial, and national hospitals, inaccordance with the Kenya National Drug Policy and Kenya Essential DrugsList. The Kenya Medical Supplies Agency (KEMSA) should centrally procure oral morphine.Create palliative care units withexpertise in children’s palliative care in district, provincial, andnational hospitals, and raise awareness about the existence of theseservices.Roll out a program of support for home-basedpalliative care with expertise in children’s palliative care throughexisting hospices and palliative care units or newly established services.Develop a policy and action plan onpalliative care, with a specific focus on the needs of children.Ensure that the National CancerControl and Prevention Bill and Strategy contain strong provisionsaddressing pain treatment and palliative care, including for children.Make pain treatment and palliativecare an integral part of the HIV/AIDS response.Improve training for health workers onpain management and palliative care, including for children.Remove the tax on morphine powder.To Health DonorsEnsure that allpatients using donor-funded clinical services for life-limiting illnesscan access palliative care, either by providing it as part of the service,or by strengthening hospice and public palliative care services andfacilitating access to them.Key Terms in Palliative Care andPain TreatmentPalliative care:Health care that aims to improve the quality of life ofpeople facing life-limiting illness, through pain and symptom relief, andthrough psychosocial support for patients and their families. Palliative carecan be delivered in parallel with curative treatment, but its purpose is tocare, not to cure.Life-limiting illness: Abroad range of conditions in which painful or distressing symptoms occur;although there may also be periods of healthy activity, there is usually atleast a possibility of premature death.Psychosocial support: A broad range of services such as those provided by psychologists,counselors and social workers. Many kinds of psychosocial support, such asfacilitating play for hospitalized children, can be performed by volunteers.Hospice: Aspecialist palliative care facility. Some hospices are residential facilities,but in Kenya, many hospices do not have inpatients. Instead, staff providepalliative care for outpatients and visit patients in the hospital or theirhomes.Community-based palliative care: Also called home-based palliative care. Care performed by one ormore health workers visiting the patient at home. Basic community-basedpalliative care services can be performed by appropriately trained communityhealth workers, but other aspects of palliative care, such as diagnosis andopioid prescribing, can only be performed by a doctor or nurse.Chronic pain: As used in this report, pain that occurs over weeks, months, oryears, rather than a few hours or a few days. Because of its duration, moderateto severe chronic pain should be treated with oral opioids, rather thanrepeated injections, especially for children and people who are emaciated bydiseases such as cancer and HIV/AIDS.Neuropathic pain: Pain caused by damaged or dysfunctional nerves. This type of pain isa common symptom of HIV and cancer. Some patients with neuropathic pain do notreceive adequate relief from opioids alone and need other specializedmedicines.Opioid: Drugsderived from the opium poppy and similar synthetic drugs.  All strong painmedicines, including morphine and pethidine, are opioids. Weakeropioids include codeine, tramadol, and dihydrocodeiene (known in Kenya as DF-118).Morphine: Astrong opioid medicine, the gold standard for treatment of moderate to severepain. Morphine is considered an essential medicine by the World HealthOrganization in its injectable, tablet, and oral solution formulations. Oralsolution mixed from morphine powder is the cheapest formulation.Basic pain medicines: Non-opioid pain medicines suitable for mild pain. These include paracetamol (also known as acetaminophen), aspirin, diclofenac, and ibuprofen (known in Kenya as Brufen).Gabapentin: Amedicine originally developed to treat epilepsy, now also used to treatneuropathic pain.Amitriptyline: A medicine originally developed as an antidepressant, now also usedto treat neuropathic pain.Opioid dependence: Physical dependence experienced by a patient treated with opioidsover time, such that withdrawal symptoms occur if the opioid is stoppedabruptly. Physical dependence is treated by gradually reducing the opioid dose.It is distinct from addiction, a pattern of behaviors including compulsive useof drugs despite harm, which is uncommon in patients receiving opioid paintreatment.MethodologyField research for this report wascarried out in February and March 2010 in Nairobi, including the Kibera andMathare slums, and in Nyanza province, in the Bondo district and Kisumu. Thisresearch followed earlier field research and advocacy on children’saccess to HIV treatment in Kenya, based on over 150 interviews between August2007 and August 2008, published in A Question of Life of Death: TreatmentAccess for Children Living With HIV in Kenya, December 2008.In this report,the word “child” refers to anyone under the age of 18.”[1]For this research, we interviewed the parents or guardians of 30children, of whom 17 were girls and 13 wereboys.[2] Nineteen of these children were present during theinterviews. Four girls and two boys actively participated in interviews, in thepresence of a parent. Eight of the children were in the care of a guardian whowas not their parent, in most cases a relative. In addition, we interviewed twoyoung women, aged 18 and 20, about events that occurred when they werechildren, in one case with a parent. Two interviews were with parents ofchildren who had died.Eleven of the children concernedhad a confirmed diagnosis of cancer, and ten were confirmed to be HIV positive.Other children had burns, tuberculosis, malaria, and sickle cell anemia. Inseveral cases the child’s family members were not able to say preciselywhat their child’s illness was, either because no diagnosis had been made,the diagnosis had not been communicated to the family, or the family had notunderstood the diagnosis.In addition, we carried out 50interviews with health care workers, including 15 doctors, 18 nurses, 14community health workers, a clinical officer, a nutritionist, and a hospiceadministrator. These interviews concerned barriers to pain treatment andpalliative care generally, but the health care workers also related cases ofanother 31 children that they had cared for, including 14 who had died. Ten ofthese children had been diagnosed with cancer and seventeen were confirmed HIVpositive. Some children had also suffered tuberculosis, malaria andpneumonia.In the Kenyan government, weinterviewed representatives of the Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation,the Ministry of Medical Services, the Ministry for Gender and Children Affairs,the Pharmacy and Poisons Board, the Medical Practitioners and Dentists Board,the Kenyan Medical Research Institute, and district health authorities. We alsointerviewed several Kenyan and international experts on pediatric medicine,palliative care and opioid availability, as well as staff of Kenyan andinternational nongovernmental organizations working on health and child rights,several church-run orphanages and community health projects, the CDC, andWHO.Carrying out interviews withchildren suffering from life-limiting illness, and their families, poses anumber of methodological and ethical challenges.[3] In situations where children were too ill to beinterviewed or were suffering pain, we deliberately refrained from conducting theinterview. In some cases, we interviewed parents or guardians instead.Children who have been traumatizedby experiences of childhood illness, including untreated pain and otherdistressing symptoms, may be susceptible to re-traumatization and heightenedstress when questioned by an unknown person.[4] For each child interviewed, we explained our work inage-appropriate terms. Before each interview we informed potential participantsof the interview’s purpose and the kinds of issues that would be covered,and asked whether they wanted to participate. We informed participants thatthey could discontinue the interview at any time or decline to answer anyspecific questions, without consequence. We took great care to interviewchildren and their families in a friendly and sensitive manner, and ensuredthat the interview took place in a location where the interviewee’sprivacy was protected.In order to protect the identitiesof the children interviewed, we have replaced all their names in this reportwith pseudonyms. Where information about the health status, including HIVstatus, of children or their family members was disclosed during interviews,this was kept strictly confidential.In order to avoid falseexpectations of support or financial assistance,[5] we made clear at the start of each interview that we were notable to provide direct individual support to those who spoke with us. Instead,when we encountered situations where people were in acute need of medicaltreatment, we tried to refer them to local NGOs or other actors who couldassist them.Interviews with health careworkers and officials were conducted in English. Interviews with children andtheir families were carried out in English, Dholuo, Swahili, and Kikuyu. Wheretranslation was necessary, it was generally provided by a health care workerknown to the interviewee or by a translator with experience working with peoplewith life-limiting illness.I. BackgroundThe Importance of Palliative Care and Pain TreatmentPalliative care aims to improvethe quality of life of people who face life-limiting illness, through pain andsymptom relief, and through psychosocial support for patients and their families.[6] Its purpose is to provide care, not to cure.While palliative care is oftenmistakenly seen as limited to end-of-life care, the World Health Organization(WHO) recommends that palliative care be available to all patients who havelife-limiting illnesses, from the moment they are diagnosed. Life-limitingillnesses include a broad range of conditions that have painful or distressingsymptoms; although there may be periods of healthy activity, there is usuallyat least a possibility of premature death.[7] When provided alongside curative treatment, palliativecare not only improves the quality of life of patients and their families butcan also improve the outcome of the treatment, for example, by improving patients’adherence to medication.[8]Children’s palliative carehas been defined by WHO as “the active total care of the child’sbody, mind and spirit,” as well as support for the family.[9] Children’s palliative care includes efforts toassess and treat pain; the provision of medicines in appropriate formulationsfor children; support for the child through play, education, counseling andother methods; child-appropriate communication about the illness; andcommunication with, and support for, the family.[10] It should also address child protection, as some severelyill children are vulnerable to exploitation, abuse, and neglect.[11] Hence, palliative care for children requires pediatricexpertise, including on child-specific symptoms and diseases, as well asexpertise in child psychology and child protection.Palliative care is very important forchildren with life-limiting illness. For children, serious illness, pain,hospitalization, and invasive medical procedures are often profoundlydisorienting and traumatizing and can cause great suffering. For parents andcaregivers, watching a child suffer from symptoms and medical procedures,balancing the needs of the sick child with those of other children, and facing theprospect of the child’s potential death, cause great distress. Pediatricpalliative care can help both children and parents navigate these difficultcircumstances by relieving distressing physical symptoms, minimizing pain causedby medical procedures, and enhancing communication among health care workers,children and parents about the child’s illness and prognosis.WHO recognizes palliative care asan integral part of health care that should be available to those who need it.[12] It has urged countries with limited resources to makepalliative care services available because “the majority of patientspresenting with advanced disease and urgently in need of symptom control mustsuffer without relief.”[13]When the majority of thepopulation cannot access adequate health care, as in many parts of Africa, manyhealth professionals and policy makers are more concerned with access tocurative treatment than palliative care. Palliative care providers have evenbeen accused of making people “comfortable with dying.”[14] Yet palliative care is fundamentally a responseto suffering. Where so many children sufferpain and are threatened with death, effortsto scale up curative treatment need to go hand in hand with efforts to improveaccess to palliative care.[15]One key objective of palliativecare is to offer treatment for pain.[16] Chronic pain is a common symptom of cancer and HIV/AIDS,as well as many other health conditions. Studies have shown that 60 to 90percent of patients with advanced cancer experience moderate to severe pain,and that up to 80 percent of HIV patients suffer severe pain in the last phaseof illness.[17] There is a widespread but incorrect perception that, sinceanti-retroviral therapy (ART) is now more widely available, palliative careshould no longer be a priority in the HIV/AIDS response. But most patientsworldwide who need ART still do not receive it, and patients who do receive ARToften continue to experience pain, including severe pain caused bydysfunctional or damaged nerves (neuropathic pain). Simultaneous delivery ofpalliative care and ART can also improve treatment adherence.[18]Moderate to severe pain has aprofound impact on quality of life. It can lead to reduced mobility andconsequent loss of strength; compromise the immune system; and interfere with aperson’s ability to eat, concentrate, sleep, or interact with others.People who live with chronic pain are also more likely to suffer fromdepression or anxiety.[19] The physical effect of chronic pain and the psychologicalstrain it causes can influence the course of a disease; severe pain canactually lead to death.[20]Most pain can be treatedeffectively with inexpensive and safe medicines. The standard tool for treatingpain is WHO’s Pain Ladder.[21] The ladder recommends the use of increasingly potent pain killers as pain becomesmore severe, from basic pain medicines (suchas acetaminophen, aspirin, or ibuprofen) to strong opioids like morphine.While morphine can either beinjected or taken orally, oral morphine is preferable for treatment of chronicpain, particularly for children, who often fear injections. Injectable and oralmorphine are both included in the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines, whichitemizes the drugs that should be available to all those who need them, and theWHO List of Essential Medicines for Children.[22] WHO is currently in the process of developing treatmentguidelines on pain related to cancer, HIV, and other diseases for children.[23]Due to their potential for abuse,morphine and other opioids are controlled medicines. This means that theirdistribution and dispensing is strictly regulated at international and nationallevels. Nevertheless, the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, theinternational treaty that governs drug control, states that “the medicaluse of narcotic drugs continues to be indispensable for the relief of pain andsuffering” and that “adequate provision must be made to ensure theavailability of narcotic drugs for such purposes.”[24]Palliative Care for Children in AfricaSub-Saharan Africa has by far theworld’s highest rate of child mortality—half of all deaths ofchildren under the age of five occur there. Close to one in seven children diebefore their fifth birthday, which amounted to 4.4 million deaths among theregion’s 135 million children younger than five in 2008. According to theUnited Nations, many countries in the region have made “little or noprogress at all” towards Millennium Development Goal 4, which aims toreduce by two-thirds the mortality of children under the age of five.[25]HIV is one of the main causes ofdeath in Sub-Saharan Africa. Although more children with HIV are now survivingdue to the roll-out of ART, 230,000 children died of HIV in Sub-Saharan Africain 2008.[26] In that year, WHO found that HIV was the leading cause ofdeath among children below the age of five in six countries of Sub-SaharanAfrica.[27]Cancer is on the rise inSub-Saharan Africa. Experts estimate that between 2000 and 2020, the number ofpeople diagnosed with cancer annually in the region will increase by onemillion.[28] There are no conclusive studies explaining the increase incancer in Sub-Saharan Africa, although it is commonly explained by changes inlifestyle and the high HIV prevalence, leading to some HIV-related cancers. Despitethe rise in cancer, Africa has few and weak cancer care services. Reputableoncologists have estimated that as few as 5 percent of childhood cancers inAfrica are cured, compared with nearly 80 percent in the developed world.[29]Despite the urgent need,palliative care is rarely available in Africa. Many African countries have nopublic palliative care services and no access to morphine at all, includingSenegal, Mali, Niger, Chad, Sudan, and Angola. Other countries offer palliativecare services in a few specialist centers that are inaccessible for themajority of patients. South Africa, Zimbabwe, and Uganda have more developedpalliative care services, but even these reach only a fraction of the peoplewho need them.[30]Children’s palliative careis particularly weak in Africa, despite the enormous need. An evaluation of oneof the few children’s palliative care services—inUganda—found that “one of the biggest barriers to goodchildren’s palliative care is failure to recognize that a child is inneed of it.”[31] Consequently, when a specialist children’spalliative care service was established by a hospice in Uganda, the number ofchildren referred and treated with chemotherapy and morphine rose sharply.[32]TheKenyan ContextKenya’schallenges in providing pain treatment and palliative care to childrenrepresent those of many African countries: high child morbidity and mortality,and poor availability and accessibility of health services.Child Mortality and Morbidity in KenyaAlthough Kenya has the highest per capita income in East Africa andis sometimes described as the economic powerhouse of the region, its indicatorsfor child health are poor.[33] Over the last two decades, Kenya’sunder-five mortality rate actually rose, from 105 to 128 children who will diebefore their 5th birthday for every 1,000 live births.[34] Other poorer East African countries such asUganda, Rwanda, and Ethiopia have managed to reduce child mortality during thesame period—in the case of Rwanda and Ethiopia, below the child mortalityrate of Kenya.[35]There are an estimated140,000 to 170,000 children under the age of 15 living with HIV in Kenya.[36] Around 60,000 children need ART, but only abouthalf of them are receiving this life-saving treatment. An estimated 15,000 babiesare infected through mother-to-child transmission each year.[37]As in other parts ofAfrica, cancer is believed to be on the rise in Kenya.[38]Although Kenya does not have a cancer registry, the government estimates thatthere are 80,000 cases of cancer (adults and children) per year.[39] According to WHO, an estimated 48,000 peopledie of cancer each year in Kenya.[40] Common cancers in children include cancer ofthe eye, Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, leukemia and Burkitt’s lymphoma, a cancer of the lymphatic systemthat often leads to tumor growth in the jaw area.[41]II. Living with Pain: Children’s Suffering Due to Lack ofPalliative CareThe dearth of pediatric palliativecare services in Kenya condemns many children to great suffering. In interviews with Human Rights Watch, children,their parents, and health workers told of experiences of untreated pain andlack of psychosocial support.Patrick O., a 10-year-oldboy from a rural area of Nyanza province, had sickle cell anemia, a blooddisorder that includes episodes of severe pain and can be life-threatening. He toldHuman Rights Watch:The pain feels as if it comesfrom the bones. Sometimes it burns. Sometimes it aches.… When it wasreally bad, I could not go to school or even walk… At night, sleeping isnot good because I have a backache. Sometimes one leg hurts and I cannot turn,so I need assistance … sometimes I wake up in pain…. I feel badwhen other children are learning [in school] and I am here.[42]Patrick’smother said she sometimes buys paracetamol or ibuprofen for him, but Patricksaid that these “provide no relief at all.” He once receivedtreatment at Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital, more than 100 miles away, butwas unable to go back because of transportation costs.Seven-year-old Elena C.was being treated for tuberculosis when Human Rights Watch visited her in the Mathareslum in Nairobi. Doctors told her parents to purchase over-the-counter painmedicines for her, but they said they could not afford them. Elena’sfather said that she suffers from joint pain,sores on her head, and a swollen jaw. He said that she sometimes cannot standor walk, and “she cries all the time.”[43]Gerard K. from Kiberaslum in Nairobi was five years old when he died. He was receiving ART, but diedfrom suspected pneumonia and other complications associated with HIV/AIDS, whilereceiving only weak, over-the-counter painkillers.Gerard’s mothersaid:He had severe pain sometimes,especially some abdominal pains… There were times that he would use thosepain killers paracetamol and Brufen [ibuprofen] and the pain would … justpersist … I could tell he was in a lot of pain because he was juststiffened and you could see he was really struggling because there were soundshe was making. So I could say that he died in pain.[44]The mother ofseven-year-old Nick M. from Kakamega in Western province described how her sonsuffered with a misdiagnosis and then inadequate pain medication before he eventuallyreceived chemotherapy and pain treatment at Kenyatta National Hospital:He has Burkitt’s lymphomaof the belly. It started in 2008…. He received pain killers by the doctor[probably a clinical officer] at the health center. They did not help a lot. Itwas very painful; he used to cry a lot and could not sleep.... He sufferedbadly.[45]We met several childrenliving with chronic, painful diseases but who had never had a diagnosis ortreatment. They spent their days sitting at home, enduring needless pain. Onesuch child was four-year-old Jacob O. from Nyanza province. Jacob developed alarge swelling or tumor on his back when he was one, and has suffered painsince then. He was visibly uncomfortable during our interview, leaning in astiff posture on a chair but unable to sit. In the absence of any diagnosis ortreatment plan, his mother was treating him with a simple pain reliever:It is still bad now, oozing andhurting.… He cannot sit, only lie or stand, because sitting is toopainful. It sometimes affects his sleep. He sometimes cries through thenight.… He gets Panadol [paracetamol] to ease the pain…[46]Another such case was Rebecca A.from Nyanza province, who is now 20 years old. Rebecca has suffered from anundiagnosed condition causing pain on her left leg and upper side since the ageof two, according to her mother.[47] Her condition worsened when she was about 10. At the timeof our visit, her left leg was thick and swollen, and she could not walk morethan a few steps. Rebecca said:My leg is always very painful. Attimes I have a shooting pain through my leg and cannot stand up. Sometimes thepain is in the flesh, sometimes in the veins, sometimes right in the bone.Walking is very difficult. I can’t walk to the next home [about 20meters] or to the road [about 300 meters]. Going to the toilet it hard becausesometimes my leg is too heavy to walk there. The leg is better if I sit, buteven a short walk makes it worse. I can’t allow anyone to touch my leg.Sometimes the pain comes all the way up my side. It has been painful my entirelife. Sometimes the pain gives me difficulty breathing… Sometimes it isvery painful at night. It is painful to turn so I have to lie still.[48]Several palliative care doctorstold us of children’s suffering when health care workers fail to provideemotional support and communicate effectively. The head doctor at Nairobihospice explained that children naturally reach out for answers and support:They ask you questions:“Why am I not going to school and my peers are going to school?”“Why am I not being allowed to play with my friends and my friends areplaying out there?” “Why are you always taking me to the doctor andmy friend so-and-so and neighbor are not always going to thedoctor?”…. [Emotional support] is extremely important because theyalways ask, “Why is this happening to me?”[49]A palliative care activist anddoctor spoke of her experience of the lack of emotional support in a pediatriccancer ward:The nurses do not help the children cope with the fact thatanother child on the ward dies…. These children don’t want candy,when you come they throw up their arms to be hugged, they want a cuddle.[50]Several doctors and nursesstated that health care workers lack training in effective communication andways of providing emotional support to children with life-limiting illness.They also said that overworked doctors and nurses focus on medical proceduresand lack the time to invest in providing emotional support to children.[51]The Positive Effect of Palliative Care on Children’s LivesSeveral interviewees explainedhow palliative care can have a transformative impact on a child’s qualityof life. The doctor atNairobi Hospice told Human Rights Watch about Fredrick B., a seven-year-old boy,who seemed to improve dramatically when he received morphine:He was not on pain medication forsome time … When he came, we started him on pain killers. After hestarted on morphine, he requested his books to start writing. He had not askedfor his books for two months, but at this time he requested for his books. Hestarted demanding a PlayStation from the palliative care team so that he couldplay on the TV. Then he also requested his father. He requested his father toallow his friends to come, so that they can play.[52]Christine L., now 18years old, was diagnosed with breast cancer when she was 17. She told us how hermobility and capacities improved after she entered Kenyatta National Hospitaland received morphine for her pain:Before I came [here], Icouldn’t eat or breathe well [because of the pain]. Now that I have beengiven medicine, I can eat and breathe. I couldn’t sit down, but now Ican. I had pain for more than a month. I told the doctor and nurses [at the Kijabemission hospital] that I hadpain. It took too long to get pain treatment in Kijabe. Here I got itimmediately and started feeling well again.[53]III. Barriers to Pain Treatment and Palliative Care for Children inKenyaIn Kenya, a sick child encounters almostinsurmountable obstacles to receiving pain treatment and other palliative care.There is no overarching governmentpolicy on palliative care, and few palliative care services. Existing servicesare poorly integrated into the public health system and rarely geared towardsthe needs of children. Oralmorphine, the medicine of choice for the treatment of severe chronic pain, is largelyunavailable in Kenya’s public hospitals. Even when the drugs areavailable, health workers refrain from using them because they lack guidance on the medicinal use of opioids and perceivemorphine as dangerous. At Kenya’s medical and nursing schools, doctors and nurses receivelittle training on palliative care and pain treatment. As a result, healthworkers lack skills in assessing and treating pain, and communicatingappropriately with children and their families about the child’s illness.Children’scaregivers often do not know about existing palliative care services and mayconsider pain to be inevitable. As a result, they may neglect to take childrenfor medical care. The Kenyan government has done little to inform the publicabout pain treatment and palliative care, or to protect vulnerable children inneed of medical care. Furthermore, the government has failed generally to make healthcare for children more affordable and accessible, making palliative careonly one part of a health system that shuts out large numbers of sick children.Under international law,Kenya has an obligation to progressively realize the right to the highest attainable standard of health.[54] This includes several core obligations relevantto palliative care for children. States must provide essential drugs as definedby WHO, ensure access to child health care,and provide training for health personnel.[55]WHOhas explicitly stated that all countries, even poor ones, should allocateresources to palliative care:The fundamental responsibility of the health profession toease the suffering of patients cannot be fulfilled unless palliative care haspriority status within public health and disease control programmes; it is notan optional extra. In countries with limited resources, it is not logical toprovide extremely expensive therapies that may benefit only a few patients,while the majority of patients presenting with advanced disease and urgently inneed of symptom control must suffer without relief.[56]WHO has urged countries to adopt nationalpolicies that support pain treatment and palliative care; enact educationalprograms for health care personnel and the public; and ensure the availabilityof palliative care medicines, including morphine. It has noted that thesemeasures “cost very little but can have a significant effect.”[57] For countries with limited resources, like Kenya, WHO hasrecommended implementing palliative care services in the community, inpeople’s homes, and in medical institutions that deal with large numbersof patients in need.[58]Palliative Care and Pain Treatment on the MarginsLack of Palliative Care Services and Poor Integration intothe Health SystemKenyan public healthfacilities have very few palliative care services where health professionalsare trained to offer pain and symptom relief along with psychosocial support. Instead, privately funded hospices provide palliative care,functioning relatively separately from other parts of the health care system.The majority of hospice patients are adults with terminal cancer; however, thisis only a small fraction of cancer patients in need of hospice care. Adultssuffering from pain as a result of HIV and other diseases are rarely referredto palliative care services, and children even less often.[59]In an important step towardsintegrated palliative care, a few public hospitals have established palliativecare units in recent years.[60] These include the palliative care unit at thecountry’s largest national referral hospital, Kenyatta National Hospital (Nairobi), and palliative careunits at three provincial hospitals, Embu Provincial General Hospital, MachakosLevel 5 Hospital (both serving Eastern province), and Nakuru Provincial GeneralHospital (Rift Valley province). In addition, two district hospitals offerpalliative care for the districts they serve, Port Reitz District Hospital(Coast province) and Nanyuki District Hospital (Rift Valley province). A provincialhospital in Kakamega contains a hospice that is similar to a palliative careunit.[61] There are no palliativecare services at all in the north of the country. Overall, palliative careservices remain few and far between.Staff in palliative care unitsassess patients’ needs and provide pain treatment and other symptomrelief. Few counseling services are available, but doctors and nurses trainedin palliative care described efforts to address children’s psychosocialneeds, especially reuniting children with family members. Staff in palliativecare units also have the important role of educating fellow health workersabout the importance of palliative care. Palliative care units do not havepatients in their full-time care—they serve outpatients and also visitpatients in the wards—so they must work with other hospital staff to addresseach patient’s needs. This is not always easy, as palliative care units receivereferrals from a patient’s main doctors, and are expected to bedeferential to them. Staff of one palliative care unit found that doctors andnurses are as reluctant to refer patients to the palliative care unit as to ahospice becausethey consider such a referral a defeat in the face of a patient’sdisease.[62]The creation ofpalliative care services, and their integration into existing health services,is a key WHO recommendation to governments. Politicaland institutional commitments to palliative care are critical to ensuringfunctional delivery of services. Other recommended measures—such astraining—can only come to fruition if doctors and nurses work in healthfacilities where they are able to practice the skills they have learned.[63] Hospital leaders can create such an environment bydeveloping and regularly evaluating policies on pain management and palliativecare, with particular attention to children. Such policies should addresspractical issues such as assessing pain as part of routine patient assessment,pain treatment protocols, as well as staff training. In particular, hospitalsshould regularly assess whether children are receiving appropriate pain andsymptom management and psychosocial support.[64]Some private hospitals in Kenyainclude pain on the initial assessment form that nurses fill in when they firstencounter a new patient.[65] Small reforms like this can be an important part ofinstitutionalizing pain management.Lack of Services for Children’s Pain Treatment andPalliative CareThere is nospecialist palliative care service for children in Kenya’s public healthsystem. Even the private children’s hospital in Nairobi does not havesuch a service.[66] Two public hospitals provide limited palliativecare for children with cancer on their pediatric oncology wards.[67]Where palliative careservices exist in hospitals and privately-run hospices, they are geared towardsadults and rarely treat children. A 2007 survey found that a hospice in Eldoret(Rift Valley province) treated no children at all.[68]St. Catherine’s Hospice in Nyanzaprovince was established to care for children with cancer, but in several yearsof operation, only a handful of children have been referred there, so most ofits patients are adults.[69]The fact that mostpalliative care facilities serve mostly adults probably contributes to lownumbers of referrals of children. One parentdescribed the local hospice as “not child-friendly,” even thoughthe hospice provides palliative care through outpatient visits and home-basedcare.[70] Doctors arealso often reluctant to refer children to palliative care services, as theybelieve that referring a child to a hospiceamounts to “giving up on” the child.[71]Underinternational law, governments are obligated to take measures to ensure theavailability of child health care. WHO has specifically recommended nationalcancer pain relief programs for children.[72]Lack of Community-Based Pain Treatment and Palliative CareHome-basedcareWhen parents look aftera very sick child, they often—although not always—prefer to havethe child at home.[73] But the health care system does not providesupport for adequate pain treatment and palliative care in the home, in contrastto home-based care for people living with HIV, which is relatively welldeveloped.Inthe last two decades, home-based care provided by community health workers, whoare lay volunteers, has become the most common form of care for people livingwith HIV in Kenya.[74] The community health workers are attached toNGOs, churches, or government health centers working on HIV. If they areconnected to a public health facility, they are trained and supervised by acommunity health extension worker who is a paid staff member.[75] Community health workers raise awareness aboutHIV prevention and other health issues. They regularly visit HIV-positivepatients, monitor their adherence to treatment, give referrals to healthfacilities, and provide basic health advice and physical care, such as helpwith washing and dressing wounds. Community health workers play a vital role inlinking a sick child and the health system. For example, they frequentlyconvince parents or guardians to take the child to a health facility for HIVtesting, treatment, or other medical care.[76]Community healthworkers have uneven levels of training and access to resources to providehome-based care. Some have basic care kits, often provided by health donors,consisting of such items as bandages, antiseptic, and basic pain medicines.Unfortunately, others have no supplies at all. In rural areas, community healthworkers are not able to reach many patients because they lack transportation,and could help many more people if they were equipped with bicycles. Communityhealth workers are also more effective if they have strong links with doctorsand nurses. For example, if they can bring a nurse to visit a patient in needof more expert attention, or refer a patient to a doctor who they know will waivefees for a destitute patient.A minority of communityhealth workers has training in palliative care, but this tends to focus on HIV,and the basic symptom relief and counseling that non-professionals can provide.There is lesshome-based care for patients suffering from diseases other than HIV. Forexample, parents looking after children with cancer at home rarely get anysupport.[77] A few private hospices, such as the Nairobi andKisumu hospices, provide home-based palliative care, but these can reach only asmall fraction of patients in need, and are not focused on children.[78]Ann Wanjiru, the headof a community-based group providing home-based care in a Nairobi slum,explained how the absence of palliative care services made it very difficult tocare for child patients at home:It is very frustrating becauseonce you find that a child is crying, [and] you have already given him somemedicine like aspirin and still a child cries, you feel so bad. So you try toput some wet clothes on the body of the child so their temperature can go down,but it is really very painful for us.[79]Given the large numberof children with serious illness in Kenya and the general preference of manyparents for care at home, it is essential to improve and support home-basedcare, and shift some palliative care tasks to community health workers.WHO has urged countries withlimited resources, such as Kenya, to develop community-based palliative careservices:In low-resource settings it is important to ensure that minimumstandardsfor pain relief and palliative care are progressivelyadopted at all levels of care in targeted areas, and that there is highcoverage of patients through services provided mainly by home-based care.Home-based care is generally the best way of achieving good quality care andcoverage in countries with strong family support and poor healthinfrastructure.[80]As the example of HIV has shown,community health workers can play a positive role in ensuring that children accesstreatment. This could be extended to pain treatment and palliative care, sothat community workers could help child patients get a diagnosis and seek theright treatment, as well as provide practical support and treat symptoms, offerpsychosocial support, and create links with community support groups, such asHIV support groups.Community healthworkers are usually unpaid, yet many work dozens of hours each week as acompassionate response to the enormous need for basic health care in theircommunities.  In some programs, retention is poor. Modest compensationwould improve retention, ensuring that patients benefit from investments incommunity health worker training programs.Orphanage-Based CareThere are numerousorphanages in Kenya, many of which care for children living with HIV.[81] Children in these orphanages sometimes sufferfrom severe HIV-related or treatment-related pain. Some die when they becomeresistant to ART. Others die because they are put on treatment too late or havenot adhered to treatment.There is hardly anysupport from the public health system for care in orphanages. While some largerorphanages have trained health workers on staff, or enjoy regular visits from doctors,many others do not.[82]At one orphanage, astaff member remembered the case of Henry K., who became resistant to allanti-retroviral combinations available in Kenya and died at the age of 10. Hereceived morphine only during the last few days of his life, after sufferingsevere pain:He often had abdominal pain,headaches, constant vomiting, and sometimes diarrhea. He was prone torespiratory infections and so was periodically on antibiotics…. He alsohad depression because he knew he was going to die. We tried to control hispain with Brufen [ibuprofen] and paracetamol…. In his last week, he hadhigh blood pressure, was on an IV [intravenous] drip, couldn’t eat, andhad generalized pain.… One night, the cardiologist stayed with him forthree hours. The next day, Dr. [name withheld] prescribed morphine for him.[83]Staff at the sameorphanage also looked after an 18-year-old girl who developed resistance to ARTand died. Among other things, she suffered from rashes, headaches, stomachpain, and bleeding from her mouth and nose. She was given only basic painmedicines until very shortly before her death, when a doctor prescribedmorphine for her.[84]Absence of a Government Policy on Palliative CareAlthough WHO has calledon countries to establish a national policy and program for pain relief andpalliative care, Kenya has no such policy orstrategy.[85] The national health plansof the Ministry of Medical Services and the Ministry of Public Health andSanitation for 2008 to 2012 include specific targets for other key issues, suchas HIV, tuberculosis, and malaria prevention and treatment, access to cleanwater and sanitation, and maternal and reproductive health, but do not mentionpalliative care or pain treatment.[86]Kenya’s newly adoptedNational HIV/Aids Strategic Plan 2009/10-2012/13 makes just one brief referenceto palliative care and no mention of pain, even though the Kenya Hospices andPalliative Care Association (KEHPCA) provided extensive input on the topic.[87] It is particularly disappointing that the government anddonors have failed to address the issue of pain treatment and palliative carein the context of the HIV response, for which many policies and guidelines havebeen developed.More positively, the government iscurrently preparing a Cancer Prevention and Control Bill, and a cancer controlstrategy, with the overall goal to “improve treatment, pain relief andpalliative care of people affected by cancer.”[88] The current draft bill, which establishes a NationalCancer Prevention and Control Institute, also includes palliative care asintegral part of cancer care.[89]Given the general absence ofpolicy guidance on palliative care from the government, it is not surprisingthat Kenya lacks a policy or strategy on pediatric palliative care, even in policy documents onchild health care. One government survey on child health care does not includepain assessment in its description of a complete physical examination of a sickchild.[90]Lack of Availability of Pain DrugsThe poor availability of paintreatment in Kenya’s health facilities is reflected in thecountry’s overall consumption of opioid medicines, which governmentsreport annually to the International Narcotics Control Board (INCB), a body charged with monitoring theimplementation of UN drug conventions.[91] Between 2004 and 2008, the last year for which figures werepublished, Kenya used an average of 8.6 kg of morphine annually.[92] This is sufficient to adequately treat moderate to severepain in approximately 1,500 adult patients with terminal cancer or HIV/AIDS,less than 2 percent of those estimated to require such treatment in Kenya.[93] According to the INCB, in 2008, Uganda, Kenya’s farpoorer neighbor, used twice as much morphine per person as Kenya; South Africa,18 times more; and Canada, 240 times more.[94]Our research has identified anumber of key barriers to the availability of essential palliative caremedicines, including a failure to implement the current medicines policy; fearsamong health care providers about prescribing opioid medicines; the lack ofcentral procurement of morphine; and the drug’s inflated cost.The UN Committee onEconomic, Social and Cultural Rights has defined governments’ coreobligations under the right to health in the International Covenant onEconomic, Social and Cultural Rights to include the provision of essentialmedicines, as defined by WHO.[95] These include oral and injectable morphine andcodeine for pain treatment in adults and children.[96] WHO stresses that governments must explore ways for essential drugs to be made available atthe lowest possible cost, and createlaws and policies to support opioid drug availability for pain relief andpalliative care.[97] Kenya has failed to meetthese international legal obligations regarding essential pain medicines.Poor Availability of Morphine and Other OpioidsKenya has approximatelytwo hundred and fifty public hospitals, but only seven of them offer treatmentwith oral morphine for severe chronic pain. These are Kenyatta NationalHospital (Nairobi), Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital, Nakuru ProvincialGeneral Hospital (both Rift Valley province), Embu Provincial General Hospital(Eastern province), New Nyanza Provincial General Hospital (Nyanza province),Kakamega Provincial General Hospital (Western province), and Nanyuki DistrictHospital (serving one district in Rift Valley province).[98]Some of these hospitals have oralmorphine because they are near a hospice that supplies it to them.Injectable morphine isslightly more widely available. All provincial hospitals have injectable morphine for acute paintreatment—for example, for accident trauma or after operations—andsome district hospitals stock it for the same purpose.[99] But injectable morphine is farless suitable for the treatment of chronic pain because it requires severalinjections a day, which is difficult for children and patients who areemaciated by cancer or HIV/AIDS.Nationaland provincial hospitals also generally stock dihydrocodeine, a weak opioid,but it is generally not available in district hospitals.[100]In our interviews, parentsrepeatedly told us that they had visited district hospitals with their childrenbut had not received adequate treatment for the children’s pain. Such insufficient treatment of severe pain inchildren occurred at district hospitals in Kisii, Rachuonyo, Bondo, Homa Bay(Nyanza province), Busia (Western province), Naivasha (Rift Valley province),Karatina (Central province), and Nairobi (Mbagathi district hospital).[101] For example, the sisterof 16-year-old Judith A., who has cancer and is from Kisii in Nyanza province,told us:The problems started in June2009…. She used to be in pain. She used to cry. She had a lot of pain inthe mouth, so she could not eat. When the pain got worse, some growth startedappearing. She was in form 3 [third year of secondary school]. After the summershe did not go back to school. When the growth started, we went to see a doctorat the district hospital in Kisii. He said he cannot handle the case andreferred her to Kenyatta National Hospital. [In Kisii district hospital], shewas given pain medication, paracetamol. It did not help very much, she wasstill in pain.[102]A palliative care nurse atKenyatta National Hospital told us about Kevin N., a 12-year-old boy withcancer (rhabdomyosarcoma) who had come to the Karatina district hospital with“unbearable pain” in late 2009. The hospital did not havemedications strong enough to treat his pain. To get treatment, he traveled 160kilometers to Nairobi. Within 24 hours of arriving at Kenyatta National Hospital,doctors put him on morphine, which eased his pain.[103]A nurse in the Bondo District Hospitalexpressed her frustration at the lack of strong pain medications available toher, saying:We have no pethidine [an opioid],no DF-118 [dihydrocodeine] and no morphine…. We have children here withadvanced HIV, some are in severe pain. The pain management for children withadvanced HIV is not enough.[104]A community healthworker in the Mathare slum of Nairobi complained that strong pain drugs are notavailable in many hospitals:We wish … that hospitals are equipped with suchmedicines [morphine] so that whenever you find a child who is in great painwhen you go to the hospital … you don’t have to give your usualaspirin or paracetamol.[105]Even basic, non-opioidpain medicines are not as widely available as they should be. During our visitto the Bondo District Hospital, nurses complained that they had no diclofenac,a basic non-opioid pain reliever. One nurse showed us a child who had sufferedsevere burns the previous day and said: “Ifwe had diclofenac we would give it, but we don’t have it here.”[106]Thepoor availability of morphine and dihydrocodeine at district and provincialhospitals contradicts the goals of Kenya’s Essential Drugs List. In thecase of morphine, which is classified as an essential medicine by WHO, it isalso a violation of a core obligation under the right to the highest attainablestandard of health.Failure to Implement Kenya’s Medicines PolicyThe Kenya National DrugPolicy provides the framework for the procurement, distribution, and use ofmedicines in Kenya.[107] The policy aims to ensure the rational use andconstant availability of drugs at affordable prices.[108] At the heart of the Kenya National Drug Policyis the Kenya Essential Drugs List. It is the basis forpublic sector procurement, prescribing, and dispensing; medical education; andtraining programs for health professionals.[109]Kenya’s EssentialDrugs List includes the opioids morphine, dihydrocodeine, and pethidine,classifies them as essential for district, provincial, and national hospitals,and stipulates that morphine must be available as an oral solution, a tablet,and in its injectable form.[110] The list also includes several basic painmedicines, such as aspirin and paracetamol, which must be available tocommunity health workers.[111]Kenya is currently inthe process of revising its Essential Drugs List, which differs from the WHOModel List of Essential Medicines and the WHO List of Essential Medicines forChildren, which do not include dihydrocodeine and pethidine (see text box).[112]Essential drugs for severe, chronic painIn Kenya, both dihydrocodeine and pethidineare used more often than oral morphine to treat pain, even when oral morphineis available and would be a better alternative.WHOrecommends avoiding pethidine to treat chronic pain because it can becometoxic when used over long periods.[113] It is also weaker andshorter-acting than morphine.[114]Dihydrocodeine(known locally by the brand name DF-118) is very similar to codeine. Both aretoo weak to treat severe pain. Yet, even in hospitals where oral morphine isavailable, many more children are given dihydrocodeine than oral morphine.Recentlypublished textbooks and medical literature recommend against giving codeineor dihydrocodeine to children.[115] Due to genetic differences, manypatients find them ineffective, while for others, especially children, whohave small body masses, there is a risk of overdose. This risk can be avoidedby administering an equivalent dose of morphine instead.[116] WHO is currently developingtreatment guidelines for chronic pain in children and is considering whethercodeine should be removed from its pain relief ladder, and replaced withtramadol or a low dose of oral morphine.[117]Kenyashould monitor these developments and ensure that health care workers haveup-to-date education about the relative merits of these pain medicines. Kenyashould also ensure that oral morphine is always available as an alternativeto dihydrocodeine and pethidine for the treatment of children’s chronicpain.The Chilling Effect of Kenya’s Narcotics LawCurrent legislation on opioids inKenya is perceived by many health care workers as a prohibition on morphine,and has contributed to under-treatment of pain with opioids.Kenya’s 1994 Narcotic Drugsand Psychotropic Substances Control Act (Narcotic Drugs Act) regulatesmorphine and other opioid pain medicines. Illicit possession of thesesubstances is an offence punishable by life imprisonment and a fine of up toone million Kenyan shillings (KSh) (US$12,256).[118] The act contains exceptions for medical use, allowingmedical practitioners and pharmacists, as well patients, to handle, prescribeand possess the medicines. Hospices need to obtain a license to stock morphine,and all health facilities must account annually for how they used the morphinethat they purchased. The Act, however, provides no further guidance regardinglawful possession of controlled medicines by health care workers and theirpatients.[119] A law on “medicinal use of dangerous drugs,”envisioned by the 1994 Kenya National Drug Policy, has never been enacted.[120] The Narcotic Drugs Act stipulates that medicalpractitioners who are convicted under the Act may lose their medical licensesin addition to facing criminal penalties.[121]The harsh punishments contained inthe Act and the lack of clarity around appropriate prescription procedures meanthat many health workers in Kenya are afraid of using opioid medications, aproblem that the Kenyan Pharmacy and Poisons Board has recognized:[D]ue to the punitive nature ofthe 1994 Act, most providers have shied away from selling opioids.[122]Although no doctor interviewed byHuman Rights Watch was aware of any prosecutions under the Narcotic Drugs Act, severalsaid that misperceptions about drug control laws, fear of legal sanction, andcontinued reference to opioid pain medicines as “dangerous drugs”deter their prescription.[123] While doctors prescribing morphine recognized theimportance of careful procedures for preventing its diversion to illicit use,at least one doctor, who was not in the palliative care field, perceivedmorphine as a medicine that is “hard to get” as a result of theseregulations.[124]The INCB has stated that healthprofessionals should be able to prescribe and dispense opioids “withoutunnecessary fear of sanctions for unintended violations.”[125]The Commission onNarcotic Drugs, the body of states that are parties to the UN drug conventions,recently passed a resolution calling upon states to “identify theimpediments in their countries to the access and adequate use of opioidanalgesics for the treatment of pain and to take steps to improve theavailability of those narcotic drugs for medical purposes,” including by“educat[ing] regulators and health-care professionals.”[126]Procurement and Cost of Morphine as Access BarriersLack of CentralProcurement of Oral MorphineThe government has failed tocentrally procure oral morphine as it does other drugs. This makes access tothe drug more difficult.The Kenya Medical Supplies Agency(KEMSA) procures medicines for all public health facilities. As mentionedabove, under Kenya’s National Drug Policy and Essential Drugs List, oralmorphine should be available in all district, provincial, and nationalhospitals.[127] However, KEMSA does not currently procure oral morphinetablets or powder for oral solution.[128]Hospitals may independentlyprocure medicines from private suppliers, but this requires finding a supplier,negotiating terms, and paying for the medicines using funds raised from patientfees. It is not surprising that public hospitals—which are short-staffedand financially overextended—rarely choose to procure oral morphineprivately.[129]KEMSA maintains that it does notprovide oral morphine because there is little demand for it.[130] But a demand-driven approach is wrong for medicines thatare classified as essential. Essential drugs must always be available, and ifthere is little demand—as in Kenya—the government has an obligationfind out why this is the case and address the problem. The current systemcreates a vicious cycle: because KEMSA does not provide oral morphine,hospitals must purchase it out of their own funds and are therefore less likelyto use it; KEMSA interprets this as low demand and a reason not to procure oralmorphine.The failure to include oralmorphine in the central procurement scheme may also inflate its cost as itdiscourages public health care institutions from procuring morphine and leavesindividual hospitals to negotiate their own terms with the private supplier.Bulk procurement of oral morphine byKEMSA could increase the total use of the medicine and allow for centralizedprice negotiations. The government could explore procuring oral morphine from anot-for-profit supplier. In Uganda, for example, the ministry of healthcommissioned a charitable procurement and manufacturing facility to producemorphine solution to be distributed to hospitals, health centers and palliativecare providers, which has resulted in a considerably lower cost of morphinethan in Kenya.[131]Cost of MorphineThe Kenyan government has anobligation to explore ways to ensure that basic oral morphine is available atlow cost to people who need pain treatment. Morphine can be produced at a verylow price. For example, the Indian pharmaceutical company Cipla sells morphinetablets locally at US$1.70 per gram.[132] In Uganda, a non-profit organization imports morphinepowder and sells it for $1.72 per gram.[133]Based on this price, thecost of 90 days of treatment for an adult cancer or HIV patient would be about$11.50.[134]But the price of morphine ishigher in Kenya. The morphine powder used in Kenya today is imported byLaborex, a UK-based pharmaceutical company, which sells it to both public andprivate hospitals and hospices for 292KSh ($3.57) per gram.[135] To encourage its use, Laborex currently sells morphinepowder to “needy” private hospices at the lower price of 200KSh($2.45) per gram. Even so, staff at the Kisumu Hospice said that morphinepowder is a significant expense that the hospice sometimes struggles to meet,resulting in pressure to use less.[136]At present, Kenya, which does notgenerally tax medicines, imposes a 16 percent import tax on morphine powder,because it is classified as a “raw product.” This makes Kenya oneof the few countries in the world to tax morphine.[137] At the urging of the Kenyan Hospice and Palliative CareAssociation, the minister for medical services has written to the minister forfinance requesting that the tax be removed, and the request is currently underconsideration.[138]Poor Availability of Medicines for Neuropathic PainSome children suffer fromneuropathic pain, caused by dysfunctional or damaged nerves, as a side effectof ART or tuberculosis medication, or as a symptom of HIV or cancer.[139] While most children with neuropathic pain get significantrelief if they are given morphine or other opioids, about one-third of childrenneed other medicines—such as gabapentin or amitriptyline—to get anyrelief for their neuropathic pain.[140] Globally, these medicines are not always available informulations appropriate for children.[141] In Kenya, public health facilities often lack any drugsfor neuropathic pain.In our research, we came across anumber of cases where pain could not be treated adequately because of theabsence of appropriate drugs. For example, at one orphanage, several childrensuffered from severe HIV-related pain in their hands and feet. The head of theorphanage complained that gabapentin, a medicine commonly used to treat nervepain, was too expensive for the orphanage to purchase.[142]Health Workers: Lack of Palliative Care Training and SkillsIn Kenya,lack of training about palliative care among health care workers is one of thecauses of the dearth of services in this field. Health care workers do not alwaysknow how to assess and treat pain and other symptoms. They are often afraid ofmorphine because of unfounded fears about addiction and have misconceptionsabout palliative care.[143] The lack of training results in poormedical practice, such as insufficient pain assessment and treatment, and poorcommunication with child patients and their families.Under internationallaw, governments are obliged to provide health education for the community and appropriatetraining for health personnel.[144] WHO has stressed that “education in painrelief and palliative care must be an essential component of training for allhealth workers who may be expected to treat patients with advanced chronicillness,” and that educational programs for the public, health carepersonnel and regulators are also necessary.[145]Lack of Training among Health WorkersDoctors andNursesKenyan medical schoolsaddress palliative care only briefly, and the large majority of Kenyan doctorshave little knowledge or experience in this area.[146] Pain management is dealt with briefly in the curriculumon management of chronic disease, but with little attention to treating severepain with opioids. The main message to medical students is that the cause ofthe pain must be treated, not the pain itself; pain caused by medical proceduresis considered unavoidable.[147] A lecturer and pain specialist at NairobiMedical School told us:[P]art of the training was to give these drugs [opioids] tothe terminally ill. So as long as you don’t have a terminally illpatient, it doesn’t even cross your mind that you can prescribe suchdrugs…. We are all trained that opioids are given [only] to theterminally ill because of addiction. The addiction aspect was really over-emphasized.[148]Although medicalschools have recently ceased telling students that opioids are only for theterminally ill, these attitudes persist. Training for nurses on palliative careis slightly better, but not sufficient, according to the Kenyan Hospices andPalliative Care Association (KEHPCA).[149]The general reluctanceof health care workers to treat pain with morphine or even weaker opioids, andto provide palliative care, is magnified when it comes to children. There aredifferences in palliative care for adults and children:  the spectrum ofdiseases encountered, the doses and formulations of pain medicines, and the psychological,social, and cultural issues that come up in communication with patients’families.[150]Nonetheless, in Kenya, there is nospecific training on palliative care for children. As a result, there are nopediatric palliative care specialists and pediatricians have no specializedknowledge of pain treatment and palliative care for children.As almost every doctorand nurse will encounter adults and children with life-limiting illness andpain, the curriculum for medical and nursing students should contain trainingon pain treatment and palliative care, including pediatric pain treatment andpalliative care. Efforts to improve the curriculum are currently underway atNairobi Medical School and at one nursing school in Nairobi, and will hopefullybear fruit soon.[151]Continuing medicaleducation is an important way to educate doctors who have already completedtheir basic education, especially because junior doctors learn as much fromtraining under more senior doctors as they do from their formal studies. Kenyandoctors are required to undertake continuing professional development annually.[152] KEHPCA offers palliative care workshops and other shorttraining sessions in which palliative carespecialists give lectures on the topic to other health workers. The coordinatorof KEHPCA and the nurses at Kisumu Hospice, who give similar training sessions,told Human Rights Watch that they usually lead to increased referrals tohospices and palliative care units.[153]Doctors and nursesworking in palliative care sometimes get additional vocational training whileworking in Kenya or abroad. KEHPCA offers courses of varying length, and KenyattaNational Hospital and Nairobi Hospice offer one week courses for healthworkers. Nairobi Hospice also offers a diploma in cooperation with a Britishuniversity, and Kenyan palliative care specialists have undertaken otheradvanced courses offered by universities in Uganda, South Africa, and the UK.[154] Such training is highly valuable and has helpedincrease the capacity of Kenya’s palliative care specialists.CommunityHealth WorkersCommunity healthworkers do not have the expertise to prescribe strong pain medicines, but withbasic training, they can assess pain, including in children, and refer patientswho need opioids to a service that prescribes them. Community health workerscan also play an important role in monitoring patients to ensure that they aretaking opioid medicines correctly, and administering them to patients who arenot able to do so themselves, as they often do with ART. At Kisumu Hospice,nurses teach individual community health workers to do this when they know thata patient prescribed morphine by the hospice will be in their care, but thispractice is rare.[155] The head of a community-based organization in aslum providing home-based care for people living with HIV said she had neverheard about morphine until Human Rights Watch visited, and added:We hope that in the future thegovernment or even partners or donors can train more caregivers in palliativecare because we are not getting the training … If we all get thatpalliative care training, I think [we] can really support [people] and givehope to many people who are hopeless, especially if they … have terminaldiseases in the community.[156]Small numbers of community health workers have been trained in palliativecare for people living with HIV. Their training has focused on basic symptomrelief and counseling, and other aspects of palliative care that communityhealth workers can provide, and has sensitized them to the importance ofreferrals to higher-level health facilities.[157] However, such training is still relatively rareand does not focus on assessing pain or administering opioid medicines. Communityhealth workers receive almost no training on palliative care for children or forpeople with diseases other than HIV.Lack of Skill in Assessing and Treating PainAssessing PainAssessing pain in children can bedifficult when they are too young or otherwise unable to describe how they feel.Assessment is also difficult in children who have suffered chronic pain alltheir lives and who do not know a pain-free state. Some children do not want to talk about pain, one nursetold us, because they believe that “ifyou can bear pain, you can be strong.”[158]Health workers in Kenya are not trained to assess pain in children,and when they examine a patient, they do not regularly do it. Generally, doctors do not communicate much with patients,and even less so with child patients.[159] With regards to older children and adults, a painspecialist told us:What I see as the biggest problemin managing pain in this country is that many [patients] do not know they needto tell us about pain. But if we sensitize them by asking them, “Are youin pain?” then … tomorrow they will come back more comfortable toreport that, “Actually, this place is painful.”[160]This problem was illustrated by12-year-old Beatrice A., who sinceJune, 2009, had been suffering from a painful and itchy skin condition. Thecondition initially caused parts of her flesh to flake off and made itespecially painful to bathe. Beatrice had visited a dispensary, a privateclinic, and another health facility in Nyanza province. At each facility,health workers treated Beatrice’s condition but never asked her whetherit was painful or offered her any pain treatment.[161]Treating Painwith OpioidsAs a result of poor painassessment and unwarranted fear of prescribing opioids, health workers oftenfail to treat severe pain with opioids even when they are available and a childis evidently in pain.Some doctors at Kenyatta NationalHospital and New Nyanza General Hospital treat child cancer patients withdihydrocodeine for short periods, and then withdraw the medicine for a period,due to its side effect of constipation, despite the WHO recommendation that painmedicines be administered at regular intervals around the clock.[162] It should be common practice to treat constipation witha laxative, not by withdrawing pain treatment.[163]This happened to three-year-old Alex K. at KenyattaNational Hospital, who suffered from leukemia.[164] Similarly, in New Nyanza General Provincial Hospital, anurse explained that Thomas N., age 12, was given dihydrocodeineintermittently, and otherwise given diclofenac, a weaker pain medicine.[165] Thomas complained of strong headaches during the treatmentwith diclofenac. His mother explained:[My son] has a tumoron the belly… Here [at New Nyanza General Hospital]… he stillsuffers a lot of pain. Even now, he is in pain. He has a terrible headache. This morninghe was given medicine [diclofenac] against the headache but it did not getbetter.[166]Several doctors told us thatwhen they prescribe morphine to children, nurses sometimes refuse to administerit.[167] A doctor who treats childhood cancer found that childrenare at a particular disadvantage:People have no problems withrelieving pain in adults with morphine, but when it comes to children, there isalways some reservation. Putting a child on morphine is always a big issue… Morphine is underutilized.[168]Case Study:Kenyatta National HospitalKenyattaNational Hospital is a national teaching and research hospital, and by farthe most important public health facility in Kenya. It has a capacity of1,800 beds and treats about 89,000 inpatients and 600,000 outpatients a year.[169]Duringour visit, there were an estimated 120 children with cancer on variouspediatric wards, and none was being treated with morphine. Only one16-year-old girl in an adult oncology ward—Judith, whose case isdescribed above—received morphine.[170]Onlyone of the wards—the pediatric oncology ward, for 28 children—isspecialized in childhood cancer. Some nurses on the pediatric oncology wardhave received training in palliative care and have experience treating severepain and dealing with the stress of childhood cancer. But even those nursesare reluctant to give morphine to children. One nurse told us that she onlyrefers children to the palliative care unit of her hospital when “thechild is very sick, not responding to pain treatment, and when the child isjust crying from pain.”[171] Her ambivalence becameevident when she said to us on one day, “Giving morphine is OK,”and on another, “We don’t like to give morphine.”[172] Some nurses also fearthat morphine will cause respiratory distress, especially in children.[173]Asa result, children are referred late, if at all, to the palliative care unitthat prescribes morphine. The head of the palliative care unit told us:We often get sent the patients too late: theyare close to death or nothing can be done. We need to find a way to make surepatients are referred earlier.[174]Moreover,due to overcrowding, the majority of children with cancer are notconcentrated in pediatric cancer wards, but dispersed among eight otherwards.[175] These children do notbenefit from special attention from nurses who focus on caring for childrenwith cancer. One doctor observed that nurses in the other wards sometimes donot administer morphine as prescribed, “because they are afraid …they rarely handle opioids.” He also found that children with cancerget less pain treatment in the other wards due to staff shortages and lack ofattention to children’s pain. He told us:Children must wait longer for pain treatment. On [these other]wards, understaffing and lack of communication between staff are problems.The nurses rotate and this delays administration of drugs. A doctor might prescribea drug, but it might take two days for it to come. There is a lack ofvigilance. The nurses are not looking for pain. Pain should be added to thecharts that the nurses fill in when they first see a patient, as a way ofinstitutionalizing pain treatment, by asking the question.[176]TreatingHIV-Related PainHealth workers tend to associatepain only with certain diseases, such as cancer, and not with others, includingHIV, and consequently often fail to assess pain in patients with these diseases.Some pediatricians consider pain in children on ART “not a bigissue.”[177] However, studies have shown that children and adultsliving with HIV—including those on ART—can experience moderate tosevere pain, including neuropathic pain, and have significant needs for palliativecare.[178] The head ofthe hospice in Nairobi remarked:Patients with HIV also havesevere pain, especially the type of pain called neuropathic. Its control ispoor, but I believe the clinicians don’t know that patients with pain whoare HIV-positive also need a palliative care team to take care of their pain.[179]The need for comprehensivepalliative care to be integrated into the HIV response was demonstrated bystories of children who were receiving ART but had many untreated symptoms, includingpain. A community health care worker in Kisumu, Nyanza province, told us aboutfive-year-old Douglas O., an orphan whose only caregiver was his adolescentsister. Douglas was on ART but his sister did not give the medicine to himregularly. He was very sick:The body and his wounds were verypainful and eating was very difficult. He would refuse food and cry. Bloodwould come out of his mouth when we washed it…. He was in pain … itwould hurt him to bathe. He would cry because of wounds and peeling off ofskin.[180]Other community health workers andorphanage staff related similar experiences of helplessness in the face ofsevere pain in an HIV-positive child.[181]A palliative care doctor told usabout difficulties in reaching out to HIV services, which operate somewhatseparately from the rest of the health system:We should be looking after morechildren with HIV. But it is hard to penetrate this area. The CCC[Comprehensive Care Centre providing HIV care] only brings patients when theyare literally screaming.[182]Lack ofTraining among PediatriciansNot a single Kenyanpediatrician has received training on palliative care at the diploma level, andvery few have received any training beyond limited instruction during medicalschool. There are also very few pediatricians with specialized knowledge of childhoodcancer, which is often treated by hematologists who have no pediatricbackground.[183]One reason for this is thatpalliative care is widely misunderstood as a replacement for curativetreatment, and many pediatricians see it as part of their ethic to fight for achild’s life and not give up. A leading Kenyan pediatrician expressed herconcern that palliative care would become a “dump basket” forchildren who should get curative treatment. She also complained that“there has been too much home-based care, it is too easy.”[184] Another pediatrician said that:Getting children ontreatment is a battle. Palliative care could become the easy way out. “Palliative”suggests you are not giving them treatment.… People think here that itteaches a message that you don’t want to convey.[185]Lack of Health Worker Skills in Communicating with Child Patients andParentsParents and childrenliving with life-limiting disease have a great need to know what is happeningto them and to express their worries and fears. Effective communication andpsychosocial support is a key component of palliative care.WHO emphasizes theimportance of psychosocial support for children and their families.[186] Under international law, the right to healthcare includes mental health care and the right to information about healthcare.[187] Children have a right to age-appropriateinformation about their health conditions, to participate in decision makingregarding their own health care, and to psychological support. However, atpresent, health workers communicate very little about children’s illnessesand their consequences to caregivers and to the children themselves. As aresult, parents and children are left alone with their worries and fears.Communication withParentsMany doctors communicate poorlywith parents about their child’s diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis, andthe uncertainty caused by this lack of communication can create additionalemotional turmoil for the child and family. Parents interviewed for thisresearch showed varying degrees of understanding regarding theirchildren’s illnesses.According to an experienced childoncologist, many doctors do not tell parents when their child has terminalcancer.[188] One doctor in New Nyanza General Hospital told a womanthat her daughter’s disease “can only be cured by luck,”which left her confused as to whether there was hope or not.[189] At the same hospital, the father of four-year-oldFlorentine P. complained that he did not know who the child’s doctor was.He also mistakenly assumed that her upcoming biopsy was intended to treat thedisease.[190]When James Nyaga took his son, age three, to Kenyatta NationalHospital, doctors did not tell him what disease they had diagnosed. So hesearched the Internet, using several terms the doctors used, and realized thathis son had cancer (a primitive neuroectodermal tumor). He commented:I couldn’t understand whynobody would tell me about my own child. I think that they [the doctors] thinkthat I wouldn’t understand.[191]Nyaga’s son was treated withchemotherapy and subsequently discharged and cared for at home. Although themedical staff did not directly tell Nyaga that his son’s disease wasincurable, that was his understanding. A few months after Human Rights Watchspoke with Nyaga, we were informed that his son had died.In Kenyatta National Hospital,some parents have weekly “counseling” sessions with medicaldoctors. During these sessions, doctors provide medical information. Theyrarely address psychological, emotional, and social issues.[192]Some private facilities, includingchurch-based health facilities, offer professional psychosocial support. Forexample, Pandipieri is a Catholic community health center in Kisumu that has achild counseling program and trains bereavement counselors.[193] But public hospital staff must also communicate clearlyand effectively to children and their parents about the illness and offersupport as families manage their emotions.Communication withChildren: “You need to break the conspiracy”All sick children need tocommunicate through language and play to cope with the discomfort of disease,the daily routines of illness, medical treatments, and the threat of death.[194]But health workers are not trainedto elicit such communication, or even to discuss the basic facts of the diseasewith children and their parents; most rarely make emotional support for sickchildren a priority.[195] It is emotionally difficult for health care workers (andfor parents) to disclose to children that their illness is serious or terminal,and many avoid it completely.  Sometimes parents explicitly ask healthworkers not to disclose information to the child.[196] This is especially true of HIV/AIDS. Because of thecontinuing stigma, many parents conceal from their child—even as thechild approaches adolescence—that he or she is HIV positive.[197] The lack of communication about the disease leaves manychildren anxious and fearful. Hospitals provide no counselors, psychologists,or social workers for children with chronic diseases.When doctors do discloseinformation, they tend to do so very late, after the child has already figuredit out, as the head of thepalliative care unit in Kenyatta National Hospital explained:Children disclose to each otherabout their diseases. They say “if you are in this ward, you havecancer”... By the time we do [disclose], they already know. You tell theparent first but they don’t want to tell the child. Sometimes you need tobreak the conspiracy.… Sometimes children think they are sick for thewrong reasons.[198]Some children believe that someonemust be responsible for their illness, and need to be told that no one is toblame.[199] Nurses at Kenyatta National Hospital told Human RightsWatch of several children who believed that they were ill or in hospitalbecause they were “bad,” or because someone else had brought theillness upon them. One was an 11-year-old girl who had cancer in her leg, andsubsequently broke the leg when she fell down. She believed that another familyin conflict with her family had done this to her.[200]Many children miss their parentsand siblings terribly because they are far from home. One father described theloneliness of his 11-year-old son Steve K., from Kitui in Eastern province, whowas being treated for Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma in Kenyatta NationalHospital:He is [emotionally] affected. Henever went home. He misses home, his siblings, school. He asks when I go home.He cries when I go home [the father lives in the city]. He could feel verydisplaced.[201]In one case, Kenyatta NationalHospital was treating a terminally ill six-year-old orphan with HIV and cancerfrom Nyanza province. He expressed the wish to go back to his home area to seehis siblings, but his relatives and the nurses did not want this, so he died inNairobi.[202] Parents of children with cancer have founded Hope forCancer Kids, an NGO, with the explicit aim of “trying to look at what thechild wants … and turning that into a program.”[203]Parents’ and Caregivers’ ResponsibilitiesAttitudes towards Pain and Pain TreatmentMany Kenyan patients do not talk explicitlyabout pain to health workers, or even to family members. As one doctor put it, people “have beenbrought up … to believe you should brave it.”[204] A palliative care nurse said that her patientsoften feel they should not talk about painbecause others will consider them weak.[205]Self-treatment is an importantpart of Kenyan medical culture. People usually deal on their own with common illnesses such as malaria by taking paracetamolor aspirin, for example. Only when an illness is prolonged or very serious dopeople seek advice from a traditional healer or a medical professional.[206]Yet many Kenyans are not aware of the existence of stronger painmedicines, and so few people actively seek specialized treatment for severepain for themselves or their children. There is also little information abouthospital- or hospice-based palliative care, and many people are simply unawareof such services. The head of the Nairobi hospice said:I think there’s thatacceptance of pain as a part of an illness.... People don’t know anddon’t believe that someone can be pain free, especially [with] cancer andHIV/AIDS. The society knows that they are painful illnesses, so when you talkabout pain, that is normal for that illness.[207]Under internationallaw, governments have a duty to ensure that people have access to healthinformation, including regarding children’s health.[208] Public education about pain medication is one of WHO’skey recommendations to improve access to it.Neglect of Children in Need of Palliative CareExperts on palliativecare in Africa have emphasized that because there are many orphans and othervulnerable children, child protection constitutes an important part of pediatricpalliative care.[209]As in other African countries, Kenya hasa large number of orphans whose parents have died of HIV/AIDS or other causes.Other children are vulnerable because HIV/AIDS or poverty make it difficult fortheir parents to care for them. Most parents andcaregivers do their utmost to look after a seriously ill child. However, somefail to provide medical care even when it is clear that the child needs it.In some cases,HIV-positive orphans are moved from one relative to the next, or abandoned byrelatives altogether.[210] One such case was two-year-old Ann A., anHIV-positive orphan from Nyanza province who had been taken in by the firstwife of her deceased father (her mother was his second wife). The woman and her husband looked after Ann for a while, butwhen she became sick with pneumonia and a skin disease, they decided that theydid not want her any more.[211] The girl was taken in by a staff member of an(non-residential) orphan support organization, which provided her withtreatment for her pneumonia and skin disease and eventually persuaded herfather’s former wife to accepted custody of Ann again.In another case, a boycalled Douglas O., whose case is mentioned above, died of an HIV-relateddisease at the age of five. The same orphan support organization that cared forAnn provided home-based care for Douglas. He was an orphan looked after by his 15-year-oldsister. The girl was poor and stayed with a man who took care of her, butrefused to look after Douglas. The head of the orphan support organizationexplained:This person didn’t want[Douglas] to join them…. Then [the sister] decided to go to her aunt andleave her brother there outside the gate. Because he was crying, the aunt foundhim and took him in. It took us long to trace [Douglas] … We took theinitiative of going to their home…. He was again very down. The husbandof the aunt also never accepted him so he was put again in another place.Nobody was giving him proper care. The much we could do was to give food andmoney to take care. After two days we were told he was dead.[212]Sometimes, caregivers also deny children access to medical tests or to medicine,even when they are visibly sick. Pain medicines are not even considered. Acommunity health worker in the Mathare slum in Nairobi explained how the fatherof Josephine W., age nine, reacted to his wife’s and daughter’ssickness:[Josephine] is nineand HIV-positive. She is an orphan and lives with her stepmother…. She isnot going to school. She is in a lot of pain. She complains at times of chestpain. Sometimes her whole body is in pain. The girl is on ART, and so is thestepmother. But the father does not want any of this. He has said he will throwthe drugs away when he finds them in the house.[213]As stated above, WHO definespalliative care as “the active total care of the child’s body, mindand spirit.”[214] For orphans and vulnerable children who have life-limitingdisease, palliative care should include child protection.  This requireshealth care workers who are trained in child protection issues, as well as afunctioning child protection system.International andKenyan laws stipulate that the authorities must take steps to protect childrenfrom violence, abuse, and neglect.[215]In Kenya, the Children Act prohibits child abuse and neglect. The Department ofChildren’s Services is responsible for implementing the Act and employsabout 320 children officers across Kenya. The Children Act empowers a childrenofficer to take a child in need of protection to a place of safety, or a childin need of medical care to a health institution. In practice, the childprotection system is understaffed and weak, and often fails to reach childrenin need.[216]Economic Barriers to Pain Treatment and Palliative CareHealth Care CostsUser Fees in KenyaIn Kenya, where around 20 percent of the population survives onless than a dollar per day, cost is a majorbarrier for children to access health care including pain treatment.[217] While the government has instituteda policy of health services for free for children under five at lower-levelhealth facilities, and at a nominal fee for those over five, these policies arenot uniformly implemented. Indeed, the government has conceded that thesepolicies are “not adhered to and clients are still paying for the freeservices.”[218]The policies also do not coverdistrict, provincial, and national hospitals. At these hospitals, patients haveto pay for medicine, tests and treatment, and the bed. At provincial andnational hospitals, patients are also charged an admission fee.[219] At Kenyatta National Hospital, children pay4,000KSh($49.02) for admission, or 8,000KSh ($98.05) for admission if the childis likely to need surgery. A bed costs 400KSh ($4.90) per night. Patients must usuallypay for any medicines at the hospital pharmacy, although some drugs might beavailable in the hospital and administered without fees.[220]In New Nyanza General Hospital,the situation is slightly better. Child patients pay 200KSh (approximately$2.45) per night for a bed for the first two weeks; after that, the bed doesnot cost anything, and children under the age of five are not charged a bedfee. There is generally no separate charge for medicines, although there arecharges for some disposable equipment.At New Nyanza General Hospital, chemotherapyis subsidized by a donor, but at other hospitals, its cost is particularlyprohibitive.[221] In Kenyatta NationalHospital, costs may range from 50,000KSh (approximately $613) to over500,000KSh (approximately $6,130), depending on the case.[222] For example, 11-year-old Steve K., an inpatient sufferingfrom Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, underwent chemotherapy, radiotherapy, andsurgery at a total cost of 448,000KSh ($5,491). His father paid by selling landand asking others for money. He also received some support from the NationalHealth Insurance Fund, but was unable to keep up his contributions. When we metSteve’s father, another bill for further treatment was imminent, and hedid not know how he would pay.[223]There is a fee waiver system fordestitute patients, but it often fails to function. In some hospitals, patientsare detained after they have completed their treatment because they are unableto pay the bill.[224]The current health insurancescheme, the National Hospital Insurance Fund, mainly insures patients who workin the formal sector, and this excludes the poorest segments of the population.[225] According to one health donor, about 40 percent of Kenyansdo not seek health care when they need it because of the cost.[226]As a result of the complex andsometimes inconsistent user fee policies in the public hospital system,patients sometimes assume that they have to pay for health services even whenthey should be free or relatively low cost.[227] Outside the public system, fees are even higher and moreerratic. About 40 percent of Kenya’s health services are delivered bychurch-based health facilities, which usually charge more than publicfacilities because they do not receive state subsidies.[228] User fees are significantly higher yet at private, for-profitfacilities.Cost of Pain Treatmentand Palliative Care for ChildrenThe cost of painmedicines varies dramatically at different health care facilities, often makingthe drugs inaccessible to children in need. Most patients are expected to pay fortheir own medicine, though they are often unable to do so. The cheapest way totreat a child’s mild pain is with children’s paracetamol tablets.They cost 5KSh (approximately US$0.06) in the Mathare slum, where manyinhabitants earn less than 75KSh (approximately $0.92) a day. Many othermedicines are more expensive.One community healthworker in the slum explained:The big problem is that guardiansoften can’t afford the medicine that is prescribed for the child, so theygo on doing what they saw the community health worker do—grind upparacetamol in water and give that to the child.[229]Dihydrocodeine tablets can bedifficult to find in pharmacies and cost 10KSh (approximately $0.12) for a 30mgtablet, the maximum daily dose for a child.[230] A weekly dose would cost 70KSh ($0.86).Some Kenyan hospicesgive oral morphine free of charge to destitute patients, but others charge formorphine.[231] A 100ml bottle of morphine costs 100KSh ($1.22)at Kenyatta National Hospital and 500KSh ($6.14) at Kisumu Hospice.[232]For an adult prescribed a typical dailydose of oral morphine, this is a two-week supply;[233] as children typically require a lower dose,proportional to their body weight, this amount would usually, but not always,last longer for a child.[234] In a 2007 survey, five Kenyan hospices thatcharge patients reported that between 50 and 95 percent of their patients couldnot afford to pay the full fee requested.[235]Under internationallaw, governments have an obligation to make health care services physically andfinancially accessible, and also provide information about available services.[236]WHO has noted that palliative careservices “cost very little” and has urged countries to make palliative care available,including through low-cost community-based palliative care.Children as Pawns: Detention of Children WhoseParents Cannot Pay the BillWhen parents cannot pay a child’s hospital bill, healthcare workers sometimes keep the child at the hospital until the bill issettled. The practice of de facto detention is meant to put pressure on theparents to come up with the money. Yet it violates Kenya’s obligationsunder international law, which prohibits the detention of debtors.[237]In some situations, parents abandon their child at the hospital,due to their inability to pay, negligence, or a mix of both. During a visitby Human Rights Watch to Kenyatta National Hospital, there were four suchabandoned children in the pediatric oncology ward.  One child’sparents had explicitly told the hospital that they were not taking back thechild. Another child’s parents had initially said they would pick theboy up, but had since failed to respond to phone calls from the hospital.[238] In theMathare slum in Nairobi, we spoke to a young mother who could not pay herchild’s hospital bill at Kenyatta National Hospital, and thus had onlyvisited her child once in several months.[239] For thesechildren, the suffering of serious illness is compounded by abandonment byparents unable to pay the hospital’s fees.The new Constitution of Kenya protects the right to freedom andsecurity of the person. It provides that no person shall be deprived offreedom arbitrarily or without just cause, or detained without trial, exceptin a state of emergency.[240] A personunlawfully detained is entitled to apply to a court for redress, includingcompensation.[241]The Constitution further provides thatchildren have the right not to be detained except as a measure of lastresort, and for the shortest appropriate period of time, and that thechild’s best interests are of paramount importance in every matterconcerning the child.[242]TransportationCostsMany children in severepain do not receive treatment because their parents or caregivers are unable topay for transportation to a health facility where opioid pain medicines aredispensed.[243]  While most Kenyans live within five kilometers from a dispensary orhealth center, these facilities are only equipped to diagnose and treat alimited number of common diseases. They generally do not have a doctor on staffand have no laboratories. As a result, sick children are frequently referred todistrict, provincial, or national hospitals for diagnostic tests and treatment.When children cannot afford to make the trip to a higher-level health facility,they often fail to get any diagnosis,making it impossible to establish what type of treatment they need or treatpain.This problem wasexemplified by the situation of four-year-old Jacob O., suffering from a largepainful swelling on his back and buttocks, whose case is described above. SinceJacob’s family could not afford to go to the nearest hospital, his mothertook him to the local dispensary, where she was referred to the districthospital in Bondo, about 10 kilometers away. The mother lacked the means to travelto Bondo and continued to ineffectively medicate his apparently serious illnesswith simple pain relievers. Jacob continued to suffer pain which affected hismobility and sleep.[244]Such situations of continued paincan last for years. Also in Bondo district, we met Rebecca A., whose case ismentioned above. Twenty-year-old Rebecca had been suffering from an undiagnosedillness since she was two years old. Several years ago, Rebecca’s mothertraveled with her to Bondo District Hospital, where she was told she should gettreatment at Nyabondo Mission Hospital in South Nyanza, about 100 kilometersaway. The mother could not afford the travel and also feared the hospital costs,so she never took Rebecca there.[245] Rebecca endured severe pain and trouble walking for mostof her childhood.Transportation is particularlydifficult for parents of children with chronic disease. We interviewedrelatives of children who had managed to go to a hospital once to seektreatment, but failed to return for check-ups and additional treatment. As aresult, children lived for long periods with undertreated pain.[246] Children with cancer are sometimes discharged betweencycles of chemotherapy, and some do not come back for the next cycle, or forcheck-ups at a later stage, because of transportation costs. Some children onlyreturn when they are very sick, and often die soon thereafter.[247]There are also too few ambulancesand they are often not equipped to work in rural areas. Patients in need oftransportation are frequently asked to pay for ambulance fuel costs, or to organize their own transportation.[248]A localgovernment official in Kisumu described transportation costs within theprovince, or to one of the two Kenyan referral hospitals, as “a hugeissue.” For example, fuel for an ambulance to go from Nyanza’sprovincial capital to the nearest national referral hospital, in Eldoret, costsabout 5000KSh (US$61).[249]While transportation ismostly a problem in rural areas, it is also a barrier to health care and paintreatment for patients in Nairobi’s slums. Community health workers inthe Mathare slum described taking sick children to hospital on crowded buses, atrip that can take several hours. One community health worker told of a childwho became ill during the night. His family could not afford a taxi to take himto the hospital, so decided to wait and take him on a bus, but he died beforemorning.[250]IV. Kenya’s Legal Obligations Regarding PalliativeCare and Pain TreatmentInternational and Kenyan lawscontain important guarantees for the child’s rights to health and toprotection from degrading conditions. These are binding on the government, yetKenya violates many of these legal obligations in the context ofchildren’s access to pain treatment and palliative care.The Child’s Right to theHighest Attainable Standard of HealthThe new Kenyan Constitutionprovides that every person has a right to the highest attainable standard ofhealth, which includes health care services.[251]  The Constitution requires the State to takelegislative, policy and other measures, including the setting of standards, toachieve the progressive realization of the right to health.[252] In allocating resources, the State is required to“give priority to ensuring the widest possible enjoyment of the right ...having regard to prevailing circumstances, including the vulnerability ofparticular groups or individuals.”[253] Children have a right to basic health care, which is notsubject to progressive realization or limited by available resources.[254]Kenya is a state party to theseveral human rights treaties that enshrine the child’s right to thehighest attainable standard of physical and mental health, including theInternational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), theConvention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), the African Charter on Human andPeoples’ Rights, and the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of theChild.[255] Under international law, the right to the highestattainable standard of health is subject to “progressiverealization,” requiring each state party to “to take steps …to the maximum of its available resources” to achieve the fullrealization of the right.[256] The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR),the body charged with interpreting and monitoring compliance with the ICESCR,has held that states have a “specific and continuing obligation to moveas expeditiously and effectively as possible towards the fullrealization” of the right to health and must “refrain frominterfering directly or indirectly with [its] enjoyment.”[257]The CESCR has called for anintegrated approach to the provision of “preventive, curative andrehabilitative health treatment,”[258] which “should not disproportionately favourexpensive curative health services which are often accessible only to a small,privileged fraction of the population.”[259]The Committee hasspecifically called for “attention and care for chronically andterminally ill persons, sparing them avoidable pain and enabling them to diewith dignity.”[260] States must refrain from actions that interfere withaccess to palliative care, and take reasonable steps to facilitate its development,and its integration into the health care system as a whole.In addition, the CESCR has saidthat a state party to the ICESCR “cannot, under any circumstanceswhatsoever, justify its non-compliance with the core obligations … whichare non-derogable.”[261] The core obligations defined by the committee that arerelevant to palliative care include: providing essential medicines; ensuringnondiscriminatory access to health facilities, especially for vulnerable ormarginalized groups; ensuring equitable distribution of all health facilities,goods and services; and adopting and implementing a national public healthstrategy and plan of action addressing the health concerns of the wholepopulation with particular attention to all vulnerable and marginalized groups.[262] Relevant obligations of “comparable priority”include: ensuring child health care; taking measures to treat and controlepidemic and endemic diseases; providing education and access to informationfor important health problems; and providing appropriate training for healthpersonnel.[263] The CESCR has also stressed the “obligationof all States parties to take steps, individually and through internationalassistance and cooperation … towards the full realization of the rightsrecognized in the Covenant, such as the right to health.”[264]The right to health is alsoenshrined in the Children Act of Kenya, which aims to implement internationallaw by “[giving] effect to the principles of the CRC and the AfricanCharter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child.”[265] The Children Act states that:Every child shall have a right tohealth and medical care the provision of which shall be the responsibility of theparents and the Government.[266]The Act provides that if a childis in need of medical care that his or her caregiver is failing to furnish, achildren’s officer may take him or her to a registered health institutionfor treatment, and expenses will be defrayed out of public funds.[267]TheChild’s Right to Protection from DiscriminationThe new Kenyan Constitutionprovides that the State and no person shall discriminate against any person onany ground, including age or health status.[268] Under national and international law, children have theright to access health care without discrimination on the basis of age orhealth status, among other grounds. The Kenyan Children Act, the ICESCR, theCRC, the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights and the AfricanCharter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child all protect children fromdiscrimination on various grounds, including “other status.”[269] Bodies responsible for interpreting internationalconventions have stated that “other status” includes both age andhealth status.[270] Therefore, children cannot be arbitrarily excluded frompalliative care services, and reasonable steps must be taken to ensure thatpalliative care appropriate for children of all ages is available, and at leastas accessible as services for adults.TheChild’s Right to Information and Participation in Health careIn addition to the treatment ofpain and other symptoms, palliative care emphasizes the importance of goodcommunication. This approach upholds the child’s right to “seek,receive and impart information of all kinds,” found in both the CRC andthe new Kenyan Constitution, and the principles, enshrined in the CRC, that achild’s views should be given due weight in accordance with his or her ageand maturity, and that children and parents should be informed and supported aboutchild health.[271]Interpreting these provisions ofthe CRC, the Committee on the Rights of the Child has said that “thechild’s right to express his or her views and to participate … appliesto individual health-care decisions,” and that:Children, including youngchildren, should be included in decision-making processes, in a mannerconsistent with their evolving capabilities. They should be provided withinformation about proposed treatments and their effects and outcomes.[272]The Committee on the Rights of theChild has also emphasized that adolescents have the right to participate“actively in planning and programming for their own health anddevelopment.”[273] If they are of sufficient maturity, informed consent shallbe obtained from the adolescent, and parental consent shall not be necessary.[274]The Child’s Right to be freefrom Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading TreatmentIn some circumstances, the denialof pain treatment may violate the prohibition of cruel inhuman or degradingtreatment in international law.The right to be free from cruel,inhuman or degrading treatment is recognized in the new Kenyan Constitution,the Convention Against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatmentor Punishment, the African Charter of Human and Peoples’ Rights, andother international instruments.[275]Apart fromprohibiting the use of torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatmentor punishment, the right also creates a positive obligation for states toprotect persons in their jurisdiction from such treatment.[276]As part of this positiveobligation, states must take steps to protect people from unnecessary painrelated to a health condition, according to a joint letter by UN SpecialRapporteur on Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment orPunishment Manfred Nowak, and UN Special Rapporteur on the Right to HealthAnand Grover:Governments also have anobligation to take measures to protect people under their jurisdiction frominhuman and degrading treatment. Failure of governments to take reasonablemeasures to ensure accessibility of pain treatment, which leaves millions ofpeople to suffer needlessly from severe and often prolonged pain, raisesquestions whether they have adequately discharged this obligation.[277]In a report to the Human RightsCouncil, Nowak later specified that “the de facto denial of access topain relief, if it causes severe pain and suffering, constitutes cruel, inhumanor degrading treatment or punishment” and that “all measures shouldbe taken to … overcome current regulatory, educational and attitudinalobstacles to ensure full access to palliative care.”[278]Not every case where a personsuffers from severe pain but has no access to appropriate treatment willconstitute cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment. Human RightsWatch believes that this will only be the case when the following conditionsare met:·The suffering issevere and meets the minimum threshold required under the prohibition oftorture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment;·The state is, orshould be, aware of the level and extent of the suffering;·Treatment isavailable to remove or lessen the suffering but no appropriate treatment is offered;and·The state has noreasonable justification for the lack of availability and accessibility of paintreatment.In such cases, states will beliable for failing to protect a person from cruel, inhuman, or degradingtreatment.The Child’s Right toProtection from Abuse and NeglectThe new Kenyan Constitution provides thatevery child has the right to be protected from abuse, neglect, and inhumantreatment.[279] Similar protections are found under the Children Act.[280]Under the CRC, parents,guardians, and other persons caring for a child, have the “primary responsibilityto secure, within their abilities and financial capacities, the conditions ofliving necessary for the child's development.”[281]The conventionprotects children from “all forms of physical or mental violence, injuryor abuse, neglect or negligent treatment, maltreatment or exploitation,including sexual abuse, while in the care of parent(s), legal guardian(s) orany other person who has the care of the child.”[282] The African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child hassimilar protections.[283]While the convention emphasizes the responsibility of caregivers,it also makes clear that the state has a role in child protection. Children who are deprived of their family environment, or whocannot, in their own best interest, be allowed to remain in that environment,are entitled to special protection and assistance provided by the state. Thestate must ensure alternative care for the child, which can include fosterplacement, adoption or placement in suitable institutions for the care ofchildren.[284]V. The Crucial Roleof Kenyan Civil SocietyCivil society groups arespearheading efforts to increase access to palliative care in Kenya. One of themain organizations working on the issue is the Kenya Hospices and PalliativeCare Association (KEHPCA). Funded mostly by international donors, KEHPCA wasregistered as an NGO in 2005 and officially launched in 2007. Although arelatively new organization, KEHPCA has undertaken a very broad range ofactivities, including raising awareness through community events and media; offeringsensitization workshops for health care professionals; assessing needs and evaluatingservices; and developing curriculum. Among other activities, KEHPCA organizedKenya’s first palliative care conference in 2008, and has worked with otherorganizations to ensure that palliative care is addressed in the NationalCancer Control and Prevention Bill currently under consideration by the Kenyanparliament. KEHPCA has also provided short courses in palliative care forhundreds of health professionals and volunteers.[285]Other organizations working toincrease access to pain treatment and palliative care include the Kenya Societyfor Pain, the Kenya Cancer Association, and the Kenya Treatment AccessMovement.[286] None of these organizations specializes in palliative careneeds of children, although one Nairobi-based organization, Hope for CancerKids, specializes in the needs of children with cancer, including palliativecare.There are also many Kenyan NGOsworking to protect the rights of children living with HIV, including theiraccess to medical care, psychosocial support, and legal protection. Whilesupport from child rights groups and children’s charities sometimesincludes aspects of palliative care—such as home-based care andpsychosocial counseling—they usually do not provide treatment for severepain.VI. International Donors’Lack of Attention to Palliative CareInternational donors are uniquelyplaced to facilitate the integration of palliative care into Kenya’sHIV/AIDS response. To date, however, they have failed to do so effectively.Kenya’s most importantinternational health donor is the United States, through the President’sEmergency Plan for AIDS Relief(PEPFAR). In 2009, PEPFAR funding forKenya was approximately US$534 million, more than the Kenyan government’stotal health budget.[287] The legislation that established PEPFAR in 2003 included anon-binding direction that 15 percent of PEPFAR funds should be spent onpalliative care.  Although this direction was omitted from the legislationthat funded PEPFAR from 2008, PEPFAR has assigned very large sums to activitiesthat it considers palliative care.[288] However, PEPFAR has adopteda very broad definition of palliative care, including routine HIV counselingand testing; prevention and treatment of opportunistic infections; and HIVprevention and behavior-change counseling. This definition is much broader thanthe WHO definition of palliative care, and as a result, little real progresshas been made towards improving access to pain treatment.[289]In 2007, 600 facilities in Kenyareceived PEPFAR funding to provide palliative care. A survey covering 10percent of those facilities found that commonly provided services included pre-and post-test counseling (90 percent), prevention programs (90 percent),nutrition programs (98 percent) and patient support groups (75 percent). Bycontrast, none of the facilities stocked oral morphine or any other strong oralopioid for treating chronic severe pain. While 83 percent of the facilitiesreported dispensing weak non-opioid pain relievers, such as paracetamol, only27 percent reported dispensing weak opioids, such as codeine.[290] Professionals working for PEPFAR-funded programs confirmedthat this situation remained unchanged in 2010. PEPFAR-funded facilitiesusually stock weak non-opioid pain relievers but no strong opioids, and thereis no systematic effort to ensure the availability of oral morphine oralternative medicines for treating severe chronic pain.[291]PEPFAR funds the Supply ChainManagement System (SCMS), which the Kenyan and United States governments could useto improve the availability of oral morphine and other pain medicines. SCMS isa collaboration of private-sector, faith-based and nongovernmentalorganizations that “helps strengthen and build reliable, secure andsustainable supply chain systems [and] helps to reduce the price ofessential medicines by working closely with clients to plan future procurement,pooling orders to buy in bulk [and] establishing long-term contracts withmanufacturers.”[292] Although governments and PEPFAR-funded health facilities canpurchase oral morphine from SCMS, very few have done so.[293] This may be a missed opportunity.PEPFAR staff members include clinicians who are influentialin the countries where they work and in international institutions such as WHO.For this reason, increased attention to pain treatment within PEPFAR could helpbring about important reforms in Kenya and internationally, such as theinclusion of pain treatment and palliative care in HIV clinical guidelines; therevision of medical and nursing school curricula to include pain treatment andpalliative care; the inclusion of pain assessment in initial patient assessmentforms, and the addition of access to pain treatment as a factor in the routinemonitoring and evaluation of HIV programs.Other key international health donorsin Kenya include the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria; thegovernments of the United Kingdom, Japan, and Germany; and multilateralagencies such as UNICEF, UNAIDS, the World Bank, and the European Union.[294]  There are also two important private US donors, theClinton Health Access Initiative—whichhas a focus on pediatric HIV treatment—and the Bill and Melinda GatesFoundation.[295]Unfortunately, internationalfunding for HIV/AIDS programs dwarfs funding for strengthening the healthsystem as a whole, as well as for child health care, cancer treatment, andpalliative care. Nonetheless, international donors have also made someimportant contributions to these areas. The US government has helped to fund anew children’s ward at Kisumu’s provincial hospital and issupporting some research and treatment on childhood cancer. Some internationalNGOs support Kenyan hospices, including Hospice Care Kenya, the Diana Princessof Wales Memorial Fund Palliative Care Initiative, and Hospice Care Inc.Many international donors and NGOsserve orphans and vulnerable children (OVCs), and specifically childrenaffected by HIV. However, their programs usually do not explicitly includepalliative care.VII. Providing PainTreatment and Palliative Care with Limited ResourcesThe Example of UgandaSignificant improvements in accessto palliative care in Uganda, a country with considerably fewer resources thanKenya,[296] demonstrate the potential for government leadership torapidly scale up access to palliative care. In developing strategies to improvepain treatment and palliative care, Kenya could look closely at Uganda’sexperience.In recent years, Uganda has significantlyboosted its capacity for palliative care. There are now at least 50 facilitiesproviding palliative care services, including morphine.[297] In order to reach more patients in need, communityservices for home-based palliative care have been greatly strengthened. Manypatients can now receive palliative care in their own homes.The Ugandan government has workedclosely with palliative care organizations to expand access. In 1998,representatives of the Ugandan government, nongovernmental organizations, andWHO met at a conference entitled “Freedom from Cancer and AIDSPain” to discuss ways to make pain treatment widely available.[298] A task force, including representatives of the Ministry ofHealth and WHO, was formed to draft a national policy on palliative care, whichthe Ministry of Health incorporated into its Health Service Strategic Plan(HHSP) for 2000-2005, and the current HHSP II for 2006-2011. The currentstrategic plan states that all hospitals and health centers should providepalliative care, that necessary medicines should be available, and thatpalliative care should be integrated into the curriculum of health traininginstitutions. It also emphasizes the need to strengthen referral systems andcommunity-based palliative care.[299]To implement the policy, anational palliative care team was established.[300] In 2004, the law was amended to allow nurses and clinicalofficers to prescribe morphine, once they have completed a nine-monthpalliative care course.[301] More than 80 nurses and clinical officers have graduatedfrom Hospice Africa Uganda’s Clinical Palliative Care Course. TheMinistry of Health started importing oral morphine powder and providing oralmorphine solution to public health facilities at no cost. It has also publishedclinical guidelines on palliative care.Hospice Africa Uganda establisheda specialist children’s palliative care service in 2006. The serviceprovides home-based and outpatient palliative care in Kampala and visitspatients at the national children’s oncology ward, also in Kampala. Theservice is led by nurses who can call upon doctors as required. Elements of thechildren’s palliative care service include pain and symptom management,basic needs support (providing food, clothing, blankets and transportationcosts), chemotherapy, patient information services, a volunteer-led play andlearning program, and child advocacy and protection. A review of the specialistchildren’s service found that it significantly increased the number ofchildren referred to palliative care and the proportion of palliative carepatients who were children. Adherence to chemotherapy also improved. Theaverage cost per child was $75 per year.[302]Hospice Africa Uganda’schildren’s palliative care service demonstrates the benefits ofspecialized palliative care services for children, but it can only serve a tinyfraction of children in need of palliative care in Uganda—it isinaccessible to children who live outside the capital, most of whom do not havethe means to travel there.In 2004, the law was amended toallow nurses and clinical officers to prescribe morphine, once they havecompleted a nine-month palliative care course.[303]More than 80 nursesand clinical officers have graduated from Hospice Africa Uganda’sClinical Palliative Care Course.The INCB hascommended Uganda’s efforts to improve access to pain treatment, includingby reform of its narcotics control laws so that specially trained nurses can prescribemorphine.[304]When Human RightsWatch asked Kenyan health workers about the possibility of allowing nurseprescribing of opioids, some expressed reservations. Some doctors felt that nurses are not qualified to prescribestrong medicines such as morphine,[305]and some nurses wereconcerned that doctors would abdicate responsibility for palliative careentirely if nurses do the prescribing.[306] But Kenya, like Uganda, faces a great shortage of doctors, and theexisting doctors are concentrated in a few large health facilities.[307] The Ugandan experience demonstrates that when nurse prescribingis part of a broader change, in which palliative care is more fully integratedinto the health system, it can be a useful part of a larger strategy.[308]Despite progress, many challengesremain in ensuring access to palliative care throughout Uganda. Some of the nursestrained in palliative care are not using their training because morphine is notavailable where they work or because hospital administrators are not supportingtheir efforts—for example, by failing to assign them to care for patientswith life-limiting disease. District health departments do not have definedpalliative care budgets and inadequate distribution systems for morphine remaina problem.[309] Nonetheless, Uganda’s progress in scaling up accessto palliative care demonstrates what can be quickly achieved with limitedresources and political will.Detailed RecommendationsTo The Government of KenyaTo the Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation, and theMinistry of Medical ServicesAvailability of medicines and treatmentUrgently improveavailability of drugs for moderate to severe pain, in particular by: oEnsuringthat strong opioids, including morphine tablets and morphine powder for oralsolution, are available at all national, provincial, and district hospitals, inaccordance with Kenya’s international legal obligation to provideessential medicines, and with the Kenya Essential Drugs List.oEnsuring that oralmorphine is procured centrally by the Kenya Medical Supplies Agency (KEMSA).oEnsuring thatmedicines for neuropathic pain are available in all district, provincial, andnational hospitals, including in formulations suitable for children.oInvestigate whetherprocuring and distributing morphine and other pain medicines using Supply ChainManagement System or a nongovernment organization could decrease their cost andensure better supply across the country.Work with theMinistry of Finance to remove the tax on morphine powder.Create palliativecare units with expertise in children’s palliative care in district,provincial, and national hospitals, ensure that existingservices respond to the needs of children and their families, andraise awareness about the existence of these services.Implement aprogram of support to home-based palliative care with expertise inchildren’s palliative care through existing hospices and palliativecare units or newly established services.Strengthen the role of communityhealth workers and community health extension workers in providinghome-based palliative care. Community health workers should be equippedwith basic care kits, receive modest compensation, and have strong linkswith health care professionals. In rural areas they should be providedwith transportation.Providepsychological support to children with life-limiting diseases and theircaregivers, through the employment of child psychologists, counselors, orsocial workers in hospital settings and in home-based care.When reviewing the KenyaEssential Drugs List, consider revising the opioid analgesics included onthe list to conform to the World Health Organization (WHO) Model List ofEssential Medicines and the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines forChildren.PolicyDevelop a policyand plan of action on palliative care, with a specific focus on the needsof children. Such a policy and plan of action should be developed inconsultation with other relevant government ministries and agencies,nongovernmental organizations, and international agencies. As a firststep, organize a stakeholders meeting to map existing barriers and discussstrategies for overcoming them.Assign officers of the Ministry of MedicalServices and the Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation responsibilityfor implementing the policy, and allocate them a budget.Develop a medicalprotocol on pain management for children, in coordination with WHO, whichis currently developing new guidelines on chronic pain in children.Develop legislation on the medical use ofopioids, as envisaged by the Kenya National Drug Policy. Such legislationshould recognize that opioids like morphine are indispensable forthe relief of pain, promote theavailability of opioids for medical purposes, and protect health careprofessionals from unnecessarily harsh sanctions for inadvertent breach ofdrug control regulations. In the short term, until legislation is enacted,develop guidelineson the appropriate use of controlled medicines, including morphine, and thelegal requirements for prescribing and dispensingthem. Ensurethe guidelines and any new legislation is well publicized and disseminatedto all physicians.Ensure that theNational Cancer Control and Prevention Bill and Strategy contain strongprovisions addressing pain treatment and palliative care, including forchildren.Encouragehospitals to institutionalize pain management, for example by regularlyassessing whether patients are receiving adequate pain management andincluding pain on nurses’ initial patient assessment forms.Make paintreatment and palliative care an integral part of the HIV/AIDS response,and include this explicitly into the next Kenya National HIV/AIDSStrategic Plan. This should include better availability of pain medicinesand palliative care at facilities providing HIV services on site or in thehome.Support the efforts of civil societygroups, such as the Kenya Hospices and Palliative Care Association, toimprove palliative care.Awareness and educationRaise publicawareness around the right to pain relief, and on the availability oftreatment for severe pain in Kenya. Include this as anaspect of information campaigns on HIV and cancer.Improve trainingfor health workers on pain management and palliative care, including forchildren: oby improving thecurriculum for medical and nursing students, in partnership with Kenyanuniversities;oby increasingcontinuing professional development opportunities for doctors;oby increasingopportunities for health care workers to get vocational training; andoby providingtraining on pediatric pain management and pediatric palliative care forpediatricians, pediatric nurses, and other health workers treating children.Provide trainingto community health workers on pain treatment and palliative care foradults and children with life-limiting disease, including cancer.Ensurethat health workers are trained in how to communicate with child patientsand their families, especially in how to disclose information aboutillness, taking into consideration the child’s age, maturity,and family dynamics, and the clinical context.Raise awareness among health workersabout the current Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic SubstancesControl Act, which allows for the use of opioids for medicinalpurposes, and any new legislation or guidelines on this issue.Economic access barriers and health system strengtheningTake steps to improveaccess to health care for children, through the establishment of aNational Social Health Insurance Fund that ensures health care provisionfor all children; and through the full implementation of thegovernment’s policy of free health care at the local level for allchildren under the age of five.Take steps tostrengthen the referral system, for example by providing transport betweenhealth care facilities without requiring patients to pay for fuel.Strengthen therole of community health workers by providing them with basic health caresupplies and transportation where needed, and introducing compensation fortheir services.Take steps tolower the price of chemotherapy for children, for example by subsidizingits cost.Help set upschemes to provide children on anti-retroviral treatment (ART) with keynutrients, in order to improve adherence to treatment.Use information campaigns to raise awareness that thepractice of detaining children in hospitals is illegal and instructhospitals to immediately release all children detained due to unpaid bills.Investigate and prosecute cases of unlawful detention in hospitals andestablish a compensation scheme for children unlawfully detained.Child neglectIn cooperationwith the Ministry for Gender and Children Affairs, create and intensifylinkages and referral mechanisms between the health system and the childprotection system, in order to improve monitoring and intervention forchildren in need of protection.In cooperation with the Ministry forGender and Children Affairs, provide training on child protection to healthcare workers, including community health workers and others providinghome-based care; and provide training to children officers about thechild’s right to health, including palliative care, and about how toaccess health care services for children.To the Ministry of FinanceRemove the tax on morphine powder. To the National Aids Control CouncilMake pain treatment and palliativecare an integral part of the HIV/AIDS response, and include thisexplicitly into the next Kenya National HIV/AIDS Strategy. This shouldinclude better availability of pain medicines and palliative care atfacilities providing HIV services on site or in the home. To the Kenya Medical Supplies Agency (KEMSA)Procure oral morphine and distributeit to all district, provincial, and national hospitals,in accordance with the Kenya National Drug Policy and Kenya EssentialDrugs List.To the Ministry of Gender and Children AffairsIn cooperationwith the Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation and the Ministry ofMedical Services, create and intensify linkages and referral mechanismsbetween the health system and the child protection system.In cooperationwith the Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation, provide training onchild protection to community health workers and others providinghome-based care; and provide training to children officers on thechild’s right to health and existing health services.In cooperation with the Ministry ofPublic Health and Sanitation and the Ministry of Medical Services, trackcases of child neglect, and intervene when necessary.To the Kenyan National AssemblyEnact the NationalCancer Control and Prevention Bill, ensuring that it retains strongprovisions addressing pain treatment and palliative care, including forchildren.Enact the NationalSocial Health Insurance Bill, ensuring that the planned National HealthInsurance Fund provides health care for all children.Enactlegislation on the medical use of opioids, as envisaged by the KenyaNational Drug Policy. Such legislation should recognize thatopioids like morphine are indispensable for the relief of pain, promote the availability of opioids for medicalpurposes, and protect health care professionals from unnecessarily harshsanctions for inadvertent breach of drug control regulations.To the World Health Organization (WHO), the United NationsChildren’s Fund (UNICEF), the US President’s Emergency Plan forAIDS Relief (PEPFAR), and Other Health DonorsEnsurethat all patients using donor-funded clinical services for life-limitingillness can access palliative care, either by providing it as part of theservice, or by strengthening hospice and public palliative care servicesand facilitating access to them. Provide technicaland financial assistance to the Kenyan government in its efforts to boostpain treatment and palliative care for children, as outlined above.Support efforts toimprove access to health care for children, through improved healthfinancing systems and strengthening the health system as a whole. Inparticular, support steps to lower the price of chemotherapy for children.Ensure thatdonor-funded clinical programs on HIV provide palliative care and adequatepain treatment, including with opioids and other drugs for neuropathicpain.Scale up funding for cancer treatment,including efforts to make chemotherapy cheaper, especially for children.To the World Health Organization (WHO)Complete treatmentguidelines on chronic pain in children, and make them widely available togovernment, health workers, and NGOs in Kenya and other countries withpoor pain management.Through the Accessto Controlled Medications Programme, engage the Kenyan government toimprove access to opioid pain medicines.Through the “Make MedicinesChild Size” campaign, work with pharmaceutical companies to ensurethat medicines for neuropathic pain are available in formulations suitablefor children.To International and KenyanNGOs, and Private and Church Health ServicesDeveloppolicies on pain treatment and palliative care.Ensurethat all patients using clinical services for life-limiting illness canaccess palliative care, either by providing it as part of the service, orby strengthening hospice and public palliative care services andfacilitating access to them.Establishpalliative care services for children, ensuring thatstrong opioids and medicines for neuropathic pain are available.Train healthworkers on palliative care and pain treatment, including for children.Strengthen the role of community healthworkers and community health extension workers in providing home-basedpalliative care. Community health workers should be equipped with basiccare kits, receive modest compensation, and have strong links with healthcare professionals. In rural areas they should be provided withtransportation.AcknowledgmentsThis report was researched andwritten by Juliane Kippenberg, senior researcher in the Children’s RightsDivision of Human Rights Watch, and Laura Thomas, fellow in the Health andHuman Rights Division of Human Rights Watch.The report was reviewed byDiederik Lohman, senior researcher in the Health and Human Rights Division;Joseph Amon, director of the Health and Human Rights Division; Ben Rawlence,researcher in the Africa Division; Agnes Odhiambo, researcher in theWomen’s Rights Division; and Clive Baldwin, senior legal advisor. It wasedited by Zama Coursen Neff, deputy director of the Children’s Rights Divisionand Robin Shulman, consultant to the program office.Production assistance was providedby Kyle Knight and Cassandra Mikicic, associates in the Children’s Rightsdivision; Anna Lopriore, creative manager; Grace Choi, publications director;and Fitzroy Hepkins, mail manager.We would like to thank Dr.Zipporah Ali and her colleagues from the Kenya Hospices and Palliative CareAssociation (KEHPCA) for sharing their analysis with us, providing us withassistance during our field research, and commenting on the draft report. Allerrors are our own. We would also like to thank Charles Olango for invaluablesupport during our research in Bondo district, Nyanza province.[1]The Convention on theRights of the Child states, "For the purposes of the present Convention, achild means every human being below the age of eighteen years unless under thelaw applicable to the child, majority is attained earlier." Convention onthe Rights of the Child (CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, G.A. Res. 44/25,annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), enteredinto force September 2, 1990, India acceded to the CRC on December 11, 1992, art.1.[2]Under international law, anyone under the age of 18 is a child. Convention onthe Rights of the Child (CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, G.A. Res. 44/25,annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), enteredinto force September 2, 1990, s.1.[3]National Children’s Bureau, “Guidelines For Research,” April2003, http://www.ncb.org.uk/dotpdf/open percent20access percent20- percent20phasepercent201 percent20only/research_guidelines_200604.pdf (accessed March 29,2010).[4]The National Child Traumatic Stress Network, “Understanding ChildTraumatic Stress,” 2005,http://www.nctsn.org/nctsn_assets/pdfs/edu_materials/understanding_child_traumatic_stress_brochure_9-29-05.pdf(accessed March 29, 2010).[5]Erick O. Nyambedha, “Ethical dilemmas of social science research on AIDSand orphanhood in Western Kenya,” Social Science & Medicine,vol. 10 (2008), pp. 1-9.[6]WorldHealth Organization (WHO), “Palliative care,” undated,http://www.who.int/cancer/palliative/en/ (accessed February 12, 2010). ForHuman Rights Watch publications on the right to pain treatment, see UnbearablePain:  India’s Obligation to Ensure Palliative Care, October2009, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/health1009webwcover.pdf;“Please, do not make us suffer any more…”: Access to PainTreatment as Human Right, March 2009, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/health0309web_1.pdf.[7]The International Children’s Palliative Care Network (ICPCN) hasidentified four types of life-limiting condition: life-threatening illness forwhich curative treatment is possible but can fail (for example, cancer);illness where premature death is likely, but treatment can prolong life andallow long periods of health (i.e. HIV, cystic fibrosis, sickle cell disease);progressive illnesses with no treatment options, where treatment is exclusivelypalliative but may extend over many years (i.e. muscular dystrophy); andirreversible but non-progressive conditions that involve severe disability,health complications and risk of premature death (i.e. severe cerebal palsy,multiple disability following brain or spinal injury). ICPCN, “What isChildren’s Palliative Care,” http://www.icpcn.org.uk/page.asp?section=0001000100080004&itemTitle=What+is+Childrenpercent92s+Palliative+Care percent3F (accessed April 23, 2010).[8]Peter A. Selwyn and Marshall Forstein, “Overcoming the false dichotomy ofcurative vs. palliative care for late-stage HIV/AIDS,” Journal of theAmerican Medical Association, vol.290 (2003), pp. 806-814; Richard Hardinget al., “Does Palliative Care Improve Outcomes for patients withHIV/AIDS: A systematic review of the evidence,” Sexually TransmittedInfections , vol. 81 (2005), pp. 5-14; Justin Amery et al., “TheBeginning of Children’s Palliative Care in Africa: Evaluation of aChildren’s Palliative Care Service in Africa,” Journal ofPalliative Medicine, vol. 12 (2009), pp. 1015-1021.[9]WHO,National Cancer Control Programs: Policies and Managerial Guidelines,(Geneva: World Health Organization 2002), p. 85, http://www.who.int/cancer/media/en/408.pdf(accessed February 12, 2010). See also Justin Amery, ed., Children’sPalliative Care in Africa (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009).[10]WHO,National Cancer Control Programs, p. 85. See also Amery, Children’sPalliative Care in Africa.[11]Amery et al., “The Beginning of Children’s Palliative Care inAfrica,” Journal of Palliative Medicine.[12]World Health Assembly, “Cancer prevention and control,” WHA58.22,May 25, 2005, http://www.who.int/cancer/media/news/WHA58 percent2022-en.pdf(accessed on February 12, 2010).[13]WHO,National Cancer Control Programs, p. 86.[14]Eric Krakauer, “Just Palliative Care: Responding Responsibly to theSuffering of the Poor,” Journal of Pain and Symptom Management,vol. 35, no. 5 (November 2008), p. 506. On such views in Kenya, see subsectionbelow on Lack of Skill in Assessing and Treating Pain.[15]Ibid., pp. 505-512.[16]Foran anthropological perspective on cancer pain in Africa, see Julie Livingston,“The Social Phenomenology of the Next Epidemic: Pain in Botswana’sCancer Ward,” draft paper presented at an exploratory seminar onAnthropology and Social Innovation in Global Health, Princeton University,March 11-14, 2010 (on file at Human Rights Watch).[17]For more detail, see Human Rights Watch, “Please, do not make ussuffer any more…”, March 2009, pp. 5-10; Kathleen M. Foley etal., “Pain Control for People with Cancer and AIDS,” in Dean T.Jamison et al., eds., Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries,2nd ed. (New York: Oxford University Press, 2006), p. 982.[18]Selwyn and Forstein, “Overcoming the false dichotomy of curative vs.palliative care,” pp. 806-814; K. Collins and R. Harding, “ImprovingHIV management in Sub-Saharan Africa: How much palliative care is needed?”AIDS Care, vol. 19, no. 10 (November 2007), pp.1304-1306; Family HealthInternational, “Integrating palliative care into primary HIV careservices: why it is important and how it can be done,” August 11, 2009(unpublished document on file at Human Rights Watch). At the end of 2008, only42 percent of people in need of ART in low and middle income countries receivedit, including just 38 percent of children.  AIDS caused 2 million deathsin the same year. UNAIDS, WHO, “Global Facts and Figures,” 2009, http://data.unaids.org/pub/FactSheet/2009/20091124_FS_global_en.pdf(accessed June 18, 2010).[19]Oye Gureje, et al., “Persistent Pain and Well-being: a World HealthOrganization Study in Primary Care,” Journal of the American MedicalAssociation, vol. 280 (1998), pp. 147-151.[20]Amery, Children’s Palliative Care in Africa, p. 98; WHO, NationalCancer Control Programs, p. 83.[21]WHO, “WHO’s pain ladder,” undated, http://www.who.int/cancer/palliative/painladder/en/(accessed March 15, 2010). This has been developed for cancer but is alsoreferred to for other conditions. See also WHO, Cancer Pain Relief andPalliative Care for Children (Geneva: World Health Organization, 1998), pp.24-25.[22]WHO, “WHO Model List of Essential Medicines,” March 2009,http://www.who.int/selection_medicines/committees/expert/17/sixteenth_adult_list_en.pdf(accessed February 12, 2010), art. 2.2; WHO, “WHO Model List of EssentialMedicines for Children,” 2nd ed., March 2009, http://www.who.int/selection_medicines/committees/expert/17/second_children_list_en.pdf(accessed March 30, 2010), art. 2.2.[23]WHO, “Scoping Document for WHO Treatment Guidelines on Chronic Pain inChildren,” 2008, http://www.who.int/medicines/areas/quality_safety/Scoping_WHOGuide_chronic_pain_children.pdf(accessed April 23, 2010). WHO is also developing similar guidelines foradults. WHO, “Scoping Document for WHO Treatment Guideline on PainRelated to Cancer, HIV and other progressive life-threatening illnesses inadults,” October 14, 2008,http://www.who.int/medicines/areas/quality_safety/Scoping_WHOGuide_malignant_pain_adults.pdf(accessed March 18, 2010).[24]Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, adopted March 30, 1961, 520 U.N.T.S.151, entered into force December 13, 1964, http://www.incb.org/incb/convention_1961.html(accessed January 15, 2009), preamble.[25]United Nations Secretary General (UNSG), “The MillenniumDevelopment Goals Report 2009,” July 6, 2009,http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/pdf/MDG_Report_2009_ENG.pdf (accessedFebruary 12, 2010), pp. 24-25. UNICEF, The State of the World’sChildren: Special Edition (New York: UNICEF, 2009), pp. 4 and 31. In 2001,UN member states adopted the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), definingtime-bound global objectives in the areas of health, education, and povertyeradication, to be reached by 2015. The MDG target for Africa is a reduction toabout 61 per 1000 births by 2015. The Sub-Saharan Africa mortality rate forchildren under the age five was 184 per 1,000 live births in 1990, and 144 per1,000 live births in 2008. United Nations International Children's EmergencyFund (UNICEF), “Child info,”http://www.childinfo.org/mortality.html (accessed February 16, 2010).[26]UNAIDS, WHO, “Mapping Progress Towards Universal Access,”http://www.slideshare.net/UNAIDS/mapping-progress-towards-universal-access(accessed March 18, 2010).[27]WHO, “Towards Universal Access, Scaling up priority HIV/AIDSinterventions in the health sector,” 2008,http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/towards_universal_access_report_2008.pdf (accessedMarch 18, 2010), p. 80 (table).[28]Rebecca J. Lingwood etal., “The challenge of cancer control in Africa,” Nature ReviewsCancer, vol. 8 (May 2008), p. 398-403. Cancer is also on the riseglobally. According to experts, around 250,000 children develop cancer eachyear worldwide. Vittal Katikireddi, “100 000 children die needlessly fromcancer every year,” British Medical Journal , vol. 328, no. 7437(February 21, 2004), http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC344290/(accessed March 30, 2010), p. 422.[29]International Union Against Cancer (UICC), “Cancer Control in Africa: Declarationpresented during the Cancer Control in Africa meeting London, UK, 10-11 May2007,” http://www.uicc.org/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=15726&Itemid=631(accessed February 12, 2010). “Cure” is understood to mean 5-yearsurvival after remission. International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), WHO,“Cancer in Africa, Epidemiology and Prevention,” 2003,http://www.iarc.fr/en/publications/pdfs-online/epi/sp153/SP153.pdf (accessedMarch 18, 2010). There are few reliable statistics on cancer in Africa, due tothe absence of cancer registries, and no reliable estimates for the number ofchild deaths from cancer.[30]David Clark et al., “Hospice and Palliative CareDevelopment in Africa: A Multi-Method Review of Services andExperiences,” Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, vol. 33,issue 6  (June 2007); David Clark et al., “Mapping Levels ofPalliative Care Development: A Global View,” Journal of Pain andSymptom Management, vol. 35, issue 5 (February 2008); Justin Amery et al.,“Thebeginnings of children's palliative care in Africa: evaluation of a children'spalliative care service in Africa,” Journal of Palliative Medicine; Richard Harding  andIrene Higginson, Palliative Care in Sub-Saharan Africa: An Appraisal (London:King's College and Diana, Princess of Wales, Memorial Fund, 2004),http://www.cpsonline.info/content/resources/africa/pallcareinsubsaharanafrica.pdf(accessed February 16, 2010).[31]Amery et al., “The Beginning of Children’s Palliative Care inAfrica,” Journal of Palliative Medicine, p. 1019.[32]Ibid. Chemotherapy can be a form of palliative care. Even if a child’scancer is considered incurable, chemotherapy may be used to shrink a tumor inorder to reduce pain.[33]“Africa, Countries,” The World Bank resources page, undated,http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/COUNTRIES/AFRICAEXT/0,,menuPK:258664~pagePK:146748~piPK:146812~theSitePK:258644,00.html(accessed March 30, 2010).[34]“Info by Country: Kenya, Statistics,” United Nations Children'sFund (UNICEF), http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/kenya_statistics.html(accessed March 30, 2010). Figures are from 1990 and 2008.[35]“Info by Country: Eastern and Southern Africa”, UnitedNations Children's Fund (UNICEF),http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/esaro.html (accessed March 30, 2010).Figures are from 1990 and 2008.[36]“Kenya,” The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS),undated, http://www.unaids.org/en/CountryResponses/Countries/kenya.asp(accessed March 30, 2010).[37]Presentation by Dr. Irene Mukui, representative of the National STI/AIDSControl Program (NASCOP), Nairobi, November 30, 2009, direct attendance byHuman Rights Watch researcher.  Mother-to-child transmission of HIVincludes transmission during pregnancy, birth or breastfeeding.[38]Human Rights Watch interview with David Makumi, deputypresident, Kenya Cancer Association, March 9, 2010.[39]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Ochiba Lukandu, Division ofNon-Communicable Diseases, Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation, February26, 2010.[40]Dagi Kimani, “New topic of cancer,”The East African, June 1, 2009. These figures are onlyestimates, as the country lacks a cancer registry. The WHO estimate has been calculatedusing statistics from the World Health Organization Statistical InformationSystem (WHOSIS) http://www.who.int/whosis/en/index.html (2009 data accessed as Excelspreadsheet, March 24, 2010).  According to this data, Kenya’s populationis approximately 37,538,000 (2007), and its cancer mortality rate is 129.0 per100,000 (2004).[41]The only cancer registry is for Nairobi; it registered213 cases of cancer among children between 2000 and 2002. Kenya MedicalResearch Institute/Nairobi Cancer Registry, “Cancer Incidence Report2000-2002,” October 2006, p. 30; International Agency for Research onCancer (IARC)/World Health Organization (WHO), “Cancer in Africa,Epidemiology and Prevention,” 2003, http://www.iarc.fr/en/publications/pdfs-online/epi/sp153/SP153.pdf(accessed March 18, 2010); J. Rainey et al., “Spatial clustering ofendemic Burkitt’s lymphoma in high-risk regions of Kenya,” InternationalJournal of Cancer, vol. 120 (2006), pp. 121-27.[42]Human Rights Watch interview with Patrick O., age 10, Nyangoma, Bondo district,Nyanza province, February 27, 2010.[43]Human Rights Watch interview with father of Elena C., age seven, Mathare,Nairobi, February 26, 2010.[44]Human Rights Watch interview with mother of Gerard K., Kibera, Nairobi, March9, 2010.[45]Human Rights Watch interview with mother of Nick M., age seven, KenyattaNational Hospital, Nairobi, February 25, 2010. The boy eventually reachedKenyatta National Hospital, where he had surgery and got pain treatment.[46]Human Rights Watch interview with mother of Jacob O., age four, Nyangoma, Bondodistrict, Nyanza province, February 28, 2010.[47]Human Rights Watch interview with mother of Rebecca A., Nyangoma,Bondo district, February 27, 2010.[48]Human Rights Watch interview with Rebecca A., age 20, Nyangoma,Bondo district, February 27, 2010.[49]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. John Weru,head doctor at Nairobi Hospice, March 10, 2010.[50]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Zipporah Ali, National Coordinator,KEHPCA, February 24, 2010.[51]Human Rights Watch interview with a doctor treating children withcancer A,  Nairobi, February 25, 2010; Human Rights Watch interview with head nurse and asecond nurse, Bondo District Hospital, March 1, 2010; Human Rights Watchinterview with Dr. Juliana Otieno, chief administrator and head of pediatrics,New Nyanza General Hospital, March 1, 2010.[52]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. John Weru,head doctor at Nairobi Hospice, February 25, 2010.[53]Human Rights Watch interview with Christine L., age 18, Kenyatta NationalHospital, Nairobi, February 24, 2010.[54]For details see legal section below.[55]UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, “Substantive IssuesArising in the Implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Socialand Cultural Rights,” General Comment No. 14, The Right to the HighestAttainable Standard of Health, E/C.12/2000/4 (2000), paras. 43-44, The GeneralComment is based on the International Covenant on Economic, Social and CulturalRights (ICESCR), adopted December 16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAORSupp. (No. 16) at 49, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 993 U.N.T.S. 3, entered intoforce January 3, 1976, art. 11; see also CRC, art 24.[56]WHO, National Cancer Control Programs, p. 86.[57]WHO, Cancer Pain Relief: with a guide to opioid availability, 2nded. (Geneva: World Health Organization, 1996), http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/9241544821.pdf(accessed April 22, 2010).[58]Ibid. Some similar recommendations were made in other documents, such as; WorldHealth Organization (WHO), National Cancer Control Programs, p.86-88; Cancerpain relief and palliative care in children, pp. 71-72.[59]A survey of seven Kenyan hospices found that they served 5,426 cancer patientsbetween July and December 2008, and 1,586 patients with HIV during the sameperiod. KEHPCA has been carrying out workshop with hospices to sensitize themto the palliative care needs of patients living with HIV. KEHPCA, “AnnualReport,” 2008, pp. 8 and ii. Regarding the referral of children, see nextsection below.[60]Kenya’s public health system is classified into six levels. The communityis at level one, dispensaries are at level two, health centers are at levelthree, and hospitals are at levels four, five, and six. There are national(tertiary), provincial (secondary), and district and sub-district (primary)hospitals. Ministry of Medical Services, Government of Kenya, Strategic Plan2008-2012, p. 14, http://www.medical.go.ke/dmdocuments/MOMSpercent20Strategic percent20Plan percent20- percent202008 percent20-percent202012.pdf (accessed April 22, 2010). A health center is generallystaffed by a clinical officer and a nurse and a dispensary generally has onlynurses. Human Rights Watch interview with Medical Officer for Public Health,Bondo District, March 1, 2010.[61]KEHPCA, “Annual Report” 2008, p. 11; Human Rights Watch interviewwith Dr. Zipporah Ali, National Coordinator, KEHPCA, March 3, 2010. In addition, some nongovernment mission hospitals have alsoestablished palliative care units. A few public hospitals, New NyanzaProvincial General Hospital and Moi Referral Hospital, offer some palliativecare services but do not have a separate palliative care unit. Regardingthe availability of morphine in hospitals, see section below on Poor DrugAvailability.[62]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Esther Munyoro, headof the palliative care unit, Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi, February 24,2010; Human Rights Watch interview with nurse A, palliative care unit, KenyattaNational Hospital, Nairobi, February 24, 2010.[63]Jack Jagwe and Anne Merriman, “Uganda: Delivering Analgesia in RuralAfrica: Opioid Availability and Nurse Prescribing,” Journal of Painand Symptom Management, vol. 33, no. 5 (May 2007), p. 550.[64]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with NeilL. Schechter, director, Pain Relief Program, Connecticut Children's MedicalCenter, March 23, 2010.[65]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. HellenKaryuki, Kenyan Association for the Study of Pain, February 25, 2010; HumanRights Watch interview with David Makumi, March 9, 2010.[66]Human Rights Watch interview with head nurse, Gertrude’s Children’sHospital, Nairobi, March 5, 2010.[67]New Nyanza General Hospital in Kisumu and Kenyatta National Hospital inNairobi.[68]Between 8 and 10 percent of patients at Nairobi, Meru, and Coast Hospices were children.The exception was Kisumu Hospice, where 60 percent of patients were children. KEHPCA,“Annual report 2008,” Annex P.ii.[69]Human Rights Watch interview with hospice administrator, St. Catherine’sHospice, March 4, 2010.[70]Human Right Watch interview with James Nyaga,founder, Hope for Cancer Kids, February 24, 2010.[71]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Esther Munyoro, Kenyatta National Hospital, February 24, 2010; HumanRights Watch interview with Dr. John Weru, March 25, 2010; Human Rights Watchinterview with Dr. Juliana Otieno, March 1, 2010.[72]WHO, Cancer pain relief and palliative care in children, p. 71.[73]Human Rights Watch interview with James Nyaga, founder, Hope for Cancer Kids,February 24, 2010; Human Rights Watch interview with hospice administrator, St.Catherine’s Hospice, March 4, 2010; Human Rights Watch interview with Dr.John Weru, March 25, 2010.[74]WHO, “Community Home-Based Care: Action Research in Kenya,”WHO/NMH/CCL/01.01, 2001; Charles Olango, “An ethnographic study ofhome-based care for people living with HIV/AIDS in Nyang’oma Division,Bondo District, Western Kenya,” MA Thesis, Institute of Anthropology,Gender and African Studies, University of Nairobi, 2008 (unpublished, on fileat Human Rights Watch).[75]Ministry of Health, “Taking the Kenya Essential Package for Health to theCommunity. A Strategy for the Delivery of Level One Services,” June 2006.[76]Human Rights Watch, A Question of Life or Death, pp. 78-80; HumanRights Watch interview with community health worker, Nyangoma, February 28,2010; Human Rights Watch interviews with community health workers, Mathare,Nairobi, February 26, 2010.[77]Human Rights Watch interview with James Nyaga, founder of Hope for Cancer Kids,Nairobi, February 24, 2010.[78]Human Rights Watch interview with John Weru, March 25, 2010; Human Rights Watch interview with palliative carenurses, Kisumu Hospice, March 2, 2010.[79]Human Rights Watch interview with Ann Wanjiru, head of GROOTS Mathare MothersDevelopment Centre, Mathare, February 26, 2010.[80]WHO, National Cancer Control Programs, p. 91[81]On some of the challenges of care in Kenya’s orphanages, see CarlosAlviar and Roger Pearson, “Cash transfers for vulnerable children inKenya: from political choice to scale-up,” UNICEF, October 2009, http://www.unicef.org/socialpolicy/files/Postscript_Formatted_PPCI_cash_transfers_in_Kenya_Final_Dec_15.pdf(accessed April 22, 2010), p. 12.[82]Nyumbani orphanage in Nairobi has a staff nurse with knowledgeof palliative care, and health care workers administer morphine to children whosuffer from severe pain. In one case, a doctor who regularly visits theorphanage prescribed an extended course of morphine to a 13-year-old boy whohad become resistant to ART and eventually died. Human Rights Watchinterview with staff members of Nyumbani orphanage, March 9, 2010.[83]Human Rights Watch interview with staff member of orphanage, Nairobi, March 4,2010.[84]Human Rights Watch interview with head of orphanage, Nairobi, March 3, 2010.[85]WHO, National Cancer Control Programs, p. 88.[86]Ministry of Medical Services, Government of Kenya, Strategic Plan; Ministryof Public Health and Sanitation, “Strategic Plan 2008-2012,”December 2008, http://www.publichealth.go.ke/index.php?option=com_docman&task=cat_view&gid=15&Itemid=94(accessed March 27, 2010).[87]National AIDS Control Council, Kenya National AIDS Strategic Plan:Delivering on Universal Access to Services, (Nairobi: Office of thePresident, November 2009), http://www.nacc.or.ke/2007/images/downloads/knasp_iii_document.pdf(accessed April 22, 2010), p. 34. For specific policies on opioid medicines,see the section below on drug availability.[88]Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation, Ministry of Medical Services, NationalStrategy for the Prevention and Control of Cancer, draft, November 2009 (onfile at Human Rights Watch); Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Lukandu,Division of Non-Communicable Diseases, Ministry of Public Health andSanitation, February 26, 2010.[89]The Cancer Prevention and Control Bill, 2009 (draft on file at Human RightsWatch).[90]Annah Wamae et al., Kenya working papers No.2: “Child Health Services inKenya,” (Nairobi: Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation/USAID/UNICEF)January 2009,http://www.usaid.gov/ke/ke.buproc/Child_health_services.pdf(accessed April 22, 2010), p. 23; Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation/Ministry of Medical Services, “Child Survival and Development Strategy2008-2015,” January 2009, http://www.usaid.gov/ke/ke.buproc/index.html(accessed April 22, 2010).[91]States are required to report their“consumption” of morphine and other opioid medicines to the INCB aspart of the system of international drug control established by the SingleConvention on Narcotic Drugs. A drug is considered “consumed” whenit has been “supplied to any person or enterprise for retaildistribution, medical use or scientific research.” Single Convention onNarcotic Drugs, art. 1(2).[92]INCB, Narcotic Drugs: Estimated World Requirementsfor 2010 – Statistics for 2008, T.10.XI.2 (New York: United Nations,2010) http://www.incb.org/incb/en/narcotic_drugs_2009.html (accessed March 30,2010), p. 219.[93]This calculation is based on an estimate by Foley andothers that 80 percent of terminal cancer patients and 50 percent of terminalAIDS patients will require an average of 90 days of pain treatment with 60 to75 mg of morphine per day. Kathleen M. Foley et al., “Pain Control forPeople with Cancer and AIDS” in Disease Control Priorities inDeveloping Countries, pp. 981-994.[94]INCB, Narcotic Drugs: Estimated WorldRequirements for 2010 – Statistics for 2008, pp. 260, 262 and267.[95]UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, “Substantive IssuesArising in the Implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Socialand Cultural Rights,” General Comment No. 14, The Right to the HighestAttainable Standard of Health, U.N. Doc. E/C.12/2000/4 (2000), para 83.[96]WHO, “WHO Model List of Essential Medicines”; WHO, “WHO ModelList of Essential Medicines for Children,” art. 2.2.[97]WHO, National Cancer Control Programs, p. 87; WHO, Cancer Pain Relief,p. 43.[98]KEHPCA, “Annual Report,” 2008; Human Rights Watch interview with Dr.Zipporah Ali, National Coordinator, KEHPCA, February 24, 2010. New Nyanza Provincial General Hospital does not stock morphine, but usesoral morphine from a hospice nearby. Several other nongovernmentalhealth facilities also have morphine, including health facilities inNairobi’s slums. However, even the leading private children’shospital lacks oral morphine: Human Rights Watch interview with head nurse,Gertrude’s Children’s Hospital, Nairobi, March 5, 2010. Port Reitzdistrict hospital, which has a palliative care unit, also lacks oral morphine.[99]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Mikal Ayiro, Pharmacy and PoisonsBoard, March 3, 2010; Human Rights Watch interview with pharmacist, NairobiHospice, March 10, 2010. Most hospitals also stock pethidine to treat acutepain; it is also unsuitable to treat chronic pain. For details, see text boxbelow.[100]Human Rights Watch interview with Medical Officer forPublic Health, Bondo District Hospital, March 1, 2010; Human Rights Watchinterview with medical officer in charge, District Medical Office, Kisumu East,March 2, 2010; Human Rights Watch Interview with Dr. Mikal Ayiro, March 3, 2010;Human Rights Watch interview with head nurse and a second nurse, Bondo DistrictHospital, March 1, 2010.[101]Human Rights Watch interviews with relatives of child patients at New NyanzaGeneral Hospital and Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi,February and March 2010.[102]Human Rights Watch interview with sister of Judith A.,age 16, Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi, February 24, 2010.[103]Human Rights Watch interview with nurse B,palliative care unit, Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi, February 24, 2010.[104]Human Rights Watch interview with head nurse, Bondo District Hospital,March 1, 2010.[105]Human Rights Watch interview with Ann Wanjiru, head of GROOTS Mathare MothersDevelopment Centre, Mathare, February 26, 2010.[106]Human Rights Watch interview with head nurse, Bondo District Hospital,March 1, 2010.[107]Republic of Kenya, Ministry of Health, “The Kenya National DrugPolicy,” July, 1994, http://collections.infocollections.org/whocountry/en/d/Jh4332e/(accessed March 30, 2010).[108]Ibid., art.  1.2.[109]Ibid., arts. 2.1, 2.4, 2.5, 3.2, 3.4, and 6.4.[110]Ibid.,art. 2.2. Injectable pethidine and dihydrocodeine tablets arealso listed as essential drugs for referral, provincial, district, and sub-districthospitals. Although the Kenya National Drug Policy provides that the KenyaEssential Drugs List should be updated at least every two years, the currentlist was agreed to in 2002 and published in 2003.[111]Republic of Kenya, Ministry of Health, “Kenya Essential DrugsList,” art. 2.1. The Essential Drugs list also states that asprin,paracetamol and ibuprofen should be available in health centers.[112]WHO, “WHO Model List of Essential Medicines,” art. 2.2; WHO,“WHO Model List of Essential Medicines for Children,” art. 2.2.[113]World Health Organization, Cancer pain relief and palliative care inchildren, p. 31.[114]World Health Organization, Cancer pain relief, p. 24.[115]Friedrichsdorf SJ, Kuttner L, and Karl H, “PharmacologicalMethods to Relieve Pain,” in Kuttner L. (ed), A Child in Pain (2nded), (Bethel: Crown House Publishing, 2010) pp. 221-64; Stefan J. Friedrichsdorf, “CancerPain Management in Children,” in Paul Farquhar-Smith, TimWigmoreand Colm Irving (eds), Anesthesia, Intensive Care and PainManagement for the Cancer Patient, (Oxford: Oxford University Press,2010).[116]Codeine and dihydrocodeine are metabolized to morphine in the body. Geneticdifferences mean that some people metabolize very little codeine to morphine,resulting in ineffective pain relief. Other people metabolize more codeine tomorphine than would usually be expected, which can result in overdose and hascaused child deaths. D.G. Williams, A. Patel and R.F. Howard,“Parmacogenetics of codeine metabolism in an urban population of childrenand its implications for analgesic reliability,” British Journal of Anaesthesia,vol.89, no. 6 (2002), pp. 839-45; Catherine Ciszkowski, “Codeine,Ultrarapid-Metabolism Genotype and Postoperative Death,” New EnglandJournal of Medicine , vol. 8, no. 36 (2009).[117]WHO, “Scoping Document for WHO Treatment Guidelines on Chronic Pain inChildren,” http://www.who.int/medicines/areas/quality_safety/Scoping_WHOGuide_chronic_pain_children.pdf(accessed April 20, 2010), pp. 5-6.[118]Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Control Act, Laws ofKenya Cap. 245 (Narcotic Drugs Act), sec. 3. The maximum penalty for possessionsolely for personal consumption is imprisonment for 20 years.  A fineequal to three times the market value of the controlled drug may be imposed ifthat amount is greater than 1 million Kenyan Shillings. Narcotic Drugs Act, sec.3(2)(b). At the time of writing, one US dollar was worth 81 Kenyan Shillings.[119]Ibid., sec. 3(3).[120]Republic of Kenya, Ministry of Health, “The Kenya National DrugPolicy,” art. 8. The prescription, supply and dispensing of all medicinesis further regulated by the Pharmacy and Poisons Act, Laws of Kenya,Chapter. 244, 1957 http://www.kenyalaw.org/kenyalaw/klr_app/frames.php(accessed March 30, 2010).[121]Narcotic Drugs Act, sec. 15.[122]Cited in Richard Harding, et al., “Pain Relieving Drugs in 12 AfricanPEPFAR Countries,” January 2007,http://www.theworkcontinues.org/document.asp?id=87&pageno= (accessed March30, 2010), p. 30.[123]Human Rights Watch interviews with doctors specializedin palliative care and pain treatment, February and March 2010; Human Rightsinterview with Regina Mbindyo, WHO Medicines Officer, Nairobi, March 8, 2010.The Narcotic Drugs Act replaced the now-repealedDangerous Drugs Act, Laws of Kenya, Chapter 245, 1933 (repealed)http://www.kenyalaw.org/kenyalaw/klr_app/frames.php (accessed March 30, 2010),known as the ‘DDA.’ An officer of the Kenyan Pharmacy and PoisonsBoard told Human Rights Watch that, in the absence of a law on the medicinaluse of opioids, the Board continues to apply the rules that were in effectunder the DDA. Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Mikal Ayiro, Pharmacy andPoisons Board, March 3, 2010.[124]Human Rights Watch interview with a pediatrician A, Nairobi, March 3, 2010; HumanRights Watch interview with Dr. John Weru, February 25, 2010; Human Rights Watch interview with Hellen Karyuki,Kenyan Association for the Study of Pain, February 25, 2010.[125]INCB, Demand for and Supply of Opiates for Medical and Scientific Needs,E.89.XI.5 (New York: United Nations, 1989), p. 15.[126]UN Commission on NarcoticDrugs, “Promoting adequate availability of internationally controlledlicit drugs for medical and scientific purposes while preventing theirdiversion and abuse,” Resolution 53/4, E/CN.7/2010/18.[127]Ibid., art. 2.2. Injectable pethidine and dihydrocodeinetablets are also listed as essential drugs for sub-district hospitals. Althoughthe Kenya National Drug Policy provides that the Kenya Essential Drugs Listshould be updated at least every two years, the current list was agreed to in2002 and published in 2003.[128]These drugs are not the only drugs on the list that KEMSA does not procure. Republicof Kenya, Ministry of Health, “The Kenya National Drug Policy”;Human Rights Watch email correspondence with public relations officer, KEMSA,April 27, 2010.[129]Human Rights Watch telephone interview withLaborex salesman, March 4, 2010; Human Rights Watch email correspondencewith public relations officer, KEMSA, April 27, 2010.[130]Together with the Ministry of Medical Services and the Ministry of PublicHealth and Sanitation, KEMSA determines which medicines to procure by annuallyassessing which medicines are in the greatest demand. A standard order form isthen created, which hospitals use to procure medicines from KEMSA. Oralmorphine is does not currently appear on the form and thus may not be obtainedfrom KEMSA.[131]Vanessa Adams, Access to pain relief – an essential human right(London: Help the Hospices, 2007), p. 37.[132]Scott Burris and Corey S. Davis, "A Blueprint for Reforming Access toTherapeutic Opioids: Entry Points for International Action to Remove the PolicyBarriers to Care" (Centers for Law and the Public's Health: ACollaborative at the Johns Hopkins and Georgetown Universities, 2008), p. 18.[133]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Dr.Anne Merriman, April 8, 2010.[134]This calculation is based on a relatively high need of 75 mg of morphine perday. Kathleen M. Foley et al., “PainControl for People with Cancer and AIDS”.[135] Human Rights Watchtelephone interview with Laborex salesman, March 4, 2010.[136]Human Rights Watch interview with palliative carenurses, Kisumu Hospice, March 2, 2010.[137]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Martha Maurer, Pain andPolicy Studies Group, WHO Collaborating Center for Policy and Communications inCancer Care at the University of Wisconsin, January 26, 2010.[138]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Zipporah Ali, National Coordinator,KEHPCA, February 24, 2010.[139]Human Rights Watch interview with a pediatrician B,  New Nyanza GeneralHospital, Kisumu, March 2, 2010.[140]Althoughneuropathic pain is difficult to treat and more research is needed into whichmedicines work best, medicines commonly used to treat neuropathic pain includeamitriptyline and gabapentin. Amery, Children’s Palliative Care inAfrica, p. 118; Stefan J. Friedrichsdorf and Tammy I. Kang, “TheManagement of Pain in Children with Life-limiting Illnesses,” PediatricClinics of North America, vol. 54 (2007), p. 660.[141]Human Rights Watch interview with South African experts on pediatric palliativecare, Nairobi, March 5, 2010.[142]Human Rights Watch interview with head of orphanage, Nairobi, March 3, 2010.[143]There is an important distinction between physical dependence and addiction.Physical dependence is a side effect of chronic pain treatment with opioids,which is addressed by gradually reducing the dose when pain treatment is nolonger needed. According to WHO, “Fear of what is commonly thought of asopioid addiction is one of the principal reasons for children with severe cancerpain not receiving adequate analgesia. This fear has been greatly exaggerated.‘Addiction’ occurs when individuals are overwhelmingly involved inobtaining and using a drug primarily for its euphoric effects. This is not aproblem in children with cancer who receives opioids for pain control.”WHO, Cancer Pain Relief and Palliative Care for Children, p. 43.[144]UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 14, para. 43.[145]WHO, National Cancer Control Programs, p. 87; WHO, Cancer PainRelief, p. 42.[146]Human Rights Watch interview with Prof. Were, head of the Kenya PediatricAssociation, March 3, 2010.[147]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Esther Munyoro, palliative careunit, Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi, February 24, 2010.[148]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Hellen Kariuki, Nairobi, February 25,2010.[149]Human Rights Watch interview with David Musyoki, KEHPCA, Nairobi, February 24,2010.[150]Amery et al., “The Beginnings of Children’s Palliative Care,”Journal of Palliative Medicine, pp. 1015-16.[151]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. ZipporahAli, National Coordinator, KEHPCA, Nairobi, February 24, 2010.[152]Medical Practitioners andDentists Board, “CPD Guidelines,” January 2010, http://www.medicalboard.co.ke/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=24&Itemid=21(accessed July 2, 2010).[153]KEHPCA, “Annual Report 2008,”pp. 8-9; Human Rights Watch interview with palliative care nurses, KisumuHospice, March 2, 2010.[154]KEHPCA,“National Participants Manual for Health care Providers,” October24, 2008; KEHPCA, “Annual Report 2008”; Education, Hospice AfricaUganda, “Bachelor's Degree in Palliative Care (Distance Learning),”undated,http://www.hospiceafrica.or.ug/index.php?mod=article&cat=educ&article=37(accessed March 25, 2010);Nairobi Hospice, Oxford Brookes University,“Diploma in Higher Education in Palliative Care DipHE,” undated,http://shsc.brookes.ac.uk/images/pdfs/courses/postqualifying/long_courses/palliative-nairobi_091222.pdf(accessed March 25, 2010); School of Health and Social Care, Oxford BrookesUniversity,“Palliative Care, Nairobi Hospice,” undated,http://shsc.brookes.ac.uk/courses/post-qualifying/labc/palliative-care-nairobi-hospice(accessed March 25, 2010).[155]Human Rights Watch interviews with community health workers in Mathare, Kisumuand Nyangoma, February and March, 2010.[156]Human Rights Watch interview with Ann Wanjiru, head of GROOTS Mathare MothersDevelopment Centre, Mathare, February 26, 2010.[157]Human Rights Watch interviews with community healthworkers, Mathare, Nairobi, February 26, 2010, and Nyangoma, Bondo district,February 28, 1010. Such trainings also cover aspects of home-based care, suchas the treatment of wounds and bedsores.[158]Human Rights Watch interview with palliative care nurse B,Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi, February 24, 2010.[159]Human Rights Watch interview with Prof. Nduati, Nairobi, February 24, 2010.[160]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Hellen Kariuki, Nairobi, February 25,2010.[161]Human Rights Watch interview with Beatrice A., age 12, and her grandmother,Nyangoma, Bondo district, February 27, 2010.[162]WHO, “WHO’s pain ladder.”[163]Friedrichsdorf and Kang, “The Management of Pain in Children withLife-limiting Illnesses,” Pediatric Clinics of North America, p. 659.[164]Human Rights Watch interview with father of Alex K., age 3, Kenyatta NationalHospital, Nairobi, March 5, 2010. Alex’s father was told that his son wasgiven DF-118 on and off because of constipation.[165]Human Rights Watch interview with nurse on pediatric oncology ward, New NyanzaGeneral Provincial Hospital, Kisumu, March 1, 2010.[166]Human Rights Watch interviews with Thomas N., age 12, his mother, and the nursein charge, New Nyanza General Hospital, Kisumu, March 1, 2010.[167]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Esther Munyoro, palliativecare unit, Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi, February 24, 2010; HumanRights Watch interview with Dr. John Weru, February 25, 2010.[168]Human Rights Watch interview with a doctor treating children withcancer A,   February 25, 2010.[169]Ministryof Medical Services, “Kenyatta National Hospital,” http://www.medical.go.ke/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=39 (accessedMay 18, 2010).[170]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Esther Munyoro, head ofthe palliative care unit, Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi, March 5, 2010.[171]Human Rights Watch interview with oncology nurse, Kenyatta National Hospital,Nairobi, February 25, 2010.[172]Human Rights Watch interview with oncology nurse, Kenyatta National Hospital,Nairobi, February 25 and March 3, 2010.[173]Human Rights Watch interview with nurse, Kenyatta NationalHospital, Nairobi, February, 25, 2010.[174]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Esther Munyoro, KenyattaNational Hospital, Nairobi, February 24, 2010.[175]They are distributed among four pediatric wards, as well as wards for dentaland facial diseases; ear, nose, and throat diseases; and eye diseases.[176]Human Rights Watch interview with a doctor treating children withcancer B, February 26, 2010.[177]Human Rights Watch interview with a pediatrician C, Nairobi, February 24, 2010.[178]Selwyn and Forstein, “Overcoming the false dichotomy of curative vs.palliative care.” Collins and Harding, “Improving HIV management inSub-Saharan Africa: How much palliative care is needed?” Family HealthInternational, “Integrating palliative care into primary HIV careservices.” For more details see above, Chapter I.[179]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. John Weru,February 25, 2010.[180]Human Rights Watch interview with community health worker, Kisumu, March 1,2010.[181]Human Rights Watch interview with community health workers, Mathare, Nairobi,February 26, 2010; Human Rights Watch with staff member of orphanage, Nairobi,March 4, 2010.[182]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Esther Munyoro, KenyattaNational Hospital, Nairobi, February 24, 2010.[183]Human Rights Watch interview with Prof. Fred Were, head of the Kenya PediatricAssociation, March 3, 2010.[184]Human Rights Watch interview with Prof. Ruth Nduati, Nairobi, February 24,2010.[185]Human Rights Watch interview with pediatrician B, New Nyanza General Hospital,March 2, 2010.[186]WHO, National Cancer Control Programs, p. 85.[187]UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 14:The Right to the Highest Attainable Standard of Health, para 22.[188]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Juliana Otieno, New Nyanza GeneralHospital, Kisumu, March 1, 2010.[189]Human Rights Watch interview with mother of Betty, age ten, New Nyanza GeneralHospital, March 1, 2010.[190]Human Rights Watch interview with father of Florentine, agefour, New Nyanza General Hospital, March 1, 2010.[191]Human Rights Watch interview with James Nyaga, founder of Hope for Cancer Kids,Nairobi, February 24, 2010. James Nyaga founded a support group for parents ofchildren with cancer, which has since become an NGO, called Hope for CancerKids.[192]Human Rights Watch interview with James Nyaga, founder of Hope for Cancer Kids,Nairobi, February 24, 2010; Human Rights Watch interview with oncology nurse,Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi, February 25, 2010.[193]Human Rights Watch interview with Pandipieri trainer, Kisumu, February 26,2010. Another example is psychosocial support at Nyumbani Children’sHome.[194]Amery, Children’s Palliative Care in Africa.[195]Human Right Watch interview with James Nyaga,founder, Hope for Cancer Kids, February 24, 2010.[196]This happened for example in the cases of Kevin N. and JudithA., whose stories are mentioned above. Human Rights Watch interview withpalliative care nurse A, Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi, February 24,2010.[197]Human Rights Watch, Letting Them Fail:Government Neglect and the Rights to Education for Children Affected by AIDS,vol. 17, no. 13 (A), October 2005, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2005/10/11/letting-them-fail (accessed March 31, 2010); Human Rights Watch, Inthe Shadow of Death: HIV/AIDS and Children’s Rights in Kenya, vol.13, no.5(A), June 2001, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2001/06/02/shadow-death (accessed March 31, 2010).[198]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Esther Munyoro, head ofthe palliative care unit, Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi, February 24,2010.[199]Amery, Children’s Palliative Care in Africa, p. 13; Human RightsWatch interview with palliative care nurse B, Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi,February 24, 2010.[200]Human Rights Watch interview with palliative care nurse B, Kenyatta NationalHospital, Nairobi, February 24, 2010.[201]Human Rights Watch interview with father of Steve K., age 11,Nairobi, February 25, 2010. Steve’s father moved to Nairobi to be withhis son in hospital, though he did not stay overnight.[202]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Esther Munyoro, KenyattaNational Hospital, Nairobi, February 24, 2010.[203]Human Right Watch interview with James Nyaga,founder, Hope for Cancer Kids, February 24, 2010.[204]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Hellen Kariuki, Nairobi, February 25,2010.[205]Human Rights Watch interview with palliative care nurse B,Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi, February 24, 2010.[206] P. Wenzel Geissler et al., “Self-treatment by Kenyan andUgandan schoolchildren and the need for school-based education,” HealthPolicy and Planning, vol. 16, no. 4 (2001), pp.362-71.[207]Human Rights Watch interview with John Weru, February 25, 2010.[208]UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 14:The Right to the Highest Attainable Standard of Health, paras 11, 22.[209]Amery et al., “The Beginnings of Children’s Palliative Care,”Journal of Palliative Medicine.[210]HumanRights Watch, A Question of Life or Death, pp. 41-45.[211]Human Rights Watch interview with head of orphan support organization, Kisumu,February 27, 2010.[212]Human Rights Watch interview with head of orphan support organization, Kisumu,March 1, 2010.[213]Human Rights Watch interview with community health worker A, Mathare, Nairobi,February 26, 2010.[214]World Health Organization (WHO), “Palliative care,” undated,http://www.who.int/cancer/palliative/en/ (accessed February 12, 2010).[215]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc.A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23, 1976, arts. 7,9(1); The Children Act, sec. 13(1).[216]Human Rights Watch, A Question of Life or Death, pp. 80-83.[217]19.7 percent of Kenyans live on less than $1 per day, (purchasing power parityat international dollar rate, 2005). WHOSIS.[218]Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation, “Strategic Plan 2008-2012,”December 2008, p. 14. This was also found in National Coordinating Agency forPopulation and Development (NCAPD), Ministry of Health (MOH), Central Bureau ofStatistics (CBS), ORC Macro, “Kenya Service Provision Assessment Survey2004,” 2005,http://www.measuredhs.com/pubs/pub_details.cfm?ID=561&srchTp=advanced(accessed March 16, 2010), p.77. The policy requires patients to pay a fee of10KSh (approx. 0.13 USD) at dispensaries and a fee of 20KSh (approx. 0.26 USD)at health centers. Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation, “StrategicPlan 2008-2012,” p. 14.[219]For an overview of hospital costs in Kenya (excluding drugs and diagnostics),see WHO, “Estimates of Unit Costs for Patients Services for Kenya,”http://www.who.int/choice/country/ken/cost/en/index.html (accessed March 25,2010).[220]Human Rights Watch interviews with staff and patients at Kenyatta NationalHospital, Nairobi, February 2010.[221]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Juliana Otieno, New Nyanza GeneralHospital, Kisumu, March 1, 2010.[222]Human Rights Watch interview with oncology nurse, Kenyatta National Hospital,Nairobi, February 25, 2010.[223]Human Rights Watch interview with father of Steve K., age 11,Nairobi, February 25, 2010.[224]Beatrice Gachenge, “KNH ailing from heavy burden of Defaulters,” BusinessDaily, August 5, 2009,http://www.businessdailyafrica.com/-/539552/634896/-/item/0/-/6j95vxz/-/index.html(accessed March 18, 2010). GTZ Kenya, “Detention of patients in publichospitals,” unpublished document (on file at Human Rights Watch).[225]Diana N. Kimani, David I. Muthaka and Dminaro K. Manda, Health careFinancing Through Health Insurance in Kenya: The Shift To A National SocialHealth Insurance Fund, KIPPRA Discussion Paper Nr. 42 (Nairobi: KenyaInstitute for Public Policy Research and Analysis 2004).[226]Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ), “Strategyfor Accessible, Affordable and Quality Health care in Kenya,” February11, 2010, power point presentation (on file at Human Rights Watch). Treatmentfor certain diseases is free of charge for children and adults alike. Thisincludes anti-retroviral treatment for HIV, treatment of HIV-relatedopportunistic infections, other sexually transmitted diseases, tuberculosis,and malaria. A. Opwora at al., Health Policyand Planning 2010, pp. 1-13. Advance Access published online on March 8,2010,http://heapol.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/reprint/czq009v1?maxtoshow=&hits=10&RESULTFORMAT=&fulltext=User+charges+in+government+health+facilities+in+Kenyapercent3A+effect+on+attendance+and+ percentE2 percent80 percentA6&searchid=1&FIRSTINDEX=0&resourcetype=HWCIT(accessed March 18, 2010).[227]Human Rights Watch interview with nurse in an HIV clinic,Mathare, Nairobi, August 14, 2008; Consortium for Research on EquitableHealth Systems (CREHS), “Reducing User Fees,Implementation challenges and a possible solution,” October 2009,http://www.crehs.lshtm.ac.uk/downloads/publications/user_fees.pdf (accessedMarch 18, 2010).[228]Human Rights Watch interview with representative of Christian HealthAssociation in Kenya (CHAK), Nairobi, August 20, 2008; Ministry of PublicHealth and Sanitation, “Strategic Plan 2008-2012,” p. 51.[229]Human Rights Watch interview with Ann Wanjiru, head of GROOTS Mathare MothersDevelopment Centre, Mathare slum, Nairobi, February 26, 2010.Community health workers told Human Rights Watch that they would prefer to givesmall children syrup pain relievers, which are easier to administer and morereliable than trying to feed children crushed tablets, but syrups are much moreexpensive—as much as 300KSh for a bottle ($382).[230]Amery, Children’s Palliative Care in Africa, p. 389.[231]Human Rights Watch interview with hospice administrator, St Catherine’sHospice, 4 March 2010; Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. John Weru,March 25, 2010; KEHPCA, Annual Report 2008, p. iii.[232]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Dr. Esther Munyoro, Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi, March 25, 2010; HumanRights Watch interview with palliative care nurses, Kisumu Hospice, March 2,2010.[233]Human Rights Watchinterview with Dr. John Weru, March 25, 2010.[234]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Dr. Stefan J. Friedrichsdorf,Medical Director, Pain Medicine & Palliative Care, Children'sHospitals and Clinics of Minnesota, March 3, 2010; Amery, Children’sPalliative Care in Africa, pp. 378 and 399.[235]KEHPCA, Annual Report 2008, p. 5.[236]UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 14:The Right to the Highest Attainable Standard of Health, para. 12.[237]On the legal analysis of hospital detentions, see Human Rights Watch, A HighPrice To Pay: Detention of Poor Patients in Burundian Hospitals, vol. 18,no. 8(A), September 2006.[238]Human Rights Watch interview with oncology nurse, Kenyatta National Hospital,Nairobi, February 25, 2010.[239]Human Rights Watch interview with mother of an abandoned child, Mathare,Nairobi, February 26, 2010; additional information from community health workerB, Mathare, Nairobi, February 26, 2010.[240]Constitution of Kenya, art. 29.  http://www.kenyalaw.org/Downloads/The%20Proposed%20Constitution%20of%20Kenya.pdf,(accessed August 6, 2010). At the time of writing, the new Constitution hadbeen passed at referendum but not yet enacted.[241]Ibid., art. 72.[242]Ibid., arts. 53(f)(i) and 53(2).[243]This is also the case for treatment of children livingwith HIV. Human Rights Watch, A Question of Life or Death, pp.50.54; seealso Horizons/Population Council, “‘If You Build It, Will TheyCome?’ Kenya Healthy Start Pediatric HIV Study: A Diagnostic Study toInvestigating Barriers to HIV Treatment and Care Among Children,” June2008,http://www.popcouncil.org/pdfs/horizons/Kenya_PediatricHIVTreatment.pdf(accessed March 17, 2010), pp. 33-34.; A. M. Noor et al., “Definingequity in physical access to clinical services using geographical informationsystems as part of malaria planning and monitoring in Kenya,” TropicalMedicine and International Health, vol. 8, no. 10 (October 2003), pp.917-926.[244]Human Rights Watch interview with mother of Jacob O., age four, Nyangoma, Bondodistrict, Nyanza province, February 28, 2010.[245]Human Rights Watch interview with Rebecca A., age 20, and with her mother, Nyangoma, Bondo district, February 27, 2010.[246]Human Rights Watch interview with Patrick O., age 10, Nyangoma, Bondo district,Nyanza province, February 27, 2010; Human Rights Watchinterview with aunt of Sarah A., age three, Nyangoma, Bondo district, February28, 2010. Patrick suffered from sickle cell disease, and Sarah from a birthdefect.[247]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Juliana Otieno, New Nyanza GeneralHospital, Kisumu, March 1, 2010; Human Rights Watch interview with oncologynurse, Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi, February 25, 2010.[248]Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation, “Strategic Plan 2008-2012,”p. 17; Human Rights Watch interview with medical officer in charge, DistrictMedical Office,  Kisumu East, Kisumu, March 2, 2010; HumanRights Watch interview with head nurse and a second nurse, Bondo District Hospital,March 1, 2010.[249]Human Rights Watch interview with medical officer in charge, District MedicalOffice, Kisumu East, Kisumu, March 2, 2010.[250]Human Rights Watch interview with community health worker B, Mathare slum,Nairobi, February 26, 2010; see also Human Rights Watch, A Question of Lifeor Death, p. 54.[251]Constitution of Kenya, art. 29 (b).[252]Ibid., art. 21(2).[253]Ibid., art. 20(5)(b).[254]Ibid., art. 53(1)(c).[255]ICESCR, art. 12; CRC, art. 24; TheAfrican [Banjul] Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, adopted June 27,1981, OAU Doc. CAB/LEG/67/3 rev. 5, 21 I.L.M. 58 (1982), entered intoforce October 21, 1986, acceded to by Kenya January 23, 1992,http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/instree/ratz1afchr.htm (accessed  September 8,2008), art. 16; and the African Charter on the Rights andWelfare of the Child, OAU Doc. CAB/LEG/24.9/49 (1990), November 29, 1999,ratified July 25, 2000, art. 14.[256]ICESCR, art 2.[257]UNCommittee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 14: TheRight to the Highest Attainable Standard of Health, paras. 30and 33.[258]Ibid.,para. 25.[259]Ibid.,para. 19.[260]Ibid., para. 25. While the Committee included this reference in aparagraph on the right to health for older persons, the wording clearlyindicates that it applies to all chronically and terminally ill persons.[261] Ibid., para. 47.[262] Ibid., para. 43.[263] Ibid., para. 44.[264]Ibid., para 38.[265]The Children Act, No.8 of 2001, Laws of Kenya, introduction.[266]The Children Act, sec. 9.[267]Ibid., sec. 121.[268]Constitution of Kenya, arts. 27(4) and (5).[269]The Children Act, sec. 5; ICESCR, art. 2; CRC, art. 2; AfricanCharter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, art. 2; African Charter on theRights and Welfare of the Child; art. 3.[270]UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, “Non-discriminationin economic, social and cultural rights (art.2, para. 2, of the InternationalCovenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights),” General Comment No.20, U.N. Doc. E/C.12/GC/20 (2009), paras. 29, 33; UNCommittee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 14: TheRight to the Highest Attainable Standard of Health, para. 18; UN Committee onthe Rights of the Child, “Adolescent health and development in thecontext of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,” General CommentNo. 4, U.N. Doc. CRC/GC/2003/4 (2003), para. 6.[271] CRC, arts. 12, 13 and 24(2)(e); Constitution of Kenya,art.33(1)(a).[272]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, “The right of the Child to beheard,” General Comment No. 12, U.N. Doc.  CRC/C/GC/12 (2009) paras.98 and 100.[273]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, “Adolescent health inthe context of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,” GeneralComment No. 4, U.N. Doc. CRC/GC/2003/4 (2003), paras. 39(b) and 39(d).[274] Ibid., para. 32.[275]Constitution of Kenya, art. 29(f); African [Banjul] Charter on Human andPeoples’ Rights, art. 5; Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Convention against Torture),adopted December 10, 1984, G.A. res. 39/46, annex, 39 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 51)at 197, U.N. Doc. A/39/51 (1984), entered into force June 26, 1987, art. 16;ICCPR, art. 7; Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), adopted December10, 1948, G.A. Res. 217A(III), U.N. Doc. A/810 at 71 (1948), art. 5.[276]ConventionAgainst Torture, art. 16; UN Human Rights Committee, “Article 7(Prohibition of torture, or other cruel treatment or punishment (Art.7),” General Comment No. 20, Compilation of General Comments and GeneralRecommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, U.N.Doc.HRI/GEN/1/Rev.9 (Vol. I),http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G08/422/35/PDF/G0842235.pdf?OpenElement(accessed April 27, 2010) p. 200, para. 8; See also the judgment of theEuropean Court of Human Rights in Z v United Kingdom (2001) 34 EHHR 97.[277]Jointletter by the UN special rapporteur on the prevention of torture and cruel,inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, Manfred Nowak, and the UN specialrapporteur on the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainablestandard of physical and mental health, Anand Grover, to the Commission onNarcotic Drugs, December 2008. A copy of the letter is available at http://www.ihra.net/Assets/1384/1/SpecialRapporteursLettertoCND012009.pdf(accessed April 27, 2010).[278]Human Rights Council,Report of the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman ordegrading treatment or punishment, Manfred Nowak, U.N. Doc. A/HRC/10/44,January 14, 2009, paras. 72 and 74(e).[279]Constitution of Kenya, art. 53(1)(e).[280]The Children Act, secs.13 and 15.[281] CRC, art.27.[282] CRC, art.19.[283] African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child,arts.16 and25.[284] CRC, art.20. This provision reinforces article 24(1) of the ICCPR,which guarantees every child “the right to such measures of protection asare required by his status as a minor.”[285]KEHPCA, Annual Report 2008; Human Rights Watchinterview with Dr. Zipporah Ali, Kenyan Hospice and Palliative CareAssociation, March 3, 2010. Among theorganization’s donors are Open Society Institute, The Diana Princess ofWales Memorial Fund, African Palliative Care Association (APCA), Hospice CareKenya, the True Colours Trust and Catholic Relief Services. The United KingdomDepartment for International Development provides funding through APCA, and inthe past funding has been provided the United States Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention (CDC).[286]Organizations such as the International Union Against Cancer and the WHO Accessto Controlled Medications Programme work at the international level to improveaccess to opioids in all countries.[287]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Elizabeth Brennan, US StateDepartment, July 15, 2010; government budget in GTZ Health Sector ProgrammeKenya, “Estimated Government Spending 2009/2010. Kenyan Health SectorBudget Analysis,” 2010 (on file at Human Rights Watch).[288]United StatesLeadership Against HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria Act of 2003, sec.402(b)(2). The Act states that it is the “sense of the Congress”that effective distribution of PEPFAR funds includes spending 15 percent onpalliative care for people with HIV/AIDS. This is an authoritativerecommendation but does not bind the agencies implementing PEPFAR. The Act wasamended to remove the reference to palliative care by the Tom Lantos and HenryJ. Hyde United States Global Leadership Against HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, andMalaria Reauthorization Act of 2008, sec. 402.[289]The United States President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief,“HIV/AIDS Palliative Care Guidance #1,” February 3, 2006, http://www.pepfar.gov/guidance/75827.htm(accessed March 28, 2010).[290]Three facilities (5 percent) reported having stronger opioids, but an inspectionof pharmacy data revealed that only one of the facilities actually had a strongopioid in stock, and this was in an injectable form. Harding et. al, “TheNature and Scope of PEPFAR Palliative Services in Kenya: A Cross-sectionalSurvey”  in Scaling Up Through Partnerships: Overcoming Obstaclesto Implementation, abstract book of the 2008 HIV/AIDS Implementers Meeting,http://www.hivimplementers.com/2008/pdf/OGAC_08_BookHR.pdf (accessed April 27,2010), pp. 257-8.[291]Human Rights Watch interview with staff of theCDC, Kisumu, March 2, 2010; Human Rights Watch interview with a doctor incharge of a health facility receiving PEPFAR funding for palliative care, April19, 2010. At the international level, PEPFAR’s implementing agencies havebegun work to assist governments to assess and reform drug control regulationsthat impede the availability of opioids.[292]SCMS, “About Us,” http://scms.pfscm.org/scms/about(accessed March 28, 2010).[293]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with a staff member of the CDC, March16, 2010.[294]USAID, “Kenya,” http://www.usaid.gov/pubs/cbj2003/afr/ke/ (accessedMarch 28, 2010); The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria hasmade grants totally more than $329 million for Kenya, including more than $200million for HIV/AIDS programs. The Global Fund, “Kenya and the GlobalFund,” http://www.theglobalfund.org/programs/country/?countryID=KEN&lang=en(accessed March 28, 2010).  The Global Fund resumed making grants to theKenyan Government in 2007 after refusing its applications for a period becauseKenya had failed to submit audited accounts for past grants or delayed grantreports: Wairagala Wakabi, “Kenya’s mixed HIV/AIDS response,”The Lancet, vol. 369, issue 9555 (January 6, 2007), pp.17-18.[295]Clinton Foundation, “Clinton HIV/AIDS Initiative: Our Approach,” http://www.clintonfoundation.org/what-we-do/clinton-hiv-aids-initiative/our-approach(accessed March 28, 2010); Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, “GlobalHealth Program,” http://www.gatesfoundation.org/global-health/Pages/overview.aspx(accessed March 28, 2010).[296]Kenya and Uganda are similar in population size (Kenya: 37.5 million; Uganda:30.1 million, as of 2007), but Kenya has a significantly larger gross nationalincome per capita (Kenya: $1,540; Uganda: $920, purchasing power parity atinternational dollar rate (PPP), 2007) and fewer people living on less than $1(PPP) per day (Kenya: 19.7 percent; Uganda: 51.5 percent, 2005). Kenya hasapproximately twice as many doctors and nurses as Uganda (Kenya: 4,506 doctors,37,113 nurses; Uganda: 2,209 doctors, 18,960 nurses, 2000-2007) and morehospital beds (hospital beds per 10,000 people: Kenya: 14; Uganda: 10,2000-2008).  All statistics from WHOSIS.[297]Palliative Care Association of Uganda (PCAU), “Audit Report of PalliativeCare Services in Uganda,” April 2009,http://www.theworkcontinues.com/document.asp?id=1386&pageno= (accessedMarch 27, 2010), pp. 7 and 12.[298]Jan Stjernsward, “Uganda: Initiating a GovernmentPublic Health Approach to Pain Relief and Palliative Care,” Journal ofPain and Symptom Management, vol. 24, no. 2 (August 2002).[299]Jack Jagwe and Anne Merriman, “Uganda: Delivering Analgesia in RuralAfrica: Opioid Availability and Nurse Prescribing,” Journal of Painand Symptom Management, vol. 33, no. 5 (May 2007); Stjernsward,“Uganda: Initiating a Government Public Health Approach to Pain Reliefand Palliative Care,” Journal of Pain and Symptom Management.[300]It is chaired by the Ministry of Health’s Commissioner for ClinicalServices, with other members representing the Ministry of Health, WHO, thenational AIDS control program, Makerere University, palliative care providers,the Palliative Care Association of Uganda and the African Palliative CareAssociation.[301]Jagwe and Merriman, “Uganda: Delivering Analgesia in Rural Africa,”Journal of Pain and Symptom Management.[302]Amery et al., “The Beginnings of Children’s Palliative Care,”pp.1015-1021. The number of children referred to palliative care increased from120 to 275 (129%) and the proportion of patients who were children increasedfrom 19% to 35%.[303]Jagwe and Merriman, “Uganda: Delivering Analgesia in Rural Africa,”Journal of Pain and Symptom Management.[304]INCB, Report of the International Narcotics Control Board for 2004 (NewYork: United Nations, 2005), pp. 32-33.[305]Human Rights Watch interview with Prof. Nduati, Nairobi, February 24, 2010; Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Esther Munyoro, head of the palliativecare unit, Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi, February 24, 2010.[306]Human Rights Watch interview with palliative care nurse A,Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi, February 24, 2010; Human Rights Watchinterview with head nurse and a second nurse, Bondo District Hospital, March 1,2010.[307]Kenya has approximately one doctor for every 10,000 people.WHOSIS.[308]David Makumi, “Cancer Pain Management in Kenya in the Context of WorldHealth Organization Guidelines,” presentation at UICC World CancerCongress 2006, July 8-12, 2006,http://2006.confex.com/uicc/uicc/techprogram/P9415.HTM (accessed March 31,2010).[309]PCAU, “Audit Report of Palliative Care Services in Uganda,” p. 8.Related ContentSeptember 9, 2010News ReleaseKenya: Provide Treatment for Children in PainGovernment Should Provide Medicines and Care Often Denied to Young PatientsSeptember 9, 2010News ReleaseKenya: Provide Treatment for Children in PainRegion / CountryAfrica KenyaProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch