 
 
ASSOCIA TION  ON AMERICAN  IN DI AN  AFFAI RS   
Protecting Sovereignty ◦ Preserving Culture ◦ Educating Youth  
SINCE ₁₉₂₂ 
 
 
2017 A NNUAL  REPORT   
 
 
 
 
 
Letter from the President ..........................................1
                                                                                   
Mission Statement.................................................2 - 5
How You Can Help...............................................6 - 8            
                                                                             
Achievements.......................................................9 - 16
Organizational Highlights...............................17 - 18
  
Financials............................................................19 - 21      
                                                                            
      
Leadership..........................................................22 - 24
Contact.......................................................................25CONTENTSLETTER  FROM THE  PRESIDENT OF THE  BOARD
Dear Friends of Cultural Sovereignty,
I am proud to present this Annual Rep ort of 2017. AAIA is the oldest Native Amer -
ican advocacy and grassroots organization, having been founded in 1922. Preserv -
ing Native cultures while promoting self-determination of Tribes is a priority for 
our organization and has been for our long history. During 2017, AAIA continued 
to focus on Preservation of Tribal Cultures (international and domestic repatria -
tion and sacred sites protection), Promoting Sovereignty (federal recognition re -
form) and Youth and Education (scholarships, summer camps, juvenile justice and 
Indian child welfare advocacy training, research and legal assistance).
The year 2017 was a transition period for AAIA, as the prior Board President, Faith 
Roessel, stepped in as the Interim Executive Director in February and into Sep -
tember of 2017. On September 11, 2017, a new Executive Director, Shannon Keller 
O’Loughlin, was appointed with the explicit mandate to raise the profile of AAIA 
and take us into the next 100 years of grassroots advocacy and service to Indian 
Country. 
Everyone on the Board and Staff at AAIA understands how important the organi -
zation’s relationships with its donors are – and some of those donors have been a 
part of AAIA for nearly its entirety. Now more than ever threats have shown their 
destructiveness to Indian Nation Cultures, Youth and Education and Sovereignty. 
AAIA continues to work tirelessly to protect our sacred sites and return our an -
cestors, their burial items and other cultural patrimony from around the world, 
the Indian Child Welfare Act is being attacked in court, and sovereignty is being 
questione d.  
The work AAIA undertakes is possible because we are an independent organiza -
tion. Individuals, Tribal Nations, corporate and other contributors make possible 
the flexibility we have to put our strength where it is most needed. As we look to 
our 100th year anniversary in 2022, we ask you to continue your journey with us 
to support Culture, Youth and Education, and Sovereignty.
Thank you for your continued support to make possible our important assistance 
to Indian Country.
Sincerely,
Frank Ettawageshik (Odawa)
President of the Board
12MISSION  STATEMENT
As the oldest Native American service and advocacy organization in the Unit -
ed States, the Association on American Indian Affairs (AAIA) has impacted the 
lives of Native American and Alaska Native peoples for 95 years. From helping 
the Pueblos keep their lands and water rights in the 1920s, drafting the Indian 
Reorganization Act that ended federal policies of assimilation and allotment, the 
scholarships provided to Native college students in the 1940s, to the Field Nursing 
Program in the 1950s which sent nurses to reservations, to helping Alaska Natives 
protect their lands and hunting and fishing rights in the 1960s, and the studies that 
were done in the 1970s which led to the Indian  Child Welfare Act, AAIA was there.  
In the 1980s we wer e still there working to establish the Tribal Governmental Tax 
Status Act, and in the 1990s we were there to gain enactment of the Native Amer -
ican Graves Protection and Repatriation Act and ensure its implementation, and 
helped to protect sacred lands. In the 2000s we were there too—making sure that 
Tribes have access to funding for their child welfare programs, fighting for the 
right to use eagles and other birds for sacred ceremonies, providing funding so 
Native children can attend summer camps that focus on cultural preservation and 
health education, and helping to change the process by which Tribes are federally 
recognized. As we move into our 96th year providing grassroots advocacy, train -
ing and technical assistance to Indian Tribes and their citizens, we will continue to 
be here to impact Indian Count ry for future generations.
AAIA is governed by an all-Native Board of Directors from across Indian Country 
representing a diversity of Tribes, geography and areas of expertise. AAIA works 
in close cooperation with Indian Nations, their citizens and other organizations 
that have similar missions in determining which issues will be pursued. Our na -
tional advocacy work and grassroots initiatives are reflected in AAIA’s mission to 
protect sovereignty, preserve culture and educate youth. 
To fulfill its mission, the AAIA curren tly has the following programs:
REPATRIATION OF  CULTURAL  ITEMS
AAIA has advocated fo r the p rotection and repa triation of cultural items over the 
last 60 years, including the development of the National Museum of the American 
Indian Act, which provides a mechanism for repatriation of cultural items from 
the Smithsonian Institution, and the Native American Graves Protection and Re -
patriation Act, which provides for repatriation and graves protection involving 
museums, and federal and Tribal lands. The Repatriation Program also works on 
international efforts for repatriation and: 1.   Provides a centralized information hub of expertise and information  
        that provides training and technical assistance and supports repatriation 
                 efforts domestically and abroad; 
 2.   Develops templates, toolkits and model laws that can be used by Tribes 
                 to support repatriation of ancestors and their burial items, cultural patri      
                 mony and sacred objects;
 3.   Advocates for stronger laws and policies that protect ancestors and their 
                  burial items, cultural patrimony and sacred objects on private lands, and 
                 items held by private collectors domestically and abroad; and
 4.   Raises awareness and provides educational opportunities domestically 
                 and internationally with governments, institutions and the public to in
                 fluence positive action towards addressing repatriation issues.
The Repatriation Program is advised by the Repatriation Working Group, which 
consists of Tribal Leadership, Tribal Historic Preservation Officers, Tribal Practi -
tioners. and Spiritual Leaders, as well as archaeologists, academics and attorneys. 
PROTECTION OF SACRED SITES, 
TRADITIONAL CULTURAL PROPERTIES AND 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL  SITES
AAIA has p rovided legal representation and trai ning to Tribes seeking to protect 
sacred places, including the  successful effort to have the Bighorn Medicine Wheel/
Medicine Mountain in Wyoming designated as a National Historic Landmark. 
This work:
     1.   Provides a centralized information hub of expertise and information for 
           training and support of the protection of these sites and properties; 
     2.   Develops templates, toolkits and model laws that can be used by Tribes to 
           support the protection of these sites and properties;   
3.    Advocates for stronger laws and policies that protect these sites and proper 
 ties; and
     4.    Raises awareness and provides educational opportunities with govern 
           ments, institutions and the public to influence positiv e action towards site 
 protection issues.
3     
INDIAN CHILD WELFARE
AAIA has worked actively in the field of Indian child welfare for more than five 
decades. AAIA developed studies and advocacy that were the catalyst for the pas -
sage of the Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978 (ICWA), and for the new Bureau 
of Indian Affairs regulations implementing the ICWA in 2016. AAIA has further 
worked to promote the full implementation of the ICWA by seeking to obtain ad -
equate resources and support for Tribal child welfare programs. In doing so, the 
AAIA’s advocacy helped to expand Tribal eligibility under Titles IV-B and Title 
IV-E of the Social Security Act. 
AAIA also provides extensive training programs for Tribes seeking to institution -
alize their own child welfare programs. Recently, AAIA was actively involved in 
the Adoptive Couple v. Baby Girl case (a.k.a. Baby Veronica case), including au -
thoring a brief for 30 Tribes and 8 national organizations. In response to the de -
cision, together with the National Indian Child Welfare Association, AAIA has 
written law review articles explaining how Tribes and Indian families can appro -
priately respond to the decision. The AAIA is currently developing a study to 
document abuses in the adoption industry that are having a negative effect upon 
Indian children.
AAIA is extremely interested in how Tribes and states work together on Indian 
child welfare matters. AAIA has developed lengthy reports on Tribal-State Agree -
ments concerning Title IV-E and ICWA, inclu ding what are promising practices in 
the industry.   
JUVENILE  JUSTICE
AAIA convenes Tribal leaders and juvenile justice experts to explore how Tribes 
can benefit from alternatives to incarceration of youth, including the Juvenile De -
tention Alternatives Initiative (JDAI) developed by the Annie E. Casey Founda -
tion (AECF). AAIA seeks to document and address disparities in the treatment of 
Native Americans by federal and state juvenile justice systems. AAIA is currently 
undergoing a pilot projects in Indian Country concerning JDAI and culturally ap -
propriate alternatives to incarceration.
45EDUCATIONAL  OPPORTUNITIES  FOR YOUTH
For more than 50 years, AAIA has provided undergrad uate and graduate schol -
arships to native american graduate and undergraduate college students. AAIA 
scholarships target native students that are not specifically targeted for scholar -
ships by other national indian scholarship programs, including indian students 
that are enrolled citizens of non-federally recognized indian tribes.
AAIA also provides seed money for youth summer camps generally run by na -
tive organizations and tribes. The summer camp program has focused on areas 
including cultural preservation, language preservation, health and wellness, and 
diabetes education.
AAIA will also begin, in 2018, developing fellowship and internship positions to 
bring native undergraduate and graduate students, as well as recent graduates, to 
the dc area to work on AAIA initiatives.6HOW YOU CAN HELP
Currently, AAIA is engaged in a comprehensive strategic planning process to pre -
pare the organization for its next 100-years. By building internal capacity and ef -
ficient infrastructure around our cultural values, AAIA will achieve its vision to 
ensure “A world where Native American cultures and values are lived, protected 
and respected.”
But one thing is very clear. We cannot continue into the next 100 years without you. 
We need your commitment, we need your time, we need your advocacy, and most 
important, we need your financial support to continue the great path that AAIA 
has laid down over the last 100 years. Now is the time to commit to the next 100 
years of American Indian sovereignty, culture, education and capacity bui lding.
The Association offers opportunities for your commitment at every level.  Your 
support will fund programs that protect sovereignty, preserve culture, educate 
youth and build capacity. Commit to 100 MONTHS  FOR 100 YEARS  and make a 
reoccurring donation to AAIA every month for the next 100 months. In addition, 
the Association seeks members of its  LEGACY  COUNCIL  to build a $10 million 
endowment to fund AAIA’s 100 Year Cultural Sovereignty Campaign. Together 
we can affect the change necessary to strengthen Indian Country for the next 100 
years.
Indian Tribes , companies, foundations, individuals, trusts, estates and other or -
ga-nizations or entities are all invited to take advantage of the opportunities to 
become a part of the AAIA legacy of success. Relationships are crafted in many 
ways and can occur in the form of general or designated financial contributions, as 
well as volu nteering time.
GENERAL  SUPPORT
AAIA’s service in Indian Country depends on all types of donors. The day-to-day 
expenses of operations as well as the programs AAIA supports requires regular 
and predictable contributions from generous Tribal, foundation, corporate and in -
dividual contributors. Such contributions are the cornerstone to our foundation 
of success and help us provide consistent representation of the issues, as well as 
deliver the results Tribes depend on over the long term. Please consider becoming 
a regular general supporter each budget year.DONATE NOW
You can donate online at our website – www.i ndian-affairs.org, and click on 
the Donate Now or Become a Member buttons.  Please contact Shannon Keller 
O’Loughlin, Executive Director, at (240) 314-7155 or Shannon.aaia@indian-affairs.
org, to explore these opportunities to invest in Indian Country.
AAIA welcomes partnership opportunities with Indian Tribes, foundations, 
cor-porations, and other entities and individuals to receive grants and funding to -
wards the achievement of specific program goals. Whether your interest is cultural 
resources, youth, education or other Indian Country issue, AAIA receives project 
specific support, which allows AAIA to develop programs in collaboration with 
those partners.
If the work of AAIA is meaningful to you and your family, you may provide for 
AAIA with a charitable donation or trust as one of your last wishes. A charitable 
donation will minimize your taxable estate since charitable donations are exempt 
from gift taxes . 
PROJECT  SPECIFIC  SUPPORT
AAIA w elcomes partnership opportunities with Indian Tribes, foundations, cor -
porations, and other entities and individuals to receive grants and funding to -
wards the achievement of specific program goals. Whether your interest is cultural 
resources, youth, education or other Indian Country issue, AAIA receives project 
specific support, which allows AAIA to develop programs in collaboration with 
those partners.
PROVIDE A  CHARITABLE  GIFT IN YOUR  ESTATE PLANNING
If the work of AAIA is meaningful to you and your family, you may provide for 
AAIA with a charitable donation or trust as one of your last wishes. A charitable 
donation will minimize your taxable estate since charitable donations are exempt 
from gift taxes. 
VOLUNTEER
AAIA has volunteer opportunities for public affairs, legal, accounting, and project 
specific expertise. Be a part of advocacy in Indian Country by donat¬ing your time 
and effort to changing lives on the ground, preserving culture, and supporting 
strong Tribal governments.
78BECOME A  MEMBER
Become a member of the AAIA and stay informed of AAIA’s activities and oth -
er important news pertaining to Indian Country. You will receive our newsletter 
published two times a year. Members may also receive periodic “call for action” 
letters and emails regarding state or congressional action that would adversely 
affect American Indians. Membership also gives you the opportunity to vote for 
members of AAIA’s Board of Directors and vote for changes to AAIA’s corporate 
charter and by-laws. Membership is included in your donation of $35 or more, 
unless you choose to opt out of membership.INDIAN  CHILDREN  AND  YOUTH
INDIAN  CHILD  WELFARE ACT ADVOCACY
AAIA works to promote the well-being of Indian children and families by ensur -
ing the child welfare system preserves the connection between Indian children 
and their families, extended families, communities and cultures. In 2014 and 2015, 
AAIA began development of an Indian Child Welfare Tribal-State Agreement re -
port with funding from Casey Family Programs. Throughout 2016, AAIA contact -
ed states and Tribes to gather all ICWA Tribal-State Agreements that were current -
ly in effect and began drafting and finalizing the  report. 
On October 1, 2017 the AAIA  released its report entitled “A Survey and Analysis of 
Tribe-State Indian Child Welfare Act Agreements, Including Promising Practices” 
that provides important guidance to Tribes and states regarding the implementa -
tion of the Indian Child Welfa re Act (ICWA). 
The “Survey and Analys is” details best practices currently in use by Tribes and 
states that support the Indian child and family in ICWA matters. The report also 
includes information about the new ICWA regulations passed by the Bureau of In -
dian Affairs in June 2016 (which the AAIA helped draft), as well as the BIA’s new 
“Guidelines for Implementing the Indian Child Welfare Act. In the 39 years since 
the ICWA was passed, only ten states have entered into ICWA Tribal-State Agree -
ments with 37 of the 567 federally recognized Tribes across the country. It is hoped 
that this report, along with the BIA regulations, will provide Tribes and states 
strong motivation to renew their current agreement or develop effective ICWA 
agreements that support the goals of ICWA.
ADOPTIO N PROJECT
AAIA has been working with the Na tional Indian Child Welfare Association 
(NICWA) on a project to review practices by the private adoption industry con -
cerning Indian children. The first objective of the Project was to compile state 
adoption data and laws, policies and practices relevant to ICWA and the adoption 
of Indian children.2017 A CHIEVEMENTS
910JUVENILE  JUSTICE
Native youth are incarcerated at a hig her and disproportionate rate than oth -
er youth, and for many reasons, spend more time in detention than non-Native 
youth. AAIA’s work has been focused on promoting appropriate and safe alter -
natives to incarceration for Native youth, whether they are involved with Tribal, 
state, or federal justice systems. AAIA has developed research regarding Annie E. 
Casey Foundation’s Juvenile Detention Alternative Initiative (JDAI) implementa -
tion at JDAI Sites across the country. AAIA attended the Child Welfare League of 
America Conference in Washington, DC and the Juvenile Detention Alternative 
Initiative Conference in Orlando, Florida in 2017 to discuss this research and ob -
tain feedback. AAIA looks to release its research in 2018.
In additio n, the AAIA has been working with the Mississippi Band of Choctaw 
Indians to support the implementation of JDAI there. The Mississippi Band of 
Choctaw Indians (MBCI) is the first Tribal nation to implement JDAI. MBCI’s ex -
perience implementing JDAI in a Tribal context is unique, and lessons learned 
will be informative for other Tribal nations addressing juvenile justice reform in 
general. AAIA previously reported on its findings on the MBCI site, chronicling 
the accomplishments, successes, challenges, and lessons learned through MBCI’s 
adaptation of the JDAI model. These findings when completed will help to inform 
Tribal nations addressing juvenile justice reform as well as those involved in juve -
nile justice about th e lessons learned to date from MBCI’s project. 
GRADUATE AND UNDERGRADUATE  SCHOLARSHIPS
AAIA, through several sm all endowments, continues its history of supporting the 
education of Native American undergraduate and graduate students by providing 
scholarships. Scholarships were awarded to students from federally recognized 
Tribes as well as to those students from Tribes that are not yet included on the list 
of federally recognized Tribes. 
The 2017 scholars were:
 -  Amber M. Byars – Choctaw - Institute of American Indian Arts – Studio Arts and 
    Indigenous Liberal Studies
-   Andrew Roybal – Piro/Manso/Tiwa Indian Tribe, Pueblo of San Juan de Guada    
    lupe 
-   St. Mary’s University School of Law – Juris Doctorate
-   Annie Evans – Blackfeet Tribe – Salish Kootenai College – Social Work
-   Benjamin M. Cornelius – Oneida of Wisconsin – University of Michigan Law 
    School – Juris Doctorate11-   Chase Harmon – Nanticoke – Yale School of Management – Masters in Busi 
     ness Administration
-   Christian Wassona – Cheyenne and Arapaho Tribes – Southwestern Christian 
    University – Bachelor of Science in Sports Management
-   Frank J. Gilbert – Chippewa – Montana State University, Bozeman – Masters 
    in Educational Leadership
-   Garrett A. Holm – Cherokee – University of Arizona James E. Rogers College 
    of Law Juris Doctorate for Indigenous Peoples Law and Policy
-   Lindsey Hancock - Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma – Oklahoma State Univer   
    sity – Bachelor of Science in Pre-Med Physiology
-   Maranda M. Byrd - Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma – University of Central    
    Arkansas- Masters in Nursing
-   Marcene Hoover-Bennett - Navajo - Arizona State University – Bachelor of     
    Science in Communications
-   Marcus Bear Eagle – Oglala Lakota – University of California, Los Angeles – 
    Master’s of Arts in American Indian Studies
-   Marisa Skolnick – Village of Togiak – Alaska Pacific University – Counseling 
    Psychology
-   Megan Susanne Warren – Central Council Tlingit & Haida Indian Tribes of 
    Alaska University of Alaska Anchorage – Bachelor degree in Political Science 
    and Law
-   Melinda Casey – Navajo – University of South Florida – Doctorate in Nursing    
    Practice
-   Morgan Atkins - Delaware & Cherokee Tribes – Ithaca College – Bachelor of    
    Music
-   Nicholas C. Hill - Muscogee (Creek) Nation – University of Tulsa – Bachelor 
    of Fine Arts
-   Shannon Wentworth – North Fork Rancheria of Mono Indians – San Joaquin 
    College of  Law – Juris Doctorate
-   Taryn St. Louis – Prairie Band of Potawatomi Nation – Benedictine College – 
    Undergraduate Undetermined12YOUT H SUMME R CAMPS
Through the help of annual funding  from the Plucknett Charitable Trust, AAIA 
provides seed money to Native Americ an summer camps that support culture, 
language, health and wellness for Native youth. 2017 recipients were:
Interfaith Action of Greater Saint Paul was provided a grant for its American Indi -
an Youth Enrichment Summer Program for Native youth from 30 different Tribes. 
Each student attended  Book-It! Reading Warriors class twice a week to assist with 
reading fluency. The goal was to support literacy capabilities in order that the 
youth would build skills to explore his or her history and to learn how to commu -
nicate achieve ments.
Kamiah Nimiipuu Health Clinic received a grant to provide Native youth camp 
activities that included participating in a variety of physical fitness activities, tra -
ditional games and arts and craft activities. The Nimiipuu Health Nurses and Pro -
viders shared information on nutrition, physical activity and diabetes prevention. 
Story telling lessons were given such as Stop the Pop and Drink Water.
Pollen Circles, Inc. was provided a grant for 2 wellness camps, which included 
a workshop called Sheep to Life; directed outings to sacred sites and gave sweat 
lodge ceremonies fo r Native American youth and you ng adults.
Camp Thunderbird South Dakota was given funding to empower Native Amer -
ican youth of South Dakota through outdoor and educational experiences that 
emphasize leadership, teamwork, and goal setting skills, and provide a nurturing 
space for campers to gain self-confidence, make new friends, and explore the nat -
ural world.
Pathkeepers for Indigenous Knowledge was awarded funding and provided camp 
activities for Native youth that included: exploring artistic expression like bead -
ing, Native flute, storytelling and Native logic and creative writing; Native horse 
culture; and Native games and social activities, like lacrosse, Kiowa hand game, 
powwow singing and dancing. Campers also helped prepare Camp meals, which 
were all-natural, healthy a nd nutritious with emphasis on trad itional Indian foods.
Summer Y outh Corporation, Gallup, New Mexico was aw arded a grant and pro -
moted health y, balanced living by teaching Native American youth about phys -
ical, mental, social-emotional, and spiritual well-being (hózho); increased under -
standing of environmental stewardship, family, 
teamwork, and responsibility; worked toward building self-esteem and to taking 
pride in their community.13 American Indian Youth Wellness Camp—University of Arizona was given fund -
ing and provided Native youth one week of healthy eating, exercise, learning, and 
fun while receiving in-depth physical assessments to track progress and personal -
ize pathways to hea lth.
PROTECT CULTURE
REPATRIATION AND  PROTECTION  OF SACRED SITES
AAIA ma de significant progress heightening awareness about the protection of sa -
cred places and the important human rights issue of repatriation: the return of 
Ancestors and cultural objects to their rightful Tribes and commun ities.
THIRD ANNUAL  INDIGENOUS  INTERNATIONAL  REPATRIATION 
CONFERENCE, “THE JOURNEY  HOME”
AAIA hosted its Third Annual Indigenous International Re patriation Conference 
on September 25-26, 2017 at the Isleta Resort and Casino, Albuquerque, NM. The 
overall conference kept with the theme Journey Home: Empowering Indigenous 
Communities in International Rep atriation. 
Pueblo of Acoma Governor Kurt Riley provided the opening lecture and discussed 
the status of the Pueblo’s efforts to obtain return of the “Acoma Shield,” which is 
currently in the possession of a p rivate French collector. 
The Acoma Shield which had been stolen was slated for auction, but through the 
advocacy of Acoma Pueblo the sale was stopped. AAIA awarded Governor Riley 
with its first ever “AAIA Visionary Leader Award” in recognition of the Gover -
nor’s persistence and advocacy in the return of the Acoma Shield and he was pre -
sented with a hand crafted s terling si lver medallion. 
A diverse and expert group of presenters spoke on a variety of topics that related 
to international repatriation and the trafficking of Native American Ancestors, fu -
nerary objects, sacred items, and cultural  patrimony.  
A panel called “Gaining Insight – The Dynamics of the Tribe-Museum Relation -
ship” discussed how Tribes were building relationships with museums for inter -
national collaboration on repatriation. Among the panel members, Neil Curtis, 
the Head of Museums at the King’s Museum, University of Aberdeen in Scotland, 
provided insight on how indigenous peoples and the King’s Museum were devel -
oping productive relationships leading to repatriation. Also, Helen Robbins, the 
repatriation director at the Field Museum enlightened the participants about how 
the Field Museum had documentation showing how the Museum transferred cul -
tural items to foreign institutions.  14Presentations were also given on proposed legislation in Congress to prevent the 
ongoing trafficking of Native American Ancestors and cultural items, and the need 
for investigations to be concluded to gather data from Tribal communities and the 
federal government to shut down illegal activity. Toward the end of the confer -
ence, Indigenous Peoples representatives had the opportunity to meet with each 
other to express shared concerns about continuing trafficking on federal, state, and 
private lands; the needs for repatriating internationally; and the ongoing issues 
Tribes have surrounding the lack of meaningful consultations with agencies, fed -
erally funded  institutions, and other museums. 
For the first time AAIA created a Native Youth component of the conference with 
the generous support of Casey Family Programs. Native high school students were 
invited to participate in the “youth track” of the Third Annual Indigenous Interna -
tional Repatriation Conference and to share what was most important to them that 
they could not do without, such as the “sacred,” “hope,” and sacred items that are 
“culturally important.” Also as part of the youth track, AAIA invited professionals 
to talk about their work, education, career paths and how they overcame challeng -
es and how culture and language helped them in their work. 
Faith Roessel, former President of AAIA’s Board of Directors, and also past In -
terim Executive Director, developed a Cultural Resources Protection Handbook 
with Ravis Henry, a National Park Services Ranger. The Handbook was developed 
through youth input from the Conference, as well as working with public schools 
in New Mexico. 
PROTECTION OF BEARS  EARS NATIONAL  MONUM ENT
AAIA has been working w ith Tribal leaders, the Native A merican Rights Fund, 
and other individuals and entities to fight against the red uction of Bears Ears Na -
tional Monument. On April 26, 2017, President Trump signed an executive Order 
requiring the Secretary of the Interior to review all National Monuments designat -
ed under the Antiquities Act of 1906 since 1996 that were Monuments over 100,000 
acres or had been designated “without adequate public outreach.” The Bears Ears 
National Monument was established on December 28, 2016 by President Barack 
Obama and was the only National Monument expressly named in the Executive 
Order. The Bears Ears Monument is considered sacred by Tribes and is covered by 
100,000 plus significant cultural and sacred sites, structures and objects and envi -
ronmental sanctity. Numerous Tribes worked together to support the proposal for 
the designation of Bears Ears as a protected N ational Monument.15On December 4, 2017 , President Trump ordered a reduction to the size of Bears 
Ears, shrinking it to 15% of its original size. The revoked lands are to be opened 
up to “entry, location, selection, sale” and “disposition under all laws relating to 
mineral and geothermal leasing” and “location, entry and patent under mining 
laws” within 60 days, essentially selling the sacred land to the highest bidder. 
The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is suing President Trump on behalf of 
several Tribes. Other recreational, scientific and environmental groups have also 
filed litigation to stop the administration from acting on the diminishment. AAIA 
continues to work on efforts to reverse the actions of the current federal 
administra tion.
SAFEGUARD TRIBAL OBJECTS OF  PATRIMO NY ACT
On November 22, 2 017 AAIA submitted comments in response to the November 
8, 2017 Senate Committee on Indian Affairs regarding Senate Bill 1400, the Safe -
guard Tribal Objects of Patrimony Act of 2017 (STOP Act). The STOP Act protects 
cultural items and archaeological items from export to other countries. Though the 
Bill only applies to “cultural items” as that term is defined by the Native American 
Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, and “archaeological items” defined by 
ARPA and the Antiquities Act, such a law is significant for the return of Native 
American Objects that have been improperly taken and have been found for sale 
in other coun tries.  
AAIA comme nts strongly support this bipartisan legislation for continued revital -
ization of Native cultures and support Tribal self-sufficiency and self-determina -
tion.
NAGPRA R EVIEW  COMMITTEE  SUSPEN DED  
In May, Secr etary of the Int erior Ryan Zinke indefinitely suspended the Native 
American Graves Protection Act (NAGPRA) Review Committee and there is no 
expectation from the Department when the NAGPRA Review Committee will be 
able to fulfill its statutory mandate. Congress mandated that the NAGPRA Review 
Committee oversee and make decisions about the repatriation of human remains 
and other cultural and sacred items. The Act states that NAGPRA is based on the 
unique government-to-government relationship the federal government has with 
Tribes. The Secretary’s suspension of all Advisory Committees is an overbroad ac -
tion; though his intention is to make sure stakeholders have a say in what happens 
at Interior, his action is actually preventing that with Tribes and N AGPRA. 
Tribes have been working to get meetings with Secretary Zinke reg arding the sus -
pension and have been rejected several times. AAIA has been in contact with con -
gressional and executive representatives regarding this issue. INTERNATIONAL  REPATRIATION AND DATABASE DEVELOPMENT
AAIA has participated in a three-year g rant entitled “Return, Reconcile, Renew” 
with the Ngarrindjeri Nation, Torres Strait Islander community, and the Kimber -
ley Aboriginal law and Culture Centre (KALACC) which are Indigenous commu -
nities working in international repatriation in Australia, as well as the Australian 
National University and the Australian Government. This research and culturally 
sensitive database will help to address one of the greatest challenges of Indige -
nous communities: finding Indigenous Ancestors and cultural items beyond their 
country’s borders.
162017 O RGANIZATIONAL  HIGHLIGHTS
17AAIA held its 95th Annual Membership meeting on November 30, 2017, at the 
Cambria Suites, in Rockville, Maryland. The theme of the evening celebrated 
“Remembering Our Past and Advocating for the Future” and included a panel of 
speakers who discussed how best to advocate for Indian Country in the current 
federal administration. The speakers included, Larry Roberts (Oneida), Attor -
ney with Kilpatrick Townsend Native American Litigation Practice and former 
Acting Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs during the Obama Administration; 
Raine Theile, (Dena’ina Athabascan and Yup’ik), Owner of Theile Strategies and 
former Associate Director of Intergovernmental Affairs during the Obama Ad -
ministration; and Gabrielle Tayac (Piscataway), Associate Director for Commu -
nications at the Spirit Aligned Leadership Program and Previous Historian of 
the National Museum of the American Indian. The evening ended with Native 
American singing and dancing provided by Lance Ma’heonenahkohe Fisher and 
his drum group.
 
AAIA held two face to  face Board meetings and two teleconference Board meet -
ings in 2017. On November 30, AAIA Board of Directors elected new officers to 
serve for a two-year te rm. 
The new officer s are:
- Frank Ettawageshik (Odawa), President
- Jonathan Perry (Wampanoag), Vice President
- Dee Ann DeRoin (Ioway), Treasurer and Secretary
- Sarah Kastelic (Alu tiiq), Nominating Committee Chair  
AAIA announced the appointment of its new Executive Director, Shannon Keller 
O’Loughlin. Shannon is a citizen of the Choctaw Nation of  Oklahoma. Shannon 
was the former Chief of Staff to the National Indian Gaming Commission, where 
she assisted in the development and implementation of national policy through -
out the agency, and oversaw the agency’s public affairs, technology, compliance 
and finance divisions.  Shannon has also served Indian Country in the private 
sector  as an attorney , leading a large national firm’s Indian law practice group  
and  bringing more than 17 years of Indian Country legal and policy work to 
strengthen, maintain and protect Indian nation sovereignty, self-determination 
and culture. Shannon was appointed by Secretary  of the Department of the Interior, Sally Jew -
ell, to the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act Review Com -
mittee in 2013, and was appointed by President Barack Obama in September 2016 
to the Cultural Property Advisory Committee within the State Department.  Shan-
non received a B.A.  in American Indian Studies  from California State University, 
Long Beach, and joint M.A. and J.D. degrees from the University of Arizona  in 
Indigenous Peoples Law and Policy . Prior to becoming the Executive Director, 
Shannon worked with AAIA for several years providing legal analysis on AAIA 
efforts in Indian Child Welfare, NAGPRA, International Repatriation and sacred 
site efforts.
In November, Faith Roessel (Navajo), former AAIA Board President, received 
a Native American Heritage Month Proclamation from the Mayor of Rockville, 
Maryland, on behalf of AAIA. The Proclamation states how Native Americans 
have shaped and contributed to the United States through every turn in history 
and that the City of Rockville renews their commitment to our nation-to-nation 
relationships to give all our people the future they deserve. 
   
18FINANCIALS
2017 continued to show a diverse range of revenue streams. Additionally, there 
was a broad range of donors reflecting both Tribal and non-Tribal support. Mem -
bership numbers stayed level. The Third Annual Repatriation Conference contin -
ued to grow both in attendance and revenue. Interest and Investments continue to 
play a strong role in our overall revenue picture. One large legacy donor made up 
almost half of 2017 revenue. 
Our End of Year Net Assets totaled: $1,012,209.00.
19Expenses stayed level with the majority going towards running programs to pro -
tect sovereignty, preserve culture and educate youth. AAIA will continue to invest 
in fundraising to ensure future revenue. Because of staffing changes in 2017, there 
may be an increase in staffing dollars next year.  
20The $198,294 total of AAIA’s General and Administrative Expenses were broken 
down by percentage of activity for each program. AAIA continues to invest heav -
ily in Indian Children and Youth along with Repatriation and Sacred Sites, which 
are at the core of AAIA’s Vision and Mission. We continue to support additional 
programs that align with our overall strategy to serve Indian Country, including 
our legacy scholarships for graduate and undergraduate Native American stu -
dents. 
21
LEADERSHIP
BOARD OF  DIRECTORS
AAIA is governed by an All-Native Board of Directors representing all regions of 
Indian Country. The collective wealth of knowledge and expertise in diverse ar -
eas makes AAIA’s Board well suited to develop policies that benefit all of Indian 
Country.
       
       Elke Chenevey                           Cheriena Ben
      {Omaha)                  (Choctaw)
  
Frank Ettawageshik    
(Odawa)  
President  
Jonathan Perry  
(Wampanoag)  
Vice President  
Dee Ann DeRoin, MD  
(Ioway)  
Treasurer and Secretary  
Sarah Kastelic 
(Alutiiq)  
Chair, Nominating 
Committee  
 
Alfred R. Ketzler, Sr.  
(Athabascan)  
John Echohawk  
(Pawnee)  
Bradford R. Keeler
(Cherokee)  
Faith Roessel 
(Navajo)  
Photo Not 
AvailableFrank Ettawageshik
(Odawa)
PresidentJonathan Perry
(Wampanoag)
Vice PresidentDee Ann DeRoin MD
(Ioway)
Treasurer/SecretarySarah Kastelic
(Alutiq)
Chair, Nominating Com -
mittee
22Alfred R. Ketzier, Sr.
(Athabascan)John Echohawk
(Pawnee)Bradford Keeler
(Cherokee)Faith Roessel
(Navajo)
Elke Chenevey
(Omaha)Cheriena Ben
(Choctaw)COUNCIL OF  ADVISORS
In 2013, AAIA was pleased to expand its Advisory Board into a Council of Advi -
sors. Based largely in New York where AAIA was established and incorporated, 
the Council is comprised of individuals who are interested in furthering the work 
of the organization. The Council holds a wealth of knowledge and various inter -
ests, and are prominent in their own fields. The Council’s main initiatives consist 
of raising the profile of AAIA’s work, assisting in planning fundraising events, and 
helping AAIA to network with individuals who can assist AAIA programmatical -
ly and financially.
Howard B. Teich, Chair
Nadema Agard (Cherokee/Lakota/Powhattan)
Gail Bruce
Kimberly Guerrero (Colville/Salish-Kootenai/Cherokee)
John Haworth (Cherokee)
Dennis Hirschfelder
Peter Johnson
Alli Joseph (Shinnecock)
Hattie Kauffman (Nez Perce)  
Kerry Kennedy
Dr. Francesca Kress
Mary Kathryn Nagle (Cherokee)
Gloria Steinem
Curtis Zunigha (Delaware)
Lynn Taylor-Corbett
Jody Naranjo (Pueblo)
Martha Redbone (Cherokee/Choctaw)
23  
STAFF
Shannon Keller O’Loughlin (Choctaw) 
Executive Director (since September 11, 2017)
Faith Roessel (Navajo)
Interim Executive Director (January through September 2017)
Honor Keeler (Cherokee)
International Repatriation Director (until August 2017)
Danielle Haskins
Office Administration
Nancy Pieriskalla
Office Administration
Betsy Detlefs
Bookkeeper (until August 2017)
Sofia Barrera
Financial Officer
24
966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 30-A
Rockville, MD 20850
240-314-7155
general.aaia@indian-affairs.org
Donate at
www.indian-affairs.org
The Association on American Indian Affairs is a 501(c)(3) non-profit,  
publicly supported, tax exempt corporation.
Donations and contributions to AAIA are tax deductible 
to the extent provided by law.
ASSOCIATION ON AMERICAN  INDIAN AFFAIRS
25