just detention international  march 2009  | fact  sheetTHE RAPE of persons in 
custody is a reality that needs 
to be acknowledged and 
addressed effectively in South Africa.
— Department of  
Correctional Services,  
Republic of South Africa1Sexual Violence Plagues  
South African Prisonsfact sheet                                                                                      march 2009
SoutH AfR icAn detention 
facilities are plagued by sexual 
abuse, in contravention of do -
mestic law and international 
human rights principles. the country’s 
prisons tend to be overcrowded, 2 and suf -
fer from high levels of violence and poor 
management.3 Pre-trial detainees,4 first-
time, non-violent offenders, and those who 
are gay or transgender, physically small or 
mentally disabled are among the most 
likely targets of sexual abuse.5 Gangs play 
an integral role in perpetuating sexual vio -
lence in South Africa’s prisons.
in 2006, the Jali commission of inquiry, 
appointed by former President thabo 
Mbeki, described “the horrific scourge of 
sexual violence that plagues [South Afri -
can] prisons where appalling abuses and 
acts of sexual perversion are perpetrated 
on helpless and unprotected prisoners.”6 
Young inmates are especially vulnerable to 
being viewed by more powerful prisoners 
as commodities to be sold or traded. one 
nationwide South African prison gang – 
known as the ‘28s’ – uses rape as a means to 
recruit and control so-called ‘wyfies,’ who 
are forced to provide sex and domestic ser -
vices to other gang members.7 While the 
28s is most often associated with rape and 
forced prison ‘marriages,’ all of the domi -
nant gangs, including the two other so-
called numbers gangs (the ‘26s’ and ‘27s’) 
are also involved in sexual abuse. 
fueling the incidence of sexual violence 
in South African prisons are ineffectual 
and detrimental corrections policies. Be -
cause inmates are not properly classified, those most vulnerable to sexual violence 
are commonly housed with predatory gang 
members in large communal cells. Perhaps 
the most problematic practice in prisons 
throughout South Africa is the system of 
“lock-up.” Each afternoon, inmates are 
provided their dinner in a paper bag and 
sent to their cells, mostly large dormito -
ries, at which point these housing units 
are locked until the next morning.8 During 
the late afternoon, evening, and through -
out the night, the prisons operate with a 
minimal staff, leaving inmates to fend for 
themselves. it is during lock-up that the 
vast majority of sexual assaults in South 
African prisons occur.  
Rape in South African prisons is directly linked to the country’s H iV/AiDS crisis.
9 
HiV prevalence in South Africa is among 
the highest in the world,10 and the rate 
among prisoners is estimated to be more 
than double that of the general popula -
tion.11 the Jali commission concluded 
that, in light of the egregious sexual abuses 
in prisons nationwide, the national De -
partment of correctional Services (D cS) 
“is effectively, by omission, imposing a 
death sentence on vulnerable prisoners.”12 
With 360,000 prisoners in South Africa 
released back into their communities each 
year, the consequences for the public are 
dire as well.13 
Efforts to address prisoner rape are in the early stages in South Africa. the D cS is 
developing initiatives focused on the link between prisoner rape, gangs, and H iV/
AiDS. for example, in 2008, the D cS 
convened a day-long “Seminar on offender just detention international  march 2009 | fact  sheetfact sheet                      
Endnotes
1  Department  of CorreCtional  ServiCe S, republiC  of South  afriC a, DiSCuSSion  DoCument  on offenDer  rape 2-3 
(presented at the Seminar on offender Rape in correctional centres, Johannesburg, South Africa ( June 30, 2008)) (available 
on-line at http://www-dcs.pwv.gov.za/) (last visited March 6, 2009).
2  JuDiCial  inSpeCtorate  of priSonS  ( Jiop), a nnual  report  2007/2008 21  (2008) (many South African prisons operate 
at levels of between 150 and 400 percent capacity); see also , roy WalmSley , international  Centre  for priSon  StuDie S, 
WorlD  priSon  population  liSt 2 (8th ed., Jan. 2009) (with nearly 165,000 people behind bars, South Africa has the 
seventh highest incarceration rate in the world).
3  See generally , JuDiCial  CommiSSion  of inquiry  into allege D inCiDentS  of Corruption , malaDminiStration , violenCe  
or intimiD ation  in the Department  of CorreCtional  ServiCe S, final report  (hereinafter “ Jali CommiSSion ”) (2006).
4  See u.S. D epartment  of State, Country  report  on human  rightS  praCtiCe S (South  afriC a) 2008 (2009) (reports 
that awaiting trial detainees had contracted H iV as a result of sexual violence).   
5  for more information on the heightened risk of sexual abuse faced by vulnerable inmates, see Just Detention international, 
fact Sheet: the Basics About Sexual Abuse in Detention (2009); Just Detention international, f act Sheet: LGB t Detainees 
chief targets for Sexual Abuse in Detention (2009). 
6  Jali CommiSSion , supra  note 3, at  393.
7  SaSha  gear & K inDiza  ngubeni , Centre  for the StuD y of violenCe  anD reConCiliation , Daii Ding: Sex, Sexual  
violenCe  anD Coer Cion  in men’S priSonS  13 (2002).
8  Jali CommiSSion , supra  note 3, at 179 (recommending that the D cS addresses the understaffing that “results in 
[corrections staff ] being unable to monitor incidents of gang activity, particularly sexual abuse, that occur during lock-up, 
particularly in the awaiting trial section of the prisons.” 
9  for more information about the link between H iV and prisoner rape in detention, see Just Detention international, f act 
Sheet, Sexual Violence in Detention is a Public Health issue (2009).  
10  un aiDS, 2008 r eport  on the global  aiDS e piDemiC  40 (2008).
11  Shanta Singh, Being a Criminology Ethnographer in a South African Prison: A Search for Dynamics and Prevalence of HIV/
AIDS in the Westville Prison, Durban, South Africa  15 J. S oC. SCi. 79 (2007) (citing K.C. g oyer , inStitute  for SeCurity  
StuDie S, hiv/aiDS in priSon : problemS , poliCie S anD potential  30 (2003)). 
12  Jali CommiSSion , supra  note 3, at 446-47.  
13  Singh, supra  note 10, at 77.
14  Materials from the seminar can be viewed on-line at http://www-dcs.pwv.gov.za/ (last visited March 6, 2009).
15  criminal Law (Sexual offences and Related Matters) Amendment Act, 2007 (Act n o. 32 of 2007). 
16  commissioner Vernie Petersen, Opening Remarks at the Seminar on Offender Rape in Correctional Centres , Johannesburg, 
South Africa ( June 30, 2008) (available on-line at http://www-dcs.pwv.gov.za/) (last visited March 6, 2009).
17  optional Protocol to the convention Against torture and o ther cruel, inhuman or Degrading treatment or 
Punishment (“oPc At”), G.A. Res. 57/199, u.n. Doc. A/RES /57/199 (Dec. 18, 2002). South Africa is a signatory to the 
convention Against torture and o ther cruel, inhuman or Degrading treatment or Punishment, G.A. Res. 39/46, 39 u.n. 
GAoR, 39th Sess., Supp. n o. 51, at 197, u.n. Doc. A/39/51 (1984) (entered into force June 26, 1987 and ratified by South 
Africa on Dec. 10, 1998). f or more information on the oPc At, see Just Detention international, f act Sheet: u.n. optional 
Protocol to the convention Against torture (2009).About Just Detention  
International (JDI)
Just Detention international ( JDi) is a 
human rights organization that seeks to 
end sexual abuse in all forms of detention. 
All of JDi ’s work takes place within the 
framework of international human rights 
laws and norms. the sexual assault of detain -
ees, whether committed by corrections staff 
or by inmates, is a crime and is recognized 
internationally as a form of torture.
JDi has three core goals for its work: to en -
sure government accountability for prisoner 
rape; to transform ill-informed public atti -
tudes about sexual violence in detention; and 
to promote access to resources for those who 
have survived this form of abuse.
 
JDi is concerned about the safety and well-
being of all detainees, including those held 
in adult prisons and jails, juvenile facilities, 
immigration detention centers, and police 
lock-ups, whether run by government agen -
cies or by private corporations on behalf of 
the government. 
When the government takes away someone’s 
freedom, it incurs a responsibility to pro -
tect that person’s safety. All inmates have 
the right be treated with dignity. no matter 
what crime someone has committed, sexual 
violence must never be part of the penalty.
Just detention international  
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast Office
1025 Vermont Ave., NW,  Third Floor
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: (202) 580-6971
Fax: (202) 638-6056
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.orgRape in correctional centres,” bringing to -
gether senior corrections officials, non-gov -
ernmental organizations (including JDi), 
oversight officials, and academics to analyze 
the problem and to develop a response.14 
At the invitation of the D cS, JDi has since 
provided a five-day ‘master training’ for cor -
rections officials at Pollsmoor prison – one 
of South Africa’s most notorious detention 
facilities – in order to create a core group of 
staff who are equipped to address sexual abuse and the spread of H iV.
With the passage of the Sexual offenses 
Amendment Act in 2007,15 the South Af -
rican Parliament adopted a gender neutral 
definition of rape. Previously, when the victim 
was a man, rape was prosecuted as ‘indecent assault’ – a much lesser offense. in a country 
where 98 percent of prisoners are men, this 
legislative change represents an important 
move toward ending impunity for prisoner rape. commenting on the new law, former 
DcS commissioner Vernie Petersen stated, 
“[w]hereas previously such an act against a 
male was euphemistically described as sodomy or assault, this definition liberates us from the 
inaction that engulfed South African penal 
institutions.”16 
South Africa has developed an important 
model for independent oversight of its prisons, 
which, if fully utilized, could help put an end to sexual abuse in detention. the Judicial in
-
spectorate of Prisons (J ioP), an independent 
monitoring body, employs more than 200 community-based ombudspersons – indepen
-
dent Prison Visitors (iPVs) – who have access 
to all South African prisons, are able to speak 
confidentially with inmates, and can assist 
with requests ranging from facility transfers to access to medical care. JDi has conducted 
workshops on sexual violence for these om -
budspersons, in order to increase their capac -
ity to detect instances of sexual abuse, secure 
assistance for survivors, and identify policies 
and practices that contribute to the problem. 
South Africa is expected to enhance further its prison oversight capacity through the u.n. 
optional Protocol to the convention Against 
torture (oPc At),
17 a protocol the govern -
ment has signed, but not yet ratified.