Flight Attendant Initiative — Innocents At RiskHomeAbout UsOur MissionOur StoryOur WorkOur InternsLatest UpdatesPodcast (New)Press and MediaNiños de CristoHuman TraffickingThe FactsWarning SignsWhat Has Been DoneWhat Needs To Be DoneIn the NewsIn BooksOn FilmOn VideoECPAT Code of ConductFlight Attendant InitiativeEventsGet InvolvedDonateInnocents At RiskHomeAbout UsOur MissionOur StoryOur WorkOur InternsLatest UpdatesPodcast (New)Press and MediaNiños de CristoHuman TraffickingThe FactsWarning SignsWhat Has Been DoneWhat Needs To Be DoneIn the NewsIn BooksOn FilmOn VideoECPAT Code of ConductFlight Attendant InitiativeEventsGet InvolvedDonateFLIGHT ATTENDANT INITIATIVEA BRIEF HISTORYInnocents at Risk established the Flight Attendant Initiative in 2008 with senior American Airlines flight attendant Sandra Fiorini. We provided training brochures and gave flight attendants the correct protocol to report red-flag situations. In 2009, with hundreds of flight attendants reporting to the national hotline number, we realized we needed additional support and reached out to the Department of Homeland Security. After several meetings with flight attendant Sandra Fiorini, DHS (CPB/ICE) and other members of law enforcement, Blue Lightning was established. Flight attendants and airline personnel were given a direct DHS call number to report possible trafficking situations. Also in 2009, Deborah Sigmund gave a presentation on human trafficking and the Flight Attendant Initiative at an Airline Ambassadors meeting in Miami. Deborah asked Nancy Rivard, CEO of Airline Ambassadors, and her team to join the Innocents at Risk Flight Attendant Initiative, to which they agreed. Together, Airline Ambassadors and Innocents at Risk continued training thousands of flight attendants. In 2010, Congressman Chris Smith asked Nancy Rivard and Deborah Sigmund to speak at a congressional briefing for the airlines about the Flight Attendant Initiative (Read Deborah Sigmund’s written testimony for that briefing) After the briefing, using the Innocents at Risk training brochure, American Airlines created a one-page bulletin to train their airline personnel.(Read more about Airline Ambassadors)Deborah met with Secretary of Transportation Raymond LaHood in 2010 about the Innocents at Risk Flight Attendant Initiative. From that meeting, Secretary LaHood agreed that the Department of Transportation would get involved and have everyone trained: TSA officials, train crew, truckers, taxi drivers, etc. Innocents at Risk was very pleased that we were creating thousands of eyes on the issue of human trafficking. Airline Ambassadors created extensive trainings for airline personnel and hosted trainings in the U.S. Working with the embassies, Deborah met with Aero Mexico, Air Canada, and Copa Airlines of Panama about the Innocents at Risk Flight Attendant Initiative and Blue Lightning. Those airlines began training their airline personnel. Together, Airline Ambassadors and Innocents at Risk have conducted 145 trainings for airline personnel worldwide. According to the Department of Homeland Security, the Flight Attendant Initiative has saved thousands of lives! In 2010, the DHS Blue Campaign to Combat Human Trafficking was announced. The DHS Blue Campaign/Blue Lightning offered training to the airlines. Since that time, the airlines have publicly stated that they were training all their airline personnel.What is the Flight Attendant Initiative?Innocents at Risk’s air-crew training initiative began with the help of senior flight attendant Sandra Fiorini in 2008. In 2009, it was given the name Flight Attendant Initiative by the U.S. Customs and Border Protection. It is an action plan to arm flight attendants with the tools necessary to combat child trafficking. Our brochures, “Protecting Women and Children from Human Trafficking,” provide vital information on how to recognize and report the human trafficking that flight attendants see daily. We also distribute wrist bands with the National Hotline Number, 1-888-373-7888, so that flight personnel can call from the air and get officials to meet suspected offenders when the flight lands. Alternatively, attendants can give wrist bands to children they suspect might be entering a dangerous situation, arming them with the resources to get help.The Flight Attendant Initiative has been extremely successful. Innocents at Risk has already been able to reach approximately one-third of American Airlines’ 19,000 flight attendants, and we are expanding the program to other airlines. Flight attendants are in a unique position to notice and report suspicious activity, and they continue to save innocents from the dangers of human trafficking daily.Flight Attendants Fight Human TraffickingFlight attendants at a large U.S. airline are training other flight attendants to recognize signs of human trafficking on international and domestic flights. The flight attendant leading the program says it's possible to catch traffickers in the act, saving the lives of women and children trapped in the net. Elizabeth Lee reports for VOA.A CALL TO ACTIONUnfortunately, it has come to the attention of Airline Ambassadors and Innocents at Risk by comments from flight attendants and concerned passengers that some airlines are not reporting situations of trafficking. Recently, a government official traveling from Atlanta to Washington saw a red-flag situation on a plane and the flight attendant and pilot refused to report it. This should never have happened! After 12 years of Innocents at Risk, Airline Ambassadors, and DHS/Blue Lightning educating the airlines, every red-flag situation should be reported! The fact that airline crew members would not report a situation to DHS when asked by a government official is alarming and unacceptable. For Airline Ambassadors and Innocents at Risk, this is a call to action!Want to get involved?Become a Flight Ambassador today! Order a brochure (or read it online here!) to inform yourself about human trafficking. Pledge to wear the hotline wristband (pictured below) on every flight.Want to do more? Order brochures and wristbands to distribute to your fellow employees.Not an airline employee? You can still sponsor an employee, airplane, airport, or airline. Your donation would go towards training personnel, and it is 100 percent tax deductible.For more information, please email Deborah Sigmund at debsigmund@gmail.com with ‘Flight Attendant Initiative’ as the subject line.Innocents at Risk has brought this incident to the attention of several Members of Congress. Innocents at Risk and Airline Ambassadors have asked for a congressional hearing. Hopefully, with the attention of members of Congress, the airlines will be reminded of the importance of reporting the Blue Lightning protocol for all red-flag situations. Innocents at Risk and Airline Ambassadors will respond by arranging awareness trainings in all major airports. We will work diligently and invite airline personnel to be reminded of the correct DHS Blue Lightning protocol to ensure that every red-flag situation is reported. Innocents at Risk and Airline Ambassadors will conduct online trainings for all airline personnel and flight attendants everywhere. This call to action is important for the safety of all citizens. We need your help to respond to this most needed call to action! Please join and help us sponsoring these important online airline trainings. We cannot do this without you! This call to action is important for the safety of all citizens. Please donate whatever you can today! We will be grateful for your support and you may be saving a life! If you are in the airport or on a plane and you see something, report it to the flight attendant or gate agent.Available to purchase for $20.If you notice possible human trafficking, report it to the nearest person in uniform. If you are in the air, you can call the DHS tip line: 1-866-347-2423 (U.S./Canada). Do not confront or alert the suspected trafficker or victim. Do not draw attention to yourself. When not in an airplane, call the National Human Trafficking number, 1-888-373-7888, or 911. We are grateful for your support. Together, we can ensure that women and child being trafficked on airplanes and airports will be reported! Warm Regards, Deborah Sigmund Founder, Innocents at RiskPHOENIX TRAINING PROGRAM UPDATEView fullsizeDeborah Sigmund traveled to Phoenix, Arizona to conduct a presentation with IAR partner, Airline Ambassadors, at the Anti-Trafficking Awareness Training Program for Airport PersonnelInnocents at Risk and Airline Ambassadors conducted an airline personnel training in Phoenix, Arizona on February 10th, 2014. The 150 attendees included flight attendants from 10 airlines, operations personnel from two airports, members of the Phoenix Mayor’s Task Force on Trafficking, law enforcement officers, and several local non-profits. Tamie Fisher, acting director of aviation at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport, welcomed Deborah Sigmund, founder of Innocents at Risk, and Nancy Rivard, head of Airline Ambassadors, and thanked them for bringing this important training to their city. Following their introduction, Deborah thanked Deborah Carstens, an Innocents at Risk board member who lives in Arizona and was driving force behind the Phoenix Airline Personnel Training Program. Without her, this training event would not have been possible.View fullsizeSandra Fiorini (left) and Deborah SigmundAlso, a very special thank you to senior AA flight attendant Sandra Fiorini, who started the Flight Attendant Initiative with Deborah Sigmund and Innocents at Risk. Deborah Sigmund said, “You, Sandra, are the reason the Flight Attendant Initiative began. We all owe you a great deal of thanks for having the courage to stand up and say, ‘We are just doing our job.’ You organized a band of angels, which has just continued to grow. I am so grateful to you, Nancy, and all of you for taking this issue so seriously and for continuing to spread the work and the training to others.” Since 2009 DHS/ICE and CBP have been vital partners with Innocents at Risk. Deborah Sigmund recognized the DHS/ICE agents in attendance and thanked them for being there, saying: “You are our true heroes! Without you, the Flight Attendant Initiative would not be a success. You are the ones who meet the planes and take the innocent lives out of harm’s way.” She also thanked DHS/ICE and CBP “for their overwhelming support of the Flight Attendant Initiative and for always being there for us.”Innocents at Risk and Airline Ambassadors are dedicated to taking expanding the Flight Attendant Initiative to every major city across the United States. We are also hoping to widen our scope, and involve hotel and hospitality chains such as Hilton Hotels, in order to eliminate the opportunities for traffickers to abduct, transport, and imprison their victims.FURTHER READINGDownload our flight attendant brochureDownload bulletinDownload PDFSandra Fiorini’s testimony for the Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission of the United States Congress, March 25, 2010Good morning my name is Sandra Fiorini and I am an international flight attendant with American Airlines. My seniority number is 719 and I have flown with American for 39 years. I would like to thank the House and Innocents at Risk for their opportunity to comment on Human trafficking. During my career with American Airlines I have seen many instances of human trafficking. While every instance has been different, there were always red flags that indicated that something was not right. Most of us are parents and when children of any age are involved we seem to be more keenly aware when these flags are raised. A few examples I have seen can enlighten you to what is happening everyday:18 year old boy with newborn baby. No diaper bag, just one bottle and two diapers.3 adults of same nationality with 5 children of all different nationalities and same age (4-5 yrs old).Prostitution tents at Redwood, CA campground. Men coming in and out.Young girls 15-17yrs old coming over from Russia thinking they are going to be models and work on TV in NYC, even though they didn’t speak any English. Moscow to Chicago direct flight.Please remember I am just one of 90,000 flight attendants world wide. Think of all the stories the other 90,000 can tell. Before I was involved in Innocents at Risk, I would call the local police. They would respond it was my word against theirs and what did I want them to do about it. Of course I wanted them to respond and file a report, which they would not do. Innocents at Risk has created a brochure with the trafficking signs and the Hotline Number to call. This gives us a tool to report from the plane what we are seeing, which is the first step in prevention. Because of calling the hotline an ICE agent was assigned to work the Moscow to Chicago flight to prevent the daily flow of young boys and girls from Russia for the sex trade.Flight attendants are the first line of defense against human trafficking. Innocents at Risk is pulling together with many government agency’s in a coordinated effort under Blue Lightning. For two years I have been educating my crews with the Innocents at Risk Brochures and wristbands with the Hotline number. I am asking them to wear the bracelets and use the hotline number to report what they have seen and pass the brochure on to other flight attendants. During that time the hotline has reported a 30% increase in call from flight attendants. The general public is unaware of the positive results Innocents at Risk is making.Flight attendants are an untapped work force that can combat this crime against woman and children. Innocents at Risk is raising awareness in my workplace. The small percentage of trained flight attendants are reporting what they encounter everyday. With funding we could educate the whole 90,000 person strong army of winged angels. I intend to keep working with Innocents at Risk until all 90,000 flight attendants are trained.Deborah Sigmund’s written testimony for the Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission of the United States Congress, March 25, 2010My name is Deborah Sigmund and I am the Founder and Director of Innocents at Risk, a 501 (c)(3) organization dedicated to preventing child exploitation and child trafficking. I would like to thank the Tom Lantos and the Human Rights Commission for asking me to be with you today to discuss the greatest human rights issues of this century- human trafficking.The Slavery Abolition Act of 1833 ended slavery in most of the British Empire, and the Emancipation Proclamation of 1863 encouraged the conclusion of slavery in the United States. Most people believe that slavery ended long ago- but sadly, it did not. Trafficking victims are modern day slaves and there are currently an estimated 27 million slaves worldwide.Like many, I was unaware of the perils of human trafficking. I first learned about trafficking in the summer of 2003. I was told that each year millions of women and children are coerced, tricked, drugged, kidnapped and sold into the underground world of the sex trade. I was horrified that this was happening in virtually every part of the world. I also learned that this was not just happening hundreds of miles away from me, this was occurring in nearly every city in the United States. Everyday young girls and boys were being forced to work in the sex trade, yet their stories were not front-page news.From the Department of State’s Trafficking In Persons office, I learned that Human Trafficking is a $32 billion dollar global industry. It is the fastest growing criminal industry in the world. Trafficking has become more lucrative than the illegal arms trade, and is quickly beginning to surpass the revenue acquired from the illegal drug trade.From the Department of State I also learned that in spite of the large number of dedicated government and Non Government Organizations working to combat trafficking, there was still a great need for awareness and education about the issue. As a result, Innocents at Risk was formed. Since 2004 Innocents at Risk has been working with the Department of State, leaders in Congress such as Representatives Carolyn Maloney and Christopher Smith, the Diplomatic Corps, private corporations and the media, to educate the public about the horrors of the human trafficking. We have built hundreds of partnerships with NGO’s in the US and abroad.Two years ago at an Innocents at Risk event, I met Sandra Fiorini a senior flight attendant for American Airlines. Sandra told me that she and other flight attendants often see suspicious situations with children in airports and in flight. From our discussion we realized that these situations were more than likely child trafficking incidents. Sandra told me that flight attendants wanted to act, but did not know what to do. I had to take immediate action. I knew that if we could effectively target trafficker’s mode of transportation, that we could begin to alleviate this epidemic.Innocents at Risk created a brochure of basic information titled “ How to Recognize Potential Victims” which contained the Human Trafficking National Hotline number sponsored by Polaris Project. Sandra, along with a task force of dedicated flight attendants, began to spread the word about trafficking, and about Innocents at Risk’s program to combat trafficking in air. From further discussions with more flight attendants we learned that trafficking was taking place via commercial airlines. As the initiative grew, we learned valuable information from airport personal. We were informed that twice a week young girls were aboard a flight from Moscow to Chicago with one- way tickets. The girls were told that they would become models or work in television in New York City. I called the Department of Homeland Security, a trusted NGO working in Moscow and the Association of Catholic Bishops working in Chicago. With the help of law enforcement and the immediate attention of the NGOs, we were all able to thwart the trafficker’s plans and save girls lives. This was a major breakthrough and a positive step for trafficking prevention.In 2009, John Ingham of the Department of Homeland Security assembled members of his agency, Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and the FBI to meet with Mike Wascom, an American Airlines representative. The Polaris Project, Sandra Fiorini and Innocents at Risk were present at the meeting in order to discuss how to mobilize the task force of flight attendants, who had become the first line of defense in the transatlantic anti-trafficking movement. After 6 months of meetings we created the Blue Lightning Initiative; now the Flight Attendant Initiative. The initiative’s mission is to train all airline personnel and flight attendants about how to properly assess, stop, and respond to various trafficking situations.We applaud American Airlines and John Ingham for the success of this initiative. We have been hosted by various embassies to discuss and promote our efforts. We also thank the embassies of Afghanistan, Sweden, Switzerland, Mexico, Colombia, Romania, Chile, Iceland, Malta, Cyprus and Canada for continued support.Thus far the hotline has received calls as a result of this initiative, and law enforcement has met planes at the terminal to take action. Children’s lives have been saved, but there is still much work to be done. Our goal is to educate all flight attendants about this issue, and save each and every victim. With your help, this can be accomplished. Please help us wake up America and open the eyes of the public to this horror happening all around us. In the name of the children, today we ask for your support and funding to help us prevent more innocent lives from slipping away.AN EXCERPT FROM “10 SHOCKING SECRETS OF FLIGHT ATTENDANTS”By Heather Poole, Published in May/June 2012 issue of MentalFloss2 Teen Girls Present First-Class Tickets, Airline Attendant Notices They're In Real DangerPublished Aug 31, 2021By Amy PDenice Miracle was an American Airlines ticket agent at California's Sacramento International Airport. And yes, that's her actual name. Denice was working behind the desk when two teenage girls walked up to her counter and presented her with their plane ticket.The two girls, aged 15 and 17, said they were trying to board a flight to New York City. They had very little luggage with them, no identification, and no adults accompanying them on their trip.The eagle-eyed agent noticed the tickets were bought online, with a credit card using a name that did not match either of the two girls.Denice then took a closer look at the very expensive first-class tickets — and her gut told her something was horribly wrong. It wasn't until she called the police and deputies arrived that the chilling identity of the person who bought the teens their plane ticket began to emerge.Now, American Airlines is hailing Denice a hero for potentially saving the teenagers' lives.Child trafficking is happening in every corner of the world, in major cities and small towns, and in every state and province. Children who have seen so little of life are taken by force or fraud and put into the worst of life: the child sex trade. Every 60 seconds, a child is trafficked into this dark and evil world. We all need to do everything we can to protect all children, to know what to look for and know how to report it. Now more than ever, we need your help to Turn A Million Eyes On Children.Download the PDFSubscribeSign up with your email address to receive news and updates.Email AddressSign UpThank you!Back to TopAdvisory BoardPartnersSponsorsFinancial RecordsGet In Touch1101 30th Street NW, Suite 500, Washington, D.C. 20007Phone: 202.625.4338 Fax: 202.625.4363 e-mail: debsigmund@gmail.com© 2006-2022 Innocents at Risk. All rights reserved.