“Crossfire”: Continued Human Rights Abuses by Bangladesh’s Rapid Action Battalion | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportMay 10, 2011“Crossfire”Continued Human Rights Abuses by Bangladesh’s Rapid Action Battalion“Crossfire”Continued Human Rights Abuses by Bangladesh’s RapidAction BattalionMap of BangladeshSummaryKeyRecommendations:MethodologyI. Killings and Other Cases of Abuse by RAB Since theAwami League Government Came toPower in 2009Killing ofRasal Ahmed BhuttoTheDisappearance of Mohammad Rafiqul Islam..The Killingof Azad Hussein Pappu and Abdus SattarThe Death ofMohiuddin ArifThe Killingof Lutfar and Khairul KhalashiThe Tortureof F. M. Masum..Killing ofKaiser Mahmud BappiKilling ofMoshin Sheikh and Ali JinnahII. RAB Impunity: The Failure to Punish Human Rights AbusesIII. Concerns about RAB Expressed by CivilSociety Actors and OthersIV. International CooperationRecommendationsTo theBangladesh GovernmentTo the National Human Rights CommissionTo the Chief JusticeTo Bangladesh’s Bilateral and Multilateral DonorsTo the US GovernmentTo the United NationsAppendix I:Letter to Home Minister Sahara Khatun, April 22, 2010Appendix II:Letter to Home Minister Sahara Khatun, copying RAB Director General, MukhlesurRahman, October 27, 2010AcknowledgmentsSummaryMap of BangladeshClick to expand ImageThe brothers Lutfar andKhairul Khalashi were arrested by the Rapid Action Battalion (RAB), an elitegovernment crime-fighting force in Bangladesh, on November 13, 2009. Because ofRAB’s long record of killing people in custody, the following day familymembers organized a press briefing in which they urged the authorities toensure that the brothers would not be killed while in custody. But two dayslater, on November 16, 2009, RAB announced that both had been killed in aso-called shoot-out, or “crossfire,” with a RAB patrol team earlythe same morning. RAB provided no credible explanation for the killings. Whenthe High Court issued a ruling the next day directing the authorities toexplain the deaths, the law officer at RAB headquarters denied that any shoot-outhad occurred at all, contradicting its previous announcement.In one recent case, on March 3, 2011, RAB personnel inplainclothes picked up Rasal Ahmed Bhutto while he was minding a friend’sshop in the capital, Dhaka. According to Bhutto’s brother-in-law, GulamMustafa, one of their relatives in the army was able to contact colleagues inRAB and extract a promise that Bhutto would not be killed in“crossfire.” However, on March 10, Bhutto was brought tothe areawhere he lived, in a RAB vehicle. He was shot inside the park. RAB summonedjournalists to show the body of an alleged criminal killed in crossfire.“They brought him and committed cold-blooded murder,” Gulam Mustafatold Human Rights Watch.This report examinescases of extrajudicial killings, “disappearances,” and torture thathave taken place in and around Dhaka, after the current Awami League governmentcame to power in January 2009. It builds on the 2006 Human Rights Watch report,Judge, Jury, and Executioner: Torture and Extrajudicial Killings byBangladesh’s Elite Security Force. The number of victims is astonishing.In March 2010, the director general of RAB said that since it was started in 2004RAB had killed 622 people. According to Odhikar, a Bangladesh human rightsgroup, at least 732 people were killed by RAB between its inception and March2011.Although some within the government urge reform andaccountability, the government has failed to make serious efforts to end thesystematic use of extrajudicial killing and torture to fight crime. Its claimsthat incidents of “crossfire” deaths are the result of RAB officersacting in self-defense are as hollow now as they were under the previousmilitary backed government and its predecessor, the Bangladesh NationalistParty (BNP), which created RAB.The Rapid Action Battalion was formed in March2004. RAB was designed as a composite force comprising elite members from themilitary (army, air force, and navy), the police, and members of Bangladesh'svarious law enforcement groups. RAB personnel are seconded from their parentorganizations, to which they return after serving time with the force. Itoperates under the ministry of home affairs and is commanded by an officer notbelow the rank of deputy inspector general of the police or someone of theequivalent rank from the military. RAB is organized into twelve battalions ofwhich five operate in capital Dhaka.[1] It is regarded as an elite counter-terrorism force and indeed RAB hastargeted, apart from criminal suspects, alleged members of militant Islamist orleft-wing groups. RAB’s official website depicts itself as battling the‘war against terrorism.’ When it was first created, critics,including the then opposition Awami League, had said that instead of setting upRAB, the government should undertake efforts to reform law enforcement and thecourts. Creating RAB, they feared, would undermine the police, and some hadexpressed concern about using the military for civilian policing.[2]Their concern was well-founded. In often standardized pressstatements, RAB claims that these victims were shot and killed in crossfire inself-defense or after they or their accomplices opened fire on the force. Investigationsby Human Rights Watch and Bangladeshi human rights organizations have, however,for many years found that many victims were executed while in the custody ofRAB. Bodies of those killed have often carried marks indicating that they hadbeen tortured. Many persons who survived periods in RAB custody have repeatedlyalleged torture.RAB’s penchant for killing people in custody is soinfamous that many of those taken into custody expect to die. A man, who washeld blindfolded in custody and beaten in August 2010, told Human Rights Watchthat he heard his captors discuss his killing in a crossfire. “Iperformed my last rituals and was prepared,” he said. “I know thatpeople die like this every day in Bangladesh.”The impunity RAB has enjoyed since its establishment in 2004continues under the Awami League government. In spite of commitments to end thekillings and to punish perpetrators, no RAB officer or official has ever beenprosecuted for a crossfire killing or other human rights abuse.Nearly 200 people have been killed in RAB operations sinceJanuary 6, 2009, when the Awami League government assumed office. Echoing theirpredecessors in the BNP-led government, the home minister and other governmentrepresentatives deny any wrongdoing by RAB and other law enforcement agencies. Instead,they cling to the fiction that all of those killed were shot by authoritiesacting in self-defense. This is disappointing because, while in opposition,leading members of the Awami League expressed strong criticism of RAB and itsactions.As far back as March2005, the Awami League criticized RAB in its official newsletter. Referring to RAB and two short-livedspecial police units named Cheetah and Cobra, it said that:These forces have beengiven so much power and authority that they have blatantly disregardedconstitutional provisions, human rights laws, as well as court law. Almostevery day they are catching people on different false charges and are brutallymurdering them, covering it by calling it ‘crossfire deaths.’ Thevictims are not tried or given any opportunity for self-defense. So there is awidespread saying ‘How can a man be certain that his death is imminent?The answer is ‘When he is caught by RAB or other special forces of theruling party.’[3]The newsletter also acknowledged that the practices of RABhad spread to the police and other law enforcement agencies:Being encouraged by the actions of RAB and the impunitiesenjoyed by them, the police and other forces have now also indulged inextra-judicial killings calling it crossfire. While killing a handcuffed personin the so-called crossfire, the most astonishing thing is the stereotypicalstatements issued by those forces.[4]The Awami League also reflected these concerns in theirelection manifesto issued before the December 2008 elections, stating that,“extrajudicial killings will be stopped.”[5]In the first few months after it was elected to power, theAwami League maintained its firm rhetoric. In February 2009, at the UnitedNations Human Rights Council’s Universal Periodic Review, ForeignMinister Dipu Moni announced that Bangladesh had a policy of “zerotolerance” for extrajudicial killings, torture, and deaths in custody, stating: “We do not condone any such incidentand will bring the responsible officials to justice.”[6]A few days later, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasinaalso promised that legal action would be taken against those responsible forextrajudicial killings.[7]Indeed, the first few months of 2009 saw a comparatively low number ofextrajudicial killings carried out by RAB. Some observers have attributed thisto a wait-and-watch approach from RAB to determine whether the new governmentwould take strong action to hold it accountable for past abuses or implementroot and branch institutional reform.But the new government has since followed in the footstepsof previous governments by embracing RAB as a crime fighting and anti-terrorismforce to respond to public concern about high crime rates and internationalconcern about the activities of Islamic militants on Bangladeshi soil. RAB isseen by the public as more capable of addressing organized crime than thepolice. Many Bangladeshis are unconcerned about abusive practices, believingthat criminals deserve to be dealt with aggressively. It appears that thegovernment is afraid of a populist backlash in taking on RAB.Indeed, in March 2009, LawMinister Shafique Ahmed told Human Rights Watch that the government had nointention of investigating allegations of past human rights abuses by securityforces, even though the perpetrators remained in RAB’s ranks and would belikely to continue their illegal methods. Ahmed said that even though he didnot condone “crossfire” killings, it should be remembered that RABhad only killed criminals.[8]A year later, in May 2010,despite numerous reports by human rights groups, the law minister claimed thatsuch incidents had stopped. “No more crossfire incidents are taking placein the country,” he said.[9]This was a shockingstatement for a senior official and lawyer who is well aware of the legallyrequired presumption of innocence. Even BNP officials have admitted that manyinnocent people have been killed by RAB. Ahmed and other Awami League officialshave consistently argued that they did not need to root out abusers becausethey could exercise effective political control over RAB, a claim that isbelied by the evidence after over two years in office.In response to allegations of rising extrajudicialexecutions, Home Minister Sahara Khatun said: “Many people are talkingand will talk about this. But as the home minister, I am saying that the lawenforcers’ task is to bring the criminals to the book.” When askedabout allegations by Human Rights Watch on continuing extra-judicial killings,she said: “What will the law enforcers do—save themselves or die—whencriminals open fire on them?”[10]Khatun has even denied that RAB has committed any extrajudicial killings sincethe current government came to power. On December 26, 2009, she said that“There is no crossfire in the country,” but added that lawenforcement agencies were compelled to shoot “miscreants” to defendthemselves when the suspects opened fire on them.[11]Port and Shipping Minister Shajahan Khan expressed evenstronger support for the actions of RAB and other security forces. On October3, 2009, during a dialogue organized by BBC’s Bangla Service, hereportedly said that it was impossible to try criminals under existing laws andthat it was crossfire that will one day bring criminality to an end.[12]A few days later, the press reported that during an inauguration inNarayanganj, Khan said that crossfire killings were not human rights violationsand that such killings helped to bring extortion and other crimes undercontrol.[13]Surprisingly, none of the other ministers in the government publicly denouncedKhan’s comments.In an article published onMay 5, 2010, the New Nation newspaper claimed that as many as 50 peoplehad recently been abducted and killed by people claiming to be members of RAB.According to the director general of RAB, members of the force had noinvolvement in these cases, which he attributed to criminal elements disguisingthemselves as members of RAB and other law enforcement agencies.[14] After his appointment as the new director generalof RAB on September 5, 2010, Mokhlesur Rahman declared, “RAB neversupports extrajudicial killings. RAB is not involved with these incidents andRAB will operate its duty upholding human rights.”[15]While senior government officials insist that all thosekilled by RAB are criminals, in some cases RAB has killed individuals becauseof mistaken identity. Under pressure, the Ministry of Home Affairs orderedinvestigations into the killings of Mohiuddin Arif, killed by RAB on February3, 2010, and Kaisar Mahmud Bappi, killed by RAB on September 10, 2009. Theinquiries were conducted by home ministry officials. Both inquiries concludedthat the men were victims of extrajudicial killings by RAB.[16]“Witnesses heard my brother tell the officers, ‘Please don’tkill me. You are mistaking me for someone else. I am from a goodfamily,’” said Kaisar Mahmud Bappi’s sister, ShamsunnaharAlam. “They still shot him.”[17]Officials from RAB have admitted privately to family members that Bappi’skilling may have been a mistake, but there is still no officialacknowledgement.[18]The committees recommended the prosecution of the perpetrators, but no actionhas followed.[19]On February 4, 2011, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina admittedthat extrajudicial killings remained a problem, something that governmentofficials had for so long denied. On February 4, 2011, she said: “We havebeen trying our best to stop extrajudicial killings, which started in2004…. I have always been against extra-judicial killing, which arecontinuing a long time. They cannot be stopped overnight.”[20]Hasina’s comments raise the question of whether the government has eitherthe will or ability to control RAB.One thing appearscertain: RAB will continue to commit serious abuses as long as it is able tooperate with impunity. Human Rights Watch has found no cases in which thecurrent government has even initiated a serious criminal investigation of a RABofficer for a human rights violation, despite obvious cases such as the killingof the Khalashi brothers. The government and RAB have in a handful of casesclaimed that disciplinary measures have been taken after internal inquiries.Human Rights Watch has repeatedly requested the Bangladeshi government toprovide details of such disciplinary action. However, despite pledges from thehighest levels, including the Prime Minister’s office, no information hasbeen provided.Lawyers, politicians, representatives of civil societyorganizations, the media, and even artists have repeatedly warned against thedangers of not addressing the “crossfire” problem. They have urgedthe government to hold those responsible to account and to stop protecting theperpetrators.Worryingly, RAB has recently begun to engage in enforceddisappearances, perhaps as a way of hiding its involvement in killings. Bangladeshihuman rights groups say that there have been more disappearances in recent timesand that RAB has started to kill people without acknowledging any role in theirdeaths.[21]A member of Ain o Salish Kendra, a Bangladeshi human rights group, told HumanRights Watch, “They are picking up people, often in plainclothes, andthen there is no word. Any unit can operate anywhere. Sometimes bodies turn upin some other district. This is a new trend.”[22]In July 2010, the National Human Rights Commission reported that it was dealingwith a number of disappearances of people who had allegedly been picked up byRAB.[23]The police appear to have increasingly adopted some of theextrajudicial working methods of RAB. According to Bangladeshi human rightsgroups, several hundred killings have in recent years been attributed to theregular police or other security forces, a sharp increase.[24]The judiciary hasexpressed concern that RAB personnel are taking the law into their own hands,but it has had no better luck in holding abusers accountable. On November 17,2009, the High Court issued an unprecedented suo moto ruling in the killingof the Khalashi brothers. The court directed the government and RAB to explainwithin 48 hours why appropriate action should not be taken against the RABofficers involved. The court also ordered a halt to extrajudicial killings. Thehearing on the case was adjourned, however, and the bench that issued the noticewas reconstituted before it could hear the case. As of March 2011, the case hadnot been transferred to a new bench and no new date for a hearing had been set.Foreign governments, in particular the UK and the US, regardRAB as Bangladesh’s most effective anti-terrorism force and haveexpressed strong interest in increasing cooperation with RAB. In the hope ofimproving RAB’s human rights record and deflecting criticism at homeabout working with RAB, these governments have provided human rights trainingto some RAB officers. They also say they are working with RAB to establish astructure for internal accountability.[25]The US, UK, and Australia, among other countries, want towork with RAB on counter-terror issues because they view RAB as the mostprofessional and well equipped law enforcement agency in Bangladesh. However, diplomatsand foreign officials agree that RAB engages in widespread abuses. They insistthat they are working with RAB and the Bangladeshi government to implementreform. Leaked diplomatic cables make clear that the US government isconstrained in its ability to assist RAB as a result of its reputation forextrajudicial killings. Under US law it can only provide human rights training aftervetting participants, though it devotes few resources to the vetting procedure.[26]At present RAB is drawn from personnel from the police andthe military who return to their units once they have served their term withRAB. This practice has been widely criticized for giving soldiers civilian lawenforcement tasks and expecting them to operate under a different framework andcode of conduct without adequate training, leading to predictable abuses. It isalso likely that the abusive practices of RAB are then introduced into otherforces, such as the police. The constant shuffling between the different forcesmakes it difficult to keep track of those responsible for violations forvetting purposes.Because they consider RAB as an important counter-terrorpartner, the US, UK, and other governments have proven extremely reluctant tocriticize RAB publicly (though they have been more forthright in diplomaticcables back to Washington and London). These governments have worked to fendoff accusations that they are supporting a “death squad,” but haveshown little appreciation that the trainings they have supported to improve RABpractices appear to have had little impact. This is not surprising, as humanrights training without vigorous prosecution of rights violators is unlikely tolead to improvements.One recommendation made by some diplomats to Human RightsWatch is to disband RAB and instead create a separate, smaller force to focuson counter-terrorism and security issues. Such a force would be composed ofspecially trained police officers without the participation of soldiers. Ifsuch a force required specialized training, international assistance could beprovided.Key Recommendations:The Bangladeshi government should take allnecessary measures to end RAB’s involvement in extrajudicial killings,torture, and other human rights violations. It should ensure that all allegationsof human rights violations by RAB are thoroughly investigated and prosecute allthose responsible, regardless of rank or position.If RAB’s human rights record does notimprove dramatically within the next 6 months and abusers are not prosecuted,the Bangladeshi government should disband RAB and donors such as the US and UKshould withdraw all aid and cooperation. In its place the government shouldcreate a new unit within the police or a new institution with a differentoperating culture that puts human rights at its core to lead the fight againstcrime and terrorism.RAB or its replacement should become anentirely civilian institution. Its officers and rank and file members should nolonger be drawn from the military, which has a different culture, ethos, andtraining from the police.In the meantime, the Bangladeshi government shouldestablish an independent commission to assess RAB’s performance, identifythose responsible for serious violations such as extrajudicial killings,including those at the highest level, and ensure that those personnel areexcluded from a reformed RAB and prosecuted. The commission should also developand supervise implementation of an action plan to transform RAB into an agencythat operates within the law and with full respect for international humanrights norms.The Bangladeshi government should ensurethat anyone detained by RAB or police has prompt access to lawyers, medicalpersonnel, and family members. It should also allow nongovernmental humanrights organizations unfettered access to all RAB stations and detention cellsto ensure that the practice of torture ends.Foreign governments and internationalorganizations should refuse to work with RAB in law enforcement orcounter-terror operations until the force ceases its use of torture andextrajudicial executions, promotes transparency, and pursues accountability forviolations of human rights.MethodologySince early 2006, Human Rights Watch has closely followedRAB and monitored its record of continuous human rights violations. During thisperiod, the organization has spoken with dozens of persons with insight intoRAB operations, and interviewed many persons directly affected by them.This report is primarily based on Human Rights Watchinterviews with more than 80 victims, witnesses, human rights defenders,journalists, law enforcement officials, lawyers, and judges. Research wasconducted from April 2010 to March 2011.The report also makes use of officialstatements, press articles, and fact-finding reports prepared by Bangladeshinongovernmental human rights organizations.The cases of human rights violations presented in SectionIII of this report were selected following a review of all RAB violationsreported in the media from 2009 to 2011. Criteria for selecting the casesincluded that the incident took place after the new government led by the AwamiLeague took power; the violation took place in or near Dhaka, indicating thatthese cases were well known to the government; and demands were being made byfamily or relatives for justice in the cases.In April 2010, Human Rights Watch sought a meeting withHasan Mahmud Khandaker, then the director general of RAB, to discuss thefindings presented in this report. Human Rights Watch spoke to him on the phonetwo times in April 2010, but in both instances he indicated he was notavailable for a meeting at that point in time. On April 22, 2010, Human RightsWatch sent a letter to Home Affairs Minister Sahara Khatun, copying the RABdirector general, seeking information about investigations, internaldisciplinary measures, criminal prosecutions, convictions, sentences, andcompensation to victims in relation to the cases raised in this report or anyother cases in which RAB is alleged to have committed human rights abuses. Theletter was resent to the minister and to the new RAB director general, MoklesurRahman, on October 27, 2010.[27]Human Rights Watch also met with Prime Minister SheikhHasina and senior officials from the Prime Minister’s office to raiseconcerns and request responses to letters written by Human Rights Watch with allegationsof human rights violations by RAB. Despite repeated commitments, Human RightsWatch received no response from the government. Copies of these letters appearin the appendix.I. Killings and Other Casesof Abuse by RAB Since theAwami League Government Came to Power in 2009Bangladesh is a stateparty to several of the central international human treaties, including theInternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention againstTorture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.Bangladesh is thus, among other things, obliged to ensure that no one isarbitrarily deprived of her or his life, that no one is subjected to torture,and that in the determination of a criminal charge, everyone is entitled to afair and public hearing by a tribunal established by law, and to be presumedinnocent until proven guilty.[28] Under international human rights law, Bangladeshis also obliged to thoroughly and promptly investigate serious violations ofhuman rights, prosecute those implicated by the evidence and, if their guilt isestablished following a fair trial, impose proportionate penalties.[29] Implied in this is that all victims shall havethe opportunity to assert their rights and receive a fair and effective remedy,that those responsible shall stand trial, and that the victims themselves canobtain reparations.United Nations principleson the prevention and investigation of extrajudicial executions providedetailed guidelines for governments. They include the need for “thorough,prompt and impartial investigations” of all suspected unlawful killingsto determine the cause of death and the person responsible. Independent andimpartial physicians should perform autopsies in cases of possible unlawfulkillings, and bodies should be kept until an adequate autopsy is carried outand the family informed of the findings. Where the established investigativeprocedures are inadequate because of lack of expertise or impartiality,investigations of possible unlawful killings should be pursued through anindependent commission of inquiry.[30]It should be noted that the UN special rapporteur onextrajudicial, summary, or arbitrary executions has repeatedly requestedpermission for a country visit to Bangladesh, but has yet to receive a positiveresponse.[31]Below are some illustrative cases of continuing abuses byRAB. Human Rights Watch could have documented dozens of others, but takentogether with all the unresolved cases in “Judge, Jury, andExecutioner,” Human Rights Watch press releases on other cases in theinterim,[32]and documentation by Bangladeshi human rights groups and the media,[33]we believe that the cases below are sufficient to indicate the urgency of theproblem.Killing of Rasal Ahmed BhuttoRasal Ahmed Bhutto, a34-year old shopkeeper, was picked up in the street outside a friend’sshop in Dhaka by men in plainclothes in a white microbus on March 3, 2011.Bhutto had been worried for many months that he was under RAB surveillancebecause of his alleged association with the murder of a BNP politician. He hadstarted avoiding going to his shop for fear of arrest. His brother-in-law, GulamMustafa, said that Bhutto had a bad reputation in the neighborhood, and that hewas often the scapegoat, blamed for any crime in the area.After his arrest, Bhutto’s family and friends startedcalling journalists to find out where he had been taken. They were told by ajournalist with close ties to RAB that he had initially been in the custody ofRAB-10, one of RAB’s Dhaka units, and was then transferred to RAB-3, alsoin Dhaka.[34]This was later confirmed to Gulam Mustafa by a close relative, a member of thearmed forces with ties to RAB headquarters.One week later, men in several vehicles, some of thembelonging to RAB and some civilian, brought Bhutto to his family’sneighborhood in Naya Bazaar at around 10 p.m. and killed him there. Theyclaimed he was killed in a shoot-out. Eyewitnesses to the killing describedseeing Bhutto in an unmarked microbus on the night of his death escorted by twomarked RAB vehicles. They heard a volley of gunshots about an hour later. Bythe time Gulam Mustafa arrived there, Bhutto had been shot and was slumpedagainst a wall in a sitting position. Mustafa described the scene:There were RAB officersand police all over the place, about 50 in total. The media was already thereand RAB kept saying that Bhutto had been caught in a special operation. Istarted shouting at them, saying maybe Bhutto had done some bad things butwhere is the rule of law, how dare RAB kill Bhutto. The RAB officers juststared at me and said nothing, which frightened me. And then although somepeople supported me, a local Awami League leader came out and started raisingslogans saying that Bhutto was a criminal anyway… RAB then took the bodyaway for the autopsy. When I went to collect the body, I saw that there wasonly one bullet inside his ear. The police made me sign a blank sheet of paper,I didn’t want to do it but then I just gave in.[35]When asked why thefamily had not filed a notice with the police after Bhutto’s arrest,Mustafa said: “We know what happens when people go missing. We decidednot to file a case because it is better to have a body to mourn over thanhoping forever that your missing one is still alive.”The Disappearance of Mohammad Rafiqul IslamAccording to witnesses, uniformed RAB personnel arrived ataround 4:30 p.m. on February 15, 2011, to pick up 41-year-old Mohammad Rafiqul Islam,a salesman at a grocery store in Dhaka. He has since disappeared. RAB hasdenied taking him into custody.After the family was informed by other shopkeepers in theneighborhood who saw Rafiqul being taken into custody, they tried to contactvarious government authorities and even went to the RAB camp. No one was ableto provide any information. On February 22, 2011, Shada Mia, Rafiqul’sson-in-law, filed a missing person report with the local police.Family members said that Rafiqul was a member of an Islamistgroup called “Allah-r Dol,” (Allah’s party). A case had beenfiled against him by the police in April 2004 for his alleged involvement of amilitant organization. Mohammad Shada Mia, Rafiqul’s son-in-law, saidthat his father-in-law used to attend court hearings regularly.My father-in-law was working at the shop for three yearsand everyone in the neighborhood knew him. He had studied Arabic and used tosometimes give the call to prayers at the mosque…. That afternoon, itseems that a Coca Cola van had come to deliver new supplies to the store. Whenhe stepped out of the shop, five or six men in plainclothes took him away.Other shopkeepers said that there were more men in RAB uniform waiting at thetop of the lane with vehicles….I went to the RAB-3 camp, but the guardsaid no one had been taken into custody. I went to the police, but they refusedto register a complaint and asked us to wait because sometimes RAB releasespeople…. I finally filed a complaint when he did not return after a week.[36]Odhikar interviewed two eyewitnesses who saw Rafiqulhandcuffed by plainclothes officials outside his shop and then taken to themain street where there were some armed men wearing RAB uniforms and others incivilian clothes. RAB authorities have denied arresting Mohmmad Rafiqul Islam.[37]At the time of writing his whereabouts are unknown, but his family is concernedthat he may have been killed by RAB.The Killing of Azad Hussein Pappu and Abdus SattarAccording to witnesses, Azad Hussein Pappu, and Abdus Sattarwere arrested by RAB officers in the Mirpur area of Dhaka on February 27, 2010.[38]The next day, on February 28, RAB issued a statement sayingthat the two men had been killed that morning, around 3 a.m., during a raid inthe capital’s South Keraniganj area, which is located at the opposite endof the city from the point where they were arrested. RAB claimed to befollowing a tip-off that two criminal groups were confronting each other. RABclaimed that after RAB arrived on the scene, Pappu and Sattar came into theline during a shoot-out as the force retaliated when the criminals opened fire.[39]According to Pappu’s family members and otherwitnesses interviewed by Human Rights Watch, five to seven men in civilianclothes arrested the two men at gunpoint around 11 a.m., as they were leavingthe Mirpur home where Pappu’s mother and several of his relatives live.The armed men took the two men to a microbus parked at a street corner a fewmeters from the entrance to the house, and at that time the men in plainclothesput on vests with “RAB” written on the back.[40]A large crowd of people witnessed the arrest. Pappu’saunt, Shima Begum, was present at the time and told Human Rights Watch,“RAB was telling people to move away as Pappu had a bomb in his bag thatcould explode at any moment.”[41]She and Pappu’s uncle also said they heard a RAB officer accusing the twomen of having stolen 1.4 million taka.[42]Pappu and Sattar were then forced into the microbus and taken away.Pappu’s relatives started looking for him and Sattarat different RAB and police stations in the area, but officials told them thatnothing was known about the arrests.[43]They also made repeated attempts to call Pappu on his mobile phone. He answeredon four different occasions that afternoon during which he talked to his aunt,mother and his wife, who was seven months pregnant. He told them that he wasblindfolded, did not know where he was being held and that he would be releasedas soon as the interrogation was over.[44]At around 7 p.m., Sattar’s family was informed of thearrest by a relative living in South Keraniganj. They made several attempts tocall Abdus Sattar, but found that his phone was switched off.[45]Late in the evening they arrived at the RAB-10 office in South Keraniganj but officerstold them Sattar was not there.Early the next morning, on February 28, friends andrelatives informed both families that the two men had been killed and thattheir bodies were lying in an open field in the South Keraniganj area.[46]When Pappu’s mother and other relatives arrived there, approximately 10to 12 RAB officers and many bystanders were present. The mother told HumanRights Watch that she started screaming at the RAB officers:I asked them how much money they got to kill my son andtold them that they could kill me in crossfire as well. One RAB officer thengrabbed my neck and said, ‘Get out of here, bitch. If you don’tshut up, people here will kill you.’ I asked him what he was doing thereand if it was not his job to protect me. He then calmed down, asked me to leaveand said that I could collect Pappu’s body at Mitford hospital.[47]When the two families arrived at Mitford hospital around 3p.m., hospital staff informed them that the bodies could not be handed over astheir condition did not correspond to what was stated in the police report.However, they were allowed to see the bodies. Family members said Pappu’sthighs were severely bruised and there were burn marks on his back and theright cheek of his face which to the family looked as if they had been causedby a hot iron. They added Pappu had been shot in the right ear and the bullethad exited on the left side of his head. Despite repeated requests, the familyhas not been able to obtain a copy of the post-mortem report from the police.[48]Sattar’s family members took a number of photos at themorgue, which they showed to Human Rights Watch. The photographs show wounds onAbdul Sattar’s forehead and chin, as well as bruises on his thighs andhands. He also had a burn mark on his chest.Sattar’s sisters told Human Rights Watch that Sattarand another brother, Mustaq, had been accused of killing a man named Kamal inthe South Keraniganj area. Mustaq had been arrested three months earlier, butSattar had gone into hiding. One of the sisters, Mukta, said that during avisit to South Keraniganj police station after Mustaq’s arrest, she heardhim screaming as he was being beaten and that a police inspector told her,“now you know how it feels to hear your brother’s screams.”Afterwards, when she was allowed to see him, Mustaq was unable to stand up andsaid that the police had beaten him severely.[49]Mustaq was later released on bail in June 2010. The same day that she wasinformed of the death of her son, Pappu’s mother went to file a complaintwith the South Keraniganj police station. She told Human Rights Watch that thepolice refused to accept the complaint and said to her, “why should weaccept a complaint when a criminal has been killed?”[50]Sattar’s family also tried to file a complaint withthe South Keraniganj police station. According to his sister Mukta, the policetold her, “You cannot file a complaint when criminals killcriminals.” When she asked him if he meant that RAB are criminals, hejust told her to shut up and leave.[51]A few days later, the family filed a complaint with the Dhaka ChiefMetropolitan Magistrate’s Court. On July 15, 2010, the Officer-in-Chargeof the South Keraniganj Police Station submitted a report to the courtregarding the unnatural deaths of Sattar and Pappu. The report stated that bothwere killed in crossfire. The family's lawyer, Advocate Moshiur Rahman,informed Human Rights Watch that he planned to submit a petition disagreeingwith the police report in time for the next hearing on September 15, 2010 butat the time of this writing there was no additional information available onwhether that appeal went forward.[52]The Death of Mohiuddin ArifOn February 3, 2010, Mohiuddin Arif, a 32-year-old surgerytechnician at the Apollo hospital in Dhaka, died from injuries that heapparently sustained after he was arrested and detained by RAB ten daysearlier.At 7:30 a.m. on January 24, 2010, three men in plain clothesclaiming to be officers from RAB-4 arrived at Arif’s house inDhaka’s Pallabi area, where he lived with his wife, two young children,parents, and other relatives. As Arif had just left for work, his father AbdulMajid phoned him and told him that RAB was waiting for him at the house. Arifreturned home about 15 minutes later and RAB members immediately took him away.[53]Majid told Human Rights Watch that he phoned RAB-4 aroundnoon to clarify the whereabouts of his son. He was told that there was nosenior officer present at the station and so therefore no information could beprovided. At 8 p.m., however, seven or eight RAB officers arrived at the house,bringing Arif with them. In the presence of several family members, theystarted searching the house and pushing a handcuffed Arif from room to room.When they apparently did not find what they were looking for, they yelled atArif, asking why he had told them that he had a pistol hidden in the house. Heresponded that he had done so to get them to stop beating him. As he was beingdragged back to the vehicle in which he and the RAB officers had arrived, Arifshouted out to Majid, “Father please kill me now; do not let them take meaway again.”[54]Around 7 p.m. on January 25, the RAB transferred Arif to thePallabi police station. Family members arrived at the station around 9 p.m.that evening, but they were not allowed to talk to Arif. They claim, however,that they paid the police a 16,000 taka (about US$ 230) bribe in exchange for apromise that he would not be tortured.[55]On January 26, Arif was accused of robbery and taken to theDhaka Chief Metropolitan Magistrate’s Court. The family paid a courtclerk a bribe of 16,000 taka to facilitate his release on bail. They were told,however, that bail could not be granted, but that the court could ensure thathe was not returned to the police station for further interrogation. Arif wasinstead sent to the Dhaka Central Jail, where he was admitted to the jailhospital.[56]On January 31, Arif was taken from the prison hospital tothe Dhaka Medical College Hospital, but due to a lack of available beds hecould not be admitted. Majid was permitted to talk to his son at the DhakaMedical College Hospital, and told Human Rights Watch that Arif was in a verybad physical condition at the time, vomiting and unable to walk. Arif also toldhis father that he had severe pain in his chest because several RAB officershad stomped on him during interrogation.[57]On February 4, Majid returned to the Dhaka Medical CollegeHospital in the hope that his son had then been admitted. He was told, however,that he had already been treated and returned to the jail. A few hours later hewas informed by the jail authorities that his son had died the previous day andthat the body had been transferred to the hospital morgue.[58]At the morgue, Majid noticed that Arif’s legs were,“smashed and did not retain their usual shape; they wereflattened.”[59]Arif’s brother, Mahabub Alam Khokon, who collected the body from themorgue, said that the repeated beatings had turned the legs green, that skinhad been scraped off on several parts of the body, and that the feet wereswollen and looked as if they were falling apart.[60]In line with standard procedures when there is a death incustody, a report describing the cause of the death was drawn up. According tothe The Daily Star newspaper, executive magistrate Mokbul Hossain’sinvestigation report confirmed that torture marks were found on different partsof the body.[61]The officer in charge at Pallabi police station, however,informed human rights workers from Odhikar that when Arif was detained at the station,the officer did not notice any injuries on Arif’s body.[62]The second officer in charge, Afsahl Hossain, told Human Rights Watch that Arifhad fallen ill in prison. He added that he did not have any further details ofthe case and recommended that Human Rights Watch talk to sub inspector Feroze Hossain,the first investigating officer, or to the second investigating officer sub-inspectorMainul Kabir.[63]When contacted by Human Rights Watch, sub inspector Hossain first denied thathe was the investigating officer on the case and then said that he could notremember any details about it.[64]Kabir simply said that he had nothing to do with the case.[65]Odhikar was told by the officer in charge of Pallabi policestation that Arif had been fired from Apollo Hospital long before his arrestdue to allegations of corruption. However, the senior manager of the humanresource division at the hospital said that this information was incorrect. Infact, Arif’s time punch card from the hospital appeared to show that he wason duty at the hospital at the time the alleged robbery took place that he waslater accused of taking part in.[66]Arif’s family did not attempt to file a crime casewith the police or the courts. Majid said to Human Rights Watch, “Whatwould be the outcome? At the very most a RAB officer will be transferred. Iwill not get my son back.”[67]However, Constable Zakir Hossain, a guard at Dhaka Central Jail, has reportedlyfiled a case of unnatural death with Shahbagh police station.[68]When Human Rights Watch contacted the police station, assistant sub inspectorSharif said he was unable to provide any details relating to the case and thatit would take him some time to find out about its current status.[69]However, after theintervention of the NHRC, this case was investigated by the Home Ministry.Although the report was not officially made public, it was leaked. Thecommittee concluded that “Arif’s death was caused by the physicaltortures he endured while he was under the custody of RAB and police.”[70] Yet no criminal charged have been filed againstany of the perpetrators.The Killing of Lutfar and Khairul KhalashiTwo brothers, Lutfar Rahman Khalashi, who owned a pharmacy,and Khairul Huq Khalashi, a local garment trader, were arrested by RAB inNarayanganj district around 1 a.m. on November 13, 2009.[71]The following day, family members organized a press briefing at Madaripur pressclub in which they urged the authorities to ensure that the two men would notbe killed in crossfire.[72]When relatives and friends heard that the two brothers might be taken to theRAB-8 office in Madaripur city, approximately 150 kilometers south ofNarayanganj, they organized a demonstration in front of the RAB station thereon November 15. The following morning, they were informed that the two men hadbeen shot and killed near South Shirkhara Sewage gate.[73]On November 16, RAB issued a statement saying that the twobrothers had been killed in an exchange of gunfire after a group of criminalsopened fire on a RAB patrol team early the same morning in the Jolkor area ofMadaripur district.[74]According to a family member who saw the brothers’dead bodies, both of them were shot with a single bullet to the chest. Thefamily has not been able to obtain a copy of the magistrate’s inquest reportor of the autopsy report.[75]Media accounts reported that the two men were local leadersof an outlawed left-wing political group, the Purba Banglar Communist Party.[76]Bablu Khalashi, the son of Lutfar Khalashi, said at the press briefing onNovember 14 that his father had twice contested local government elections andthat his father’s political rivals had spread the false rumor that he wasinvolved with the outlawed group.[77]He also claimed that less than two years ago, in July 2008, Obaidul Khalashi, asibling of Lutfar and Khairul Khalashi, was killed by RAB.[78]A family member told Human Rights Watch that the RAB killingcould be linked to a previous murder case, in which the Khalashi brothers hadbeen accused in the killing of man who was the brother of the local governmentchairperson. The relative further claimed that the Khalashi brothers werecharged with the murder, but they were out of jail, having been released onbail, when they were killed by RAB.[79]After the death of the two brothers, family members allegedthey received repeated anonymous threats by phone and were warned by the callernot to proceed with a criminal case.[80]Several journalists who attended the press briefing in Madaripur told humanrights workers that RAB later requested them to sign a statement saying thatthey had not been present at the briefing.[81]The killing of the Khalashi brothers echoes the case ofMizanur Rahman Tutul, a physician and alleged leader of the outlawed Purbo BanglarCommunist Party (Red Flag faction), who according to the authorities was killedin a shootout between his group and police on July 27, 2008.The evening beforehis death, at a press conference at Jhenidah Press Club, his 80-year-oldmother, Novera Khatun, urged the government to save her son from “crossfire”and prosecute him instead if he had committed any crimes. According to her, theRAB arrested Tutul in Dhaka on 25 July, and the arrest was reported by a dailynewspaper.[82]The Torture of F. M. MasumAround 10 a.m. on October 22, 2009, F. M. Masum, ajournalist with the New Age newspaper, heard loud noises outside theDhaka apartment building where he lives. When he went downstairs he found onthe street outside a group of men in civilian clothes beating Baby Akhtar, thewife of his landlord. The men requested that he unlock the front gate of thebuilding. As he did not know who they were, he was initially reluctant to do soand asked them to identify themselves. The men shouted that they were membersof RAB.When Masum, after some hesitation, opened the gate, RABcommanding officer Anisur Rahman and other RAB members, in front of severalwitnesses, punched Masum in the face, beat him with wooden batons, and kickedhim. Masum and the witnesses have described to Human Rights Watch how the RABmembers demanded that Masum explain why he dared to defy their orders, andaccused that his reluctance to open the gate showed that he was assisting thelandlord Akhtar in peddling drugs. Masum denied any involvement in drug dealingand repeatedly shouted that he was a newspaper journalist.[83]According to Masum, the RAB officers then tied his hands andtook him inside the building where he was blindfolded and beaten again. Hisleft ear started to bleed. Masum says that he was also forced to sit down onthe floor and repeatedly beaten on the soles of his feet with something thatfelt like the blunt side of a machete. “At one point I asked the officersfor water, but I was told that I was going to get a bullet instead ofwater,” he told Human Rights Watch.[84]Eventually Masum fellunconscious. When he woke up he was taken to his own apartment on the secondfloor of the building. RAB had placed seven or eight bottles of Phensedyl, acough syrup that in Bangladesh is regarded to be an illegal drug, on his bed.When Masum tried to protest, someone punched him again and he was forciblyphotographed with the bottles.Shortly afterwards, the RAB took Masum together with Akhtarto the RAB-10 office in Dholpur, and they arrived there around 11 a.m. As hewas too weak to walk, he had to be assisted to the 3rdfloor where he was interrogated and asked if it was true that he was ajournalist. He showed the officers the business and identity cards he had inhis wallet. According to Masum, one officer said, “You should be punished.You are working for Nurul Kabir [the editor of the New Age newspaper].Lots of army officers had to suffer during the Caretaker Government because ofhim.”Masum says he was then beaten with bamboo sticks around hisknees and with an iron rod on the soles of his feet. “Every time they hitthe soles of my feet it felt as if they were beating straight on to mybrain,” he told Human Rights Watch. He fell unconscious again. When hewoke up he found himself locked up in a cell.Later on he was taken outside. A sign saying “drugpeddler” was attached to his t-shirt and he was placed behind a tablewith Phensedyl bottles and photographed and filmed with a video camera. When hewas taken back to the cell, one RAB officer told him that he would be killed in“crossfire.”When Masum’s journalist colleagues learned about thearrest, they immediately contacted RAB, and the minister and the secretary ofthe Ministry of Home Affairs, and requested Masum’s release. According toOdhikar, various RAB officers provided them with different explanations for thearrest, stating that he had been discovered with Pethedine, a pain reliever andanti-spasmodic drug that is widely abused in Bangladesh, or that he was inpossession of Phensedyl syrup, or that he was found in the company of sex workers.[85]Eventually the authorities decided to release Masum. At 10p.m. on October 22, a group of journalists from the New Age arrived atthe RAB office. RAB Office Director S. M. Kamal Hossain requested thejournalists sign a document saying that Masum was in good health, even thoughthey could see that he had bruises on his face and other parts of his body, andthat he was unable to walk unassisted.[86]Following his release, Masum was immediately taken to DhakaMedical College Hospital, where doctors gave him first aid and took an x-ray.He also had a CT-scan performed at another hospital. The following day he wasadmitted to a private hospital, the Dhaka Community Hospital.On October 23, RAB released a statementsaying that, “RABsincerely expresses regret for the unwarranted incident that has taken placebetween RAB personnel and journalist F.M. Masum of the largely-circulated [sic]daily New Age. RAB is looking into the matter with importance. The RABheadquarters has formed an inquiry team and the matter is being investigated.Punitive action will be taken against anyone of RAB found guilty.”[87]The same day, Arif Newaz Farazi, one of Masum’scolleagues at the New Age tried to file a complaint with the Jatrabaripolice station. The police officer in charge informed him that because theincident included a public authority, the police could not initiate any actionwithout authorization from the higher authorities. When he returned thefollowing day, the police told him that they would investigate the matter andthat a sub-inspector had been assigned the task.[88]The sub-inspector went to see Masum in hospital and talkedwith him several times on the phone, as did an investigation team from RAB.[89]On October 25, Home Minister Sahara Khatun and State Minister Shamsul HaqueTukualso came to the hospital. The home minister told the press, “It is verysad if the law enforcers did anything unlawfully…nobody will be spared ofhis or her misdeed.”[90]In April 2010, Enamul Kabir, operations officer in RAB-10,told Human Rights Watch that RAB officer Anisur Rahman was found guilty by aRAB court of inquiry for the torture of Masum. As a result, his deputation toRAB was ended and he was sent back to the Bangladesh Air Force, where hepreviously served. No further disciplinary sanction or criminal action had beentaken against anyone involved.[91]Masum spent 12 days in hospital and another two monthsresting at home before returning to work. As of early April, he still sufferedreduced hearing in his left ear and pain in his legs.Baby Akhtar, who wasarrested at the same time as Masum, alleged the RAB also beat her and stagedphotographs of her with bottles of Phensedyl.[92] She told Human Rights Watch that:I was blindfolded and my hands were tied. I was forced tosit down. Four men in civilian clothes beat my legs with sugar cane stalks,while a man in RAB uniform sat on a chair watching. My legs were swollen likepillows.[93]During interrogation at the RAB-10 office, she says the RABbeat her again. She added that when she was asked to stand up to sign andthumbprint the interrogation documents, she had so much pain in her legs twoofficers had to assist her.Killing of Kaiser Mahmud BappiAccording to RAB, just before midnight on September 9, 2009,a team of officers led by Flight Lieutenant Raihan Asgar Khan, the operations officerof RAB-1 (one of the five battalions that operate in Dhaka), conducted a raidat the construction site of an apartment block called Aftab Tower in Dhaka.According to Major Mohammad Sakhawat Hossain, deputy director of the Legal andMedia wing at RAB headquarters, RAB-1 had received specific information that awanted criminal called Kamrul Islam, a name similar to, but not the same asthat of the victim, except that they both shared the nickname“Bappi,” was plotting a major crime at Aftab Tower. According toMaj. Hossain, the criminals opened fire when the RAB team entered the building.RAB personnel responded in self-defense. The exchange of fire lasted almost 20minutes. Police and RAB reinforcements arrived and surrounded the building.After the shooting ended, RAB searched the area, recovering arms andammunition. They also discovered a body, which they identified as Kamrul Islam.RAB also claimed to have arrested his two accomplices, Chashma Masud and AbidHossain Shoikat.[94]The deceased’sfamily disputed the RAB claim. They said that the victim’s name wasKaiser Mahmud, and not Kamrul Islam as claimed by RAB. Kaiser Mahmud, 24, alsohad the common Bengali nickname of “Bappi.”Kaiser Mahmud was raisedby his older sister, Shamsunnahar Alam, and her husband, Manzurul Alam.According Manzurul Alam, he spoke with Bappi at around 11:30 p.m. on September9. When Manzurul Alam came home from work after midnight, he was told thatBappi had not returned. The family kept trying his mobile phone, but it wasswitched off. According to his sister, Bappi always came home when he said hewould. “I was very strict with him,” she told Human Rights Watch.“He would not stay out late without permission.”[95] Manzurul Alam says they waited all night fornews.Everyone wakes early for Sehri [the meal before theday-long Ramadan fast begins], so we started calling his friends at thattime… Finally, Habib, a friend of Bappi’s, called and asked tospeak with me. He said that there was some problem during the night. “Gocheck the hospitals,” he said. “It might be serious. He might be inthe morgue.”[96]Manzurul asked a relative to check at the Dhaka Medical College.Meanwhile, another relative said that the television networks were reportingthat a criminal had been killed and that the person looked rather like Bappi.Manzurul and other relatives went to the morgue and identified Bappi’sbody. However, an autopsy conducted on September 11, 2009 identified thedeceased as Kamruzzaman Bappi instead of Kaiser Mahmud, the actual name of thevictim, or even Kamrul Islam, as RAB had claimed.Kaiser Mahmud’s family believes that Bappi was killedbecause RAB was looking to find and kill the other Bappi, Kamrul Islam, and didnot take the time to properly identify their target. According to ShamsunnaharAlam:We talked with the watchmen at Aftab Tower. They say thatBappi was standing near the gate when he saw some strangers outside. He askedthem who they were. One of the men, we later learned his name is Faruk, waswearing shorts and shirt. He asked Bappi, “What is your name?” Whenhe heard Bappi, he opened fire. Witnesses heard my brother tell the officers, “Pleasedon’t kill me. You are mistaking me for someone else. I am from a goodfamily.” They still shot him.[97]According to family members, Bappi worked as a model and wasplanning on a management degree. They said that a group of watchmen at theAftab tower said that there was no shoot-out that day and that Bappi had beenkilled without provocation.[98]After human rights groups began to question the incident,the Home Ministry ordered an investigation. The inquiry was led by the deputy secretary,Law Section of the Ministry of Home Affairs, and included a member fromOdhikar. The investigation found that Bappi did not die in crossfire, asreported to the media by RAB. Instead, when they questioned the two menarrested during the operation, the committee discovered that Masud, Saikat, andBappi had gathered at Aftab Tower to consume Phensedyl, a cough syrup oftenused as a recreational drug. They interviewed an eyewitness who worked as alaborer at the construction site who said that he had often seen the three mengather there to drink Phensedyl and that he had never seen them carry anyweapons. He also said that RAB had placed the weapons they later claimed tohave recovered beside Bappi’s body. The committee also found that,contrary to RAB claims, there were no police cases lodged against Kaiser Mahmudto show that he was a criminal suspect. The committee found that, “RABhas not been able to prove and as per RAB's statement that armed criminals werepresent at the crime spot.” It concluded that:[I]t is evident that that it was a mistake on the part ofRAB to have conducted the raid without verifying the truth of the informationprovided by the source regarding the presence of top terrorist KamaruzzamanBappi alias Mian Bhai alias Bappi and his associates with arms at the crimespot. In this case, the officer who gave the leadership in the raid has failedto prove his efficiency and wisdom. Kaiser Mahmud Bappi became the victim ofwrong information provided by RAB source and criminal Kamaruzzaman Bappi aliasMian Bhai alias Bappi of RAB's records and the dead Kaiser Mahmud Bappi who waskilled at 00:30 hours on 10/9/2009 by RAB - 1 at No 323 East Rampura on theground floor of an under-construction building of Mr. Bacchu Mian in aRAB-conducted raid are not the same person. The dead Bappi is a drug addict butin the investigation of the Committee, Bappi has not been identified as acriminal. The secret-information providing source and the officer who led theoperation should be brought under the law.[99]Despite these findings by the committee that Kaiser Mahmudwas wrongfully killed in a case of mistaken identity the government has notacted on the report, which recommended that the perpetrators be prosecuted.Killing of Moshin Sheikh and Ali JinnahOn May 28, 2009, 23-year-old Moshin Sheikh, and 22-year-oldAli Jinnah, both students at Dhaka Polytechnic Institute, were killed by RAB.According to fellow students interviewed by Human RightsWatch, Sheikh and Jinnah went to have tea at a stall located just outside thedormitories of the Dhaka Polytechnic Institute around 10 p.m. on May 27. Whenthey failed to return at midnight, the time by which regulations require allstudents to be back at the dormitories, their friends made several failedattempts to reach them by phone.[100]The media reported thatseveral students witnessed the two men being arrested by plainclothes RABofficers as they were going to have tea.[101] One of Sheikh’s classmates also reportedlysaid that someone identifying himself by name as a member of RAB-2 answered thephone when their friends tried to call the two missing students around midnighton May 27.[102]Around 1 a.m. on May 28, one of the students saw atelevision headline stating that the RAB killed two men in Dhaka. Suspectingthat the two men might be Sheikh and Jinnah, early in the morning a group ofstudents went to the Dhaka Medical College Hospital, where they foundSheikh’s and Jinnah’s bodies in the morgue.[103]Assistant superintendent of RAB-2 Talebur Rahman told thepress that the killing took place around 12:30 a.m., when RAB conducted asearch of vehicles near the National Parliament. He said, “[a]s the RABmen asked them to halt, they fired on them forcing the RAB men to retaliatetriggering the shootout. Soon after the exchange of fire, the RAB personnelfound two dead bodies lying on the roadside. After searching the bodies, theyfound two revolvers and bullets.”[104]The director general of RAB said that the two students were killed in a“shootout” as they were engaged in “snatching.”[105]The autopsy report reportedly stated that a total of sevenbullets pierced the bodies of Sheikh and Jinnah. Jinnah was hit in the middleand on the right side of the chest. Injury marks were also found on his legs.Sheikh was hit in the neck and abdomen.[106]Farhad Sheikh, the older brother of Sheikh, told HumanRights Watch that his brother was involved in student politics and served as anorganizing secretary of one of three rival factions of the Chhatra League, theAwami League’s student wing. In the weeks prior to the death of Sheikhand Jinnah, there had been several violent clashes between the differentstudent factions, including one on the day that the two men were last seenalive.[107]On June 7, 2009, Sohel Taj, then state minister for home affairs,said that, “If a case is filed in connection with the killings, actionswill be taken against the people responsible through properinvestigation.”[108]On June 15, 2009, Jashimuddin,brother-in-law of Jinnah, filed a case with the Dhaka Chief Metropolitan Magistrate’sCourt, accusing ten members of RAB-2 and one student of murder. MetropolitanMagistrate AKM Emdadul Haque asked the officer-in-charge of Tejgaon policestation to investigate and submit a report to the court.[109] According to Jashimuddin, the report eventuallyissued by the Tejgaon police simply repeated what RAB had stated in its pressrelease. Jinnah’s family then filed a new petition with the Dhaka ChiefMetropolitan Magistrate’s Court challenging the report submitted by thepolice. The court issued an instruction to the Criminal InvestigationDepartment of Police to conduct a new investigation. As of September 2010, thefamily had not received any information about the investigation.[110]Sheikh’s family has not filed a case with theauthorities. Farhad Sheikh told Human Rights Watch: “We do not have themoney to file a complaint with the police, and nothing happens withoutmoney.”[111]The principal of Dhaka Polytechnic Institute, Shamsul Alamhas said about the victims that, “both of them were meritorious studentsand well behaved.”[112]II. RAB Impunity: The Failure to PunishHuman Rights AbusesGovernment and RAB officials often stress that RAB-memberswho commit wrongdoing face internal administrative sanctions and areoccasionally prosecuted. In 2009, RAB said, 164 officers were punished by theforce and criminal cases were filed against five members.[113]However, RAB’s willingness to take action againstmembers for alleged involvement in extortion, drug trafficking and other crimesapparently does not extend to bringing actions against those RAB members who commitgrave human rights violations. As far as Human Rights Watch has been able toestablish, no RAB officer has ever been prosecuted for any of the killingscarried out by the force. The torture of journalist F.M. Masum is a case inpoint, where the RAB officer judged by the RAB to have committed the acts wassimply sent back to his military unit without any further punishment.In two cases, theMinistry of Home Affairs, after its own investigations, found RAB officialsresponsible for extrajudicial killings. In the case of Mohiuddin Arif, who waskilled on February 3, 2010 in Mirpur, the investigation found that Arif haddied in RAB custody due to torture.[114]The other case was that of Kaisar Mahmud, also known asBappi (both cases discussed in detail in the previous chapter). A member ofOdhikar was part of the inquiry committee. The committee found that Bappi hadnot died in crossfire as claimed by RAB, but had been shot.[115]Although, in both cases, it was recommended that the perpetrators be prosecutedand punished, the government has not taken any action.[116]The High Court Division of the Supreme Court has raisedconcerns on several occasions about the “crossfire” phenomenon. OnJune 29, 2009 the High Court issued a notice in response to a public interestlitigation filed by the human rights organizations Ain o Salish Kendra,Bangladesh Legal Aid and Services Trust, and Karmajibi Nari, asking thegovernment to explain why killing by law enforcement personnel in the name of“crossfire” or “encounters” should not be declaredillegal.[117]At this writing, the government had not responded. On November 17, 2009, theHigh Court issued an unprecedented suo moto ruling in relation to theabove mentioned killing of Lutfar Khalashi and Khairul Khalashi.[118]Relying on newspaper reports stating that the two brothers were killed by RABpersonnel, Justice AFM Abdur Rahman and Justice Mohammed Emdadul Hoque Azad,directed Major Kazi Wahiduzzaman of RAB-3, Lt. Hasan of RAB-8, the directorgeneral of RAB and the secretary of the Ministry of Home Affairs to show causewithin 48 hours as to why appropriate actions should not be taken againstconcerned RAB officers.[119]In December 2009, in a reply to the suo moto ruling, MohammedAshraf Hossain, law officer at the RAB headquarters, stated that the newspaperreports were, “not at all true and the reportings are baseless, false andmotivated.” He further stated that, “no occurrence as claimed inthe report has taken place within the territorial jurisdiction of RAB-3 andRAB-8 and no operation whatsoever was conducted by the RAB-3 and RAB-8 at thealleged place of occurrence as well as against the alleged victims andfurthermore no officer is working by the name of Kazi Wahiduzzaman in RAB-3 andRAB-8.”[120]Hossain’s statement provided no explanation as to whyRAB had previously said that the two men were killed in a shootout between RABand a group of criminals.[121]On December 14, the High Court heard the arguments of theState and the nongovernmental organizations Ain O Salish Kendra and BangladeshLegal Aid and Services Trust, acting as interveners in the case. However, onthe request of the attorney general, the matter was adjourned until January 9,2010. Expressing concern that 11 crossfire killings had been reported in the 26days since the suo moto ruling was issued, the court asked the attorneygeneral to ensure that there would be no new “crossfire” killingsbefore the next hearing. The attorney general promised to communicate therequest to the director general of RAB.[122]On January 7, 2010, the Chief Justice reconstituted the HighCourt benches and the judges that had issued the suo moto ruling wereassigned to deal with civil instead of criminal cases. At this writing, the casehas not yet been assigned to a new bench.III. Concerns about RAB Expressed by Civil Society Actors and OthersHuman rights workers, lawyers, judges, journalists, andother concerned citizens in Bangladesh have repeatedly expressed apprehensionabout the “crossfire” killings, and urged the government toinvestigate deaths in the custody of RAB and the police.[123]There was outrage after RAB shot and injured a student,Limon Hossain, in Jhalakathi on March 23, 2011, as he was grazing cattle. Hisleft leg was amputated on March 27. Limon said that RAB members shot at himwithin minutes of arriving at the field where he was working, even as he toldthem that he was a student and urged them check with villagers and his collegeprincipal. RAB insisted the boy was injured during a shoot-out with criminals,and started a criminal case against him accusing him of possessing illegalweapons.[124]This case may well have ended up asanother statistic in RAB’s record of killings, torture and indiscriminatefiring, except that the Bangladeshi media highlighted Limon’s suffering.The National Human Rights Commission wrote to the Home Ministry demanding animmediate investigation. “I will go to the president if the Home Ministrydoes not form a probe committee and submit its report to the NHRC within thestipulated time,” NHRC chairman Mizanur Rahman told journalists. “TheRapid Action Battalion has no authority to shoot a person even if that personis guilty. The RAB personnel responsible for the incident have violated humanrights and the law. The offenders must be detected and punished to stop suchpractice.”[125]Earlier, after a leaked cable citing international concernsabout RAB violations, the Daily Star, in an editorial had said:Regrettably crossfire, or encounter deaths, has become anaccepted norm of operation of RAB, which, we assume, has the blessings of thegovernment too. Had that not been so, such an abhorrent practice would havestopped long ago when the media started spotlighting the extrajudicial killings….A damning indictment has been made, both of the battalion and the government ofBangladesh, by the international human right organisations who have termed theunit as “government death squad.”…. It is time for thegovernment to react decisively. We cannot have a situation where methods usedto combat criminals and criminality replicate exactly the behaviour of thecriminals. That bodes very badly for a society that claims to be civilized. Ifthe government is really serious about human rights and the rule of law it muststop the extrajudicial killings must stop forthwith.[126]Earlier, in May 2009, ata time when many government representatives still paid lip-service to thepromise of putting an end to extrajudicial killings, the New Agenewspaper, in an editorial, called upon the government to take decisive actionto hold those responsible to account:The government needs to realize that the impunity withwhich the Rapid Action Battalion has carried out extrajudicial killings sinceits inception in 2004 may have become well-entrenched after more than half adecade of virtual non-accountability…If it is truly committed to bringingan end to extrajudicial killings by the law enforcement agencies, it needs totranslate its tough talk into decisive and demonstrable actions.[127]Many within the justicesystem have also warned that law enforcement officers’ lack of respectfor rule of law undermines the whole legal system. Dr. Shahdeen Malik, SupremeCourt advocate and director of the law school at BRAC University, points outthat extrajudicial killings mean that the government does not have faith in itslegal and judicial system:Though often imaginary excuses and stories are introducedto justify the murders, for us to continue as a viable nation and state, these killingsmust stop. Otherwise, like any other society that had used extrajudicialkilling, Bangladesh will degenerate into a lawless and violent society.[128]Senior judges havepublicly expressed the same views. In January 2010, Supreme Court JusticeNazrul Islam Chowdhury said in a seminar that “extrajudicial killing mustbe stopped” and argued that “it will be suicidal for the nation,the society and the country to leave with the law enforcement agencies todecide who should be killed on criminal charges.”[129]The National Human Rights Commission had earlier recommendedthe government to ensure independent investigations into all allegedextrajudicial killings. In December 2009, Justice Amirul Kabir Chowdhury, thecommission’s chairperson, recommended that:Each of the incidents should be investigated by anindependent inquiry committee of minimum three members comprising a governmentofficial not below the rank of deputy secretary, a police officer not below therank of superintendent of police and a civil society personality of the choiceof the family of the victim.[130]Shahidul Alam, the renowned photographer and managingdirector of Drik Picture Gallery in Dhaka, said in April 2010 that,“Criminals have survived because of patronage of the powerful. The removalof criminals, through ‘crossfire,’ does not affect the system ofcontrol, but merely substitutes existing criminals for new ones. This is whycrimes continue unabated under RAB. All it does is to undermine the legalsystem.”[131]On March 22, 2010, the police closed down Drik PictureLibrary shortly before the opening of an exhibition featuring photographs by ShahidulAlam and installations relating to the theme of “crossfire” and theRAB. The reason given by the authorities was that the exhibition “lackedofficial permission” and would “create anarchy.”[132]Shahidul Alam, told the news media, however, that Drik had organized thousandsof exhibitions in the past, including some at which the present and formerprime ministers attended the opening, without any requirement from theauthorities for explicit permission to hold an exhibition.[133]On March 31, after Shahidul Alam filed a writ petition with the High Court, thepolice officers placed outside the gallery were removed and the exhibition wasopened to the public.[134]IV. International CooperationForeign governments and inter-governmental organizationshave repeatedly expressed concern about RAB’s poor human rights recordand the government’s reluctance to hold accountable those responsible. Atthe UN Human Rights Council’s Universal Periodic Review of Bangladesh in2009, it was recommended that Bangladesh, “address the problems ofextrajudicial killings and torture by security forces” and “takesteps to address the culture of impunity for human rights violations by lawenforcement agencies.”[135]Dhaka-based diplomats have repeatedly made similarrecommendations. In early 2009, EU ambassador Stefan Frowein stated:Internally, it falls to the judiciary and the new NationalHuman Rights Commission to ensure that human rights are fully enforced, notleast with respect to allegations of torture and extrajudicial killings bysecurity forces. If there is no punishment for such crimes, there is nodeterrent emanating from the State and such violence becomes sanctioned,officially or unofficially.[136]At the same time, many foreign governments have come toregard RAB as an essential partner in the fight against terrorism. Talking tothe New Age newspaper in December 2009, M. Sohail, director ofRAB’s legal and media wing, said that RAB exchanged experience,knowledge, training and facilities with defense teams in the US, UK, andAustralia.[137]In January 2010, in an interview with the same newspaper, the director generalof RAB said that the three countries had helped the force by conductingtraining on human rights, investigations, and counterterrorism.[138]In 2008, the UK and the US started separate humanrights-focused training programs for RAB.[139]The US Department of Justice has reported that its International CriminalInvestigative Training Assistance Program works with the US Marshals Service toassist RAB in implementing internal disciplinary procedures and internationallyaccepted standards for use-of-force.[140]In February 2009, at the inauguration of a US sponsored human rights trainingworkshop for RAB, Ambassador James Moriarty stated:The training we are providing is aimed at helping RABdevelop a capacity to transparently report and investigate allegations of humanrights violations and, when necessary, hold accountable those individual RABofficers who may have acted improperly.[141]According to the US embassy, the training strives to “contributeto increasing transparency of investigations; improving forensic capabilities,especially evidence collection and management; establishing an internal affairsunit; and improving risk assessment and mitigation. Future training willalso include basic forensics, interview skills (for internal investigations),public affairs training and investigating human rights complaints.”[142]The US embassy reports that it, since 2008, has completedtwo rounds of training for a total of approximately 50 RAB members.[143]While indicating to Human Rights Watch that their approach was to first focuson human rights and then expand to more general anti-terrorism and anti-crimetraining, the US State Department stated in a report to the US Congress as farback as fiscal year 2004 that the Anti-Terrorism Assistance Program hadcontributed to ensure that RAB officers had received “expert anti-terrorisminstructor training.”[144]In November 2009, a Bangladeshi newspaper reported a US Admiral as saying theUS had promised RAB to work together on counter-intelligence and curbingterrorism.[145]The UK has also worked on “introducing and providingRAB with the skill sets to conduct their law enforcement duties in a moreethical manner.”[146]Areas covered in the UK's cooperation with RAB include human rights training,interview, investigation and crime scene skills, and the inclusion of RABmembers in a range of other human rights and law focused events. The trainingis delivered to selected candidates with the idea that these candidates shouldprovide training to other RAB members, thereby ensuring the skills andknowledge are spread through all RAB battalions.[147]In March 2008, for example, the British High Commissionorganized a 12-day training in which 54 members of RAB were trained by Britishpolice on human rights.[148]In October 2009, the British National Policing Improvements Agency gave afive-day-long training session to 21 RAB members on forensics.[149]In November 2009, a nine-day-long training on major crime investigations wasorganized for 20 RAB members.[150]The UK has publicly justified its human rights training program for RAB[151]To date, from a human rights perspective, the UK’s andUS’s training and capacity building efforts appear to have had littlepractical impact. Since the training, there have not been significantreductions in RAB’s involvement in human rights abuses, andaccountability for such violations has not increased. The training approachappears to have overlooked the fact that the RAB’s poor human rightsrecord is not a consequence of isolated actions by a few “bad apples,”but rather results from an operating strategy that sanctions impunity for thosewho commit human rights abuses.RecommendationsTo the Bangladesh GovernmentProtectionMake strong and repeated public statements,at the highest institutional level, against unlawful killings and custodialabuse by the RAB, and make public commitments that all those responsible forabuses will be prosecuted.Ensure that the RAB and other lawenforcement agencies promptly communicate information on all persons taken intocustody to relatives and legal counsel, and make sure that all persons detainedare brought before a court within 24 hours of arrest, as required by Bangladeshlaw.Ensure that the RAB and other lawenforcement agencies grant detainees prompt access to legal counsel, medicalpersonnel, and family members.Allow nongovernmental human rightsorganizations unfettered access to all RAB stations and detention cells toensure that the practice of torture ends.Make it mandatory for the RAB to regularlyprovide the government and the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) withdetailed information about all arrests carried out by the force, all personsheld in its custody, and any killings in which its members are involved, and toalso make that information public.Develop a policy, with input from victims ofabuse (and their families) by the security forces, to provide financialcompensation to the victims of abuse, and ensure the policy is fullyimplemented.Immediately adopt the rules of procedure ofthe National Human Rights Commission and ensure the NHRC has adequate andindependent budget and personnel resources to conduct effective operations toinvestigate allegations of abuses by the RAB and other security forces.Investigationsand ProsecutionsEnsure there are prompt and impartial andindependent investigations into all allegations of torture and deaths in thecustody of RAB. Implement the National Human Rights Commission’s proposalthat all such incidents be investigated by an independent inquiry committeecomprising a government official not below the rank of deputy secretary, a policeofficer not below the rank of superintendent of police and a civil societypersonality selected by the family of the victim.Prosecute to the fullest extent of the lawall former and current members of RAB, of whatever rank, who are found to beresponsible for unlawful killings, torture, and other human rights abuses,including those who gave orders. Similarly punish commanding officers andothers in a position of authority that knew of these abuses and failed toprevent or punish those who committed them.Immediatelysuspend, pending a full investigation, and remove from RAB facilities anyindividual for whom there exists credible evidence that he or she has committedtorture or participated in the extrajudicial execution of a detainee, pendinginvestigation.Establish an independent civilian authoritycharged with receiving complaints and investigating allegations of crimescommitted by members of RAB and other law enforcement agencies and armedforces, or ensure that the National Human Rights Commission is sufficientlyresourced and fully mandated to do so. Require by law that all state officials,including members of the RAB, shall cooperate with such investigations.Make public all past reports of inquirycommissions tasked with investigating alleged violations of human rightsconcerning RAB, and ensure all future reports are also made public.Publicly release detailed information on allarrests, prosecutions, and convictions against members of RAB for human rightsviolations.Ensure that administrative and judicialproceedings against RAB members regarding alleged violations of human rightsare open to public scrutiny and the participation of victims and their familymembers.Investigate all allegations that RAB membersand other public officials have intentionally acted to obstruct efforts byvictims, their family members, and others to seek justice for violations ofhuman rights, and prosecute or discipline those responsible for suchobstructions and any attempt obstruct justice, including tampering withevidence. Re-open and re-investigate formal complaints made to police aboutabuses by RAB officials.Establisha comprehensive witness protection program to guarantee that anyone who files acomplaint or is prepared to testify against an alleged human rights abuser isable to do so without fear of being subjected to retaliatory harassment orviolence.InstitutionalReformIf RAB’s human rights record does notimprove dramatically within the next 6 months and abusers are not prosecuted,the Bangladeshi government should disband RAB and donors such as the US and UKshould withdraw all aid and cooperation. In its place the government shouldcreate a new unit within the police or a new institution with a differentoperating culture that puts human rights at its core to lead the fight againstcrime and terrorism.RAB or its replacement should become anentirely civilian institution. Its officers and rank and file members should nolonger be drawn from the military, which has a different culture, ethos, andtraining from the police.In the event RAB is retained, establish anindependent commission to assess RAB’s performance, to identify all thoseplausibly deemed to be involved in serious violations such as extrajudicialkillings who should be excluded from a reformed RAB and prosecuted, and todevelop an action plan to transform RAB into an agency that operates within thelaw and with full respect for international human rights norms. The commissionshould:Be composed of respected members of lawenforcement, independent judges and lawyers, and members of Bangladesh’shuman rights community;Include the active participation ofindependent international experts on law enforcement and human rights;Have full access to all relevant governmentdocuments;Have the power to subpoena documents andcompel witnesses to appear and give testimony;Provide victim and witness protection asnecessary;Have a time limit of no more than six monthsto complete its inquiry and present its report, with concrete recommendationson RAB reform;Have the power to make public statementsduring and after its inquiry, including to answer the government’sresponse(s) to the commission’s recommendations; andHave the power at any time during its mandate to publiclyrecommend the immediate suspension, pending investigation, of any current orformer RAB member implicated in serious human rights violations.Duly consider and promptly implement therecommendations issued by the commissions on RAB reform.LawReformEnd the practice of seconding members of thearmed forces to RAB, and make necessary legislative amendments to prohibit thefuture use of serving soldiers for law enforcement duties.Adopt legislation that makes torture aspecific criminal offense in accordance with article 1 of the UN Conventionagainst Torture, with punishment that is commensurate with the crime, in linewith Bangladesh’s international commitments as state that has ratifiedthe UN CAT.InternationalCooperationInvite relevant United Nations special mechanisms,such as the special rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degradingtreatment or punishment and the special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary orarbitrary executions to visit Bangladesh to conduct investigations and makerecommendations.Make the required declarations underarticles 21 and 22 of the Convention against Torture so that the Committeeagainst Torture can receive individual communications.Accede to the Optional Protocol to the UNConvention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment orPunishment and immediately establish the National Preventative Mechanismrequired by that treaty, with the power to visit any place of detention. Accedeto the Optional Protocol and Second Optional Protocol to the InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political Rights.Ratify the International Convention for theProtection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance.Thoroughly vet all Bangladeshi military andpolice who apply for UN peacekeeping missions to ensure that they have notcommitted violations of human rights.Ban from participation in UN peacekeepingoperations any individual from RAB, the police, or military whom the governmentidentifies as having responsibility for serious human rights violations,pending investigation.To the National Human RightsCommissionContinue to strenuously press the governmentto accept the proposal of the NHRC for independent investigations into allalleged extrajudicial killings.Afterthe rules for the operation of the NHRC are adopted by the government,establish a special desk with dedicated staff to receive complaints of extrajudicialkillings by the RAB and other security forces, effectively document cases ofsuch killings, and use its powers to compel RAB and other security officials totestify about such abuses in public hearings.To the Chief JusticeImmediately assign the suo moto caseto a court, and instruct that court to promptly set a date for a hearing on thecase. ToBangladesh’s Bilateral and Multilateral DonorsPress the government, through public andprivate diplomacy, to implement all the recommendations made in this report.Refuse to work with RAB on law enforcementor counter-terror operations until the RAB ceases its use of torture andextrajudicial executions, promotes transparency in its operations by revealingtimely information about detainees it is holding, and agrees to measures (bothinternal as well as an external monitoring scheme) to ensure accountability forall RAB personnel found to be involved in violations of human rights.Refuse to provide material and financialassistance to RAB until serious measures are taken to end extrajudicialexecutions and torture, and to actively prosecute those implicated in suchabuses.Refuse to support training programs forRAB—unless specifically focused on human rights education—until theforce ends the pattern and practice of torture and extrajudicial executions. Ensuretrainers providing human rights education to RAB personnel have thoroughknowledge of RAB’s human rights record, and have received first-handinformation and testimonies from victims and family members of victims whoserights have been violated by RAB.Set clear benchmarks to measure progress forany RAB pledges to respect human rights, and undertake internal reformprocesses which must be met before cooperation or assistance is resumed.Ensure proper vetting of all participants intraining and exchange programs in order to guarantee that RAB officers againstwhom there are credible allegations of involvement in human rights violationsare barred from taking part.Publicly call on the government to disbandthe RAB. In the event that the government refuses and decides to retain theRAB, publicly insist on that a commission on RAB reform be created, with aterms of reference developed in consultation with victims, their families, andhuman rights NGOs, and support the commission’s work.Publicly raise in donor and UN forums, andthe UN Human Rights Council, the government’s continuing failure to keepits promise (made during the Bangladesh universal periodic review at the HumanRights Council) to implement a “zero tolerance” policy forextrajudicial executions, and insist on accountabilityRaise strong concerns with the prime ministerabout ministerial-level statements that reject outright the involvement of RABin extrajudicial executions, despite evidence to the contrary, and insist thatministers be disciplined or dismissed if they continue to issue blanket denialsin response to credible allegations of violations of human rights by RABpersonnel.Ensurethe United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) vets allBangladesh military and law enforcement officials, including commanders,applying for UN peacekeeping missions, reviews the participation of Bangladeshofficials already serving in peacekeeping operations, and bars all thosecredibly found or suspected to have committed, ordered, or tolerated serioushuman rights violations. Ensure the DPKO publicly informs the government of Bangladeshof the reason for the exclusion of any Bangladesh solider or law enforcementofficial on human rights grounds.Support civil society initiatives to bringpressure on RAB personnel to cease violating human rights, seek governmentaction to prosecute members of RAB responsible for violations, and convince thegovernment and political parties to take legislative and other policy measuresto address RAB’s violations of human rights.Provide funding and technical assistance tosupport a broad-based coalition of civil society organizations working againstimpunity, and to NGOs and civil society groups who are members supporting orparticipating in that coalition.Tothe US GovernmentVigorously enforce theLeahy Law, denying US assistance and training to all RAB units and members, untilserious and systematic abuses by RAB end and the Bangladeshi government holdsRAB officials and officers responsible for human rights abuses accountable.Publish details of the content and dates of all training provided by USofficials, civilian and military, to RAB.To the UK and Australian GovernmentsEnd UK and Australianassistance and training to RAB until serious and systematic abuses by RAB endand the Bangladeshi government holds RAB officials and officers responsible forhuman rights abuses accountable. Adopt legislation similar to the Leahy Lawprohibiting UK assistance to units and individuals responsible for gross humanrights abuses. Publish details of the content and dates of all trainingprovided by UK officials, civilian and military, to RAB.To the United NationsThe UN Country Team in Bangladesh shouldpublicly issue a joint agency statement opposing arbitrary detention, torture,and extrajudicial executions by the RAB, and raise these concerns in meetingswith the prime minister, cabinet members, and representatives of the militaryforces and police.The UN Human Rights Council shouldcommunicate its serious concerns to the Bangladesh government that issuesraised at the UPR session on Bangladesh remain largely unaddressed, andespecially draw attention to continued extrajudicial executions, torture, andarbitrary detention being practiced by the RAB.The Department of Peacekeeping Operations(DPKO) should thoroughly review the participation in peacekeeping operations ofall Bangladeshi soldiers and law enforcement officials, including commanders,to ensure that they have not committed, ordered, or tolerated serious humanrights violations.Appendix I: Letter to Home Minister SaharaKhatun, April 22, 2010Click to expand ImageClick to expand ImageAppendix II: Letter to Home Minister Sahara Khatun,copying RAB Director General, Mukhlesur Rahman, October 27, 2010Click to expand ImageAcknowledgmentsThis report was researched and written byHenrik Alffram, consultant to the Asia Division of Human Rights Watch,Meenakshi Ganguly, South Asia director, and Tejshree Thapa, South Asiaresearcher. M. Sanjeeb Hossain provided valuable research and translationsupport.The report was edited by Brad Adams, Asiadirector; Clive Baldwin, senior legal advisor, and Cassandra Cavanaugh, programoffice consultant, reviewed the report.Production assistance was provided by PemaAbrahams, coordinator in the Asia division. Kathy Mills, prepared the reportfor publication, Anna Lopriore, assisted with the cover photograph, and FitzroyHepkins provided publication and production assistance.Human Rights Watch wishes to sincerelythank the many victims, family members of victims, and witnesses who bravelyshared their accounts with us. We also express our heartfelt appreciation tothe Bangladeshi human rights activists, lawyers, and journalists who greatlyassisted our work. We especially want to extend a special word of appreciationand thanks to the human rights groups Odhikar and Ain O Salish Kendra.[1]Rapid Action Battalion, http://www.rab.gov.bd/index.php#, (accessed April 22, 2011).[2] Human Rights Watch, Judge, Jury,Executioner: Torture and Extrajudicial Killings by Bangladesh’s EliteSecurity Force, December 2006, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2006/12/13/judge-jury-and-executioner.[3]“Three and Half Years Misrule of the BNP-Jamat Alliance and The Rise ofIslamic Militants and Terrorism,” Awami League Newsletter, vol. 4, no. 3,March 28, 2005, http://www.albd.org/autoalbd/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=85&Itemid=37, (accessed November 9, 2010).[4]Ibid.[5]BangladeshAwami League, “Election Manifesto of Bangladesh Awami League –2008,”http://www.albd.org/autoalbd/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=367&Itemid=1, (accessed November 9, 2010).[6] UNHuman Rights Council, Report of the Working Group on the Universal PeriodicReview: Bangladesh, A/HRC/11/18, October 5, 2009, para. 87,http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G09/162/52/PDF/G0916252.pdf?OpenElement(accessed September 5, 2010).[7]“Seatrow in JS: Hasina turns down opposition demand,” New Age, February12, 2009, http://www.newagebd.com/2009/feb/12/front.html#2(accessed November 9, 2010).[8]HumanRights Watch meeting with Shafique Ahmed, law minister, Dhaka, March 19, 2009.[9] “Shafiquesees no “crossfire,” bdnews24.com, May 28, 2010, http://www.bdnews24.com/details.php?id=162586&cid=2(accessed April 15, 2011).[10]“No extrajudicial killing so far,” The DailyStar, January 26, 2011, http://www.thedailystar.net/newDesign/latest_news.php?nid=28160,(accessed April 22, 2011).[11]“No crossfire,” The Daily Star, December 27, 2010, http://www.thedailystar.net/newDesign/news-details.php?nid=119471, (accessed November 9, 2010).[12]Ain O Salish Kendra (ASK), “ASK’s reaction to port and shipping minister ShajahanKhan comments hailing ‘Crossfire’ as a solution,” http://www.askbd.org/web/?page_id=835&view=archive&bymonth=10&byyear=2009(accessedNovember 9,2010); see also, “Crossfire to continue until terrorism uprooted:minister,” New Age,October 4, 2009, http://www.newagebd.com/2009/oct/04/front.html (accessedNovember 9, 2010).[13]“Killing in ’crossfire’ notviolation of human rights: Minister,” TheDaily Star, October 8, 2009,http://www.thedailystar.net/newDesign/latest_news.php?nid=19787 (accessed November 9, 2010).[14]MamunurRashid, “Govt worried over rate of abductions in recent months: 50 peoplekilled in RAB’s cover,” New Nation, May 5, 2010;http://www.ittefaq.com/issues/2010/05/05/news0195.htm,(accessed May 5, 2010).[15]Odhikar,“Human Rights Monitoring Report,” January-September 2010, October1, 2010.http://www.odhikar.org/documents/2010/English_Reports/Nine_months_Odhikar_Report_Eng_2010.pdf,(accessed April 1, 2011).[16]Bangladesh First, “Govt InvestigationProves RAB Responsible for Extrajudicial Killings- Arif Dies From Torture,Bappi from Direct Firing,” November 24, 2010,http://www.bangladeshfirst.com/newsdetails.php?cid=2&scid=0&nid=564,(accessed April 15, 2011).[17]HumanRights Watch interview with Shamsunnahar Alam, Dhaka, March 8, 2011.[18]HumanRights Watch interview with Manzurul Alam, Dhaka, March 8, 2011.[19]HumanRights Watch interview with Odhikar, Dhaka, March 7, 2011 and with ASK, Dhaka,March 10, 2011.[20] “Plan to Build Airport at Arial Beelscrapped,” Prothom Alo, February 4, 2011, http://www.prothom-alo.com/detail/date/2011-02-04/news/128857,(accessed April 15, 2011). Human Rights Watch translation from Bengali.[21]Human Rights Watch interviews with human rights workers in Dhaka,February and April, 2010.[22]Human Rights Watch interview, Dhaka, March 9, 2011.[23]“HRC asks lawmen to stop extrajudicial killings,” NewAge, July 7, 2010, http://www.newagebd.com/2010/jul/07/front.html, (accessed November 9, 2010).[24]US Department of State, 2010 Country Reportson Human Rights Practices, Bangladesh, http://paei.state.gov/documents/organization/160056.pdf,(accessed April 15, 2011).[25]Human Rights and Democracy: The 2010 Foreign &Commonwealth Office Report, 2011says, “Human rights are intrinsically linked to the trainingwe provide and the capacity-building work we support. In Bangladesh, forinstance, we continued a programme training Bangladesh’s Rapid ActionBattalion (RAB) in human rights and ethical policing. The training focused ondeveloping the Battalion’s skills in areas such as basic human rights andinterview and investigation techniques and the promotion of ethical policing bytraining in operational judgments and procedures that comply with modern policestandards.”http://fcohrdreport.readandcomment.com/human-rights-in-safeguarding-britains-national-security/countering-terrorism/,(accessed April 1, 2011).[26]“US embassy cables: UK police trainedBangladeshi paramilitaries condemned for human rights abuses,” TheGuardian, December 21, 2010, http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/206936, (Accessed April 1, 2011).[27]Thisletter was also delivered in person by Human Rights Watch to Home MinisterSahara Khatun, in Dhaka, on December 14; and to Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina,in London, on January 30, 2011.[28]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),adopted December 16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16)at 52, U.N. Doc. A6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23,1976, art. 6, 7, and 14.[29]See, for example, ICCPR, art. 2; UN Human Rights Committee, Bautista deArellana v. Colombia, Communication No. 563/1993, 13 November 1993 (UN doc.CCPR/C/55/D/563/1993), reproduced athttp://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/undocs/html/563-1993.html, (accessed November 9, 2010); and UN Human Rights Committee, BasilioLaureano Atachahua v. Peru, Communication No. 540/1993, 16 April 1996 (UN doc.CCPR/C/56/D/540/1993), reproduced athttp://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/undocs/540-1993.html (accessed November 9, 2010).[30]Principles on the Effective Prevention and Investigation ofExtra-Legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions, E.S.C. res. 1989/65, annex, 1989U.N. ESCOR Supp. (No. 1) at 52, U.N. Doc. E/1989/89 (1989), art. 11.[31]Human Rights Council, “Report of theSpecial Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, PhilipAlston,” A/HRC/14/24, May 20, 2010, http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G10/135/03/PDF/G1013503.pdf?OpenElement,(accessed April 15, 2011).[32]See “Allow Photo Exhibit of Crossfire Killings,” HumanRights Watch news release, March 24, 2010,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2010/03/24/bangladesh-allow-photo-exhibit-crossfire-killings;“Bring Paramilitary Unit Torturers to Justice,” Human Rights Watchnews release, 23 October, 2009,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2009/10/23/bangladesh-bring-paramilitary-unit-torturers-justice;“Executions, Torture by Security Forces Go Unpunished,” Human RightsWatch news release, May 18, 2009,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2009/05/18/bangladesh-executions-torture-security-forces-go-unpunished;“Investigate Killing by Anti-Crime Unit,” Human Rights Watch newsrelease, April 15, 2009, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2009/04/15/bangladesh-investigate-killing-anti-crime-unit;“New Government Should Act on Rights,” Human Rights Watch newsrelease, 29 January, 2009,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2009/01/29/bangladesh-new-government-should-act-rights;“Stop Denying Killings and Torture,” Human Rights Watch newsrelease, October 6, 2009,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2008/10/06/bangladesh-stop-denying-killings-and-torture-0;“End Wave of Killings by Elite Forces,” Human Rights Watch newsrelease, August 11, 2008, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2008/08/10/bangladesh-end-wave-killings-elite-forces;“Stop Killings by Security Forces,” Human Rights Watch newsrelease, January 25, 2007,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2007/01/24/bangladesh-stop-killings-security-forces;and, “Elite Force Tortures, Kills Detainees,” Human Rights Watchnews release, December 14, 2006,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2006/12/13/bangladesh-elite-force-tortures-kills-detainees.[33]See for example, Ain O Salish Kendra, “Human Rights inBangladesh 2009: A Summary Report,” 2010,http://www.askbd.org/web/wp-content/uploads/2010/09/HR_summary_09.pdf (accessedNovember 9, 2010); Ain o Salish Kendra, “RAB: Eradicating Crime or Crimesof the State?,” 2005., www.askbd.org/RAB/RAB.htm (accessed November 9,2010); Odhikar, “Human Rights Report 2009,” January 1, 2010,http://www.odhikar.org/documents/2009/English_report/HRR_2009.pdf (accessedNovember 9, 2010); and, Odhikar, “Human Rights Report 2008,”January 15, 2009,http://www.odhikar.org/report/pdf/Odhikar_Annual_Human_rights_Report_%202008.pdf(accessed November 9, 2010).[34]Rapid Action Battalion, http://www.rab.gov.bd/#,(accessed April 2, 2011).[35]HumanRights Watch interview with Gulam Mustafa, Dhaka, March 13, 2011.[36]HumanRights Watch interview with Mohammad Shada Mia, Dhaka, March 7, 2011.[37]Odhikarfact-finding report, March 21, 2011.[38]HumanRights Watch interviews with Shaina Begum, Pappu’s mother; Md. AminHossain, Pappu’s neighbor; Md. Azahar, Pappu’s uncle; and SimaBegum, Pappu’s aunt, Dhaka, April 9, 2010.[39]“Two die in crossfire,” The Daily Star, March 1, 2010,http://www.thedailystar.net/newDesign/news-details.php?nid=128235, (accessed November 9, 2010).[40]Human Rights Watch interviews with Shaina Begum, Md. Amin Hossain,Md. Azahar, Sima Begum, and Priayanka Begum, Pappu’s wife, Dhaka, April9, 2010.[41]Human Rights Watch interview with Shima Begum, April 9, 2010.[42] HumanRights Watch interviews with Shima Begum and Md. Azahar, April 9, 2010.[43]Human Rights Watch interviews with Shima Begum and Md. Azahar,April 9, 2010.[44]Human Rights Watch interviews with Shaina Begum, Shima Begum, and Priayanka Begum, April 9, 2010.[45]Human Rights Watch interview with Mukta and Noyontara Begum, Dhaka,April 9, 2010.[46] HumanRights Watch interviews with Shaina Begum, and Mukta,and Noyontara Begum, April 9, 2010.[47]Human Rights Watch interview with Shaina Begum, April 9, 2010.[48] Ibid.[49]Human Rights Watch interview with Mukta and Noyontara Begum, April9, 2010[50]Human Rights Watch interview with Shaina Begum, April 9, 2010.[51]Human Rights Watch interview with Mukta and Noyontara Begum, April9, 2010[52]Human Rights Watch interview with Moshiur Rahman, lawyer, Dhaka,August 17, 2010.[53]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdul Majid, Dhaka, April 5, 2010.[54]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdul Majid, April 5, 2010.[55]Human Rights Watch interview with a relative of Mohiuddin Arif(name and details withheld).[56]Human Rights Watch interview with a relative of Mohiuddin Arif(name and details withheld).[57]Human Rights Watch interviews with Abdul Majid and Mahabub AlamKhokon, Dhaka, April 5, 2010.[58]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdul Majid, April 5, 2010.[59]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdul Majid, April 5, 2010.[60]Human Rights Watch interview with Mahabub Alam Khokon, April 5,2010.[61]“Man dies in custody,” The DailyStar, February 5, 2010,http://www.thedailystar.net/story.php?nid=124943 (accessed November 9, 2010).[62]Odhikar, “Apollo Hospital technician Md. Mohiuddin Arif diedafter alleged torture by RAB,” fact-finding report.[63]Human Rights Watch interview with Assail Hossain, second officer incharge, Pallabi police station, Dhaka, April 6, 2010.[64]Human Rights Watch interview with Feroze Hossain, police officer,Pallabi police station, April 6, 2010.[65]Human Rights Watch interview with Mainul Kabir, sub inspector,Pallabi police station, April 6, 2010.[66]Odhikar, “Apollo Hospital technician Md. Mohiuddin Arif diedafter alleged torture by RAB,” fact-findingreport.[67]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdul Majid, April 5, 2010.[68]Odhikar, “Apollo Hospital technician Md. Mohiuddin Arif diedafter alleged torture by RAB.”[69]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif, assistant sub-inspector,Shahbagh police station, May 16, 2010.[70]Ministry of Home Affairs, Government ofBangladesh, “Home Ministry Probe Report Of Md.Mohiuddin Arif's Death In RAB-Police Custody,”http://bangladeshfirst.com/docdetails.php?cid=&scid=0&docid=9, (accessedMarch 26, 2011).[71]“Govt seeks time to answer HC rule over killing of 2brothers,” New Age, November 23, 2009,http://www.newagebd.com/2009/nov/23/nat.html, (accessedNovember 9, 2010).[72]“Two brothers killed during a gunfight with RAB inMadaripur,” Prothom Alo, November 16, 2009,http://www.prothom-alo.com/detail/date/2009-11-16/news/19832, (accessed November 9, 2010).[73]Human Rights Watch interview with a relativeof the Khalashi brothers (name and details withheld), April 6, 2010.[74]Rapid Action Battalion, press release, November 16, 2009.[75]Human Rights Watch interview with relative of the Khalashi brothers(name and details withheld), April 6, 2010.[76]“2 brothers killed in ‘shootout,’” TheDaily Star, November 17, 2009,http://www.thedailystar.net/story.php?nid=114426 (accessed November 9, 2010).[77]“Govt seeks time to answer HC rule over killing of 2brothers,” New Age, http://www.newagebd.com/2009/nov/23/nat.html.[78]Ibid.[79]Human Rights Watch interview with a relative of the Khalashibrothers, April 6, 2010.[80] Ibid.[81]Confidential NGO-report (details withheld).[82]“End Wave of Killing by Elite Force,” Human Rights Watch newsrelease, August 11, 2008, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2008/08/10/bangladesh-end-wave-killings-elite-forces;“Top outlaw Dr. Tutul killed in ‘crossfire,’” TheDaily Star, July 28, 2008,http://www.thedailystar.net/story.php?nid=47800,(accessed November 9, 2010).[83]Human Rights Watch interviews with F. M. Masum, Dhaka, April 3; andBaby Akhtar and Nusrat Jahan Srity, Baby Akhtar’s daughter, Dhaka, April4, 2010.[84]Human Rights Watch interview with F. M. Masum, April 3, 2010.[85]Odhikar, “Journalist F M Masum Tortured by Members ofRAB-10,” fact-finding report, http://www.odhikar.org/FF/ff09/RAB09/English/FM_Masum_Jatrabari_Dhaka_RAB.pdf,(accessed April 15, 2011).[86]Human Rights Watch interview with Nazrul Islam, senior reporter, NewAge, Dhaka, April 4, 2010.[87]“The headlines ‘Journalist Masum tortured by RAB andarrested,’ ‘RAB detains, beats up New Agecorrespondent’ and other similar headlines published on October 23, 2009have drawn the attention of the RAB Headquarters. RAB’s response to theabove news published is as follows,” Rapid Action Battalion pressrelease, October 24, 2009.[88]Human Rights Watch interview with Arif Newaz Farazi, Reporter, NewAge, Dhaka, April 4, 2010.[89]Human Rights Watch interview with F M Masum, Dhaka, April 4, 2010.[90]“Tortured journo Masum denied filing case,” TheDaily Star, October 26, 2009,http://www.thedailystar.net/story.php?nid=111370,(accessed November 9, 2010).[91]Human Rights Watch interview with Anaemul Kabir, operationsofficer, RAB-10, Dhaka, April 7, 2010.[92]Human Rights Watch interview with Baby Akhtar and Nusrat JahanSrity, April, 4, 2010.[93]Human Rights Watch interview with Baby Akhtar, April 4, 2010.[94]Odhikar fact-finding report, September 10,2009.[95]Human Rights Watch interview with Shamsunnahar Alam, Dhaka, March8, 2011.[96]Human Rights Watch interview with Manzurul Alam, Dhaka, March 8,2011.[97]Human Rights Watch interview with Shamsunnahar Alam, Dhaka, March8, 2011.[98]Ibid.[99]Home Ministry Probe of Kaiser Mahmud Bappi’sdeath.” http://bangladeshfirst.com/docdetails.php?cid=&scid=0&docid=10,(accessed March 26, 2011).[100]Human Rights Watch interview with Ashaduzzaman and Habibur Rahman,students, Polytechnic Institute, Dhaka, April 5, 2010.[101]“Familyof slain polytech student to file murder case,” New Age, May 30,2009, http://www.newagebd.com/2009/may/30/front.html (accessed November 9,2010).[102] Ibid.[103]Human Rights Watch interview with Ashaduzzaman Khokon and HabiburRahman, Dhaka, April 5, 2010, and Shojib Hossain, student, PolytechnicInstitute, Chittagong, April 7, 2010.[104]“Two students killed in RAB “shootout,” NewAge, May 29, 2009, http://www.newagebd.com/2009/may/29/front.html (accessedNovember 9, 2010).[105]“Family of slain polytech student to file murder case,”New Age.[106]“RAB sued for murder, ‘shootout’questioned,” Dhaka Mirror, June 17, 2009,http://dhakamirror.com/?p=5745 (accessed November 9, 2010). The newspaperarticle appears to quote the police report by stating “According to theautopsy report prepared by a forensic doctor of the DMCH in presence of anexecutive magistrate, a total of seven bullets pierced the bodies of the Jinnahand Mohsin. Injury marks were also found on the legs of the Jinnah,” thecase details said.[107]Human Rights Watch interview with Farhad Sheikh, Dhaka, April 7,2010.[108]“RAB sued for murder, ‘shootout’questioned,” Dhaka Mirror, and “Crossfire: Departmentalprobe on into 2 students’ death,”TheDaily Star, June 8, 2009,http://www.thedailystar.net/pf_story.php?nid=91658 (accessed November 9, 2010)[109]“10 RAB men sued for ‘killing’ Dhaka polytechstudent,” The Daily Star, June 17, 2009,http://www.thedailystar.net/newDesign/news-details.php?nid=92943 (accessedNovember 9, 2010).[110]Human Rights Watch interview with Md. Jashim Uddin, brother-in-lawof Ali Jinnah, Bhola, April 7 and September 13, 2010.[111]Human Rights Watch interview with Farhad Sheikh, Dhaka, April 7,2010.[112]“RAB sued for murder, ‘shootout’questioned,” Dhaka Mirror.[113]“60killed in ‘crossfire,’” TheDaily Star, December 30, 2009,http://www.thedailystar.net/story.php?nid=119703 (accessed November 9, 2010).[114]Seetext of Home Ministry findings, “Home Ministry Probe of Md. MohiuddinArif’s Death in RAB-police custody,” http://bangladeshfirst.com/docdetails.php?cid=&scid=0&docid=9, (accessedMarch 26, 2011).[115]“Home Ministry Probe of Kaiser Mahmud Bappi’sdeath,” http://bangladeshfirst.com/docdetails.php?cid=&scid=0&docid=10, (accessed April 22, 2011).[116]Odhikar,Human Rights Report 2010.[117]“Govt seeks time to answer HCrule over killing of 2 brothers,” New Age,http://www.newagebd.com/2009/nov/23/nat.html.[118]Suo moto is a Latin term that means“upon one's own initiative.” It here refers to the fact that thecourt on its own initiative proceeded against the RAB officers.[119]The State v. Major Kazi Waheduzzaman and others, Supreme Court ofBangladesh, High Court Division, Criminal Miscellaneous Case No. 24727 of 2009,Suo Moto Rule, November 17, 2009.[120]The State v. Major Kazi Wahiduzzaman and others, Supreme Court ofBangladesh, High Court Division, Criminal Miscellaneous Case No. 24727 of 2009,Suo Moto Rule, Reply on behalf of the opposite party nos. 2 to 4 to the suomoto rule, December 2009.[121]“2 brothers killed in ‘shootout,’” TheDaily Star, November 17, 2009.[122]Bangladesh Legal Aid and Services Trust, Court Update: Highcourt’s Suo Moto Case on Alleged ‘Extra-JudicialKillings,” (State V Major Kazi Waheduzzaman and Others), December 15,2009.[123]See for example, Shahiduzzaman, “MinisterExcoriated for crossfire comments,” New Age, October 5, 2009,http://www.newagebd.com/2009/oct/05/front.html (accessed November 9, 2009);Mahbubul Islam, “The danger of denying fundamental rights,” NewNation, January 14, 2010,http://www.ittefaq.com/issues/2010/01/14/news0130.htm (accessed November 9,2010).[124]ShaheenMollah, “RAB Firing Questioned,” The Daily Star, April 7,2011, http://www.thedailystar.net/newDesign/news-details.php?nid=180810,(accessed April 15, 2011).[125]“NHRCchief pushes for govt probe,” The Daily Star, April 9, 2011, http://www.thedailystar.net/newDesign/news-details.php?nid=181085,(accessed April 15, 2011).[126]“RAB under Fire,” The DailyStar, December 27, 2010, http://www.thedailystar.net/newDesign/news-details.php?nid=167523(accessed April 15, 2011).[127]“Rhetoric will not stop extrajudicialkillings, decisive action will,” New Age, May 8, 2009,http://www.newagebd.com/2009/may/08/edit.html (accessed November 9, 2010).[128]“Postmortem of 'crossfire': IGP, RAB DGsay their members act in self-defence,” News from Bangladesh, May 30, 2009,(accessedApril 20, 2011).[129]‘“Extra-judicialkilling, remand, disturbing for judiciary,’” The DailyStar, December 19, 2009,http://www.thedailystar.net/newDesign/latest_news.php?nid=21176,(accessed November 9, 2010).[130]Save OurBangladesh, “Outgoing NHRC chief recommends independent probe of theextrajudicial killings, June 21, 2010, http://www.savebd.com/news/outgoing-nhrc-chief-recommends-independent-probe-of-the-extrajudicial-killings/,(accessed April 26, 2011).[131]RahnumaAhmed, “Representing ‘Crossfire’; politics, art andphotography,” New Age, April 8, 2010http://www.newagebd.com/2010/apr/08/oped.html#1, (accessed November 9, 2010).[132]Launchof Pathshala, South Asian Media Academy and “Crossfire” exhibitiongoes on despite police,” Drik Picture Library Ltd press release, March23, 2010.[133]“AllowPhoto Exhibit of Crossfire Killings,” Human Rights Watch news release,March 24, 2010, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2010/03/24/bangladesh-allow-photo-exhibit-crossfire-killings.[134]“HCreturns Drik’s writ petition after police withdrawal,” New Age,April 1, 2010, http://www.newagebd.com/2010/apr/01/front.html#12, (accessed November 9, 2010).[135] UNHuman Rights Council, Report of the Working Group on the Universal PeriodicReview: Bangladesh, A/HRC/11/18, October 5, 2009,http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G09/162/52/PDF/G0916252.pdf?OpenElement, (accessed May 13, 2010).[136]Speech by Dr Stefan Frowein, Head of Delegation of the European Commission, EUHuman Rights Roadshow, Sylhet, 12th February 2009.[137]MosfequrRahman, “Targeting the reds,” New Age Xtra, December 18-24,2009, http://www.newagebd.com/2009/dec/18/dec18/xtra_cover.html, (accessed November 9,2010).[138]SaadHammadi, “'We are not supposed to do anythingextrajudicial,’” New Age Xtra, January 22-28, 2010,http://www.newagebd.com/2010/jan/22/jan22/xtra_inner4.html, (accessed November 9, 2010).[139]Thenon-governmental organization Bangladesh Society for Enforcement of HumanRights has provided human rights training for RAB since 2006 and claims to havetrained about 5000 officers. UNDP has also been involved in human rightstraining for RAB.[140]UnitedStates Department of Justice, International Criminal Investigative TrainingAssistance Program (ICITAP), Asia and Pacific, http://www.justice.gov/criminal/icitap/programs/asia-pacific.html, (accessed April 25, 2011).[141]Remarks by US Ambassador James F. Moriarty at RABHuman Rights Training Workshop, RAB Headquarters, February 9, 2009,http://dhaka.usembassy.gov/9_feb_09_moriarty_remarks_rab_hr_training_workshop.html(accessed November 9, 2010).[142]Emailcommunication from Jon Danilowicz, US embassy political counselor, to HumanRights Watch, August 22, 2010.[143] Ibid.[144] United States Department of State, TheAntiterrorism Assistance Program: Report to Congress for Fiscal Year 2004,February 2005, http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/state/44890.pdf,(accessedNovember 9, 2010).[145]“US to work with RAB to curbterrorism,” The Daily Star, November 26, 2009, http://www.thedailystar.net/newDesign/news-details.php?nid=115641,(accessed November 9, 2010).[146]Emailcommunication from Stephen Evans, UK High Commissioner to Bangladesh, to HumanRights Watch, August 26, 2010.[147] Emailcommunication from Stephen Evans.[148]“Quest for a better outlook on human rights,” TheDaily Star, 17 March, 2008,http://www.thedailystar.net/story.php?nid=28031,(accessed November 9, 2008).[149]“Special training for RAB,” The Daily Star, October 30, 2009,http://www.thedailystar.net/newDesign/news-details.php?nid=111904, (accessed November 9, 2010).[150]“RAB to be deployed across country during Eid,” TheNew Nation, November 25, 2009,http://www.ittefaq.com/issues/2009/11/25/all0530.htm,(accessed November 9, 2010).[151]UnitedKingdom Foreign & Commonwealth Office, Annual Report on Human Rights 2010,p. 50, http://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/htcdn/Human-Rights-and-Democracy-The-2010-Foreign-Commonwealth-Report.pdf, (accessed April 26, 2011); United Kingdom Foreign& Commonwealth Office, Annual Report on Human Rights 2009, March 2010, http://www.humansecuritygateway.com/documents/GOVT_UK_AnnualHumanRightsReport2009.pdf, (accessed November 9, 2010).Related ContentMay 10, 2011News ReleaseBangladesh: Broken Promises From Government to Halt RAB KillingsGovernment Should Disband or Radically Reform Rapid Action BattalionMay 10, 2011News ReleaseBangladesh: Broken Promises From Government to Halt RAB KillingsRegion / CountryAsia BangladeshProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch