 
August 1994 Vol. 6, No. 11 
 
 
 GEORGIA  
 
 TORTURE AND GROSS VIOLATIONS OF DUE PROCESS IN GEO RGIA 
 
 An Analysis of Criminal Case No. 7493810  
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION....................................... ................................................... .................................  2 
 
VIOLATIONS OF DUE PROCESS .......................... ................................................... ..................  4 
 Torture During Arrest and Investigation ........... ................................................... .............  4 
 Gross Mistreatment During Trial ................... ................................................... ............... 10 
 Illegal Arrests................................... ................................................... ............................. 10 
 Failure to Inform of Charges in a Timely Manner... ................................................... ...... 11 
 Denial of the Right to Timely Access to Legal Coun sel of One's 
Choosing........................................... ............................................ 11 
 Denial of the Right to Familiarize Oneself with In formation 
Pertinent to the Case.............................. ....................................... 11 
 
OTHER VIOLATIONS ................................... ................................................... ........................... 12 
 Harassment and Arbitrary Arrests of Relatives and Denial of 
Family Visits ...................................... .......................................... 12 
 Harassment and Discriminatory Dismissals of Defens e Attorneys................................... 14 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS .................................... ................................................... ........................ 15 
 
APPENDIX A: 
 List of Defendants and Charges Against Them....... ................................................... ...... 18 
 
APPENDIX B: 
 Human Rights Watch/Helsinki Letter ................ ................................................... ........... 20 
 
   Human Rights Watch/Helsinki 2 August 1994, Vol. 6, No. 11  
 INTRODUCTION  
 
 Between May and October 1992, nineteen men were arrested in Georgia on a variety of criminal charges; by 
September, their cases were united into one C Case No. 7493810 C along with the case against former President of 
Georgia Zviad Gamsakhurdia for abuse of power and related pol itical crimes.1  Today, almost two years later, 
President Gamsakhurdia is dead, but the legacy of the po litical resentment against him lives on at the trial i n the 
form of massive violations of due process, including the tor ture of the defendants.  Prosecuted under the government 
of Eduard Shevardnadze, who came to power several months af ter Gamsakhurdia's ouster on January 6, 1992, the 
defendants face charges ranging from illegal arms posse ssion to murder, and sentences from three years of 
imprisonment to, in the case of sixteen of the defendants, d eath. 
 
 On the basis of extensive interviews in Tbilisi, the Geor gian capital, in June, including with several of the 
defendants, Human Rights Watch/Helsinki believes that the trial has been riddled with gross violations of due 
process from the moment of these arrests, including tortu re to extract confessions.  We are also concerned that at 
least some of the charges have been brought to punish and s ilence opposition to Head of State and Chairman of the 
Presidium Eduard Shevardnadze, in violation of the right  to free speech.  
 
 Human Rights Watch is a non-governmental, non-partisan orga nization C the largest based in the United 
States and an observer at the United Nations.  It is bey ond our competence to evaluate the guilt or innocence of any  
defendant, and the organization takes no position on this issu e.  Our only interest is in insuring that the legal 
standards by which they are tried conform with international ly accepted standards of due process.  Human Rights 
Watch/Helsinki also opposes the death penalty in all cases  as cruel and inhuman.  We draw attention to this case in 
particular not only because of the scope and seriousness of  violations of due process already witnessed in this case,  
but as a microcosm of abuses we believe to be practiced in law enforcement and prosecutorial circles in Georgia as  a 
whole.  We will be issuing a comprehensive report on thes e violations in the near future. 
 
 In this case, in particular, we are concerned that the c ritical legal principle of the presumed innocence of 
defendants in all trials has been severely compromised be cause of the public pressure to convict.2  There are several 
reasons for this.  The first is the widespread public abhor rence of the terrorist act with which several of the 
defendants are charged: on June 13, 1992, a car bomb detonated  on a street in Tbilisi, reportedly moments after the 
automobile belonging to public figure Jaba Ioseliani had p assed by, leaving five by-passers dead, including a child.  
The second source of pressure to convict comes from the  frequent public statements by such high-level government 
                     
     1 Case No. 7493810 consists of charges brought in co nnection with seven different incidents:  
1) Case No. 7492801 was brought in January 1992 aga inst Zviad Gamsakhurdia for, among other things, ab use of power and 
plundering state property.  
2) Case No. 265 was brought in connection with a ca r bomb explosion on June 15, 1992, on Chikovani Str eet in Tbilisi (the so-
called "Chikovani Street Bombing Case"), and brings  charges against Irakli Dokvadze, Gedevan Gelbakhia ni and Petre 
Gelbakhiani.  
3) Case No. 7792809 C the so-called "Khvareli" case in which individuals  were arrested in the town and forest surrounding 
Khvareli, allegedly for attempting to launch violen t acts against the Georgian government.  Some 19 in dividuals also implicated 
in this case have already been convicted and are cu rrently serving their sentences in or near Tbilisi.  
4) Case No. 792815 was brought in connection with t he seizure of the television and radio stations in Tbilisi on June 24, 1992, 
against Sergo Khakhiashvili, Gocha Makhviladze, and  Gela Mchedlishvili.  
5) The case, brought in connection with an alleged attempt to hamper the elections of October 11, 1992 , brings charges against 
Kalmakhelidze, Kapanadze and Kochlamazashvili.  
6) The case of alleged theft of French perfume from  the "Agregat" factory was brought against Ramazi C harigogdishvili, Ivane 
Lashkarashvili and Gela Mchedlishvili.  
7) A case was brought in connection with a reported  attempt on the life of Acting Procurator General R azmadze against Zurab 
Bardzimashvili, Zurab Gogichashvili, Teimuraz Kapan adze and Tamaz Tsiklauri.  
     2 Article 14 (2) of the International Covenant on Ci vil and Political Rights states that "everyone char ged with a criminal 
offence shall have the right to be presumed innocen t until proved guilty according to law."   Human Rights Watch/Helsinki 3 August 1994, Vol. 6, No. 11 officials as Eduard Shevardnadze, who have already labele d the defendants in this case "terrorists;" Mr. 
Shevardnadze has also publicly called for a death sentenc e to be carried out in the case, although the trial is st ill 
under way.3  
 
 On August 3, 1992, an amnesty was passed releasing from criminal liability "representatives of the previous 
[Gamsakhurdia] administration accused of committing serious crimes" and "individuals who participated in the 
adventurous attempt at government overthrow of June 24, 1994,  regardless of the serious crimes committed by them 
before the country and the people."4  Several of the defendants in this case seem to fall un der the terms of this 
amnesty, but have not been released.  
 
 The trial began on October 5, 1993, at least one year af ter the initial arrests.  It has been recessed on 
numerous occasions, in part because of natural delays caused by illness or prior commitments of lawyers, and in part 
because the court suspended hearings in response to the defend ants' protests:  these included standing with their 
backs to the courtroom and holding hunger strikes. 
 
 A pattern of abuse emerged from interviews with severa l of the men on trial in this case.  Their accounts of 
their treatment almost invariably repeat the same sequen ce.  The accused was arrested in his home by armed men in 
civilian clothing who did not present an arrest warrant.  He w as beaten on the spot, on the way to the militia station,  
and upon arrival.  During questioning, he was beaten and thr eatened, questioned about his views on and relationship 
with former President Gamsakhurdia, and then intimidated a nd tortured into signing a deposition. Contact with 
family members and lawyers came typically only after a  minimum of several days after the arrest, in some cases  only 
after several months. 
 
 In the testimonies compiled here defendants describe havin g been hung upside down, burned, doused with 
boiling water, and subjected to systematic beatings that broke bones and cut and bruised most of their bodies.  
Lasting physical injuries reported included broken teeth,  broken noses, impaired hearing and damaged vision.  
Threats to torture or murder members of their families  left other scars on the defendants; one defendant tells h ow his 
children were brought to the detention center where he h ad been tortured and he was threatened that the children 
would be killed if he did not confess. 
 
 Doctors attached to the interrogation centers were desc ribed as having been accomplices to torture, 
assessing suspects' fitness to continue being questioned under  torture.  One detainee said he was hospitalized when a 
police doctor told interrogators the alternative was th at he would die, but interrogation under torture soon continued 
in the hospital; another defendant described having been to rtured in his hospital bed after a failed suicide attempt  
and an emergency operation. 
 
 Human Rights Watch/Helsinki draws attention to this case  in particular not only because of the scope and 
seriousness of violations of due process already observed, but as a microcosm of abuses we believe to be practiced 
in law enforcement and prosecutorial circles in Georgia a s a whole.  We will be issuing a comprehensive report on 
these violations in the near future. 
 
 Human Rights Watch/Helsinki (formerly Helsinki Watch) has monitored and urged compliance with the 
human rights provisions of the 1975 Helsinki Accords in sign atory countries since the organization was created in 
1978.  The Republic of Georgia, as a member of the commonw ealth of Independent States, is obliged to uphold 
these provisions. 
 
 Human Rights Watch/Helsinki calls on the government of the  Republic of Georgia and all those acting in an 
official capacity for it to take all steps necessary to prevent acts of torture and gross mistreatment of individu als in 
                     
     3 See , for example, Sakartvelos Respublika , November 30, 1993. 
     4 Gushagi , No. 28, 1992, p. 61.   Human Rights Watch/Helsinki 4 August 1994, Vol. 6, No. 11 custody on Georgian territory.  We call on the government  to conduct a prompt and impartial investigation into 
allegations of torture and mistreatment made by the defe ndants in this case, to ensure that those who are found guilty  
of such acts are punished, and that the victims are guara nteed an adequate remedy for their suffering.  In particul ar, 
Human Rights Watch/Helsinki calls on the judge in this cas e to exclude from the record of the trial any statement by 
the defendant that is to be used against him and that is s hown to have been obtained through torture or other coercive 
means. 
 
 
 VIOLATIONS OF DUE PROCESS  
 
Torture During Arrest and Investigation  
 Article 14 (3) (g) of the International Covenant on Civi l and Political Rights (hereinafter ICCPR) guarantees 
that a defendant not be "compelled to testify against hims elf or to confess guilt."  Article 7 of the ICCPR stat es that 
"no one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman o r degrading treatment or punishment." 
 
 Documented cases of torture and gross mistreatment during  detention are unquestionably the most shocking 
and heinous of the violations witnessed in this case to dat e, and represent the biggest impediment to the defendants 
receiving a fair trial.  All of the defendants in the c ase claim to have been beaten during the period of arrest and 
interrogation, in violation of the categorical prohibition against torture in international law.  Many of the defendants 
also report that they were tortured to force them to confe ss to crimes they now deny having committed.  These 
allegations of torture have been raised by the defendants'  lawyers during the course of the trial.  However, excep t for 
the case of Zaza Tsiklauri, whom authorities generally acknowledge to have been tortured, no investigations are 
known to be underway into these allegations, and despite su bstantial evidence of torture, the statements of the 
defendants continue to be used as evidence in the case. 
 
 Tamara Bardzimashvili, the daughter of defendant Zurab Ba rdzimashvili, reportedly has visited him in the 
pre-trial detention center five or six times since his arrest, and told HRW/Helsinki representatives:  
 
 When they came to arrest him, they surrounded the house and he  tried to kill himself by stabbing 
himself in the chest.  They took him to the hospital and o perated on him immediately.  On the third 
day after the arrest, they came to him at the hospital and began interrogating him.  [He said] 
Inspector Baluashvili personally kicked him in the che st, where his wound was. . . . They have 
tortured him during the investigation: they put needles in his leg, kicked him in his stomach, put 
him in a death row cell.  It is indescribable.  There ar e scars on the left side of his neck, and round 
scars like bracelets mid-calf on both legs.  Now they do n't let me in to see him anymore.5 
 
 Viktor Domukhovskii  
 Viktor Domukhovskii, one of the men facing the death penalty , recounted to a HRW/Helsinki representative 
who visited him in the pre-trial detention center where he  was being held: 
 
 Petre Gelbakhiani [another defendant] and I were kidnapped from a friend's house in Baky [the 
capital of neighboring Azerbaijan] on April 6, 1992.  About t hirty men in civilian clothing 
handcuffed us, bound our eyes and put us in a car.  They beat us in the car, and in the airplane 
which took us to Tbilisi.  In the car I was sitting in the mid dle, and was hit from both sides with fists 
and automatic weapons.  Petre got it worse because he was l ying on the floor of the van and they hit 
and kicked him.  They broke my nose, broke my teeth, and I had bruises all over. 
 
 They took us to the KGB building in Tbilisi.  They taped u s and made us speak on television. . . .  
They told us that we had apparently blown something up on the orde rs of Gamsakhurdia.  We didn't 
admit to anything.  Petre and I were the only ones who said "no." Then they took us to the police 
                     
     5 HRW/Helsinki interview, Tbilisi, June 1994.   Human Rights Watch/Helsinki 5 August 1994, Vol. 6, No. 11 lock-up and began working us over psychologically.6 
 
 Petre Gelbakhiani  
 Petre Gelbakhiani, a doctor in his thirties, painted a si milar picture of abuse and coercion: 
 
 About twenty or thirty men came to arrest us in civilia n clothes.  We were handcuffed and our eyes 
were bound.  They did not show any arrest warrant.  They beat us without stopping.  It continued in 
the airplane.  I had bruises and a bloody face.  I still have  scars on my face.7 
 
 They demanded that I confess that I was involved in a ca r bomb against Ioseliani and that I had 
done it on Gamsakhurdia's orders.  They made us speak on television.  Kviraia [the current Minister 
of Internal Affairs] was present during all of this.8  
 
 Irakli Dokvadze  
 Irakli Dokvadze, a young man with piercing black eyes, a former member of the Communist Party and an 
Afghanistan veteran, told a HRW/Helsinki representative : 
 
 [When I was arrested on September 4, 1992,] they started t aking physical measures and threatened 
my children.  Two guys came into the police lock-up where  I was.  They started threatening me.  
They hit me with rubber clubs.  Another method is that you si t on the floor with your knees up, they 
put handcuffs on your hands under your legs, and they hit you on the soles of your feet.  I lost 
consciousness.  They broke my nose.  Then they came to mak e a video film of me to air on 
television.  They actually put make-up on my face to cover  the broken nose.  
 
 They would come to interrogate me regularly at two or thr ee in the morning.  They came many 
times, about ten or fifteen times over the course of about a  month and twenty days or two months.  
They beat me so many times I can't count.  At one point, they kept me for two weeks in one room.  
They put on funeral music.  It was indescribable.  There  was fecal matter on the floor so you 
couldn't walk.  It stank. 
 
 They brought in my children.  Baluashvili, the head of the D ivision for the Fight against Terrorism 
and Sabotage, said "If you want them to live, sign." They said, "You live on the first floor.  We will 
throw in a grenade and then we'll say it was done by one of  the people who had lost someone [in the 
car bomb attack on Chikovani Street that killed several  people.] They threatened that the father of 
the seven-year-old kid who died in the blast would kill me.  I don't understand how people could be 
so low that they would manipulate the father of a dead chil d.  My mother was already arrested at 
that point.9  I already knew that if I didn't admit guilt they would  annihilate my whole family.10 
 
 Zaza Tsiklauri  
 Zaza Tsiklauri is a tall man, bearded and thin when a  HRW/Helsinki representative met with him in the 
Hospital for Inmates which adjoins the pre-trial detention c ell.  At the time of the interview, he had been 
recuperating from the ill effects of the hunger strike he and his co-defendants had embarked on in January and 
February 1994.  He had previously been treated in the prison ho spital for tuberculosis he may have contracted during 
                     
     6 HRW/Helsinki interview, Tbilisi, June 1994. 
     7 A Human Rights Watch/Helsinki representative confi rmed the existence of these scars. 
     8 HRW/Helsinki interview, Tbilisi, June 1994. 
     9 See  "Arrest and Harassment of Relatives"  
     10 HRW/Helsinki interview, Tbilisi, June 1994.   Human Rights Watch/Helsinki 6 August 1994, Vol. 6, No. 11 confinement, and the effects of torture. 
 
 I was relaxing with my family in the village, and cam e back to Tbilisi for food, on family business.  
When I got back, by coincidence I went to my mother's hous e, where she lives with my brother, a 
deputy.  Some men came in military uniform and said they w anted to clarify one or two things.  
They took me to the KGB building, and began asking about my attitude toward the president, 
toward my brother, when was the last time I was in Groz nyi.11  There were very high-ranking 
officials present. 
 
 That same night they started beating and torturing me.  T hey didn't say what they wanted from me.  
They hit me with their fists, with clubs, kicked me, hel d me upside down, beat the soles of my feet, 
my head.  It lasted all night.  You hang there, people com e in and out.  I lost consciousness several 
times, but they would burn me or throw water on me to wa ke me up.  I was covered in blood.  I kept 
going in and out of consciousness.  They kept moving me arou nd. . . .  The next day I was all blue, 
from head to toe.  My left leg and left arm were broken , and I had cuts all over.  My right leg was 
cut, and my right arm.12   
 
 They tried too hard C I couldn't stay conscious.   The doctor said, "If you don't  take him to the 
hospital, he'll die." They took me to the hospital. . . .  I  couldn't move, I could only sit or lie flat.  
The interrogations continued, different people doing the inte rrogations.  They would dictate my 
testimony.  The charges against me changed, after all.13  They began pouring boiling water on the 
right side of my neck, my back.14  They made me put on a shirt when they took me to the off icial.  
They made me wear a heavy jacket, which you can imagin e on burned skin. . . .  I said, "Tell me 
what you want and I'll sign." I had said this before.  Fi rst they said I should write that I was involved 
in a terrorist act against [Jaba] Ioseliani.  They brought in electric shock cords.  I was already 
dreaming of dying.  I wanted them to apply the shock cords.  It's easy to say now, but then I was 
hoping they would kill me.  But the chief officer said I was already ready to sign and they did not 
need [the cords]. 
 
 I was held in solitary confinement for a month after tha t so that no one would see the results of the 
torture.15 
 
 The allegations of the torture of Zaza Tsiklauri hav e been officially confirmed, and were the basis for a 
criminal investigation (case no. 7492832), according to his w ife, Nino.  She reported that the case was later dropped 
because Mr. Tsiklauri refused to give testimony, fearing for the safety of his family if he disclosed details .16  Indeed, 
                     
     11 When he was ousted, Zviad Gamsakhurdia, parliament arians and a group of his supporters fled to Grozny i, in the 
southern Russian republic of Chechnia, which border s Georgia, and headquartered there until Gamsakhurd ia returned to 
Georgia in the fall of 1993. 
     12 A doctor with the British Helsinki Group who visit ed Mr. Tsiklauri soon after this incident confirmed  the existence of 
physical traumas consistent with what Mr. Tsiklauri  describes. 
     13 Mr. Tsiklauri reports that he was originally charg ed with violations of part 1 of Article 238 of the Criminal Code ("illegal 
possession of firearms or explosive devices"), carr ying a maximum sentence of three years of imprisonm ent). Later three, 
more serious charges were brought: violations of Pa rts 2, 3 and 4 of that same Article ("illegal trans mission, transportation, 
making or selling of firearms or explosive devices"  or all of the above violations, respectively, carr ying a maximum 
sentence of ten years of imprisonment with confisca tion of property). 
     14 A Human Rights Watch/Helsinki representative confi rmed the existence of these scars. 
     15 HRW/Helsinki interview, Tbilisi, June 1994. 
     16 HRW/Helsinki telephone interview, August 1994.   Human Rights Watch/Helsinki 7 August 1994, Vol. 6, No. 11 the charges of torture caused the chairman of the Informa tional Intelligence bureau of Georgia (the successor of t he 
K.G.B.) Batiashvili to announce his resignation on August 17, 1992, ten days after Mr. Tsiklauri's arrest; Mr. 
Batiashvili did not, however, resign. Procurator General Razmadze ordered one charge against Mr. Tsiklauri 
remanded to the review of the Procuracy, citing the "fasci st methods used against defendant Z. Tsiklauri, as a res ult 
of which he received numerous physical injuries." 
 
 In June 1994, a HRW/Helsinki representative received p ermission from pre-trial detention and hospital 
authorities to visit Zaza Tsiklauri, who, according to the defendant and to hospital records, was at the time 
recuperating from the compounded effects of torture, tuber culosis, which he had contracted in detention, and 
weakening and severe malnourishment caused by a lengthy hunge r strike.  According to relatives, the following day, 
an angry call from the judge ordered that Mr. Tsiklauri b e put under "strict isolation;" the following day he was 
forcibly removed from the hospital and put back in the pre- trial detention cell, where conditions are even worse t han 
in the hospital, and where he does not have constant acces s to medical care.  The order was clearly punitive, and 
displayed gross neglect of the defendant's physical condit ion, as well as disregard for human rights monitoring. 
 
 Gedevan Gelbakhiani  
 When a HRW/Helsinki representative met with Gedevan G elbakhiani, a doctor and medical professor in his 
sixties currently facing the death penalty, he had been hel d for four months in the small hospital attached to the 
Tbilisi pre-trial detention facility.  He told HRW/Hel sinki the following:  
 
 The first beating took place when I was arrested.  I w as taken to the municipal police precinct. . 
.without any arrest warrant.  I was taken to Ivanov, the Deputy Minister of Internal Affairs, and 
several "Mkhedrioni," who were wildly on drugs.17  They were absolutely weaving.  They started 
beating me right away, hitting me with something hard f rom behind.  I lost two front teeth on the 
left side.  Then they took me downstairs, where I spent  a month.18   
 
 Between October [1992] and February [1993] I would be woken  in the middle of the night, taken 
out and beaten.  It was like that for six months.  I would lie on the floor, and end up in one horrible 
room after another. . . .  I said, "I will change my te stimony every time you beat me." 19 
 
He continued in a written statement, whose contents he confi rmed in person having written:  
 
 When they finished to beat me (sic), they made me to wr ite a statement (sic), then if my memory 
serves me right I was dragged to isolation cell. . . .   There I spent two days under continuous loud 
sounds of run (sic) water and ventilation system which is  the continuation of torture to be used after 
beating.  The noise produced by strong flow of water combi ned with loud noise produced by the 
ventilation amplifies the volume of the noise.  This is one of the methods of torture since it exerts 
unfavorable and continuous (sic) impact on the nervous syste m. . . .  Finally I was able to stick my 
hanky into the pipe and that stemmed it a bit.  Otherwise  I thought I would have gone crazy.20   
 
 The second beating took place the fourth, fifth or sixth of F ebruary.  I haven't seen anything like it 
even in the movies.  They beat me terribly.  About sev en men, "plants"  beat my right side.  I was 
                     
     17 The "Mkhedrioni" (in English, "the Horsemen") is a  paramilitary group which currently serves in a de facto  capacity as 
part of the law enforcement structure, often workin g together with the Ministry of Internal Affairs. T heir leader is Jaba 
Ioseliani, who is generally believed to have been t he target of the bomb explosion for which some of t he defendants in this 
case are charged.  
     18 The maximum length of such detention allowed under  Georgian law is ten days.  
     19 HRW/Helsinki interview, Tbilisi, June 1994. 
     20 Statement, no date, "Tbilisi jail."   Human Rights Watch/Helsinki 8 August 1994, Vol. 6, No. 11 sitting down and they held me from both sides so I couldn't m ove.  One kicked me right in the face. . 
. .  The beating went on for two or three hours.  Then they t hrew me into a damp cell, then into a 
cold room.  The right side of my face was completely blac k on the second day.  Nekros  had set in C 
which is a sign of death C not bruises.  I was afraid I'd lost my eye.  Now I see poorly with my right 
eye.  I have lost almost all of the hearing in my right  ear.  They wanted to finish with the 
investigation.   
 
 Recently things have been calmer.  But every day there is something horrible.  The hospital is as 
bad as the cell, maybe worse.  If you saw the toilet you 'd lose your mind. 
 
 The doctors here [in the pre-trial detention facility ] are security agents.  They give permission for 
interrogations even when I am clearly not in any condition.  I am a doctor, so I know what I'm 
talking about.  The doctors assist in investigations.21 
 
 Mamuka Aptsiauri  
 Mr. Aptsiauri has written in sworn testimony that "From the first day of arrest, the supporters of 
Shevardnadze, the "Mkhedrioni", and the "Guards" used violent  methods of investigation, beat [me] until I lost 
consciousness and demanded that I give false testimony aga inst our group and President Zviad Gamsakhurdia. . . .  
During the investigation, the investigatory team used for bidden methods against me. During the physical pressure 
[nazhimy], they broke my nose."22 
 
 Zurab Gogichashvili  
 In a signed statement, Mr. Gogichashvili has reported:  "In the process of preliminary investigation I was 
subjected to physical and psychological processing which res ulted in aggravation of my health.  My repeated 
demands for medical examination were not satisfied.  My he alth is progressively worsening (sic).  I developed 
decreased hearing, and have problems with my lungs."23 
 
 In a statement prepared during the HRW/Helsinki visit to Tbilisi in June 1994, he reported that "On 
September 24, 1992, I was detained by the militia of the G ldan region of Tbilisi and, after nine days of torture I wa s 
brought up on charges of apparent illegal possession of fir earms and a hand grenade. . . .  I denied these charges , 
after which I was subjected to torture and beatings. . . .   I have gone on hunger strike three times."24   
 
 Givi Kalmakhelidze  
 In a signed statement, Mr. Kalmakhelidze wrote that "Af ter [my arrest, I] was taken to the municipal police 
station of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the City  of Tbilisi, where they began mistreatment [izdevatel'st vo], 
moral degradation and beating as a supporter of the lawful president Zviad Gamsakhurdia.  I spent twenty days in 
the municipal police station, then they took me to Investig ation Cell No. 1 of the City of Tbilisi, where they agai n 
began mistreatment, moral humiliation and beatings, where I remain to this day [June 18, 1994]."25 
 
 Teimuraz Kapanadze  
 In a statement written during HRW/Helsinki's stay in Tbi lisi, Mr. Kapanadze reported: "During my arrest, in 
front of the senior head of the law enforcement body, I wa s savagely beaten.  After I lost consciousness they t hrew 
me into the lock-up of the municipal militia.  [From Octo ber 5] until October 16 [1992] they took their revenge 
                     
     21 HRW/Helsinki interview, Tbilisi, June 1994. 
     22 Written statement submitted to HRW/Helsinki. No da te. 
     23 Statement, no date. 
     24 Statement, dated June 19, 1994. 
     25 Statement, dated June 1994.   Human Rights Watch/Helsinki 9 August 1994, Vol. 6, No. 11 every day with physical force, and beat me cruelly.  A fter they created their charges (October 16) they remov ed me 
to the investigation cell, where my torture continues to th is day."26 
 
 Omari Kochlamazashvili  
 In a statement presented to HRW/Helsinki representati ves, Mr. Kochlamazashvili wrote: "Despite my 
frequent demands, the investigation was conducted without a lawyer, and under unbearable physical and 
psychological pressure."27 
 
 Tamaz Tsiklauri  
 Tamaz Tsiklauri's wife, Meri Zurabishvili, told HRW /Helsinki representatives her impressions after she saw 
her husband, four months after his arrest: 
 
 His right hand was missing fingernails.  He had broken teeth.  He was covered in bruises - there 
were no white spots left on him.28 
 
Gross Mistreatment During Trial  
 Not only was torture used during the investigation proces s to extract confessions, but serious mistreatment 
of the defendants has continued during the pre-trial and tria l period. 
 
 Zurab Bardzimashvili  
 Defendant Zurab Bardzimashvili is an elderly invalid who before his arrest wore braces on his right arm and 
leg and suffered from epilepsy,  and had been tortured and hospitalized during arrest and investigation.  According 
to his daughter Tamara, he had attempted suicide on sever al occasions beginning the day of his arrest when he 
realized he was surrounded.  He reportedly suffered a ser ious relapse in health during a trial recess on July 7, 1994.  
Despite his poor physical condition, it was reported that h e was forcibly brought into the courtroom again when the 
trial reconvened on July 29.  He reportedly did not withstand the stress, and had to be removed to the prison hospital.  
 
 Gela Mchedlishvili  
 In a statement handed to a HRW/Helsinki representative  in prison in July 1994, Gela Mchedlishvili reported 
that "They torture and beat me and use all forms of violence,  which are impossible to even imagine.  This continues 
to this day."29 
 
Illegal Arrests  
 Article 9 (2) of the ICCPR states that "anyone who is arrested shall be informed, at the time of arrest, of the  
reasons for his arrest and shall be promptly informed of any  charges against him." Subsection (3) goes on to state 
that: "Anyone arrested or detained on a criminal charge s hall be brought promptly before a judge or other  officer 
authorized by law to exercise judicial power." 
 
 Gedevan Gelbakhiani, Zaza Tsiklauri, Tamaz Tsiklauri  and Ramazi Charigogdishvili all claim that they 
were arrested without having been presented with an arrest w arrant; this is believed to have been the case with 
others charged in case.  Meri Zurabishvili, Tamaz Tsikl auri's wife, was present during her husband's arrest: 
 
 It was evening.  Armed men started shooting through our do or, and another three came through the 
balcony.  They took my husband barefoot from the shower.  T hey stole money, rings, gold.  They 
                     
     26 Statement, dated June 16, 1994. 
     27 Statement, no date. 
     28 HRW/Helsinki interview, Tbilisi, June 1994. 
     29 Statement, dated June 27, 1994.   Human Rights Watch/Helsinki 10 August 1994, Vol. 6,  No. 11 took me too, and held me overnight.30 
 
Failure to Inform of Charges in a Timely Manner  
 Most of the detainees were not informed of the charges a gainst them at the time of their arrest.  Gedevan 
Gelbakhiani, for example, reports that "I was informed of t he charges on the third or fourth day [after my arrest].  . . . 
 The first time I saw a lawyer was on the seventh or eighth day.  They interrogated me several times without my  
lawyer present.  He never protested the second beating."31 
 
 His son, Petre Gelbakhiani, also reported being informed of  charges against him only four or five days after 
his arrest, and after he had been beaten, intimidated, and  forced to make a statement on television. 
 
Denial of the Right to Timely Access to Legal Counsel of One's Choosing  
 Article 14 (3) (b) of the ICCPR guarantees a defendant the right to "adequate time and facilities for the 
preparation of his defense and to communicate with counsel of  his own choosing." 
 
 Defendant Zaza Tsiklauri bemoaned the lack of legal guarant ees in the case in a conversation with a 
HRW/Helsinki representative: "How can the lawyers work when they themselves are under threat?" To a question 
about whether legal counsel had been present during questioning , he said, "There could be no discussion of such a 
luxury as a lawyer." This sentiment was echoed in convers ations with almost everyone HRW/Helsinki 
representatives interviewed during their two-week stay in Tbilisi, including many who were associated with cases 
unconnected with the one in question. 
 
 For several months, defendant Zurab Bardzimashvili was no t represented at all during the proceedings, 
although reportedly he had submitted an appeal to the court i n January 1994.  In April, Ms. Bekauri was assigned to 
him against his wishes.  Zurab Bardzimashvili's request for a change in defense counsel was also denied at that ti me, 
leaving him effectively without defense of his choosing, as is his right.   
 
 Defendant Viktor Domukhovskii told a HRW/Helsinki represent ative that the first time he saw a lawyer was 
not until April 12, 1993, six days after his arrest.  He st ated that he was interrogated some five times withou t the 
presence of a lawyer.  In addition, he stated that the court had denied him access to his lawyer on five occasions,  the 
first time in October 1993, when the trial began.  Petre Gelbakhiani reported that he did not see a lawyer until o ne 
week after his arrest. 
 
 Omari Kochlamazashvili and Gocha Makhviladze have state d independently that the investigation of their 
cases was conducted without the assistance of counsel, alth ough they already had lawyers who had assumed their 
defense. 
 
Denial of the Right to Familiarize Oneself with Infor mation Pertinent to the Case  
 In this transitional period when the Georgian legisla ture is overhauling entire bodies of law, and when 
amnesties are passed in an unpredictable but often sweepi ng manner, lawyers and lawmakers themselves were often 
hard pressed to tell HRW/Helsinki representatives which law s applied in certain cases.  In addition, current 
Georgian jurisprudence suffers from chronic and systemica lly poor and spotty access to legal texts.  This impedes 
the work of judges and lawyers, and causes anxiety among de fendants.  As defendant Zaza Tsiklauri lamented to 
HRW/Helsinki, "I am being tried according to laws I don't  know." 
 
 Exacerbating this already unsatisfactory situation is the  judge's illegal refusal to give defendants, and in at 
least one case, defense counsel, full access to the mater ials connected with their cases, as is their right unde r Article 
14 (3) (b) of the ICCPR and Articles 202 and 236 of the Crimina l Procedure Code of the Georgian Republic.  In at 
                     
     30 HRW/Helsinki interview, Tbilisi, June 1994. 
     31 HRW/Helsinki interview, Tbilisi, June 1994.   Human Rights Watch/Helsinki 11 August 1994, Vol. 6,  No. 11 least one case, the judge denied the repeated requests of defense attorneys for Zaza Tsiklauri and Gedevan 
Gelbakhiani to allow their clients full access to the docum ents in the case.  The entire set of pertinent documents 
reportedly consists officially of thirty-six volumes.  
 
 The court proceedings and the vast majority of documents p ertaining to the case are in the Georgian 
language.  According to his wife, defendant Viktor Domukhovs kii speaks Georgian as a second language and 
requested that the 560-page written evidence against him be translated into his native language, Russian.  According 
to his lawyer, this request was denied.  The denial violat es Article 15 of the Criminal Procedure Code of the 
Republic of Georgia. 
 
 Gevedan Gelbakhiani, a defendant who has reportedly lost  significant hearing as a result of beatings during 
interrogation, requested that an amplifier be provided so tha t he could better follow the proceedings.  This request 
was also denied, without explanation. 
 
 Zurab Gogichashvili reportedly informed the court on at le ast two occasions that because of hearing loss 
suffered during beatings and torture during investigation, he was unable to adequately hear the proceedings, and 
requested an amplifier.  As he was making his statement  to this effect at the January 10, 1993, court session, the  
judge reportedly ordered him removed from the courtroom for continuing to speak when the judge spoke.  An 
individual close to the case maintains that Mr. Gogicha shvili continued to speak because, being hard of hearing , he 
was unaware that the judge was speaking. 
 
 Ketevan Bekauri, the defense lawyer ultimately assign ed to Zurab Bardzimashvili, requested at least 
fourteen days to familiarize herself with the pertinent m aterials.  The court allowed her only five days and reporte dly 
gave only partial access to documents.   
 
 
 OTHER VIOLATIONS  
 
Harassment and Arbitrary Arrests of Relatives and Denial o f Family Visits  
 
 Gedevan Gelbakhiani  
 Gedevan Gelbakhiani, now facing the death sentence, told a H RW/Helsinki representative: "I was not an 
active [political] figure.  I was arrested simply beca use of my son [Petre, also a defendant in the case].  It  was to get 
back at him, to put pressure on him.  When they beat me the second time, they shouted this out. . . .  They have k ind 
of achieved their goal."32  
 
 Tamara Bardzimashvili and Mari Gugeshashvili  
 Tamara, a young teacher and the daughter of Zurab Bardzi mashvili, told HRW/Helsinki representatives the 
following: 
 
 On October 7, 1992, two days after the arrest of my fath er, they arrested me, too.  Without any 
warrant, four armed men took me from my home.  They state d that they were officers of the 
Information-Intelligence Directorate and showed some kind o f identification.  I don't remember 
what kind because I was so frightened - I had been home alo ne. . . .  They demanded that I appear 
on television and condemn Gamsakhurdia and his supporters, incl uding my father.  When I refused, 
they started to beat me.33   
 
 They hit me three times in the chest and stomach.  I  started bleeding.  I was put in solitary 
                     
     32 HRW/Helsinki interview, June 1994, Tbilisi. 
     33 Statement, dated June 20, 1994.   Human Rights Watch/Helsinki 12 August 1994, Vol. 6,  No. 11 confinement until the next morning.  I have had gastritis for the last eight months, since they beat 
me.34 
 
 The next morning, beaten and bloody, they let me go and wa rned me not to speak about this fact to 
anyone or [there would be] physical retribution.35 
 
 The day the trial started [October 5, 1993]. . ., they ar rested my mother, Mari Gugeshashvili, a 
teacher and member of the Helsinki Union of Georgia since 1989.  Militia officers from the Gldan 
region of Tbilisi arrested her at home with no reason or  display of the pertinent warrant.  They held 
her for two days. . .and also forced her to publicly cond emn Z. Gamsakhurdia and the whole 
national movement.  After she was released, representat ives of the kommendatura  and press 
secretary L. Chkhenkeli personally appeared at School 174, where my mother works to this day, 
and openly demanded that the director fire her from work s ince she is a "Zviadist." But the teachers 
group, directorate and the students defended their teacher.36 
 
 Leila and Nodari Dokvadze  
 The mother of defendant Irakli Dokvadze told HRW/Helsi nki representatives: 
 
 "I was arrested and held for one month after Irakli was  arrested.  When they finally released me, 
they said that, officially, I had been detained for violat ion of the curfew in Tbilisi.  They still have 
my passport to this day, and I can't get it back."37 
 
 Her husband, Nodari, reported that on June 24, 1992, "We wer e sitting at home, the house that we shared 
with Irakli, his wife and children, when the militia cam e.  There was no search warrant, but they took things.  They 
basically just robbed us. . . .  On October 8 of that year , right before the elections, I was brought in to the mi litia 
station from my place of work.  The lock-up cell was overf lowing with "Zviadists."38 They kept me for four days and 
let me go without charges."39 
 
 Giorgi Kikaleishvili  
 Mr. Kikaleishvili is the brother of the wife of defendan t Viktor Domukhovskii.  He reports having been 
detained and his house searched by armed men seven times si nce February 1992, when his sister and the 
Domukhovskii children came to live with him after the arres t.  They reportedly found nothing on any of these 
occasions; nor did they bring charges against him.  He told a HRW/Helsinki representative about the pattern of 
harassment of the family, which he claims to be gratuitous .  He reported that armed men repeatedly come to his 
house and search it, without showing a search warrant, and he is taken to the police precinct for questioning, 
detained for one or two hours and released without charges .  The men, he reports, claim they are looking for ille gal 
weapons.   
 
 Mr. Kikaleishvili reports that on one occasion, on May 2 4, 1993, the men "threw everything on the floor." 
                     
     34 HRW/Helsinki interview, Tbilisi, June 1994. 
     35 Statement by Tamara Bardzimashvili, dated June 20,  1994. Contents confirmed in person, HRW/Helsinki i nterview, June 
1994, Tbilisi. 
     36 Statement by Tamara Bardzimashvili, dated June 20,  1994. Contents confirmed in person, HRW/Helsinki i nterview, June 
1994, Tbilisi. 
     37 HRW/Helsinki interview, Tbilisi, June 1994, . 
     38 A perjorative term for supporters of former Presid ent Zviad Gamsakhurdia. 
     39 HRW/Helsinki interview, Tbilisi, June 1994.   Human Rights Watch/Helsinki 13 August 1994, Vol. 6,  No. 11 On another occasion, he reported, they detained his wife and young children.  He told HRW/Helsinki, "They never 
find anything.  But they take my fingerprints and make me  feel like a criminal. . . .  I don't know the reason f or it, but 
of course it's connected with politics." When he was agai n taken in on July 1, 1994, Mr. Kikaleishvili reported tha t 
one of the men conducting the search told him 'We have been m aking the rounds since 4:00 a.m., according to a 
list.'"40 
 
 Mamuka Aptsiauri has stated that "Not only I but my fam ily experienced the pressure of investigation.  
KGB agents, without any warrant and on the pretext of a sear ch, have broken into my house several times and 
searched the apartment.  They frightened my parents: 'I f you or your son don't say where the arms are kept, we will 
shoot your son," and used other psychological and moral method s of pressure.'41 
 
 Zaza Tsiklauri and Viktor Domukhovskii also reported t o HRW/Helsinki that their family members had 
been denied visiting rights.  Mr. Domukhovskii stated that he was not allowed to see a family member for two and a 
half months after his arrest.   
  
 As one person close to the case stated, "Permission depe nds entirely on the judge's mood.  If he is in a good 
mood, he will grant it; otherwise he won't." 
 
 Gedevan Gelbakhiani, the doctor now facing the death penalty , also told HRW/Helsinki: "I didn't see Petre[ 
his son, facing identical charges] for two and a half year s.  I was getting used to the idea of not seeing him ag ain.  It 
was very difficult."42 
 
Harassment and Discriminatory Dismissals of Defense Attor neys 
 For reasons that are not immediately apparent, the ju dge or the Supreme Court or the Bar Association or a 
combination of these authorities have ordered that defense  lawyers must assume or continue to provide a defense 
even against the wishes of the defendant during the course of this trial.  The right for a defendant to communicate 
with legal counsel of his own choosing is enshrined in A rticle 43-1 of the Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic 
of Georgia and Article 14 (3) (b) of the ICCPR. At the  same time, at least one independent lawyer appears to hav e 
been arbitrarily stripped of his credentials, losing the r ight to represent defendants before the courts.  There is 
concern that these measures are intended to permit the a ccused in political trials to be defended only by court 
appointed lawyers they can not dismiss.  
 
 In the first case, independent lawyer Tengiz Nijaradz e, defense lawyer for Zaza Tsiklauri and Viktor 
Domukhovskii, was released from his contract by Zaza Tsik lauri and therefore could not legally continue his 
defense.  The court initially rejected this change, in violation of Article 45 of the Criminal Procedure Code and 
Article 10 of the Ordinance of the Plenum of the Supreme Court of April 29, 1992, which allows a defendant to 
change defense counsel at any point.  Indeed, chairman of t he Collegium Vladimir Baratashvili reportedly called and 
visited Mr. Nijaradze with a personal appeal that he re sume the defense.  Soon after, however, the Collegium of 
Lawyers, the equivalent of the Bar Association or Lawyers Union in other countries, expelled him from the 
Collegium, effectively stripping him of his right to wor k as a lawyer in Georgia.  According to Chairman 
Baratashvili, Mr. Nijaradze had been expelled because he had arrived late for trial on several occasions, and on one  
occasion had failed to appear altogether.  Mr. Nijaradze  denies these allegations, asserting that it was instea d a 
veiled effort to replace his outspoken defense with the defense of a government appointed lawyer who would be 
more compliant to the wishes of the judge.  As a result of this decision, Mr. Nijaradze is now unemployed, and his 
two clients are being represented against their will by co urt-appointed attorneys. 
 
 In the second such instance, the court has denied Mr. Ts iklauri's request that his wife assume his defense, as 
                     
     40 HRW/Helsinki interview, July 1994, Tbilisi. 
     41 Statement, dated June 1994. 
     42 HRW/Helsinki interview, Tbilisi, June 1994.   Human Rights Watch/Helsinki 14 August 1994, Vol. 6,  No. 11 is permitted under Georgian law.  The judge reportedly issue d the rejection on the grounds that Mr. Tsiklauri was 
artificially trying to drag out the proceedings.  His wif e told HRW/Helsinki representatives that this could not ha ve 
been the case, however, since her appointment would not have required any delays, because she was already 
intimately familiar with the case.   
 
 In the third instance, Ketevan Bekauri, a young, court-a ppointed lawyer who was already defending Zurab 
Bardzimashvili, was ordered on June 15, 1994 to assume the de fense of Zaza Tsiklauri as well.  Although she is 
state-appointed, she told a HRW/Helsinki representative that,  "[the authorities know] I won't be silent," and sees thi s 
move as a way to legitimize removing her from the trial  process.  She could not, however, assume the defense of 
someone who had rejected her services.  She reports alrea dy having been threatened with exclusion from the 
Collegium, as Mr. Nijaradze had been, if she refused the order.43  Her exclusion would leave another two defendants 
in the case without independent defense attorneys.  It was reportedly announced on August 5 that Ms. Bekauri was 
relieved of the duty; yet another state lawyer, Givi K apanadze, was appointed in her stead, again against the explici t 
wishes of Mr. Tsiklauri.44 
 
 In a signed statement to our organization, defendant Zur ab Gogichashvili writes, "The situation of terror and 
violence forces me to decline the services of [my] lawyer,  Konstantin Gogichaishvili, who is my close relative, s ince 
he [illegible] is threatened with danger. . . .  Since I  am concerned for the life of my lawyer and the fact that  he could 
be deprived of means of subsistence (expel him as well from  the Collegium of Lawyers ,i.e. dismiss him from work) 
I decline the services of a lawyer and will defend mysel f personally."45 
 
 
 RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
 It is the responsibility of the government of the Republ ic of Georgia and of those acting in an official 
capacity for the government to take all steps necessar y to prevent acts of torture and mistreatment on its ter ritory and 
to provide redress to those who have suffered such treatment.   The defendants in this case require such redress.   
Furthermore, the government and its agents must ensure  that defendants are given a fair and impartial forum in 
which to have the evidence against them evaluated.  HRW/H elsinki makes the following recommendations: 
 
To Judge Mirza Dolidze:  
 
! Exclude from the record of the trial any statement by a  defendant that is intended to be used against him and 
that is shown to have been obtained through torture or other coer cive means.  Such statements are 
admissible only to prove the allegation of torture or coer cion.  Similarly, exclude from the evidence for the 
prosecution any physical or documentary evidence that was obt ained as a result of torture or coercion; 
 
! If, during the course of the proceedings, evidence revea ls that the defendants were not informed of the 
charges against them in a timely manner, prosecute those responsible and provide defendants with damages; 
 
! Guarantee defendants access to the legal counsel of thei r choosing and ensure that defendants are given 
sufficient time to consult with their defense counsel to prepare their defense; 
 
! Guarantee to defendants and their defense counsel equal ac cess to all relevant evidence in the case, 
sufficient time to familiarize themselves with such ev idence, as well as the chance to present their own 
evidence and to petition for the production of evidence for t he defense; 
 
                     
     43 HRW/Helsinki interview, Tbilisi, June 1994. 
     44 HRW/Helsinki telephone interview with Nino Tsiklau ri, August 5, 1994. 
     45 Statement, dated June 26, 1994.   Human Rights Watch/Helsinki 15 August 1994, Vol. 6,  No. 11 ! Guarantee to those defendants who do not speak or understand Ge orgian the free assistance of an 
interpreter; 
 
! Allow defendants access to proper medical evaluations and r elease into the care of medical professionals 
those defendants who are determined to be in poor health. 
 
To the General Procuracy of the Republic of Georgia  
 
! Initiate prompt and impartial investigations  into allegat ions of torture and mistreatment of individuals under 
investigation and, where such allegations are substantiated,  ensure that the victims are able to obtain an 
adequate remedy as provided for in international law; 
 
! Ensure that any statements that are shown to have been the  result of torture  or coercion, as well as any other 
evidence so obtained, are not offered as evidence in any pr oceeding against the defendants; 
 
! Initiate prompt and impartial investigations into the all eged torture of detainees by police officers in this 
case, and if there is evidence of torture, bring crimi nal charges against all who committed acts of torture, as 
well as against any public officials who consented to or ac quiesced in the torture; 
 
! Review the legality of the defendants' detention and prose cute anyone responsible for an illegal arrest.  Any 
evidence for the prosecution obtained through the illegal ar rest of the defendant should be excluded from his 
case.  If the arrest is deemed illegal and the decision t o prosecute is not otherwise based on legally obtained 
evidence, then the defendant should be released. 
 
 
To the Government of the Republic of Georgia  
 
! Review interrogation rules and procedures for the custody and  treatment of those in custody in an effort to 
prevent future acts of torture; 
 
! Educate all law enforcement officials and public official s about the absolute prohibition against torture and 
make clear that any official proved to have committed a n act of torture or to have consented to or acquiesced 
in acts of torture will be charged with a criminal offens e and prosecuted to the full extent of the law; 
 
! Provide an effective means of redress for the victi m of torture and the right to fair and adequate 
compensation; 
 
! Ensure that victims of torture have the opportunity to fi le a complaint against those responsible for their 
torture and guarantee both the victim and his or her supporti ng witnesses safety from ill-treatment or 
intimidation as a consequence of the complaint.   Human Rights Watch/Helsinki 16 August 1994, Vol. 6,  No. 11  APPENDIX A: 
 List of Defendants and Charges Against Them 
 (in alphabetical order)  
 
 The following information was taken from the indictment s tatement as it stood when the investigation was 
concluded in August 1993. Many of the charges are said to hav e been changed prior to that moment. 
 
1. Mamuka Aptsiauri:  born 1971.  Arrested September 2, 1992, Khvareli.  Charged  with violating Articles 17-67 
(attempted terrorism) and 17-69 (attempted subversive act)  of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Georgia 
(hereinafter the Criminal Code.)   
 
2. Zurab Bardzimashvili:  born 1949; geologist.  Arrested on October 5, 1992, Tbilisi .  Charged with violating 
Articles 17-67 (terrorism), 78 (banditry), 17-69 (subversi ve act) of the Criminal Code.  
 
3. Bessarion Bochoridze:  born 1961; profession unknown.  Arrested August 11, 1992.  Char ged with violating 
Articles 90-1 (failure to report a state criminal act)  and 205 (concealment of a criminal act) of the Criminal C ode.  
 
4. Ramazi Charigogdishvili:  born 1960; driver.  Arrested July 10 or 11, 1992, Tbilisi.  C harged with violating 
Article 78 (banditry) of the Criminal Code. 
 
5. Mamuka Danelia:  born 1959; student.  Arrested August 13, 1992, Tbilisi.  Char ged with violating Articles 90 
(failure to report a state criminal act) and 206 (concea lment of a criminal act) of the Criminal Code.  
 
6. Viktor Domukhovskii:  born 1948; physicist, former Deputy of the Supreme Council of  Georgia, former 
chairman of the Judicial Commission.  Arrested on April 6, 19 93, in Baky, Republic of Azerbaijan.  Charged with 
violating Articles 17-67 (attempted terrorism), 17-69 (atte mpted subversive act) and 78 (banditry) of the Criminal 
Code.  
 
7. Irakli Dokvadze:  born 1961; television and radio engineer, electrician.  Arre sted September 4, 1992, Khvareli.  
Charged with violation of Articles 17-67 (attempted terror ism), 17-69 (attempted subversive act), 78 (banditry), 104,  
parts 4 and 6 (premeditated murder of two or more people) and 104, parts 4 and 6 (murder) of the Criminal Code.  
 
8. Gedevan Gelbakhiani:  born 1937; doctor, professor; therapist.  Arrested on Septe mber 13, 1992, Tbilisi.  
Charged with violation of Articles 17-67 (terrorism), 17- 69 (subversive act), 78 (banditry), 17-104, parts 4 and 6 
(premeditated murder of two or more people) and 104, parts  4 and 6 of the Criminal Code.   
 
9. Petre Gelbakhiani:  born 1962; doctor, candidate of medical sciences.  Arreste d April 6, 1993, Baky, Republic of 
Azerbaijan.  Charged with violation of Articles 17-67 ( attempted terrorism), 17-69 (attempted subversive act), 7 8 
(banditry), 17-104, parts 4 (premeditated murder of two  or more people) and 104, parts 4 and 6, of the Criminal 
Code. 
 
10. Zurab Gogichashvili:  born 1956; farmer, technician.  Arrested September 24 or 30, 1992.  Charged with 
violating Articles 17-67 (attempted terrorism), 17-69 (atte mpted subversive act) and 78 (banditry) of the Criminal 
Code.  
 
11. Givi Kalmakhelidze:  born 1952; military.  Arrested September 29 or October 7,  1992.  Charged with violating 
Articles 17-67 (attempted terrorism) and 78 (banditry) of  the Criminal Code.  
 
12. Teimuraz Kapanadze:  born 1950; construction worker, chief of the Republican Commi ttee of Material 
Resources.  Arrested October 5 or 6, 1992.  Charged with v iolating Articles 17-67 (attempted terrorism), 17-69 
(attempted subversive act) and 78 (banditry) of the Criminal  Code.  
 
13. Sergo Khakhviashvili:  born 1966; carpenter.  Arrested June 24, 1992, Tbilisi.  C harged with violating Articles   Human Rights Watch/Helsinki 17 August 1994, Vol. 6,  No. 11 17-67 (attempted terrorism) and 78 (banditry) of the Crimina l Code.  
 
14. Omari Kochlamazashvili:  born 1943; driver, farmer.  Arrested October 4 or 7, 1992.  Charges unconfirmed, 
but are likely to include violations of Articles 17-67 (att empted terrorism), 17-69 (attempted subversive act), and 78 
(banditry) of the Criminal Code.  
 
15. Ivane Lashkarashvili:  born 1960; driver.  Arrested on July 11, 1992.  Charged wit h violating Article 78 
(banditry) of the Criminal Code. 
 
16. Gocha Makhviladze:  born 1958; economist.  Arrested June 24, 1992, Tbilisi.  Char ged with violating Articles 
17-67 (attempted terrorism) and 78 (banditry) of the Crimina l Code.  
 
17. Gela Mchedlishvili:  born 1968, policeman, teacher at technical college.  Arre sted June 24, 1992, Tbilisi.  
Charged with violating Articles 17-67 (attempted terroris m) and 78 (banditry) of the Criminal Code. 
  
18. Tamaz Tsiklauri:  born 1954; economist.  Arrested October 5, 1992, Tbilisi.  Cha rged with violating Articles 
17-67 (attempted terrorism), 17-69 (attempted subversive ac t) and 78 (banditry) of the Criminal Code.  
 
19. Zaza Tsiklauri:  born 1961; physicist.  Arrested on August 7, 1992, Tsdo, Republ ic of Georgia.  Charged with 
violating Article 238, parts 1, 2, 3 and 4 (illegal possess ion, holding, transport, buying, production and selling of a  
weapon or explosive device) of the Criminal Code.     Human Rights Watch/Helsinki 18 August 1994, Vol. 6,  No. 11  APPENDIX B: 
 Human Rights Watch/Helsinki Letter  
 
July 20, 1994 
 
Grigori Shalamberidze 
GUIN, Orthachala Prison  
ul. Gorgasali, 89a 
Tbilisi 380014 
Republic of Georgia 
By telegram 
 
Dear Mr. Shalamberidze, 
 
 As you know, Human Rights Watch/Helsinki (formerly Helsink i Watch) is a non-governmental, non-
partisan organization, the largest based in the United Sta tes and an observer at the United Nations. On behalf of 
Human Rights Watch/Helsinki representatives Erika Daile y and Alexander Petrov, with whom you met last month 
in Tbilisi, I take this opportunity to thank you for your con sideration and your assistance in the conduct of our work 
in Georgia.  
 
 We are greatly disturbed that on July 2 a defendant who wa s undergoing medical treatment and observation 
at the Republican Hospital for Inmates was transferred bac k to the pre-trial detention center (SIzo), at great ris k to 
his health. The defendant, Zaza Tsiklauri, is currently on  trial on charges of violating Article 238, parts 1, 2,  3 and 4 
of the Criminal Code of the Georgian Republic (illegal posse ssion, acquisition and transfer of firearms and explosive 
devices). 
 
 Since his arrest on August 7, 1992, he reportedly has been removed to the SIzo hospital for treatment from 
the pre-trial detention center in Tbilisi on three occasi ons. The first time, he told our representatives, he wa s 
recovering from severe torture, including brutal beatin gs and scaldings with boiling water, inflicted by law 
enforcement officials in Tbilisi. He reported that the tor ture took place initially in order to extract a confessio n. His 
most recent stay in the hospital was to allow him to rec over from a hunger strike he held to protest the violat ions of 
due process that reportedly led to his arrest and mistreat ment in detention. Within two days of meeting with on e of 
our representatives, Mr. Tsiklauri was abruptly returned to the SIzo, we believe prematurely and punitively, to 
prevent Mr. Tsiklauri from further contact with observers.  
 
 We fear that lack of constant medical supervision will exacerbate his already poor physical condition, 
seriously endangering his health. We respectfully urge you  to use your good offices to insure that Mr. Tsiklauri be 
returned immediately to the supervision of medical personne l, and be allowed all assistance required to maintain hi m 
in a satisfactory health condition.  
 
 Thank you in advance for your attention to this urgent situa tion. We look forward to continued cooperation. 
 
Respectfully, 
 
 
Jeri Laber 
Executive Director 
 
cc: Procurator General Damlet Papilashvili 
 U.S. Ambassador Kent Brown 
 International Committee of the Red Cros 
 media 
   Human Rights Watch/Helsinki 19 August 1994, Vol. 6,  No. 11  
   Human Rights Watch/Helsinki 20 August 1994, Vol. 6,  No. 11  
 This report was written by Erika Dailey, research as sociate, and edited by Holly Cartner, acting executive 
director, and Alexander Petrov, associate. Anne Kuper and Liudmila Belova provided essential production 
assistance. The majority of the materials presented here were gathered by Erika Dailey and Alexander Petrov during 
a two-week trip to Tbilisi in June 1994. 
 
 * * * 
 
Human Rights Watch/Helsinki (formerly Helsinki Watch)  
Human Rights Watch is a nongovernmental organization establi shed in 1978 to monitor and promote the observance 
of internationally recognized human rights in Africa, the A mericas, Asia, the Middle East and among the signatories 
of the Helsinki accords.  It is supported by contributions f rom private individuals and foundations  worldwide.  This 
publication, like all our reports, was made possible by s uch grants.  It accepts no government funds, directly or 
indirectly.  Kenneth Roth is the executive director; Cynthi a Brown is the program director; Holly J. Burkhalter is t he 
advocacy director; Gara LaMarche is the associate directo r: Juan E. Mndez is general counsel; and Susan Osnos is 
the communications director.  Robert L. Bernstein is the  chair of the executive committee and Adrian W. DeWind i s 
vice chair.  Its Helsinki division was established in 1978  to monitor and promote domestic and international 
compliance with the human rights provisions of the 1975 Helsi nki Accords.  It is affiliated with the International 
Helsinki Federation for Human Rights, which is based in Vienna, Austria.  Jeri Laber is the executive director ; Holly 
Cartner, counsel; Erika Dailey, Rachel Denber, Ivana Ni zich and Christopher Panico are research associates; Anne 
Kuper, Ivan Lupis, Alexander Petrov and Isabelle Tin-Aung  are associates; eljka Marki  and Vlatka Miheli  are 
consultants.  Jonathan Fanton is the chair of the advisory  committee and Alice Henkin is vice chair. 