Yemen’s Torture Camps: Abuse of Migrants by Human Traffickers in a Climate of Impunity | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload the summary and recommendations: photo featureDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload the summary and recommendations: photo featureMay 25, 2014Yemen’s Torture CampsAbuse of Migrants by Human Traffickers in a Climate of ImpunityAvailable InEnglishالعربيةEthiopian migrant, 19, at a local medical facility in Haradh. He said he was tortured for a month and shot in the leg by traffickers trying to extort money from family members abroad, May 2013.© 2013 Michael Kirby Smith for Human Rights WatchTorture Camps in YemenAbuse of Migrants by Human Traffickers in a Climate ofImpunityMap of the Horn of Africa Migration PatternsSummaryRecommendationsTo the Ministry of InteriorTo the Ministry of Defense and Officeof the Attorney GeneralTo the Ministries of Justice, Defenseand Human RightsTo the Criminal InvestigationDepartmentTo the ParliamentTo the Governments of Saudi Arabiaand YemenTo the Government ofSaudiArabiaTo the Governments of Ethiopia andother Sending Countries to Yemen and Saudi ArabiaTo Donor CountriesMethodologyI. BackgroundMigration to YemenEmigration from EthiopiaThe Smugglers’ Town of HaradhRegional ContextII. The JourneyJourney over LandVoyage over SeaIII. Torture CampsJourney in Yemen to the CampsThe CampsTorture and AbuseRansomIV. After the CampsRecaptureReturn to EthiopiaV. Role of the Yemeni GovernmentPayoffs and ComplicityCorruption by Checkpoint Officialsaround HaradhOfficials Allegedly Selling Migrantsto TraffickersMap: Government Checkpoints Allegedly“Selling” Migrants to TraffickersHierarchy of Corruption in HaradhRaidsFailure to Prosecute TraffickersAfter the RaidsVI. Role of the Saudi GovernmentExit from Saudi ArabiaVI. Yemen’s International LegalObligationsTraffickingObligations to Investigate TortureObligation to Investigate ViolenceAgainst WomenSpecial Obligations for the Treatmentof ChildrenAcknowledgmentsAnnex I: List of Cases Forwarded byHaradh Police to the Haradh ProsecutionMap ofthe Horn of Africa Migration PatternsClick to expand ImageSummaryFor decades, migrants from Africa have passed through Yemento seek work in Saudi Arabia. Since 2010, more than 337,000 migrants andrefugees have landed on Yemen’s coastline from the Red Sea and the Gulfof Aden. Their numbers rose significantly, and then dipped in July 2013, mostlikely due to a Saudi crackdown on undocumented migrant workers, only to riseagain in March 2014. A multi-million-dollar trafficking and extortion rackethas developed in Yemen based on the migrants’ passage. Its locus is the hotand dry northern Yemeni border town of Haradh, where one government officialestimated that trafficking and smuggling make up about 80 percent of theeconomy.Since 2006, Yemeni traffickers in and around Haradh havefound a particularly horrific way to make money: by taking migrants captive andtransporting them to isolated camps, where they inflict severe pain andsuffering to extort money from the migrants’ relatives and friends inEthiopia and Saudi Arabia.In interviews with Human Rights Watch, migrants who survivedor escaped these places referred to them as “torture camps.” Theiraccounts, along with those of traffickers, smugglers, government officials, andhealth and aid workers, paint a picture of an enduring network of illegaloperations that, according to them, is bound together by Yemeni officials ofvarious ranks and positions who at a minimum take bribes to turn a blind eye,or may play a more active and insidious role in the operations.Except for a spate of Yemeni government raids that ended in2013, the authorities have done little to stop the trafficking. Officials havemore frequently warned traffickers of raids, freed them from jail when they arearrested, and in some cases, have actively helped the traffickers capture anddetain migrants.Between June 2012 and March 2014, Human Rights Watchinterviewed 67 people for this report, including 18 male migrants fromEthiopia, of whom 4 migrated when boys, 10 traffickers and smugglers, as wellas health professionals, government officials, activists, diplomats, andjournalists.Migrants told Human Rights Watch that armed men greeted themas they waded onto shore from rickety boats on the Yemeni coast. “Theykept pointing their guns at us and yelling to get onto the backs of the trucks,”said Ali Kebede, a 21-year-old farmer from Ethiopia who landed on the Yemencoast in August 2013.These armed men are from gangs of smugglers and traffickerswhose networks extend to Djibouti, Somalia, Ethiopia, and Saudi Arabia.They sell African migrants from one gang to the next, through a syndicate, asthe migrants pass from country to country. But in Yemen, the migrantscease to have any choice in the matter. The smugglers and traffickers on theYemeni shore pay the boat crews for each migrant and then demand money from theAfricans. They forcibly take those who cannot pay or who refuse to pay to theirisolated camps to be tortured.“Welcome to hell,” one trafficker told a migrantupon his arrival at a camp. An official shared with Human Rights Watchinformation on 12 such camps, and thought the total number in the area was 30;a long-time aid worker put the number of camps in and around Haradh at 200.Some camps consist simply of a walled yard where traffickers hold dozens oreven hundreds of migrants, sometimes with only a tarp hanging over posts toshelter them from the blazing sun. Sometimes there is no shelter at all. Themore elaborate camps have guard towers and concrete buildings.Brutality is the trafficker’s tool. The migrants whoHuman Rights Watch interviewed described how their captors had tortured them toforce them to phone relatives to ask for money. Beatings were commonplace. Oneman described watching another man’s eyes being gouged out with a waterbottle. Another said that traffickers looped metal wires around his thumbs andhung him for up to 15 minutes, and tied a string around his penis from whichthey suspended a full water bottle. Others described watching or hearingtraffickers rape women from their group.Aid workers told Human Rights Watch they observed signs ofabuse in migrants consistent with their accounts of traffickers ripping offtheir fingernails, burning the cartilage of their ears, branding their skinwith irons, gouging out their eyes, and breaking their bones. Healthprofessionals at a Haradh medical facility said they commonly saw migrants withinjuries including lacerations from rape, damage from being hung by theirthumbs, and burns from cigarettes, and hot, melted plastic. One medical workertold Human Rights Watch about treating more than 1,100 migrants in Haradh overthe last four years and said that well over half of them reported torture.The torture sometimes ends in death. An Ethiopian man toldHuman Rights Watch that he saw traffickers tie a man’s penis with astring and beat him with wooden sticks until the man died before his eyes.Another said that traffickers killed two men in his group by hacking at themwith the blade of an axe. The chief doctor at the Haradh hospital said that thehospital receives the bodies of at least two migrants per week. Traffickersoccasionally torture an African to near death and then drive to the wall of theMigrant Response Centre in Haradh, which is run by the InternationalOrganization for Migration, and dump the person there.The use of torture against migrants is highly profitable.Migrants who spoke to Human Rights Watch said their family members and friendspaid ransoms for their freedom ranging from US$200 to over US$1,000. Atrafficker who negotiates ransoms said that he is often able to extractUS$1,300 per migrant from their families.Many of the migrants trapped in the camps come from poorfamilies who lose their property or go deeply into debt to pay a ransom.Eighteen-year-old Sisay Mengesha, who had sold his ox to pay smugglers for hispassage to Saudi Arabia, was held as a hostage in a camp until his mother soldthe family’s small farm to secure his release. Others simply have noresources to pay off the traffickers. Araya Gebremedihin, 16, said that when hephoned his mother from the camp, she said, “I have only one cow andnobody will buy it. If they hurt you, they hurt you. I can’t do anythingfor you.” He was particularly fortunate to escape and survive.When migrants go free, they face new perils, includingnavigating the extreme heat of northern Yemen on foot with insufficient waterand food, and inadequate clothing and shoes. Hagos Gebremedihin, 28, from theEthiopian village of Qoro in West Tigray, told Human Rights Watch that hiscaptors realized that they would not get money for him and simply released himone night around 2:30 a.m. He ran all night, he said. “It was sandy andextremely hot,” he said. “My leg was wounded and my knees wereshaking; my body was very tired. I felt like I was unconscious, like an animalmoving by instinct.” He and other migrants are also often aware of thedanger that another group of traffickers may pick them up and force them toanother torture camp to repeat the ordeal.The abuses associated with the camps are well-known to theYemeni government. A government official in Haradh provided Human Rights Watchwith a list of 14 individuals who run 12 torture camps in the vicinity. Somehave been arrested, but only one was in custody at this writing. The camps areusually run by the Yemeni owners of the land, who typically come from localfamilies known to officials.Traffickers pay checkpoint officials similar rates forpermission to drive through carrying Yemeni and African migrants to the Saudiborder. But the level of government complicity in the trafficking operationsgoes beyond petty bribery: smugglers and migrants alike described somegovernment officials themselves holding migrants in custody before turning themover to traffickers for money.One migrant, Ali Kebede, told Human Rights Watch that he hadescaped a torture camp with a friend in August 2013 and they walked for 10 daysbefore Yemeni soldiers at a checkpoint near Haradh apprehended them. While thetwo were fed bread and tea, the soldiers made some calls and a car appearedwith two men. The men discussed the hawala money transfer system withthe soldiers, then handed the soldiers Saudi cash. The soldiers forced Kebede andhis friend into the car, and the men drove them to their torture camp.Involvement in trafficking appears to extend to elementswithin all the state security forces in Haradh: police, military and theintelligence services. Traffickers, smugglers, and Yemeni government officialsnamed senior officials as being complicit and two officials admitted to HumanRights Watch that traffickers had bribed them in order to ensure they were notraided or arrested.There appears to be total impunity for security forcesinvolved in trafficking. Interior Ministry and other officials could not pointto a single case of disciplinary or legal action against officials forcollaborating with traffickers.From March to May 2013, Yemeni security forces engaged in aseries of raids of traffickers’ camps, but little information has beenprovided about the outcomes. The security forces discontinued the raids,according to the Defense Ministry, because they were unable to provide themigrants with food or shelter upon their release. Officials acknowledged thatthe camps that security forces had raided were now functioning again.Border Guard commander Ali Yaslam, who coordinated the 2013raids, said about 50 to 55 camps were raided and 7,000 migrantsreleased, figures other officials consider inflated. While Yaslam said that allproperty owners and some of the traffickers present at the raided camps weresent to the Criminal Investigation Department, a local Haradh official saidonly 14 to 20 traffickers were charged. Human Rights Watch has yet to verify asingle successful prosecution of a trafficker.In 2013, a Border Guard commander in Haradhsent information to the local prosecutor on 36 traffickers and landownersarrested in torture camp raids. This information was sharedconfidentially with Human Rights Watch. “The prosecution did not do itsjob in holding the criminals accountable and they did not cooperate with thesecurity and military bodies even though they knew of serious crimes committedagainst migrants by traffickers and camp-owners,” the frustratedcommander said in a letter to his superiors. Even though traffickers killed anumber of soldiers during the raids, he said, “all of that was ignored bythe prosecution and instead they acquitted the criminals and became de factoprotectors of the smuggling gangs.”A judge at the trial court in Haradh, which handles minorfelonies, said that he has seen only a single case related to abuse againstmigrants, and that the prosecutor in that one case botched the prosecution.Human Rights Watch found no indication that more serious charges have beenbrought in the nearby higher criminal court.The Yemeni government’s failure to investigate andprosecute serious abuses committed against migrants by private individuals andentities or to investigate and prosecute involvement of government officials inthis abuse violates Yemen’s obligations under international human rightslaw. International rights bodies have made clear that governments have positiveobligations to protect individuals from acts, such as infringements on therights to life and to bodily integrity, committed by private persons. Agovernment’s failure to prevent, investigate, or punish such abuses mayitself give rise to a violation of those rights.Although Yemen is not a party to the United NationsTrafficking Protocol, the crimes described in this report nonethelessconstitute trafficking. They include the transport, transfer, and harboring ofmigrants by using force or the threat of force for the purpose of slavery. The practice by traffickers in Yemen of effectively“selling” migrants to each other amounts to slavery underinternational law.The Yemeni Constitution and international law prohibittorture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. While the intentionalinfliction of severe pain or suffering by someone not a public official is nottechnically “torture” under the Convention against Torture, theconvention nonetheless places obligations on governments to adopt measuresagainst such acts by non-state actors. The Committee against Torture has beenclear that government officials can be complicit in torture and otherill-treatment carried out by non-state actors.Saudi border officials have also been complicit in the abuseof migrants, by apprehending border crossers and turning them over toHaradh-based traffickers. They also frequently shoot at migrants. Migrantsdescribed seeing dead bodies strewn across the desert border region, and aidworkers and officials said the local morgue housed dozens of bodies of migrantsshot on the border.To end the horrific abuses committed against migrants inYemen, the Yemeni government should develop a comprehensive strategy, includingraids, to stop the functioning of torture camps. Officials should work withhumanitarian organizations to provide all migrants freed from captivity withadequate food, shelter, and health care.The government should launch a concerted law enforcementeffort to investigate and prosecute traffickers, as well as members of thesecurity forces, regardless of rank, suspected of collusion with traffickers.Yemen’s attorney general should initially focus on trafficking in andaround the town of Haradh. The police, military, and intelligence agenciesshould take appropriate disciplinary action against personnel implicated intrafficking and assist in the investigations.Parliament should pass the draft anti-trafficking law,pending before parliament, and finalize a draft law on refugees and asylumseekers. Yemen should ratify the UN Trafficking Protocol.International donors to Yemen, including the United States,the European Union and itsmember states, and the Gulf Cooperation Council states,including Saudi Arabia, should call on the Yemeni government to take steps toend the collusion of security forces with traffickers, and ensure that themilitary and police shut down the torture camps once and for all.RecommendationsTo the Ministry of InteriorEnsure that law enforcement agenciesactively investigate and prosecute perpetrators of crimes against migrants andrefugees. Discipline or prosecute as appropriate officials who fail toinvestigate such crimes or are themselves implicated in such abuses.Ensure the protection of survivors of sexualviolence and provide them with medical and psychological support.Strengthen the search-and-rescue capacity ofthe Coast Guard, as well as awareness of migrants’ human rights.Uphold the rights of all migrants,particularly those held in Yemeni detention facilities.During the release or return of migrants totheir home countries, set up functional mechanisms to identify asylum seekersand refugees and grant all individuals claiming asylum access to fair andefficient asylum procedures.To the Ministry of Defense and Office of the AttorneyGeneralInvestigate military and police collusionwith traffickers and discipline or prosecute as appropriate those responsible,regardless of rank.Create safe and secure mechanisms, such astelephone and Internet hotlines, for the general public and governmentofficials to report corruption and other illegal practices.To the Ministries of Justice, Defense and Human RightsCoordinate to develop a comprehensivestrategy, including raids, to stop the functioning of torture camps. Allotenough resources to provide migrants freed from captivity with adequate food,shelter, and health care access until they can be repatriated.To the Criminal Investigation DepartmentMonitor with judicial warrant, cashtransfers from African countries to the town of Haradh through cash transfercompanies with offices in Haradh in order to locate and identify traffickersextorting money from migrants.To the ParliamentRatify the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress andPunish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children.Enact a national anti-trafficking law that is in line withinternational standards, including significant penalties for violators.To the Governments of Saudi Arabia and YemenProsecute appropriately perpetrators ofhuman trafficking, including members of the security forces complicit inabuses.Publicly raise awareness of the gravity ofrights violations against migrants.Improve the capacity of the security forcesand other law enforcement officials to differentiate between smuggling, whichis voluntary, and trafficking, which is not, so they may better protect victimsof trafficking.To the Government of Saudi ArabiaOrder military and other law enforcementoperations in border regions to rescue migrants who are the victims oftrafficking when they encounter them and to arrest their captors when feasible.Order border guards to end any ”shooton sight” policy against migrants at the border that may be in place;appropriately discipline or prosecute those responsible for issuing suchorders.Stop detaining migrants in inhumane anddegrading conditions in deportation centers.Immediately introduce procedures allowingrefugees to seek asylum or other forms of protection.To the Governments of Ethiopia and other Sending Countriesto Yemen and Saudi ArabiaUrge transit and receiving countries toenact and implement laws to protect migrants, regardless of whether their entrywas legal.Launch targeted information campaigns,combining the efforts of governments, donor countries, intergovernmentalorganizations, and nongovernmental organizations to ensure that prospectivemigrants are informed both of the risks of migration and their rights tofreedom of movement, and protection and assistance from officials in eachcountry through which they pass.Closely monitor private employment agencies(PEAs) and hold them responsible for ensuring safe transit to theirdestination. Monitor and prosecute brokers who knowingly send migrants into thehands of traffickers.To Donor CountriesSupport improvements in the way thatnongovernmental organizations can better assist the humanitarian needs ofmigrants in Haradh.Call on Yemeni and Saudi Arabian authoritiesto investigate and prosecute traffickers responsible for the abuses againstmigrants and hold accountable members of state security forces who carry out orfacilitate these abuses.MethodologyThis report is based on field research in Yemen conducted byHuman Rights Watch researchers in and around the town of Haradh, between June2012 and November 2013, and in the capital, Sanaa, between August 2013 andMarch 2014. We interviewed 67 people in total, including 18 male migrants, ofwhom 4 were children at the time of their interview or during their migrationto Yemen. We also interviewed 10 smugglers and traffickers, a person workingwith both traffickers and state security services, 16 local officials, and 3local doctors, as well as human rights activists, local and internationaljournalists, and diplomats. A videographer and a film producer, whom HumanRights Watch hired to work on this project, conducted seven of the interviewswith migrants and one with a trafficker, all in January 2014.Interviews were conducted in Arabic, Afan Oromo, Amharic,French, and English, using interpreters where necessary. Human Rights Watchcarried out follow-up interviews by telephone and email. Human Rights Watch informedinterviewees of the purposes of our research. No payment or other inducementwas offered.Local contacts in Haradh helped identify smugglers andtraffickers based in Haradh and facilitate interviews with them in securelocations in order to protect their identities. In one case, Human Rights Watchconducted a group interview with seven of them, and one-on-one interviews withthree others.Human Rights Watch interviewed the migrants at theInternational Organization for Migration camp in Haradh, and in a Haradhlocation where migrants live while awaiting an opportunity to return home ortravel to Saudi Arabia. While we conducted most interviewees with migrantsindividually, we interviewed some in the presence of others, asking each aboutdifferent incidents. On one occasion, we canvassed a group of about 75Ethiopian migrants living in an open square in Haradh, and they responded toquestions by raising their hands.All of the migrants Human Rights Watch interviewed for thisreport were Ethiopians, and none had sought asylum in Yemen. All18 of the migrants Human Rights Watch interviewed one-on-one said they had beentortured in a trafficker’s camp. The migrants interviewed had beenin Yemen for different periods of time when interviewed, spanning from lessthan one month to 22 months.Human Rights Watch has given pseudonyms to all smugglers,traffickers, others close to the smuggling and trafficking industry, and someworkers at international nongovernmental organizations, to protect those whohelped facilitate this research. All names of migrants interviewed have beenreplaced by pseudonyms to protect their identity.In October 2013, Human Rights Watch met with representativesof the Yemeni Ministry of Interior to inform officials of our initial findingsand request responses to specific questions. This report reflects comments theymade during the meeting. Human Rights Watch sought but was unable to obtainmeetings with officials from the Office of the Attorney General, including theHaradh prosecutor, and the Ministry of Defense.In April 2014, Human Rights Watch wrote to the Ministry ofForeign Affairs and provided a list of questions for the Ministries of Defense,Interior, and Justice. Despite several follow-up requests, however, Human RightsWatch had not received a reply from the Yemeni government by the time thisreport went to print. Any future responses to this report from the Yemenigovernment may be posted on the Yemen page of the Human Rights Watchwebsite: www.hrw.org.Human Rights Watch also reviewed a range of publicmaterials, including reports from nongovernmental organizations and the UnitedNations, media reports, official statements, private ministerial correspondenceshared by government sources, and court documents provided to Human RightsWatch by a judge. The annex, which lists 37 people alleged to have committedcrimes related to trafficking, is derived from seven letterssent by a police official in Haradh to the local prosecution team, aswell as an internal Ministry of Defense letter, all of which were unofficiallyprovided to Human Rights Watch.This report uses the term “torture” in itseveryday sense of the infliction of severe physical or mental pain as a meansof punishment or coercion, not as it is defined in international human rightslaw, except in chapter VI on Yemen’s legal obligations. Torture asdefined in the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or DegradingTreatment or Punishment refers to:“…any act by which severe pain or suffering,whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person for suchpurposes as obtaining from him or a third person information or a confession,punishing him for an act he or a third person has committed or is suspected ofhaving committed, or intimidating or coercing him or a third person, or for anyreason based on discrimination of any kind, when such pain or suffering isinflicted by or at the instigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of apublic official or other person acting in an official capacity.”[1]In this report, those allegedly committing“torture” are private individuals, not public officials or thoseacting on behalf of public officials and the aim is typically for coercion orto obtain information, but not confessions.This report frequently refers to the“trafficking,” as opposed to the “smuggling” ofmigrants. When smugglers in Yemen abuse, capture, and extort money frommigrants, even those who have paid them to transport them to Saudi Arabia, thesmugglers are considered traffickers as defined under international law.I. BackgroundMigration to YemenIn recent years, hundreds of thousands of migrants from theHorn of Africa have flooded into Yemen, some searching for local jobs asdomestic servants or in construction or agriculture, but most hoping to travelon to neighboring Saudi Arabia for employment.[2] Yemen itself is the poorest country inthe Middle East. In 2011, the United Nations reported that 55 percent ofYemen’s population of 24 million was living in poverty.[3] The country’swater supplies are rapidly diminishing and some 13 million people live withoutaccess to safe water or sanitation.[4]Almost 43 percent of children in Yemen are malnourished, and more than 6million people have no access to health care. Conflict has displaced more than300,000 people.[5]Officials said they first saw waves of migrants from theHorn of Africa passing through to Saudi Arabia in the 1970s, as they fled warand insecurity at home.[6]New waves of migrants began passing through in the 1990s, after Ethiopia'spresent government came to power in 1991 and removed restrictions onemigration.[7]Armed conflict in Somalia has pushed over 966,000 refugees into nearbycountries over several decades, including 244,000 who reside in Yemen and whoare automatically granted refugee status, based simply on their nationality.[8] Africansfrom as far away as Nigeria and Niger also pass through Yemen via the Horn enroute to the wealthier countries of the Arabian peninsula.Especially since the 2011 uprising in Yemen, the governmenthas had difficulty asserting control over much of the country, including landand sea borders, which may have encouraged traffickers and spurred migration.In 2010, 53,000 migrants and refugees arrived on Yemen'sshores; this number doubled to 104,000 in 2011, and rose again to 108,000 in2012, only to drop to 65,000 in 2013, according to the Office of the UnitedNations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).[9]Though organizations tracking the numbers cannotdefinitively explain the 2013 drop, which started in July, many aid workerssaid that the likely reason was Saudi Arabia’s 2013 campaign to deportundocumented migrants and tighten border security.[10] In 2014, numbersrose again, according to UNHCR. Between January and March 2014 8,148, migrantsarrived on Yemen’s shores.[11]Click to expand ImageDuring the first half of 2013, a full 83 percent of the65,319 migrants and refugees UNHCR tallied in Yemen were Ethiopian; 17 percentwere Somali, and there were small numbers of Eritreans, Djiboutians, andSudanese—whereas only three years prior, the majority of new arrivalswere Somali.[12]The routes into the country have changed too. Until 2009, most migrants werecoming to Yemen from northeastern Somalia across the Gulf of Aden. Since 2009,the majority have been crossing from Djibouti across the Red Sea. [13]Click to expand ImageAn entire underground economy has grown up aroundtrafficking Africans through the country and over borders and extorting moneyfrom them. Yemeni smugglers and traffickers make large amounts of money movingmigrants through their country. One 2013 study which tracked the cost of theindustry in each of the countries involved estimated that the migranttrafficking industry across the Red Sea from Djibouti to Yemen alone is worthbetween US$11 and $12.5 million.[14]There are major gaps in knowledge about the migrants. Forexample there are no estimates of the number of migrants currently living inYemen who are not refugees—a category that includes the people HumanRights Watch interviewed for this report.[15]The UNHCR numbers are generated from the numbers of peoplethe organization serves in its programs for refugees and asylum seekers, and onfigures from its partners, the Danish Refugee Council and the Society forHumanitarian Solidarity, which conduct daily patrols of the Yemeni coastline.[16]Humanitarian organizations reported registering andassisting 11,308 migrants during 2012 in Haradh, of whom around 9 percent, or1,000, were children.[17]The Regional Mixed Migration Secretariat (RMMS), an independent agency thatsupports other agencies, institutions and forums in the Horn of Africa andYemen to improve the management of protection and assistance response to peoplein mixed migration flows in the region, has documented the presence in Yemen ofunaccompanied Somali and Ethiopian children as young as 9, primarily boys, whosay that they traveled to Yemen because their parents or guardians at homerelied on them to find work and send money back for the family to survive.[18] Africanchildren in Yemen are subjected to similar abuses as adults.Little is also known about the small numbers of women fromthe Horn of Africa who attempt the journey to Saudi Arabia. Of 271 migrants theDanish Refugee Council interviewed before they were repatriated, only five, or1.8 percent, were female. Yet many of the migrants told the researchers thatwhen they crossed the Red Sea to Yemen they remembered traveling withgirls—and no one could say what happened to them.[19] The Danish RefugeeCouncil reported that accounts by some Yemeni and Ethiopian migrants suggestedthat the girls may have been trafficked as virtual domestic slaves to householdsin Saudi Arabia while others were trafficked for sexual exploitation.[20]Ethiopian women interviewed for the same report said that during their journeythrough Djibouti, Somalia, and Yemen, they had been raped.[21] Some Ethiopian womentold an international aid worker who assists migrants on the Yemeni coast thatthey took contraceptive pills before boarding boats to Yemen, because they wereaware of the likelihood of rape on the journey.[22]Emigration from EthiopiaA combination of poverty, repression, and proximity torelatively prosperous labor markets in Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states hasfueled, and continues to fuel, migration from Ethiopia to Yemen.Ethiopia is one of the poorest nations in sub-SaharanAfrica. Average GDP is just US$470 annually, the sixth-lowest globally.[23] Despiterecent macroeconomic gains, extreme poverty pervades the countryside. Jobs arehard to find and pay is low.[24]Jemal Muhammad, 17, who is from the Amhara region ofEthiopia, told Human Rights Watch he came to Yemen alone “because I'mpoor.” His father died and his mother is too old to work, hesaid. “I don’t have income, so that’s why I left.”[25]Ethiopia is also one of Africa’s most repressivenations. The ruling Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary Democratic Frontcame to power in 1991 and severely curtailed access to information and freedomsof expression and association. Officials have shut down most legitimatepolitical avenues for peaceful protest and imprisoned opposition leaders, civilsociety activists, and independent journalists. Those who fail to support thegovernment do not receive state benefits, including access to agriculturalinputs, food aid, employment, and education opportunities.[26]Thegovernment particularly targets those with suspected connections to the outlawedOromo Liberation Front and Ogaden National Liberation Front, which thegovernment considers terrorist organizations.[27] This repressive environment hasresulted in the emigration of thousands, and most of Ethiopia’s neighborshost significant numbers of Ethiopian refugees.Most Ethiopians in Yemen do not register with their embassy.Even those who cite economic rather than political reasons for migrating tellaid organizations that they suspect the Ethiopian authorities are trying tomonitor them. Ethiopia demands the forcible return of Ethiopians who claimrefugee status from some, particularly neighboring, countries. In 2012,Djibouti, Somalia, and Sudan are all known to have returned Ethiopian citizensat the request of the Ethiopian government, but not Yemen.[28]Recognizing the importance of remittances, Ethiopia has inthe past facilitated and encouraged labor migration even as it regulates theindustry to combat abuse and human trafficking.[29] The governmentinvokes anti-trafficking legislation to prosecute recruitment agencies thatwork without official approval.[30]Officials at the Ethiopian Embassy in Sanaa estimated that in 2013, theEthiopian government arrested 180 Ethiopian labor recruiters based in Ethiopia.[31]On October 25, 2013, Ethiopia’s Ministry of ForeignAffairs announced a temporary government ban on citizens traveling abroad foremployment, “in an effort to curb the rising tide of abuse andexploitation.” The ministry, which also indefinitely suspended thelicenses of foreign employment agencies, said it issued the ban because it hadfailed in other efforts “to prevent abuse and even killings of manyEthiopians” traveling abroad for work.[32]The Smugglers’ Town of HaradhAccording to organizations tracking the movements ofmigrants, the majority of Africans passing through Yemen to Saudi Arabia travelthrough Haradh, a town of 94,000 in Hajja governate, 7 kilometers (4 miles)south of the border with Saudi Arabia and 30 kilometers (19 miles) inland fromthe Red Sea coast. In Haradh, a place prone to extreme heat and flash flooding,a government official estimated that at least 80 percent of the local economyis based on smuggling.[33]Humanitarian organizations have estimated that at its peak in late 2012 early2013. Haradh hosted an average of 25,000 migrants hoping to travel to SaudiArabia or return home. The International Organization for Migration (IOM), anintergovernmental organization that works closely with governmental, intergovernmentaland nongovernmental partners to manage migration and aid migrants, in 2012registered 11,298 vulnerable Ethiopian migrants for repatriation at its camp inHaradh, and from January to September 2013, the organization registered 6,228Ethiopian migrants for repatriation.[34]In mid-2013, the number of migrants in Haradh droppedprecipitously for the first time in five years, possibly because of Saudi massdeportations of undocumented migrants and tightened border security. Anofficial from the Yemeni Human Rights Ministry in Haradh estimated that as ofmid-2013, about 25,000 migrants were present.[35] Local officials described throngs ofmigrants at the doors of restaurants during mealtimes in June, waiting forrestaurant staff to give them leftovers.[36] By September 2013, only about 500 to600 migrants remained in town.[37]During January and February 2014, with reduced numbers ofmigrants in Haradh, the IOM had closed its Migrant Response Centre (MRC) to newarrivals except for medical emergencies and vulnerable cases. Though it hadconsidered closing down its provision assistance structures for third countrynationals and shifting all resources to Yemeni returnees, the numbers ofstranded African migrants in Haradh increased tenfold, from 800 in January 2014to a total of 8,000 by March 2014.[38]Regional ContextIn February 2014, Human Rights Watchdocumented serious allegations of torture and abuse of Eritreans in easternSudan and Egypt’s Sinai peninsula between mid-2010 and early 2014.[39]Initially Eritreans travelled voluntarily, withsmugglers, from eastern Sudan through Egypt towards Israel, Human Rights Watchfound. But as of 2011 the smugglers increasingly turned on their clients andabused them to extort tens of thousands of dollars in exchange for the onwardjourney, thereby becoming traffickers. By 2012 large numbers of Eritreans werebeing kidnapped in eastern Sudan and taken against their will to Egypt, wherethey were tortured. In 2013 and early 2014 media and other sources reportedthat , smugglers transporting Eritrean, Somali and Sudanese nationals to andthrough Libya had abused their clients to extort additional money from them.[40]Click to expand ImageMigrants en route to Saudi Arabia along Yemen’sHodaida-Haradh road, May 2013. (C) 2013 Michael Kirby SmithClick to expand ImageEthiopian migrants piling into a pickup truck to work in qatfields near Rada`a, Yemen, June 2013. (C) 2013 Michael Kirby SmithII. The JourneyMost of the migrantsinterviewed by Human Rights Watch were men in their early 20s, though we alsointerviewed boys as young as 12 and men as old as 43. All of them came fromimpoverished rural Ethiopia, the majority from Wollo, an agrarian northeasternprovince with a sizable population of the ethnic Oromo group. Four of thoseinterviewed had been farmers, six were high school students from farmingfamilies, and one was a shepherd.All those interviewed told Human Rights Watch that friendsfrom their villages connected them with brokers who promised, for a fee, toarrange their passage to Saudi Arabia, either by procuring a visa or arranginga smuggling route, usually through a network of smugglers in each country alongthe way.[41]In some cases the fee paid was supposed to include all costs to get to SaudiArabia, and in others just one leg of the trip. Muhammad Awol, 20, a studentfrom Wollo, said a friend introduced him to a local broker whom he paid 1,700 EthiopianBirr ($89) to take him to the town of Gore, in southwest Ethiopia, where hepaid another broker 2,100 Birr ($111) to take him to Yemen.[42] The migrants toldHuman Rights Watch that different smugglers escorted them for successivestretches of the trip. Some paid brokers the exact same amount for the same legof the journey, suggesting coordination between traffickers charging similarrates. Among those who provided Human Rights Watch a figure, the prices paidfor the journey ranged from $315 to $433. Some said they exhausted familysavings or sold their families’ work animals or farms to pay for thepassage.Traffickers and smugglers told Human Rights Watch thatsmuggling networks extend through Djibouti, Somalia, Ethiopia, and SaudiArabia. They said that members of their smuggling and trafficking gangsmaintain phone and text message contact throughout the migrants’ journey.Smugglers and traffickers sell people from one gang to the next, through asyndicate, as the migrants pass from country to country.Journey over LandMigrants described setting out for their journey in a groupwith a guide from landlocked Ethiopia to the port city of Obock, Djibouti. Some made the entire journey on foot, while others hid in containertrucks.Regardless of how they travel, migrantsrisk death. The terrain is arid and hot, and many traveling by foot haveinsufficient food and water, flimsy shoes, and little protection from the sun.People suffer severe dehydration, leading to kidney failure, saidIbrahim Zaidan, a representative of the Human Rights Ministry in Haradh, whoregularly interviews migrants in the hospital soon after they arrive in Yemen.[43].Traveling by vehicle from their homes to the border with Djibouti is alsoperilous. In February 2012 Ethiopian authorities seized acontainer truck filled with 75 Ethiopians near the Djiboutian border; 11 hadsuffocated to death.[44]The migrants Human Rights Watch interviewed entered Djiboutiopenly, at border crossings and over open land, without interference fromofficials.[45]“At the border we passed lots of guards, but no one stopped us,”said Akmel Ibrahim, 30, a farmer from Silte, Ethiopia, who said a smuggler ledhim and a large group of others across the border on foot in September 2012.[46]Voyage over SeaMigrants said that upon reaching Obock, they had to waituntil night to board a boat to ferry them to the Yemeni coast. Those who couldidentify the nationality of the boat crew said they were Yemeni. They reportedas many as seven crewmembers on one boat. The boats each transported from 27 to151 migrants, sometimes including as many as 10 children. One migrant describedthe vessel that in August 2013 took him as a small wooden fishing boat with amotor, crowded with 63 passengers.[47]Some boats transported only men, but on others more than half the passengerswere women. One said he traveled in a convoy of three boats. After a six orseven-hour journey, the boats reached the Yemeni coastline at dawn.The dangers of the sea crossing to Yemen have decreasedsince Human Rights Watch published its 2009 report on refoulement and abuse ofrefugees in Yemen.[48]The Yemeni coast guard has pledged not to intercept boats asthey land, and most boats now approach the shore so that passengers candisembark in shallow water, decreasing the likelihood of drowning.[49]Conditions on the boats themselves seem also to have improved dramatically inrecent years, perhaps because the migrants’ lives now have monetary valueto smugglers who buy and sell them along the route and traffickers who extortransom from them in Yemen. According to Christopher Horwood, coordinator of theRMMS, “There is a direct correlation in the rise of kidnapping andtorture camps and the murder of migrants at sea (and disembarking them in thewater). This is what we emphatically call ‘commoditization ofmigrants’.”[50]From January to October 2013, UNHCHR documented the deathsor disappearances of only five migrants attempting to cross either the Gulf ofAden or the Red Sea, a drop from 2012, when 43 migrants were reported dead ormissing, and 2011, when 131 migrants were reported dead or missing.[51]Only one migrant told Human Rights Watch that he witnessedabuse on the boat to Yemen. In May 2013, Sindew Yimam Idris, a 43-year-oldfarmer from Wollo, said he boarded a boat to cross the Red Sea with 130migrants, including 10 unaccompanied children under age 14.[52] The children weretraveling without their families to seek work in Saudi Arabia, and for noapparent reason the boat crew beat them with wires. “I cried on theboat,” Idris said. “I was crying because I watched.”The boats’ crews illegally transport migrants withoutfear of arrest. One Haradh-based trafficker told Human Rights Watch that as faras he and his colleagues are concerned, there is no functioning coast guard. Hesaid that he currently works with Yemeni boat crews that ferry hundreds ofpeople over the Red Sea every 10 to 15 days. He said he has never seen a Yemenicoast guard ship.[53]The Djiboutian ambassador to Yemen told Human Rights Watch that hiscountry’s coast guard agents usually just report unlicensed boats totheir Yemeni counterparts, and that recently, in June 2013, when the Djiboutiancoast guard tried to intercept a Yemeni ship, the crew opened fire.[54]Only one migrant interviewed by Human Rights Watchencountered the coast guard of any country. Hagos Gebremedihin, 28, from WestTigray, Ethiopia, said that the Djibouti navy stopped his boat full of migrantsin the Red Sea:They took the captain off the boat, leaving us forapproximately an hour and a half alone in rough seas. During that time we werevery stressed. When the navy brought back the captain after an hour and a half,they beat him and demanded hawala [money transferred through an informalsystem]. The captain started calling everywhere [to get money]. The navyeventually took a large container from the boat…. [and] the boat startedmoving again.[55]III. Torture CampsBy 2006, migrants were reporting tohumanitarian workers that traffickers had detained, beaten, and robbed them.[56] Localgangs set up camps in the desert around Haradh as traffickers startedholding migrants and demanding that their victims phone their families back homeor friends already employed in Saudi Arabia to get additional funds to coverthe rest of their trip to Saudi Arabia. Effectively, the traffickers wereholding them hostage and demanding ransom. When migrants refused to comply, orfailed to come up with the money, the traffickers tortured them.In recent years, the scopeand violence of the trafficking abuses against migrants have increased, alongwith traffickers’ revenue. The traffickers have evolved from local thugsto organizers of international networks, employing Ethiopian interpreters andintermediaries to phone migrants’ relatives to extract ransom while theytorture migrants. Some international and local observers say that during theinstability following the 2011 Yemeni uprising, traffickers were able toratchet up their operations, their networks, and their violence.[57]A June 2013 report by theRegional Mixed Migration Secretariat (RMMS) based on interviews conducted bythe Danish Refugee Council found that “the majority” of around 130respondents from the Horn of Africa who had arrived in Yemen between June 2011and January 2013 reported being taken hostage.[58]In September 2013, the RMMS recorded 2,529abductions, 30 incidents of sexual and gender-based violence, 198 shootings,and 273 other physical assaults (including 30 involving women) among migrantsupon their arrival on Yemen’s shores.[59]Among 271 migrant African children the RMMSinterviewed at the Sanaa deportation center for a 2013 report, 234 said armedmen met them when they landed in Yemen, and traffickers took 222 of them toisolated camps in northern Yemen.[60]One middle-aged Yemeni who acts as a paid informant both forlocal traffickers in Haradh and for the Political Security Organization, theYemeni intelligence agency that reports directly to the president, sought toexplain the use of torture as economically necessary to cover the costs oftaking someone north to Haradh. Yemeni traffickers pick up the migrants fromthe shore and pay the boat crews about 500 SAR (US$133) per migrant, he said.[61]Including transportation costs, he estimated it costs about 700 SAR ($187) toget each migrant to his camp in Haradh.[62] He said that once there,“sometimes the trafficker finds out that the migrant has no money….So there is no solution other than to torture the Ethiopian until he getsmoney.”All the migrants Human Rights Watch interviewed for thisreport believed that by the time they boarded the boat to Yemen, they hadalready paid the full cost of their journey to Saudi Arabia.The existence of the traffickers’ camps is commonknowledge among aid and medical workers and government officials in Haradh, thenucleus of the trafficking industry in Yemen. Smugglers and traffickers spokeopenly with Human Rights Watch about the camps and their locations.Journey in Yemen to the CampsAs the boats full of migrants approach the Yemeni shore fromthe Red Sea in the pre-dawn hours, crew members hold migrants on board and onlyallow them to disembark when armed men drive up on trucks, migrants told HumanRights Watch. Sometimes they wait for several hours.[63] All of the migrantswho spoke to Human Rights Watch said that they were met by traffickers –from four to a dozen armed men – as they waded ashore.Two Haradh-based traffickers who make regular once-a-weekcash payments to boat crews, and the government informant, said thattraffickers paid amounts ranging from $133 and $533 per person.[64] Factors such asgender, nationality, and age did not affect the price, though they did notcharge for children under five years old.[65]Land-based traffickers, who sometimes wear police uniformsto help force compliance, tell the migrants that they will have to pay anotherfee if they want to get to Saudi Arabia. The traffickers put those who handover the additional money onto trucks that go straight to the border, and thosewho do not onto different trucks. All those interviewed by Human Rights Watchhad refused to pay the money, and believed that is why they ended up in thetraffickers’ camps.Ali Kebede, 21, the farmer from Wollo, said that he lefthome in September 2013 to seek work because he had to support his youngerbrother and sister. He told Human Rights Watch that on the open sea, he saw aYemeni crew member making calls on his cell phone.[66] As the boat nearedthe shore, eight armed men stood waiting with two pickup trucks. “Theykept pointing their guns at us and yelling to get onto the back of thetrucks,” he said. “One man refused to get on the truck and theybeat him with the butts of their guns. This made all of us afraid.”Sindew Yimam Idris crossed the Red Sea in May 2013 on a boatwith 130 other migrants, including 10 children.[67] When they waded ontoshore in the middle of the night, 12 Yemeni men were waiting, Idris told HumanRights Watch. The man who appeared to be in charge was armed with a pistol, andeight others brandished rifles. The Yemenis forced the migrants to board nineopen-air trucks, separating the children from the adults and forcing them ontoa different truck. “I did not get to see them again,” he added,saying that he worries and wonders about them still.The CampsWhen migrants cannot pay or refuse to pay the traffickers’price, the traffickers drive them to isolated camps, where they demand ransomand threaten and torture them until they call friends or family to procure themoney. According to Haradh-based traffickers and smugglers who spoke with HumanRights Watch, the gangs that pick the migrants up at the shore sell them toother traffickers who run their own independent camps.[68] However the man HumanRights Watch interviewed who works as an informer for both the government andthe traffickers said some traffickers who run camps pick up migrants directlyfrom the shore.[69]None of the migrants interviewed by Human Rights knew whereexactly on the Yemeni shore their boats had landed, or the precise locations ofthe camps where traffickers had held them.All of the migrants interviewed described having beendetained in camps in deserted areas. They said that Yemenis ran the camps,sometimes with guards who were Ethiopian or Eritrean. The camps varied instructure; most of the migrants described being kept in a walled yard with asingle guarded exit, under a tarp hung on posts to provide shelter from thesun. One migrant said traffickers held him in a small house, another said theydetained him in a multi-story building. Kebede described conditions in thewalled compound where traffickers held him in August 2013:The camp was a square area that was totally open, with noshelter. There were concrete walls with four guard towers, one in each corner.There were no buildings in the camp. There were eight guards, who were on dutyat different times, including some Ethiopians. The guards slept in the campwith over 50 of us, but they had created a small shaded area that only theywere allowed to sleep under. The weather was very hot, and there were nobathrooms. We had water tanks in the camp for drinking water, but the guardsonly refilled the tanks every five days. The water would always be finished ina single day and we would have to go four days without water.… The sevenwomen who arrived with us were taken to a separate area of the camp, behind awall. I did not see them again, but I heard women screaming at night and noisesthat sounded like beatings. When we first arrived I saw one man lying on theground bleeding from his back. I could not tell if he was alive or dead.[70]Ibrahim Zaidan, the representative of the Human RightsMinistry in Haradh, who advocates on behalf of migrants, estimated that 90percent of the camps are run by Yemeni landowners.[71]A trafficker who frequently negotiates for ransom withmigrants’ families, told Human Rights Watch that he does not know of asingle camp that is not run by the person who owns the land on which the campis situated, and all the camp owners with whom he deals come from localfamilies.[72]Zaidan and some smugglers and traffickers estimated thatabout 30 trafficking gangs operate in Haradh, with many more in surroundingareas.[73](Other smugglers and traffickers said they were unable to estimate). Over thelast two years there have also been about 30 separate functioning torture campsin and around Haradh, all well-known to the local authorities. Variousofficials identified Haradh as the epicenter of the migrants’ traffickingtrade in Yemen, but no one could estimate the number of camps in other parts ofthe country.[74]A staff member from Medecins Sans Frontières estimated that there may beas many as 200 torture camps in and around Haradh.[75]Al-Osaila (west of the town of Haradh)#+Yahya Abdu Kudaish[76]#*+Ali Saghir Abdu Kudaish#*+Hadi Abdu Hassan Kudaish#+Khabak (nickname) Muhammad Ibrahim*Ahmed Ibrahim Ali JuaididAl-Sharifiyya (north of the town of Haradh,on the way to the border with Saudi Arabia)#+Ali Haj Haradi#+Ali Kuaidan#*+Husain Ali Ahmed AzzamAl-Khodur (northeast of the town of Haradh,on the way to the border with Saudi Arabia)#+Ali Aishan Alsunaidar[77]#*+Muhammad Ibrahim Abdullah OdabiIn Al-Dahel (west of the town of Haradh)#+Khaled Dabos and Ali Hashim[78]In Al-Nijara (northern west of the town ofHaradh)#+Esam al-Jomai and Abdullah al-Jomai[79]Above are the names of 14 individuals who allegedly run 12camps in and around Haradh. A Haradh-based government official provided thenames to Human Rights Watch anonymously; two local traffickers and smugglerscorroborated the names.Those with an asterisk (*) next to their names were arrestedand sent to the Haradh prosecutor’s office but were not subsequentlyprosecuted with regard to crimes committed against migrants. Only one remainedin custody at the time of writing. Those with a plus sign (+) next to theirnames allegedly own the land on which the camps they run are located, accordingto the government official who provided the list, as well as a local trafficker[See Annex I for more details]. Those with a hash sign (#) next to their nameswere on a list identifying local smugglers sent by the Criminal InvestigationDepartment in Sanaa to the administration of Hajja governorate, according to agovernment official who saw the list. The Criminal Investigation Department,within the Ministry of Interior, conducts most criminal investigations andarrests nationwide.Torture and AbuseAll 18 of the migrants Human Rights Watch interviewed forthis report said their captors tortured them to force them to make phone callsto relatives or friends to ask for money. They said that their captors beatthem—using fists, feet, sticks, and cables. Four said their captors tiedthem up by their thumbs with rope. One said he was burned by melted plastic.Another said his captors tied his genitals with a string attached to a fullwater bottle.Hagos Gebremedihin, 28, from a village in the Tigray regionof Ethiopia, said that traffickers took him from the Yemeni shore to afenced-off area next to a house:We had no food, no water; wewere still white from the salty sea water. They started beating us anddemanding money and insulting us…. The women were raped, and the boyswere kicked or raped by Yemenis. They demanded money. If there was someone whosaid he didn't have any money, they tied him up and hit him…. Sometimesthey tied you up by your legs and they hit you. They make you suffer, pouringdrops of melted plastic on your skin. We stayed in the smugglers’ houseone-and-a-half months. It felt like five years.[80]Araya Gebremedihin, 16, from a town in Ethiopia’sTigray region told Human Rights Watch,When we arrived [at the camp], the punisher said,“Welcome to hell.” We were afraid and asked, “What do youmean by that? We want to go to Saudi Arabia. What do you mean by that?”Then we went inside the house. Four Oromo [Ethiopian] people beat us and toldus to line up. They started asking, “Do you have [telephone]numbers?” One guy said yes and one said no. To the one who replied no,they said, “You can't say no. If you say no, you're going to die…Then they came to me and said, “Give me a number.”I said I don't have any friends in Saudi. He said,“Call Ethiopia.” I explained that my father and my mother, they arepoor. He said, “Call!” I called to Ethiopia, to my mother, and Itold her I was caught in Yemen. [I said], “If I work, I will return thismoney, but if I die I can't.” She answered, “I don't havemoney.” She said, “I have only one cow and nobody will buy it. Ifthey hurt you, they hurt you. I can't do anything for you.” The guy askedwhat she said. He also spoke Tigrinya, so I told him what she said. [He got onthe phone and said], “You don't need your boy, what do you mean? He'sgoing to die.” He said like this. “Kill him,” she said.“When you kill him, inform me and I will sit and cry for him.” Thenhe started beating me.[81]Bahiredin Ahmad, a 20-year-old high school student from atown in the Gurage Zone of the Southern Nations, Nationalities and PeoplesRegion (SNNPR) in Ethiopia, who arrived in Yemen in February 2013 told HumanRights Watch:They hung me up by [my] thumbs for four days, sometimes foras long as two hours, then they would give me breaks in between and let medown. ... While I was hanging, they would beat my chest and back with sticksvery hard.[82]After four days, Ahmad said, he finally agreed to call hisfamily, and his relatives agreed to transfer the 2,500 Saudi Arabian Riyals($667) that his captors demanded. “I just could not take the painanymore,” he said.Ahmad said he saw traffickers tie another man’s peniswith string, and beat him with wooden sticks: “That man died before myeyes.”Shikuri Muhammad, a 20-year-old from southernEthiopia, said in December 2012 he spent time in a traffickers’ campwhere he met another man from his home town who refused to pay ransom. Fourguards started by beating the man with sticks, then one took an axe, and hackedat the man’s head with the blade. The man died. “Theguards wanted to make an example out of him, and it worked,” Muhammad said.“After that, almost all of prisoners paid their ransoms.”[83]Muhammad said that another man from the Tigray region hadcalled his family, asking them to send the traffickers money. One day, theguards beat this man, too, with an axe, until he died in front of the othermigrants. “I did not know why,” Muhammad said. Ethiopian guardslater told him the traffickers had arranged for a local broker in Ethiopia togo to the man’s family home in Tigray to collect the money, Muhammad said.When the broker arrived, the police were waiting. They arrested and detainedhim for a few days, but he paid his way out, Muhammad said. When the brokercalled his colleagues in Yemen, they beat the man to death, Muhammad said.[84]Ali Kebede told Human Rights Watch that in August 2013traffickers tortured him about four hours a day for 13 days.[85] Guards hung him fromhis thumbs, beat his legs with sticks, punched him, and burned him by meltingplastic on his left shin, he said. Human Rights Watch observed noticeable scarsthat looked like burn marks on his left shin during an interview a month later.Kebede said he saw guards use other methods on other migrants, includingbeating with cables and burning skin with lighters. Some migrants in the camphad lost eyes and had broken teeth. “From what I was hearing and feeling,I thought I would die in that place,” he said. Since his ordeal, he said,he has had recurring nightmares. “I happened to survive, but othersdidn’t,” he said. “I saw shameful things. No one deserves tosee what I saw.”[86]Jemal Said, 29, a shepherd from Wollo, left his wife andinfant son in August 2013 in order to provide for them with a job in SaudiArabia, but ended up trapped for seven days in a traffickers’ camp.“They would tie my hands behind my back and lay me down on the ground.Then they would beat me with sticks,” Said said, showing scars across hisback. “I saw the guards kick the face of one man who was on the floor,breaking his teeth.” Still Said refused to call his family. “I toldthem I do not have a family.”[87]Some of the men told Human Rights Watch that they had eitherwitnessed the rape of women, or overheard it, or overheard talk of it. AkmelIbrahim, 30, a farmer from Silte arrived in Yemen in late 2012 with about 60others, including seven women. Traffickers transported them all to a huge opencamp with high walls, already housing around 100 migrants. “I watched[the guards] punish the women,” he said, his voice cracking. “Theyraped the women in front of us, it was awful.”[88]Sindew Yimam Idris, a 43-year-old farmer from Wollo, whoarrived in Yemen in May 2013, said that traffickers beat him with sticks andwire cables every few days. A medical examination upon his arrival at theMigrant Response Centre (MRC) revealed three broken ribs. “I have hadtrouble sleeping since then,” he said, almost half a year later, showingscars on his chest and back and saying he still had severe pain. Idris said thesmugglers at the camp kept the women in separate rooms in the house. “Ioverheard them speaking together quietly, talking about being raped,” hesaid.[89]Aid workers, religious leaders, medical staff, and others inHaradh who have close contact with migrants said that they observed signs ofsimilar abuse consistent with stories migrants told them. A humanitarian aidworker with years of experience helping migrants in Haradh told Human RightsWatch that migrants had said that traffickers had ripped off their fingernails,tied them to trees, burned the cartilage of their ears, branded their skin withhot irons, gouged their eyes, melted plastic bottles onto their skin, brokentheir bones, hung them by their thumbs, and tied a full, heavy water bottle tomigrants’ penises. He said he interviewed a number of women who said thetraffickers raped them and then burned their inner thighs with hot irons,leaving visible scars.[90]A local Yemeni religious leader who works with migrants toldHuman Rights Watch he met one man who said his captors hung him suspended byhis arms until his arms were virtually paralyzed, and he was unable even tolift food to his mouth.[91]An aid worker who was present during Yemeni military raids of trafficker campsin May and June 2013 said that he met a migrant who also said his captors hunghim by his arms for long periods, leaving him unable to move his arms. He saidthat he also met between five and eight people whose captors had beaten theirears with shoes, causing them to lose their hearing.[92]Two Yemeni doctors and a nurse at a Haradh medical facilitysaid the most common injuries they saw among migrants were lacerations fromrape, damage to the hands from hanging a person by the thumbs, and burns allover the body from cigarettes and molten plastic. They showed Human RightsWatch the medical files of a case from April 2013 that particularly horrifiedthem. Passersby had found a 25-year-old Ethiopian man unconscious and close todeath on the street next to the MRC. Staff from the IOM brought him to theirmedical facility, where he eventually told doctors that his captors had forcedhim to lie on the ground on his back with heavy weights on his chest andabdomen, for three or four days, until he lost consciousness. The skin on hisback was black and rotten–the doctors said he had developed necrotizingfasciitis, a rare infection of the deeper layers of skin and subcutaneous tissues.They treated him for a month, and transferred him to Sanaa for a skin graft.“I can still smell the rotting skin on his back,” one doctor said.[93]Aid and medical workers and migrants themselvescharacterized torture and other abuse as ubiquitous.A local medical worker told Human RightsWatch about treating more than 1,100 migrants in Haradh over the last fouryears, including those released following the army raids. The aid workerestimated that well over half of these migrants claimed they had been tortured.[94] InSeptember 2013 Human Rights Watch canvassed a group of about 75 migrants whowere living in a public square in Haradh. Seventy-one of them said they hadbeen tortured in Yemen.[95]One aid worker present in Haradh during the raids estimated that the vastmajority of the migrants he encountered in the camps showed signs of torture.[96] Twodoctors and a nurse at the Haradh medical facility estimated that 9 out of 10female migrants they see have been raped, along with 1 in 10 of male patients.[97]Traffickers and smugglers acknowledge the abuse. Nadim, atrafficker who says he also serves as a ransom negotiator between other Yemenitraffickers and migrants’ families in Ethiopia, said that about two yearsago he saw a trafficker tie a migrant’s penis with a rubber band so thathe could not urinate and then force him to eat large quantities of watermelon.Within the last year he saw another trafficker cut off a migrant’s fingerin order to take a ring. He said over the last three years he has also witnessedtraffickers cut off a migrant’s ears, burn a migrant’s skin withhot water, and place a migrant’s hands under the leg of a chair and thensit on the chair.[98]When traffickers in Haradh torture a migrant to a point neardeath, they often drive the person to the wall near the MRC, or to a main road,and dump the body. Sometimes passersby or soldiers find the migrant on the roadand bring them to the MRC.[99]Since 2010, traffickers have dumped at least 10 bodies of migrants who died intheir custody outside the MRC, said the IOM operations manager.[100]Dr. Yahya Ibrahim Jarad, the head doctor at the Haradh hospital, told HumanRights Watch in September 2013 that the hospital received an average of atleast two dead migrants per week. In some periods the average climbs to as manyas three or four dead per week.[101]RansomAmong those who spoke to Human Rights Watch who paid theirway out of the camps, the lowest ransom was about US$200 and the highest morethan US$1,000. Several had to pay ransom twice, after being resold or caught bya second trafficking gang. Nadim, the ransom negotiator, told Human RightsWatch that he usually negotiates a ransom of about US$1,300 each time.[102] Thefamilies of migrants who spoke to Human Rights Watch transferred the money to theircaptors in Yemen using international cash transfer companies with branches inHaradh.Other migrants have reported paying ransom through the hawalasystem, in which brokers in various countries transfer money to one anotherthrough a phone call in a trust-based network. It is especially difficult totrack funds transferred under the hawala system.[103]Ali Kebede told Human Rights Watch that traffickers heencountered in August 2013 offered migrants who had access to hawala networksbetter treatment because they could more easily receive their money:When we entered the camp, the Yemeni guards asked each ofus, “Do you have hawala?” Those who said yes were put on oneside, those who said no, including me, were tied up and beaten. The people whosaid they had hawala already had relatives inside Saudi Arabia.Sometimes the smugglers called their family members to let them hear thepeople’s voices. From what the guards were saying, it seemed like theyhad a contact in every town in Saudi Arabia to collect money.[104]After 13 days in captivity, Kebede said, he escaped withoutmaking any payment. But soon Yemeni soldiers detained him at a checkpoint onthe way to Haradh and sold him to another group of traffickers. Thesetraffickers took him to a second camp, and immediately asked him for hisfamily’s phone number:I gave them my mother’s phone number because Icouldn’t go through the torture again. The money took some time to arriveand they kept beating me even though the money was on the way. Later mymother told me that a man from Saudi Arabia had called her. He had instructedher how to give the money to someone who would come to her village to pick itup. She had no idea that he was a trafficker at that time. He told her,“I know your son and want to help him, he has been taken by smugglers andneeds money to get out.” He pretended to be a friend.[105]Nadim described his role as a ransom negotiator to HumanRights Watch:My friends who are traffickers in Haradh sometimes areholding migrants who are refusing to get their family to pay the ransom to freethem, or their family is refusing to pay. In those cases my friends sometimescall me and I call family members who are easy to reach, either because theyare based in Saudi Arabia or even in Yemen, or maybe I know someone from theirvillage back home. I convince the family that I am trying to help theirrelative and have their best interests at heart. After I convince them then Inegotiate the price between them and the traffickers. This is how I get paid.[106]Traffickers used mobile phones to call Africa and SaudiArabia to arrange money transfers, purchasing the SIM cards from local stores.[107]The practice has become so widely known that an employee at a Haradh outlet ofMTN, one of Yemen’s biggest mobile phone companies, said that when acustomer returns to his store soon after a purchase to buy a second SIM card,he refuses, to avoid complicity in the abuse of migrants.[108]The period hostages spent in captivity varied; those whospoke to Human Rights Watch were held from two days to one month before beingreleased, with or without paying ransom.IV. After the CampsOnce traffickers receive the ransom money, they may freetheir hostages, smuggle them into Saudi Arabia as originally promised, orresell them to other traffickers who restart the process of extortion andtorture. One migrant told Human Rights Watch that traffickers resold himdirectly to another group of traffickers, while others said they were laterrecaptured, often with the involvement of officials at government checkpoints.Several migrants said that traffickers released them once it became clear that theywould not receive a ransom.An Ethiopian migrant named Hagos Gebremedihin said he ranall night after his captors released him around 2:30 a.m. one morning.“It was sandy and extremely hot. My leg was wounded and my knees wereshaking; my body was very tired. I felt like I was unconscious, like an animalmoving by instinct.[109]Many migrants have sought refuge in the Migrant ResponseCentre (MRC) run by the IOM in Haradh. The camp is comprised of two open areasenclosed by brick walls. In the middle of one is a makeshift tent of a tarp onposts to provide shelter from the sun. This is where the migrants sleep, eat,and spend their days as they wait to be deported back to their home countries.In the corners of both compounds there are white metal shipping containersserving as offices, medical clinics, and bedrooms for the more vulnerablemigrants. On the days that Human Rights Watch visited the camp, at least 30 menwere lying under the tarp, or huddled in small groups out in the sun. The twowomen migrants in the camp were inside one of the sweltering containers, onenursing a three-month-old baby.Others found themselves in limbo in a dusty open square inthe town of Haradh, opposite a row of small hotels that traffickers andsmugglers are known to use for business meetings.[110] In the square thereare piles of old mattresses, remnants of cooking fires and, in one corner, ashipping container raised one meter off the ground, on stilts. During the day,when they could not find work, men napped under this container. They installedmakeshift curtains around the rim to limit dust.Fuad Hassan Shikuri, 25, told a researcher from Human RightsWatch in September 2013 that he had been living for eight months in the squarein Haradh after escaping torture in a traffickers’ camp. During the day,he said, he tried to find food and work in town, in construction or other oddjobs. At night, Shikuri and others slept huddled together in this square, nearthe container. He said they protected themselves from recapture with theirnumbers and their ferocity:Around six months ago a group of four armed traffickerscame two times in a car. They rolled down the window the first time andscreamed bad words at one of my friends, so we threw everything we could findat them. They drove away. Then they came a second time and we threw thingsagain. We damaged the car the second time and it could barely drive away. Afterthis the traffickers have not come back.[111]He said that because traffickers had held and tortured himand his companions and extorted fees multiple times, the traffickers knew theywere unlikely to get any more money out of them. He and his friends wereregistered at the MRC and waiting to go home, he said, but chose not to live atthe center, which he described as crowded and smelly.RecaptureSeveral migrants who spoke to Human Rights Watch wererecaptured by a new group of traffickers shortly after they escaped a firstgroup. After a week in captivity in May 2013, Sindew Yimam Idris, the farmerfrom Wollo, escaped from a traffickers’ camp with three other Africansduring a police raid, he told Human Rights Watch. They walked for nine days,picking up two other men as they traveled. Outside a restaurant in the city ofHodaida, a waiter came and offered them breakfast. “While we were eating,some men came from behind, grabbed us, and forced us into trucks,” Idrissaid. “Some people on the streets saw all of this happen, but theydidn’t help us.” This new group of traffickers took the men toanother camp. “These guards did not beat us, but they tied our arms andlegs together for the entire time, even when we were eating.” After amonth and a half, the traffickers released Idris and his group, who walked forseven days, avoiding main roads and checkpoints, to reach the MRC.[112]Jemal Said, 29, told Human Rights Watch that in August 2013the traffickers holding him captive in a camp gave up after a week and tradedhim and two others to other traffickers who picked them up and took them to asecond camp, four hours away. There armed guards beat him with sticks, againdemanding that he call his family to ask for money.[113]Those migrants stopped at Yemeni checkpoints operated bycorrupt soldiers or policemen may be detained until they are sold totraffickers. (See “Migrants’ Stories of Corrupt CheckpointOfficials.”)Return to EthiopiaDuring registration at the MRC in Haradh, intake staff askmigrants if they want to return home or not. If they want to return home, theIOM contacts their embassy in order to procure paperwork proving their identityand nationality that then allows them to board a plane home. From January 2010to November 2013, the IOM repatriated around 17,000 Ethiopian migrants fromYemen, 10,547 of whom had registered at the MRC in Haradh. An IOM official estimatedthat the organization only registers 10 percent of the migrants who passthrough Yemen.[114]The Ethiopian embassy in Sanaa provides assistance toEthiopian migrants who agree to voluntary repatriation through the IOM. Manywho left Ethiopia illegally do not have passports or other necessary documentsto return, and would otherwise have to pay more money to smugglers to escortthem home illegally.[115]Funding for helping economic migrants to return home is nota donor priority, and it can fluctuate yearly, according to the Regional MixedMigration Secretariat (RMMS).[116]The IOM assisted in repatriating more than 7,000 Ethiopian migrants in 2011;2,800 Ethiopian migrants in 2012; and 8,000 Ethiopians between January andSeptember 2013.[117]A 2013 RMMS study found that the governments of Yemen andEthiopia appeared to be cooperating and using military transport aircraft toenable the return of migrants in mass deportations without adequately screeningEthiopian migrants in order to see whether they could seek asylum and remain inYemen.[118]V. Role of the Yemeni GovernmentPayoffs and ComplicityCorruption is rampant in Yemen. Transparency Internationalranked the country 167 out of 175 countries in 2013, with the 175thbeing the most corrupt.[119]Human Rights Watch has documented attacks on Yemeni journalists who publishallegations of government corruption.[120]Human Rights Watch’s interviews indicate thatgovernment officials in Haradh often accept payments to turn a blind eye totraffickers’ activities, or otherwise assist their operations. Along-time aid worker told Human Rights Watch that many traffickers arewell-known locally and that when aid groups report crimes against abusedmigrants to the police, officers rarely investigate in any way. “Everyonehere has participated in this industry,” the aid worker said. “Theyare all complicit.”[121]Smugglers and traffickers told Human Rights Watch that whentransporting migrants to the Saudi border they generally avoid Yemenigovernment checkpoints, unless they have a working relationship with theofficials there.Where there is no other route, and they have norelationship with the officials on duty, they let the migrants out of theirvehicle so they can walk through the checkpoint, and they pick them up on theother side.[122]Officials manning checkpoints who are not corrupt do not stop migrants on foot.[123]Each smuggler or trafficker has his own preferred routes totraverse the checkpoints between Haradh and the border. Smugglers told HumanRights Watch the going rates at checkpoints around Haradh on their usual route.They pay a flat fee of 500 YER (US$2) per car at two of the three checkpointswhen smuggling Yemenis. When trafficking Ethiopians or other Africans, they paya flat fee of 100 Saudi Arabian Riyals (US$27) per car at all three checkpointsif they notify the checkpoint in advance, and 500 SAR (US$133) if they do not.[124]The flat fee gives them an incentive to pack as many people as possible intothe car each time.The trafficker Nadim said he uses two main routes to theborder in the desert just north of Haradh, one with nine checkpoints, the otherwith six. The checkpoints are staffed by a combination of officials from theYemeni Military Police, the Border Guard, and General Security. Nadim said thatwhen he is smuggling Yemenis he may not need to pay at any of the checkpoints,because in a region where families and tribes are split by the border,officials allow Yemenis into Saudi Arabia to work. When smuggling Africanmigrants, he pays 200 SAR (US$53) per car at each checkpoint on thenine-checkpoint road, and more per checkpoint on the six-checkpoint road.[125]In a joint meeting with Haradh officials, the representativeof the Criminal Investigation Department, Musleh al-Ghazi, told Human RightsWatch that his department had opened no cases against military or securityofficials for complicity in smuggling and trafficking. He said that despiterumors of complicity, particularly at checkpoints, the department would onlyinvestigate allegations if officials received a specific complaint. When askedhow often the department received complaints from migrants, he said“never.”[126]However, two international aid workers said they frequently registeredcomplaints with his department.[127]Corruption by Checkpoint Officials aroundHaradhMigrants told Human Rights Watch they witnessed collusionbetween checkpoint officials and traffickers who run camps. One said that inAugust 2013 he passed through multiple checkpoints while being escorted bytraffickers and expected to get some help from officers at checkpoints. But, hesaid, he got nothing. “The soldiers saw us,” said 20-year-oldMuhammad Awol, “but they didn’t ask any questions, they just let uspass.” Others said that they walked through checkpoints where guardsstopped them, searched their pockets, and took whatever money–US$20 orUS$30–they had left. Some migrants told Human Rights Watch thatcheckpoint guards detained them, robbed them, and turned them over totraffickers. They said they saw traffickers pay the guards directly.[128]The collusion of checkpoint officials with traffickers poses a particularhazard for migrants, as checkpoints are difficult to avoid when travelingaround Haradh.Bahiredin Ahmad, the 20-year-old from Silte in Ethiopia,crossed the Red Sea from Djibouti to enter Yemen in February 2013 with 150others. The migrants found armed men waiting to load them into three trucks,which drove them through several checkpoints. His truck stopped a few hundredmeters before the second-to-last checkpoint before the town of Haradh, and thesmugglers told the migrants to get out, Ahmad said. “They pushed us inthe direction of the checkpoint and told us to walk right through.” Sixsoldiers searched the migrants one by one. The soldiers took their money, Ahmadsaid: 4,000 YER (US$19) that he had been carrying in his pocket since Djibouti,and 9,000 YER (US$42) from another man in the group. One man put his fists inhis pockets so the soldiers could not search him. “But then two soldiersbeat him very badly, each with a dulla[a wooden stick]. Hestarted crying in pain.”[129]After the theft, the traffickers picked them up on the other side of thecheckpoint, and drove them to their torture camp.Siraj Bedru, a 23-year-old social sciences student from Silte,was released from a traffickers’ camp in August 2013, and walked northtoward Haradh, picking up other migrants as he traveled, until they formed agroup of eight.[130]Two days into their journey, they arrived at a checkpoint where five soldiersand two men in civilian clothes approached Bedru and his two companions. Hesaid:The soldiers started discussing with the men whether themen could take us away. Three of the soldiers seemed to be taking the side ofthe men. The other two soldiers were arguing back and shaking their heads.After some arguing, the two soldiers made the other soldiers let go of our armsand pushed us away, signaling that we should go, but the men looked very angry.We started running and did not look back.[131]In March 2013, Redwan Kadir, a 20-year-old farmer fromSilte, escaped after eight days in a traffickers’ camp and walked with agroup of migrants toward Haradh. When he and three others arrived at thenext-to-last checkpoint on the road to Haradh, two soldiers asked to see theirIDs and searched their pockets, taking 6,000 Yemeni Riyals ($28) fromKadir’s pocket, he said. Then they made a phone call, and he overheardthem saying into the phone, “Come!” The two officials keptKadir’s group at the checkpoint for five minutes until eight armedtraffickers arrived in a Hilux truck. “They pulled out their guns andstarted pushing us to into the truck with the help of the officers,”Kadir said. “I was resisting and pushing back, and was able to break freefrom the soldier who was holding me, and I ran as fast as I could.” Theother three did not escape, he said.[132]Sisay Mengesha, 18, left the Oromia region of Ethiopia andtraveled unaccompanied to Yemen.He said he sold his ox to pay forhis passage to Saudi Arabia, and then his mother sold the family’s farmto send 20,000 Ethiopian Birr (US$1,040) to secure his release from traffickerswho held him hostage. His family had nothing left, he said. Yet after escapingcaptivity, he walked to a checkpoint, where soldiers handcuffed him and phoneda new group of traffickers to pick him up. At the new camp, he said,traffickers tortured him so badly that “now when I am sleeping liquidsdrip out of my ear and I see it on my pillow.”[133]Ali Kebede and a friend escaped a traffickers’ camp inAugust 2013 and walked for seven days before officials at a checkpoint on theroad from Hodaida to Haradh detained them. “Two soldiers signaled us overand asked us to sit down,” Kebede told Human Rights Watch. “Theybrought us bread and tea. One soldier walked away from us and made a phonecall. Then he came back and said, ‘A car is coming to take you to Haradh,so have a rest and take your time.’” Not long afterward, two mendrove up in a car. Kebede said he saw the soldiers shake hands with the driverand heard them talk about hawala. The soldiers pushed them into the car,and he saw the soldier reach in through the window to accept Saudi Riyal billsfrom the driver. After a 20-minute drive down a dirt road, Kebede and hiscompanion had arrived at another traffickers’ camp.[134]Shikuri Muhammad said he walked north with a group of nineother Ethiopian migrants heading toward the Saudi border, until they arrived onthe coastal road from Hodaida to Haradh, and noticed a Toyota Hilux pickupdriving slowly behind them. They stepped onto the shoulder of the road andthrew rocks at the truck.[135]The truck disappeared for about 15 minutes, until Muhammad’s grouparrived at a checkpoint. A road sign indicated they were 187 kilometers outsideof Haradh, he said. Four soldiers searched their pockets, saying they werelooking for hashish, but instead they took 7,000 Yemeni Riyals (US$33) fromMuhammad’s pocket.“They told us to get into the same Hilux truck thathad been following us before, which had pulled up behind us at thecheckpoint,” Muhammad said. The men first refused, but the soldiers hitthem with the butts of their guns, and they got in. The truck drove throughseven checkpoints and Muhammad saw the driver give officials cash at three ofthe checkpoints. As the car slowed down at the last checkpoint before Haradh,Muhammad and six others escaped. An officer at the checkpoint who witnessed theescape told Muhammad and his group that they were at risk of another kidnappingand that his colleagues would take them to the MRC. The Ethiopians got into amarked police vehicle, but the officer drove them not to safety—but toyet another traffickers’ camp in the desert, Muhammad said.Officials Allegedly Selling Migrants to TraffickersMilitary and security agents working at governmentcheckpoints unlawfully make money by facilitating trafficking of migrants. Somemigrants told Human Rights Watch that officials at government checkpoints heldthem and then turned them over to traffickers in exchange for money. Theseallegations were corroborated by smugglers and traffickers who said thatofficials at checkpoints in and around Haradh routinely hold and sell migrantsto traffickers, and they provided information on locations where officials didthis. A government official who wished to remain anonymous said that he hasseen officials at all the checkpoints listed below sell migrants totraffickers. The list was corroborated by all the smugglers and traffickersinterviewed.[136]Map: Government Checkpoints Allegedly“Selling” Migrants to TraffickersClick to expand ImageName, LocationDistance from HaradhResponsibleAuthorityExit of Hodaida+, Hodaida187 km (116 miles)General Security, Ministry ofInteriorAl-Hizr, al-Qanaws, Hodaida140 km (87 miles)General Security, Ministry ofInteriorAl-Kubri, Mur Valley, Hodaida101 km (63 miles)Military Police, Ministry ofDefenseShafar, Hajja48 km (30 miles)General Security, Ministry ofInteriorBani Hasan al-Raboa’a,Hajja24 km (15 miles)Ground Forces, Fifth (Western)Military Region, Ministry of DefenseHairan, Hajja15 km (9 miles)General Security, Ministry ofInteriorAl-Kers+, Hajja14 km (9 miles)Ground Forces, Fifth (Western)Military Region, Ministry of DefenseHaradh, Hajja8 km (5 miles)Political Security Organization,Ministry of InteriorMuthalath al-Majbar,International RoadMarker unclearSpecial Security Forces(previously Central Security Organization), Ministry of InteriorAl-Majbar Area, in a side roadtoward the borderMarker unclearBorder Guard, Ministry of DefenseThe “+” sign indicates checkpoints where migrantsinterviewed for this report reported that officials sold them to traffickers.Hierarchy of Corruption in HaradhHaradh’s human trafficking industry is able tofunction without interruption because of official corruption at various levelsof Yemen’s military and civilian governmental bodies. All the traffickersand smugglers interviewed described to Human Rights Watch the ease with whichthey could pay off poorly paid, low-ranking policemen, security forces andsoldiers at checkpoints. But they say that they also bribe higher-rankingofficials in Haradh’s General Security, the police force, the CriminalInvestigations Department, and the Central Security Organization, aparamilitary force controlled by the Interior Ministry. Only the Haradh towncouncil is uninvolved in trafficking, according to the smugglers andtraffickers interviewed.[137]One officer in the military’s Border Guardacknowledged to Human Rights Watch that smugglers and traffickers pay him andother military officials to look the other way when they transport peopleacross the border or encounter them in their camps. He said that some officialscooperate even more closely with smugglers and traffickers.[138] The Danish RefugeeCouncil cited an article that quoted a border guard saying that he madeUS$20,000 a month facilitating trafficking between Yemen and Saudi Arabia.[139]Government sources, international aid workers, and diplomatswho preferred to remain anonymous gave Human Rights Watch the names of several high-level officials who they believe to be involved in humantrafficking, including by ensuring no interference of state forces in crackingdown on the industry.There is no evidence that the Ministry of Interior has takenserious action to investigate or prosecute government officials at any levelimplicated in the trafficking industry. Interior Ministry officials who spoketo Human Rights Watch were unable to provide any information on whetherdisciplinary or legal action had been taken against officials for collaboratingwith traffickers and smugglers. One said that if Human Rights Watch couldprovide names of officials they could begin investigations.[140]The US State Department, in its Yemen chapter in the 2013 Traffickingin Persons Report, concluded that officials had not been held accountablefor their role in trafficking:The government did not report efforts to investigate orpunish government employees complicit in trafficking-related offenses despiteallegations that local government and security officials willfully ignoredtrafficking crimes taking place in their areas of responsibility.... Thegovernment did not fund anti-trafficking public awareness or educationcampaigns, and it made no progress implementing its 2008 national action planon trafficking.[141]RaidsVarious Yemeni government agencies have carried out sporadicand limited raids on Haradh-area traffickers’ camps in recent years, butwere unwilling to provide information on them to Human Rights Watch. Accordingto the Danish Refugee Council, a series of raids between January 2011and February 2012 resulted in the freeing of 170 migrants, including 10 womenand 50 children.[142]The raids followed media attention about abuses in traffickers’ camps.Raids on two camps, by the military and police, took place in March 2012.Officials in Haradh told Human Rights Watch they feared that local policeofficers might have compromised the second raid by warning smugglers inadvance.[143]Sheikh Hamood Haidar, deputy director of the local councilin Haradh, said that in early 2013 he organized one raid in which the smugglersfired shots that wounded one of his officers and damaged a vehicle.[144]In March 2013, the Yemeni Ministries of Defense and Interior jointly launched aseries of raids on camps around Haradh. The Ministry of Defense took the lead,and observers suggested this may have been out of concern that localauthorities were too closely connected to trafficking to be effective.[145]Ali Yaslam, head of operations of the Second Brigade BorderGuard and the coordinator of the 2013 raids, said officers of the Border Guard,General Security, and Central Security carried out raids for three full months,from March to May 2013. They raided three to four different camps per day, hesaid, but the camps returned to operation so quickly that soldiers oftenreturned to a camp three or four days after a raid to raid it again. Heestimates that the Border Guard raided a total of around 50 to 55 differentcamps.[146]The Border Guard says it released more than 7,000 migrantsduring the raids, though the Ministry of Interior disputes this number asinflated.[147]Ibrahim Zaidan, the Human Rights Ministry representative in Haradh, provided amore modest figure of about 3,000.[148]No one disputes that most of the migrants in the camps had endured physicalabuse, including torture, while in the traffickers’ custody. MedecinsSans Frontieres, which provided health care to the migrants upon their release,said that some of them had their nails pulled off or theirtongues partially cut off; others had been severely beaten or showed signs ofsexual abuse.[149]In some cases, soldiers arrived at a camp only to find itabandoned, because officials had warned traffickers, according to thetraffickers and two government sources interviewed.[150] One night in May2013, Sindew Yimam Idris told Human Rights Watch, guards at atraffickers’ camp woke him up. “They said we had to move becausepolice were coming,” he said. Idris and two others ran, and the guardsshot after them, but they escaped.[151]A local official present during the raids said he believedofficials arrested only the “bad” smugglers who did not pay off thegovernment, but not the “good” ones who made their payments and, inreturn, received early warnings of raids.[152] He said they choose the officials topay off based on which forces are closest to their camps. “They have awell-connected network, which they maintain by paying the authorities,including people within the police, military, and security forces,” hesaid. “If a smuggler gets a call, he leaves.” In some cases theowner of the property disappeared, leaving the African guards to be arrested inhis stead.[153]Secrecy surrounding the raids may have prevented officialsfrom preparing sufficiently to take custody of large numbers of abusedmigrants. An aid worker told Human Rights Watch that the military notified noone, not even local humanitarian organizations, before carrying out the raids.[154]Ahmed Shedaiwah, the head of Haradh’s local council, and other governmentofficials, said that officers took the migrants to a military camp at al-Tuwalborder crossing—where some aid workers said there was no food, water, orshelter—before sending some of them on to Amran and Sanaa.[155]The IOM stated in April 2013, partway through the raids,that officials held a total of 1,163 migrants, including 121women and girls at a detention facility run by the Immigration Passport andNaturalization Authority in Sanaa, and another 535 migrants, including 90 womenand girls, at the Amran Central Prison.[156] Women and girls weresegregated from the men. Prior to the raids both holding facilities werealready filled beyond their maximum capacity.[157]Officials took Somali migrants fromtraffickers’ camps to the Kharaz refugee camp. Eventually the IOMcoordinated the repatriation of around 500 Ethiopians released during theraids, two-thirds of them unaccompanied children.[158]Border Guard head of operations Yaslam said that duringraids government officials would bring into custody all traffickers andproperty owners they found at the site for possible transfer to the custody ofthe Criminal Investigation Department. If a migrant alleged being mistreated bya trafficker, an officer would bring the migrant together with the suspect toattempt a “reconciliation”; if the former forgave or accepted compensationfrom the trafficker, officials would not pursue a prosecution for mistreatment.Only if the migrant refused to forgive did officials seek prosecution by theCriminal Investigation Department for abuse.[159]Failure to Prosecute TraffickersMilitary officials who spoke to Human Rights Watch would notdivulge the number of traffickers apprehended at the camps, or the number ofcases they sent to prosecution. Sheikh Hamood Haidar, the deputy director ofthe Haradh Local Council, said that following the 2013 raids, between 14 and 20traffickers were sent for prosecution.Under Yemen’s criminal procedure law, when armedforces personnel apprehend a trafficker, they are to transfer him to thecustody of the Criminal Investigation Department.[160] The department has24 hours to carry out an initial investigation before transferring the file tothe public prosecutor. That time period is often exceeded, said Muhammad Abdal-Aleem al-Sururi, a judge at the Hajja Criminal Court, which sees most of thetrafficking cases from Haradh.[161]The prosecutor then has a week to set a hearing, interrogate the detainee, andfollow-up on the initial investigation before the prosecutor must present thecase before a judge or release the suspect.[162]Musleh al-Ghazi, the representative of the CriminalInvestigation Department, told Human Rights Watch that his office has opened 12cases against groups of alleged traffickers including two murder cases, onerape, and eight for deprivation of free movement under article 246 of Yemen'sPenal Code.[163]The defendants were 39 Yemenis, 4 Ethiopians, and 2 Somalis whose names hewould not furnish.[164]Nor would he or other officials discuss the outcomes of these cases or theircurrent status.Walid, a border guard, said some traffickers (with whom hecontinues to cooperate) had been charged and faced prosecution both before andafter the raids. But he said they were able to pay off an official to bereleased, so their cases never ended up in court.[165]Judge Abu-Oraij, who presides over Haradh Court, which trieslocal cases where the charge carries a sentence of less than three years’imprisonment, told Human Rights Watch that officials had brought no casesbefore him relating to the raids.[166]His court had a single case related to abuse against migrants, of an allegedtrafficker facing charges for torturing migrants at a camp, from December 2012.The prosecutor charged and detained a Yemeni man for restricting the right offree movement of 7 Sudanese and 13 Ethiopian migrants, and then released him onbail. When the court convened in May 2013 to examine the case, the defendantfailed to appear. The prosecution had failed to deliver to the defendant thewritten notification of the hearing date. This happened again at the second hearingin September. “Perhaps the prosecution is not trying,” the judgesaid. “And the court cannot order the defendant to court by force, it isthe job of the prosecution to notify him and bring him here.”Cases in which the charge carries a sentence of three yearsor more go to the Criminal Court, which is located in Hajja governorate. JudgeAbu-Oraij was not sure why his court had only a single case pending:“There are no difficulties in processing these cases…if they reachme.” He told Human Rights Watch that he did not believe the governmentwas doing enough to stop the smuggling and trafficking.[167]The criminal court in Hajja provided Human Rights Watch therecords of nine cases, brought against a total of 20 defendants, related tooffenses against migrants, six from 2013 and one each from 2010, 2011, and2012. Six of the cases involve charges for restricting free movement, one isfor attempted murder, one is for murder, and one is for illegal entry intoYemen and rape. Eleven of the defendants are Yemeni and nine are Ethiopian. Thecourt could not provide Human Rights Watch with any details on the whereaboutsof the defendants or progress on any of the cases, other than that they hadbeen opened. Judge Muhammad Abd al-Aleem al-Sururi of the Hajja Criminal Courtsaid that there was an additional trafficking case involving several Ethiopiandefendants charged for beating another Ethiopian to death; they were acquittedon January 15, 2014, for lack of evidence.[168]One Yemeni official involved in the 2013 raids privatelyraised his concerns with superiors about the failure to prosecute traffickers.Ali Omar Said, Commander of the Second Brigade Border Guards, wrote an internalletter to the Ministry of Defense on November 22, 2013, later shared by aperson who wished to remain anonymous with Human Rights Watch, in which Saiddenied to his superiors accusations that six of his soldiers killed a femaleAfrican migrant at a checkpoint.[169]In the same letter, he refers to the success of the raids earlier in the year,and states that his forces detained 36 traffickers and owners of torture camps,but nothing came of the arrests:The prosecution did not do its job in holding the criminalsaccountable and they did not cooperate with the security and military bodies eventhough they knew of serious crimes committed against migrants by smugglers andcamp-owners…. They were meant to do their job and hold these criminalsaccountable instead of covering up their crimes. During the raids, a number ofsoldiers were killed and wounded by the smugglers and the camp owners…allof that was ignored by the prosecution and instead they acquitted the criminalsand became de facto protectors of the smuggling gangs. Not only did theprosecution release those accused of serious crimes, they also released [28]drug smugglers who we detained…they were released by Haradh prosecutorAhmed Jibreel.[170]Officials at the Ethiopian Embassy in Sanaa said they hadvisited Hajja Central Prison and found 10 Ethiopians serving prison sentencesfor crimes related to the operation of traffickers’ camps, but they didnot know whether they had been captured during the raids. They explained thattheir nationals usually serve a few months of their prison sentence and thenthe authorities release them and allow the IOM to repatriate them. They do notserve any more time upon their return to Ethiopia.[171]It is not clear to what extent the prosecutors make anyeffort to bring successful prosecutions against alleged traffickers. Forinstance, doctors at a Haradh medical facility, which receives about 10 to 15victims of torture per month, told Human Rights Watch that authorities havenever once contacted them to request medical reports as evidence of torture fora judicial process.[172]An international aid worker dealing with sexual violencecases concluded that the authorities were unwilling to prosecute Yemenis forcrimes against African migrants:For the year I have beenworking with victims, I have not seen a single successful case brought by amigrant who was a victim of sexual violence. Sometimes this is because they arein areas where no hospital is willing or able to provide a medical certificate.But more often it is because of the nationality of the victim. When it comes tonon-Yemeni victims, the government does not care. And when the perpetrator isYemeni nothing will ever be done by way of justice. There is a high degree ofdiscrimination. It exists already at the police level—the police will notintervene to arrest the perpetrator. Or if they do, it is after they ask formoney as a bribe. Every case I have seen where the police did intervene,someone had to pay them a bribe.[173]After the RaidsBy June 2013, officials had freed thousands of captivemigrants from the camps, the registered 1,987 of them for repatriation, and theraids stopped.[174]Border Guard senior officer Yaslam, who coordinated the raids,acknowledged that the camps his soldiers raided quickly began functioningagain, but says senior Ministry of Defense officials in Sanaa ordered him tocease conducting raids because authorities had insufficient food and shelter toprovide for the large number of freed migrants.[175] Other governmentofficials provided this same explanation for ending the raids. Ahmed Shedaiwah,the head of the Haradh Local Council, told Human Rights Watch, “In ourview, we have solved the problem as best we can.”[176]Ministry of Interior officials conceded to Human RightsWatch that the raids were not part of any broader policy to address the abuses,and there were no current plans to restart the raids.[177] They said that thegovernment lacked the resources to develop a long-term strategy. None suggestedcontinuing the raids while partnering with humanitarian agencies to address theneeds of those released.[178]VI. Role of the Saudi GovernmentSaudi labor authorities in 2011 passed new Nitaqatregulations, a program that aims to boost employment for Saudi citizens. Thenew regulations set specific quotas for employment of Saudi citizens in privatefirms based on the company’s business sector and size.[179] In addition, Saudipolice and labor authorities in early 2013 launched a vigorous campaign toarrest and deport foreign workers found in violation of labor laws, targetingworkers who did not have valid residency or work permits, or those foundworking for an employer other than their legal sponsor. Authorities suspendedthe campaign in April 2013 following King Abdullah’s declaration of alimited “grace period” for workers to correct their status, butresumed it in November.[180]In addition, Saudi Arabia accelerated work on high-tech improvements for itsfence along its border with Yemen in an effort to stem illegal crossings.Migrants’ sudden difficulties getting into and stayingin Saudi Arabia may have led fewer migrants to embark on the journey fromEthiopia. But trafficking and smuggling of migrants still takes place acrossthe border between Saudi Arabia and Yemen with the apparent complicity of Saudiborder guards.After extorting money from migrants in their torture camps, sometraffickers then escort them into Saudi Arabia. A group of smugglers who metwith Human Rights Watch said that traffickers breach the border fence, whichSaudi media has reported includes night lighting and thermal cameras, bysnipping holes in the fence along the ground.[181] Then they bribeSaudi border guards with qat (a chewed stimulant ubiquitous in Yemen butbanned in Saudi Arabia) or wine; when guards suspect the fence has beenbreached, they wait by the opening in the fence to exact payment.[182]They also pay Saudi border guards stationed at one of five to seven gates inthe fence near Haradh to open the gate and allow the traffickers to walkthrough with African and Yemeni migrants.[183] Once a smuggler clips the fence, thehole usually remains open for a week to 10 days before Saudi security personnelrepair it.[184]Traffickers and smugglers told Human Rights Watch they hadarrangements with Saudi border guards to ensure they could cross the borderinto Saudi Arabia. Those who bring across Yemeni migrants and illegal qatsaid that they used two crossing points, one far from the nearest Saudivillage, the other, more convenient, close to a Saudi village. Human RightsWatch was unable to find out how much smugglers bribed Saudi border guards tosmuggle migrants across the border but a local qat smuggler said itcosts him 500 Saudi Arabian Riyals (US$133) to cross at the further point andSAR 2,000 (US$533) to cross at the other.The director of Yemen’s Immigration for the Haradharea alleged that officials on the Saudi side are complicit in all aspects ofsmuggling and trafficking.[185]However, the deputy chief of the Saudi embassy in Sanaa, Haza’aal-Mutiri, told Human Rights Watch that officials had no concerns aboutcomplicity in smuggling or trafficking on the Saudi side, and that multipleagencies monitoring the area would report if officials were involved incorruption.[186]Saudi security forces frequently send migrants whom theypick up near the border to a deportation center near Jizan to await deportationto Yemen. Smugglers and aid workers told Human Rights Watch that migrants hadtold them about terrible conditions in the deportation center.[187]Human Rights Watch interviewed 42 Yemeni and 9 Somaliworkers deported from Saudi Arabia after November 2013, most of whom describedterrible detention conditions prior to deportation, including overcrowding,insufficient food and drinkable water, and beatings by prison guards.[188]Ethiopian nationals in the Saudi capital, Riyadh, told Human Rights Watch inNovember that thousands of foreign workers were being held in makeshiftdetention facilities without adequate food and shelter before being deported.[189]Exit from Saudi ArabiaSome Saudi border guards turn undocumented migrants over toYemeni traffickers.[190]They load migrants onto buses, drive them to a specific border crossing, andcall a trafficker on the Yemeni side to pick them up, said one trafficker. Thetraffickers take the migrants to their camps, where they again torture them toextort money.[191]One Ethiopian migrant, Muhammad Hussain, 25, from the townof Silte, said that he crossed from Yemen to the Fifa district of Saudi Arabiain a group of 123 migrants, including three women. Saudi officials arrested themigrants and placed them in a detention center, where they remained for amonth. One night at 2 a.m., the Saudi police took the migrants to a remote,sandy area on the Yemeni border and began making phone calls in Arabic. He toldHuman Rights Watch:One of us understood Arabic and he said, "They areselling us to the smugglers!” Four cars arrived. When the cars got closeto us, they [Saudi police officers] released us. One car drove to the soldiersand the other three came to us. They ran toward us to capture us. We tried toprotect ourselves by throwing stones at them. After a short period of time weescaped and reached Yemeni farmland where they could not catch us.[192]Shikuri Muhammad said he entered Saudi Arabia in June 2013with a group of 200 migrants, including 52 women, from Ethiopia, Chad, andNigeria, on foot through the mountains of Sa`ada, where no fence separatesYemen from Saudi Arabia. They sought refuge in a deserted construction sitenear the Saudi side of the border but within a few hours, border guardsappeared, loaded them into four buses, and drove them back to the border, hesaid.Muhammad was the only man on his bus, with the 52 women. Hedid not see the other buses again. Once the migrants were on the bus, he said,the guards locked the bus and the driver stood outside the bus and made a phonecall. Muhammad, who speaks Arabic, said he heard the driver say“something about us being ready to leave.” Then, just before thebus stopped in the desert, the driver made another phone call saying they hadarrived. No one was allowed to exit for about 20 minutes, until Muhammad sawarmed men drive up in seven trucks. The migrants realized they weretraffickers. Muhammad said:The cars pulled up next to our bus and the bus driver openedthe doors. We ran towards the doors and pushed each other out and startedrunning in different directions. The smugglers started shooting at us frombehind. I think that most of us were able to escape but I did see some peopleget shot and fall down.Muhammad escaped uninjured.A Yemeni government official, aid workers, migrants, andsmugglers told Human Rights Watch that Saudi border guards fire warning shotsat migrants and on occasion have fired at them directly, injuring or killingthem.[193]One Yemeni migrant told Human Rights Watch in November thatwhile attempting to illegally cross in Saudi Arabia two days before theinterview, Saudi border guards shot a man travelling in his group of nine. Hesaid: “I saw a man shot in the head right in front of me. [The borderguards] asked us to stop and raise our hands, but he ran and they shot him. Iwas so scared, all of us stopped, we didn’t run, the Saudis took the bodyaway in one car and eight of us to jail in another car.”[194]Migrants who were deported from Saudi Arabia have reportedseeing other migrants’ dead bodies in the border area, according to theDanish Refugee Council.[195]A humanitarian aid worker who visited Haradh’s localmorgue, told Human Rights Watch that since late 2012, people have brought thebodies of at least 50 Africans from the border region of Haradh to the morgue,and that the bodies often remain there unclaimed and unidentified.[196]People have brought other bodies to a clinic run by Medecins SansFrontières.[197]One Haradh resident who acknowledged that his family membersare traffickers told Human Rights Watch that in June 2013 he visited the localmorgue and saw 14 bodies of African migrants, all of them brought from theborder areas, according to morgue records that he saw, two with severed heads.He said he saw the coroner’s reports, which categorized them as“accidental deaths.” He said the bodies had been lying in the openso long that they were rotting.[198]Ahmed Shedaiwah, the head of the Haradh Local Council, told Human Rights Watchthat in August 2013, Yemeni border guards brought 38 bodies from the border tothe morgue.[199]Ibrahim Zaidan, the Haradh representative of the Ministry of Human Rights, saidthat for a period in September 2013, there were 48 bodies of migrants in themorgue.[200]VI. Yemen’s International Legal ObligationsThe Yemeni government’s failure to investigate andprosecute serious abuses committed against migrants by private individuals andentities as well as by government officials violates Yemen’s obligationsunder international human rights law. International human rights bodies havemade clear that governments have positive obligations to protect individualsfrom acts, such as infringements on the rights to life and to bodily integrity,committed by private persons.[201]A government’s failure to prevent, investigate or punish such abuses mayitself give rise to a violation of those rights.[202]TraffickingThe United Nations Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and PunishTrafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children (Trafficking Protocol)defines trafficking as the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harboring, orreceipt of persons through “the threat or use of force or other forms ofcoercion…or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achievethe consent of a person having control of another person, for the purpose ofexploitation.” Exploitation includes, at a minimum,“the exploitation of prostitution of others or other forms of sexualexploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar toslavery, servitude or the removal of organs.”[203]Although Yemen is not a party to the Trafficking Protocol,the crimes described in this report nonetheless constitute trafficking. Theyinclude the transport, transfer, and harboring of migrants by using force orthe threat of force for the purpose of slavery.The practice of traffickers in Yemen toeffectively buy and sell migrants from, and to each other, amounts to slaveryunder international law. For instance, the Rome Statute of the InternationalCriminal Court defines enslavement as “the exercise of any or allof the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includesthe exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, inparticular women and children.[204]In 2000, the Preparatory Commission for theEstablishment of an International Criminal Court issued guidance on theelements the crimes of “enslavement” and “sexualslavery,” and concluded that in both cases, the crimes involved a personexercising “any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownershipover one or more persons, such as by purchasing, selling, lending or barteringsuch a person or persons, or by imposing on them a similar deprivation ofliberty.”[205]In 2002, theTrialChamber of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY)found that that factors contributing to “enslavement” included“control of someone’s movement, control of physical environment,psychological control, measures taken to prevent or deter escape, force, threatof force of coercion, duration, assertion of exclusivity, subjection to crueltreatment and abuse control of sexuality.”[206]Article 248 of Yemen’s penal code criminalizes buying,selling, dealing in, or gifting people, and particularly penalizes anyoneimporting or exporting people with the intent of taking advantage of them. Thiscrime is punishable by a prison sentence of up to 10 years. Human Rights Watchcould not confirm a single instance in which a trafficker was charged with thiscrime. Although the government reported that it convicted and sentenced 17trafficking offenders in 2012, despite multiple efforts to gain moreinformation, Human Rights Watch was unable to verify the convictions ordetermine for which crimes the individuals were convicted.States party to the Trafficking Protocol are obligated tocriminalize trafficking and the act of working as an accomplice to traffickers,and to strengthen border controls to detect and prevent trafficking.[207]Yemen has not passed anti-trafficking legislation, beyond article 248 of thepenal code, consistent with the UN Trafficking Protocol, though a nationalcommittee on combating human trafficking has prepared a draft anti-traffickinglaw, which it introduced in late 2013 and which is currently pending beforeparliament.[208]Obligations to Investigate TortureTorture is prohibited under the Yemeni Constitution inarticle 47.[209]International law prohibits torture and other cruel, inhuman or degradingtreatment.[210]The definition of torture under the Convention against Torture includes threecore elements: the nature of the abuse, the purpose of the abuse, and theinvolvement of a public official. [211]Thus, while the intentional infliction of severe pain orsuffering by someone not a public official is not torture under the conventiondefinition, the convention nonetheless places obligations on a government toadopt measures against acts by non-state actors.The Committee against Torture, the independent expert bodythat monitors compliance with the Convention against Torture, has stated in ageneral comment that government officials can be complicit in torture and otherill-treatment carried out by non-state actors:where State authorities or others acting in officialcapacity…know or have reasonable grounds to believe that acts of tortureor ill-treatment are being committed by non-State officials or private actorsand they fail to exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate, prosecute andpunish such non-State officials or private actors consistently with theConvention, the State bears responsibility and its officials should beconsidered as authors, complicit or otherwise responsible under the Conventionfor consenting to or acquiescing in such impermissible acts.[212]The committee stated that a government’s failure“to exercise due diligence to intervene to stop, sanction, and provideremedies to victims of torture facilitates and enables non-State actors tocommit acts impermissible under the Convention with impunity,” andprovides a form of encouragement or de facto permission. It notedthat it had applied this principle in other areas, including trafficking.[213]The readily available information in thepublic realm about the widespread abuses traffickers have committed in Yemenand evidence of abuse obtained in the traffickers’ camps, means thereare, as the Committee against Torture puts it, “reasonable grounds tobelieve … that acts of torture or ill-treatment are beingcommitted by … private actors.” The authorities’failure “to exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate, prosecute andpunish such non-State officials or private actors” indicates that theYemeni government “facilitates and enables [traffickers] to commit actsimpermissible under the Convention [against Torture] with impunity.” Thusthe government “bears responsibility and its officials should beconsidered as authors, complicit or otherwise responsible under the Convention[against Torture] for consenting to or acquiescing in such impermissibleacts.”[214]Obligation to Investigate Violence Against WomenInternational and regional human rights treaties placeobligations on state authorities to act with due diligence to combat violenceagainst women. For example, the committee monitoring compliance with theConvention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women(CEDAW),[215]has identified violence against women as a form of discrimination, and statedin a general recommendation that governments have a due diligence obligation toprevent, investigate, prosecute, and punish all acts of gender-based violence.[216]The CEDAW committee said in its General Recommendation No.26 on women migrant workers that governments “should take all appropriatemeasures to ensure non-discrimination and the equal rights of women migrantworkers” and “measures that may be required include” the“protection of undocumented women migrant workers.” The committeenoted that “the situation of undocumented women needs specific attention.Regardless of the lack of immigration status of undocumented women migrantworkers, States parties have an obligation to protect their basic humanrights.”[217]The Committee furthermore stated:Undocumented women migrant workers must have access tolegal remedies and justice in cases of risk to life and of cruel and degradingtreatment, or if they are coerced into forced labour, face deprivation offulfilment of basic needs, including in times of health emergencies orpregnancy and maternity or if they are abused physically or sexually byemployers or others.[218]Special Obligations for the Treatment of ChildrenThe Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) providesthat governments “shall respect and ensure the rights” under theconvention “to each child within their jurisdiction withoutdiscrimination of any kind.”[219]The Committee on the Rights of the Child encourages governments to strengthentheir efforts to integrate the right to non-discrimination in all relevantlegislation and to “ensure that this right is effectively applied in allpolitical, judicial and administrative decisions and in projects, programmesand services which have an impact on all children, including non-citizenchildren and children belonging to minority groups.”[220]All decisions taken regarding children, including decisionsconcerning immigration status or detention, must take as a primaryconsideration “the best interests of the child.”[221] The CRC Committeespecifies that the “best interests” include, among other things,consideration of children’s need for care, protection, and safety, andattention to particular vulnerabilities of, for example, migrant children.[222]With specific regard to unaccompanied migrant children, theCRC Committee provides important guidance for designing and implementingreception policies under the “best interest” principle, observingthat such children need to be assigned a guardian to help them cope withcomplex procedures and to secure appropriate shelter and care.[223]International law indicates that childrenshould not be detained for reasons related to their migration status, andplaces strict limits on the exceptional use of detention: article 37 of the CRCstates that detention of any type should only be used against children as“a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period oftime.” The Committee in General Comment No. 6 states that “unaccompaniedor separated children should not, as a general rule, be detained,” and“detention cannot be justified solely on…their migratory orresidence status, or lack thereof.” Most importantly, in February 2013,the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child urged states to “expeditiouslyand completely cease the detention of children on the basis of theirimmigration status,” arguing that such detention is never in thechild’s best interest.Children should also have access to legal and psychologicalassistance, including by enabling contact with nongovernmental organizationsoffering such assistance, and they should receive care appropriate to theirage, including ability to contact family, appropriate medical treatment andpsychological counseling, and access to education.[224]States should ensure the full economic, social and cultural rights of allnon-citizen children in detention without discrimination—especially theright to education—and ensure their right to integration into society.[225]AcknowledgmentsThis report was researched and written by Belkis Wille,researcher for Human Rights Watch’s Middle East and North Africadivision, with assistance from Osamah al-Fakih, research assistant, and AdamCoogle, researcher with the Middle East and North Africa division.Robin Shulman, editor with the Middle East and North Africadivision, Joe Stork, deputy Middle East and North Africa director, and TomPorteous, deputy program director, edited the report. James Ross, legal andpolicy director, provided legal review. Alice Farmer, researcher in theChildren's Rights division, Gerry Simpson, senior researcher in the Refugeesdivision, Adam Coogle, Rothna Begum, Women's Rights division researcher for theMiddle East and North Africa region, Felix Horne, and Laetitia Bader, researcherswith the Africa division, provided specialist review on different sections.Middle East and North Africa division associate SandyElkhoury provided production assistance. Kathy Mills, publications specialist, and Fitzroy Hepkins, administrativemanager, prepared the report for publication. Freelance photojournalist MichaelKirby Smith and producer Casey L. Coombs produced all footage for themultimedia accompanying the report.Human Rights Watch would like to thankindividuals who shared their experiences, despite very real concerns ofreprisals, making this report possible.Annex I: List of Cases Forwardedby Haradh Policeto the Haradh ProsecutionNature of ChargeNameIf non-Yemeni, Nationality Listed in BracketsVictimsDate Case was sent from Local Policeto Haradh ProsecutionStatusMurder and attempted murderAli Omar Ali Zaila’aHadi Yosuf MatariAhmed Ahmed Awaji Zaila’aIbrahim Abdu Shoaee KatbiNoah Ibrahim Shoaee RajihiAbdu Yosuf Jaishi (Ethiopian)Muhammad Ibrahim Shoaee RajihiAbdullah Ibrahim Shoaee RajihiAbd al-Rahim Ghaleb Naser (Border Guard, killed).Wounded- an unidentified Ethiopian;Burhan Jermay Aroji (Ethiopian); and Jarjana Jabra (Ethiopian).March 19, 2013Arrested, and still in detentionEscapedArrestedArrestedEscapedUnsure of statusUnsure of statusUnsure of statusDetention, restricting freedom of movement andtortureHadi Abdu Hassan KudaishAli Saghir Abdu KudaishAli Shoaee Muhammad KudaishAli Hadi Abdu KudaishHassan Ali Shoaee KudaishHusain Ahmed Husain HairanAhmed Hadi Abdu KudaishYahya Ali Muhammad AydiMuhammad Shoaee Muhammad KudaishAli Sultan Muhammad HadadiMuhammad Ibrahim Abdullah OdabiShafi Ali Admo (Ethiopian)Shakro Idrees Hassan (Ethiopian)A number of African migrantsApril 20, 2013All were released by Haradh and Hajja prosecutionteams and did not face trialDetention, restricting freedom of movement andtortureIbrahim Sayd Ali Adam (Ethiopian)Othman Muhammad Ibrahim Adam (Somali)A number of African migrantsApril 20, 2013All were released by Haradh and Hajja prosecution teamsDetention, restricting freedom of movement and tortureMatar Shoaee Bukhit HarmaliHassan Ibrahim Bukhit HarmaliIbrahim Muhammad Ali OkailiAbkar Ahmed Ibrahim JuaidiAhmed Ibrahim Ali JuaididHajar Esa Suliman KatbiAhmed Husain Abdullah JabriIbrahim Ibrahim Ali Jomai119 African migrantsApril 20, 2013All were released by Haradh and Hajja prosecutionteamsMurderHadi Abdu Hassan KudaishAn unidentified EthiopianApril, 20, 2013Released by Haradh and Hajja prosecution teamsSmuggling and restricting freedom of movementHusain Ali Ahmed AzzamA number of African migrantsApril, 27, 2013Released by Haradh and Hajja prosecution teamsSmuggling and restricting freedom of movementAhmed Abdu Hassan KudaishAhmed Hamdan Hassan AlaanGhawi Esa Suliman OkailiAbdu Yahya Kudaish[not mentioned]June 25, 2013All were released by Haradh and Hajja prosecutionteams except Abdu Yahya Kudaish, who escaped.This list is a compilation of informationderived from seven letters sent from Muhammad Ahmed Nijad, director ofGeneral Security in Haradh, to the Haradh prosecutor’s office, sent onthe dates listed in the fourth column, transferring criminal files, as well asa letter from Ali Omar Said, commander of the Second Brigade Border Guard, tothe Ministry of Defense on November 22, 2013, outlining what Said charged wasthe lack of follow-up by Haradh’s prosecution team with regard to casesthat were transferred to it as a result of the raids. Said in his letter listsall of the cases that were transferred, as well as the status of each case.[1]Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment orPunishment (Convention against Torture), adopted December 10, 1984, G.A. res.39/46, annex, 39 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 51) at 197, U.N. Doc. A/39/51 (1984),entered into force June 26, 1987, art 1.[2]Danish Refugee Council, “Desperate Choices: conditions, risks &protection failures affecting Ethiopian migrants in Yemen,” October 2012,http://www.refworld.org/docid/52401aba4.html (accessed 28 November 2013) pp.6,15; Marina de Regt, “Ethiopian Women's Migration to Yemen: Past and Present,” Chroniques Yémenites, 17 (2012), http://cy.revues.org/1853(accessed March 25, 2014).[3]WorldBank, “Yemen Country Page,”http://data.worldbank.org/country/yemen-republic (accessed October 29, 2013);United Nations Development Program, “Yemen CountryProfile,” http://www.undp.org.ye/y-profile.php (accessedNovember 29, 2013).[4]WorldBank, “Yemen Country Brief,”http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/yemen/overview (accessed November 29,2013).[5]Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, “HumanitarianBulletin: Issue 22, 05 December 2o13 to 07 January 2014,” June 2013,http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/OCHA%20Yemen%20Humanitarian%20Bulletin%20Issue%2022.pdf(accessedJanuary 19, 2014).UNHCR, “RefugeeOperation in Yemen,” October 2013, on file with Human Rights Watch.[6] HumanRights Watch interview with Abdullah Salah Hadi, immigration office director ofal-Tuwal border region, Haradh, September 23, 2013.[7]Marina de Regt, “Migration To and Through Yemen: The Case of MigrantDomestic Workers” (paper presented at Migration and Refugee Movements inthe Middle East and North Africa conference, Cairo, Egypt, October 23-25, 2007)http://www.aucegypt.edu/GAPP/cmrs/Documents/MarinadeRegt.pdf (accessed December8, 2013).[8]Human Rights Watch, HostileShores. Abuse and Refoulement ofAsylum Seekers and Refugees in Yemen,December 2009, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/yemen1209webwcover.pdf,p. 10-11. UNHCR, “Somali Refugees in the Region,” September 10,2013, http://data.unhcr.org/horn-of-africa/download.php?id=1250 (accessed March5, 2014). UNHCR, “2014 UNHCR country operations profile –Yemen”, http://www.unhcr.org/pages/49e486ba6.html (accessed March 5,2014). “UNHCR, Somali: Population Movement Trends”,http://data.unhcr.org/horn-of-africa/country.php?id=197 (accessed April 4,2014)[9]These estimates, based on international groups’ monitoring of sea bordersand interviews with migrants themselves, only include migrants who arrivethrough irregular channels, some of whom may seek and gain asylum.Regional Mixed Migration Secretariat, "Regional mixed migration monthly updates,"December 2012,http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/RMMS%20Monthly%20Summary%20December%202012%20.pdf(accessed November 28, 2013). The Office of the United Nations High Commissionerfor Refugees (UNHCR) began keeping statistics on migration from the Horn ofAfrica to Yemen in 2006. Between 2006 and April 2013, UNHCR estimates that 477,000 people travelled from the Horn ofAfrica to Yemen, with a recent increase in numbers. (UNHCR,“Briefing Notes: Over 30,000 refugees and migrants arrive in Yemen so farthis year,” April 2013, http://www.unhcr.org/517a58b5fac.html (accessedDecember 8, 2013).[10]“Saudi Arabia's foreign labourcrackdown drives out 2m migrants,” The Guardian, November 29,2013, http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/29/saudi-arabia-foreign-labour-crackdown-migrants(accessed March 24, 2014).[11]UNHCR, “New Arrivals in Yemen Comparison 2011-2014,” March 31,2014, http://reliefweb.int/map/yemen/new-arrivals-yemen-comparison-2011-2014-31-march-2014(accessed April 13, 2014)[12]UNHCR,“Yemen-New Arrivals at Coast: 2006-2013,” December 2013, on filewith Human Rights Watch. UNHCR bases its statistics from numbers gathered bythe Danish Refugee Council and the Society for Humanitarian Solidarity based ontheir daily patrols of the Yemeni coastline.17UNHCR, “New Arrivals Incident Report,”December 2013, on file with Human Rights Watch.[14]Regional Mixed Migration Secretariat, “Migrant Smuggling in the Horn ofAfrica & Yemen: The Political Economy and Protection Risks,” June2013, http://www.regionalmms.org/fileadmin/content/gallery/Migrant_Smuggling_in_the_Horn_of_Africa_and_Yemen._report.pdf(accessed November 28, 2013) p. 75. This number only takes into account theactual payments made to brokers for the journey. It does not include fundsobtained by extortion or other means.[15]Regional Mixed Migration Secretariat, “Alarming Abuse ofMigrants in Yemen,” April 18 2013,http://www.regionalmms.org/index.php?id=45&tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=171&cHash=c99cb2384f3f93959692c600db541840(accessed December 8, 2013). None of the migrants Human Rights Watchinterviewed for this report considered themselves to be refugees.[16]The patrols, which stop between 5 and 6 p.m. and resume between 7 and 8 a.m.,do not cover the full length of the Yemeni coast, and traffickers have contactson the shoreline who coordinate with them in order to avoid the patrols.[16]Most of the migrants interviewed for this report landed in Yemen during theearly morning hours, before the patrols become active. However since 2014 theDanish Refugee Council has extended the scope of their coastal patrols furthernorth. Human Rights Watch interview with Mazen Shaweesh, ProtectionCoordinator, Danish Refugee Council, Sanaa, March 10, 2014.[17]Regional Mixed Migration Secretariat, “Alarming Abuse ofMigrants in Yemen,” April 18 2013,http://www.regionalmms.org/index.php?id=45&tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=171&cHash=c99cb2384f3f93959692c600db541840(accessed December 8, 2013).[18]Regional Mixed Migration Secretariat, "Regional mixed migration monthly updates,"August-September 2013, http://www.regionalmms.org/fileadmin/content/about%20us/RMMS_Monthly_Summary__August-September_2013.pdf(accessed November 28, 2013).[19]Regional Mixed Migration Secretariat, “Disappearing girls:new findings from Yemen,” July 26, 2013, http://www.regionalmms.org/index.php?id=45&tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=190&cHash=458094d14c1f5b6dfce8b2f441bf15e5(accessed November 28, 2013).[20]Danish Refugee Council, “Desperate Choices,” p. 39.[21]Danish Refugee Council, “Desperate Choices,” p. 45.[22]Human Rights Watch interview, Sanaa, October 25, 2013.[23]World Bank GDP per capita (current US$) Data Bank,http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD (accessed November 3, 2013).Only Niger, Malawi, Burundi, Madagascar, and Congo fare worse.[24]Danish Refugee Council, “Desperate Choices,” pp. 19-20.[25]Human Rights Watch interview with “Jemal Muhammad” (a pseudonym),Haradh, June 12, 2013.[26]Human Rights Watch. Ethiopia- One Hundred Ways of Putting Pressure,March 2010, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/ethiopia0310webwcover.pdf.Human Rights Watch, Development without Freedom, October 201o,http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/ethiopia1010webwcover.pdf[27]The Anti-Terrorism Proclamation, article 25, enables Ethiopia to designateterrorist organizations. Presently, Ginbot 7, OLF, ONLF, Al-Shabaab andAl-Qaeda have been designated.[28]Danish Refugee Council, “Desperate Choices,” p.19.[29]Regional Mixed Migration Secretariat, “Migrant Smuggling in the Horn ofAfrica & Yemen: The Political Economy and Protection Risks,” June2013, p. 35.[30]Regional Mixed Migration Secretariat, “Migrant Smuggling in the Horn ofAfrica & Yemen: The Political Economy and Protection Risks,” June2013, p. 45.[31]Human Rights Watch interview with Techane Bekele Yadete, Consular at EthiopianEmbassy Sanaa, and Brehane Meskel Kihisen, Diaspora Engagement AffairsCounselor at Ethiopian Embassy Sanaa, Sanaa, November 3, 2013.[32]Ethiopian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “Government announces temporaryban on traveling abroad for work,” October 25, 2013, http://www.mfa.gov.et/news/more.php?newsid=2632(accessed December 9, 2013).[33]IOM, “Lack of Funds Limiting IOM Assistance to Stranded Migrants inYemen,” April 2, 2013,http://www.iom.int/cms/en/sites/iom/home/news-and-views/press-briefing-notes/pbn-2013/pbn-listing/lack-of-funds-limiting-iom-assis.html(accessed December 9, 2013). Yemen National Information Center, “PopulationStatistics: Directorate Hajja,” 2004,http://www.yemen-nic.info/contents/Brief/detail.php?ID=7632&print=Y(accessed December 9, 2013). This is an informal estimate, and there is nocensus data to substantiate it. However based on Human Rights Watch’s researchin Haradh this estimate seems accurate. Human Rights Watch interview withIbrahim Zaidan, Ministry of Human Rights representative in Haradh, Haradh,September 21, 2013[34]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Lilian Ambuso, Operations Manager,IOM, Sanaa, October 18, 2013.[35]Human Rights Watch interview with Ibrahim Zaidan, Ministry of Human Rightsrepresentative in Haradh, Haradh, September 21, 2013.[36]Human Rights Watch interview with Ahmed Shedaiwah, head of Haradh LocalCouncil, Haradh, September 20, 2013.[37]Human Rights Watch interview with Abd al-Salam al-Mahbashi, deputy head of theHuman Rights Department in the Ministry of Interior and Abd al-Salam Jawhar,Head of the Refugees Affairs Department in the Ministry of Interior, Sanaa,October 28, 2013. Ministry of the Interior officials told Human Rights Watchthis was based on numbers the ministry gathered from local authorities and fromthe IOM.[38]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Miranda Hurst, Program SupportOfficer, IOM, Sanaa, April 10, 2014.[39]Human Rights Watch, "’I Wanted to Lie Down and Die’:Trafficking and Torture of Eritreans in Sudan and Egypt”, February2014.[40]Ibid.[41]There is a high correlation between the desire to migrate and the presence oflocal brokers/smugglers in Ethiopia. Danish Refugee Council, “DesperateChoices,” p. 21.[42]For example, Human Rights Watch interview with “Muhammad Awol” (apseudonym), MRC, Haradh, September 21, 2013.[43]Human Rights Watch interview with Ibrahim Zaidan, Ministry of Human Rightsrepresentative in Haradh, Haradh, September 21, 2013, Human Rights Watchinterview with Muhammad Abu Ghanim, Director of Traffic Police, Haradh,September 22, 2013.[44]Danish Refugee Council, “Desperate Choices,” p.35.[45]Human Rights Watch interview with Mohamed Douhour Hersi, Djiboutian Ambassadorto Yemen, Sanaa, October 9, 2013.[46]Human Rights Watch interview with “Akmel Ibrahim” (a pseudonym),Haradh, September 22, 2013.[47]Human Rights Watch interview with “Ali Kebede” (a pseudonym), MRC,Haradh, November 29, 2013.[48]Hostile Shores: Abuse and Refoulement of Asylum Seekers and Refugeesin Yemen[49]Danish Refugee Council, “Desperate Choices,” p.36-37.[50]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Christopher Horwood, Coordinator,RMMS, Sanaa, May 8, 2014.[51]UNHCR, “New Arrivals in Yemen Comparison 2010-2013,” October 2013,http://www.mmyemen.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/New-Arrivals-in-Yemen-Comparison-2010-October-2013.pdf(accessed November 28, 2013). UNHCR, “New Arrivals IncidentReport,” December 2013, on file with Human Rights Watch.[52]Human Rights Watch interview with “Sindew Yimam Idris” (apseudonym), MRC, Haradh, September 21, 2013.[53]Human Rights Watch interview with “Nadim” (a pseudonym), Haradh,September 21, 2013. Osman Ahmed Mohamed, a diplomat at the Somali Embassy inSanaa, told Human Rights Watch that he was not aware of any boat coming fromSomalia that had been intercepted by the Yemeni Coast Guard. (Human RightsWatch interview with Osman Ahmed Mohamed, First Secretary at the SomaliEmbassy, Sanaa, October 28, 2013.)[54]Human Rights Watch interview with Mohamed Douhour Hersi, Djiboutian Ambassadorto Yemen, Sanaa, October 9, 2013.toYemen, Sanaa, October 9, 2013.[55]Hawala is a payment system where brokers in various countries transfermoney to one another through a phone call or fax in a trust-based network,which makes funds especially difficult to track.[56]Danish Refugee Council, “Desperate Choices,” p.38.[57]Desperate Choices p. 36.[58]Regional Mixed Migration Secretariat, “Migrant Smuggling in the Horn ofAfrica & Yemen: The Political Economy and Protection Risks,” p. 44.[59]The Regional Mixed Migration Secretariat bases its statistics on numbersgathered by the Danish Refugee Council and the Society for HumanitarianSolidarity based on their daily patrols of the Yemeni coastline.Regional Mixed Migration Secretariat, "Regional mixed migration monthly updates,"August-September 2013, http://www.regionalmms.org/fileadmin/content/about%20us/RMMS_Monthly_Summary__August-September_2013.pdf(accessed November 28, 2013).[60]Disappearing girls: new findings from Yemen,” July 26, 2013, http://www.regionalmms.org/index.php?id=45&tx_ttnews[tt_news]=190&cHash=458094d14c1f5b6dfce8b2f441bf15e5(accessed November 28, 2013).[61]Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh, September 21, 2013. See also BBC,“Inside Yemen's 'torture camps’,” BBC News Online,July 18, 2013, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-23369009 (accessed November 28,2013).[62]Human Rights Watch could not verify these figures.[63]Human Rights Watch interview with “Shikuri Muhammad” (a pseudonym),Haradh, September 22, 2013.[64]Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh, September 21, 2013. Human Rights Watchinterview, Haradh, September 22, 2013. Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh,January 10, 2014.[65]Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh, September 21, 2013. Human Rights Watchinterview, Haradh, September 22, 2013,[66]Human Rights Watch interview with “Ali Kebede” (a pseudonym), MRC,Haradh, November 29, 2013.[67]Human Rights Watch interview with “Sindew Yimam Idris” (apseudonym), MRC, Haradh, September 21, 2013.[68]Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh, September 21, 2013. Human Rights Watchinterview, Haradh, September 22, 2013. Human Rights Watch interview with sevensmugglers, Haradh, September 24, 2013.[69]Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh, January 10, 2014.[70]Human Rights Watch interview with “Ali Kebede” (a pseudonym), MRC,Haradh, November 29, 2013.[71]Non-nationals cannot own land except in special circumstances, for instance,for investment purposes according to Yemeni lawyer Hayil Salam. Human RightsWatch interview with Hayil Salam, March 9, 2014. Human Rights Watch interviewwith Ibrahim Zaidan, Ministry of Human Rights representative in Haradh, Haradh,September 21, 2013. Human Rights Watch interview with Ali Yaslam, Head ofOperations of Second Brigade Border Guards and deputy commander, and Ali OmarSaid, Commander of the Second Brigade Border Guards, Haradh, September 23,2013.[72]Human Rights Watch interview with “Nadim” (a pseudonym), Haradh,September 21, 2013.[73]Human Rights Watch interview with Ibrahim Zaidan, Ministry of Human Rightsrepresentative in Haradh, Haradh, September 21, 2013.[74]Human Rights Watch interview with Ibrahim Zaidan, Ministry of Human Rightsrepresentative in Haradh, Haradh, September 21, 2013.[75]“Inside Yemen's 'torture camps,’” BBC News Online,July 18, 2013, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-23369009 (accessed November 28,2013).[76]According to traffickers and smugglers, Kudaish is the leading trafficker inHaradh. One trafficker who works with him alleged to Human Rights Watch thatKudaish pays 90,000 Yemeni Riyals (US$418) per month to an agent in theCriminal Investigation Department to protect his camp. When other traffickersand smugglers cross him, he reports on them to officials who then arrest themor take other steps to block their smuggling and trafficking operations,according to an official and the trafficker who works with him.[77]One trafficker said he witnessed him gouging out a migrant’s eyeball witha plastic bottle.[78]They allegedly jointly own and run the camp.[79]They allegedly jointly own and run the camp.[80]Human Rights Watch interview with “Hagos Gebremedihin” (apseudonym), Haradh, January 8, 2014.[81]Human Rights Watch interview with “Araya Gebremedihin” (apseudonym), Haradh, January 9, 2014.[82]Human Rights Watch interview with “Bahiredin Ahmad” (a pseudonym),Haradh, September 22, 2013.[83]Human Rights Watch interview with “Shikuri Muhammad” (a pseudonym),Haradh, September 22, 2013.[84]Human Rights Watch interview with “Shikuri Muhammad” (a pseudonym),Haradh, September 22, 2013.[85]Human Rights Watch interview with “Ali Kebede” (a pseudonym), MRC,Haradh, November 29, 2013.[86]Human Rights Watch interview with “Ali Kebede” (a pseudonym), MRC,Haradh, November 29, 2013.[87]Human Rights Watch interview with “Jemal Said” (a pseudonym), MRC,Haradh, September 21, 2013.[88]Human Rights Watch interview with “Akmel Ibrahim” (a pseudonym),Haradh, September 22, 2013.[89]Human Rights Watch interview with “Sindew Yimam Idris” (apseudonym), MRC, Haradh, September 21, 2013.[90]Human Rights Watch interview with an international aid worker, Haradh,September 21, 2013.[91]Human Rights Watch interview with Imam Ali Khamisi, September 22, 2013.[92]Human Rights Watch interview with “Ammar” (a pseudonym), Haradh,September 23, 2013.[93]Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh, September 23, 2013.[94]Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh, September 21, 2013.[95]Human Rights Watch interview with group of 75 migrants, Haradh, September 22,2013.[96]Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh, September 23, 2013.[97]Ibid.[98]Human Rights Watch interview with “Nadim” (a pseudonym), Haradh, September22, 2013.[99]Human Rights Watch interviews with Ahmed Shedaiwah, head of Haradh LocalCouncil, Haradh, September 20, 2013; Human Rights Watch interview with“Shikuri Muhammad” (a pseudonym), Haradh, September 22, 2013.[100]Human Rights Watch interview with Lilian Ambuso, Operations Manager at IOM,Haradh, September 22, 2013.[101]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Yahya Ibrahim Jarad, Manager of theHealth Office in Haradh and of Haradh Public Hospital, Haradh, September 21,2013. He did not identify the reasons for death.[102]Human Rights Watch interview with “Nadim” (a pseudonym), Haradh,September 21, 2013.[103]Danish Refugee Council, “Desperate Choices,” p.42.[104]Human Rights Watch interview with “Ali Kebede” (a pseudonym), MRC,Haradh, November 29, 2013.[105]Ibid.[106]Human Rights Watch interview with “Nadim” (a pseudonym), Haradh,September 21, 2013.[107]Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh, September 22, 2013.[108]MTN is one of the biggest mobile phone companies in Yemen. Human Rights Watchinterview with Muhammad al-Bukari, Haradh, September 22, 2013.[109]Human Rights Watch interview with “Hagos Gebremedihin” (apseudonym), Haradh, January 8, 2014.[110]Human Rights Watch interview with “Fuad Hassan Shikuri” (apseudonym), Haradh, September 22, 2013.[111]Human Rights Watch interview with “Fuad Hassan Shikuri” (apseudonym), Haradh, September 22, 2013.[112]Hodaida is a large coastal city 190 kilometers (118 miles) south of Haradh.[113]Many of the migrants Human Rights Watch met with refer to IOM as the Red Crosswhen they first arrive and local residents know that migrants asking for theRed Cross are seeking the MRC.[114]Human Rights Watch interview with Lilian Ambuso, Operations Manager at IOM,Haradh, September 22, 2013.[115]Danish Refugee Council, “Desperate Choices”, p. 33.[116]Regional Mixed Migration Secretariat, “Migrant Smuggling in the Horn ofAfrica & Yemen: The Political Economy and Protection Risks,” p. 74.[117]2013 statistics from Human Rights Watch interview with Abd al-Salamal-Mahbashi, Deputy Head of the Human Rights Department in the Ministry ofInterior and Abd al-Salam Jawhar, Head of the Refugees Affairs Department inthe Ministry of Interior, Sanaa, October 28, 2013. Additional statistics fromRegional Mixed Migration Secretariat, “Migrant Smuggling in the Horn ofAfrica & Yemen,” p. 74.[118]Regional Mixed Migration Secretariat, “Migrant Smuggling in the Horn ofAfrica & Yemen,” p. 76.[119]TransparencyInternational, “Corruption Perceptions Index 2013,” December 3,2013, http://www.transparency.org/cpi2013/results (accessed April 22, 2014).[120]Human Rights Watch, A Life-Threatening Career: Attacks on Journalists underYemen’s New Government, September 2013,http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/yemen0913_ForUpload_3_0_0.pdf.[121]Human Rights Watch interview with an international aid worker, Haradh,September 21, 2013.[122]Human Rights Watch interview with seven smugglers, Haradh, September 24, 2013.[123]Human Rights Watch interview with “Nadim” (a pseudonym), Haradh,September 20, 2013.[124]Human Rights Watch interview with seven smugglers, Haradh, September 24, 2013.[125]Human Rights Watch interview with “Nadim” (a pseudonym), Haradh,September 22, 2013.[126]Human Rights Watch interview with Musleh al-Ghazi, Criminal investigationDepartment representative; Faisal Sharhah, Director of Drug Control; MuhammadAhmed Nijad, Police Director of Haradh; and Fuad Farhan, Administrative AffairsOfficer, Haradh, September 23, 2013.[127]Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh, September 22, 2013. Human Rights Watchinterview, Haradh, September 23, 2013.[128]Human Rights Watch interview with “Shikuri Muhammad” (a pseudonym),Haradh, September 22, 2013. Human Rights Watch interview with “AliKebede” (a pseudonym), MRC, Human Rights Watch interview with “BahiredinAhmad” (a pseudonym), Haradh, September 22, 2013. Haradh, November 29,2013. Human Rights Watch interview with Haftu Haile, Haradh, January 9, 2014.Human Rights Watch interview with “Sisay Mengesha” (a pseudonym),Haradh January 9, 2014.[129]Human Rights Watch interview with “Bahiredin Ahmad” (a pseudonym),Haradh, September 22, 2013.[130]Human Rights Watch interview with “Siraj Bedru” (a pseudonym),Haradh, September 22, 2013.[131]Human Rights Watch interview with “Siraj Bedru” (a pseudonym), Haradh,September 22, 2013.[132]Human Rights Watch interview with “Redwan Kadir” (a pseudonym),Haradh, September 22, 2013.[133]Human Rights Watch interview with “Sisay Mengesha” (a pseudonym),Haradh, January 9, 2014.[134]Human Rights Watch interview with “Ali Kebede” (a pseudonym), MRC,Haradh, November 29, 2013.[135]Every migrant who was able to identify the truck in which they were detained bysmugglers said they were the Toyota Hilux pickup.. Hilux are large trucks thatsmugglers in Haradh commonly use. Human Rights Watch witnessed smugglingoperations in Haradh and in all of them white Hiluxs were used.[136]Human Rights Watch interview with seven smugglers, Haradh, September 24, 2013.Human Rights Watch interview with “Nadim” (a pseudonym), Haradh,September 21, 2013. Human Rights Watch interview, September 22, 2013. HumanRights Watch interview, September 23, 2013.[137]Human Rights Watch interview with Ibrahim Zaidan, Ministry of Human Rightsrepresentative in Haradh, Haradh, September 21, 2013. Human Rights Watch interviewwith “Nadim” (a pseudonym), a ransom negotiator, Haradh, September21, 2013. Human Rights Watch interview, September 22, 2013. Human Rights Watchinterview, September 23, 2013. Human Rights Watch interview with“Walid” (a pseudonym), a border guard, Haradh, September 23, 2013.Human Rights Watch interview with Sheikh Hamood Haidar, Deputy Director ofHaradh Local Council, Haradh, September 23, 2013. Human Rights Watch interviewwith seven smugglers, Haradh, September 24, 2013.[138]Human Rights Watch interview with officer in Border Guard, September 23, 2013.[139]Danish Refugee Council, “Desperate Choices”, p.43.[140]HumanRights Watch interview with Abd al-Salam al-Mahbashi, Deputy Head of the HumanRights Department in the Ministry of Interior and Abd al-Salam Jawhar, Head ofthe Refugees Affairs Department in the Ministry of Interior, Sanaa, October 28,2013.[141]U.S.Department of State, “Trafficking in Persons Report 2013,” June 19,2013, http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/210742.pdf (accessed December8, 2013) p. 397.[142]DanishRefugee Council, “Desperate Choices,” p.38-39.[143]Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh, September 21, 2013. Human Rights Watchinterview, Haradh, September 23, 2013. Human Rights Watch interviewSeptember 24, 2013.[144]Human Rights Watch interview with Sheikh Hamood Haidar, Deputy Director ofHaradh Local Council, Haradh, September 23, 2013.[145]Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh, September 21, 2013.[146]Human Rights Watch interview with Ali Yaslam, Head of Operations of SecondBrigade Border Guards, and Ali Omar Said, Commander of the Second BrigadeBorder guards, Haradh, September 23, 2013.[147]The number 7,000 came from Ali Yaslam. Human Rights Watch interview with AliYaslam, Head of Operations of Second Brigade Border Guards, and Ali Omar Said,Commander of the Second Brigade Border guards, Haradh, September 23, 2013.Human Rights Watch interview with Abd al-Salam al-Mahbashi, Deputy Head of theHuman Rights Department in the Ministry of Interior and Abd al-Salam Jawhar, Headof the Refugees Affairs Department in the Ministry of Interior, Sanaa, October28, 2013.[148]Human Rights Watch interview with Ali Yaslam, Head of Operations of SecondBrigade Border Guards, and Ali Omar Said, Commander of the Second BrigadeBorder Guards, Haradh, September 23, 2013. Human Rights Watch interview withIbrahim Zaidan, Ministry of Human Rights representative in Haradh, Haradh,September 21, 2013. Human Rights Watch interview with Abd al-Salam al-Mahbashi,Deputy Head of the Human Rights Department in the Ministry of Interior and Abdal-Salam Jawhar, Head of the Refugees Affairs Department in the Ministry ofInterior, Sanaa, October 28, 2013. Human Rights Watch attempted to verify thenumber of raids with the Ministries of Defense, Human Rights, Interior, theHaradh Local Council and local police, and international organizations presentat the time including MSF and IOM. None were able to give exact numbers.According to the Ministry of Defense, 60 percent of those released wereEthiopian and Eritrean, 5 percent Somali and 5 percent other nationalities.Letter from Ali Omar Said, Commander of the Second Brigade Border guards, toMinistry of Defense, November 22, 2013.[149]“In Brief: Raids free enslaved migrants/refugees in Yemen,” IRINnews,May 2, 2013,http://www.irinnews.org/report/97961/in-brief-raids-free-enslaved-migrants-refugees-in-yemen(accessed November 28, 2013).[150]Human Rights Watch interview with Ibrahim Zaidan, Ministry of Human Rightsrepresentative in Haradh, Haradh, September 21, 2013.[151]Human Rights Watch interview with “Sindew Yimam Idris” (apseudonym), MRC, Haradh, September 21, 2013.[152]Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh, September 21, 2013.[153]Ibid.[154]Human Rights Watch interview with an international aid worker, Haradh, September21, 2013.[155]Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh, September 21, 2013. The fact that themigrants were sent from Haradh to Amran and Sanaa was confirmed by theMinistries of Interior, Defense and Human Rights.[156]IOM, “Plight of Ethiopian migrants in Yemen continues unabated,”April 19, 2013,http://www.iom.int/cms/en/sites/iom/home/news-and-views/press-briefing-notes/pbn-2013/pbn-listing/plight-of-ethiopian-migrants-in.html(accessed November 28, 2013).[157]IOM, “Plight of Ethiopian migrants in Yemen continues unabated,”April 19, 2013,http://www.iom.int/cms/en/sites/iom/home/news-and-views/press-briefing-notes/pbn-2013/pbn-listing/plight-of-ethiopian-migrants-in.html(accessed November 28, 2013).[158]Human Rights Watch interview with Lilian Ambuso, Operations Manager at IOM,Haradh, September 22, 2013.[159]Human Rights Watch interview with Ali Yaslam, Head of Operations of SecondBrigade Border Guards, and Ali Omar Said, Commander of the Second BrigadeBorder Guards, Haradh, September 23, 2013.[160]The Hajja Criminal Court sees all Haradh-area cases where the charge carries asentence of more than three years’ imprisonment.[161]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with judge Muhammad Abd al-Aleemal-Sururi, Hajja, January 19, 2014.[162]Yemeni Criminal Procedural Code, No. 13 of 1994, arts. 105, 184, 299, and 503.[163]Article246 of Yemen's Penal Code on deprivation of free movement states: "Whoeverillegally arrests a person or detains him or deprives him of his freedomwill be punished with imprisonment for a maximum of three years. The punishmentshall be imprisonment for no more than five years if such an act wascarried out by a public servant or by someone impersonating the character ofpublic servant, or by an armed person, or by two persons or more, or forthe purpose of stealing, or if the victim is a minor or lacking perceptionor short of it, or if confiscation of freedom would subject his life or healthto danger."[164]Human Rights Watch interview with Musleh al-Ghazi, Criminal investigationDepartment representative; Faisal Sharhah, Director of Drug Control; MuhammadAhmed Nijad, Police Director of Haradh; and Fuad Farhan, Administrative AffairsOfficer, Haradh, September 23, 2013.[165]Human Rights Watch interview with “Walid” (a pseudonym), Haradh,September 23, 2013.[166]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdullah Hameed Abu-Oraij, judge at Haradhcourt, Haradh, September 25, 2013.[167]Human Rights Watch interview with Ahmed Shedaiwah, head of Haradh LocalCouncil, Haradh, September 20, 2013.[168]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with judge Muhammad Abd al-Aleemal-Sururi, Hajja, January 19, 2014.[169]Letter from Border Guard commander, November 22, 2013.[170]Letter from Ali Omar Said, November 22, 2013.[171]Human Rights Watch interview with Techane Bekele Yadete, Consular at EthiopianEmbassy Sanaa, and Brehane Meskel Kihisen, Diaspora Engagement AffairsCounselor at Ethiopian Embassy Sanaa, Sanaa, November 3, 2013.[172]Human Rights Watch interview with two doctors at a medical facility, Haradh,September 23, 2013.[173]Human Rights Watch interview with a humanitarian aid worker, Sanaa, November25, 2013.[174]Human Rights Watch interview with Ahmed Shedaiwah, head of Haradh LocalCouncil, Haradh, September 20, 2013. Human Rights Watch interview with Lilian Ambuso,Operations Manager at IOM, Haradh, September 22, 2013.[175]Human Rights Watch interview with Ali Yaslam, Head of Operations of SecondBrigade Border Guards, and Ali Omar Said, Commander of the Second Brigadeborder guards, Haradh, September 23, 2013. Human Rights Watch interview withAhmed Shedaiwah, head of Haradh Local Council, Haradh, September 20, 2013.Human Rights Watch interview with Naser al-Matari, Military Police deputy.[176]Human Rights Watch interview with Ahmed Shedaiwah, head of Haradh LocalCouncil, Haradh, September 20, 2013.[177]Human Rights Watch interview with Abd al-Salam al-Mahbashi, Deputy Head of theHuman Rights Department in the Ministry of Interior and Abd al-Salam Jawhar,Head of the Refugees Affairs Department in the Ministry of Interior, Sanaa,October 28, 2013.[178]Human Rights Watch interview with an international aid worker, Haradh,September 21, 2013.[179]DLA Piper Nitaqat Studyhttp://www.dlapiper.com/files/Publication/8013ec0e-9213-4de5-93b1-769e55e29b70/Presentation/PublicationAttachment/c8a4d367-e2f0-4df4-83c4-8b94cf0e0e88/Be_Aware_Middle_East_June_2012.pdf[180]http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/29/saudi-arabia-foreign-labour-crackdown-migrants[181]Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh, September 22, 2013. Human Rights Watchinterview with seven smugglers, Haradh, September 24, 2013. “Saudi Arabiacontinues strengthening border security with Yemen,” Al Arabiya News Online,April 10, 2013,http://english.alarabiya.net/en/News/middle-east/2013/04/10/Saudi-Arabia-continues-strengthening-border-security-with-Yemen.html(accessed November 28, 2013). One area the fence does not span is theHuthi-controlled area bordering Sa`da. “The fence has taken advancedphases at the Yemeni border and expectations of deporting villagers from BaniMalik soon,” Eldayer, May 4, 2012,http://www.aldayer.net/news.php?action=show&id=5053 (accessed March 9,2014).[182]Human Rights Watch interview with seven smugglers, Haradh, September 24, 2013.[183]Ibid.[184]Ibid.[185]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdullah Salah Hadi, Immigration OfficeDirector of Al Tuwal border region, Haradh, September 23,2013.[186]Human Rights Watch interview with Mr. Haza’a al-Mutiri, Saudi DeputyChief of Mission, Sanaa, October 28, 2013.[187]Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh, September 21, 2013, Human Rights Watchinterview with seven smugglers, Haradh, September 24, 2013.[188]“Saudi Arabia: 12,000 Somalis Expelled,” Human Rights Watch newsrelease, February 18, 2o14,https://www.hrw.org/news/2014/02/18/saudi-arabia-12000-somalis-expelled.[189]“Saudi Arabia: Labor Crackdown Vi9lence,” Human Rights Watch newsrelease, December 1, 2013, http://www.hrw.org/news/2013/11/30/saudi-arabia-labor-crackdown-violence.[190]Human Rights Watch interview with Hussain Mohammed, Haradh, January 8, 2014.Human Rights Watch interview with “Shikuri Muhammad” (a pseudonym),Haradh, September 22, 2013. Human Rights Watch interview with seven smugglers,Haradh, September 24, 2013. Human Rights Watch interview with“Nadim” (a pseudonym), Haradh, September 21, 2013. Human RightsWatch interview, September 22, 2013. Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh,September 22, 2013. Human Rights Watch interview, September 23, 2013. HumanRights Watch interview, Haradh, September 23, 2013. Human Rights Watchinterview, Haradh, September 23, 2013.[191]Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh, September 22, 2013.[192]Human Rights Watch interview with Muhammad Hussain, Haradh, January 8, 2014.[193]Human Rights Watch interviews with Abdullah Salah Hadi, Immigration OfficeDirector of Al Tuwal border region, Haradh, September 23,2013, with migrant “Shikuri Muhammad” (a pseudonym), Haradh,September 22, 2013,with smugglers, Haradh, September24, 2013,with trafficker “Nadim”(a pseudonym), Haradh, September 21, 2013. Human Rights Watch interview,September 22, 2013. Human Rights Watch interview, September 23, 2013. See also Tom Finn, “Migrant hunting, smuggling onYemen-Saudi border,” Reuters, May 30, 2012,http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/05/30/us-yemen-migrants-idUSBRE84T0WU20120530(accessed May 8, 2014).[194]Human Rights Watch interview with Ahmed Ali Dahman, Haradh, November 29, 2013.[195]Danish Refugee Council, “Desperate Choices,” p.43.[196]Human Rights Watch interview with an international aid worker, Haradh,September 21, 2013.[197]Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh, September 22, 2013.[198]Human Rights Watch interview, Haradh, September 21, 2013.[199]Human Rights Watch interview with Ahmed Shedaiwah, head of Haradh LocalCouncil, Haradh, September 20, 2013.[200]Human Rights Watch interview with Ibrahim Zaidan, Ministry of Human Rightsrepresentative in Haradh, Haradh, September 21, 2013.[201]See generally, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),adopted December 16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16)at 52, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23,1976, articles 6 and 7. Yemen ratified the ICCPR in 1987.[202]See, e.g., Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 31 on the Nature of theGeneral Legal Obligation Imposed on States Parties to the Covenant, para. 8.[203]Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, EspeciallyWomen and Children, Supplementing the United Nations Convention onTransnational Organized Crime (Trafficking Protocol), adopted November 15,2000, G.A. Res. 55/25, annex II, 55 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 60, U.N. Doc.A/45/49 (Vol. I) (2001), entered into force December 25, 2003,http://www.uncjin.org/Documents/Conventions/dcatoc/final_documents_2/convention_%20traff_eng.pdf(accessed May 2, 2013). Yemen has not signed or ratified the protocol.[204]Rome Statuteof the International Criminal Court (Rome Statute), A/CONF.183/9, July 17,1998, entered into force July 1, 2002,article7(1)(c),http://www.icc-cpi.int/nr/rdonlyres/ea9aeff7-5752-4f84-be94-0a655eb30e16/0/rome_statute_english.pdf(accessed November 21, 2013). See also, Slavery, Servitude, Forced Labor andSimilar Institutions and Practices Convention of 1926 (Slavery Convention),adopted September 25, 1926, 60 L.N.T.S. 253, entered into force March 9, 1927,article 1, http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/instree/f1sc.htm (accessed November 21,2013) (Slavery involves “the status or condition of persons over whom anyor all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership areexercised”).,”[205]Report of thePreparatory Commission for the International Criminal Court, Addendum, Part II,Finalized draft text of the Elements of Crimes,”Preparatory Commission for the International CriminalCourt, November 2, 2000,http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N00/724/27/PDF/N0072427.pdf?OpenElement(accessed November 21, 2013). In2001, the Trial Chamber of the International Criminal Tribunal for the FormerYugoslavia (ICTY) held that “acquisition” or “disposal”is a “prime example” of the exercise of the right of ownership oversomeone. ICTY, Prosecutor v. Kuanarac, Kovac and Vukovic, Judgement ofFebruary 22, 2001, http://www.icty.org/x/cases/kunarac/tjug/en/kun-tj010222e.pdf(accessed November 21, 2013), para 542.[206] Ibid., para. 543.[207]Ibid., articles 5(2) and 11.[208]Human Rights Watch interview with Fouad al-Ghaffari, Director for the office of the Minister of Human Rights, Sanaa, January26, 2014.[209] Article47 of Yemen’s Constitution also prohibits torture, stating:Any person whose freedom isrestricted in any way must have his dignity protected. Physical andpsychological torture is prohibited. Forcing confessions during investigationsis forbidden… The law shall determine the punishment for whosoeverviolates any of the stipulations of this Article and it shall also determinethe appropriate compensation for any harm the person suffers as a result ofsuch a violation. Physical or psychological torture at the time of arrest,detention or jail is a crime that cannot be prescribable. All those whopractice, order, or participate in executing, physical or psychological tortureshall be punished.Yemeni Constitution, February 10, 2001,http://www.refworld.org/docid/3fc4c1e94.html (accessed February 13, 2014).The Committee against Torture, in its 2010 review ofYemen’s implementation of the convention, that the definition of torturein the Yemeni constitution was limited:The current definition in theConstitution prohibits torture only as a means of coercing a confession duringarrest, investigation, detention and imprisonment, and that punishment islimited to individuals who order or carry out acts of torture and does notextend to individuals who are otherwise complicit in such acts.Consideration of reports submitted by States partiesunder article 19 of the Convention, Concluding observations of the Committeeagainst Torture, Committee against Torture, Forty-fourth session, 26 April-14May 2010, CAT/C/YEM/CO/2/Rev.1, May 25, 2010, para 7.[210]See, e.g., ICCPR, article 7; Arab Charter on Human Rights, article 8; CRC,article 37.[211]Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment orPunishment (Convention against Torture), adopted December 10, 1984, G.A. res.39/46, annex, 39 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 51) at 197, U.N. Doc. A/39/51 (1984),entered into force June 26, 1987, http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CAT.aspx. Yemen ratified the Convention against Torture in 1991. Torture isdefined as:any act by which severe pain or suffering, whetherphysical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person for such purposes asobtaining from him or a third person information or a confession, punishing himfor an act he or a third person has committed or is suspected of havingcommitted, or intimidating or coercing him or a third person, or for any reasonbased on discrimination of any kind, when such pain or suffering is inflictedby or at the instigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of a publicofficial or other person acting in an official capacity.Ibid., art. 1.[211]Committee against Torture, General Comment No. 2, Implementation of article 2 by States parties, U.N. Doc. CAT/C/GC/2/CRP.1/Rev.4 (2007), November 23, 2007,http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/cat/general_comments/cat-gencom2.html, para. 18.[212]Committeeagainst Torture, General Comment No. 2, Implementation of article 2 by States parties,U.N. Doc. CAT/C/GC/2/CRP.1/Rev.4 (2007), November 23, 2007,http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/cat/general_comments/cat-gencom2.html, para. 18.[213]Ibid.[214]CommitteeAgainst Torture, General Comment 2.[215]Convention on the Elimination of All Forms ofDiscrimination against Women (CEDAW),G.A. res. 34/180, 34 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 46) at 193,U.N. Doc. A/34/46, entered into force Sept. 3, 1981.Yemen acceded to CEDAW onMay 30, 1984.[216]CEDAW Committee, General Recommendation No. 28, The Core Obligations of StatesParties under Article 2 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms ofDiscrimination against Women, CEDAW/C/GC/28 (2010), http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G10/472/60/PDF/G1047260.pdf?OpenElement(accessed September 11, 2013), paras. 19 and 34; and CEDAW Committee, GeneralRecommendation No. 19, Violence against Women, (Eleventh session, 1992),Compilation of General Comments and General Recommendations Adopted by HumanRights Treaty Bodies, UN Doc. HRI\GEN\1\Rev.9 (Vol. II) (2008),http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/recommendations/recomm.htm#recom19(accessed September 11, 2013), para. 9.[217]UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, GeneralRecommendation 26, Women Migrant Workers, CEDAW/C/2009/WP.1/R (2009), para. 26,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cedaw/docs/GR_26_on_women_migrant_workers_en.pdf.[218]Ibid.[219]Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), G.A. res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N.GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into forceSept. 2, 1990, article 2. Yemen ratified the CRC in 1991.[220]Committee on the Rights of the Child, concluding observations on the secondperiodic report of the Czech Republic (CRC/C/15/Add.201) , para. 29.[221]CRC, article 3. See also, Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment14, On the right of the child to have his or her best interests taken as aprimary consideration (art. 3, para. 1), U.N. Doc. CRC/C/GC/14 (2013), May 29,2013, http://www2.ohchr.org/English/bodies/crc/docs/GC/CRC_C_GC_14_ENG.pdf (accessedMarch 30, 2014).[222]Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment 14, paras. 52-84.[223]Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment 6, Treatment ofunaccompanied and separated children outside their country of origin, U.N. Doc. CRC/GC/2005/6 (2005), September 1, 2015,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/crc/docs/GC6.pdf (accessed March 30,2014), paras. 19-22.[224]Committee on the Rights of the Child, concluding observations on the secondperiodic report of the Czech Republic (para. 57) and on the second periodicreport of the Netherlands (CRC/C/15/Add.227, paras. 30–31 and53–54). As a minimum, children of asylum seekers should not be separatedfrom their parents during detention. Committee on the Rights of the Child,concluding observations on the second periodic report of Lebanon (para. 52).[225]Committee on the Rights of the Child, concluding observations on the secondperiodic report of Italy (CRC/C/15/Add.198, para. 21).Related ContentMay 25, 2014News ReleaseYemen: Migrants Held at ‘Torture Camps’Hold Traffickers, Officials Accountable for Role in AbusesMay 25, 2014News ReleaseYemen: Migrants Held at ‘Torture Camps’Region / CountryMiddle East/North Africa YemenProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch