Truth and Justice Can’t Wait: Human Rights Developments in Libya Amid Institutional Obstacles | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload reportDownload report with coverDonate NowDownloadsDownload reportDownload report with coverDecember 12, 2009Truth and Justice Can’t WaitHuman Rights Developments in Libya Amid Institutional ObstaclesAvailable InEnglishالعربيةItalianoThis 78-page report is based on research conducted by Human Rights Watch during a 10-day visit to Libya in April, 2009. The report is also based on ongoing monitoring from outside the country. The report finds that while the internet and two new newspapers in the country have given journalists increased space to write openly on certain sensitive subjects, heavy criminal sanctions continue to stifle journalists and prohibit freedom of association. Lawsuits and prosecutions of journalists under the country's libel laws have increased, but so far no journalist has been sentenced to prison.I. Summary“I need to talk about it, I needto feel that my voice is being heard, not just mine but that of all thefamilies of the disappeared.  For my family, every celebration, every holiday becomes a funeralbecause they are not with us.”—Mohamed Hamil Ferjany to Human Rights Watch,USA, August 2009“I couldn’t have spoken to you in2005 the way I can today.”—Libyan Lawyer interviewed by Human RightsWatch, Tripoli, April 2009Over the past decade Libya dramatically transformed itsinternational status from a pariah state under UN, EU and US sanctions to acountry that, in 2009 alone, held the Presidency of the UN Security Council,the chair of the African Union and the Presidency of the UN General Assembly.But this transformation in Libya’s foreign policy has not galvanized anequivalent transformation of Libya’s human rights record which remainspoor, despite some limited progress in recent years.This report examines recent human rights developments inLibya, identifies key areas of concern and highlights steps the Libyangovernment must take to meet its obligations under international human rightslaw. Libya’s reintegration into the international community means thatits human rights record has and will come under increasing scrutiny as theabsolute control the Libyan government customarily exercised over the flow ofinformation out of Libya continues to erode. Human Rights Watch believes thisis an opportunity for human rights reform that the Libyan authorities shouldpursue and other governments should promote in their relations with Libya.This report updates Human Rights Watch’s 2006 reporton Libya, Words to Deeds, and focuses on the areas where there has beensome limited progress, such as freedom of expression, as well as  thosethat remain severely restricted, such as freedom of association. The reportalso addresses how the Internal Security Agency remains responsible forsystematic violations of Libyan rights, including the detention of politicalprisoners, enforced disappearances and deaths in custody. This report does notexamine the treatment of migrants, asylum seekers and refugees in Libya, mostrecently reviewed in Human Rights Watch’s 2009 report, Pushed Back,Pushed Down: Italy’s Forced Return of Boat Migrants and Asylum Seekers,Libya’s Mistreatment of Migrants and Asylum Seekers.Overall, the past five years have witnessed an improvementin the human rights situation, though far less than promised or required. Thereare less frequent reports of arbitrary arrests and enforced disappearancescompared to the two previous decades. There has been greater tolerance offreedom of expression and some progress in addressing gross violations of thepast, though this remains very unpredictable.  Limited steps towardincreased tolerance of dissent indicate that at least some elements of thegovernment recognize the need for reform. Two new private newspapers and theinternet have created a new limited space for freedom of expression, and someunprecedented public demonstrations have been allowed to take place. TheJustice Ministry has announced plans to reform the most repressive provisionsof the penal code, though it has not yet made the proposed revisions public.The justice system at times has made independent decisions, ordering thegovernment to pay compensation to people whose rights have been violated and,in some cases, the government has complied.Yet, despite work to develop a new penal code, anessentially repressive legal framework remains in place, as does the ability ofgovernment security forces to act with impunity against dissent. Many trials,especially those before the State Security Court, still fail to meetinternational due process standards. Overall, unjustified limits on freeexpression and association remain the norm, including penal code provisionsthat criminalize "insulting public officials" or "opposing theideology of the Revolution." Many relatives of prisoners killed in a 1996incident at Abu Salim prison are still waiting to learn how their relativesdied and to see those responsible punished.  The jurisdiction of courts,the duties of government agencies, respect for legal rights of prisoners andadherence to the country’s stated list of human rights often remainmurky, erratic and contradictory.The basis for this report is research conducted by HumanRights Watch during a ten-day visit to Libya in April 2009, theorganization’s most recent trip to the country, as well as generalresearch and monitoring of the state of human rights in Libya from outside thecountry. Human Rights Watch met with the Secretary of Public Security and theSecretary of Justice and visited Abu Salim prison, where it interviewed sixprisoners. Human Rights Watch also met with members of the Tripoli BarAssociation and the Journalists’ Syndicate, relatives of prisoners and aformer political prisoner.Freedom of expression remains severely restricted by the Libyanpenal code. However, the past five years have witnessed a gradual opening of anew, still vulnerable, space for freedom of expression. Cracks in the wall thatthe government has set up against free expression are thin but evident. Oea andQuryna, two private newspapersestablished in August 2007, allowtheir journalists to write more critically about the government than waspreviously tolerated in the press, though this criticism remains in line withthe political agenda of Saif al-Islam al-Gaddafi, the son of Mu’ammaral-Gaddafi. Libyan correspondents for websites based abroad that frequentlypublish criticism of the government and news of human rights violations areallowed to operate in Libya and have even managed to obtain press cards. Thisgradual opening of space has brought with it an increase in criticism ofgovernment policies in the media.  However, there has also been anincrease in the number of prosecutions of journalists, although no journalisthas been sentenced to prison so far.There is no freedom of association in Libya because theconcept of an independent civil society goes directly against Gaddafi’stheory of governance by the masses. Law 71 still criminalizes politicalparties, and the penal code criminalizes the establishment of organizationsthat are “against the principles of the Libyan Jamahireya system.”Law 19, "On Associations," requires a political body to approve allnongovernmental organizations, does not allow appeals against negativedecisions and provides for continuous governmental interference in the runningof the organization. The government has refused to allow independentjournalists' and lawyers' organizations. The law itself allows the governmentto revoke the authorization of an association at any time without needing toprovide justification. There are a number of semi-official organizations thatdo charitable work, providing services and organizing seminars, but none thatpublicly take critical stances against the government.Libya has no independent nongovernmental organizations. Theonly organizations that can do human rights work, the most sensitive area ofall in Libya, derive their political standing from their personal affiliationwith the regime.  The main organization that can publicly criticize humanrights violations is the Gaddafi International Charity and DevelopmentFoundation (Gaddafi Foundation), chaired by Saif al-Islam al-Gaddafi.  Asecond organization, Waatasemu, is run by Dr. Aisha al-Gaddafi, Mu’ammaral-Gaddafi’s daughter, and has intervened in death penalty cases andwomen’s rights issues. The International Organization for Peace, Care andRelief (IOPCR), run by Khaled Hamedi, the son of a member of the RevolutionaryCommand Council, is the only organization able to access migrant detentioncenters.Attempting to set up a human rights organization is a riskyventure with the potential for harassment by Libyan security and also criminalprosecution. In 2008, for example, a group of lawyers and journalists tried toset up two organizations dealing with human rights and democracy. Theauthorities initially approved their request, but the Internal Security Agency,the section of the General People’s Committee (ministry) for PublicSecurity in charge of controlling domestic political activity, subsequentlyblocked the process. The group ultimately abandoned the initiative after theabduction and assault of one of the lawyers (who was a founding member of bothorganizations) for one day. The government says it is investigating theabduction.The Internal Security Agency retains full control over twoprisons in Libya, Abu Salim and Ain Zara, which are notorious for the arbitrarydetention of political prisoners. According to the Secretary for Justice, therecurrently are approximately 500 prisoners who have served their sentence or whohave been acquitted by Libyan courts, but remain imprisoned under orders of theInternal Security Agency.  The Agency has refused to implement thedecisions of the Libyan judiciary to release detainees, despite calls from theLibyan secretary of justice for their release. A number of prisoners remaindisappeared, including high-profile Libyan opposition members who were lastheard of in Abu Salim prison. The Internal Security Agency also continues todetain individuals who were sentenced by the People’s Court, notoriousfor trying individuals for political crimes without access to defense lawyers,and since abolished in 2005. The lack of fairness in the trials of suchdetainees means they should be released or re-tried before an ordinary court.In late June 1996 an estimated 1200 prisoners were killed inTripoli’s Abu Salim prison. For years the authorities denied this hadtaken place. Until late 2008, the vast majority of the familiesof the prisoners who were killed  had received no information about them.Some families of detainees killed at the prison sued the government in court,seeking to learn what happened to their relatives.In June 2008, the North Benghazi court ordered the GeneralPeople’s Committee (the cabinet) , the General People’s Committee(ministry) for Justice and the General People’s Committee (ministry) forPublic Security to inform the relatives of those who had died. The Libyanauthorities told Human Rights Watch in 2004 that an investigation into theincident was under way; however, in April 2009 the Secretary of Justiceconfirmed to Human Rights Watch that no such investigation took place. InSeptember 2009, the General People’s Committee for Defense established aninvestigation panel composed of seven investigative judges and headed by aformer military judge to investigate the Abu Salim killings 13 years after theyoccurred.Following the decision of the North Benghazicourt, starting in December 2008 Libyan authorities began issuing deathcertificates to the families, without acknowledging that they were related tothe Abu Salim killings. These documents do not include the correct date,place or any cause of death. The  authorities have offeredcompensation of 200,000  Libyan Dinars ($162,300) in exchange forassurances that family members will not pursue further legal claims in Libyanor international courts. Calling for truth, accountability and appropriatecompensation, several hundred of the families formed a committeeto demand the facts about what occurred on the day of the prison killings andthe prosecution of those responsible. And  most of the families inBenghazi have refused to accept compensation on those terms, insistingthat they want to know the truth of what happened and to have those responsibleprosecuted. Mohamed Hamil Ferjany, a spokesperson for thefamilies now based in the US, told Human Rights Watch that for him, ”themoney is irrelevant.  My family spent years suffering, not knowing wheremy brothers were, only to be given a piece of paper 15 years later saying theyare dead and nothing more. We want justice.”Over the past months, some of the familiesinsisting on accountability from the government have been demonstratingprimarily in Benghazi, but also in Al Bayda and Derna.  The government has, for the most part, allowed the families todemonstrate, and the Libyan press has covered their activities and demands.However, the families also have  faced harassment from security forces andeven, at times, arrest.The 2005 abolition of the People’s Court was greetedby human rights organizations as a welcome step on the path of reform. However,in August 2007 a new State Security Court was established bearing a worryingresemblance to the People’s Court which often issued heavy sentencesafter unfair trials. Human Rights Watch has spoken to a number of defendantsbrought before this court who were not able to meet with their defense counsel aheadof the court session. Moreover, the court’s decisions are not availableto the public or even to the families of those sentenced. It is not clear whetherthere is a court that can review decisions by the State Security Court norwhether the right to appeal is granted to those it does sentence.Despite statements by senior officials, including LibyanLeader Mu’ammar al-Gaddafi, that the country is working toward theabolition of the death penalty and that it is rarely applied, Libya continuesto sentence people to death and to carry out death sentences.  A systembased on Islamic law and custom allows for a pardon only when the family of amurder victim is willing to grant one in exchange for financial compensation orso-called “blood money.”The steps Libya has taken to address some of its humanrights problems do not go far enough in addressing the systemic and legalinfrastructure that deprives Libyans of their basic human rights. Libya mustensure that it complies with all of its obligations under international humanrights law and should immediately implement a number of reforms in policy, lawand practice. The General People’s Congress (the legislative assembly) shouldrepeal all provisions of the penal code and other laws such as Law 71 thatviolate freedom of expression and association, and that any new draft laws arefully in line with international human rights law. The Internal Security Agencyshould immediately release all prisoners detained for peacefully exercisingtheir right to free expression or association and compensate them for theirdetention. In addition, Internal Security agents should immediately release theapproximately 200 prisoners they are continuing to detain in Abu Salim prisondespite the fact that Libyan courts have acquitted them and ordered theirrelease or that they have completed their sentences.Human Rights Watch further urges the People’sLeadership Committees to immediately inform the families of prisoners who diedin the 1996 Abu Salim prison massacre of the circumstances of the death oftheir relatives and give them the remains of their relatives to bury. Theauthorities must carry out a full and effective investigation and make publicthe findings. This should be immediately followed by the prosecution of thoseresponsible for the summary execution of those prisoners. Under human rights law,the Libyan government is under an obligation to make reparation and must notpressure the families into accepting compensation instead of pursuingaccountability. The families of prisoners who were killed in Abu Salim have theright to demonstrate peacefully and make demands to the Libyan authoritieswithout intimidation and harassment from the security forces. In addition, inthe context of Libya’s increasing political and economic integration inthe world community, Human Rights Watch urges all organizations and governmentsengaging with Libya to ensure that the promotion of human rights in Libya formspart of their relationship.II. RecommendationsTo the Libyan Government:Human Rights Watch urges the Libyan authorities to implementthe reforms that they have announced and to ensure that these are carried outin full compliance with international human rights law. In particular, HumanRights Watch calls on the Libyan government to:With respect to freedom of expression:Repeal Law 71 of 1972, which bans any groupactivity based on a political ideology opposed to the principles of the 1969al-Fateh Revolution when Mu’ammar al-Gaddafi led a military coupoverthrowing the Libyan monarchy;Repeal articles of the penal code thatcriminalize free expression, including articles 166, 178, 206, 207,  andensure that the new draft penal code is revised to comply with internationalhuman rights law;Present a revised draft penal code to theBasic People’s Congresses for discussion as soon as possible;[1]Release all individuals imprisoned ordetained solely for exercising their right to free expression.With respect to freedom of association and assembly:Allow for the establishment of independentorganizations that wish to peacefully exercise freedom of association;Revoke the decision to refuse theregistration of the Association for Justice and the Centre for Democracy, theorganizations that a group of lawyers and journalists attempted to establish in2008;Repeal Law 71 of 1972 and related articlesof the penal code that criminalize free association and amend Law 19 to allowfor the establishment of independent non-governmental organizations;Ensure that individuals seeking to establishassociations are not harassed by security forces or prosecuted for thesubsequent exercise of freedom of assembly;Revoke General People’s Committeedecision number 312/2009 which further restricts freedom of assembly andassociation with disproportionate and unnecessary requirements.With respect to prisons under the control of the InternalSecurity Agency:Immediately release all prisoners acquittedby courts;Immediately release all prisoners who haveserved their sentences;Implement all legal decisions issued byLibyan courts;Allow the Office of the General Prosecutorto conduct investigations regarding detention in Abu Salim and Ain Zaraprisons;Quash all sentences against and immediatelyrelease all political prisoners who are imprisoned solely for the peacefulexpression of their views or for activities protected by freedom of associationand assembly;Compensate all who have been arbitrarilydetained;Sign and ratify the International Conventionfor the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance;Issue an invitation to the Special Rapporteuron Extrajudicial Summary or Arbitrary Executions;Facilitate the visit of the Working Group onArbitrary Detention and allow them full access to all centers of detentionincluding those controlled by the Internal Security Agency.With respect to the Abu Salim prison killing in 1996:Make public the conclusion of anyinvestigation which may have taken place into the Abu Salim incident;Ensure that the investigation is conductedby an independent and impartial judge and that the Internal Security Agencyfully cooperates with the investigation;Identify those responsible for the killingsand prosecute them to the fullest extent of the law in fair proceedings;Implement the North Benghazi Court decisionto inform family members of the fate of their relatives;Re-issue death certificates with the correctdate, place and cause of death;Immediately cease pressuring or threateningfamilies into accepting compensation and, where requested, allow those who wishto consider compensation time to reflect;Allow families of victims of Abu Salim todemonstrate freely and to freely express their opinions about the processwithout intimidation or harassment from security forces.With respect to the State Security Court:Clarify the status of the State Security Courtin the Libyan legal system;Ensure that a right of appeal is availableto every defendant and clarify which court is competent to hear that appeal;Ensure that defendants have the right to alawyer of their choice and sufficient access to their lawyers before the courtsessions ;Ensure that both private and state-appointedlawyers have equal and full access to the case documents;Make all decisions rendered by the StateSecurity Court publicly available, especially to the defendant and his family.With respect to the Death Penalty:Order an immediate moratorium on the deathpenalty;Commute all death sentences to terms ofimprisonment;Eliminate the death penalty as a punishmentunder Libyan law;Become a party to the Second OptionalProtocol of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),which aims at the abolition of the death penalty.To the European Union and its Member StatesBefore finalizing the Framework Agreementwith Libya, ensure that the Libyan government commits to improving its humanrights record and respecting the rights of prisoners, journalists and familiesof victims of human rights violations;Consistent with the EU Guidelines on HumanRights Defenders, engage with the Libyan government to raise the rights ofhuman rights defenders.To the United NationsThe Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial,Summary or Arbitrary Executions should request a visit to Libya;The Working Group on Enforced or InvoluntaryDisappearances should request a visit to Libya;Members of the Human Rights Council shouldaddress the recommendations in this report to Libya during its upcomingUniversal Periodic Review session.III. MethodologyInformation about human rights violations in Libya remainsscarce due to continued state control of the media and the high risk associatedwith providing information to organizations based abroad.  The print mediain Libya and foreign correspondents based there rarely report on human rightsviolations. Lawyers, family members and friends of individuals whose rightshave been violated often refrain from communicating with internationalorganizations due to fear of repercussions.This report is based primarily on a ten-day visit toLibya in April 2009, as well as interviews with Libyans abroad and generalresearch on the country. During the visit Human Rights Watch met with theSecretary of the General People’s Committee for Justice (Ministry ofJustice); the Secretary of the General People’s Committee for PublicSecurity (Ministry of Interior); the head of the Internal Security Agency atthe General People’s Committee for Public Security; representatives ofthe General People’s Committee for Foreign Liaison and InternationalCooperation (Ministry of Foreign Affairs) and the acting General Prosecutor.The organization also met with lawyers, journalists, former prisoners andfamilies of prisoners. Human Rights Watch visited one prison, Abu Salim inTripoli, and interviewed six prisoners, briefly meeting with and confirming thedetention of an additional prisoner who refused to be interviewed. Prisonauthorities refused Human Rights Watch requests to interview seven otherprisonersDespite three hours of negotiation with the InternalSecurity Agency officer in charge, Human Rights Watch was not able to secureinterviews in private with any prisoners. The interviews took place in acourtyard where a guard hovered nearby to eavesdrop, refusing Human RightsWatch’s request to move further away. This affects the overall value ofthe testimonies.  The Libyan authorities denied Human Rights Watch accessto Ain Zara, the other prison run by the Internal Security Agency.Because of the fear of compromising the security ofinterviewees, Human Rights Watch only met individuals in public places and onlyinitiated contact after ascertaining the willingness of those individuals tospeak to Human Rights Watch in public. Human Rights Watch conducted twointerviews with relatives of victims of human rights violations in Benghazi anda further four telephone interviews with other relatives. Human Rights Watchsubsequently met with two brothers of prisoners who were killed in Abu Salim inLondon, UK in June 2009 and in Cleveland, Ohio in August 2009.Human Rights Watch was not visibly followed by any security officialsduring the visit, but it was clear that Libyan security kept Human Rights Watchunder surveillance.In June 2009, Human Rights Watch sent letters to theSecretary of Justice and the Secretary of Public Security requesting furtherclarification on a number of issues and outstanding questions.  At thetime of publication of this report Human Rights Watch had not received aresponse to these letters despite repeated attempts to follow up. The lettersare reproduced in the Appendix.IV. BackgroundLibya, formally known as the Great Socialist People’sLibyan Arab Jamahiriya, is a large country, 1,759,540 square kilometers(679,363 sq. miles), with a population of just over 6 million.[2]The vast Sahara Desert encompasses more than 90 percent of the country, and themajority of the population lives on the Mediterranean coast. The United NationsDevelopment Program ranks Libya 55out of 182 countries on its HumanDevelopment Index.[3]Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, police and security forcesarrested hundreds of Libyans who opposed, or who the authorities feared couldoppose, the new system. Authorities labeled critics “stray dogs”and rounded up academics, lawyers, students, journalists, Trotskyists,communists, members of the Muslim Brotherhood and others considered“enemies of the revolution,” imprisoning or subjecting them toenforced disappearance.[4]Another wave of internal repression came in 1989, with the governmentinstituting “mass arbitrary arrest and detention, ‘disappearances,’torture, and the death penalty.”[5]No form of dissent was tolerated and Libya openly espoused a policy ofassassinating Libyan dissidents abroad.[6]Libya’s international isolation intensified in thelate 1980s after a number of attacks abroad were attributed to Libyan agents.In December 1988, Pan Am flight 103 blew up over Lockerbie, Scotland, killing270 people. This was followed by the bombing of UTA flight 772 over Niger in1989, killing 170.The U.S. and European governments blamed al-Gaddafi for theattacks. In January 1992, the U.N. Security Council passed Resolution 731,which ordered Libya to surrender the suspects in the two plane bombings,cooperate with the investigations, pay compensation to the victims' families,and cease all support for terrorism. This was followed in March 1992 bySecurity Council Resolution 748, which imposed an air and arms embargo onLibya. The embargo had a negative impact on Libya's economy. It was furtherstrengthened by Security Council Resolution 883 in November 1993 which imposeda limited asset freeze and an embargo on select oil equipment.In 1999 Libya improved its relations with Western Europe andthe United States by surrendering two Libyan nationals suspected of the Pan Ambombing. A Scottish court in the Netherlands subsequently acquitted one of themen and sentenced the other, `Abd al-Basit al-Megrahi, to life in prison in2001. In a controversial decision, the Scottish Cabinet Secretary for Justicereleased al-Megrahi on August 20, 2009, citing his terminal illness, andreturned him to Libya. Crowds at Tripoli airport waving Scottish flags greetedhim upon return, an orchestrated affair which was condemned as a hero’swelcome by much of the western media and by many governments.InternationalRe-integrationThe turning point in Libya’s relationship with theinternational community came in December 2003 when Libya announced it wouldgive up its Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) programs and limit its long-rangemissiles.[7]Libya said it would comply with the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and theBiological Weapons Convention, sign the International Atomic Energy AgencyAdditional Protocol and adhere to the Chemical Weapons Convention. In August2003, Libya accepted "responsibility for the actions of Libyanofficials" for the Pan Am and UTA bombings and agreed to pay compensationto the families.[8]The US-Libya compensation deal was signed in August 2008[9]and by November 2008 the families announced that they had received 100% of thecompensation.[10]As one State Department official put it, the past six years have witnessed a"gradual, step-by-step normalization" of U.S.-Libyan relations.[11]In May 2006 then-U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Riceannounced that the U.S. was “restoring full diplomatic relations withLibya” and would remove it from the list of state sponsors of terrorismwhere it had been since December 1979.[12] In August 2008 theUS and Libya signed a claims settlement agreement, indemnifying each otheragainst outstanding lawsuits for bombings attributed to Libya and US airstrikesin the 1990s. In September 2008 Condoleezza Rice became the first U.S.Secretary of State to visit Libya since 1953. On November 20, 2008, the USSenate confirmed Gene Cretz as U.S. Ambassador to Libya, the first Americanambassador there in over 35 years.[13]The thawing of relations between Libya and the U.S. has beenparticularly significant in terms of counter-terrorism cooperation. Libya isregarded as a partner in the fight against terrorism and continues to share intelligenceon militant Islamists with Western governments.[14]Since 2004, the US has rendered a number of Libyan former CIA detainees toLibya,[15]five of whom Human Rights Watch was able to interview in April 2009. HumanRights Watch was the first organization to confirm their detention in Libya. Inaddition, on December 18, 2006, the US government returned Libyan citizenMohamed al-Rimi from Guantanamo Bay to Libya, followed by Sofian Hamoodah onSeptember 30, 2007.On October 18, 2005 Libya and the United Kingdomsigned a Memorandum of Understanding “to facilitate deportation ofpersons suspected of activities associated with terrorism,”[16]which Human Rights Watch had said would put them at serious risk of torture.[17]On April 27, 2007, the Special Immigration Appeals Commission ruled that theUnited Kingdom could not return two terrorism suspects to Libya due to the riskof torture and unfair trials, a decision confirmed in appeal on April 9, 2008.[18]Other European governments and the European Union havealso strengthened ties with Libya recently, driven by business interests andencouraged by Libya's cooperation in combating terrorism and illegalmigration.  EU sanctions against Libya were lifted in 2004 and Libya andthe EU signed a memorandum of understanding on July 23, 2007. In November 2008,negotiations on an EU-Libya Framework Agreement covering areas such as“political dialogue, trade, energy, migrations and environment”began in Brussels.[19]The negotiations are ongoing with another round scheduled to take place inNovember 2009.The resolution of one of the main sticking points inEU-Libyan relations, the case of five Bulgarian nurses and a Palestiniandoctor, also paved the way for improved relations. The health workers had beenin prison since 1999, convicted of deliberately infecting 426 children withHIV. Their release in July 2007 came as a result of negotiations thatintensified after Bulgaria’s entry into the European Union in January ofthat year.  The Libyan High Judicial Council commuted the healthcareworkers’ death sentences, following a deal with the European Union toupgrade Libyan-EU relations, which Libyan sources said included compensatingthe victims’ families with a US$1 million per child.[20]The intervention of French President Nicolas Sarkozy in thecase ended with his then-wife Cecilia Sarkozy accompanying the nurses anddoctor on their flight out of Libya,[21]Mu’ammar al-Gaddafi was invited on a state visit to France in December2007, his first visit to Europe in 34 years.[22]  He signedbillions of dollars in contracts during his stays in France and Spain on thattrip.[23]Earlier that year Russia's then-president Vladimir Putin signedmulti-billion-dollar arms and energy deals during a visit to Libya in April,the first by a Russian president.Italy and Libya solidified their close relationship with anumber of agreements and joint initiatives. On August 30, 2008 both countriessigned the “The Treaty of Friendship, Partnership and Cooperation betweenthe Italian Republic and Great Socialist People’s Libyan ArabJamahiriya” which called for “intensifying” cooperation in“fighting terrorism, organized crime, drug trafficking and illegalimmigration.”[24]In September 2008 Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi visited Libya,pledging US$5 billion in reparations for "the damage inflicted"during Italy's colonial rule. Berlusconi said Italy would receive increasedaccess to Libyan oil and gas and "fewer clandestine immigrants." OnMay 15, 2009 an agreement to conduct joint Libyan-Italian naval patrols ofLibyan shores went into effect. In June 2009, Mu’ammar al-Gaddafi madehis first state visit to Italy [25]and returned the following month to attend the G8 summit in L'Aquila,Italy.  In September 2009, Human Rights Watch published a report PushedBack Pushed Around describing the negative impact this agreement has had onthe rights of refugees, asylum seekers and migrants.[26]In October 2007 Libya won a seat on the UN Security Counciland it held the rotating presidency in January 2009.[27]In February 2009 Libyan leader Mu’ammar al-Gaddafi became chairmanof the African Union at a summit in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and on June 10, 2009the General Assembly elected former Libyan secretary for African Affairs AliTreki President of its sixty-fourth session. On September 23, 2009,Mu’ammar Gaddafi gave a 96-minute speech at the opening session of the UNGeneral Assembly in which he criticized the UN system and the Security Council.However, he refrained from making provocative remarks towards the United Statesor the West in general, avoiding sensitive subjects such as the return ofMegrahi, which indicates a desire on his part to maintain good relations withthe West.Libya is party to the seven core international human rightstreaties, although not all oftheir optional protocols. It ratified the InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International Covenanton Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) in 1976, the Convention on theElimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) in 1989, theConvention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or DegradingTreatment or Punishment (CAT) in 1989, the African Charteron Human and Peoples' Rights in 1986, and the African Charter on the Rights andWelfare of the Child in 2003. Libya has taken strong positions against signingthe 1951 Convention on the Status of Refugees and the Rome Statute of theInternational Criminal Court with Mu’ammar al-Gaddafi calling the lattera “new world terrorism.”[28]Reform InitiativesHuman rights observers have, for years, criticized theLibyan penal code for violating freedom of expression and association and forexcessively heavy sentences.[29]The Libyan authorities first announced their intention to amend the penal codein 2003. Then-Secretary of Justice `Ali `Umar Abu Bakr told Human Rights Watchin May 2005 that by the end of that year the experts were due to submit a newpenal code to the Basic People’s Congresses for debate.[30] Adraft obtained by Amnesty International in 2004 contained many articles thatwere inconsistent with Libya’s obligations under international humanrights law. Vague terms in some articles, such as “spreadingrumors,” “insult,” and “harming the reputation of the country,”appeared as if they could lead to the death penalty being imposed for thepeaceful expression of political views.[31]  In October2005, Mu’ammar al-Gaddafi spoke before the Higher Judicial Councilcalling for a revision of the penal code; “I want the men and women ofLibya to create their penal code so that this is the first time that a peoplecreates its own penal code which will then run it.”[32]Chief Justice of the Libyan Supreme Court, Dr. AbdulrahmanTuta, told Human Rights Watch in April 2009 that he chaired a committeecomposed of judges, lawyers and academics which drafted a new penal code.[33]The Secretary of Justice Mostafa Abdeljalil told Human Rights Watch that thedraft penal code would be formally presented in the summer of 2009 to the BasicPeople’s Congresses for discussion.  This would be the first steptoward its adoption but as of the time of this writing this has yet to takeplace. [34]Under Libya’s political system, each congress may approve or reject theproposal, or approve it with reservations. The code will come into force ifapproved by the General People’s Congress.At a rare public meeting at the Tripoli Bar Association inApril 2008, a number of Libyan lawyers openly criticized the latest version ofthe draft penal code for its continued repression of basic freedoms and thepervasiveness of the death penalty.[35]In January 2009, Human Rights Watch received the latest version of the draftpenal code and in June 2009 sent the Libyan authorities its comments andrecommendations on the proposed provisions to bring them into compliance withinternational human rights law. The new draft limits the number of provisionsproviding for the death penalty and reduces many of the sentences but retainsprovisions criminalizing freedom of expression and association. [36]Even the General People’s Committee for PublicSecurity seems aware of the need to evolve with the times; its website now hasa form for “complaints to remedy any mistakes.”[37]The Libyan Secretary of Public Security, General Abdelfattah al-Obeidi, soughtto assure Human Rights Watch that he had issued a decision last year orderingall officers not to hit or humiliate citizens in any way during the performanceof their duties. Yet he was unable to provide Human Rights Watch with anyinformation on the number of complaints received about such treatment or thenumber of cases investigated by his ministry.[38] No information isavailable on the number of officers prosecuted but a lawyer told Human RightsWatch that the number is likely to be very low since “the GeneralProsecutor can’t interrogate any officer without authorization from theSecretary of Public Security and he always refuses.”[39]Another sign that the General People’s Committee forPublic Security recognizes the need to show some effort towards displayingawareness of human rights is the apparent establishment of human rightstraining. In April 2009, Colonel Kamal El Dib told Human Rights Watch about thehuman rights training programs he began running at the General People’sCommittee for Public Security in 2004. He said up to 60,000 officers have beentrained on issues including “human rights concepts, non-discrimination,security and legitimacy, the torture convention, how the police should dealwith citizens and the Great Green Charter on Human Rights.”[40]He said that this was a capacity-building project and that Libya had brought inexpert trainers from the UK, the US and Egypt.  Human Rights Watch couldnot verify the extent of this program or evaluate its content. While the impactof human rights training is often difficult to assess, especially where thereis a culture of impunity for violations, it shows awareness on the part of theGeneral People’s Committee for Public Security of the need to have someform of human rights program on display.Saif al-Islam al-Gaddafi, the son of Mu’ammaral-Gaddafi, is generally perceived as the leader or sometimes spokesperson forthe “reformist” groups in Libyan government. His speeches in Augustto Libyan youth associations had become the platform for reform. He used thesespeeches to announce plans to draft a new constitution, a radical suggestion inthe context of his father’s vision of direct democracy. In August 2007his speech “Libya - Truth for All” spoke candidly of some of thehuman rights violations of the past and of the right of families to learn aboutwhat had happened to their disappeared relatives.[41]On August 22, 2008, however, Saif al-Islam announced that he was retiring frompolitical life and would confine himself to his charitable activities throughhis foundation.[42]Some analysts interpreted this as a sign of his receding power internally andtherefore also that of the so-called reformist members of government. OnOctober 12, however, two months after he escorted Abdelbaset al-Megrahi back toLibya, the People’s Leadership Committees appointed Saif al-Islamal-Gaddafi as their general coordinator, effectively making him the second mostimportant man in the country. The week before, Libyan Leader Mu’ammaral-Gaddafi had asked the People’s Leadership Committees to find anofficial position for his son Saif to “allow him to implementreforms.”[43]V. Freedom of Expression“Overall, it’s true, we have morefreedom of expression. Before, we wouldn’t even try to express ourselves.Now we’re taking risks.”—Libyan journalist, Tripoli, April 2009“Things are much better but therecan be a regression because there is no liberalization in the law.”—Libyan journalist, Tripoli, April 2009“The four red lines are the applicationof Islamic law, the Koran and its requirements, security and stability ofLibya, its territorial integrity and Mu’ammar Gaddafi.”—Saif al-Islam al-Gaddafi, August 2007The past five years have witnessed a gradual opening of anew, still vulnerable but nevertheless measurable, space for freedom ofexpression. The government retains control over most of the media in Libya andmonitors and censors the new private media.  The establishment of twoprivate newspapers and a satellite TV station in August 2007 was initiallyembraced by journalists with great enthusiasm as they explored new boundariesof critical speech. Later, however, as government pushed back, journalistsbecame more cautious and less optimistic about the sustainability of thisfreedom. The continued existence of repressive laws, which criminalize freespeech, casts a heavy shadow over the press. The Press Prosecutor, one ofLibya’s specialized prosecutors who also covers narcotics, the GeneralProsecutor and the State Security prosecutors have been playing an increasinglyactive role by initiating criminal investigations into cases where complaintsof slander were brought against journalists. Many people Human Rights Watch metargued that there have been small but tangible developments in Libya over thepast 5 years, with one lawyer telling Human Rights Watch “Icouldn’t have spoken to you in 2005 the way I can today.”[44]The establishment of two new private newspapers Oea[45]andQuryna[46]on August 20, 2007 created new avenues for a certain amount of criticism ofofficials which would have been unthinkable in previous years. Both newspapersare owned by Al Ghad, a company closely affiliated to Mu’ammaral-Gaddafi’s son Saif al-Islam al-Gaddafi, which also establishedsatellite TV station Al Libeyya. Libyan authorities nationalized the latterin June 2009 and a new TV station Al Wasat.  Articles have appearedcriticizing the General Prosecutor for corruption, violating the law andfailing to investigate complaints and the Benghazi local authorities forcorruption.[47]On September 3, 2009, lawyer Mohamed Allagi wrote an article in Oeacriticizing the lack of judicial independence in Libya.[48]These newspapers act as mouthpieces for the so-called ‘reform’groups closely affiliated with Saif al-Islam al-Gaddafi’s politicalposition, but the fact that these criticisms have been voiced in a public forumreflects the existence of some tolerance towards limited politicaldiversity.Independent Libyan news websites based abroad, such asLibya Al Youm, Al Manara and Jeel Libya, which publish informationthat is critical of the government, are accessible in Libya and theircorrespondents are allowed to operate, though not without harassment. LibyaAl Youm, an independent United Kingdom-based news website, is one of theprimary references for anyone seeking news about what happens in Libya. Despitethe fact that it frequently publishes articles critical of the government andnews on the most sensitive of issues such as the Abu Salim demonstrations, itmaintains two correspondents in Libya, based in Tripoli and Benghazi,respectively.  The Tripoli correspondent, Fathi Ben Eissa, told HumanRights Watch that he has a press card and is able to interview Libyan officialsand go to high-level press conferences despite the fact that Libya al-Youmis not registered in Libya and continues to publish articles critical of thepolitical system and the authorities.[49]On November 22, 2008 Agence France-Press was the firstglobal news agency to formally open a bureau in Tripoli with an accreditedforeign correspondent and on February 24, 2009 international newspapers andmagazines such as the International Herald Tribune and Newsweek becameavailable for sale in Libya for the first time in a quarter of a century.These changes have occurred in spite of the continued repressivelegal framework and take on more significance when viewed in that contextbecause journalists take significant risks by writing critically of governmentpolicies and abuses. The 1969 Constitutional Proclamation on December whichguaranteed some rights, such as the right to work, health care and education,provides for freedom of opinion only “within the limits of publicinterest and the principles of the Revolution.”[50]Article 178 of the Libyan penal code orders life imprisonment for the disseminationof information considered to “tarnish [the country’s] reputation orundermine confidence in it abroad.” Article 207 imposes the death penaltyfor “whoever spreads within the country, by whatever means, theories orprinciples aiming to change the basic principles of the Constitution or thefundamental structures of the social system or to overthrow the state’spolitical, social or economic structures or destroy any of the fundamentalstructures of the social system using violence, terrorism or any other unlawfulmeans.” There are still political prisoners imprisoned under theseprovisions which criminalize free speech, such as the case of Abdelnasseral-Rabbasi discussed below in Section VII.In a speech in August 2007, Saif al-Islam al-Gaddafi spoke openlyof the limits to freedom of expression in Libya identifying four “redlines” which are “the application of Islamic law, the Koran and itsrequirements, security and stability of Libya, its territorial integrity andMu’ammar Gaddafi.”[51]The existence of these four lines was confirmed to Human Rights Watch byjournalists and by officials such as the acting General Prosecutor. [52]In November 2008, an unidentified caller on a live program on Benghazi LocalRadio criticized Saif al-Islam saying “Who is this Saif al-Islam on whosebehalf Libyan youth are demonstrating? And where were they when people werebeing publicly executed in the 1980s?”[53] As a result ofthis call, Younis al-Magbari, the director for Press and Broadcasting at theGeneral People’s Committee for Media and Culture, ordered disciplinarymeasures to be taken against the broadcaster and producer of the program. In aninterview to Al Jazeera, however, al-Magbari said he’d revokedthat decision and apologized to the journalists. This came after theintervention of Saif al-Islam who said that since he was not a “redline” he could be criticized.[54]As one journalist told Human Rights Watch “the problem is that you cannever tell when a particular line is red.”[55]Human Rights Watch met with a group of journalists at theTripoli Journalists’ Association, the largest section of theJournalists’ Syndicate, to discuss the state of freedom of expression inLibya. One journalist told Human Rights Watch that “there is a margin offreedom, but it’s not real freedom because it depends on the mood of theministers. This freedom goes up and down.”[56]Another journalist interjected that “there are clear boundaries, and youlose your job if you go beyond them, or they will freeze your salary.”[57]The journalists, editors and even the acting General Prosecutor with whom HumanRights Watch met all spoke matter-of-factly about the four “redlines” identified by Saif al-Islam al-Gaddafi in August 2007.Nevertheless, one journalist said that “overall, it’s true, we havea bit more freedom of expression. Before, we wouldn’t even try to expressourselves. Now we’re taking risks.”[58]Prosecution ofJournalistsThis limited expansion of freedom of the press has broughtwith it a corresponding increase in the number of defamation claims broughtagainst journalists.  Overly broad provisions in the penal codecriminalize free speech.  Under the penal code and the 1972 presslaw, a defamation conviction carries a sentence of imprisonment, which cementsjournalists’ tendency towards self-censorship.For example, journalist Tarek el-Houny, who writes for Quryna,wrote an article entitled “The Governor Is Not Governing”criticizing the lack of metal coins available in the country as a result ofpolicies by the central bank of Libya. On November 30, 2008 the PressProsecutor summoned him on charges of defamation after a complaint was filed bythe central bank governor, Farahat Ben Qaddara, who claimed the article wasslanderous. Tarek el-Houny told Human Rights Watch that he had criticized thefinancial policies of the governor and not the man himself but the prosecutorhad questioned him about his article and subsequently told him to presenthimself once a week before the office of the prosecutor to sign in.[59]After two months of this he discovered that his case had been brought before acourt. The trial was suspended after the intervention of Saif al-Islamal-Gaddafi. El-Houny told Human Rights Watch that such an experience wouldincrease self-censorship even more, saying “this experience made me verynervous. I now think twice about every line I write and am verycautious.”[60]On January 11, 2009, the State Security Prosecutor summonedGaryounis University political science professor Fathi el Baaga on charges of“incitement against the Jamahireya system” for publishing anarticle on May 5, 2007 in Quryna entitled “Where is LibyaHeading?” which criticized the current political system in Libya.[61]He was released on bail on condition he sign in at the Benghazi PressProsecutor’s office once a week. On January 16, Libya Al Youm reportedthat Public Prosecutor Mohamed al-Misrati dropped all the charges against himafter the intervention of Saif el Islam al-Gaddafi.[62]On October 21, 2009, Mohamed al-Sareet, a Libyan journalist,wrote on Jeel Libya, an independent news website based in London, abouta rare demonstration in Benghazi by women who live in a state-run careresidence for women and girls who were orphaned as children, calling for an endto sexual harassment they said they had experienced in the center. Thedemonstrators were also demanding the return of the center's former director.On October 22, local police summoned al-Sareet to the Hadaek police station forquestioning. On October 26, the General Prosecutor's Office summoned him for furtherquestioning and charged him with criminal defamation, which carries a prisonsentence. Jeel Libya's director told Human Rights Watch that al-Sareethad received threats to burn down his house to intimidate him into retractinghis article.[63]On October 29, however, the General Prosecutor’s office opened aninvestigation into the claims and on October 31 he charged the former head ofthe residence with sexual harassment. The Gaddafi Foundation also met withal-Sareet and assured him that the charges against him would be dropped.Libya’sInternational Obligations and Libyan LawThe government’s strict control of the mediacontradicts Libya’s obligations under international law. Article 9 of theAfrican Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, ratified by Libya in 1986,guarantees that, “[e]very individual shall have the right to receiveinformation,” and that “every individual shall have the right toexpress and disseminate his opinions within the law.” Article 19 of theInternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which Libya is a stateparty, sets out minimum international standards for freedom of expression. Itstates: “Everyone shall have the right to hold opinions withoutinterference; Everyone shall have the right to freedom of expression; thisright shall include freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideasof all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print,in the form of art, or through any other media of his choice.”[64]Any limitations to this right must be necessary, proportionate and establishedby law.Applicable Libyan law is far from meeting internationalstandards. The country’s Constitutional Declaration of 1969 includes abroadly worded limitation clause that opens the door to abuse. It states:“Freedom of opinion is guaranteed within the limits of public interestand the principles of the Revolution.”[65] The Great GreenCharter for Human Rights, passed in 1988, does not explicitly enshrine theprinciple of free speech or the right to information. Law 20, On EnhancingFreedom, adopted in 1991, states that “every citizen has the right toopenly express his thoughts and opinions in the People’s Congresses andin the Jamahiriya [mass] media,” unless “he uses [that right] inviolation of the people’s authority or for personal motives.”[66]The 2009 proposed draft penal code contains some overallimprovement but still retains provisions that violate freedom of expression.Article 198 states that offending a public official shall be punishable byimprisonment. Article 155 provides for imprisonment for insultingMu’ammar al-Gaddafi and Article 167 provides for life imprisonment forpromoting principles with the aim of changing the Jamahiriya system usingillegal means.  The restrictions on freedom of expression found inArticles 155, 156, 159, 167, 198 and 230 go beyond what is permitted underinternational law and create an atmosphere which stifles free speech andcriticism. The right to criticize one’s government has particularly highpriority in the protections of international law because it is precisely one ofthe rights most likely to be met with harassment, abuse, and denial bygovernments. The Declaration of Principles on Freedom of Expression in Africa,adopted by the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights in 2002, saysstates shall ensure their laws on defamation comply with the standard that“public figures shall be required to tolerate a greater degree ofcriticism.”[67]VI. Freedom of Assembly and Association“The state has swallowed up civilsociety and will not give space to human rights defenders.”—Libyan lawyer, April 22, 2009There is virtually no freedom of assembly or association inLibya because the concept of an independent civil society goes directly againstGaddafi’s theory of government by the masses without intermediary.[68]Law 71 bans any group activity opposing the ideology of the 1969 revolution andimposes the death penalty on those who form, join or support such groups.Freedom of AssemblyFreedom of assembly is severely restricted in Libya. On June29, the General People’s Committee issued a decision (312/2009) requiring30-day advance approval from a newly established government committee to holdany meeting or event, and requiring the meeting organizers to provide a list ofall participants and the issues to be discussed. Under international law, theserequirements do not meet the standard of a necessary or proportionatelimitation to freedom of assembly and association, for example as in Articles10 and 11 of the African Charter.Attempting to organize a demonstration remainsillegal. In February 2007 Libyan security agents arrested 14 organizers of aplanned peaceful demonstration intended to commemorate the anniversary of aviolent crackdown on demonstrators in Benghazi. Security forces detained themincommunicado in Ain Zara and al-Al-Jdaida prisons until June 24, 2007 whenthey came before a court to face charges of "attempting to overthrow thepolitical system" and "communication with enemy powers.”[69]Increasingly, however, some demonstrations are taking place despite theserestrictions. In Benghazi, families of a group of prisoners killed in Abu Salimprison have held a number of public demonstrations. Although security officialscontinue to harass and intimidate those taking part in the demonstrations, thefact that they have taken place at all and that they have been covered in themedia is unprecedented. (see Section IX Unprecedented Activism)No IndependentNongovernmental OrganizationsLibya has no independent nongovernmental organizations. Thegovernment has refused to allow independent journalists' and lawyers'organizations. Law 19, "On Associations," requires a political bodyto approve all such organizations, does not allow appeals against negative decisionsand allows for continuous governmental interference in the running of theorganization. If the organization plans to work country-wide, its applicationgoes to thesecretariat of the General People’s Congress.[70]If the proposed work is limited to a governorate, the application goes to thePeople’s Congress of that governorate. If thework is international, it goes to the whole GeneralPeople’s Committee. The law itself allows the government to revoke theauthorization of an association at any time without needing to providejustification.There are a number of semi-official organizations that docharitable work, providing services and organizing seminars, but none thatpublicly take critical stances against the government. The only organizationsthat do human rights work, the most sensitive area of all in Libya, are onlyable to do so because they derive their political standing from their personalaffiliation with the regime. In effect, they perform the role of human rightscommissions or ombudsmen that are part of the government but there are clearlimits to what issues they are willing to take up and how much pressure theyare willing to exert at any given time.The main organization able to do human rights work in Libyais the Human Rights Society of the Gaddafi International Charity andDevelopment Foundation (GDF), chaired by Saif al-Islam al-Gaddafi, a son ofColonel Mu’ammar al-Gaddafi. It has intervened in a number of cases tosecure the release of political prisoners or facilitate the return of Libyannationals.[71]It has at times taken public stances against the authorities, such as itscriticism of the General Prosecutor over the arrest of attorney Gum’aAtiga, former Secretary of the GDF’s Human Rights Society.  The GDF“strongly condemn[ed] this arbitrary action and request[ed] theSecretariat of the General People's Congress to hold accountable those whocaused the arrest of the person concerned and to proceed to his release as soonas possible.”[72]On many other issues, though, it treads very cautiously and prefers to try toaddress cases and concerns in a non-public manner. With Saif al-Islam’sappointment in October 2009 as General Coordinator of the People’sLeadership Committees, the governmental nature of the Gaddafi Foundation is solidified.Another organization that does some work on human rights isWaatasemu. Chaired by Aisha al-Gaddafi, a lawyer and the daughter of ColonelMu’ammar al-Gaddafi, Waatasemu has intervened in death penalty cases,successfully arranging for the payment of blood money to reduce the sentence tolife imprisonment.[73](see Section XI below) The International Organization for Peace, Care andRelief (IOPCR), run by Khaled Hamedi, the son of a member of the RevolutionaryCommand Council, is the only organization able to access migrant detentioncenters.[74]It was only on the basis of a 2008 agreement with IOPCR that the office of theUnited Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) was able to gain accessto Misrata to interview asylum seekers. [75]All professional syndicates and trade unions in Libya arestate-controlled. However, within the Bar Association and theJournalists’ Syndicate there are a number of individuals who expressindependent views and take positions critical of the government but try to workwithin the existing structures. However, opportunities remain limited. As onelawyer told Human Rights Watch “the state regards us with suspicion atthe Tripoli Bar Association because we are the biggest.”[76]Despite this, the lawyers at the Tripoli Bar Association have been trying totake an increasingly active role in monitoring and upholding human rights. Thelawyers told Human Rights Watch that they recently established a fact-findingcommittee which had requested access to Ain Zara prison in April 2009 but theInternal Security Agency had refused. They remain hopeful of eventually beinggranted access since a human rights committee affiliated with the BarAssociation had visited a prison in 1998.[77]On April 22, 2008 the Tripoli Bar Association held a seminarto discuss the new draft penal code. The lawyers rejected the draft calling forits revision and for a more inclusive consultation process.[78]One lawyer told Human Rights Watch “everything you wrote in your lastreport [Words to Deeds 2006] about the repressive legal framework stillapplies.”[79]Freedom of AssociationCriminalizedThe new draft penal code retains provisions that violatefreedom of association. Article 166 criminalizes the establishment of anyorganization that is “against the Jamahiriya system” or“threatening its popular authority”, without further defining whatthat would include. Article 167 criminalizes all those who promote“changing the Jamahiriya system”, although it appears to be limitedto those who do so “using violence or other illegal instruments.”These provisions are overly broad, not specifically defining the crime to allowfor legal certainty, and they also restrict the rights of people to formassociations or advocate for their views.  As it stands, these provisionswould encompass organizations or groups which undertake criticism of publicpolicies by the government, as well as commentary on the human rightssituation. They could even criminalize research institutes that producefindings that are critical of governmental policy.   Similarly,Article 169 seeks to limit the freedom of Libyans to join or establishinternational organizations unless they receive permission from the government,without establishing the criteria for such permission. Under international law,while a government may require notification of the establishment of anassociation, requiring governmental permission to establish or join anassociation should be on the basis of criteria that are clear, objective andappealable.Attempting to set up a human rights organization remainsvery risky, as the case of Shukri Sahil shows.In March2004, Libyan businessman Shukri Sahil, together with some friends, decided totry to establish a human rights organization in Libya and started informalconsultations about this with friends and contacts in Libya. His friendsinformed him that he would need to gain authorization from the Office ofExternal Security, so he requested a meeting with that office in May 2004.Shukri Sahil told Human Rights Watch that the security officer he spoke toreacted with great anger when he told him that he wanted to set up anorganization, accusing him of having “political ambitions” andbeing a “very dangerous person.” Shukri Sahil believes that all thesubsequent harassment he suffered from state security were related to thisinitial incident.[80]Security forces arrested Shukri Sahil on 20May 2004 and detained him in solitary confinement in the External Securityprison for 13 months. He told Human Rights Watch that security officerstortured him every day for two weeks and every two-to-three days for thefollowing three weeks. They beat him about the body, and especially on thesoles of his feet (falaka) and brought a dog to attack him.  InMarch 2005 he went before a judge for the first time.  The judge chargedhim with violating Law 71, which bans any group activity based on apolitical ideology opposed to the principles of the 1969 al-Fateh Revolution. In June 2005, the authorities transferred him to Abu Salim prison,where they kept him in solitary confinement for two months.[81]His trial before the State Security Court is described below in Section X.The 2008 Attempt toEstablish a Human Rights OrganizationThe most significant attempt to set up an independent humanrights organization came in February 2008, when a group of lawyers, journalistsand other Libyan professionals established two nongovernmental organizationscalled the Centre for Democracy and the Association for Justice and HumanRights. Their goals included spreading democratic values and makingrecommendations for legal reform to promote democratic activities and humanrights.[82]On March 17, 2008, the 90 founding members of theAssociation for Justice and Human Rights sent their application forregistration to the General People’s Committee for Social Affairs. TheCentre for Democracy sent its application to the General People’sCommittee for Social Affairs on May 4, 2008, and on May 25 the NGO Directorateat the General People’s Committee for Social Affairs sent them a letterconfirming approval of the application.[83]   On May4 Libya Al Youm reported that the NGO Directorate had sent the list ofmembers of both organizations to the Internal Security Agency[84]and on May 19 the founding members announced that the Agency had stipulated theremoval of 12 members of the Association for Justice from the list beforeallowing the organization to be established.  The 12 members includedformer political prisoners, including Gum’a Atiga, a lawyer and formersecretary of the Human Rights Society at the Gaddafi Foundation. In fact, Law19 does not prescribe a role for Internal Security Agency approval in theestablishment of organizations, stating in Article Six that “theestablishment of an association on a national level occurs by decision of theGeneral People’s Committee.”  The head of Internal Security,Col. Al-Tohamy Khaled, denied that his agency had intervened, telling HumanRights Watch that “the Internal Security Agency does not have the rightto intervene in the law and request certain members to be removed but it doeshave a duty to investigate the background of each individual and to check ifthey have a record.”[85]On June 10, the NGO Directorate at the GeneralPeople’s Committee for Social Affairs revoked its initial authorizationand officially refused the applications for registration of the Centre forDemocracy and the Association for Justice and Human Rights, a move lawyersattributed to the intervention of the Internal Security Agency.[86]Lawyer Dhaw al-Mansuri, President of the Centre forDemocracy, said he was stopped on June 30, 2008 at around 8 pm, in the streetnear his office by men in plainclothes, forced into a car, blindfolded,handcuffed and driven out of the city to an unknown location.  He wasbeaten and told to abandon the attempt to set up the Centre for Democracy. OnJuly 6, 2008 the Tripoli Bar Association held an emergency meeting to discussthe kidnapping.[87]The Bar Association sent a public letter to the Secretary of Justice and toSaif al-Islam al-Gaddafi, as chairman of the Gaddafi Foundation, protestingthis incident and calling for an investigation. The head of Internal Security,Al-Tohamy Khaled, told Human Rights Watch that an investigation into theincident was still underway. However, he said that he didn’t believe theincident had occurred, saying “who is this Dhaw that the state would careabout? I do not think that security would do that.” [88]Shortly after the incident, the group abandoned theirattempt to establish the two new organizations. As one lawyer put it, “Thisdoor, which was opened after Saif al-Islam’s speech in August 2006, wasnow closed.”[89]Libya’sInternational ObligationsAs party to the African Charter on Human and People’sRights, Libya is under an obligation to provide the right to free association,set out in Article 10. This is reflected in Article 22 of the ICCPR whichfurther stipulates that any limitation must be “necessary in a democraticsociety.” “Necessary” restrictions must also be proportionate:that is, carefully balanced against the specific reason for the restrictionbeing put in place.[90]The UN Human Rights Committee has repeatedly highlighted the importanceof proportionality.[91]In applying a limitation, a government should use no more restrictivemeans than is absolutely required. The African Commission has found“freedom of association is enunciated as an individual right and is firstand foremost a duty for the State to abstain from interfering with the freeformation of associations.”[92]These international obligations are also reflected inArticle 6 of the Great Green Charter for Human Rights which says Libyans arefree to form “associations, trade unions and leagues in order to defendtheir professional interests,” although it does not address associations thatdeal with social or political themes. According to Article 9 of the Law onEnhancing Freedom, “Citizens are free to establish and join trade unions,professional and social federations and leagues and charitable associations inorder to protect their interests or achieve the legitimate objectives for whichthose institutions have been established.”VII. Violations by the Internal Security Agency“What I want is to know what happenedto my father. If he is alive, I wish to speak with him and see him. If he hasbroken the law, he ought to be tried and given a chance to defend himself. Andif he is dead, then I want to know how, where and when it happened. I want adate, a detailed account and the location of his body.”[93]—Hisham Matar, July 2006The structure, mandate and reporting lines of Libya’svarious security agencies remain opaque, primarily because these institutionshave a great deal of informal political power, and function  withoutaccountability or transparency. The Internal Security Agency and ExternalSecurity Agency are formally under the authority of the General People’sCommittee for Public Security.The only publicly available statistics on Libya’sprison population date from June 2007 and indicate there were 12,748 prisonersdistributed among 36 institutions.[94]These prisons fall under the jurisdiction of the General People’sCommittee for Justice. However, the two most notorious prisons, Abu Salim andAin Zara, known for housing political prisoners for years without trial, do notfall under the jurisdiction of the General People’s Committee for Justicebut under the Internal Security Agency.[95]Since the authorities refuse to disclose any information,little is known about the prison populations of Abu Salim and Ain Zara. Theonly information comes from former prisoners who often are too intimidated todiscuss their experiences. During its April 2009 trip to Libya, Human RightsWatch visited Abu Salim prison in Tripoli and was given a tour of the prisonclinic.[96]When Human Rights Watch met with the Deputy Director of Internal Security incharge of the prison, and asked him about the prison population, he respondedthat he “did not know” how many prisoners were in Abu Salim because“it changed on a daily basis.”[97] When Human RightsWatch followed up by asking how many meals were prepared daily, he responded“we always make extra meals so that there is more than enough.”[98]His response is typical of the lack of transparency surrounding the InternalSecurity Agency.Libyan prisons still contain hundreds of political prisonerswho have not engaged in violent acts or advocated violence. Many of thoseimprisoned in Abu Salim belong to Islamist groups. Although some have advocatedviolence, many have not and none have received fair trials. Over the past twoyears, Libyan authorities have released 238 prisoners, 40 in March and mostrecently 88 in October. Overall, 136 of these prisoners were members of theLibyan Islamic Fighting Group, imprisoned after trials before thePeople’s Court or the State Security Court without due process for“membership in an illegal organization.” (see Section X.)Arbitrary DetentionHundreds of prisoners are detained by the Internal SecurityAgency without any legal basis. Over the past few years, an unprecedentedconfrontation between the General People’s Committee for Justice and theGeneral People’s Committee for Public Security has developed over thefailure of Internal Security to implement the decisions of Libyan courts.The Internal Security Agency continues to refuse to release from Abu Salim andAin Zara prisons, prisoners who either have been acquitted by courts or whohave already served their court- imposed sentences. Libyan Secretary of JusticeMostafa Abdeljalil confirmed to Human Rights Watch that “at least200” prisoners who either had been acquitted or had served theirsentences remain in Abu Salim and Ain Zara. [99] On November 2,2009, in an interview with Oea, Secretary for Justice Mostafa Abdeljelilsaid that there were “more than 500 prisoners who were acquitted bycourts in June 2008 and are yet to be released” and criticized thesecurity services for failing to respect court decisions.[100]Secretary Abdeljalil told Human Rights Watch “theseprisons are affiliated to Internal Security and the Ministry of Justice has nojurisdiction over them. The General Prosecutor’s office has ordered theirrelease but this has not occurred ... the General Prosecutor cannot initiate aninvestigation into their continued detention.”[101]The head of the Internal Security Agency, Al-Tohamy Khaled, denied that thereare any such prisoners. He told Human Rights Watch that the acquittal decisionsissued in favor of some prisoners were now being appealed before the HighCourt. He said prisoners who had served their sentences remained imprisonedbecause the prosecutor had brought new charges against them.[102]Human Rights Watch has obtained a copy of a leaked letterwritten by the Secretary of Justice on June 26, 2008, addressed to the GeneralSecretary (Prime Minister), which was also published on various Libyanwebsites. The letter stated that 130 of the group of 189 defendants in the caseof the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group, criminal case No. 120 of 1998, all ofwhom had been imprisoned since 1995, should be released:The court ruled on June 16, 2008 to sentence 19 of them todeath by firing squad, 50 of them to life imprisonment, 15 others to sentencesranging between 10 and 15 years and acquitting 130 defendants of all charges.On this basis the State Security Prosecutor ordered the release of all thosedefendants found innocent and those who had already served the period of theirsentence, but Internal Security has not implemented this decision to this day.[103]This publicized stance by the Secretary of Justice seems to haveemboldened relatives of prisoners to publicly call for their release. On June14, 2009, an Al Jazeera article quoted Saleh al Bakkoush, father ofprisoner Anis Al Bakkoush, [104]calling for the release of his son, imprisoned since 1999 and subsequently acquittedof all charges by a court, who remains in Ain Zara prison. Another familymember told Human Rights Watch “my brother was found innocent in 2005 bythe Tripoli specialized court but he is still in Abu Salim. We keep hoping hewill be released.”[105]Below are some examples of prisoners who are arbitrarilydetained about whose cases Human Rights Watch was able to obtain information.Given the lack of transparency and secrecy of the system, it is extremelydifficult to get detailed information about individual cases.Mahmoud BoushimaMahmoud Boushima, a Libyan national born in1962, returned to Libya on July 17, 2005 after receiving assurances from theGaddafi Foundation that Libyan security officals would not arrest him upon hisreturn.  He had been living in the United Kingdom with his family since1981 and held a UK passport. On July 28, 2005, Internal Security forcesarrested and imprisoned him in Abu Salim.  The State Security Prosecutorthen charged him with membership in an illegal organization, in this case theLibyan Islamic Fighting Group, under Article 206 of the penal code and Articles2,3 and 4 of Law 71. On March 18, 2006 the specialized court of appeal (MahkamaTakhasusiyya) acquitted him in case No. 411/2005. The Prosecutor appealedthis decision on April 22, 2006 and on February 20, 2007, the court ruled againin Boushima’s favour.  His case eventually came before the SupremeCourt, which ruled in his favour on March 30, 2008. He remains in Abu Salimprison.His brother, who is based in Europe, toldHuman Rights Watch that Boushima is in poor health, suffering from asthma,Hepatitis B and depression. For eleven months, the family was refusedpermission to visit him. Between December 2006 and October 2007 guards turnedthem away at the gates of the prison without explanation.Abdellatif Al-RaqoubiInternal Security officers arrested Abdellatif al-Raqoubi,born 1975,on June 19, 2006 in Sabha while on his way to work. Hisfamily says they had no news of him or where he was detained for nearly a year.In May 2007, local authorities informed them that he had been arrested by theHeresy-Fighters (zandaqa ), the security branch dealing with suspectedIslamists, and that he was in Abu Salim prison.Al-Raqoubi first appeared before a court on May 15, 2007, oncharges of insulting Leader Mu’ammar al-Gaddafi and possession ofweapons. The evidence against al-Raqoubi was the confessions of two otherdefendants who later told the judge that they had signed them under torture. OnJune 18, 2008, the State Security Court acquitted him along with 19 others inCase No. 314.  The Internal Security Agency released al-Raqoubi from AbuSalim prison on October 15, 2009.The continued detention of these prisoners is a violation ofArticle 9 of the ICCPR which states that “no one shall be deprived of hisliberty except on such grounds and in accordance with such procedure as areestablished by law”, as well as Article 6 of the African Charter. Thefailure to release also violates Article 434 of the Libyan Penal code on thedeprivation of liberty.The continued detention of these prisoners in the absence ofa court order authorizing it constitutes arbitrary detention and amounts to aviolation of Article 9 of the ICCPR. It is also a violation of article 434 ofthe Libyan Penal code on deprivation of liberty.Political Prisoners“We don’t have any prisoners ofconscience, we only have terrorists.”—Head of Internal Security Col. Al-Tohamy Khaled,April 25, 2009Libyan prisons still contain hundreds of prisoners,sentenced after unfair trials, for expression of their political views. Libya’spenal code and Law 71 criminalize activities protected by freedom of expressionand freedom of association under international law. Earlier this year, Libyareleased the last of a group of 14 prisoners arrested for organizing ademonstration.[106]Human Rights Watch has written to the Libyan authorities to ask how manyindividuals remain imprisoned as a result of these provisions but at the timeof publication has yet to receive a response. Because of the general lack oftransparency surrounding the prisons controlled by the Internal Security Agencyand the practice of incommunicado detention and enforced disappearance, it isimpossible to assess how many political prisoners remain imprisoned in Libya.Two cases described below are typical of the policy of the Libyan authoritiestowards any expression of dissent.  The case of Fathi al-Jahmi, one of themost prominent political prisoners, is addressed below and shows the inherent crueltyin the continued detention of such prisoners.Abdelnasser al-Rabbasi“I was imprisoned because of mattersthe Leader now says himself, criticizing the situation in my country. He nowcriticizes corruption and the economic situation.  So I don’t knowwhy I was imprisoned. I did not carry a gun, I carried a pen.”Abdelnasser al-Rabbasi, 43, was a social security worker inBani Walid, who also wrote on a freelance basis.    One day hesent the Arab Times, a US-based newspaper, a short story, entitledChaos, Corruption and the Suicide of the Mind in Libya (Al Fawda AlFawda, Al Fasad Al Fasad, wa Entihar Al Aql fi Libya maa Qeyam Okhra),  aplay on the words of the title of a piece written by Colonel Mu’ammaral-Gaddafi. On January 3, 2003, Internal Security officers in plainclothesarrested him at his home and detained him incommunicado for six months.Human Rights Watch interviewed al-Rabbasi in Abu Salimprison on April 27, 2009. Despite the fact that a guard kept eavesdropping onthe interview, al-Rabbasi bravely told Human Rights Watch his story:I was writing about corruption and human rights.  Iwrote about economic corruption in a novel.  On the 18th ofAugust 2003 I was sentenced to 15 years.  I might just as well havecarried a gun or blown myself up with explosives. I had no lawyer, nothing ofthat sort. I don’t have anything to hide. I’m not part of any groupor anything like that.  All I had at home were some papers.  I haveno objection to you publicizing these events.  I have nothing to lose.Al Karama, a Geneva-based human rights organization,submitted his case to the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, which in2005 found that “the deprivation of liberty of Mr. Abdenacer [sic.]Younes Meftah Al Rabassi is arbitrary, being in contravention of articles 14and 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.”[107]On July 28, 2003, the People’s Court, a courtnotorious for politically-motivated trials, sentenced al-Rabbasi to 15 yearsimprisonment for “dishonoring the guide of the revolution”(Mu’ammar al-Gaddafi), under article 164 of the penal code. The GeneralPeople’s Congress abolished the People’s Court on January 12, 2005and Libyan justice officials said that cases under review at the time weretransferred to regular criminal courts.[108]  HumanRights Watch has called on the government to retry all cases judged in thePeople’s Court due to systematic due-process violations in the court,such as long periods of pre-trial detention and limited access to a lawyer.[109]As of September 2009, no court has reviewed Abdelnasser al-Rabbasi’scase.Mahmud MatarSecurity officials arrested Mahmud Matar, along with his twonephews Saleh and Ali Abdel Salam Eshnaqet, in March 1990 and detained them inAbu Salim prison. For the first two years, prison authorities detained Matar inisolated confinement. More than 11 years after his arrest, the People’sProsecutor charged him and nine others under Law 71 with membership in anillegal organization whose principles are against the Fateh revolution and withthe possession of weapons under the penal code. On February 5, 2002, thePermanent Military Court sentenced Matar along with Saleh and Ali Ashneqat andHamed Said Khanfoor to life imprisonment, acquitted one, and the remaining fivewere given terms between 10-12 years. The trial was marred by a number ofprocedural irregularities. During the trial, defense lawyers argued that theconfessions presented as evidence had been extracted under torture and shouldbe dismissed. In addition, defendants’ access to their lawyers wasseverely restricted.Mahmud Matar is still imprisoned in Abu Salim prison. He hasdiabetes, high blood pressure, advanced cataract and for the past five monthsan inflamed prostate, but the Abu Salim prison authorities have not allowed himto see a doctor despite repeated requests.Fathi al-JahmiOn May 20, 2009, Libya’s most prominent dissident,Fathi al-Jahmi, died in a Jordanian hospital after six and a half years indetention. He remained detained in Libya, under the control of the InternalSecurity Agency, up until two weeks before his death.Internal security forces arrested al-Jahmi, anengineer and former provincial governor, on October 19, 2002, after hecriticized the government and the Libyan leader, Mu`ammar al-Gaddafi, regardingfree elections in Libya, a free press, and the release of political prisoners.A court sentenced him to five years in prison under articles 166 and 167 of thepenal code: trying to overthrow the government; insulting al-Gaddafi; andcontacting foreign authorities. On March 10, 2004, an appeals court gaveal-Jahmi a suspended sentence of one year and ordered his release on March 12.That same day, al-Jahmi gave an interview to the US-funded al-Hurra television,in which he repeated his call for Libya's democratization. He gave anotherinterview to the station four days later, in which he called al-Gaddafi adictator and said, "All that is left for him to do is hand us a prayercarpet and ask us to bow before his picture and worship him." Two weekslater, on March 26, 2004, security agents arrested al-Jahmi a second time, andheld him at a special facility on the coast near Tripoli.Human Rights Watch visited al-Jahmi in May 2005 at thespecial facility in Tripoli. He said then that he faced charges on three countsunder articles 166 and 167 of the penal code: trying to overthrow thegovernment; insulting al-Gaddafi; and contacting foreign authorities. The thirdcharge, he said, resulted from conversations he had had with a US diplomat inTripoli. In September 2006, a court consigned al-Jahmi to a psychiatrichospital, saying he was ‘mentally unfit.' During the roughly one yearal-Jahmi spent at the psychiatric hospital, his health significantly declined,forcing his transfer to the Tripoli Medical Center in July 2007.Human Rights Watch researchers visited al-Jahmi in theTripoli Medical Center on April 25 and 26, 2009. The delegation noted a seriousdeterioration in his condition since Human Rights Watch last saw him in March2008 in the Tripoli Medical Center: he appeared frail and emaciated, couldbarely speak, and could not lift his arms or head. When the researchers askedhim if he was free to leave, he said, "No." When they asked him if hewanted to go home, he said, "Yes."  Instead, Fathi al-Jahmi, 68,slipped into a coma on May 3 and was flown to the Amman Medical Center two dayslater, accompanied by his son. He underwent surgery on May 7 and died ofunknown causes 13 days later. On May 21, 2009, his son arranged for his body tobe flown back to Libya, where his family buried him.Libyan officials had announced in March 2008 that al-Jahmihad been freed and could leave the hospital at any time but Human Rights Watchassesses that he was detained the entire time he was in the Tripoli MedicalCenter. When Human Rights Watch researchers visited him in March 2008, theynoted the presence of guards outside his hospital room and that he and hisfamily could not freely make decisions about his medical care, due to real orperceived pressure from the government. In April 2009, four men in plainclothes were in the room next door; al-Jahmi said they were usually stationedthere. Security officers controlled access to visitors.  The Libyanauthorities therefore bore full responsibility for his well-being.Human Rights Watch repeatedly called for the immediate andunconditional release of al-Jahmi, as a political prisoner imprisoned for thepeaceful expression of his opinion. Even though al-Jahmi did not die indetention, his imprisonment contributed to the deterioration in his health.Disappearance“Internal Security is a sword hangingover the necks of the people of Libya. I only want the truth.”[110]—Libyan relative of prisoner.The practice of enforced disappearance by Internal Securitycontinues in Libya. Over the past decades, Internal Security agents haveregularly detained individuals incommunicado in prisons or in Internal Securityoffices.  Libyan groups estimate that Libyan security officials havedisappeared thousands of individuals over the past three decades.[111]Hundreds of those disappearance cases have been officially acknowledged thisyear in the context of the 1996 Abu Salim prison massacre discussion in SectionIX below. Many others, however, have not been addressed and the families of thedisappeared continue to suffer in ignorance.It is common for security officials to detain those arrestedat undisclosed locations without access to their families or to a lawyer, evenif they are subsequently released after a few months. Many, however, aredetained for several years and some for over a decade. For example, MohamedMilad El Seheili told Human Rights Watch how Libyan security forces came to thefamily home on the night of November 18, 1998 and arrested him. They alsoarrested his two brothers Omar and Boubakr, who were in different apartments atthe time. Mohamed Milad Al Seheili told Human Rights Watch that he was nevercharged or told why they arrested him. He was released in March 1999. To thisday, however, Mohamed and his family have been unable to obtain any informationabout his two brothers and do not know where they are or what has become ofthem.[112]The following are some of the most high-profiledisappearance cases which remain unresolved:Jaballa Hamed Matar and Izzat al-MegaryefProminent Libyan opposition members Jaballa Hamed Matar andIzzat al-Megaryefdisappeared in Cairo on March 13, 1990. Both membersof the National Front for the Salvation of Libya, they had sought refuge inCairo from Gaddafi’s policy of targeted assassinations of those whodeclared their opposition to him.Hisham Matar told Human Rights Watch that for two yearsafter his father’s disappearance in Cairo in March 1990, Egyptiansecurity told the family that Jaballa Hamed Matar was in Egypt. In 1993however, a friend of his father’s brought the family in Cairo a letter inhis father’s handwriting. The letter was dated 1992 and confirmed thatJaballa Hamed Matar was imprisoned in Abu Salim prison and that Egyptian securityofficials had handed him over to Libyan security in March 1990. A second letterdated 1995 reached the family in 1996. In 2002, a prisoner who had just arrivedat Abu Salim prison, sent a message to Matar’s family, stating that hehad seen Jaballa Hamed Matar in a high-security prison in Tripoli that year.[113]The Matar family has never received a response from Libyanofficials on the whereabouts of his father, despite letters over the yearsrequesting information. In an autobiographical essay for The Independent,Hisham Matar wrote “Life attempts to teach us about loss: that one canstill find peace in the finality of death. And yet, my loss gives no peace. Myfather is not incarcerated, yet he is not free; he is not dead, yet he is notalive either. My loss is self-renewing, insistent and incomplete.”[114]Youcif al-Megaryef, the son of Izzat al-Megaryef who nowlives in the United States, told Human Rights Watch that “on March 13,1990 Egyptian Intelligence officer Colonel Mohamad Hassan came to our homerequesting my dad to accompany him for a routine meeting. My father left withhim, never to be seen again.”[115]The family later received letters written in 1993 and an audio recording fromIzzat saying that Egyptian security officers had interrogated him and thenhanded him over to Libyan intelligence on March 14, 1990. Libyan securityofficials took Izzat al-Megaryef along with Jaballa Matar and imprisoned themin Abu Salim prison. Former Abu Salim prisoners told al-Megaryef’s familythat they had communicated with Izzat al-Megaryef. The last news the familyreceived of him was in April 1996. The Libyan authorities have never respondedto the family’s enquiries about Izzat al-Megaryef’s whereabouts.Mansur al-KikhyaOn 10 December 1993, Libyan opposition Mansur al-Kikhya wasin Cairo for a meeting of the Arab Organization for Human Rights of which hewas a board member.  On that day he disappeared in Cairo and his friendsbelieve that Egyptian security officials handed him over to Libyansecurity.  A former Libyan representative to the United Nations andsubsequent foreign minister in the 1970s, al-Kikhya left Libya in 1980 to jointhe Libyan opposition abroad.  In February 2009, Libyan website AlManara reported that the North Benghazi Court held the first session in acase brought by al-Kikhya’s family to address issues of inheritance andpaperwork.  This would be the first time a Libyan court addresses thedisappearance of high-profile dissidents.Imam Sayyed Musa SadrOne of the most prominent of the disappearance cases is thatof Lebanese Shii cleric Imam Sayyed Musa Sadr. On August 25, 1978, Imam Sadrarrived in Libya accompanied by Sheikh Mohamad Yacoub and journalist AbbasBadreddine for a meeting with Colonel Gaddafi. On August 31, the three set outfrom their hotel in Tripoli for the meeting and that was the last time theywere seen. Colonel Gaddafi denied that the meeting ever took place and theLibyan authorities said that the three had left Libya for Rome. Libya laterrefused to meet a panel of investigators.Death in CustodyIsmail Ibrahim Al KhazmiInternal Security agents arrested Ismail Ibrahim Al Khazmi,born 1976, from his home in June 2006.  Despite many attempts, his familywas unable to obtain news of his whereabouts and al-Khazmi was disappeared. In2006 Al-Khazmi died under torture. On May 1, 2007 his family received a medicalreport which said he had died of kidney failure.  In mid-March 2009 theyasked his family to take the body to bury it but the father refused, sayingthat he wants an autopsy and a proper investigation into his son’s death.[116]Under Article 2(3), Libya has a duty to investigate andprosecute all violations that amount to crimes, such as those against the rightto life, the right to liberty and security of the person and the right torecognition before the law, which is violated in the case of an enforceddisappearance.  UN Human Rights Committee General Comment 31 says thatfailure of a state party to investigate can itself give rise to a separatebreach of the Covenant.[117]In addition, the UN Principles on the Effective Prevention and Investigation ofExtra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions state that “there shall bethorough, prompt and impartial investigation of all suspected cases ofextra-legal, arbitrary and summary executions, including cases where complaintsby relatives or other reliable reports suggest unnatural death in the abovecircumstances.”[118]Libya is further required to take measures to prevent similar violations in thefuture.VIII. Impunity for Gross AbusesThe legacy of the abusive practices of the past decades inLibya is a heavy one.[119]Most Libyan dissidents targeted by the regime have sought asylum abroad, thoughseveral remain disappeared.  The Libyan government has yet to address theviolations of the past through investigation or prosecution. One of the mostserious incidents of gross human rights violations, one which has becomeemblematic in Libya, is the Abu Salim mass prison killing of 1200 prisoners in1996.The 1996 Abu Salim KillingsOn June 28 and 29 1996 an estimated 1200 prisoners werekilled in Abu Salim prison. This number was first made public by Hussein AlShafa’i, a former prisoner who was working in the kitchen at Abu Salimand who calculated this figure by counting the number of meals he preparedprior to and after the incident.[120]The number was also confirmed by the Libyan Secretary of Justice to HumanRights Watch in April 2009[121]and in a press release by the Gaddafi Foundation on August 10, 2009 which setthe number at 1167.[122]In June 2004 and again in June 2006, Human Rights Watchinterviewed Hussein al-Shafa’i, the former Abu Salim prisoner, now in theUS, who says he witnessed the killings. While the organization could notindependently verify his claims, many details are consistent with accounts byother former prisoners.According to al-Shafa’i, the incident began around4:40 p.m. on June 28, when prisoners in Block 4 seized a guard named Omar whowas bringing their food. Hundreds of prisoners from blocks 3, 5 and 6 escapedtheir cells. They were angry over restricted family visits and poor livingconditions, which had deteriorated after some prisoners escaped the previousyear. Al-Shafa’i told Human Rights Watch:Five or seven minutes after it started, the guards on theroofs shot at the prisoners—shot at the prisoners who were in the openareas. There were 16 or 17 injured by bullets. The first to die was Mahmoudal-Mesiri. The prisoners took two guards hostage.Half an hour later, al-Shafa’i said, two top securityofficials, Abdallah Sanussi, who is married to the sister of al-Gaddafi’swife, and Nasr al-Mabrouk arrived in a dark green Audi with a contingent ofsecurity personnel. Sanussi ordered the shooting to stop and told the prisonersto appoint four representatives for negotiations. The prisoners chose Muhammadal-Juweili, Muhammad Ghlayou, Miftah al-Dawadi, and Muhammad Bosadra.According to al-Shafa’i, who said he observed andoverheard the negotiations from the kitchen, the prisoners asked al-Sanussi forclean clothes, outside recreation, better medical care, family visits, and theright to have their cases heard before a court; many of the prisoners were inprison without trial. Al-Sanussi said he would address the physical conditions,but the prisoners had to return to their cells and release the two hostages.The prisoners agreed and released one guard named Atiya, but the guard Omar haddied.Security personnel took the bodies of those killed and sentthe wounded for medical care. About 120 other sick prisoners boarded threebuses, ostensibly to go to the hospital.According to al-Shafa’i, he saw the buses take theprisoners to the back of the prison.Around 5:00 a.m. on June 29, security forces moved some of the prisonersbetween the civilian and military sections of the prison. By 9:00 a.m. they hadforced hundreds of prisoners from blocks 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6 into differentcourtyards. They moved the low security prisoners in block 2 to the militarysection and kept the prisoners in blocks 7 and 8, with individual cells,inside. Al-Shafa’i, who was behind the administration building with otherkitchen workers at the time, told Human Rights Watch what happened next:At 11:00, a grenade was thrown into one of the courtyards.I did not see who threw it but I am sure it was a grenade. I heard an explosionand right after a constant shooting started from heavy weapons and Kalashnikovsfrom the top of the roofs. The shooting continued from 11:00 until 1:35.He continued:I could not see the dead prisoners who were shot, but Icould see those who were shooting. They were a special unit and wearing khakimilitary hats. Six were using Kalashnikovs.I saw them—at least six men—on the roofs of the cellblocks.They were wearing beige khaki uniforms with green bandanas, a turban-likething.Around 2:00 p.m. the forces used pistols to “finishoff those who were not dead.Around 11 am the next day, June 30, security forces removedthe bodies with wheelbarrows. They threw the bodies into trenches—2 to 3meters deep, one meter wide and about 100 meters long—that had been dugfor a new wall. “I was asked by the prison guards to wash the watchesthat were taken from the bodies of the dead prisoners and were covered inblood,” al-Shafai’i said.One family member of an Abu Salim prisoner who died in theincident told Human Rights Watch that a former prisoner who had been in adifferent section of the prison at the time told him that:He and others went into the cells of the men who hadrefused to move. He said they found hair and skin and blood of peoplesplattered on the walls. They saw the piece of a jaw of one man on the floor.Even though they had cleaned up the bodies, they didn’t do a good job, sothere were still remnants on the walls and floors.[123]The killing of 1200 prisoners at Abu Salim amounts to aviolation of the right to life, in Article 6 of the International Covenant onCivil and Political Rights (ICPPR) and a fundamental principle of internationallaw accepted by the international community. It may also amount to a crimeagainst humanity, one of the most serious of crimes in international law.[124]In addition, in most cases the Abu Salim prisoners had beensubject to arbitrary detention in violation of Article 9 of the ICCPR and toenforced disappearance.Libya is one of two Arab states (Algeria is the other) tohave signed the first Optional Protocol to the ICCPR, which allows individualsto communicate directly to the committee overseeing the ICCPR regarding allegedbreaches of the convention.[125]In October 2007, the UN Human Rights Committee found Libya responsiblefor the unlawful detention, torture, and enforced disappearance of Abu Baker ElHassy, who had been arbitrarily arrested and detained in Abu Salim in 1995 andwhose whereabouts remained unknown 11 years later when his brother brought theclaim before the committee.[126]On July 11, 2007, the UN Human Rights Committee also found Libya responsiblefor torture, disappearance and arbitrary execution in El Alwani v Libya,Communication No. 1295/2004. [127] It found that Libya had violated Article 6 of the ICCPR on the rightto life:The Committee observes that sometime in 2003, the author wasprovided with his brother’s death certificate, without any explanation ofthe exact date, cause or whereabouts of his death or any information oninvestigations undertaken by the State party. In addition, the State party hasnot denied that the disappearance and subsequent death of the author’sbrother was caused by individuals belonging to the Government's securityforces.General Comment 6 on Article 6, states that “Theprotection against arbitrary deprivation of life which is explicitly requiredby the third sentence of Article 6 (1) is of paramount importance. TheCommittee considers that States parties should take measures not only toprevent and punish deprivation of life by criminal acts, but also to preventarbitrary killing by their own security forces. The deprivation of life by theauthorities of the State is a matter of the utmost gravity.”From Official Denial toGrudging AcknowledgmentFor years Libyan officials denied that the killings at AbuSalim had ever taken place.   The first public acknowledgement camein April 2004 when Libyan leader Mu’ammar al-Gaddafi publicly stated thatkillings had taken place in Abu Salim, and said that prisoners’ familieshave the right to know what took place.   On July 26, 2008 Saif al-Islamal-Gaddafi gave a speech in which he spoke of the Abu Salim killings sayingthat:Investigations are complete and have been submitted toprosecution. Prosecution will begin its own investigations and summon people.This won’t be long before the file goes to court and sentences will bepronounced. There will be respectable and impartial judges, and the court willbe attended by observers. ... All people will be attending: the families, thepress, and civil and human rights NGOs, ambassadors, and everyone will face thetruth. [128]There has been no official account of the events at AbuSalim prison and there is no evidence that an investigation into the eventsever took place.  According to Libyan Law 47 of 1975 on prisons, thegovernment must immediately inform the family of an inmate in the case ofdeath, and it must return the body on request.[129]In May 2005, Internal Security Agency head Al-Tohamy Khaled told Human RightsWatch the government had opened an investigation into the 1996 incident.Hedenied that any crimes had taken place and told Human Rights Watch that“when the committee concludes its work, because it has already started,we’ll give a detailed report answering all questions.”[130]Four years later, on April 25, 2009, Human Rights Watchasked Secretary of Public Security General Abdelfattah al-Obeidi about theinvestigation and he replied that “it was still ongoing” and thatit was now in the hands of the Secretary of Justice.[131]A day later, however, when Human Rights Watch met with Secretary ofJustice Mostafa Abdeljalil he said that “there has not been anyinvestigation into this incident until this point.”[132]The Secretary of Justice’s admission to Human RightsWatch reflects the fact that he is one of the Libyan authorities seeking toaddress the issue through the legal framework. It also reflects the fact thateven he has been unable to obtain all the relevant information about the AbuSalim killings from the Internal Security Agency. In April 2008, Secretary ofJustice Mostafa Abdeljalil, gave an interview to Libya Al Youm. In it,he said his ministry had asked Internal Security for the list of those who diedin the 1996 incident but had been unable to obtain the precise information.[133]In March 2007 a group of 30 families in Benghazi filed acivil claim before the North Benghazi Court to compel the Libyan government toreveal the fate of their detained relatives.  This was the firstcollective action by families because, before that, as one of the familymembers involved told Human Rights Watch, “many of the families were tooafraid to take action.”[134] Initially the court dismissed their claim on procedural grounds,ruling on June 24, 2007 that it did not have jurisdiction to reviewadministrative decisions. The families appealed this and on April 19, 2008, thecourt ruled in their favor accepting jurisdiction. On June 8, 2008, the NorthBenghazi Court ruled in favor of the families:The Court orders respondent 1, 2 and 3 [the Prime Minister,the Secretary of Public Security and the Secretary of Justice] to reveal thefate of the following detainees and their place of detention and the reasonsfor their detention and to officially inform the applicants of their fate.[135]The court did not, however, address the broader questions ofaccountability. It did not examine whether an investigation had taken place nordid it order those responsible to be prosecuted. The decision was a victory forthe families because it was the first formal recognition of the legitimacy oftheir requests, but the court was still unable or unwilling to order a fullinvestigation of the events at Abu Salim.In a December 2008 interview with Quryna, one of thetwo privately owned newspapers in Libya, Libyan Secretary of Justice MostafaAbdeljalil said that he had called upon the General People’s Committee(the cabinet) to implement the court decision.[136]It was following this court order that the government began in earnest theprocess of notifying families of the death of their relatives by issuing deathcertificates and offering compensation.In the context of the continuing official blackoutsurrounding the Abu Salim killings, the release of prisoner Mohamed Bousidra inJune 2009 is significant because, as one of the key witnesses to a mass killingthat the authorities denied ever happened, most people expected him to remaindetained indefinitely. As an respected figure in the prison, Bousidra was oneof the prisoner representatives who negotiated demands with senior securityofficial Abdallah al-Sanussi and is believed to have witnessed the events thatunfolded. Security forces arrested him, along with his four brothers, onJanuary 19, 1989 in Al Baydaa and took him to Abu Salim prison.Bousidra’s brothers were released after six years of detention withoutcharge. In 1999, more than 10 years after his arrest, the People’s Courttried and sentenced Bousidra to life imprisonment.  After its abolition inJanuary 2005, he was retried before a special court in June 2005 which reducedthe sentence to 10 years. At that time he already had been imprisoned for 16years and the presiding judge therefore ordered his release. But he continuedto be detained at an Internal Security detention center before being moved in2008 back to Abu Salim prison. His son Tarek was able to visit him on January31, 2009 for the first time since May 21, 2005. Internal Security finallyreleased Mohamed Bousidra from Abu Salim prison on June 7, 2009 and he moved toBenghazi where his family lives. Bousidra has not spoken out about what hewitnessed.Offers of Compensationbut Not Truth“My brother has been disappeared for 13years.  My father died as a result of the sadness. ‘Justice is aright for us.”[137]Libyan relative of Abu Salim victim, March 9, 2009“They hide him and kill him and wedon’t know where his body is and then ask us to accept this money andreconcile with the state?”Brother of Abu Salim victim, May 20, 2009Between 2001 and 2006 the authorities notified around 112families, a small fraction of the total number of disappeared prisoners, that arelative held in Abu Salim was dead, without providing the body or details onthe cause of death. [138]However, until recently, most of the families had received no officialnotification about the fate of their loved ones. From January to March 2009,the government stepped up the process, providing verification to an estimated351 families, of which 160 are in Benghazi, and the rest in Tripoli, Derna, AlBayda and Misrata.  Libyan Secretary of Justice Mostafa Abdeljalil toldHuman Rights Watch in April 2009 that, to date, the People’s LeadershipCommittees had informed the relatives of some 800 to 820 victims of their deathsand had issued them with death certificates; families of 350 to 400 victims hadnot yet been informed.[139]In most cases, local police stations and offices of InternalSecurity have summoned surviving family members and informed them of the deathof their relatives, providing them with official death certificates tosign.  In some cases the families have been summoned to the localPeople’s Leadership Committee and been informed by them.[140]The death certificates have not stated the cause or specified the placeof death beyond saying ‘Tripoli.’ The dates of death specified haveranged between June, July or September but none that Human Rights Watch hasseen have stated June 28 or 29.Many of the prisoners who were killed in 1996 had beenimprisoned in Abu Salim since 1989 or 1995, years in which mass arrests tookplace to crack down on perceived opposition. For years, many families did noteven know for sure whether their relatives had been detained in Abu Salimbecause they had lost all contact with them at their time of arrest. To thesefamilies, their loved ones had disappeared.Mohamed Hamil Ferjany, former spokesperson for the committeeof families who is now in the U.S., told Human Rights Watch about his twobrothers who were killed in Abu Salim:My brothers Al-Sanussi and Khaled Ferjany were arrested in1995.  Every three months, my family would load up the car with clothes,food and bed linen and drive 12 hours from Benghazi to the prison, inTripoli.  We put the things in sacks with my brothers’ names on themand left them at the gate of the prison. All this time we were leaving themthings, we thought they were safe, all this time they were dead and thesecurity guards were taking the clothes for themselves.[141]Another family member told Human Rights Watch:We knew that he’d been taken by Internal Security inBenghazi but after that we didn’t know anything. I went, my brother went,my mother went to all the prisons - we didn’t know where he was, and theyrefused to tell us. At the beginning of 1996 we heard about something that hadhappened in the prison, and then the story started to emerge after people werereleased.  Fourteen years after his disappearance, in March 2009, InternalSecurity called us saying we should come to see them – when we were therethey said here is your brother’s death certificate and nothing more.[142]A third said:My brother’s wife was waiting for 10 years to knowabout the status of my brother, her husband. Then she died. They had adaughter, who was born right before they took him to prison. Now hergrandmother, my sister-in-law’s mother is raising her, but we are helpingalso. She never got to see her father. He never held her, never hugged her.[143]For some families the receipt of the death certificate wasthe first official acknowledgment of their detention and the destruction of allhope. In one day the Taiib family in Mistarah learned of the death of five ofits members, the youngest of whom was 14 when he was arrested.[144]One family member from Benghazi met Human Rights Watch onApril 24, 2009, at great personal risk to himself:About one month ago... someone from internal security cameto my door. He said, “Come with me.” He didn’t tell me why orwhat for. I was scared; I was shaking. Why were they calling me in? What wasgoing to happen to me now? They asked for my ID card, wrote down the details.They took me to the neighborhood where the Internal Security buildings arelocated. They took me to an office.Inside there was one man, and there was a gun –a rifle, a Kalashnikov I think, leaning against the wall. He did not give mehis name. He was from internal security. He said, “I want to talk to you.Your brother is gone. Come sign this paper.” I saw the paper. It was adeath certificate. There was no reason given for the cause of his death. Ibecame very upset. I said, “Even dogs get a reason for theirdeath.” I refused to sign the paper.[145]Initially, the government offered families 120,000 dinars(US$98,590) in compensation if the deceased detainee was single, and 130,000($106,800) if he was married. By June 2009, however, the authorities increasedthe initial offer to 200,000 Libyan Dinars ($164,300). A brother of an AbuSalim victim told Human Rights Watch that when his family refused thecompensation on principle, Internal Security officers offered to double theamount and to try to facilitate the release of other family members imprisonedin Abu Salim.[146]The offer of compensation comes with strings attached: thefamilies must give up any further legal claims. For some of the families whohave suffered the pain of the disappearance of their relative, the money is notenough.[147]Many families have said that they have a right to justice and anything lessthan that is insufficient. Interestingly, the authorities have specified thatfamilies who accept compensation from the government must relinquish anyfurther legal claims both internally and internationally, which indicates anawareness of the possibilities of seeking justice through internationalmechanisms.Although several families in Tripoli and other cities appearto have accepted compensation, most of the families in Benghazi have refused,insisting that they want to know who the perpetrators were and to hold themlegally responsible. The Libyan Secretary of Justice, Mostafa Abdeljalil, toldHuman Rights Watch in April 2009 that “the offers of compensation weremade in the context of reconciliation. Around 30% of the families who had sofar been informed of the death of their relatives have accepted the offer ofcompensation, 60% have refused because they think the amount is insufficientand 10% have refused on principle.”[148]  OnAugust 10, 2009 the Gaddafi Foundation issued a statement saying that 569families had received compensation and that 598 families remained.[149]These are the only official statistics available at the time of writing andtheir inconsistency is a reflection of the difficulty of obtaining informationfrom the Internal Security Agency.One man received a death certificate from the People’sLeadership Committee on May 24, 2009, informing him that his brother Fathi haddied. He told Human Rights Watch that he rejected the offer of compensation of120 thousand Dinars as “insufficient” because “they paid 10million dollars for Lockerbie victims and they offer us 120,000 Libyan Dinars?We don’t want their money, we want the truth and to bury ourrelatives.”[150]Saad el Ferjany’s son Salah was arrested on January 14th, 1989.Since that time Saad el El Ferjany was only able to visit him once in the firstyears in Abu Salim and he fears that his son was among those killed but has notreceived any official notification. He told a journalist that “since theLibyan state refuses to tell us of the fate of our children, we will ask theoutside world for our rights... I want to know the fate of my son, and thisoffer of compensation is unjust.”[151]Unprecedented Activism– the Demands of the FamiliesAs the families of Abu Salim victims became more vocal andorganized over the years, they started taking action collectively. In April2008, some families, who had already taken the case to court, went on to formthe Coordination Committee of the Families of the Victims to represent theirdemands.[152]In the context of Libyan laws, which severely restrict freedom of assembly andassociation and the lack of any independent NGOs, the creation of the committeewas ground-breaking.  One committee member told Human Rights Watch thatthey had tried to register it as a non-governmental organization but InternalSecurity refused this early on.[153]The committee also organized demonstrations by the families,at high risk since demonstrations are prohibited in Libya. The firstdemonstrations by the families started in Benghazi in June 2008, and havecontinued to take place every couple of months. They have varied from around 30or 40 individuals to 150 on November 30, 2008.[154]In March 2009, one family member told Human Rights Watch about the intimidationthey experience, how the more active members of the committee are summoned forinterrogation and at the demonstrations “security forces turn out inforce, they are filming all the family members who turn up. Senior securityofficials come to the demos and tell the older members to go home. All of ourposters are about our sons, the truth, nothing against Gaddafi.”[155]Another family member told Human Rights Watch:Every time I went to a demonstration I was preparing myselffor arrest, my family were afraid for me. Internal Security called me onceafter a demonstration and threatened me with imprisonment. But I have nothingto fear, four of my brothers were imprisoned in Abu Salim and two of them diedthere. I am not afraid anymore. I need to talk about it; I feel that by talkingto you, you can make my voice heard, not just my voice but that of all thefamilies. [156]A third said thatInternal security prevents us from talking to people inTripoli. They want everything to go through them. They don’t likeeverything the Gaddafi Foundation is trying to do for the people. They followus everywhere. They harass us all the time.I love my country. My dream is to improve the educationalsystem in this country. I want to get my PhD; I want to help my people. Butthey consider me a bad man, a bad citizen. Why? What have I done?[157]In March 2009, the committee published a list of demands bythe families on Libyan websites abroad, calling upon the Libyan authorities to:[158]1.       reveal the truth about the fate of their relatives2.      prosecute those responsible3.      hand over remains to the families or reveal burial place4.      issue proper death certificates with the correct dates and placeof death5.       make an official apology in the media6.      release all other arbitrarily detained family members of AbuSalim victims7.       increase the compensation to that offered to Lockerbie victimsOne of the main coordinators of the committee, Mohamed Hamilal-Ferjany, who left Libya in March 2009 and is currently in the US, told HumanRights Watch that, at the beginning, senior security officials and ministerswere engaging with the committee. Security officials invited him to Tripoli forconsultations for two weeks in February 2009, in which he met with seniorsecurity official Abdallah al-Sanussi and the Secretary of Justice MostafaAbdeljalil. It soon became clear, however, that there was no willingness on thepart of the authorities to prosecute any of those responsible for the Abu Salimkillings, he said. Since this was an unshakeable demand by the committee,negotiations broke down. “They think they can solve it through money and that’senough, so they’ve stopped dealing with the families,” al-Ferjanytold Human Rights Watch.[159]On March 25 and 26, 2009 Internal Security forcesarrested four members of the families’ committee in Benghazi.[160]On the evening of March 25, Internal Security officers arrested family membersHussein Al Madany and Fouad Ben Omran at their homes. Armed officers alsosearched, without warrant, the home of Fathi Terbil, a lawyer, who was away atthe time, and confiscated his laptop. The next morning, at anotherdemonstration by the group, security officers arrested Fathi Terbil. Terbiltold Human Rights Watch that security officers asked him upon his arrest,“Why are you doing this Fathi, why in this illegal way? I said the statewon’t listen to me, I just want to know the truth, my niece has neverseen her father.”[161]Internal security officers detained all three incommunicado for four days andreleased them on March 30, 2009 after a media outcry and the intervention ofSaif al-Islam al-Gaddafi.When Human Rights Watch raised concerns about these arrestswith Colonel Al-Tohamy Khaled, the head of Internal Security, he  saidthat they had “arrested the individuals who incited the violence”and that these family members had used “illegal means because they hadnot obtained permission to hold their demonstration.”[162]Despite the threat of arrest and the atmosphere ofintimidation, the demonstrations by the families have continued. Since March,families in al-Baida and Derna have also started organizing demonstrations infront of the Internal Security Agency offices.  The biggest demonstrationto date took place on June 29, 2009, on the anniversary of the killings, whenmore than 200 men, women and children walked through the streets of Benghazicarrying banners and pictures of their dead relatives.Video footage was posted online on Al Manara of womenchanting:“We don’t want money; we want thebutchers.”“Oh Gaddafi where are our children? We want thebodies of the martyred.”“No, No, No – we will not sell the blood of ourchildren.”[163]After these demonstrations Secretary of Justice MostafaAbdeljalil said that those who did not accept the compensation offer were freeto resort to the courts and the state would implement any final decision issuedby the courts.[164]Libya’sObligations Under International LawUnder international law, governments have an obligation toprovide victims of human rights abuses with an effective remedy—includingjustice, truth, and adequate reparations—after they suffer a violation.As a state party to the ICCPR Libya has an obligation to provide an accessible,effective and enforceable remedy “determined by competent judicial,administrative or legislative authorities, or by any other competent authorityprovided for by the legal system of the State, and to develop the possibilitiesof judicial remedy.”Victims and their families have a right to know the truthabout violations they suffered. The UN General Assembly has endorsed theprinciple that victims’ right to remedies includes having access torelevant information concerning human rights violations.[165] International principles adopted by the former UN Commission onHuman Rights state that “irrespective of any legal proceedings, victims,their families and relatives have the imprescriptible right to know the truthabout the circumstances in which violations took place.”[166]International human rights bodies have emphasized the state’s obligationto provide information to victims, particularly in cases of enforceddisappearance. The UN Human Rights Committee has held that the extreme anguishinflicted upon relatives of the “disappeared” makes them directvictims of the violation as well.[167]In addition to informing the victims and their families, the state has anobligation to inform society in general about human rights abuses, particularlywhen the violations are serious.[168]This obligation derives partly from its duty to prevent futureviolations.The duty to provide an effective remedy must also includereturning the remains of those killed to their families to allow them toprovide a proper burial. In the case of Trujillo Oroza v. Bolivia theInter-American Court ruled that “the delivery of the mortal remains incases of detained-disappeared persons is, in itself, an act of justice andreparation. It is an act of justice to know the whereabouts of the disappearedperson and it is a form of reparation because it allows the victims to behonored, since the mortal remains of a person merit being treated with respectby their relatives, and so that the latter can bury them appropriately.”[169]Several international treaties, including the ICCPR and theAfrican Charter, require that individuals be tried by “independent andimpartial tribunals.”[170]International human rights bodies have consistently rejected the use ofmilitary prosecutors and courts in cases involving abuses against civilians, bystating that the jurisdiction of military courts should be limited to offensesthat are strictly military in nature.  Sets of principles presented beforethe former United Nations Human Rights Commission also recommend that humanrights cases be transferred to civilian courts. the Draft Principles Governingthe Administration of Justice through Military Tribunals, presented to thecommission in January 2006, state that “in all circumstances, thejurisdiction of military courts should be set aside in favor of thejurisdiction of the ordinary courts to conduct inquiries into serious humanrights violations such as extrajudicial executions, enforced disappearances andtorture, and to prosecute and try persons accused of such crimes.”[171]IX. The State Security Court- A New People’sCourt?Libya established the People’s Court in 1988 to try politicaland security crimes against the state. It included an appeals court and aprosecution service, the Popular Prosecution Office. Many cases involvedcharges of illegal political activities that should have been protected underthe rights to free association or speech, in particular, alleged violations ofLaw 71, which bans any group activity based on a political ideology opposed tothe principles of the 1969 revolution that brought al-Gaddafi to power. ThePeople’s Court was widely criticized for politically-motivated trialsthat did not provide for the rights of defense or appeal and for acceptingconfessions extracted under torture.[172]Human Rights Watch and other groups welcomed the abolitionof the People’s Court in 2005[173]but stressed that those convicted for the peaceful expression of politicalviews should be immediately released and compensated for their time in prison.Human Rights Watch has urged that all those convicted by the People’sCourt be given new trials in Libya’s regular criminal courts, with fulltransparency and due process guarantees.  The Chief Justice of the LibyanSupreme Court, Dr. Abdulrahman Abu Tuta, told Human Rights Watch that thePeople’s Court was an exceptional court and that after its abolition allthe cases were transferred to the normal courts.[174]The UN Human Rights Committee has expressed concern that this has not occurred,stating in its Concluding Observations to Libya’s periodic report inNovember 2007 that “the convictions and sentences handed down by thePeople’s Court should be reviewed by the State party’s judicialauthority in the light of the guarantees contained in article 14 of theCovenant.”[175]The Higher Judicial Council, which has the power to reviewSupreme Court decisions and commute death sentences, created the State Securitycourt on August 19, 2007 by decision 27 to address “crimes related tosecurity.”[176]It was established in accordance with Law number 6 and decision No. 3 of theHigher Judicial Council on the creation of special courts. The UN Human RightsCommittee has expressed concern about the new court, saying it is unclear about“the difference between the State Security Court and the formerPeople’s Court.”[177]Libyan lawyers told Human Rights Watch that even though thePeople’s Court had been abolished in 2005, its laws are still in forceand the new State Security Court is using the same procedures as thePeople’s Court.[178]Many of the State Security Court judges were formerly judges in thePeople’s Court. The decisions of the State Security Court are notpublicly available to the defendants, their families or, frequently, to theirlawyers. Former defendants before this court told Human Rights Watch that noappeal was available to them.  Internal Security prevents lawyers fromaccompanying their clients during interrogations and the lawyers often areunable to get access to the case files necessary to prepare theirdefense.  The State Security court will try cases of alleged violations ofLaw 71 which bans any group activity based on a political ideology opposed tothe principles of the 1969 revolution that brought al-Gaddafi to power.As party to the ICCPR, Libya is obliged under Article 14 toprovide for the right to fair trial. This includes ensuring that the rights ofdefense are fully respected to ensure equality with the prosecution and thatevery defendant is granted the right to appeal the decision. The court mustalso ensure that confessions obtained under torture are not accepted asevidence in the courtroom.  Human Rights Watch opposes the creation ofspecial courts to try national security crimes. Such courts typically lackrespect for the rights of defendants. Trials should be conducted before thenormal criminal courts with all the procedural guarantees in international law.Human Rights Watch has interviewed five prisoners tried andconvicted by the State Security Court. The following are examples of casesdecided by the State Security court which reveal a number of proceduralirregularities that do not comply with international due process standards.Human Rights Watch calls upon the Libyan authorities to quash the sentences ofor retry, with due process guarantees, all prisoners sentenced after unfairtrials.Abdelhakim Al-KhoweildyWhile on a research mission to Libya in April 2009, HumanRights Watch interviewed former CIA secret detainee Abdelhakim Al-Khoweildy(also known as Abdallah al-Sadeq). Al-Khoweildy is one of the leaders of theLibyan Islamic Fighting Group which for years sought to overthrowGaddafi’s rule but which recently renounced violence in August 2009 andnegotiated the release of hundreds of its members from Abu Salim prison overthe past years. Al-Khoweildy told Human Rights Watch that the State SecurityCourt had sentenced himto death in 2008. Malaysian security officialshad arrested him on March 3, 2004 and handed him over to the CIA which he saysinterrogated and tortured him in Thailand.[179] The CIA renderedAbdelhakim Al-Khoweildy to Libya on March 9, 2004.[180]He told Human Rights Watch:After two years of interrogation by External Security, Iwas brought before the court. The court was in the new building, StateSecurity. There were 13 charges against me for my activities in Libya. I wastaken to court, they read out the charges to me, then took me back to prison.Six months later they informed me of the verdict. They appointed a lawyer fromthe People’s Bureau (muhamat shaabiya) but I never saw his face.There were seven others in the same case, case No. 1. The fact that we actuallyhad a trial is positive, but the one negative thing I would like to point outis that I was unable to meet a lawyer.[181]Abdelhakim Al-Khoweildy remains imprisoned in Abu Salimprison.Mohamed Ahmed Al-Shoro’eyyaOn August 28, 2004, the CIA rendered Mohamedal-Shoro’eyya(also known as Hassan Rabi’i)  to Libya afterapproximately 17 months in CIA custody. The State Security Court sentencedal-Shoro’eyya to life imprisonment for membership in an illegalorganization, the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group, on June 16, 2006.  Hespoke to Human Rights Watch at Abu Salim prison in the presence of a guard whorefused to leave, and said:I was interrogated, then brought before the State Securitycourt. I was sentenced to life imprisonment on 17 July 2006. I was assigned astate lawyer but I did not have the opportunity to sit down with him and talkto him. They charged me with membership in an illegal organization, the LibyanIslamic Fighting Group. It was case # 120.[182]Case of Idris Boufayed, Jamal el Haji and 12 OthersIn February 2007 Libyan security agents arrested 14organizers of a planned peaceful demonstration intended to commemorate theanniversary of a violent crackdown on demonstrators in Benghazi. Securityforces detained them incommunicado in Ain Zara and Al-Jdaida prisons until 24June 2007 when twelve of the group came before a court to face charges of"attempting to overthrow the political system" and"communication with enemy powers.” Their case was transferred to thenewly created State Security Court on November 6, 2007.  The defendantshad not been able to see their lawyers outside the courtroom[183]and this was one of the first requests they made to the judge. The judge agreedto grant their request ordering Libyan security to allow them to meet with thelawyers.[184]On June 10, 2008 the State Security Court sentenced the twelve men to prisonterms of between six and 25 years.Security forces had also arrested Jum'a Boufayed, thebrother of Idris, and Abderrahman al-Qotaiwi along with the others, but theydid not appear in court, prompting fears that they had been"disappeared." However, in May 2008 the authorities released Jum'aBoufayed without charge, and they released al-Qotaiwi, in mid-February 2009.The main organizer of the planned demonstration, Idris Boufayed, received a25-year sentence, but was released from detention on medical grounds in October2008 due to his advanced lung cancer.  He travelled to Switzerland on 11December 2008 for treatment.  Libya released nine of the prisoners betweenJune and December 2008 and the last two in March 2009.The court had sentenced Jamal al-Haji, a writer who holdsDanish citizenship, to 12 years of imprisonment. Libyan authorities rebuffedDanish government requests to visit him. Prison authorities placed Al-Haji insolitary confinement in November 2008 after he refused to end a hunger strikein protest against his continued detention.[185] The authoritieseventually released him on March 10, 2009.Case of Shukri SahilInternal Security officers arrested ShukriSahil, whose case is described above in Section VII, in May 2004 for attemptingto set up a human rights organization and detained him in Abu Salim prison. InJanuary 2006 the Court of Appeals in Tripoli acquitted him. Sahil was releasedon February 28, 2006. After the public prosecutor appealed this decision, theSupreme Court ordered a retrial. The case was transferred to the State SecurityCourt following its creation in August 2007.  On June 6, 2008, theProsecutor of the State Security Court issued a subpoena ordering Shukri Sahilto appear before the court on June 17. Sahil said he decided to leave Libya forTurkey on June 16, 2008 because he knew he would not get a fair trial beforethis court. On November 18, 2008 the State Security court sentenced him todeath in absentia. Sahil told Human Rights Watch: “I was able toappoint a private lawyer who represented me in court, but after the deathpenalty sentence he stopped taking my calls. My family and friends were unableto obtain the decision from the court or from the lawyer.” [186]Shukri Sahil is currently in Europe.X. The Death PenaltyDespite assertions by some Libyan authorities that thenation is working toward elimination of the death penalty, death sentencescontinue to be handed out and executions continue to take place.Chief Justice of the Supreme Court President Dr. AbdulrahmanAbu Tuta told Human Rights Watch that around 35 to 40 people are sentenced todeath in Libya every year but that only 5% to 7% of these sentences are carriedout annually. [187]He said that:Death sentences are never implemented until the HigherJudicial Council, which is chaired by the Secretary of Justice, has reviewedthe decision by the lower court both substantively and procedurally. Even afterthe decision is ratified, the decision is not carried out except four yearslater because the Libyan penal code gives the families of the victim a right toissue a pardon in exchange for diyya (blood money). If a payment isagreed, the case is returned by the General Prosecutor to the court which firstissued the ruling, and the sentence is replaced with life imprisonment. Thereare very few death sentences that are actually carried out because there areoften pardons issued. It is through a process of social reconciliation thatLibyan society works towards decreasing the death penalty.[188]Dr. Abdulrahman Abu Tuta said that around half of thosesentenced to death were foreign nationals, either Egyptian migrant workers orirregular migrants from other African countries.As it stands, the only chance for a prisoner to escape beingsentenced to death is if an agreement over blood money is reached. Libyan lawNo. 6 provides for a right of Qisas (retribution) to the families of thevictim, a concept adopted from Shari’a law which resonates strongly inLibyan society where tribal and familial ties remain strong. Therefore, theonly way to get a death sentence commuted, other than through order of theHigher Judicial Council which only occurs in high profile cases, is to get thefamily of the victim to agree to give up their right to Qisas inexchange for blood money. This system allows commutation only when someone canpay, thereby excluding all those without financial means. It has also proved tobe unreliable since bureaucratic delays have at times led to prematureexecutions while negotiations over a settlement were ongoing.A large number of Egyptians are on death row in Libya. Theircases have been publicized because of attempts by the Egyptian foreign ministryto intervene on their behalf. [189]The Libyan authorities have carried out many executions, however, includinganother Egyptian national executed on November 10, 2008.[190]An Egyptian NGO, the Arab Centre for the Independence of the Judiciary and theLegal Profession has been working with Waatasemu, the organization run by Dr.Aisha al-Gaddafi, and has successfully arranged for Diyya (blood money)payments in a number of these cases.The unreliable nature of this system is highlighted by thefact that there have been cases where the death sentence is carried out despitean agreement over blood money for reasons of bureaucratic delays.  On July29, 2009, Libyan authorities executed Egyptian national Fadl Ismail Heteita formurder after more than three years on death row. An agreement had been reachedwith the family of the victim to commute his death sentence in exchange for30,000 Egyptian pounds ($ 5,400) but the Libyan Prosecutor General did notrecognize the document because it had not been authenticated by the EgyptianForeign Ministry.The discussion in Libya about banning the death penalty isalive but has progressed little since it began in 1988 with the enactment ofthe Great Green Charter for Human Rights. Article 8 of the charter says:“The goal of the Jamahiriyan society is to abolish capitalpunishment.” On April 18, 2004, Mu’ammar al-Gaddafi gave a speechto the Supreme Council for Judicial Authority and other high-ranking members ofthe judiciary in which he called for a number of legal reforms, including areduction in the number of crimes for which the death penalty is applied.Despite the leader’s call, the Basic People’s Congresses decidedagainst abolishing capital punishment.  Al-Gaddafi repeated his call in aNovember 2004 speech to Libyan judges and law students that was broadcast onLibya’s state television.  Abolishing the death penalty should stemfrom societal progress, he said, and it “should not be the result ofeconomic, political or security pressures like the ones piled on Turkey to wina European Union membership.”[191]Despite these expressed positions, the Libyan penal codeprescribes the death penalty for a broad range of crimes, including for actionswhich should be protected by the rights to freedom of association andexpression. Article 3 of Law 71 criminalizes forming, joining or supporting anygroup activity opposing the ideology of the 1969 revolution that broughtal-Gaddafi to power. Article 206 of the penal code imposes thedeath penalty on those who call "for the establishment of any grouping,organization or association proscribed by law," and for those who belongto or support such an organization.The UN Human Rights Committee notedwith concern in its Concluding Comments to Libya’s state report that“under current legislation the death penalty can be applied to offenceswhich are vague and broadly defined and which cannot necessarily becharacterized as the most serious crimes under article 6, paragraph 2, of theCovenant.”[192]Proposed reforms to the Libyan penal code would narrow theapplication of the death penalty but would still retain it for a number ofcrimes such as the purchasing of unfit or hazardous weapons (Article 145),attacks on foreign heads of state (Article 172), murder (Article 273) andmurder accompanied by highway robbery (Article 345). Human Rights Watch notesand welcomes the fact that there has been a reduction in the new draft of thecrimes for which the death penalty can be imposed and that it has been replacedwith life imprisonment in many cases. However it urges that the death penaltyin any remaining provisions be replaced with imprisonment since this is a morehumane and modern punishment and there is no evidence that the death penaltyserves as a deterrent.The current global trend is towards the abolition of thedeath penalty and is best reflected in the December 18, 2007 General Assemblyresolution 62/149 calling for a worldwide moratorium on executions. Theresolution was adopted by a majority of 104 member states in favor, 54countries against and 29 abstentions.  Human Rights Watch opposes theinfliction of capital punishment in all circumstances because of its inherentcruelty and because it is most often carried out in a discriminatory manner.AcknowledgementsThis report was researched and written by Heba Morayef,researcher at Human Rights Watch. The report was edited by Sarah Leah Whitson,director of the Middle East and North Africa division, and Lisa Anderson,Encore Fellow at the Columbia Journalism Review and freelance editor. CliveBaldwin, senior legal advisor, conducted the legal review. The report wasedited by Iain Levine, director of the Program Office. MENA interns Lara Haddadand Felix Legrand assisted with the research and formatting of this report.Human Rights Watch’s delegation to Libya in April 2009was composed of Heba Morayef, researcher in the Middle East and North AfricaDivision, Sarah Leah Whitson, executive director of Human Rights Watch’sMiddle East and North Africa Division, and Bill Frelick, director of theRefugee Program at Human Rights Watch. Human Rights Watch thanks the GaddafiFoundation for facilitating the trip and the Libyan authorities for themeetings they granted us and the visit to the Abu Salim prison.Human Rights Watch also thanks the many individuals inLibya, the United Kingdom and other countries that helped strengthen thisreport’s accuracy and depth. The organization especially thanks LibyaHuman Rights Solidarity for the assistance it has provided.Annex : Letters to the AuthoritiesLetter to Libyan Secretary for JusticeHi Excellency Mostafa AbdeljelilSecretary of the General People’s CommitteeFor JusticeTripoliLibyan JamahireyyaJune 25, 2009Your Excellency,I am writing to thank you once more for meeting with theHuman Rights Watch delegation on April 26th.  We greatly appreciated theopportunity to speak with you and your openness in responding to our questions,especially since we know that you were very busy on that day.It is important for us to meet with Libyan officials and tounderstand the position of the General People’s Committee for Justice onthe various issues we raised. As we explained to you, Human RightsWatch’s methodology includes speaking to officials, organizations andindividuals about different issues so that we can obtain the most completepicture possible.We are currently in the process of drafting our reportrelated to the mission and have some questions we would like to ask you. Somerelate to issues we discussed while we met you, others to developments since thattime. We would like to get a response from your office on these issues toenable us to fully reflect the views of the Libyan authorities in our report.For this reason we would appreciate receiving a response by July 5.The issues and questions we would like to request furtherclarification on are the following:We understand from you and from other sources that there area number of individuals who remain imprisoned in Abu Salim who have eitherserved their sentences or have been acquitted by courts. We know that youexplained that Abu Salim and Ain Zara prisons do not fall under thejurisdiction of the Ministry of Justice and would therefore like to know:-What recourse do prisoners have to challengetheir continued detention by Internal Security?-What is the number of prisoners who havecompleted their sentences yet remain imprisoned in Abu Salim and Ain Zara?-What is the number of prisoners who havebeen acquitted by courts yet remain imprisoned in Abu Salim and Ain Zara?-What is the formal legal basis for theircontinued detention?We are interested in learning more about the State SecurityCourt and how it functions. We would be grateful to learn from you whetherdefendants before this court (1) may appeal the court’s verdict and if soon what grounds and to which court; and (2) have the right to appoint lawyersof their own choosing.-Could you provide us with the law thatestablished the court and the code of penal procedure that applies to thiscourt?-Do defense lawyers have the right to accessall elements in the files of defendants before the state security court?-How many prisoners are currently imprisonedin Abu Salim or Ain Zara prisoners after convictions by the state securitycourt?We would also like to ensure that we fully understand therelationship between the People’s Court and the State Security Court. LawNumber 5 of 1988, which created the People’s Court, is still on thewebsite of the General People’s Committee for Justice.  Does thismean that the law is still in force? If so how, how does this relate to LawNumber 7 of 1373, which abolished the People’s Court and is alsoavailable on the same website?-Are all cases that were previously broughtbefore the People’s Court now being referred to the State Security court?-Were individuals serving sentences handeddown by the People’s Court given the possibility of a retrial after theabolition of the People’s Court?  If so which courts were competentto review the verdicts of the People’s Court?We discussed with you the process of informing the familiesof victims of the 1996 Abu Salim killings of the death of their relatives.-Who is responsible for informing the familymembers? What information are they providing the families about the cause andthe circumstances of death?-Are the requests of the Committee ofFamilies of Abu Salim victims being considered by the General People’sCommittee? And if so who is responsible for discussing and negotiating theCommittee’s demands with its members?-What is the status of the investigation intothe events that occurred at Abu Salim prison at the end of June 1996?We understand that over the last couple of years a number ofjournalists have been brought before the Public Prosecutor or the PressProsecutor.-How many journalists have been prosecuted oncharges of libel over the last two years?-How many journalists have been convicted andwhat were the specific charges in those cases?  How many journalists arecurrently imprisoned because of something they have written?-Can the General Prosecutor or the PressProsecutor initiate a case against a journalist without permission from theGeneral People’s Committee for Media?One of the things we are very interested in isaccountability: understanding what procedures exist for lodging complaintsagainst police and internal or external security officers.-Can the General People’s Committee forJustice initiate an investigation into alleged violations committed by policeofficers or Internal Security officers?  Or does this require approvalfrom the General People’s Committee for Security?-How many police officers and how manysecurity officers have been charged with torture, ill-treatment or arbitraryarrest and detention over the past 3 years ? How many of them have beenconvicted and what were their names, ranks and sentences?We were very interested to hear of the attempt by Libyancitizens to set up two new non-governmental organizations, the Association forTruth and Justice and the Centre for Democracy.-Is it true that Internal Security objectedto the inclusion of twelve individuals as members in the Association and it wason that basis that the agency revoked the original authorization granted to theorganization?-We heard that one of the members of theCentre for Democracy was kidnapped in Tripoli on June 30, 2008 and beaten up.Was this incident investigated and has anyone been found responsible for this?-How many new non-governmental organizationshave been registered over the past 5 years?Finally, we would also like to request a copy of thefollowing legal texts:-The draft refugee law-The draft law on associations-The law establishing the State SecurityCourt and its statute and procedures.We thank you very much for our meeting and hope to be ableto return to Libya to discuss our reports with you in the near future.*              *              *Letter to Libyan Secretary for Public SecurityHis Excellency General Abdelfattah El-AbeidiSecretary of the General People’s CommitteeFor Public SecurityTripoliLibyan JamahireyyaJune 25, 2009Your Excellency,I am writing to thank you for receiving us at your office onApril 25, 2009. We greatly appreciated the opportunity to discuss with youissues of mutual concern.I would also like to thank you for the meeting we had at thePublic Relations Office the preceding week where we heard about the training inhuman rights and international law that your ministry provides to police andsecurity officers and also about how your government addresses the issue ofmigration.It is important for us to meet with Libyan officials and tounderstand the position of the General People’s Committee for PublicSecurity on the various issues we raised. As we explained to you, Human RightsWatch’s methodology includes speaking to officials, organizations andindividuals about various issues so that we can obtain the most completepicture possible.We are currently in the process of drafting our reportrelated to the mission and have some questions we would like to ask you forfurther clarification. Some relate to issues we discussed while we met you,others to developments since that time. We would like to get a response fromyour office on these issues to enable us to fully reflect the views of theLibyan authorities in our report. For this reason we would appreciate receivinga response by July 5.The issues and questions we would like to request furtherclarification on are the following:We understand that there are a number of individuals whoremain imprisoned in Abu Salim who have either completed their sentences orhave been acquitted by courts. We also understand that Abu Salim and Ain Zaraprisons do not fall under the jurisdiction of the General People’sCommittee for Justice and would therefore like to know:-What is the number of prisoners currently inAbu Salim prison?-What is the number of prisoners who haveserved their sentences yet remain imprisoned in Abu Salim?  What is thelegal basis for their continued incarceration?-What is the number of prisoners who havebeen acquitted by courts yet remain imprisoned in Abu Salim and Ain Zara? Whatis the legal basis for their continued incarceration?We also discussed with you the issue of the killings at AbuSalim prison in 1996. We understand that Internal Security has informed anumber of families of the death of their relatives. We have also heard that anumber of families have refused the offer of compensation and insist upon theirright to know the truth of what occurred.-What is the number of prisoners who died inAbu Salim prison during the events that occurred at the end of June 1996? Howmany of their families have authorities formally notified of the death of arelative in those events?-Why were family members of Abu Salimvictims, Fouad Ben Omran, Hussein Al Madany, Farag al Sharrani and FathiTerbil, arrested in Benghazi on March 26, 2009? What charges, if any, have beenbrought against them?-Are authorities examining the demands of thefamilies of Abu Salim victims who have refused the compensation and consultingwith those families?As you know, during our visit to Abu Salim prison on April27, 2009 we briefly met with Ali al Fakheri, known as Ibn al Sheikh al Libi.-When did authorities discover the death ofIbn al Sheikh al Libi?-When did authorities initiate an investigationinto his death and when did they conclude it?We would like to request a copy or a summary of the findingsof this investigation.Regarding migrants and asylum seekers:-How many boat migrants have been interdictedand returned to Libya since May 1st?  What are their nationalities?-Where have these boat migrants beendetained?  Is there a penalty in law for illegal entry or presence, and,if so, what is it? What is the legal basis for the detention of these migrants,and is there a limit to the time a migrant can be held in administrativedetention? Have Libyan authorities granted or promised to the UN HighCommissioner for Refugees access to all of the boat migrants who have beenreturned to Libya since May 1st?-How many individuals have Libyanauthorities deported by plane in 2006, 2007 and 2008? Please provide abreakdown of their nationalities.-How many individuals have Libyan authoritiesdeported via its land borders in 2006, 2007, and 2008?  Please provide abreakdown of nationalities.We would also like to know:-Is Moroccan national Issam Morchid currentlydetained by External Security or any other security agency in Libya? If so,where is he being held and on what charges?-Are Libyan women married to non-Libyan menprevented from handing down the Libyan nationality to their children? What isthe domestic law that applies to this situation?-Has the investigation into the allegedkidnapping of Daww Mansuri, which occurred on 30 June 2008 in Tripoli, beencompleted?  If so, please provide us with the findings of thatinvestigation.One of the things we discussed when we met was the procedurefor individuals to lodge complaints against police or security officers andwhat internal  procedures within the General People’s Committee mayexist for this purpose before a case is transferred to the courts.-What is the number of civilian complaintsreceived by the General People’s Committee for Security in 2008 and 2007?-In 2006, 2007 and 2008, how many policeofficers have been tried, how many have been acquitted and how many convicted?Of those tried, how many of these cases were related to allegations of torture,ill-treatment, or other violations of human rights?  Can the GeneralProsecutor initiate an investigation into abuses committed by internal securityofficers or does this require prior approval from your ministry?Once again, we thank you very much for our meeting and hopeto be able to return to Libya to discuss our reports with you in the nearfuture.Sincerely,Sarah Leah WhitsonDirectorMiddle East and North Africa Division[1]The relevant legislative bodies. For more on the political system seeBackground.[2]United Nations Development Program Libya, Country Info,http://www.undp-libya.org/countryinfo.php (accessed Sept. 29, 2009).[3]United Nations Development Program Human Development Report 2009, Libyan ArabJamahiriya, http://hdrstats.undp.org/en/countries/country_fact_sheets/cty_fs_LBY.html(accessed October 23, 2009).[4]The National Front for the Salvation of Libya’s 1998 list of2626prisoners, which relies on several different sources, gives an overview ofthe different waves of arrest which took place, see National Front for theSalvation of Libya, Human Rights Report, December 1998, http://www.libyanfsl.com(accessed November 7, 2009).[5]For a list of prisoners arrested see Libya Human Rights Solidarity, “MassTrial of 98 Prisoners of Conscience,” June 18, 2001, http://www.lhrs.ch/english/default.asp?page1=v_bayan&id=4(accessed September 29, 2009); Amnesty International, “Libya: Time toMake Human Rights a Reality,” AI Index: MED 19/002/2004, April 26, 2004,http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/MDE19/002/2004/en/0f0c0416-d631-11dd-ab95-a13b602c0642/mde190022004en.pdf(accessed Sept. 29, 2009).[6]On the assassination of Libyan dissidents in the UK by Libyan security see ChristopherAndrew, The Defence of the Realm: The Authorized History of MI5,(London: Allen Lane, 2009).[7]“Libyan WMD: Tripoli’s statement in full,” BBC News Online,December 20, 2003, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/3336139.stm ( accessedAugust 23, 2009).[8]United Nations Security Council, Resolution 1506 (2003), S/RES/1506 (2003)http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/3f8d2e164.html (accessed September 29,2009).Libya agreed topay the families of victims $10 million each-$4 million after the lifting ofU.N. sanctions, another $4 million after the lifting of U.S. sanctions based onthe International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA)and the last $2 millionwhen the U.S. State Department takes Libya off its list of states sponsoringterrorism.[9]US-Libya compensation deal sealed, BBC News Online, August 14, 2008, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/7561271.stm(accessed July 2, 2009).[10]Matthew Weaver, “Families of Lockerbie bombing victims receivecompensation from Libya,” The Guardian, November 21, 2008,http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2008/nov/21/lockerbie-libya( accessed July 21,2009).[11]Statement by Acting Under Secretary for Political Affairs William J. Burns, atU.S. House of Representatives, Hearing Before the Committee on InternationalRelations, "Libya: Progress on the Path Toward CautiousReengagement," March 16, 2005, 109th Congress, No.109-25,  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/archives/109/20056.pdf  (accessedSept. 29, 2009), p. 4.[12]“U.S. Diplomatic Relations with Libya,” U.S. Department of State,Office of the Spokesman, May 15,2006, http://2001-2009.state.gov/secretary/rm/2006/66235.htm(accessed Sept. 29, 2009).[13]“Confirmation of Gene A. Cretz as U.S. Ambassador to Libya,” U.S.Department of State Office of the Spokesman, November 28, 2009,http://www.america.gov/st/texttrans-english/2008/November/20081128140821EAifaS0.3752405.html(accessed Aug.12, 2009).[14]See Dana Moss and Simon Henderson, “Rebuilding U.S.-Libyan RelationsTwenty Years after Lockerbie,”  The Washington Institute forNear East Policy, Policy Watch#1435, November 25, 2008,  http://www.washingtoninstitute.org/templateC05.php?CID=2968(accessed Sept. 29, 2009).[15] Human RightsWatch et al, Off the Record: U.S. Responsibility for Enforced Disappearancesin the “War On Terror,” June 7, 2007, http://www.hrw.org/legacy/backgrounder/usa/ct0607/ct0607web.pdf,pp. 10, 14, 16, 17.[16]“UK signs memorandum of understanding with Libya,” Foreign andCommonwealth Office press release, Oct. 17, 2005,http://www.fco.gov.uk/resources/en/press-release/2005/10/fco_npr_181005_libyamou(accessed Sept. 29, 2009).[17] “U.K.: Torture a Risk in Libya DeportationAccord,” Human Rights Watch news release, October 17, 2005,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2005/10/17/uk-torture-risk-libya-deportation-accord(accessed July 17, 2009).[18]AS& DD (Libya) v Secretary of State for the Home Department, Supreme Courtof Judicature Court of Appeal, April 9, 2008, EWCA Civ 289, Case NoT1/2007/0504,http://www.judiciary.gov.uk/docs/judgments_guidance/judgment_as_dd_libya_090408.pdf(accessed July 17, 2009). See also  “UK: Appeals Court BlocksNational Security Deportation,” Human Rights Watch news release, April 7,2008, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2008/04/07/uk-appeals-court-blocks-national-security-deportations(accessed July 17, 2009).[19]“EU-Libya: negotiations on future Framework Agreement start,”European Union press release, November 12, 2008,http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=IP/08/1687&format=HTML&aged=0&language=EN&guiLanguage=en(accessed Sept. 29, 2009).[20]“HIV Medics Released to Bulgaria,” BBC News Online, July 24,2007, http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/6912965.stm (accessed August 8,2009).[21]Matthew Brunwasser and Elaine Sciolino, “Bulgarian nurses and Palestiniandoctor freed from captivity”, New York Times, July 24, 2007,available at http://www.nytimes.com/2007/07/24/world/europe/24iht-nurses.5.6813495.html?pagewanted=all(accessed August 3, 2009).[22]John Ward Anderson, “Gaddafi Visit Causes Stir in France,” WashingtonPost, December 11,2007, http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/12/10/AR2007121001689.html(accessed July 1, 2009).[23]“Gaddafi visit seals French deals”, BBC News, December 10,2007, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/7135788.stm (accessed July 1, 2009).[24]“Gaddafi,Berlusconi sign accord worth billions,” Reuters, August 30, 2008,http://www.reuters.com/article/worldNews/idUSLU29214620080830(accessed June 26, 2009). The Italian Senate ratified the agreement on February3, 2009; Libya ratified it a month later. “Italy-Libya: TripoliRatifiesFriendship Treaty” ANSAmed, March 2, 2009, http://www.ansamed.info/en/news/ME01.@AM49114.html(accessedJune 29, 2009).[25]“Gaddafi in first visit to ex-colonial power Italy,” Reuters,June 10, 2009, http://uk.reuters.com/article/idUKLA99895320090610 (July 1,2009).[26]Human Rights Watch, Libya/Italy: Pushed Back Pushed Around, (New York,Human Rights Watch: September 21, 2009) http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2009/09/21/pushed-back-pushed-around-0(accessed September 29, 2009).[27]“Libya Heads UN Security Council,” CNN News Online, January3, 2008, http://www.cnn.com/2008/WORLD/africa/01/03/libya.un/index.html(accessed July 7, 2009).[28]“Kadhafi slams ICC 'terrorism' in Bashir case,” AFP, March 29,2009, http://www.google.com/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5h3uxqQ4jDSzliGZ5rM8hVvhi0rbA(accessed September 6, 2009).[29]See Human Rights Watch, Libya:  Words to Deeds, Volume 18, No.1(E),(New York: Human Rights Watch, January 24, 2006), http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2006/01/24/libya-words-deeds-0,Chapter VI; Amnesty International, “Libya: Time to Make Human Rights a Reality,”AI Index: MDE 19/002/2004, April 26, 2004, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/MDE19/002/2004/en/0f0c0416-d631-11dd-ab95-a13b602c0642/mde190022004en.pdf(accessed Sept. 29, 2009), p. 3.[30]According to the Libyan political system, Basic People’s Congresses existin every local administrative unit (sha`biyya). Each Basic People’sCongress elects a People’s Committee (lajna sha`biyya lil –mahalla)as an executive body that appoints a local representative to the General People’sCongress (Mu’tamar al-Sha`b al-`Amm), the equivalent of a nationallegislative assembly.[31]Amnesty International, “Libya: Time to Make Human Rights a Reality,”AI Index: MDE 19/002/2004, April 26, 2004, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/MDE19/002/2004/en/0f0c0416-d631-11dd-ab95-a13b602c0642/mde190022004en.pdf(accessed Sept. 29, 2009), pp. 12-13.[32]“Latest Edition: Qaddafi calls for revision of Libyan penal code(Arabic),” Al Arabiya , October 30, 2005, http://www.alarabiya.net/programs/2005/10/30/18170.html(accessed Sept. 29, 2009).[33]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Abdulrahman Abu Tuta, Chief Justice ofthe Libyan Supreme Court, Tripoli, April 21, 2009.[34]Human Rights Watch interview with Counselor Mostafa Abdeljalil, Secretary ofJustice, Tripoli, April 26, 2009.[35]“Lawyers Debate New Penal Code (Arabic),”  Libya al-Youm, March22, 2008, http://www.libya-alyoum.com/look/article.tpl?IdLanguage=17&IdPublication=1&NrArticle=14853&NrIssue=1&NrSection=3(accessed Sept. 29, 2009).[36]For more discussion on the relevant provisions of the new draft penal code seeSections below on Freedom of Expression and Freedom of Association.[37]See complaint form, http://www.almiezan.gov.ly/form/contact(2).php (accessedSept. 29, 2009).[38]Human Rights Watch interview with General Abdelfattah al-Obeidi, Secretary ofPublic Security, Tripoli, April 25, 2009.[39]Human Rights Watch group interview with lawyers, Tripoli Bar Association, April22, 2009.[40]Human Rights Watch Interview with Kamal el Dib, Training Director at theGeneral People’s Committee for Public Security, Tripoli, April 22, 2009.[41]Speech by Saif Al-Islam Gaddafi Chairman of GICDF "Libya...Truth for All,July 26, 2008, http://www.gdf.org.ly/index.php?lang=en&CAT_NO=114&MAIN_CAT_NO=9&Page=105&DATA_NO=251(accessed September 7, 2009).[42]“Qaddafi's son declares he's leaving politics,” Associated Press,August 22, 2008, http://www.nytimes.com/2008/08/22/world/africa/22iht-libya.5.15563698.html?_r=1(accessed September 7, 2009).[43] “KadhafiNames Son Second-in-Command,” AFP, October 13, 2009,http://news.yahoo.com/s/afp/20091013/wl_africa_afp/libyakadhafipolitics(accessed November 2, 2009).[44]Human Rights Watch interview with Libyan journalists, Tripoli, April 21, 2009.[45]See Oea, http://www.oealibya.com/ (accessed August 23, 2009).[46]See Quryna, http://www.quryna.com/index.php (accessed August 23, 2009).[47]See Osama al-Said, “Al Muftari Al Aam,” Quryna, February 10,2009, available at http://www.quryna.com/[48]Mohamed Allagi, “Justice is Harmed Oea, September 3, 2090, http://www.oealibya.com/oea-sections/articles-and-sections/5941-2009-09-03-01-11-26,(accessed September 5, 2009).[49]Human Rights Watch interview with Fathi Ben Eissa, correspondent, LibyaAl-Youm, Tripoli, April 26, 2009. For examples of such articles, see http://www.libya-alyoum.com/look/article.tpl?IdLanguage=17&IdPublication=1&NrArticle=18851&NrIssue=1&NrSection=14(accessed Sept. 29, 2009).[50]The Green Book is available in English at http://books.google.com (accessedSept. 29, 2009). The website of the World Center for the Study and Research ofthe Green Book, an important Libyan institution, is available at www.greenbookstudies.com(accessed Sept. 29, 2009).[51]Saif al-Islam al-Gaddafi, speech given at the Second Meeting of the Youth ofBenghazi, Benghazi, August 20, 2007,http://gdf.org.ly/index.php?lang=en&CAT_NO=114&MAIN_CAT_NO=9&Page=105&DATA_NO=252(accessed August 15, 2009).[52]Human Rights Watch interview with Acting General Prosecutor, Tripoli, April 22.[53]Quoted in “Saif al-Islam Defends the Right of Libyan Citizens toCriticize Him,” Al Jazeera, November 15, 2009, http://www.aljazeera.net/News/archive/archive?ArchiveId=1161467,accessed July 18, 2009.[54]Ibid.[55]Human Rights Watch interview with Libyan journalists, Tripoli, April 21, 2009.[56]Human Rights Watch interview with Libyan journalists, Tripoli, April 21, 2009.[57]Ibid.[58]Human Rights Watch interview with a Libyan journalist, Tripoli, April 21, 2009.[59]Human Rights Watch interview with Tarek al-Houni, Tripoli, April 21, 2009.[60]Human Rights Watch interview with Tarek al-Houni, Tripoli, April 21, 2009.[61]“New Charges Against El Baaga,” Libya Al Youm, January 11,2009, http://www.libya-alyoum.com/look/article.tpl?IdLanguage=17 (accessed July3, 2009).[62]“After the Intervention of Saif al-Islam, Process Against El Baaga andMehyar Cancelled,” Libya Al Youm, January 16, 2009, http://www.libya-alyoum.com/(accessed July 3, 2009).[63]Human Rights Watch phone interview with Adel Sunalla, October 26, 2009.[64]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc.A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23, 1976, ratified byLibya in 1976, article 19.[65]Constitutional Proclamation of December 11, 1969, Libya, article 13.[66]Law 20 (1991), On Enhancing Freedom, article 8.[67]Declaration of Principles on Freedom of Expression in Africa, AfricanCommission on Human and Peoples' Rights, 32nd Session, 17 - 23 October, 2002:Banjul, The Gambia, Section XII.[68]For more on this see Dirk Vanderwalle, A History of Modern Libya,(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press 2006), Chapter 5.[69]For a full discussion of their trial see Section X - The State Security Court[70]The country’s top legislative body, the General People’s Congresspresides over all the basic people’s congresses and the GeneralPeople’s Committees (ministries).[71]“The Foundation Succeeds in Obtaining Approval to Facilitate the Returnof Eighteen Libyan Citizens Residing Abroad,” Gaddafi InternationalCharity and Development Foundation press release, Nov. 16, 2008, http://www.gdf.org.ly/index.php?lang=en&CAT_NO=2&Page=105&DATA_NO=419(accessed Sept. 30, 2009).[72]“The Foundation Succeeds in Obtaining Approval to Facilitate the Returnof Eighteen Libyan Citizens Residing Abroad,” Gaddafi InternationalCharity and Development Foundation press release, Nov. 16, 2008, http://www.gdf.org.ly/index.php?lang=en&CAT_NO=2&Page=105&DATA_NO=419(accessed Sept. 30, 2009).[73]See Section XI below. For an overview of Waatasemu’s activities, seetheir website http://www.waatasemu.org/charity/ (Arabic) (accessed Sept. 30,2009).[74]For more on the violations of rights of migrants in Libya see Human RightsWatch, Libya/Italy: Pushed Back Pushed Around, (New York, Human RightsWatch: September 21, 2009) http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2009/09/21/pushed-back-pushed-around-0(accessed September 29, 2009).[75]Underthe agreement, the organizations will support the Libyan authorities in"designing and implementingcomprehensiveand protection-sensitive asylum management strategies with full respect forinternational and regionalrefugee andhuman rights principles." See "UNHCR signs agreement aimed atensuring refugee protection in Libya," UNHCR,news stories, July 4, 2008,http://www.unhcr.org/486e48534.html (accessed July 30, 2009).[76]Human Rights Watch group interview with lawyers, Tripoli Bar Association, April22, 2009.[77]Human Rights Watch group interview with lawyers, Tripoli Bar Association, April22, 2009.[78]“Discussion about the new penal code begins tonight – rightsdefenders reveal 21 articles provide for death sentence,” Libya AlYoum, April 22, 2008,http://www.libya-alyoum.com/look/article.tpl?IdLanguage=17&IdPublication=1&NrArticle=14853&NrIssue=1&NrSection=3(accessed, Sept. 22, 2009).[79]Human Rights Watch group interview with lawyers, Tripoli Bar Association, April22, 2009.[80]Human Rights Watch phone interview with Shukri Sahil, March 17, 2009.[81]Human Rights Watch phone interview with Shukri Sahil, March 17, 2009.[82]Human Rights Watch group interview with lawyers, Tripoli Bar Association, April22, 2009 and Statute of the Centre for Democracy reproduced on Libya al Youm.[83]Letter confirming application approval, General People’s Committee for SocialAffairs, reproduced in “Rights Activist Dhaw al-Mansuri announces theestablishment of the Centre for Democracy and Association for Justice,” LibyaAl Youm, June 5, 2008, http://www.libya-alyoum.com/look/article.tpl?IdLanguage=17&IdPublication=1&NrArticle=15763&NrIssue=1&NrSection=3(accessed Sept. 30, 2009).[84]“Founders of Centre for Democracy request registration andNongovernmental Organizations Authority sends membership list to InternalSecurity,” Libya Al Youm, May 4, 2008.[85]Human Rights Watch interview with Col. Al-Tohamy Khaled, head of InternalSecurity, Tripoli, April 25, 2009.[86]“In an Unexpected Move the Government issues a Decision to Cancel theCentre for Democracy and Association for Justice,” Libya Al Youm, June11, 2008,http://www.libya-alyoum.com/look/article.tpl?IdLanguage=17&IdPublication=1&NrArticle=15892&NrIssue=1&NrSection=3,(accessed August 10, 2009).[87]Libya Al Youm, “His kidnappers threatened him over the Centre forDemocracy – Tripoli Lawyers strongly protest the attack and call for aninvestigation,” July 2, 2008, http://www.libya-alyoum.com/look/article.tpl?IdLanguage=17&IdPublication=1&NrArticle=16323&NrIssue=1&NrSection=3(August 10, 2009).[88]Human Rights Watch interview with Col. Al-Tohamy Khaled, head of Internal Security,Tripoli, April 25, 2009.[89]Human Rights Watch group interview with lawyers, Tripoli Bar Association, April22, 2009. For more on Saif al-Islam’s speech see IV. Background.[90]ManfredNowak, UN Covenant on Civil and Political Rights: CCPR Commentary (Kehl amRein: N.P. Engel, 1993), pp. 386-387.[91]See, forexample, Vladimir Petrovich Laptesevich v. Belarus, Communication 780/1997 ofthe Human Rights Committee. See also Richard Fries, “The LegalEnvironment of Civil Society,” The Global Civil Society Yearbook 2003,Centre for the Study of Global Governance, London School of Economics, 2003,chapter 9.[92] Communication101/93, Civil Liberties Organization in respect of the Nigerian BarAssociation v. Nigeria, Eighth Activity Report 1994–1995,Annex VI; Documents of the African Commission, 394.[93]HishamMatar, “I Just Want to Know What Happened to My Father,” TheIndependent, 16 July 2006,http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/hisham-matar-i-just-want-to-know-what-happened-to-my-father-407444.html(accessed October 6, 2009).[94]International Centre for Prison Studies (King’s College, London),“World Prison Brief: Libya,” modified Sept. 2009, http://www.kcl.ac.uk/depsta/law/research/icps/worldbrief/wpb_country.php?country=28(accessed Sept. 30, 2009).[95]Human Rights Watch interview with Counselor Mostafa Abdeljalil, Secretary ofJustice, Tripoli, April 26, 2009[96]See Section II- Methodology section on how Human Rights Watch gained access.[97]Human Rights Watch Interview with Deputy Director of the Internal SecurityAgency, Tripoli, April 27, 2009.[98]Ibid.[99]Human Rights Watch interview with Counselor Mostafa Abdeljalil, Secretary ofJustice, Tripoli, April 26, 2009.[100]“ Oea meets Secretary for Justice Mostafa Abdeljalil for a Very FrankInterview,” Oea, November 2, 2009, http://www.oealibya.com/front-page/local-news/9155-2009-11-02-22-02-43(accessed November 3,2009).[101]Human Rights Watch Interview with Deputy Director of the Internal SecurityAgency, Tripoli, April 27, 2009.[102]Human Rights Watch interview with Col. Al-Tohamy Khaled, head of InternalSecurity, Tripoli, April 25th 2009.[103]Letter from Secretary of Justice to the Secretary of the GeneralPeople’s Committee, June 26, 2008.[104]“Libyan Security Detains Prisoners acquitted by Judiciary,” AlJazeera, June 14, 2009,http://aljazeera.net/NR/exeres/AEC4E99C-8305-430F-A265-74F8AB5B6F8F.htm(accessed June 26, 2009).[105]Human Rights Watch interview with M.O., London, June 29, 2009.[106]See Section X - The State Security Court for a discussion of their case. HumanRights Watch, “Two Prisoners Freed,” March 10, 2009, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2009/03/10/libya-two-political-prisoners-freed(accessed August 23, 2009).[107]Abdenacer [sic.] Younes Meftah Al Rabassi v. Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, UnitedNations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, U.N. Doc. E/CN.4/2006/7/Add.1 at76, May 10, 2005.[108]For more on the People’s Court see Human Rights Watch/Middle East, Libya- Words to Deeds, Volume 18, No.1(E), January 2006, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2006/01/24/libya-words-deeds,Chapter V.[109]“Reforms Welcome, But Concerns Remain,” Human Rights Watch newsrelease, May 23, 2005. See also, “Libya: Abolition of People’sCourt is an Important Step,” Amnesty International , Public Statement,January 13, 2005.[110]Human Rights Watch interview with M.I., Tripoli, April 25, 2009[111]See National Front for the Salvation of Libya, Human Rights Report,December 1998, http://www.libyanfsl.com (accessed November 7, 2009).[112]Human Rights Watch phone interview with Mohamed Milad Al Seheili, May 26, 2009[113]Human Rights Watch interview with Hisham Matar, London, June 19, 2009.[114]Hisham Matar, “I Just Want to Know What Happened to My Father,” TheIndependent, 16 July 2006,http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/hisham-matar-i-just-want-to-know-what-happened-to-my-father-407444.html(accessed October 6, 2009).[115]Human Rights Watch phone interview with Youcif Almegaryef, November 5, 2009.[116]Human Rights Watch interview with K.I., April 5, 2009[117] UN Human Rights Committee , GeneralComment No. 31,  Nature of the General Legal Obligation Imposed on StateParties to the Covenant (2187th meeting, May 26, 2004), UN Doc.CCPR/C/Rev.1/Add.13, http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)/CCPR.C.21.Rev.1.Add.13.En?Opendocument(accessed Sept. 30, 2009).[118]UN Principles on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-legal,Arbitrary and Summary Executions.[119]See Section IV - Background for further information.[120]Human Rights Watch, Libya: June 1996 Killings at Abu Salim Prison , June28,2006, http://www.hrw.org/legacy/english/docs/2006/06/28/libya13636_txt.htm.[121]Human Rights Watch interview with Counselor Mostafa Abdeljalil, Secretary ofJustice, Tripoli, April 26, 2009.[122]“Press Release on Various Cases,” Gaddafi International Charity andDevelopment Foundation, August 10, 2009,http://www.gdf.org.ly/index.php?lang=ar&CAT_NO=4&MAIN_CAT_NO=4&Page=105&DATA_NO=553(accessed August 17,2009).[123]Human Rights Watch interview with M.I. Benghazi, April 24, 2009.[124]To establish a crime against humanity, which is among the most serious crimesof concern to the international community as a whole, there would have to beevidence that murder was “committed as part of a widespread or systematicattack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of theattack.”[124]The elements to this are that the attack is committed as part of an attackagainst a civilian population, the prison population in this case, and thatthis was or was intended as part of a policy of attack against a civilian population.[125]Libya has not signed the second Optional Protocol, which pledges signatories toabolish the death penalty. It has also not signed the Optional Protocol to CAT,which allows visits to places of detention by the Committee against Torture. InJune 2004, Libya signed the first Optional Protocol to CEDAW, which allows theCommittee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women toreceive and consider complaints from individuals or groups.[126]Decision:El Hassy v. Libya, United Nations Human RightsCommittee, CCPR/C/91/D/1422/2005, October 24, 2007.[127]Decision: El Awani v. Libya, United Nations Human Rights Committee,CCPR/C/90/D/1295/2004, July 11, 2007.[128]“Libya – Truth for All,” Saif al-Islam al-Gaddafi speech,Tripoli, July 26, 2008, http://gdf.org.ly/index.php?lang=en&CAT_NO=114&MAIN_CAT_NO=9&Page=105&DATA_NO=251(accessed Sept. 30, 2009).[129]Law 47 (1975), article 48.[130]“Libya: June 1996 Killings at Abu Salim Prison,” Human Rights Watchnews release, June 28,2006, http://www.hrw.org/legacy/english/docs/2006/06/28/libya13636_txt.htm.[131]HumanRights Watch interview with General Abdelfattah al-Obeidi, Secretary of PublicSecurity, Tripoli, April 25, 2009.[132]Human Rights Watch interview with Counselor Mostafa Abdeljalil, Secretary ofJustice, Tripoli, April 26, 2009.[133]“Minister of Justice: we asked security to give us the list of the deadin Abu Salim but did not receive it,” Libya Al Youm, April 24,2008.[134]Human Rights Watch phone interview with A.B., March 9, 2009.[135]“North Benghazi Primary Court Ruling (Arabic),” June 8, 2008,reproduced on Akhbar Libya, http://www.akhbar-libyaonline.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=19275&Itemid=1(accessed Sept. 30, 2009).[136]“Secretary of the General People’s Committee for Justice on Abu Salimincident,” Quryna, December 1, 2008.[137]Human Rights Watch phone interview with A.B., March 9, 2009.[138]Libya Human Rights Solidarity, “Abu Saleem Prison Massacre Libya”28-29 June 1996.[139]Human Rights Watch interview with Counselor Mostafa Abdeljalil, Secretary ofJustice, Tripoli, April 26, 2009.[140]Human Rights Watch phone interview with M.S., May 24, 2009.[141]Human Rights Watch interview with Mohamed Hamil Ferjany, United States, August13, 2009[142]Human Rights Watch phone interview with M.A., May 20, 2009.[143]Human Rights Watch interview with Fathi Terbil, Benghazi, April 24, 2009.[144]“Misratah is informed of its dead in the Abu Salim massacre,” LibyaAl Mostakbal, February 18,2009, http://www.libya-almostakbal.info/News2009/Feb2009/180209_misrata_busleem_victims.html(accessed Sept. 30, 2009).[145]Human Rights Watch interview with M.I., Benghazi, April 24, 2009.[146]Human Rights Watch interview with M.O., London, June 29, 2009.[147]For more on the death penalty in Libya see Section XII - the Death Penalty.[148]Human Rights Watch interview with Counselor Mostafa Abdeljalil, Secretary ofJustice, Tripoli, April 26, 2009.[149]“Press Release on Various Cases,” Gaddafi International Charity andDevelopment Foundation, August 10, 2009,  http://www.gdf.org.ly/index.php?lang=ar&CAT_NO=4&MAIN_CAT_NO=4&Page=105&DATA_NO=553(accessed August 17,2009).[150]Human Rights Watch phone interview with M.S., May 24, 2009.[151]“Families of lost prisoners reject compensation offer” AlJazeera August 23, 2008 http://www.aljazeera.net/NR/exeres/D0AC3A84-BD26-4AB9-8E82-B7AF403C8F8C.htm(accessed on July 4, 2009).[152]Human Rights Watch phone Interview with Mohamed Hamil Ferjany, July 8, 2009.[153]Human Rights Watch phone Interview with A.B., March 26, 2009.[154]See news archive on Libya Al Youm, http://www.libya-alyoum.com/ ,accessed through 2009.[155]Human Rights Watch phone interview with A.B., March 9, 2009.[156]Human Rights Watch interview with Mohamed Hamil Ferjany, United States, August13, 2009[157]Human Rights Watch interview with M.I., Benghazi, April 24, 2009.[158]Letters, Libya al Mostakbal, www.libya-al-mostakbal.org (accessedSeptember 30, 2009); Human Rights Watch phone Interview with A.B., March 26,2009.[159]Human Rights Watch phone Interview with Mohamed Hamil Ferjany, July 8, 2009.[160]“Urgent Action: Arbitrary Arrest  and Fear of Torture,” LibyaHuman Rights Solidarity press release, March 28, 2009.[161]Human Rights Watch interview with Fathi Terbil, Benghazi, April 24, 2009.[162]Human Rights Watch interview with Colonel Col. Al-Tohamy Khaled, Head of theInternal Security Agency, Tripoli, April 25, 2009.[163]Video posted on Al Manara at  http://www.almanaralink.com/new/index.php?scid=4&nid=16626(accessed June 30, 2009).[164]Muftah Abu Zaid, “In response to to the demonstration by families of theAbu Salim incident, Counselor Mostafa Abdeljalil, Secretary of Justice tellsQuryna ‘we have created a committee to resolve the issue in the contextof reconciliation but those who do not accept its terms are free to resort tothe courts,” Quryna, June 30, 2009.[165]Basic Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation forVictims of Gross Violations of international Human Rights Law and SeriousViolations of International Humanitarian Law, March 21, 2006, adopted by the60th session of the United Nations General Assembly, A/RES/60/147, paras. 11(c) and 24.[166]Set of Principles for the Protection and Promotion of Human Rights ThroughAction to Combat Impunity, October 2, 1997, adopted by the UN Commission onHuman Rights, E/CN.4/Sub.2/1997/20/Rev.1, principle 3.[167]TheU.N. Human Rights Committee articulated this principle in the case Quinterosv. Uruguay, concluding that the mother of a “disappeared”person was entitled to compensation as a victim, for the suffering caused bythe failure of the state to provide her with information. Quinteros v.Uruguay, U.N. Human Rights Committee, Case No. 107/1981: “TheCommittee understands the anguish and stress caused to the mother by thedisappearance of her daughter and by the continuing uncertainty concerning herfate and whereabouts. The author has the right to know what has happened to herdaughter. In these respects, she too is a victim of the violations of theCovenant suffered by her daughter in particular, of Article 7.”[168]Set of Principles for the Protection and Promotion of Human Rights ThroughAction to Combat Impunity, October 2, 1997, adopted by the UN Commission onHuman Rights, E/CN.4/Sub.2/1997/20/Rev.1, principle 1.[169]Trujillo Oroza v. Bolivia (Reparations), judgement of 27 February 2002,para. 115, http://www.corteidh.or.cr/docs/casos/articulos/Seriec_92_ing.pdf,(accessed September 28, 2009. See also  Staselovich v. Belarus, UNHuman Rights Committee Communication, communication No. 887/1999, para. 9.2(2003), http://humanrights.law.monash.edu.au/undocs/887-1999.html (accessedSeptember 28, 2009).[170]ICCPR, art. 14(1): “Everyone shall be entitled to a fair and publichearing by a competent, independent and impartial tribunal established bylaw.” African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, art. 7(1) (b,d); art. 7 states that everyone shall have the “right to be presumedinnocent until proved guilty by a competent court or tribunal” and the“right to be tried within a reasonable time by an impartial court ortribunal.”[171]UN Human Rights Commission, “Civil and Political Rights, Including theQuestion of Independence of the Judiciary, Administration of Justice,Impunity,” Report of the special rapporteur of the Sub-Commission on thePromotion and Protection of Human Rights, Emmanuel Decaux, E/CN.4/2006/58,January 13, 2006, principle 9.[172]See Human Rights Watch, Libya:  Words to Deeds, Volume 18, No.1(E),(New York: Human Rights Watch, January 24, 2006), http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2006/01/24/libya-words-deeds-0,Chapter V.[173]“Reforms Welcome, But Concerns Remain,” Human Rights Watch newsrelease, May 23, 2005, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2005/05/22/libya-reforms-welcome-concerns-remain;“Libya: Abolition of People’s Court is anImportant Step,” Amnesty International public statement, AI Index: MDE19/001/2005, January 13, 2005, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/MDE19/001/2005/en/e4b98fc8-d532-11dd-8a23-d58a49c0d652/mde190012005en.pdf(accessed Sept. 30, 2009) .[174]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Abdulrahman Abu Tuta, Chief Justice of theLibyan Supreme Court, Tripoli, April 21, 2009.[175]UN Human Rights Committee (HRC), Consideration ofreports submitted by States parties under article 40 of the Covenant :International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights : concluding observationsof the Human Rights Committee : Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, 15 November2007, CCPR/C/LBY/CO/4,http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/474aa9ea2.html (accessed 30 September2009).[176]Human Rights Watch interview with Counselor Mostafa Abdeljalil, Secretary ofJustice, Tripoli, April 26, 2009.[177]UN Human Rights Committee (HRC), Consideration ofreports submitted by States parties under article 40 of the Covenant :International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights : concluding observationsof the Human Rights Committee : Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, 15 November2007, CCPR/C/LBY/CO/4,http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/474aa9ea2.html (accessed 30 September2009).[178]Human Rights Watch group interview with lawyers, Tripoli Bar Association,Tripoli, April 22, 2009.[179]His claims are consistent with what is known about the CIA's treatment ofdetainees, see Human Rights Watch, Ghost Prisoner: Two Years in Secret CIADetention, February 26, 2007, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2007/02/26/ghost-prisoner-0(accessed November 7, 2009) and the Central Intelligence Agency InspectorGeneral, Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities (September2001 - October 2003), May 7, 2004 https://www.cia.gov/library/reports/Executive%20Summary_OIG%20Report.pdf(accessed November 7, 2009).[180]The CIA rendered an unknown number of detainees to countries such as Libya,Jordan, Egypt and Syria in the years following the 9/11 attacks. See HumanRights Watch, Double Jeopardy, April 7, 2008, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2008/04/07/double-jeopardy(accessed November 7, 2009).[181]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdelhakim Al Khoweildy, Abu Salim Prison,Tripoli, April 27, 2009.[182]Human Rights Watch interview with Mohamed Ahmed Al-Shoro’eyya, Abu SalimPrison, Tripoli, April 27, 2009.[183]Human Rights Watch interview with Jamal el Haji, Tripoli, April 29, 2009.[184]Human Rights Watch interview with Idris Boufayed, Geneva, April 6, 2009.[185]Human Rights Watch interview with Jamal el Haji, Tripoli, April 29, 2009.[186]Human Rights Watch phone interview with Shukri Sahil, June 25, 2009.[187]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Abdulrahman Abu Tuta, Chief Justice ofthe Libyan Supreme Court, Tripoli, April 21.[188]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Abdulrahman Abu Tuta, Chief Justice ofthe Libyan Supreme Court, Tripoli, April 21, 2009.[189]“Egyptian-Libyan Consular Delegation Meets to discuss the Issue ofEgyptians on Death Row in Libya and the Situation of Egyptian Workers in Libya(Arabic),” El Masry Al Youm, December 11, 2008, http://www.almasry-alyoum.com/article2.aspx?ArticleID=189931&IssueID=1251(accessed Sept. 30, 2009).[190]“Libya executes Egyptian prisoner... Those released thank the EgyptianForeign Ministry for its intervention on their behalf (Arabic),” ElMasry Al Youm, November 20, 2008, http://www.almasry-alyoum.com/article2.aspx?ArticleID=187213(accessed Sept. 30, 2009).[191]“Gaddafi Wants Death Penalty Scrapped,” Reuters, November 2,2004.[192]UN Human Rights Committee (HRC), Consideration ofreports submitted by States parties under article 40 of the Covenant :International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights : concluding observationsof the Human Rights Committee : Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, 15 November2007, CCPR/C/LBY/CO/4,http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/474aa9ea2.html (accessed 30 September2009), para. 13.Related ContentDecember 12, 2009News ReleaseLibya: In Repressive Atmosphere, Pockets of ImprovementAbolish Laws Criminalizing Speech and Association, Free Those Unjustly Detained, Provide Justice to Prison Massacre VictimsDecember 12, 2009News ReleaseLibya: In Repressive Atmosphere, Pockets of ImprovementRegion / CountryMiddle East/North Africa LibyaProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch