REPORT 1For more than two decades, 
Children’s Rights has been advocating  
on behalf of abused and neglected kids.
The impact is clear: Tens of thousands of children in the United 
States are now safer in foster care, have better education and health care, and are linked with permanent, loving families.  
These results drive us forward to reach even more young people. In fact, we are expanding 
our advocacy , building partnerships with like-minded organizations and, as our work over 
the past year shows, we are putting hope into action.
Along with our co-counsel, we went to trial to fight on behalf of 12,000 children 
languishing in Texas ’ dangerous system of permanent foster care. Y oung people testified 
about long-term, pervasive problems — like overwhelming caseloads, too few foster 
homes and rampant abuse — that hurt them in the very system intended to protect them.
One young woman, Crystal, told the court that she was sexually abused “nonstop, pretty 
much every home I lived in.” She did not “really know” who her caseworkers were and felt she had no workers to confide in. Crystal said she was speaking out for children currently 
in care: “I might not get justice but … some things can change for them and the other kids 
that are going to be in foster care.”
Thanks to the bravery of Crystal and others who testified, things will change. In 
December, a federal judge ruled T exas must make targeted improvements to its foster care system. The judge denounced the state for ignoring years of reports “outlining problems 
and recommending solutions … Children have been shuttled throughout a system where 
rape, abuse, psychotropic medication, and instability are the norm.” 
Crystal, above, testified about her experience in T exas foster care.
Photo Credit: Patrick Michels/Texas Observer
Megan Shattuck
Chair, Board of Directors
Sandy Santana
Executive Director
In 2015, Children’s Rights also teamed with local advocates to file two new federal class actions. One — moving through the legal process — is on behalf of more than 18,000 
kids in Arizona, where a severe shortage of foster homes and health care services and a 
failure to conduct timely abuse investigations are harming children. The other is on behalf of 3,400 kids in South Carolina foster care. The state has long struggled with a lack of 
foster homes, excessive caseloads and the mass institutionalizing of children. Now there 
is real promise for improvement: In June 2016 we reached a settlement, requiring essential changes to the way South Carolina cares for its kids.
As we focus on active cases, we have also continued to monitor progress in places where 
we have already won substantial reform.
One of these states has undergone a drastic turnaround. Tennessee was once beset with 
dangerous problems, but in April 2016 a federal judge rule it had reached more than 140 
mandated milestones to overhaul its foster care system. While some workers once had 
caseloads of 50 or more children, by 2015 at least 98 percent had caseloads of 20 or fewer kids. The state has improved medical and mental health screening for kids, eliminated 
the use of inappropriate shelters, and is reunifying more children with their relatives or 
placing them with loving adoptive families. The state must maintain these measures for at least a year to exit court oversight.
Over the past year, Children’s Rights has also branched into important policy and 
advocacy projects. W e are working with Lambda Legal and the Center for the Study of 
Social Policy to analyze the barriers that prevent transgender youth from being safe and 
supported in out-of-home care, and plan to publish a national policy report on the issue. And we worked with the New Y ork City Board of Correction to create and implement 
measures on inmate safety , access to health care, education and participation in recreation 
for young people ages 16 to 21 incarcerated at Rikers Island.
As you can see, Children’s Rights has spent the last year fighting for the young people  
who need us most. W e are determined to remain strong in our resolve and impact 
additional lives. With your help, we can ensure even more kids have the safe, loving childhoods they deserve.  2 3VICTORIES FOR KIDS
Thousands of children in Texas and South 
Carolina now have hope of a better future.
IN TEXAS:
For years Children’s Rights 
and our co-counsel — Y etter 
Coleman LLP and Haynes 
and Boone, LLP — have fought to make T exas foster care a safer place 
and to give the 12,000 kids 
in permanent managing conservatorship (PMC) a 
chance at loving families. 
The state allows 
caseworkers a maximum of 
18 months to either reunify 
children with their birth parents or find them adoptive homes before they enter PMC, a status unique to the Lone 
Star State. Once there, the attention paid to their cases drastically diminishes, and far too 
many literally grow up in state care, shuffled between a variety of poorly-supervised foster homes and institutions.
After bringing the case of M.D. v. Perry  to trial, in December 2015 a federal court judge 
ruled in favor of the children we represent. “T exas’ foster care system is broken, and it has 
been that way for decades,” wrote Senior U.S. District Judge Janis Graham Jack.
In her ruling, Judge Jack agreed that caseloads are too high, that placing up to 12 kids in 
a foster group home with no nighttime awake supervision is “a recipe for disaster,” that 
the state fails to properly oversee licensed facilities where children live and that it lacks enough placement options to ensure children reside in appropriate settings.
“The Court did not need to read a volume of studies to figure out that placing children 
hundreds of miles from all that is familiar, separating siblings, housing children in facilities 
that are inappropriate for their needs, leaving children in facilities where they have been 
abused, and placing sexualized children in the same room as other children without proper oversight, all present substantial risk of serious harm,” she wrote.
Now , the state must make specific changes to its foster care system. Judge Jack selected a 
pair of “Special Masters” to recommend a reform plan and oversee its implementation. This settlement is a game 
changer for children in South Carolina foster care. The state must now treat them as valuable, something it should have been doing all along.” 
—  Christy Irons, foster and adoptive parent 
and Children’s Rights Advisory Council memberIN SOUTH CAROLINA:
For too long, South Carolina’s child welfare system has been troubled by a drastic shortage 
of foster homes, excessive caseloads and a failure to provide basic health care to kids. 
In an effort to compel change, Children’s Rights took action. In January 2015, CR and 
our co-counsel — the South Carolina Appleseed Legal Justice Center and Matthew T . Richardson, partner at the South Carolina law firm Wyche P .A. — filed 
Michelle H. v. Haley  
on behalf of the 3,400 children in foster care throughout the state. 
Governor Nikki Haley and her administration recognized the need to strengthen state 
care, and came to the table wanting to find ways to improve the system. And by June 2016, 
we reached an agreement with state officials requiring important reforms to the way 
South Carolina treats its kids. 
The settlement promises vital changes like ensuring reasonable caseloads, improving 
investigations of abuse allegations, and placing fewer young kids in institutions. It also will revamp health care so that all children get the medical, dental and mental health screenings and treatment they need.
Months before the settlement was reached, the parties agreed to court-ordered interim 
relief. It focused on ending practices such as: allowing children in state custody to stay 
overnight in hotels and child welfare offices; placing kids age 6 and under in group 
facilities; and recommending that foster kids remain in juvenile detention facilities even though they have completed their sentences or pleas, simply because there are no places 
to house them in state care.
T wo national child welfare experts have been appointed as independent co-monitors, and 
will issue periodic, public reports on the state’s progress. Children’s Rights will continue 
to act as a watchdog, and work tirelessly until South Carolina’s most vulnerable children are safe, secure and getting the care they deserve. 
There is a 
spotlight on Texas CPS now. The problems have come to light and they cannot be ignored.”
—  Amy Zachmeyer,  
former Texas  caseworker
“
“4 52015 FINANCES
38%
Grants &  
Contributions34%
Special Events2%
Other
26%
Attorneys’ Fees
68%
Legal & Policy7%
Communications15%
Management  
& General
10%
FundraisingINCOME
EXPENSESStatement of Activities Year ended December 31, 2015
PUBLIC SUPPORT AND REVENUE:
 Attorneys’ Fees  710,940  710,940
 Contributions  828,945 215,000  1,043,945
 Special Events  925,870  925,870
 Investment & Other  6,951  6,951
 In-Kind Donations  37,000  37,000
 Net Assets Released from Restrictions  309,311 (309,311) —
 Total Public Support and Revenue 2,819,017 (94,311) 2,724,706
EXPENSES: Legal  2,976,342  2,976,342
 Policy  162,070  162,070
 Communications  308,667  308,667
 Management and General  680,835  680,835
 Fundraising  472,812  472,812
 Total Expenses  4,600,726  4,600,726
Change in Net Assets  (1,781,709)  (94,311)   (1,876,020)
Net Assets – Beginning of Year  7,004,728   370,000   7,374,728
Net Assets – End of Year  5,223,019   275,689   5,498,708UNRESTRICTED TOTALTEMPORARILY
RESTRICTED2015 FINANCES6 7INDIVIDUAL DONORS  
AND  
FOUNDATIONS
Gifts of $50,000 +
Anonymous
Joseph Belluck
The Robert Sterling Clark 
Foundation
Charles M. & Mary D. Grant 
Foundation
The Ambrose Monell 
Foundation
Alan C. and Nina Sumers 
Myers
Neukom Family Foundation
Blanchette Hooker Rockefeller 
Fund
Alice RosenwaldJordan Seaman / The Grateful 
Foundation
May & Stanley Smith 
Charitable T rust
James Stanton
Gifts of $25,000 - 
$49,999
Michael Armilio and Molly 
Gochman
Michael and Karen Borofsky
Jenny and Jay Galluzzo 
Foundation
Cori and Dan GalpernMegan ShattuckSkadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher 
& Flom LLP
Kimberly Rimer and Lewis 
T epperGifts of $10,000 - 
$24,999
Anonymous
Berdon Accountants and 
Advisors
The Herb Block Foundation
Bremen House, Inc.
The Chicago Title Insurance 
Company
The Chadda FamilyCourtney and David CorletoCravath, Swaine & Moore LLP
CRY America
Kasseem ‘Swizz Beatz’ Dean 
and Alicia Keys
EisnerAmper LLPLawrence and Paulette Fox
Robert Gilman / Gilman 
W ealth Management
The Honorable Bryanne 
Hamill
The Barbara McDowell 
and Gerald S. Hartman 
Foundation
Paul Hastings LLP; Joshua H. 
Sternoff and Lawrence J. Hass
The Rona Jaffe Foundation
Paul, W eiss, Rifkind, Wharton 
& Garrison LLP
Beth and Josh PristawJordan Roth and Richie 
Jackson
Peter and Brittany Serating
Anne Strickland Squadron 
Sophie StenbeckW ofsey , Rosen, Kweskin & 
Kuriansky , LLP
The W orld Wide Group
Gifts of $5,000 - 
$9,999
America’s Charities
AnonymousAnonymous
Anonymous
Mr. and Mrs. Sal BellinoBET NetworksRich Durkin and Ann 
Thivierge
The Durst OrganizationJeffrey S. Feinman, Partner; 
DDK & Company , LLP
Goop, Inc.The Hyde and W atson 
Foundation
Innisfree M&A Incorporated
Janie and Robert Julius
Kirkland & Ellis LLPSally Mendelsohn and David 
Lowenfeld
Palermo-Ravich Family 
Foundation
Joseph and Elizabeth Regele
Samuel W . Rosenblatt and 
Mario D’Andrea
Jennifer Rothenberg
Barry F. SchwartzAlexandra Stanton and Sam 
Natapoff
Frank & Domna Stanton 
FoundationGifts of $2,500 - 
$4,999
Laurie and Peter Atkins
Compensation Advisory 
Partners
Nan and Richard Davis
EMM
Samuel and Vicki Katz
Andrew J. Levander and  
Carol Loewenson
George Libert Foundation
Chiara T rento Mai
Michael D. Morici, Jr. and 
Jennifer L. Morici
Hunton & Williams, LLPJon and Victoria Patricof
Roselia and Sandy Santana
Dana Silverman and Robert 
Lewin 
Peter J. Solomon Company
Michael and Nina StantonHillary and Jeffrey SuchmanShoshanna and Chris SugaharaDr. Elliot Sumers and Dr. Anne 
Sumers
Ferebee and Brooke T aubeNathan W oods and Blanca 
Guillen- W oods
Gifts of $1,500 - 
$2,499
Monique V . Blake
Bravelets.comChanel, Inc.
Gabriel Cooperman
Danziger & De Llano, LLPDoug Davis & Jessie MuscioArmand and Lauren Della 
Monica 
Daniel Dunn Gail Edwin and Robert P . SteinBeth Essig and Jeff Braun
Stacy Greene and Fred Wistow
Dana W allach Jones and 
Michael T M Jones
Stacy Kanter and Eric 
KornblauSteven and Barbara Kessler
Paul Kremer
Anthony Lazzara - Morgan 
Stanley
The MacMillan Family 
Foundation
Jennifer and Eric Mann
Enid Maran and Doug 
Kunreuther
Kenneth M. McClure, Summit 
Financial Printing
Metzger-Price Fund Inc.Shoeb Omar and Guillermina 
Guillen-Omar
Melvin Rosa and Natasha 
Zolotarsky
Carol and James Shattuck
Kemp and Mike Steib 
Gary Swidler and Jennifer 
Dalven
Roz T epper and John Byrne
Mark E. Thierfelder and 
Courtney A. Lederer 
Lindsay T omenson and 
Stephen Maringer
Gifts of $1,000 - 
$1,499
Stephen and Susan Banker
Benevity
Elizabeth and Stanlee Brimberg
Brookman, Rosenberg, Brown 
& Sandler
Lisa BrownPaul ByrneChristopher and Stella 
Calabrese
Michael and Julie CivaleTiffany ClaggettSteven and Catherine ClemensEric and Stacy Cochran
Susan M. Curtis
Jeff Dangl and Sarah GrantDechert LLPFrederic and Nanu DorwartSeth and Jisha Dymond
Scott Eisen
Howard L. EllinLeigh FarrisEric and Lori Friedman
Frank and Marie Gittes
Richard Goldberg, Partner at 
Dechert LLP
Hector GonzalezLisa and Jeff GoodwinT om GreenbergCorbin and Pamela GwaltneyAndrew JacobsT eresa M. Jerner
Robert and Gigi Jones
Jonathan C. KimMr. and Mrs. Robert K. 
Kretzman
Michael and Susan LabhardDennis M. LeahyJay and Elena Lefkowitz
Karen Levin and Ira Lustbader
Nancy LiebermanStanley & Martha Livingston 
Fund
William and Julie MackloweMatthew J. Mallow & Ellen J. 
Chesler
Marjorie and Bill McAndrewsHenry N. NassauMichael Paskin and Danielle 
DeMaio 
Barnet Phillips IVRobert PondPrecious Homes, Inc.David RosenMelissa G. Salten
Susan Saltzstein
Daniel SchnurKenneth SchwartzJim and Penny SeamanKelli M. Shaughnessy
Robert C. Sheehan
The Singer & Bassuk 
Organization
Nicholas Stanton
Oren T epper
Latham Thomas and T om 
Rasmussen
Edward P . W elch
This Annual Report includes donors whose gifts were received in 2015. Every effort has been made to ensure the 
accuracy of this report.8 9BOARD OF DIRECTORS,  
ADVISORY COUNCIL
AND STAFF
BOARD OF 
DIRECTORS
Megan Shattuck, chair  
President, T eneo T alent
Daniel Galpern, treasurer 
TZP Group LLC
Bethany Pristaw , secretary  
Morgan Stanley
Joseph W arren Belluck 
Belluck & Fox LLP 
Michael Borofsky 
MacAndrews & Forbes 
Holdings Inc.
Kasseen ‘Swizz Beatz’ Dean 
Jungle City Studios
Lawrence J. Fox  
Drinker Biddle &  Reath LLP
Jay Galluzzo 
NeueHouse LLC
Molly Gochman 
Commune, LP
Alan C. Myers  
Counsel to a family/retired partner – Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP 
Jay Neukom  
Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & 
Sullivan, LLP 
Alice Rosenwald  
American Securities LP 
Sandy Santana 
Children’s Rights
Peter D. Serating 
Skadden, Arps, Slate, 
Meagher & Flom LLP
Anne Strickland Squadron
James Stanton  
W orld Wide Group 
Lewis T epper 
Aston Partners, LLCADVISORY COUNCIL
Christen Douglas 
McDermott Will & Emery
Karyn Froseth 
The Coca-Cola Company
Christy Irons
Sandra Kapell 
The Madison Square Garden 
Company
Mark Lindsay 
The Livingston Group
Enid Maran 
The Nielsen Company
Barry Pollack 
Pollack Solomon Duffy LLP
Gonja Hartmann T ekiner 
Bremen House, Inc.
STAFF
Sandy Santana, executive 
director
Sara Bartosz, lead counsel
W ende Gozan Brown,  
director of communications 
and marketing
Ira Lustbader, litigation  
director
Marjorie A. McAndrews,  
director of finance
Sally S. W eissman, director of 
operations
Kelsey Atkinson, paralegal
Hailey Cherepon, paralegalJulia Davis, senior staff  
attorney
Lauren Kidd Ferguson,  
communications manager
Aaron Finch, staff attorneyElizabeth Pitman Gretter,  
staff attorney
Bianca Herlitz-Ferguson, 
paralegal
Elissa Glucksman Hyne,  
senior policy analyst
Meetra Mehdizadeh, law clerkBridget Morrison, paralegal
Nelida Mulero, bookkeeper
Stephanie Persson, law clerk Susan Reeves, executive  
assistant
Christina Wilson Remlin, 
senior staff attorney
Kathleen Rivera, development 
manager
Joshua Rosenthal, senior staff 
attorney
Sarah Russo, senior staff  
attorney
Isabel Skilton, paralegal
Alysa Stryker, digital strategy 
associate
Emmy V argas, senior  
administrative assistant
Kate W ood, staff attorney
Of Counsel:
Philip BarberStephen Dixon
Eric ThompsonDONATE TODAY
Thank you for helping us transform the lives of abused and 
neglected children. When you make a gift to Children’s Rights, you can choose which giving vehicle best suits your philanthropic goals and boosts your financial leverage and tax savings.
Our Tax Identification Number
13-3801864
Gifts by Check
Please make your check payable to Children’s Rights, Inc.
Gifts by Credit Card
You may make your gift online by entering your credit card information at www.childrensrights.org. 
Become a Monthly Donor
Support Children’s Rights’ work by becoming a monthly donor and help us protect vulnerable children. 
Make Gifts of Stock or Wire Transfers
We happily accept gifts of appreciated stock, bonds, other marketable securities or wire transfers. Please call Kathleen Rivera at 646-216-3306 for details.
To give a gift to Children’s Rights,  
please contact:
Kathleen Rivera, Development ManagerPhone: 646-216-3306 | Email: krivera@childrensrights.orgGifts to Children’s Rights are tax deductible to the fullest extent allowed by law.CONTACT CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
Children’s Rights
88 Pine Street, Suite 800
New York, NY 10005
212.683.2210
Visit us on the web at www.childrensrights.org
Like Children’s Rights on Facebook
Follow us on Twitter and Instagram @ChildrensRights