  By Jean Casella  
Under pressure from a lawsuit 
brought by the New York Civil Liber-
ties Union on behalf of three people 
held in long -term  solitary confinement, 
New York has agreed to  a set of chang-
es to its use of  solitary and other forms 
of extreme isolation in state prisons. 
The agreement, announced on Febru-
ary 19, would bar certain vulnerable 
populations from  isolated confinement, 
while for the first time setting firm 
guidelines and maximum durations for 
isolating  others.  
New York currently holds some 3,800 
men, women, and children in 23 -hour -
a-day isolation in small, sometime win-
dowless cells, either alone or with one 
other person. “The conditions inside 
New York’s isolation cells are deplora-
ble and result in severe physical and 
psychological harm,” stated the origi-
nal complaint in  Peoples v. Fischer , 
filed in Federal District Court in Man-
hattan in  December 2012. The com-
plaint, which charges the state with 
violating  the plaintiffs’ Constitutional 
rights under the 8th and 14th Amend-
ments,  continues:  
Individuals are confined idle and iso-
lated for months and years on end in 
tiny cells. They are allowed only one 
hour of exercise a day in barren cages 
smaller than their cell. As additional 
punishment, prison staff may issue 
orders depriving individuals of what 
little remains —access to nourishing 
and edible food, exercise, bedding, and 
showers may all be denied. At some 
prisons, two men are forced to share a 
single isolation cell for weeks and 
months on end, often leading to vio-
lence. Requests for mental health care 
must be discussed through the food 
slot in the cell door.  
People  are placed in isolation on the word of corrections staff, who issue 
tens of thousands of disciplinary 
“tickets” each year that result in time 
in the state’s numerous Special Hous-
ing Units (SHUs) or its two supermax 
prisons. Five out of six tickets are for 
nonviolent misbehavior, according to 
a 2012 report  by the NYCLU. The av-
erage SHU sentence is five months, 
but many extend for years and a few 
have stretched to decades. UN Special 
Rapporteur on Torture Juan Méndez 
has stated that solitary confinement 
beyond 15 days is cruel, inhuman, and 
degrading treatment, and often quali-
fies as torture.  
The most dramatic reform brought 
about by the  agreement between the 
state  and the NYCLU  is a ban  on us-
ing solitary to discipline youth under 
the age of 18, which makes New York 
the largest state in the nation to pro-
hibit the practice for juveniles in state 
prisons. In New York, 16 and 17 year 
olds accused of a felony are automati-
cally tried and incarcerated as adults, 
and large numbers have ended up in 
the SHUs, sometimes for “their own 
protection.” Under the new deal, juve-
niles with serious disciplinary viola-
tions would be would be placed in spe-
cial units with  more out -of-cell time 
and special programming.  
The agreement also  bans placing preg-
nant women in solitary, and  sets a 30 -
day limit on isolating people with de-
velopmental disabilities. A 2007 court 
settlement and  a law enacted in 2011 
already prohibit the use of  isolated 
confinement for people with serious 
mental illness (though  evidence sug-
gests  that hundreds may still remain 
isolated, largely due to issues around 
diagnosis).  
“It made sense to immediately remove 
these vulnerable populations from ex-treme isolation,” Taylor Pendergrass, 
the NYCLU’s lead attorney in the suit, 
told Solitary Watch. “But in the longer 
term, we believe this process will bring 
about more comprehensive reforms 
that will affect many more people.” 
Those reforms will come, in large 
part,  in the form of “sentencing guide-
lines” that designate punishments for 
different disciplinary infractions, and 
for the first time set maximum sen-
tences in the SHU. The negotiated 
guidelines are covered by a confidenti-
ality agreement until staff can be 
trained and the new rules put in 
place —a process that should take no 
more than nine months, Pendergrass 
said. 
The deal also  calls for New York State 
and the NYCLU  to each choose an ex-
pert who will assess the use of isolat-
ed confinement throughout the prison 
system over the next two years and 
make further recommendations for 
change.   
Even then, however, the reforms will 
probably limited, and will bring only 
modest changes to the lives of some 
individuals in solitary —particularly 
those who are in administrative rather 
than disciplinary segregation.  
More sweeping changes to the state’s 
use of solitary confinement is envi-
sioned in a bill introduced  in the New 
York state legislature. On January 31, 
legislators joined with advocates, sur-
vivors of solitary confinement, and 
family members of those in isolation in 
a press conference to announce the 
Humane Alternatives to Long -Term 
(HALT) Solitary Confinement Act.  
Introducing the speakers at the press 
conference, Claire Deroche  of the Na-
tional Religious Campaign Against  
(continued on page 2)  
2 
Solitary Watch ( www.solitarywatch.com) is a web -based project aimed at bringing solitary confinement out of the 
shadows and into the light of the public square. Our mission is to provide the public —as well as practicing attor-
neys, legal scholars, law enforcement and corrections officers, policymakers, educators, advocates, and people in 
prison —with the first centralized source of background research, unfolding developments, and original reporting 
on solitary confinement in the United States.  
The print edition of Solitary Watch is produced quarterly and is available free of charge to currently and formerly 
incarcerated people, to prisoners’ families and advocates, and to non -profit organizations. To receive a copy, send 
a request to the address or email below.  
We also welcome accounts of life in solitary confinement, as well as stories, poems, essays, and artwork by people 
who have served time in isolation. Please send contributions to “Voices from Solitary” at the address below.  
PO Box 11374, Washington, DC 20008 / solitarywatchnews@gmail.com  (Continued from page 1)  
Torture called the bill  “the most com-
prehensive and progressive legisla-
tive response to date to the nation-
wide problem of solitary confine-
ment in our prisons and jails.” It 
would limit solitary confinement to 
15 days, and create new alternatives 
for those deemed a longer -term safe-
ty risk to others, replacing the pun-
ishment and deprivation of New 
York’s  SHUs with “Residential Re-
habilitation Units” offering therapy, 
programming, and more out -of-cell 
time.  
In addition, the HALT Solitary Con-
finement Act would completely ban 
the use of isolation on vulnerable 
populations, including not only 
youth and pregnant women but also 
the elderly, all people with physical, 
psychological, or developmental dis-
abilities, and those identifying as 
LGBTQ.  
The bill is being sponsored in the 
Assembly by Jeffrion Aubry (D, 
Queens), called solitary confinement 
“an issue whose time has come.” Au-
bry said it was time to set standards 
for treatment of all people in prison, 
regardless of their offenses. “I don’t 
believe that having committed a 
crime suspends your human rights” 
said Aubry. “That’s not the America 
I want to live in. That’s not the New 
York State I want to live in.”  The legislation’s Senate sponsor, 
Bill Perkins (D, Harlem) pointed out 
that solitary is increasingly being 
seen as a “moral issue” and a “crime 
against humanity.” The 15 -day limit 
set by the bill conforms to recom-
mendations made by UN Special 
Rapporteur on Torture, Juan Mén-
dez, but far surpasses restrictions 
currently placed on solitary in any 
American prison system.   
Five Mualimm -ak began his state-
ment at the press conference by tell-
ing listeners: “I lived five years of 
my life in a space the size of your 
bathroom.” Mualimm -ak, who said 
he never committed a violent act in 
prison, was given stints in solitary 
for offenses as minor as “wasting 
food” by “refusing to eat an apple.” 
”New York State should be a leader” 
when it comes to prison conditions, 
said Mualimm -ak, who has been out 
of prison for two years and is work-
ing against what he calls “solitary 
torture.” Instead, New York state 
prisons and city jails practice isolat-
ed confinement at levels well above 
the national average.  
Wrapping up the event, Scott Pal-
trowitz  of the Correctional Associa-
tion said that the legislation, 
“recognizes that we need a funda-
mental transformation of how our 
public institutions address people’s 
needs and behaviors, both in our 
prisons and in our communities.”  The legislation is in large part the 
work of the New York Campaign for 
Alternatives to Isolated Confine-
ment (CAIC), which describes itself 
as joining together “advocates, for-
merly incarcerated persons, family 
members of currently incarcerated 
people, concerned community mem-
bers, lawyers, and individuals in the 
human rights, health, and faith 
communities throughout New York 
State.” CAIC considers solitary and 
all forms of prison isolation to be 
“ineffective, counterproductive, un-
safe, and inhumane,” and cites evi-
dence showing that solitary confine-
ment increases recidivism while fail-
ing to  reduce prison violence.  
The legislation, drafted over the 
past year, is more ambitious and far
-reaching  than bills on solitary that 
have been introduced in other 
states. As a result, it is unlikely to 
pass in anything resembling its cur-
rent form —but supporters are deter-
mined to push forward. “The HALT 
Solitary Confinement Act imple-
ments rational, humane alternatives 
to the costly, ineffective, and abu-
sive use of long -term solitary con-
finement in New York prisons and 
jails,” said Sarah Kerr of the Legal 
Aid Society’s Prisoners’ Rights Pro-
ject, who helped draft the legisla-
tion. “The need for reform is well -
documented and the time for change 
is now.”  3  The following essay was written by 
Sarah Jo Pender, 34, who is current-
ly 13 years into a 110 -year sentence 
at the Indiana Women’s Prison on 
the far west side  of Indianapolis 
for escaping from prison  in 2008, at 
which time she was placed in soli-
tary confinement. In early February, 
Solitary Watch received word that, 
after spending over five years in iso-
lation, Pender was recently moved 
out of solitary to a transition dorm, 
where she will remain 90 days be-
fore being moved back with the gen-
eral population. –Lisa Dawson  
My name is Sarah Jo Pender. I have 
been held under the wide thumb of 
prison administrators for five years 
in solitary confinement at the Indi-
ana Women’s Prison. My official 
punishment for escaping ended four 
years ago, but I am still here and 
there is nothing I can do to get my-
self out.  
Generally, women in segregation are 
held between two weeks and six 
months, though multiple offenses 
can extend sentences to years of 
punishment. The isolation unit is 
comprised of twenty -five single cells 
along one hall separated from gen-
eral population. My cell is 7′ x 10′ of 
painted concrete, white and chip-
ping, with a barred, sealed window 
at the rear and a steel door with a 
small observation window at the 
front. A slab of concrete and thin 
mattress makes my bed. A stainless 
steel sink and toilet encrusted with 
years of use sits three feet from my 
head when I sleep.  
Food is never hot and is served on 
plastic trays through a hatch in the 
door. Sometimes, it is tolerable only 
if I don’t chew it first. Unpalatable 
globs of flour that was once upon a 
time pasta is drenched in a tomato 
base and served sixteen different 
ways mixed with mechanically sepa-
rated chicken bits and soy pellets 
marked for animal feed. However, 
the bread is always edible and I can 
buy a jar of peanut butter if I want. 
What a luxury.  Here, it is cold. Artificial ventilation 
blows directly onto my bed so that 
no amount of repositioning brings 
relief from the chill. My bed must be 
made by 7 a.m. each day, so that I 
cannot access my full bed linens 
during the day when it is the cold-
est. The captain threatens to strip 
our cells of belongings, including all 
bedding if we are caught covering 
ourselves with the sheets during the 
day. I am wearing three pairs of 
socks right now, and my toes are 
purple and stinging cold.  
I am confined to my cell 22 hours 
each day, and the other 2 hours am 
handcuffed and escorted 25 feet 
down the hallway to another locked 
room for “recreation and exercise,” 
though the space is only twice the 
size of my cell. In the largest room, I 
can take nine steps before I must 
turn around again and again. But 
there is a television that I can watch 
public broadcasting and lots of 
books. Books keep us sane. Since 
books are a main source of time 
management and entertainment, 
the prison uses them as a method of 
punishment. Women on disciplinary 
status are only allowed one non -
religious book and one religious book 
at a time. I am allowed to possess up 
to five books. If we are caught with 
too many books during a room 
search, we are subject to further dis-
cipline.  
Six days a week, my hands are re-
strained through the door hatch and 
an officer escorts me into a shower 
room. Four stalls line one wall; each 
stall is enclosed by three concrete 
walls and a steel mesh door that 
shuts us in and gets locked. I have 
fifteen minutes to shower with an army of black bugs on the walls. 
Black mold peppers the baseboards 
and thick scales of scum cling to 
ripped shower curtains. Then I am 
recuffed and escorted back to my 
perpetually cold cell.  
As a kid, I slept with my bedroom 
door cracked for a sliver of the hall 
light to visually orient me when my 
bladder woke me up at night. Now, 
my room is constantly lit even at 2 
a.m. I can push a button to dim the 
fluorescent bulbs, but I can never, 
ever sleep in darkness. However, the 
nights are usually quiet, except for 
the occasional slamming metal door, 
ringing phone, and piercing scream 
from one of the actively psychotic or 
suicidal women housed on the unit.  
Despite knowing that isolation can 
drive people insane, the mental 
health care here is woefully inade-
quate. Once a month, a mental 
health staff comes to ask us if we 
are hallucinating, hearing voices, or 
are suicidal. More frequent meetings 
can be requested, but they offer no 
coping skills, no therapy, no advoca-
cy. The luckiest among us are pre-
scribed anti -depressants to numb us 
from the hardest parts of being 
alone.  
I am fortunate to have incredible 
support from my family and friends. 
To pass the time, I read, write, learn 
and plan for the future when I can 
be with them again. What sanity I 
eek out of these letters, books, phone 
calls and visits is enough to sustain 
me just a little longer. I am mentally 
stable now, but my mind broke down 
under the weight of isolation 3 1/2 
years ago, and it was a long, slow, 
painful process of putting myself 
back together.  
Acutely psychotic women who refuse 
medication are frequently locked in 
a cell where they bang and talk and 
argue with voices, scream about God 
and demons, and/or refuse to shower 
or eat for fear of being poisoned. 
This can go on for weeks until some  
(Continued on page 4)  
4 (Continued from page 3)  
invisible threshold is crossed and 
officers dressed in full riot gear come 
in, hold her down, and a nurse in-
jects her with an anti -psychotic med-
icine. This scene gets repeated every 
two weeks until she cooperates.  
Other women who enter sane will 
become so depressed that they shut 
down or hurt themselves. I watched 
a woman claw chunks of flesh from 
her cheeks and nose and write on 
the window with her blood. My 
neighbor bashed her head against 
the concrete until officers dragged 
her to a padded cell. When she re-
turned, the scab on her forehead was 
huge and shaped like the country of 
Brazil. Right across from my cell, a 
woman slit her own throat with a 
razor and was wheeled out on a gur-
ney. Two others tried to asphyxiate 
themselves with bras and shoe-strings. Now no one has shoestrings 
and we shuffle around in floppy ten-
nis shoes with loose tongues. Once, I 
found some embroidery floss and 
tied up the middle lace holes to keep 
myself from tripping. A guard de-
manded that I give her the five inch 
strings and then formally punished 
me for this violation. Another wom-
an cut her wrists using the metal 
band around a pencil eraser. Now, 
all our pencils are stripped naked. It 
is always the poor prisoner porter 
who is forced to clean up the blood 
puddles and shit smears left behind 
when someone’s mind spirals down 
the rabbit hole.  
How is this an acceptable manage-
ment tool for human beings? Short -
term isolation is understandably 
useful for investigations, medical 
quarantines, emergencies, etc., but 
using long -term isolation to manage 
behavior is inhumane and hateful, especially when prison administra-
tors do not offer a clear alternative. 
There is no behavioral therapy, no 
guidance, no education. There are no 
identified, achievable goals for the 
prisoner to earn her way out of isola-
tion. The decisions seem arbitrary 
and capricious at best. There is no 
due process to protect our miniscule 
civil rights.  
In the thirteen years I have been 
held prisoner, I have never commit-
ted an act of violence. I escaped from 
another prison over five years ago 
with the help of a prison guard. I 
essentially walked out of the back 
door. Today, that guard is at home a 
free man while I am still kept in this 
earthly purgatory. Why and for how 
long I do not know, because the pris-
on administrators refuse to tell me. 
How’s that for human rights in 
America?  
CALIFORNIA —In the wake of a 
massive hunger strike last summer 
and fall in California’s prisons, the 
legislature held hearings on the use 
of solitary confinement, and on the 
new “step -down program proposed 
by the Department of Corrections 
and Rehabilitation. Advocates, along 
with some legislators, remain critical 
of the program because it relies en-
tirely on “debriefing” or participating 
in “behavior modification” as paths 
toward release from the state’s noto-
rious “Security Housing Units, 
where many are currently held for 
years or decades. Legislation to limit  
the use of solitary has now been pro-
posed in the California Assembly.  
NEW YORK CITY —Under pressure 
from years of activism and two 
scathing reports, New York City jails 
have been forced to begin reducing 
their use of solitary confinement, 
particularly for youth and people 
with mental illness. While many on 
Rikers Island remain in dismal con-
ditions, some have been moved to 
new therapeutic units. The New 
York City Board of Correction, which 
has oversight of city jails, has also 
voted to develop new rules governing 
the use of isolation.  SOUTH CAROLINA —In December, 
a state judge ruled that prison offi-
cials were culpable of systemic, ongo-
ing violations of the state’s constitu-
tion through their use of solitary 
confinement and other forms of 
abuse and neglect on individuals 
with mental illness in South Caroli-
na’s prisons. “Inmates have died...for 
lack of basic mental health care,” the 
judge stated, “and hundreds more 
remain substantially at risk for seri-
ous physical injury, mental decom-
pensation, and profound, permanent 
mental illness.”     
NEW MEXICO —After a year -long 
study, the New Mexico Center on 
Law and  Poverty and the ACLU of 
New Mexico issued a report in No-
vember on the state’s use of solitary 
confinement, which far exceeds the 
national average. About 16 percent 
of the state’s prison population is in 
isolation, and terms in solitary aver-
age three years. An independent 
group is now looking at ways to re-
duce the use of isolation in New 
Mexico’s prisons.  LOUISIANA —Herman Wallace, one 
of the two remaining members of the 
Angola 3 who remained incarcerated 
in solitary confinement after more 
than 41 years, died on October 4, 
2013, after a brief taste of freedom.  
He was 71 years old. Three days pri-
or to Wallace’s death, a judge had 
overturned his conviction in the 1972 
murder of an Angola corrections of-
ficer, and ordered him released im-
mediately, despite efforts by the 
state of Louisiana to keep him jailed 
pending a new trial.  
NATIONAL CALL FOR SUBMIS-
SIONS —Architects/Designers/
Planners for Social Responsibility is 
seeking drawings of the SHU/
solitary confinement. Please include 
a short description of the space and 
your experience being there, and a 
statement giving ADPSR permission 
to publish your drawing. All work 
will be displayed online and some 
will be part of a traveling exhibition 
which will support ADPSR’s pro-
posal to prohibit architects from de-
signing execution chambers and 
spaces designed for long -term soli-
tary confinement. Work accepted 
until May 30, 2014. Send to: ADPSR, 
PO Box 9126, Berkeley, CA 94709.  
