  By James Ridgeway  
Supermax prisons and solitary confine-
ment units are our domestic black 
sites —hidden places where human be-
ings endure unspeakable punishments, 
without benefit of due process in any 
court of law. On the say -so of correc-
tions officials, incarcerated Americans 
can be placed in conditions of extreme 
isolation and sensory deprivation for 
months, years, or even decades.  
At least 80,000 men, women, and chil-
dren live in such conditions on any giv-
en day in the United States. And they 
are not merely separated from others 
for safety reasons. They are effectively 
buried alive. Most live in concrete cells 
the size of an average parking space, 
often windowless, cut off from all com-
munication by solid steel doors. If they 
are lucky, they will be allowed out for 
an hour a day to shower or to exercise 
alone in cages resembling dog runs.  
The majority of these individuals have 
never committed a violent act in pris-
on. They are locked down because 
they’ve been classified as “high risk,” or 
because of nonviolent misbehavior —
anything from mouthing off or testing 
positive for marijuana to exhibiting the 
symptoms of untreated mental illness.  
Once isolated, they most quickly begin 
to deteriorate physically, psychological-
ly, and socially. While less than 5 per-
cent of U.S. prisoners nationwide are 
held in solitary, close to 50 percent of 
all prison suicides take place there.  
After three years of reporting on soli-
tary confinement for Solitary Watch, a 
website I co -founded, I’m convinced 
that much of what happens in these 
places constitutes torture. How is it 
possible that a human -rights crisis of 
this magnitude can carry on year after 
year, with impunity?  
I believe part of the answer has to do 
with how effectively the nature of these 
sites has been hidden from the press and, by extension, the public. With few 
exceptions, solitary confinement cells 
have been kept firmly off -limits to jour-
nalists —with the approval of the feder-
al courts, who defer to corrections offi-
cials’ purported need to maintain 
“safety and security.” If the First 
Amendment ever manages to make it 
past the prison gates at all, it is stopped 
short at the door to the isolation unit.  
As a reporter, I ran into solitary con-
finement in writing an article about 
Herman Wallace and Albert Woodfox, 
members of the so -called Angola 3, 
who have lived in solitary confinement 
in Louisiana since 1972. When the pris-
on denied me access, the ACLU of Lou-
isiana took up my case, and I was final-
ly granted what turned out to be the 
standard guided tour of the plantation 
prison. It included numerous dormito-
ries, chapels, and even the death cham-
ber—but not the solitary confinement 
units. Even the ACLU couldn’t help me 
penetrate those fortresses of solitude.  
While reporting on solitary confine-
ment in New York State, I was readily 
shown around Auburn Correctional 
Facility by the affable warden there. I 
saw all kinds of cells, yards, and work-
shops —everything but the so -called 
Special Housing Unit (SHU) where 
people are held in solitary. These units, 
I was told, are never shown to the me-
dia.  
At another New York prison, I man-
aged to visit (under the watchful eye of 
a guard) with a man who has been in 
solitary for nearly 25 years. Since the 
Department of Corrections media poli-
cy forbids media visits to most prison-
ers in “segregation,” I had to withhold 
the fact that I was a reporter, and sign 
in as his “friend.”  
Once I began reporting on solitary, I 
learned of a handful of other reporters 
who were encountering the same re-
strictions —and working around them 
and in spite of them: Shane Bauer in California, Susan Greene in Colorado, 
George Pawlaczyk and Beth Hundsdor-
fer in Illinois, Lance Tapley in Maine, 
and Mary Beth Pfeiffer in New York 
have all exposed the solitary suffering 
that takes place in supermax prisons 
and SHUs, usually without ever setting 
foot inside them. Instead, they have 
painstakingly searched public records 
and carried on lengthy correspondenc-
es with the men, women, and children 
who live in these gray boxes.  
Where journalists have succeeded, one 
way or another, in penetrating the 
black sites, their reporting has undeni-
ably had an impact. In Maine, it helped 
spark a grassroots movement and a 
legislative initiative, which eventually 
spurred the prison system to reduce its 
use of solitary confinement. In New 
York, it became ammunition in a battle 
to keep people with mental illness out 
of solitary. And in Illinois, it provided 
fuel for an effort that convinced the 
governor to shut down Tamms super-
max prison.  
The stories have been effective. But 
their scarcity also suggests that the lack 
of press access to these sites around the 
nation has stifled public debate on a 
significant issue of policy and human 
rights. “Solitary confinement is a brutal 
form of prison punishment that has 
claimed many lives and caused untold 
suffering,” says Mary Beth Pfieffer. 
“That is the story that officials do not 
want told.”  
Until we are allowed to tell it proper-
ly—until we can visit solitary units our-
selves, and speak unhindered with the 
people who live and work there —we 
cannot fulfill our duty as journalists to 
shine a light into society’s darkest cor-
ners.  
James Ridgeway has been a journalist 
for close to 50 years. He is co -founder 
and co -editor of Solitary Watch. A 
longer version of this article appeared 
in the Columbia Journalism Review . 
Fortresses of Solitude: Reporting on Solitary Confinement  News from a Nation in Lockdown  
www.solitarywatch.com  
Print Edition, Summer 2013  2 By Sal Rodriguez  
On July 8th, approximately 30,000 
people in in prisons across California 
launched the third statewide hunger 
strike since June 2011.  
United under the same “Five Core De-
mands” that motivated three -week 
strikes in June and September/
October 2011, and inspired at least one 
hunger strike at Corcoran State Prison 
in late January 2012, California pris-
oners refused state issued meals and 
over 1,300 engaged in a work stoppage 
and refused to attend classes.  
As of this writing, August 25th, there 
are 96 hunger strikers in three prisons, 
including 42 who have been on hunger 
strike for 49 continuous days.  
The hunger strikes are led by the Peli-
can Bay Short Corridor Collective, a 
group of men of various racial back-
grounds incarcerated in the prison’s 
Security Housing Unit (SHU). Last 
year, the group issued a call on all in-
carcerated Californians to put an end 
to the prison politics of race -based 
conflict.  
The five core demands are: an end to 
group punishment; abolition of the 
gang debriefing policy and modifica-
tion of gang status criteria; an end to 
long -term solitary confinement; ade-
quate and nutritious food; and the ex-
pansion and creation of constructive 
programming for those on SHU status. 
Hunger strikers were encouraged to 
formulate additional demands relevant 
to their specific institutions.  Approximately 3,000 individuals are 
housed in SHUs across four prisons for 
alleged prison gang affiliation. About 
half are housed in solitary confine-
ment, including 1,100 in Pelican Bay, 
where cells are 7 ½ x 11 feet and win-
dowless. Thousands more are in isola-
tion in Administrative Segregation 
Units (ASUs)  
The hunger strike has been a brutal 
affair. One hunger striker, Billy Sell, 
committed suicide after 14 days on 
hunger strike at the SHU in Corcoran 
State Prison. Sell is the second hunger 
striker to die in a year and a half. 
Christian Gomez died in February 
2012 while on hunger strike at the Cor-
coran ASU.  
The California Department of Correc-
tions and Rehabilitation (CDCR), how-
ever, insists that the hunger strike is a 
“gang power play” orchestrated by 
“violent prison gangs” to reassert their 
power in the California prison system. 
Referring to it as a “mass hunger strike 
disturbance,” CDCR was quick to dele-
gitimize the demands and actions of 
the hunger strikers. Strikers across 
have reported receiving disciplinary 
write -ups, having their property 
seized, and having sandbags or other 
items placed at their cell door to pre-
vent communications or “fishing.” 
Those identified as leaders have been 
moved to other sections in order to cut 
off their communications.  
Throughout the hunger strike, partici-
pants have been hospitalized for com-
plications. There are confirmed reports 
of dozens of hunger strikers losing over 10% of body weight. Others have 
been transported to prisons that are 
said to have better medical services 
than Pelican Bay.  
On August 19th, CDCR confirmed that 
it had obtained court permission to 
force -feed hunger strikers. To date 
there have been no reports of forced 
feedings, which the state reportedly 
plans to use  only if a participant ap-
proaches death.  
CDCR repeatedly insists that it has 
already addressed the major concerns 
of the hunger strikers. The CDCR re-
vised its gang validation criteria last 
year, but critics have argued that the 
revised criteria may result in even 
more California prisoners being target-
ed for gang validation.  
CDCR is conducting case -by-case re-
views of all SHU prisoners to deter-
mine whether continued placement in 
the SHU is justified under the revised 
criteria. Since October, CDCR has re-
viewed 425 in the SHU. Of them, 268 
have been endorsed for release to the 
general population, and 125 have been 
placed in the incentive -based Step 
Down Program, through which some-
one may hypothetically get out of the 
SHU in four years. (Currently, the av-
erage SHU term is 6.8 years, according 
to CDCR.)  
Governor Jerry Brown has yet to com-
ment on the strike and CDCR is refus-
ing to consider negotiations. Frustra-
tion continues to mount and uncer-
tainty looms over how this strike will 
end.  
About Solitary Watch  
Solitary Watch ( www.solitarywatch.com) is a web -based project aimed at bringing solitary confinement out of the 
shadows and into the light of the public square. Our mission is to provide the public —as well as practicing attorneys, 
legal scholars, law enforcement and corrections officers, policymakers, educators, advocates, and people in prison and 
their families –with the first centralized source of background research, unfolding developments, and original reporting 
on solitary confinement in the United States.  
This print edition of Solitary Watch is produced quarterly and is available free of charge to currently and formerly incar-
cerated people, to prisoners’ families and advocates, and to non -profit organizations. To receive a copy, send a request 
to the address or email below. We also welcome accounts of life in solitary confinement, as well as stories, poems, es-
says, and artwork by people who have served time in isolation. Please send contributions to “Voices from Solitary” 
at the address below.  
PO Box 11374, Washington, DC 20008 or solitarywatchnews@gmail.com  A Hunger for Justice in California’s Prisons  3  By Grace Bauer  
Solitary confinement, or isolation, is 
widely used around the country in 
jails, prisons and detention centers for 
adults as well as young people. Until 
very recently, few people, beyond at-
torneys, families and advocates, gave it 
much thought. Isolation, like so many 
corrections practices, happens behind 
the walls of silence, long ingrained 
into facility culture and practice. In 
our punishment -oriented society, we 
tend to think those behind bars de-
serve whatever they get. This kind of 
thinking is fueled by a distorted sense 
of fear created by media and political 
rhetoric so much so that falling crime 
rates and research showing the failure 
of such practices barely register in so-
ciety’s consciousness.  
When a young person enters into se-
cure detention, they typically become 
isolated from their families and com-
munities. Exorbitant phone costs, lim-
ited visitation procedures and times 
and placement in facilities long dis-
tances from home all add to that sense 
of isolation. Often, facilities will have a 
standard 2 -6 week “intake” period 
where the child is not allowed any visi-
tors and very limited communication 
by phone. Given that the majority of 
children involved in juvenile justice 
systems come from families who live 
below the poverty line, many families 
do not have transportation to reach far 
away facilities or the extra money to 
cover the cost of calls that experts de-
scribe as “gross profiteering.” These 
are common practices in detention 
that fail to take into account the re-
search that demonstrate the critical 
importance, of maintaining family and 
community connections, to the suc-
cessful reentry of young people and to 
prevent recidivism.  
My son is 25 years old. He has spent 
the majority of the last 15 years in de-
tention centers, youth prisons, county 
jails and state prisons. His sisters have 
grown up, his niece was born and will 
celebrate her sixth birthday, our home 
was lost in a hurricane, a new home 
was built, his sister started college 
(and will graduate) and his uncle died, 
all while he was confined. He earned 
his high school diploma but has few 
job skills, little job experience, no home, no family of his own, few 
friends and few prospects on the hori-
zon. We have missed him and his pres-
ence in our lives and he has missed 
life, period.  
He will return to society, at some 
point, along with roughly 800,000 
others released each year; 95% of all 
sentenced inmates. The “tough on 
crime” rhetoric may make folks feel 
better but the reality of mass incarcer-
ation impacts everyone in society 
through lost revenues, increased 
health cost, lower wages, unemploy-
ment, expensive corrections and judi-
cial budgets – the list goes on and on. 
As facilities cut back on the very things 
that lead to successful reentry, we can 
expect that young people, returning to 
society, will return less prepared, more 
disadvantaged and more deeply 
scarred.  
All of the above and then we add on 
the deep psychological damage of soli-
tary confinement. When my son was 
13 and placed in a notorious juvenile 
prison, he spent nearly a year in pro-
tective custody, AKA solitary confine-
ment. In those early days we had no 
information on the damaging effects of 
solitary and actually felt relief that he 
felt safe from the rampant violence in 
the facility. He was released from state 
secure care in 2002; four years would 
pass before we learned the truth about 
his time in isolation. It should have 
been evident that something traumatic 
and life changing had happened and 
we certainly saw the signs of some-
thing but we didn’t know what. In 
2006, a young man confined with him 
at the youth prison called to tell us 
about the day my son was raped by 
another young person, in solitary, who 
had been placed in the cell by guards. 
Those guards then took bets on which 
“kid would win”. My son lost the fight 
that day. Throughout his years of in-
carceration, he has experienced soli-
tary confinement in every facility, of-
ten for extended periods of time.  
From January 25th through May 8th 
of this year, my son was confined in 
isolation, though the prison called it 
“protective custody.” He was confined 
for 110 days with the exception of be-
ing allowed to take a shower on Mon-
day and Thursdays and use the phone at midnight or later. Several of his 
showers and calls were denied for un-
known reasons. The average call lasted 
6 minutes. That means that over a 110 -
day period my son showered approxi-
mately 30 times and was able to speak 
with us for about 3 hours. In this par-
ticular case, my son was confined for 
his own safety after being stabbed 
three times during the robbery of his 
cell. As his mother, I am grateful that 
he was kept safe and at the same time, 
terribly troubled by this prolonged 
period of isolation and its impact on 
his mental health.  
I have witnessed the long -term impact 
of my son’s time in isolation and pris-
on. Some nights when I try to sleep, 
visions of the assaults play in my 
mind, like a movie that you can’t turn 
off. I have sat across from him, trying 
to maintain my own composure, while 
mentally cataloging and assessing the 
bruises and wounds on his body. I 
have waited for calls or visits where I 
can know, at least for a short time, that 
he is safe and alive. I listen to him talk 
about how useless he is and how he 
has no worth. I held back tears (at 
least, in his presence) the day he said, 
“I’ll never be anything but a criminal.” 
In the car, on the way home, I cried 
like a child, as I thought of all the good 
in him and the future I had once 
dreamed of for him. The level of vio-
lence and inhumanity that he endures 
sickens me. Sometimes, when I can’t 
hold it off any longer or we experience 
a new trauma, I cry hard and long for 
all that he has lost, all we have lost and 
how far we still have to go.  
Day in and day out, we look for ways 
to keep him up -to-date on the world 
and engaged in learning. I marvel at 
his continued compassion and concern 
for strangers in such circumstances. 
His belief that, someday, he will finish 
serving his time and somehow over-
come the numerous and complex bar-
riers he faces inspires me. If he can 
still feel hopeful, I’ll be damned if I 
will be the one to take that from him.  
Once, he was an honor roll student 
that was well liked by his teachers and 
peers. After a few short months in ju-
venile detention he became fearful and 
anxious. I could not touch him to   
(Continued on page 4)  Solitary Confinement: A Mother’s Plea  4 (Continued from page 3)  
wake him up. He would strike out 
blindly in his waking moments out of 
fear of being assaulted. He cried out in 
his sleep and suffered from night-
mares. He was diagnosed with Post 
Traumatic Stress Disorder and deep 
depression. The physical abuse has left 
him with physical scars but it is the 
emotional damage, caused by the ex-
treme isolation and exposure to horrif-
ic violence at such a young age, that 
concerns me the most.  
My son’s original crime was stealing a 
stereo out of a truck and breaking the 
window out of the truck. He was sen-
tenced to five years for that crime. We 
were fortunate to find an attorney to 
represent him and get him out after a 
year. Unfortunately, the damage done 
in that year was enough to alter his life 
in ways I could not have imagined. He 
was grieving for his beloved grand-
mother and acted out, as adolescents often do in those tumultuous years. 
The vicious assaults on his body, se-
vere neglect and emotional and verbal 
abuse he suffered would be considered 
criminal if I or anyone else, other than 
the system, had inflicted them upon 
him. Yet the state and its employees 
were allowed to do this kind of harm 
to him and to thousands of others and 
there has never been any accountabil-
ity for those crimes.  
Behind the razor wire fences of Ameri-
ca’s prisons, there is seldom fair re-
dress of grievances, little accountabil-
ity to the safety and wellbeing of those 
housed within those facilities, scant 
programming, meager education ser-
vices, woefully inadequate healthcare, 
widespread racial disparities and the 
pervasive and systemic abuse of power 
by those in authority. Study after 
study, report after report, all confirm 
the negative impact of isolation and 
the abject failure of mass incarcera-
tion. The cost benefit analysis, illus-trated in volumes of data and re-
search, demonstrate the exorbitant 
cost we pay to have less public safety, 
generate more crime and do unneces-
sary and possibly irreparable damage 
to those behind bars.  
Prisons were supposedly built to lock 
up those who might harm others and 
deter crime. Somewhere along the way 
we lost sight of those goals. Today, 
prison walls have become an impene-
trable shroud that shields and perpet-
uates crimes against humanity. Those 
walls allow the rest of us to ignore the 
root causes of crime and save us from 
having to look at the mass destruction 
of human lives that our appetite for 
retribution and punishment have caused . 
Grace Bauer is co -director of Jus-
tice4Families, a leader and confidant 
for families seeking justice across the 
country, and the mother of three chil-
dren. This essay originally appeared 
on the website Juvenile In Justice.  
 NEW YORK —United Nations Special 
Rapporteur on Torture Juan E. Mén-
dez has repeatedly asked the United 
States government for permission to 
visit U.S. prisons to investigate the 
practice of solitary confinement. Fol-
lowing up on this request, in June, a 
coalition of civil and human rights 
groups called on the U.S. government 
to comply with the request. The coali-
tion’s letter, addressed to the State 
Department, says: “As a crucial step 
toward addressing the overuse and 
abuse of solitary confinement in this 
country… we urge you to extend an 
invitation to… Juan Méndez, to under-
take fact -finding in the US…on this 
most pressing human rights issue.”  To 
date, the government has said only 
that it is “considering” the request.  
COLORADO —A new report by the 
American Civil Liberties Union of Col-
orado, Out of Sight, Out of Mind, has 
found that the Colorado Department 
of Corrections (CDOC) continues to 
depend on long -term solitary confine-
ment to manage prisoners with mental 
illness. The report found: “Colorado 
currently holds 87 prisoners suffering 
from serious mental illness in solitary 
confinement. The number of prisoners 
in solitary confinement with moderate 
mental illness is much higher. This is 
despite the fact that a growing majori-
ty of the psychiatric community agrees that isolating seriously mentally ill 
prisoners for any length of time fur-
ther damages their mental health.”  
WASHINGTON, D.C. —In May, the 
US Government Accountability Office 
released a report questioning the use 
of solitary confinement in federal pris-
ons. According to the report, the Bu-
reau of Prisons currently holds over 
12,400 individuals in 23 -hour -a-day 
lockdown, making it the largest practi-
tioner of solitary and other forms of 
isolated confinement in the nation, 
and most likely the world. The report 
further notes that the BOP does not 
know whether its use of “segregated 
housing” has any impact on prison 
safety, how it affects the prisoners who 
endure it, or how much it all costs 
American taxpayers.  
PENNSYLVANIA —A federal civil 
rights investigation by the U.S. De-
partment of Justice has concluded that 
the State Correctional Institution at 
Cresson in western Pennsylvania holds 
people with serious mental illnesses in 
solitary confinement, in some cases for 
years. The DOJ said:  “Cresson often 
denies these prisoners basic necessi-
ties and subjects them to harsh and 
punitive conditions, including exces-sive uses of force.” The Justice Depart-
ment is expanding its probe to include 
all prisons in Pennsylvania.  
CALIFORNIA —The non -profit Ar-
chitects/Designers/Planners for Social 
Responsibility has launched a cam-
paign calling on the American Insti-
tute of Architects “to amend its Code 
of Ethics… to prohibit the design of 
spaces for killing, torture, and cruel, 
inhuman or degrading treatment. In 
the US, this comprises the design of 
execution chambers and super -
m a x i m u m  s e c u r i t y  p r i s o n s 
(‘supermax’), where solitary confine-
ment is an intolerable form of cruel, 
inhuman or degrading treatment.”  
WASHINGTON, D.C. —A new ACLU 
report on solitary confinement on 
death row has found that over 93% of 
states confine condemned individuals 
for over 22 hours a day, and that 60% 
of people on death row live in cells 
without windows or natural light. 
Death row exoneree Anthony Graves 
writes: “Solitary confinement is like 
living in a dark hole. People walk over 
the hole and you shout from the bot-
tom, but nobody hears you. You start 
to play tricks with your mind just to 
survive. This is no way to live… [S]
ubjecting anyone in prison to solitary 
confinement is torture.”  
News Briefs by Lisa Dawson  News Briefs  