  By James Ridgeway and Jean Casella  
On 21 July, prisoners in solitary con-
finement at California's notorious Peli-
can Bay State Prison began accepting 
the meals that were slipped to them 
through slots in their solid mental cell 
doors. For many, it was the first time 
they had eaten in three weeks. A group 
of inmates in the prison's Security 
Housing Unit (SHU) had resolved to 
protest their isolation using the only 
means available to them – by going on 
a hunger strike. The strike quickly 
spread to more than a third of Califor-
nia's 33 prisons, where about 6,600 
prisoners refused at least some of their 
meals. After 21 days, with prisoners 
losing as much as 30 pounds, the strike 
ended where it began – in the SHU.  
If this seems like a desperate measure 
by desperate men, it is. The widespread 
use and abuse of solitary confinement 
in U.S. prisons and jails is one of the 
nation's most pressing domestic hu-
man rights issues, and also perhaps its 
most ignored.  
In the end, the Pelican Bay hunger 
strikers won only a few token conces-
sions from the California department of 
corrections and rehabilitation (CDCR) 
– the right to wear caps in cold weath-
er, to hang wall calendars in their cells, 
and to have access to a modicum of 
educational programming. But they 
achieved something much more im-
portant, as well: For a few weeks, the 
men of the Pelican Bay SHU ceased to 
be invisible.  
Solitary confinement is a hidden world 
within the larger hidden world of the 
American prison system. At Pelican 
Bay, about 1,100 men languish in long -
term or permanent isolation. In super-
max prisons across the country, the 
number is at least 20,000, with tens of 
thousands more in solitary in other 
prisons and jails. Most are confined to 
their cells without yard time, work or 
any kind of rehabilitative program-
ming. In the Pelican Bay SHU, prison-ers spend at least 22.5 hours each day 
in windowless concrete cells, and the 
remaining time alone in concrete exer-
cise yards. Many have been there for 
years, some for decades, often with no 
end in sight to their torment.  
Solitary confinement has been de-
nounced as torture or "cruel, inhumane 
and degrading treatment" by several 
international bodies, including the UN 
and the European Court  of Human 
Rights. Research conducted over the 
last 30 years confirms that stretches in 
solitary produce psychopathologies 
that include panic attacks, depression, 
inability to concentrate, memory loss, 
aggression, self -mutilation and various 
forms of psychosis. But in the United 
States, the courts have been reluctant 
to limit its use. In the 1995 case Madrid 
v Gomez , a federal judge sharply criti-
cised conditions in Pelican Bay's SHU, 
writing that nearly round -the-clock 
isolation in windowless cells "may 
press the outer borders of what most 
humans can psychologically tolerate." 
Yet, he fell short of declaring long -term 
solitary confinement unconstitutional.  
Largely unrestrained by courts, legisla-
tures, or public opinion, solitary con-
finement has become routine – a pun-
ishment of first resort for all sorts of 
prison infractions. Today, a prisoner 
can be placed in solitary not only for 
violence, but for any form of 
"insubordination" towards prison offi-
cials, or for possession of contraband 
(which includes not only drugs but cell 
phones, cash or too many postage 
stamps). Some inmates are sent to soli-
tary confinement for exhibiting the 
symptoms of untreated mental illness. 
Others, including juveniles in adult 
prisons, end up in isolation for their 
own "protection" because they are tar-
gets of prison rape. Many of the men in 
Pelican Bay's Security Housing Unit are 
there because they've been "validated" 
as gang members, based on their tat-
toos or on the say -so of other inmates, 
who are rewarded for "snitching."  In 2006, as one of its primary recom-
mendations, the bipartisan US Com-
mission on Safety and Abuse in Prisons 
called for substantial reforms to the 
practice of solitary confinement. It 
should be "a last resort," the commis-
sion said, and even in segregation 
units, isolation should be mitigated and 
terms should be short. The Pelican Bay 
hunger strikers adopted the commis-
sion's recommendations into their core 
demands, along with an end to the sys-
tem of gang "validation" and provision 
of "adequate food" and "constructive 
programming" for SHU inmates. The 
demands were far from radical. Yet a 
spokesperson for the California depart-
ment of corrections and rehabilitation 
insisted that the state was "not going to 
concede under these types of tactics."  
While its tangible results were few, the 
hunger strike received surprisingly 
widespread press coverage, in spite of 
the CDCR's complete ban on media 
access to participating prisons and 
prisoners. And the visibility wrought by 
the hunger strike builds upon the work 
of a growing number of advocates. Ear-
lier this year, the National Religious 
Campaign Against Torture issued a 
statement calling for an end to pro-
longed solitary confinement across the 
nation, and urged people of faith to 
sign on. They joined the American Civil 
Liberties Union and American Friends 
Service Committee, along with several 
smaller or state -based groups, in op-
posing solitary confinement as it is 
practiced in the United States today.  
If the public at last begins to a 
acknowledge long -term solitary con-
finement as a form of torture and a ma-
jor human rights issue, it will be owing 
largely to the efforts of these activists – 
and to a group of prisoners who, for a 
few weeks this summer, starved them-
selves in solitude to bring their torment 
to light.  
This article was originally published b y 
The Guardian : www.guardian.co.uk.  
A Hunger for Justice in Pelican Bay  News from a Nation in Lockdown  
www.solitarywatch.com  
Print Edition, Summer 2011  2 About Solitary Watch  
The mission of Solitary Watch is to provide the public —as well as practicing attorneys, legal scholars, law enforcement and corr ections 
officers, policymakers, educators, advocates, and prisoners –with the first comprehensive source of information on solitary confi ne-
ment in the United States.  
Combining background, analysis, breaking news, fact sheets, resource lists, and ―Voices from Solitary,‖ the site will serve a s an infor-
mation clearinghouse and educational resource, aimed at bringing this issue out of the shadows and into the light of the publ ic square.  
Solitary Watch is on the web at  www.solitarywatch.com . 
The print edition of Solitary Watch is produced quarterly, and includes a small selection of pieces from the site. It is avai lable free of 
charge to current and former prisoners, to prisoners’ families and advocates, and to non -profit organizations. To receive a copy , send 
a request to the address or email below.  
We also welcome accounts of life in solitary confinement, as well as stories, poems, essays, and artwork by inmates in isolat ion. Please 
send contributions to ―Voices from Solitary‖ at the address below.  
PO Box 11374, Washington, DC 20008  
 solitarywatchnews@gmail.com  
Editor’s Note: The following is excerpted from a letter sent to a loved one outside by a hunger striker in the Security 
Housing Unit (SHU) at the California Correctional Institution at Tehachapi. It is dated July 21, after the writer had 
been refusing food for three weeks, and shortly before he received news that the strike was ending. He refers to the Cal-
ifornia Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR) policy of gang “validation” and “debriefing,” which is 
discussed in the article on page 1. — Sal Rodriguez  
I am glad the word is out, I’m just saddened that I don’t see anything on the news of our struggle. As far as we last heard 
it’s been like 12 prisons that are involved. Here there are a lot of people on strike — all races, Pelican Bay and Corcoran 
for sure...  
As far as commissary, that’s a negative. It is CDC policy to search our cells and remove all store when hunger strikes 
begin, and they did so here. All they do is weigh us and take our vitals (blood pressure, temp., and heart rate), but of 
course they weigh us in chains to weigh us down and they allow the [corrections officers] to operate the scale. I am at 171 
on my last weigh -in, down from 185. They attempt to take my blood, which I refuse; I’m weak as it is, if I do that I’ll fall 
out…  
I remain strong in the hopes that change will come. I get sad when I watch the news and they talk about stuff with no 
meaning and ignore us. I am an American citizen and when enemy combatants in Guantanamo Bay had a strike they 
covered it, all networks, beginning to end, but we are just forgotten. Contact all media networks and let them know this is 
a peaceful protest and we have been given no other option for relief rather than to hunger strike in the hopes that some-
one, ANYONE, will care enough to step in and help us.  
One might think that us as prisoners must be held under duress and extreme conditions in order to refuse the most basic 
necessity; food. I choose to remain on strike for I have been robbed of my life, my ability to be a father to my son, a son t o 
my parents, a lover to my love, a friend to friends, and to experience life in the minimum of its meaning.  
I was sentenced to life in prison at 18 for an action I committed, but now I am validated for no actual action committed 
by me. And I’ll be held here in the SHU until I die or debrief. Just imagine if anyone out there could be put in jail just fo r 
someone’s accusation. It’s unheard of. But in here its common practice for we are forgotten. We are the tragic aftermath 
of an angry committee.  
Some believe we don’t deserve common decency or compassion because we didn’t show any when we committed our 
crime. To those people I say, in life wrongs are committed. I don’t justify anything. But this country was founded on mass 
genocide and yet that is forgotten.  Now that civil rights have passed the oppression that must be has moved behind these 
walls of the new ―concrete slave ship.‖  
I am only a man who prays that I will be judged by my actions and my disciplinary file, not by the words of faceless in-
formants and a confidential file that I can’t see. We must defend ourselves against the unknown. It’s literally impossible.  
My feet still walk the trail of tears. I am in my soul still a believer in justice and the good in people. I believe if socie ty 
really knew what happened in here they’d be appalled.  Voices from Solitary: Letter from a California Hunger Striker  3  The following is excerpted from an 
interview with Solitary Watch editors 
James Ridgeway and Jean Casella, 
conducted by Angola 3 News. It origi-
nally appeared in June 2011 on the 
website Alternet: www.Alternet.org.   
Angola 3 News: What is a SHU?  
Solitary Watch: SHU is just one of 
many euphemisms prison systems 
have developed to avoid using the 
term ―solitary confinement.‖ In Cali-
fornia, it stands for Security Housing 
Unit; in New York it is Special Hous-
ing Unit. Elsewhere we see Behavioral 
Management Units, Communications 
Management Units, Administrative 
Segregation, Disciplinary Segrega-
tion—the list goes on. There are nu-
ances of difference among them, but 
they all consist of 23 - to 24 -hour -a-
day lockdown. Most of these systems —
including the federal Bureau of Pris-
ons—deny that they use solitary con-
finement, even while they have tens of 
thousands of prisoners locked alone in 
their cells for months, years, even dec-
ades.  
A3N: When was the first SHU made?  
SW: Solitary confinement was actually 
invented here in the United States, in 
the early 19th century in Philadelphia, 
as a supposedly humane alternative to 
things like floggings. Prisoners were 
locked up alone, with nothing to do 
but contemplate their crimes, pray, 
and supposedly become ―penitent‖ —
thus the term ―penitentiary.‖  
Of course, nothing like that happened. 
The U.S. Supreme Court looked at 
conditions in the Philadelphia prison 
in 1890 and found that ―A considera-
ble number of the prisoners fell, after 
even a short confinement, into a semi -
fatuous condition, from which it was 
next to impossible to arouse them, and 
others became violently insane; others 
still, committed suicide; while those 
who stood the ordeal better were not 
generally reformed, and in most cases 
did not recover sufficient mental activ-
ity to be of any subsequent service to 
the community.‖  
For nearly 100 years after that, soli-
tary confinement was rare; the famous Birdman of Alcatraz spent six years in 
solitary, and that was unusual. Things 
really began to change in 1983, when 
two guards at the federal prison in 
Marion, Illinois, were killed by in-
mates on the same day. That was the 
beginning of the notorious Marion 
Lockdown, where prisoners were per-
manently confined to their cells with-
out yard time, work, or any kind of 
rehabilitative programming.  
A3N: How have they developed since?  
SW: In 1989 California opened the 
first purpose -built supermax prison —
Pelican Bay. There was a supermax 
boom in the 1990s, and today, 40 
states and the federal government 
have supermax prisons holding up-
wards of 20,000 inmates. Tens of 
thousands more are held in solitary 
confinement in lockdown units within 
other prisons and jails. There’s no up -
to-date nationwide count, but accord-
ing to the best available data, there are 
at least 80,000 prisoners in solitary 
confinement on any given day in 
America. Solitary confinement has 
become the disciplinary measure of 
first resort, rather than of last resort.  
A3N: What are effects of the SHU on 
prisoners’ health and well -being?  
SW: As one prisoner at the Tamms 
supermax in Illinois said, ―Lock your-
self in your bathroom for the next 10 
years and tell me how it will affect 
your mind.‖  If it weren’t already obvious enough, 
research conducted over the last 30 
years confirms solitary confinement 
has an extremely damaging effect on 
mental health. One study found that a 
single week in solitary produced a 
change in EEG activity related to 
stress and anxiety. There’s evidence 
that long -term isolation profoundly 
alters the brain chemistry, and that 
longer stretches in solitary produce 
psychopathologies at a considerably 
higher rate than other forms of con-
finement. Yet we have prison systems 
that insist they are placing prisoners 
in solitary so that they can ―learn self -
control,‖ and many cases where in-
mates are released directly from long -
term isolation onto the streets. Unsur-
prisingly, they have a notably higher 
recidivism rate than other prisoners.  
It’s important to acknowledge, also, 
that a huge number of prisoners who 
are placed in solitary suffer from un-
derlying mental illness. After 40 years 
of cuts to funding for mental health 
care, prisons and jails in general —and 
solitary confinement cells in particular
–have become America’s new asy-
lums. Prisoners are placed in solitary 
for being disruptive, when what they 
are doing is simply exhibiting the un-
treated symptoms of mental illness. 
One report by Human Rights Watch 
found that in prison systems around 
the country, one -third to one -half of 
the prisoners held in solitary were 
mentally ill. Other studies have found 
that two -thirds of all prison suicides 
take place in solitary confinement.  
There has been less research done on 
the physical effects of solitary confine-
ment, but evidence from recent court 
cases suggests a relationship to things 
like extreme insomnia, joint pain, hy-
pertension and even damage to the 
eyesight —which makes sense when 
you are talking about not being able to 
walk or look more than ten feet in any 
direction for years or decades on end. 
We will clearly see more evidence of 
health damage as more and more pris-
oners grow old in long -term solitary 
confinement.  
(Continued on page 4)  Confronting Torture in U.S. Prisons: A Q & A with Solitary Watch  
4  (continued from page 3)  
A3N: What are some other character-
istics of the SHU?  
SW: These prisons have made a sci-
ence out of isolation. The cells usually 
measure between 60 and 80 square 
feet, and those cells are a prisoner’s 
entire world. They are fed through 
slots in the solid steel doors, and if 
they communicate with prison staff, 
including mental health practitioners, 
that also takes place through the feed-
ing slot. If they’re lucky they get to ex-
ercise one hour a day, alone, in a 
fenced or walled ―dog run,‖ and leave 
their cells a few times a week to take a 
shower —in shackles, of course. In 
some cells the lights are on 24 hours a 
day, and there’s round -the-clock video 
surveillance.  
Prisoners may or may not be permit-
ted to have visits. They may or may not 
be allowed reading and writing materi-
als, art supplies, or other things to help 
them pass the time, and they may or 
may not have television, with close -
circuit programming supplied by the 
prison. There’s a lot of concern about 
inmates being perceived as having it 
―too easy‖ –so they often don’t have air 
conditioning in summer or enough 
heat in the winter, and the food is 
barely adequate. Some states still use 
―the loaf‖ —made of a tasteless puree of 
foods —as punishment.  
A3N: Do you think prison authorities 
have used solitary confinement as a 
political tool against prisoner activ-
ists and organizers?  
SW: There’s no doubt that solitary 
confinement is routinely used to pun-
ish prison whistleblowers, and to sup-
press nonviolent dissent and free ex-
pression in prison.  
In the case of Herman Wallace and 
Albert Woodfox, the two still -
imprisoned members of the Angola 3, 
and of Hugo Pinell at Pelican Bay, we 
are talking about men who have had 
virtually clean disciplinary records for 
several decades, and who are now in 
their sixties. The fact that they contin-
ue to be held in solitary confinement 
clearly has everything to do with their 
involvement as prison organizers.  
But you don’t have to be associated 
with any organized political group, to 
be punished for prison activism. In Massachusetts, an inmate named Tim-
othy Muise was sent to solitary after he 
tried to expose a sex -for-snitching ring 
run by guards at his prison; they said 
his offense was ―engaging in or inciting 
a group demonstration.‖ A prison jour-
nalist in Maine named Deane Brown 
was isolated and eventually shipped 
out of state for sending broadcasts 
called ―Live from the Hole‖ to a local 
radio station.  
A3N: How well do you think the me-
dia has covered the issue of solitary 
confinement in prisons?  
SW: Well, there has actually been 
some outstanding reporting on this 
subject. The problem we have with 
media coverage is that there isn’t near-
ly enough of it. And it doesn’t get any-
thing close to the attention it deserves 
or produce the kind of outrage it 
should, considering the fact that this is 
one of the major domestic human 
rights issues of our day. Our impres-
sion is that the media is simply reflect-
ing how effectively prisoners have 
been marginalized in our society.  
A3N: Today, in the post -9/11 so -called 
“War on Terror” era, do you think 
that the U.S. public supports the use of 
torture against U.S. prisoners?  
SW: We do think that the public is tol-
erating the torture of prisoners —some 
because they don’t know about it, oth-
ers because they simply don’t care. But 
we’d actually like to turn your question 
around, because we believe that a tol-
erance for the torture of U.S. prisoners 
helped to produce a tolerance for the 
torture of foreign terrorism suspects, 
rather than vice versa. The ―War on 
Crime‖ predates the ―War on Terror,‖ 
and places like Pelican Bay and ADX 
Florence made it that much easier for 
Guantanamo Bay and Abu Ghraib and 
Bagram to exist.  
To discuss what produced this toler-
ance for torture in the first place, we 
need to remember that prisoners are 
today by far the most dehumanized 
members of our society. For at least 
the last 30 years, politicians from both 
parties have been cynically exploiting 
public fears about crime to win elec-
tions, and the prison population has 
grown by leaps and bounds with tacit 
public approval.  
It comes down to depriving prisoners 
of their full humanity. Once you do that, it becomes a lot easier to deprive 
them of their basic human rights, not 
to mention their civil rights.  
A3N: Strategically speaking, how do 
you think supporters of human rights 
can best use media -activism to chal-
lenge the powerful forces currently 
trying to convince the U.S. public that 
torture is good policy? What are key 
points that we should be making?  
SW: When it comes to solitary confine-
ment, we probably need to emphasize 
different key points with different au-
diences. For those who think that pris-
oners are criminals who deserve what-
ever they get, we can still emphasize 
the fact that solitary confinement is 
not only cruel, but also costly and 
counterproductive . It can cost two to 
three times as much to keep a prisoner 
in a supermax, rather than in the gen-
eral prison population. And it simply 
doesn’t ―work,‖ in that it makes people 
more likely to re -offend and end up 
back in prison.  
For those people who already have a 
firm opposition to all torture, we simp-
ly need to share information about the 
nature and widespread use of solitary 
confinement, and try to bring this 
practice out of the shadows and into 
the public square. Some important 
human rights and civil liberties groups 
are now trying to call attention to soli-
tary confinement, so that’s a positive 
development. We need to encourage 
people to see the torture of all U.S. 
prisoners as a human rights issue just 
as pressing as the torture of Bradley 
Manning or the torture of the captives 
at Guantanamo or Abu Ghraib —
because torture is torture, and if you 
believe this, it shouldn’t matter wheth-
er or not the victim has committed a 
crime.  
Resources on Solitary Confinement:  
American Civil Liberties Union Stop Soli-
tary Campaign: http://www.aclu.org/stop
-solitary -dangerous -overuse -solitary -
confinement -united -states  
American Friends Service Committee 
Stopmax Campaign: http://afsc.org/
campaign/stopmax  
National Religious Campaign Against 
Torture: Ending Torture in U.S. Prisons: 
http://www.nrcat.org     