  By Joshua Manson  
Early this year, the American Civil Liber-
ties Union released an extensive report 
on people with physical disabilities in soli-
tary confinement. Caged In: Solitary Con-
finement’s Devastating Harm on Prison-
ers with Physical Disabilities provides 
both statistical and anecdotal evidence 
that people with physical disabilities are 
frequently subjected to abysmal and fla-
grantly illegal treatment while incarcer-
ated, and especially while in solitary con-
finement. In addition to failing to provide 
accommodations for people with disabili-
ties, prisons often use the disabilities as 
the sole justification for placing people in 
isolation.  
According to the report,  the percentage 
of people with disabilities is significantly 
higher in prison than it is in the U.S. pop-
ulation as a whole. In Florida, nearly one 
in five people in the state prison system 
has been assigned “some kind of assis-
tive device. ” In California, nearly one in 
ten people in state prison has a hearing, 
visual, or mobility -related disability. 
Equally troubling, other states do not 
even track data on the number of incar-
cerated people who have disabilities.  
According to the report, people with disa-
bilities are routinely subject to solitary 
confinement for convenience, because 
facilities contain no other housing for 
them. It tells the story of a blind man who, 
after asking why he was placed in solitary 
confinement, was told that “prison author-
ities were trying to figure out where to 
house him. ” This, according to the report, 
is a direct violation of the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA).  
Other individuals have been sent to soli-
tary confinement as punishment for the 
symptoms or effects of their disability. 
One man who is deaf, states that he was 
subject to solitary confinement for diso-beying a command that he could not 
hear, and was not even aware of be-
cause it was made behind his back.  
The report shows that the grievances 
filed by people with disabilities are often 
ignored or rejected, leaving them no way 
to get out of solitary or improve their con-
ditions.  
People with physical disabilities often 
suffer pain, humiliation, and permanent 
harm while being held in solitary confine-
ment. One man with quadriplegia was 
placed in an isolation cell 24 hours a day 
for a week “while …prison officials worked 
to find a facility to place him. ” For the first 
two days in solitary, he was denied ac-
cess to his medication. This brought on a 
dangerous and potentially lethal condition  
that resulted in nearly 48 hours of “painful 
muscle spasms, ” “violent seizures, ” and 
self-urination.  
While solitary confinement has been 
proven to cause severe psychological 
damage to all people who endure it, iso-
lation can be uniquely devastating to peo-
ple with physical disabilities. To make 
matters worse, their disabilities often 
make it harder for them to communicate 
their mental health needs or to participate 
in group therapy or other mental health 
treatments.  
One man with a spinal cord injury was 
held in solitary confinement in a county 
jail because no appropriate booking cells 
could fit his wheelchair. The resulting 
systemic mistreatment caused him to 
become so depressed and depressed 
that he eventually started cutting himself.  
People with physical disabilities that limit 
their mobility are subject to obvious phys-
ical dangers when they are placed in soli-
tary, including architectural barriers; limi-
tations on possession of personal proper-
ty including medical equipment; disrupted medical treatment; and a lack of access 
to physical therapy, causing a decline in 
muscular health and a host of adverse 
health outcomes.  
Solitary is also devastating to people with 
sensory disabilities. A deaf man sent to 
solitary confinement after an altercation 
was left unable to communicate or ex-
press his version of events during the 
incident and subsequent disciplinary pro-
ceedings because of the prison ’s lack of 
sign language interpreters. He also could 
not communicate his injuries after being 
sprayed with a chemical agent by prison 
staff and was denied medical attention.  
The report concludes with a number of 
recommendations to lawmakers and poli-
cymakers at the local, state, and federal 
levels, and offers a set of general princi-
ples for the treatment of people with 
physical disabilities in prison in compli-
ance with the ADA.  
The report calls for a ban on the place-
ment of people with physical disabilities in 
solitary confinement “except in rare and 
exceptional cases where the person pos-
es a security threat to self or others, ” and 
even then for only short durations. It also 
calls for an end to the use of solitary for 
protective custody. In addition, it calls on 
corrections departments to improve data 
collection and reporting, to improve train-
ing of and communication between medi-
cal and security staff, and to develop pro-
cesses by which people with physical 
disabilities can request accommodations, 
among other reforms.  
These reforms would serve as a valuable 
first step in relieving the suffering of one 
group of especially vulnerable individuals 
in prison. Ultimately, however, these re-
forms —and more —must be applied to all 
people behind bars in order to end the 
routine torture of incarcerated people in 
the United States.  
2 
Solitary Watch, PO Box 11374, Washington, DC 20008                                           Email: info@solitarywatch.com  
Founded in 2009, Solitary Watch ( www.solitarywatch.com) is a national watchdog group that investigates, reports 
on, and disseminates information on the use of solitary confinement in U.S. prisons and jails. In the past seven years, 
the work of Solitary Watch has significantly expanded public awareness and understanding of a once -invisible domes-
tic human rights crisis: 80,000 to 100,000 living in complete isolation and sensory deprivation for months, years, and 
even decades. It has also stimulated mainstream media coverage, spurred and supported national and local advocacy 
campaigns, and informed government policymaking.  
The print edition of Solitary Watch is available free of charge to currently and formerly incarcerated people and their 
families and advocates. To receive future copies, please send a request to the address or email above. We also wel-
come accounts of life in solitary confinement, as well as stories, poems, essays, and artwork by people who have 
served time in isolation. Please send contributions to “Voices from Solitary ” at the address above, and tell us wheth-
er you would like us to use your name or would prefer to remain anonymous.  
Note: We regret that we cannot  offer legal assistance or advice and cannot respond to requests for this type of 
help. Legal materials sent to us cannot be returned to the sender. We also cannot forward mail to others. 
Thank you for your cooperation.  
 
Later this year, Solitary Watch will be completing a report on alternatives to solitary confinement. Our intent is to show 
how long -term solitary can be replaced with more humane and effective alternatives, in order to reduce and eventually 
eliminate this practice in U.S. prisons and jails. For this project, we have researched and visited some prisons that 
have implemented alternatives to solitary confinement. We have also spoken to dozens of officials and experts. Now 
we want to hear from you —the incarcerated individuals who have experienced solitary firsthand.  
If you would like to participate in our survey, please write the answers to the following questions on paper and mail 
them to the address below. Your answers can be as long or as short as you like. Feel free to skip some questions, and 
please add any additional thoughts you want to share with us. No names will be used in the report ; if we quote you 
we will use only your first initial and the state where you are being held. All individuals who respond to the survey will 
receive a copy of the full report if permitted by prison rules; if not, they will receive a summary.  
1. How much time have you spent in solitary confinement? What is the reason you were sent to solitary?  
2. Many prison officials say that solitary is needed to punish individuals who break prison rules. Are there other ways 
to make sure the most important rules are followed? What ways do you think would be most effective?  
3. Sometimes solitary is used for “protective custody. ” How else could prisons safeguard vulnerable people such as 
gay/lesbian/transgender individuals, juveniles, people with disabilities, or people convicted of sex offenses?  
4. Some people are placed in solitary because of behavior that results from mental illness. What other approaches 
would you suggest for dealing with mentally ill people who end up in prison?  
5. Some people are placed in indefinite solitary (often called Administrative Segregation) because they are consid-
ered a threat to the “safety and security ” of the prison. Do you think anyone belongs in long -term solitary confine-
ment? If so, who and why? If not, what do you think should be done instead to keep prisons safe and secure?  
6. Is solitary needed to prevent gang violence in prison? If not, what are some possible alternatives for dealing with 
rival gangs and making sure no one gets hurt?  
7. What are some things that can be done to make conditions better for the people who need to be separated from 
the general population, even for a short time?  
8. Have any reforms of solitary confinement (such as step -down programs or mental health units) been made in your 
prison system? Have you participated in them? Please describe these changes and tell us what you think of them.  
Please send your survey responses to: Solitary Watch Alternatives Project, 123 7th Avenue #166, Brooklyn, 
NY 11215. Thank you for helping us with our report and for making your voices heard!  3  Interview by Sarah Shourd  
In November 2016, Juan E. Méndez 
stepped down after six years as the 
United Nations Special Rapporteur on 
Torture, the UN ’s chief torture investi-
gator. During his tenure, Méndez be-
came a leading voice opposing soli-
tary confinement in U.S. prisons. He 
had experienced solitary himself as a 
young man in Argentina in the 1970s 
after being arrested for his political 
beliefs. The following is an excerpt 
from an interview with Méndez con-
ducted last year.  
After forty years working on human 
rights, I was appointed to the posi-
tion of United Nations Special Rap-
porteur on Torture and Other Cruel, 
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment in 2010. I ’m now on my 
second (and last) three -year term. 
The Special Rapporteur ’s mandate 
calls for me to transmit urgent appeals 
to countries with regard to individuals 
reported to be at risk of torture, under-
take fact -finding country visits, and 
submit annual reports to the Human 
Rights Council and the General As-
sembly.  
Precisely because as Special Rappor-
teur I have such a large mandate —
exposing torture wherever it may take 
place —the most I can do is select are-
as where I think I will have an impact. 
The case of solitary confinement is 
interesting because when I wrote my 
report on solitary confinement in 2011 
I had no idea it would have such reso-
nance. My report stated unequivocally 
that 22 or 23 hours a day alone in a 
prison cell for more than 15 days at a 
time can cause permanent, lasting 
psychological damage and can consti-
tute torture. It was surprising, and en-
couraging, how quickly people picked 
it up and how far they ’ve been able to 
take it.  
Prior to my report, international law 
had been largely silent on the issue, in 
terms of what constitutes solitary con-finement; when these conditions can 
be considered “cruel, inhuman and 
degrading treatment ”; and when they 
are in fact torture.  
In my opinion, indefinite isolation is 
always torture, and there ’s also a 
question of degree. The science we 
have shows that the mind starts work-
ing differently after 15 days in solitary, 
so my report specifies that any period 
over 15 days should be subject to 
stringent review. If a prisoner has 
books, the ability to write and receive 
letters, television and family visits —
then maybe the period can be extend-
ed to 30 days maximum, but only 
when that is absolutely necessary. It 
has to be counted in days, maybe 
weeks, but never months and definite-
ly not years.  
The public generally associates tor-
ture with physical violence; they some-
times have a hard time accepting that 
there are equally brutal forms of men-
tal torture. It ’s interesting though —
back in the 1940s and 1950s, when 
stories came out about Communist 
regimes holding prisoners in isolation 
for very long periods of time, we had 
no problem calling that torture.  
Different people will react differently to 
the same conditions. For juveniles and 
the mentally ill, I ’ve recommended a 
complete ban on isolation. But the 
essential thing is that when you sub-
ject someone to these conditions you 
don’t know how he or she is going to 
react. One person may be more or 
less okay; the next may have perma-nent mental damage. The state is not 
allowed to speculate. If there's a 
chance that someone may have irre-
versible effects, then the state is re-
sponsible.  
I think it is safe to say that the United 
States uses solitary confinement more 
extensively than any other country, for 
longer periods and with less guaran-
tees. Over the last 30 years there ’s 
been huge overcrowding in U.S. 
prisons due to the explosion of the 
incarcerated population. This has 
resulted in more violence in prisons, 
and we ’ve seen solitary confinement 
mushroom.  
In cases like California, we know 
that they send prisoners to solitary 
based on their “association ” with 
gangs. Even recognizing that the 
state has a responsibility to deal 
with prison violence and with gang 
affiliation doesn ’t suspend our long -
revered principles of due process and 
presumption of innocence. When peo-
ple go to prison they don ’t surrender 
all their rights.  
 In the federal system, solitary is used 
extensively in counterterrorism cases. 
In those cases, solitary is used to try 
and break their will and force them to 
accept a plea with perhaps a long 
sentence. Using isolation as a way of 
extracting confession is clearly prohib-
ited in the Convention Against Torture, 
to which the U.S. is a signatory.  
The United States may push for good 
human rights practices around the 
world, but first it ’s going to have to 
change its own practices. Other coun-
tries look to the U.S. for how they do 
things, and how we build and run our 
prisons is no exception to that. That is 
why reforming prisons is so urgent, 
and the most urgent part is reforming 
solitary confinement, because in a real 
way the whole system relies on it. So 
we need to keep chipping away, state -
by-state, lawsuit -by-lawsuit, and hope-
fully slowly shrink the problem.  
4 NATIONAL  — On March 7, Supreme 
Court Justice Stephen Breyer re-
leased an opinion condemning solitary 
confinement as a potential violation of 
the Constitution ’s prohibition on cruel 
and unusual punishment. Breyer dis-
sented from the Court ’s decision not to 
delay the execution of Rolando Ruiz, 
whose attorneys argued that his exe-
cution for murder should be stayed 
because of technical flaws in prior 
court proceedings and his extended 
confinement in isolation. Among the 
cases Breyer cited was In Re Medley , 
a 127 -year-old Supreme Court Case 
that found solitary confinement to be 
“too severe ” for use in prisons.  
LOUISIANA  –– In March, attorneys 
for three people in solitary confine-
ment at Louisiana State Penitentiary 
filed a class action lawsuit against 
prison officials. The suit argues that 
the conditions faced by the plaintiffs, 
who are on death row, violate their 
constitutional rights. People on death 
row at Louisiana State Penitentiary 
are confined in isolation in small, win-
dowless cells for 23 hours per day, 
and they are even kept apart from oth-
ers during the single hour they spend 
outside of the cell. This extreme isola-
tion, the suit notes, has “harsh reper-
cussions ” on the health of those who 
experience it. The suit asks the court 
to require prison officials to improve 
conditions for everyone on death row 
at the prison.  
MAINE  –– The Maine Department of 
Corrections has drastically reduced 
and reformed the use of solitary con-
finement in its prisons. Prior to 2015, 
approximately 45 -50 individuals were 
held in solitary confinement in the 
Maine State Prison; as of April 2017, 
the number had dwindled to just sev-
en. In addition, the prison has imple-
mented a system of tiered privileges 
which both offers people a chance to 
earn their way into less restrictive 
units and provides support throughout 
survivors ’ transition from solitary con-
finement to the general population. This new system has curtailed the to-
tal number of disciplinary infractions in 
the state ’s prisons, as well as the 
abuse and suffering of the men and 
women held there.  
NORTH CAROLINA –– A 90 -page 
report on solitary confinement in the 
North Carolina prison system identi-
fied some improvement but an urgent 
need for further change. The report, 
released in April by the Vera Institute 
of Justice, lauded the reduction in the 
number of people held in solitary in 
the state, which has decreased by 
more than half since 2012. However, it 
also noted several significant prob-
lems. These included the use of soli-
tary confinement to discipline minor 
infractions, the use of long -term soli-
tary confinement, the lack of alterna-
tives to solitary confinement for indi-
viduals needing protection, the dispro-
portionate number of Black people in 
solitary confinement, and the lack of 
support for survivors transitioning di-
rectly from solitary confinement back 
into the general population or the free 
world.  
TEXAS  –– Solitary confinement on  
Texas death row is torture, concludes 
a report released by the Human 
Rights Clinic at the University of Texas 
School of Law in April. The report ana-
lyzed survey responses from 32 men 
formerly incarcerated on death row in 
the state ’s Polunsky Unit. It found that 
Texas ’s death row policies are 
“particularly draconian ”: The state im-
mediately places condemned men in 
solitary confinement and prohibits 
them from sharing meals or recrea-
tional time with one another. The pro-
longed isolation, combined with the 
stress of awaiting execution, has 
caused extreme suffering and serious 
psychological harm. These practices, 
the report states, are in violation of 
international human rights standards.  NEW YORK –– Nearly 300 activists, 
lawyers, mental health experts, survi-
vors of solitary confinement, and fami-
lies with incarcerated loved ones gath-
ered in Albany in May to demand the 
state end the practice of long -term 
solitary. Organized by the New York 
Campaign for Alternatives to Isolated 
Confinement, the advocates met with 
approximately 100 legislators and held 
a rally in support of the Humane Alter-
natives to Long -Term (HALT) Solitary 
Confinement Act. That legislation 
would change the criteria for place-
ment in solitary to only the most dan-
gerous behaviors, as well as limit the 
amount of time a person can spend in 
solitary to 15 days consecutively and 
20 days within any 60 -day period. It 
would also replace long -term solitary 
with an alternative program prioritizing 
rehabilitation over punishment and 
mandating significantly more out -of-
cell time. The HALT Act is gaining 
ground but failed to pass before the 
close of this year ’s legislative session.   
NATIONAL  –– In May, the American 
Civil Liberties Union filed a lawsuit 
calling on the U.S. Department of 
Homeland Security to make available 
documents related to the abusive 
treatment of hunger strikers in Immi-
gration and Customs Enforcement 
(ICE) detention facilities. The lawsuit 
was prompted by incidents where hun-
ger strikers have been subjected to 
force -feeding and solitary confinement 
as punishment for their participation in 
strikes protesting inhumane prison 
conditions, as well as lack of access to 
lawyers and bond hearings. The suit 
aims to expose records ranging from 
general policies regarding hunger 
strikes to documentation of specific 
cases. As immigration policies and 
prison conditions grow more harsh 
under the new presidential administra-
tion, ACLU attorney Carl Takei be-
lieves that the strikes are likely to in-
crease in number despite ICE ’s puni-
tive tactics.  
News Briefs by Madeline Batt  
 