  By Garrett Zehr  
More than 100 organizations from 
across the country sent an  open let-
ter to the President October 2, calling 
for the elimination of long -term and 
indefinite solitary confinement.  
The signatories – including civil and 
human rights groups, religious organ-
izations, and groups of defense attor-
neys and mental health professionals 
– ask Obama to take quick and deci-
sive action following the attention he 
gave the issue earlier this summer.  
“We applaud your recent historic re-
marks recognizing that solitary con-
finement does nothing to rehabilitate 
those who are incarcerated.,” the let-
ter states. “We also welcome your 
announcement that the U.S. Attorney 
General will conduct a national re-
view of the practice in prisons and 
jails across the United States. We are 
writing to urge that this review re-
sult in recommendations that create 
a clear pathway toward the elimina-
tion of the use of long -term and indef-
inite isolation in the United States.” 
In a speech in July  to the NAACP, 
Obama said he has asked Attorney 
General Loretta Lynch to start a re-
view of the overuse of solitary in US 
prisons. “Social science shows that an 
environment like that is often more 
likely to make inmates more alienat-
ed, more hostile, potentially more 
violent,” Obama said. “Do we really 
think it makes sense to lock so many 
people alone in tiny cells for 23 hours a day for months, sometime for years 
at a time?”   The speech was the first 
time the issue was ever directly ad-
dressed by the President.  
The open letter to Obama highlights 
a number of government reviews of 
solitary that have already shown the 
overuse and abuse of solitary, includ-
ing two congressional hearings, a re-
port by the Government Accountabil-
ity Office and an audit of the federal 
Bureau of Prisons (BOP) earlier this 
year.   The audit was criticized  for its 
significant limitations, but did call for 
modest reform of the practice, includ-
ing eliminating its use for people 
with serious mental illness and as a 
form of protective custody, as well 
limiting the amount of time people 
can spend in solitary.  
The signatories of the letter call on 
the President to immediately imple-
ment the auditors’ recommendations 
and ensure that the national review 
prioritizes humane alternatives to 
solitary.  
A sampling of the 126 organizations 
that signed the letter include the 
American Civil Liberties Association, 
the American Friends Service Com-
mittee, the Muslim Justice League, 
branches of the NAACP, the National 
Council of Churches, the National 
Religious Campaign Against Torture, 
the Southern Poverty Law Center, 
and various Innocence Projects.   In 
the letter, they emphasize the well -
documented harmful effects of soli-tary on individuals, prison staff, and 
communities.  
“Neuroscience, ethics and interna-
tional human rights law widely con-
sider solitary confinement a form of 
torture,” the letter states. “Indeed, 
decades of research demonstrate the 
harms of solitary confinement on hu-
man beings. Its systematic and wide-
spread use in our criminal justice sys-
tem compromises our stated commit-
ments to human rights, human digni-
ty, the human potential for redemp-
tion, and public safety.”  
The letter notes that a number of ju-
risdictions, including some states, 
have implemented policies to limit 
the use of solitary, such as bans for 
youth, pregnant women, and individ-
uals with mental illness.   The letter 
says that supporting these reforms 
and creating incentives, as well as 
reform in the BOP, should be an ex-
plicit goal of the Attorney General’s 
review.  
The organizations urge quick action, 
noting that the review should be com-
pleted with enough time to allow for 
implementation of the recommenda-
tions, with just over a year left in 
Obama’s presidency.  
“The torture of prolonged solitary 
confinement compromises public safe-
ty, increases recidivism, is immoral 
and indeed has no place in any civi-
lized society. Now is the time to act to 
ensure it has no place in our own,” 
the letter concludes.  
2 
Solitary Watch, PO Box 11374, Washington, DC 20008                                   Email: info@.com  
Solitary Watch ( www.solitarywatch.com) is a web -based watchdog project aimed at bringing solitary confinement 
out of the shadows and into the light of the public square. Our mission is to provide the public —as well as prac-
ticing attorneys, legal scholars, law enforcement and corrections officers, policymakers, educators, advocates, and 
people in prison —with the first centralized source of background research, unfolding developments, and original 
reporting on solitary confinement in the United States.  
The print edition of Solitary Watch is produced quarterly and is available free of charge to currently and formerly 
incarcerated people, to prisoners’ families and advocates. To receive future copies, please send a request to the 
address or email above.  
We also welcome accounts of life in solitary confinement, as well as stories, poems, essays, and artwork by people 
who have served time in isolation. Please send contributions to “Voices from Solitary” at the address above, and 
tell us whether you would like us to use your name or would prefer to remain anonymous.  
Note: We regret that we cannot  offer legal assistance or advice and cannot respond to requests for this type of 
help. Legal materials sent to us cannot be returned to the sender. We also cannot forward mail to others. Thank 
you for your cooperation.  NATIONAL —In October, the organi-
zation  Black & Pink released a 
groundbreaking report, “Coming Out 
of Concrete Closets,” which exam-
ines the experiences of incarcerated 
LGBTQ people. A shocking 85 per-
cent of respondents to the survey 
reported that they had spent some 
time in solitary confinement during 
their time behind bars. Of those, al-
most 50 percent had spent two years 
or more in isolation. Many had been 
placed in solitary “for their own pro-
tection” from other prisoners, only to 
be abused by prison staff.  
DELAWARE —In August, the Com-
munity Legal Aid Society and the 
American Civil Liberties Union  filed 
a lawsuit  against the head of the 
Delaware Department of Correction 
(DOC) over the department’s treat-
ment of incarcerated people suffer-
ing from mental illness. The lawsuit 
asserts that individuals held in soli-
tary confinement receive “grossly 
inadequate” mental healthcare, that 
the use of solitary causes significant 
harm to mentally ill prisoners, and that the DOC is aware of this harm 
and is “deliberately indifferent” to it.  
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA —A 
scathing report on the D.C. jail sys-
tem was released in June by the 
Washington Lawyers’ Committee for 
Civil Rights and Urban Affairs. The 
report found a crumbling infrastruc-
ture, poor mental health services, a 
high suicide rate, shamefully inade-
quate youth facilities, and an exces-
sive use of solitary confinement. It 
recommended that the jail be closed 
an replaced with a new facility.  
FLORIDA —In June,  the Disability  
Rights Group of Florida reached an 
agreement with the Florida Depart-
ment of Corrections to overhaul 
treatment of people with mental ill-
ness at the Dade Correctional Insti-
tution. Past abuses at DCI, which 
were documented by the Miami Her-
ald, included one man being scalded 
to death in a shower while officers 
stood by.  LOUISIANA —Men incarcerated  at 
the Louisiana State Penitentiary, 
commonly known as Angola,  are su-
ing prison officials and the Louisi-
ana Department of Corrections for 
failing to provide adequate 
healthcare to the more than 6,000 
people  currently held  there. In a 
scathing,  63-page complaint,  filed in 
May, lawyers representing Angola’s 
prison  population allege that 
men are routinely denied appropri-
ate medical care, resulting in 
“unnecessary pain and suffering, 
exacerbation of existing conditions, 
permanent disability, disfigurement, 
and even death.”   
NATIONAL —”Together to End Soli-
tary,” a coalition of activist groups, 
has begun holding coordinated ac-
tions on the 23rd of each month to 
mark the 23 hours a day thousands 
of people spend in solitary confine-
ment. The actions, which began in 
California and have spread across 
the country, include rallies, vigils, 
exhibitions, film screenings, letter -
writing campaigns, and more.  
 3  
By Sal Rodriguez  
California prison officials have 
agreed to limit  the practice of long -
term solitary confinement, four 
years after the first hunger strike 
began in protest of the practice.  
Under a historic agreement reached 
in the  Ashker v. Brown  suit between 
the California Department of Cor-
rections and Rehabilitation (CDCR) 
and the Center for Constitutional 
Rights on behalf of individuals  in 
solitary confinement at 
Pelican Bay State Pris-
on, terms of 10 years or 
more, which have been 
common in California, 
will be virtually elimi-
nated, as will solitary 
sentences of indetermi-
nate length.  
“Today is a historic day,” 
declared Jules Lobel, 
president of the Center 
f or  Co n st i tu t i on a l 
Rights, on Tuesday morning.  
Filed in May 2012,  Ashker v. 
Brown  reached class action status in 
2014, representing all men held at 
Pelican Bay State Prison in the Se-
curity Housing Unit (SHU) for over 
a decade. Arguing that long -term 
isolation violated the Eighth Amend-
ment protections against cruel and 
unusual punishment, and that the 
lack of meaningful review of SHU 
placement violated due process 
rights, the case was set for trial in 
December.  
Through the terms of the agreement, 
individuals will no longer be placed 
in the SHU for gang affiliation; with 
limited exceptions all prison-ers currently held in the SHU for 
over 10 years will be released to gen-
eral population; and all SHU terms 
would be finite  rather than indeter-
minate.  
“This settlement represents a monu-
mental victory for prisoners and an 
important step toward our goal of 
ending solitary confinement in Cali-
fornia, and across the country,” the 
plaintiffs said in a joint state-
ment.   “California’s agreement to 
abandon indeterminate SHU con-
finement based on gang affiliation 
demonstrates the power of unity and 
collective action.   This victory was 
achieved by the efforts of people in 
prison, their families and loved ones, 
lawyers, and outside supporters.”  
“The department was headed this 
way, anyway,” said CDCR Secretary 
Jeffrey Beard.  
Under the terms of the agree-
ment,   the only way anyone  will be 
able to get in the SHU is if they com-
mit an offense carrying that punish-
ment, including assault and murder. 
If that offense is tied to gang activi-
ty, and if the offender is a validated 
prisoner, after the completion of a determinate SHU -term for the of-
fense, they will be placed in the Step 
Down Program (SDP). Under the 
terms of this agreement, the SDP, 
which has been operational for two 
years, will be reduced from three to 
four years, to two years.  
Individuals who refuse to participate 
in the SDP will be placed in a new 
Restrictive Custody General Popula-
tion Housing Unit. According to Mr. 
Lobel, the new unit “will not be soli-
tary, but a highly secured 
facility” that allows small
-group recreation, pro-
gramming, work assign-
ments and contact visits.  
Also eligible for place-
ment in the new unit will 
be individuals who have 
been in the SHU for 10 or 
more years who have re-
cently committed a SHU -
able offense and individu-
als who cannot be re-
leased to general popula-
tion due to threats to their safety.  
The department will have to review 
all individuals in the SHU within 
the next year.  
“As the plaintiffs recognize this is a 
step towards the larger goal of the 
prisoners human rights movement,” 
said Carol Strickman, staff attorney 
at Legal Services for Prisoners with 
Children.  
There are currently about 2,000 in-
dividuals in SHUs across the state, 
at Pelican Bay State Prison, Teha-
chapi State Prison, Corcoran State 
Prison, and California State Prison 
in Sacramento who will be impacted.  
4 By Enceno Macy  
Solitary confinement is no place for a 
kid. I know this from firsthand expe-
rience. As a young person in the 
criminal justice system, I was placed 
in solitary — locked down in a small 
cell for up to 24 hours a day — sever-
al different times before I was out of 
my teens. And although you can’t 
see them, I bear permanent scars 
from this treatment.  
I first experienced a kind of solitary 
confinement in juvenile detention 
when I was 13 years old. We would 
get sent to lockdown for bad lan-
guage or being too loud, or for forget-
ting to ask permission to talk, get up 
from our seats, or change the card 
game we were playing — basically, 
for acting like kids. Where I was, the 
time in isolation usually lasted a few 
days. I know that in some juvenile 
facilities, children get locked down 
for weeks or months at a time.  
When I was 15, I was accused of a 
serious felony, and while awaiting 
trial I was placed in “involuntary 
segregation” in county jail. I was put 
there solely due to my age and “for 
my own protection,” but I was treat-
ed the same way as adults who were 
put in solitary for serious rule viola-
tions. We received two books a week, 
two sheets of paper, and a golf pen-
cil. There was no access to any form 
of education or counseling for youth 
(or anyone else). In the wire cages 
we sometimes went to for exercise, 
the space was not much bigger than 
the cell. I spent seven and a half 
month in those conditions.  
Once convicted, I was sent to adult 
prison, where I experienced several 
stays in “disciplinary segregation,” 
usually lasting a few months each – 
for fighting, leaving my job early, arriving back late from a meal, and 
copying out the lyrics to a song that 
they deemed “gang related,” proba-
bly just because it was rap.  
The guards were petty, and liked to 
single out youngsters who had a lot 
of time to do — to try to “break” us, I 
guess. Something as simple as using 
profanity when speaking with a 
state employee would get us a couple 
of weeks in “seg.” In other words, 
actions that would qualify as every-
day misbehavior for most American 
teenagers would get us placed in 
conditions that have been widely 
denounced as torture, especially 
when used on young people.  
A typical day as a kid in seg involved 
a lot of sleep — probably 16 hours on 
average. I’d wake up for breakfast, 
sleep until lunch, read for an hour or 
so, go back to sleep until dinner, 
pace back and forth, try to write po-
ems or rap song lyrics, read, and 
wait/hope for mail — then go to 
sleep and do it all over again.  
In some of that time I might find 
someone I could talk to through the 
crack in my door. We had so little to 
do, we’d end up yelling insults at the 
guards just to vent our anger and 
restlessness.  
I was ruled by sorrow, fear and an-
ger: Sorrow about missing people I 
used to know, and my mom. Fear 
about what might be coming next in 
my seemingly endless sentence. (I 
had no concept of what time really 
meant, so 15 years felt the same as 
50.) And anger at those who I felt 
had wronged me. Back then I wasn’t 
skilled in identifying my emotions, 
let alone dealing with them appro-
priately.  There were no positives in my mind, 
no outlet to exercise the hurt and 
confusion. I was so lost. I never cut 
myself or attempted suicide, as I 
know a lot of kids in solitary do. But 
I did think about death a lot, and I 
had dreams of an apocalyptic world 
(and still do).  
I know that solitary confinement 
caused me considerable psychologi-
cal damage — or really, added to 
what was already brewing. It en-
couraged me to retreat deep into a 
demented reality where I was so 
alone, it made me feel as though I 
wasn’t meant for this world. I still 
feel that way to this day — like I 
don’t fit. On the clinical side, I was 
even more deeply depressed than I 
had been growing up.  
Like most people who have served 
time in solitary as teenagers, I will 
someday be released from prison and 
resume life in the free world. And 
because of solitary I will never be 
right mentally, I fear. More than 10 
years later, I think some of the ef-
fects have faded, but my panic at-
tacks are so severe that they put me 
on anti -depressants for PTSD. I still 
have a hard time trusting, so I don’t 
consider too many people my 
“friends.” It’s pretty lonely because 
of that, but I’m used to the feeling 
now.  
On any given day there are hun-
dreds, and probably thousands, of 
kids under 18 in solitary confine-
ment in America’s jails, prisons, and 
juvenile detention facilities. I know 
what they are suffering, and I won-
der how many of them, like me, will 
bear the invisible scars of their isola-
tion. It may be too late for us, but 
there is still time to save countless  
children from this silent torture.  
