BEcausE I was rap Ed, 
I got labeled as a ‘faggot,’ and 
everywhere I walked everyone 
looked at me like I was a target. It 
opened the doors for a lot of other 
predators. Even the administrators 
thought it was okay for a ‘faggot’ to  
be raped. They said, ‘Oh, you must  
like it.’ 
— Bryson Martel,
prisoner rape survivorA Call for Change:
Protecting the Rights  
of LGBTQ Detaineescall for change                                                                                       february 2009
Introduction
An astonIsh Ing  2.3 million 
people are incarcerated in the 
u.s. at any given time, with some 
12 million passing through pris -
ons and jails each year. of these detainees, 
an alarming number experience sexual vio -
lence. according to the best available re -
search, 20 percent of inmates in u.s. men’s 
institutions are sexually abused at some 
point during their incarceration.1 the rate 
for women’s institutions varies dramatical -
ly from one facility to another, with one in 
four inmates being victimized at the worst 
ones.2 
In an inmate survey mandated by the prison rape Elimination act (pr Ea) and 
published in december 2007, the Bureau 
of Justice statistics (BJs) found that 4.5 
percent (or 60,500) of the more than 1.3 
million inmates held in federal and state 
prisons had been sexually abused in the 
previous year alone.3 a subsequent BJs 
survey in county jails was just as troubling; 
nearly 25,000 jail detainees reported hav -
ing been sexually abused in the past six 
months.4
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (L gBtQ) detainees are hardest hit 
by this violence. the BJs survey of sexual 
violence in jails found that sexual orienta -
tion was the single most predictive char -
acteristic of who was targeted for sexual assault. a 2007 study conducted at six cal
-
ifornia men’s prisons found that a shock -ing 67 percent of inmates who identified as 
“non-heterosexual” reported having been sex -
ually assaulted by another inmate during their 
incarceration – a rate that was 15 times higher 
than for the inmate population overall.5
LgBtQ detainees have little access to pro -
tection from these crimes and generally en -
dure them in silence. this is due to a number 
of factors, including pervasive homophobia 
among corrections officials that creates an 
environment in which abuse is allowed to flourish. Many L gBtQ survivors do not 
report sexual abuse because they fear retalia -
tion and breaches of confidentiality. they also 
tend to believe – often based on how facility 
staff have reacted to the complaints of others 
– that reports will be met with indifference or 
hostility and that no action will be taken. 
Following any incident of rape, survivors suf -
fer severe psychological, and often physical, 
pain. In the case of prisoner rape, the initial 
assault is usually just the beginning of the victim’s ordeal. perpetrators often abuse pris
-
oner rape survivors relentlessly, sometimes for 
long periods of time. In addition, survivors 
are frequently marked as fair game for attacks 
by others. In the worst cases, they are treated 
like the assailants’ property and “sold” to oth -
ers within the facility.
prisoner rape survivors demonstrate a sig -
nificantly higher incidence of mental health 
problems than prisoners who have not expe -
See INTRO, continued on page 2
just detention international  february 2009 | call for  changejust detention international  february 2009 | call for  changecall for change  
officials must acknowledge the unique 
safety concerns of L gBtQ individuals 
and avoid pairing inmates as cellmates if 
sexual assault is likely to be the result. 
•  protect detainees at high risk for abuse 
by discontinuing housing policies and 
practices that place them in dangerous 
situations or that are unnecessarily 
punitive, including housing transgender 
detainees in the general population only 
according to genitalia or automatically placing L gBtQ detainees in segregation 
or special housing units. Instead, 
facilities must offer thoughtful housing 
alternatives, including single cells when 
available, separate units for detainees at 
risk of being targeted for sexual assault, 
and voluntary, non-punitive forms of 
segregation.
•  take into account detainee objections to 
being paired with a specific cellmate due 
to fear of assault.
•  conduct ongoing classification reviews, 
particularly in cases of repeated safety 
concerns or in the aftermath of an assault.
•  require that strip searches of transgender 
inmates be authorized by the supervisor 
on duty and that the reason for the strip search always be documented. s trip 
searches of transgender detainees must 
occur in a manner that provides privacy 
from other inmates and staff members. transgender detainees must never be 
strip searched because staff are curious 
about what their bodies look like or to 
humiliate them.
•  provide appropriate undergarments, such 
as sports bras for transgender inmates. appearance or mannerisms related 
to gender expression must not result 
in punishment or other disciplinary 
measures.
•  allow transgender and other detainees 
vulnerable because of their gender iden -
tity or sexual orientation to use shower 
facilities at a separate time from others. 
3. Staff Screening and Training
proper staff screening is an essential safeguard 
against sexual violence. regular, mandatory rienced sexual violence, including depres -
sion, post-traumatic stress disorder (ptsd), 
and substance abuse. Furthermore, the hIV 
prevalence rate inside u.s. prisons is more 
than four times higher than in society over -
all6 and detainees have only limited access 
to screening and treatment during and after 
incarceration, meaning that rape behind bars 
can amount to an un-adjudicated death sen -
tence. upon release, survivors often return to 
their communities with few resources to deal 
with the emotional scars and deadly disease 
that result from prisoner rape.
the alarming rate of sexual violence against 
LgBtQ detainees requires urgent attention. 
whether perpetrated by officials or by de -
tainees with the acquiescence of corrections staff, the sexual assault of L gBtQ detainees 
is a form of torture that violates internation -
al human rights law, the u.s. constitution, 
and domestic criminal law. 
the u.s. has ratified two international trea -
ties – the International covenant on civil 
and political rights (Iccpr) and the con-
vention against torture and other cruel, 
Inhuman or degrading treatment or pun-
ishment (cat ) – which prohibit torture 
and require the u.s. to protect prisoners 
from sexual violence. In both Farmer v. 
Brennan ,7 and the prison rape Elimination 
act of 2003,8 the u.s. government has rec -
ognized that prisoner rape can amount to 
cruel and unusual punishment, in violation 
of the Eighth amendment of the u.s. con-
stitution. Moreover, every state has rape and 
custodial sexual misconduct laws that crimi -
nalize this form of abuse, regardless of the 
detainee’s custody status, sexual orientation 
or gender identity. 
this Call for Change  presents recommenda -
tions that complement and build on these 
legal standards as well as those at the local 
level. If implemented, the policies included 
here will significantly decrease sexual vio -
lence against L gBtQ detainees. Recommendations
1. Prisoner Awareness 
all detainees need to know that sexual abuse 
is unacceptable in all circumstances, whether 
perpetrated by corrections officials or other 
detainees. they must be given a handbook 
detailing information about the policies re -
lated to sexual conduct at the facility where they are housed. the call for change coali
-
tion calls on all detention facilities to: 
•  confirm that the inmate handbook 
states every person’s right to be free from 
sexual abuse and the institution’s explicit 
prohibition of such acts. a definition 
of abuse – using clear, frank language 
– including the indicators of inappropriate 
staff relationships must be included.9 
•  Ensure that the inmate handbook provides 
information about the availability of mental 
health counseling following sexual abuse.
•  Make certain that the handbook provides 
a clear explanation of the steps a detainee 
must take to file a grievance. 
•  Verify that the handbook is translated 
into the commonly used languages of the 
locale. Low-literacy detainees must receive 
the handbook information verbally. 
2. Promoting Safety
one of the most important tools available to 
corrections officials to prevent prisoner rape 
is the appropriate classification of inmates. while anyone can be targeted for sexual 
violence behind bars, people who are young, 
nonviolent, first-time offenders, physically 
small, weak, and/or shy are more frequently singled out by perpetrators. L gBtQ and 
gender non-conforming detainees, or those 
perceived as such, are exceptionally vulner -
able to rape. corrections staff must therefore 
take special care in determining the housing arrangements for these detainees. the call 
for change coalition calls on all detention 
facilities to:
•  In classification and housing assignments, 
take into account risk factors that can lead 
to detainees becoming the target of sexual 
victimization. In particular, corrections INTRO, continued from page 1just detention international  february 2009 | call for  changestaff training – including the development of 
clear standards for on-the-job conduct and a 
zero-tolerance policy with respect to sexual 
violence – sets a tone of institutional seriousness 
and professionalism. the call for change 
coalition calls on all detention facilities to:
•  conduct extensive background checks of 
all employees who will have direct contact with detainees. n o individual convicted of 
rape, custodial sexual misconduct or any 
other crime involving nonconsensual sexu -
al contact, or any individual who has been 
fired or has resigned from a job as a correc -
tions employee pursuant to substantiated 
allegations of sexual abuse, shall be eligible 
for employment in a position that involves 
direct  contact with inmates.
•  provide mandatory training for current 
and future staff members, including all 
non-security personnel, on a regular basis. training must include: a clear statement 
that sexual abuse of detainees is a crime; 
strategies for identifying and protecting 
potentially vulnerable inmates; information 
on how to respond to a report of sexual 
abuse, including how to respect the 
survivor’s confidentiality; and information 
on reporting and tracking sexual abuse.
•  Include detailed information in train -
ing programs about non-discrimina -
tion against L gBtQ detainees and 
explicitly prohibit homophobic and 
derogatory comments directed against such detainees.  acknowledge, as a matter 
of written policy and daily practice, the unique safety concerns of L gBtQ 
 
detainees and emphasize that the  
prevention of sexual violence is a top  
institutional priority. require that staff use 
respectful language toward and in refer -
ence to all L gBtQ detainees.
•  Include the following as examples of pro -
hibited conduct in training materials for staff:   responding to detainees’ concerns or 
complaints of sexual abuse in a dismissive 
or skeptical manner; condoning, encourag -
ing or otherwise being complicit in sexual 
abuse as a method of punishing detainees; 
and failing to prevent or stop sexual abuse based on the false belief that L gBtQ de
-
tainees want or invite sexual aggression.
•  require staff to report all observed 
incidents of custodial sexual misconduct and all acts of indifference toward the 
sexual abuse of detainees, and to take a 
proactive role in monitoring the safety of 
inmates who may be vulnerable to sexual 
abuse.
•  reward staff for treating detainees in 
a respectful manner and for properly handling reports of sexual assault. when 
employment procedures allow, tie merit 
salary increases and promotions to 
adherence to this principle.
•  terminate and prosecute an employee 
if an internal or external investigation 
confirms that s/he has engaged in sexual misconduct with a detainee. while under 
investigation, such an employee shall have 
no direct contact with detainees. If this 
is not possible, then the survivor must be 
given the option of being housed where s/he 
will have no contact with the employee. 
If an employee exhibits indifference to 
the sexual abuse of a detainee, appropriate 
disciplinary action must be taken.
•  Ensure that the above stipulations apply 
to all employees, including contractors, 
volunteers, health care professionals, 
and anyone else who has contact with 
detainees, on or off the institution 
grounds. For those categories of employees 
for whom it is not feasible to attend 
regular trainings on sexual abuse, a class 
in which pertinent information about how 
to prevent and address sexual violence 
is conveyed must be mandatory before 
such employees are allowed contact with 
inmates.
4. Responding to Sexual Violence
taking action in a timely and professional 
manner to address allegations of sexual as -
sault is an essential component in minimiz -
ing harmful consequences to survivors and in 
breaking the cycle of sexual abuse in deten -
tion. the call for change coalition calls on 
all detention facilities to:
•  Establish multiple avenues for filing a 
complaint about sexual abuse, so that 
detainees are not required to report 
grievances to an abusive staff member or 
one who they believe will not take action. 
It is especially important to ensure that 
detainees are aware of their right to breach the normal chain-of-command when 
reporting sexual abuse. 
•  Ensure that detainees who file complaints 
of sexual abuse are not punished, either directly or indirectly. also ensure that all 
complaints and reports of sexual violence 
remain confidential to the extent possible, 
meaning that they are divulged only to 
those staff members who need to know 
in order to carry out an investigation and 
maintain the health and safety of the 
detainee.
•  Make certain that administrative 
segregation of those who report abuse is 
not automatic. If a person is segregated for 
his or her own protection, such segregation 
must be non-disciplinary, and must not 
result in any unnecessary loss of privileges 
or access to physical or mental health care.
•  Ensure that evidence is collected as 
promptly as possible in the aftermath of 
a sexual assault. Instruct the survivor not 
to shower, remove clothing, wash, drink, eat or defecate until examined. s taff 
implicated in the assault must never be 
involved in the collection of evidence. 
•  provide appropriate acute-trauma care 
for rape survivors, including treatment of injuries, medical examination, std testing 
and prophylaxis, and emergency mental 
health counseling. 
•  Facilitate the ability of hospital staff and 
independent rape crisis counselors to 
counsel survivors in private. 
•  Make certain that detainees who have 
been victimized receive appropriate 
physical and mental health care follow-up, 
including monitoring and confidential 
counseling for post-traumatic stress 
disorder, depression, and other mental health problems. this follow-up must also 
include access to confidential, voluntary 
testing, and treatment and counseling for hIV/aIds and other stds. 
•  Ensure that access to comprehensive 
aftercare never is dependent upon the 
survivor’s willingness to participate in 
an investigation or to testify in legal 
proceedings.
Continued on page 4just detention international  february 2009 | call for  changecall for change               
Endnotes
1  cindy struckman-Johnson & david struckman-Johnson, Sexual Coercion Rates in Seven Midwestern Prison 
Facilities for Men , 80 The Prison  Journal  379 (2000).
2  rates for women vary greatly. In one institution, 27 percent of females reported a pressured or forced sex 
incident, while in another institution the rate was seven percent. see cindy struckman-Johnson & david 
struckman-Johnson, Sexual Coercion Reported by Women in Three Midwestern Prisons , 39 Journal  of sex re-
search  3 (2002).
3  allen   J. B eck & P aige M. harrison , Bureau  of JusT ice sTaTisTics, sexual  VicTiMiza Tion in sTaTe 
and federal  Prisons  rePor Ted By inMa Tes, 2007  (2007).
4  allen   J. B eck & P aige M. harrison , Bureau  of JusT ice sTaTisTics, sexual  VicTiMiza Tion in local  
Jails rePor Ted By inMa Tes, 2007  (2008). unfortunately, the data provided by the BJs still represent only a 
fraction of the true number of detainees who are victimized in county jails. the number of admissions to local 
jails over the course of a year is approximately 17 times higher than the nation’s jail population on any given day.
5  Valerie Jenness et al., center for Evidence-Based corrections, Violence in California Correctional Facilities: 
An Empirical Examination of Sexual Assault  (2007).
6  susan okie, Sex, Drugs, Prisons, and HIV , 356 new eng. J. M ed. 105 (2007). In 2005, the confirmed aIds 
rate was two and one-half times higher in prisons than in society. laura  M. M aruschak , Bureau  of JusT ice 
sTaTisTics, hiV in Prisons , 2005 (2007).
7. 511 u.s. 825 (1994).8. 42 u.s.c. §15601, 
et seq.
9  while the power that officials wield over a person in their custody makes staff-on-inmate sexual contact 
inherently coercive, consensual sexual activity between inmates should not be included in definitions or poli -
cies concerning sexual abuse.About Just Detention  
International (JDI)
Just detention International ( JdI) is a 
human rights organization that seeks to 
end sexual abuse in all forms of detention. 
all of JdI ’s work takes place within the 
framework of international human rights 
laws and norms. the sexual assault of detain -
ees, whether committed by corrections staff 
or by inmates, is a crime and is recognized 
internationally as a form of torture.
JdI has three core goals for its work: to en -
sure government accountability for prisoner 
rape; to transform ill-informed public atti -
tudes about sexual violence in detention; and 
to promote access to resources for those who 
have survived this form of abuse.
 
JdI is concerned about the safety and well-
being of all detainees, including those held 
in adult prisons and jails, juvenile facilities, 
immigration detention centers, and police 
lock-ups, whether run by government agen -
cies or by private corporations on behalf of 
the government. when the government takes away someone’s 
freedom, it incurs a responsibility to pro -
tect that person’s safety. all inmates have 
the right be treated with dignity. no matter 
what crime someone has committed, sexual 
violence must never be part of the penalty.
Just detention international  
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast Office
1025 Vermont Ave., NW,  Third Floor
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: (202) 580-6971
Fax: (202) 638-6056
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.org5. External Monitoring, Reporting, 
and Services
In order to prevent sexual violence, detention 
facilities must operate with transparency by 
fully documenting abuse, by facilitating ex -
ternal monitoring by independent organiza -
tions, and by providing unfettered access to 
entities that provide services to survivors. the 
call for change coalition calls on all deten -
tion facilities to:
•  allow relevant, independent monitoring 
and regulatory organizations to enter 
the institution and have broad access to 
detainees. 
•  collaborate with community rape crisis 
centers to provide confidential rape crisis 
services to survivors.
•  document all complaints of sexual abuse 
of detainees, including: whether the 
abuse was perpetrated by a staff member 
or another detainee; the result of the 
investigation; the circumstances of the 
assault; whether the survivor participated 
in the investigation; and any resolution of 
the complaint. this information should be 
made public with identifying information 
redacted.
•  provide copies of Just detention 
International’s Resource Guide for Survivors of Sexual Abuse Behind Bars  to detainees 
and ensure that any effort to reach out to 
the organizations included therein remains 
free and confidential. 
Conclusion
 
the call for change was initiated in novem -
ber 2004, when Just detention International 
(then stop prisoner rape) hosted a commu -
nity dialogue in Los angeles that brought 
together more than 40 human rights advo -
cates, rape crisis counselors, L gBtQ rights 
advocates, corrections officials, survivors, and 
politicians to address the problem of sexual violence against L gBtQ detainees. Many 
other organizations (both within the u.s. and 
abroad) have since joined the coalition. 
due in part to the prison rape Elimina -
tion act (pr Ea), corrections officials are 
gradually acknowledging their responsibility 
to prevent sexual abuse against everyone in 
their custody. however, L gBtQ detainees 
continue to be dramatically over-represented 
among those targeted for sexual assault be -
hind bars. By implementing the above policy 
recommendations, detention facilities can put 
an end to this dehumanizing violence and 
protect one of the nation’s most vulnerable 
incarcerated populations.1. a window Between worlds, Venice, california
2. a ctionaIds, p hiladelphia, p ennsylvania
3. aFL-cIo , pride at work, washington, district of columbia
4. afrihealth Information p rojects, Lagos, n igeria
5. aIds p roject Los a ngeles, Los a ngeles, california
6. albuquerque r ape crisis center, albuquerque, n ew Mexico
7. allied cultures against discrimination, Van n uys, california
8. a merican civil Liberties union of s outhern california, Los a ngeles, california
9. a mnesty International usa, n ew York, n ew York
10. archdiocese of Los a ngeles, office of restorative Justice, Los a ngeles, california
11. association h IV.LV, riga, Latvia 
12. Bavarian n etwork on h IV/aIds in p rison, Bonn, germany
13. Bay area Immigrant rights coalition, oakland, california
14. Bienestar human s ervices, Los a ngeles, california
15. Birth a ttendants: the p rison doula p roject, o lympia, washington
16. Books n ot Bars, oakland, california
17. california coalition against s exual assault, s acramento, california
18. california coalition for women p risoners, s an Francisco, california
19. california p rison Focus, s an Francisco, california
20. california women’s Law center, Los a ngeles, california
21. campaign for Youth Justice, washington, district of columbia
22. center for human rights and constitutional Law, Los a ngeles, california
23. central a merican resource center, Los a ngeles, california
24. centre for the human rights of Imprisoned p eople, Flemington, a ustralia
25. centre for the s tudy of Violence and reconciliation, Johannesburg, s outh africa
26. children of Lesbians and gays Everywhere, s an Francisco, california
27. city of Los a ngeles aIds coordinator’s office, Los a ngeles, california
28. coalition for humane Immigrant rights of Los a ngeles, Los a ngeles, california
29. coalition to abolish s lavery and trafficking, Los a ngeles, california
30. colorado a nti-Violence p rogram, denver, colorado
31. community h IV/aIds Mobilization p roject, n ew York, n ew York
32. community united against Violence, s an Francisco, california
33. the correctional association of n ew York, n ew York, n ew York 
34. dc r ape crisis center, washington, district of columbia
35. dc trans coalition, washington, district of columbia
36. East Los a ngeles women’s center, Los a ngeles, california
37. Equality california, s acramento, california
38. Families to a mend california’s three s trikes, Los a ngeles, california
39. FIErcE!, n ew York, n ew York 
40. Friends o utside, Los a ngeles, california
41. FtM alliance of Los a ngeles, Los a ngeles, california
42. gay, Lesbian, and s traight Education n etwork, Los a ngeles, california
43. gay and Lesbian a ctivists alliance, washington, district of columbia
44. gay and Lesbian a dolescent s ocial s ervices, Los a ngeles, california 
45. gay Men’s health crisis, n ew York, n ew York
46. hemophilia historical archives, woodland, california
47. human rights watch, n ew York, n ew York
48. Immigration Equality, n ew York, n ew York
49. In the Life, a tlanta, georgia
50. International aIds Empowerment, El p aso, texas
51. International gay and Lesbian human rights commission, asylum documentation p rogram, n ew York, n ew York
52. Just detention International, Los a ngeles, california
53. Juvenile Justice p roject of Louisiana, n ew orleans, Louisiana“Call for Change” Signatories  
 February 2009
just detention international  february 2009 | call for  changeContinued on reverse54. Kansas city a nti-Violence p roject, Kansas city, Missouri
55. LgBt community center of greater cleveland, cleveland, ohio
56. Los a ngeles gay and Lesbian center, Los a ngeles, california
57. Men can s top r ape, washington, district of columbia
58. Milwaukee L gBt community center, Milwaukee, wisconsin
59. Münchner aids-hilfe, Munich, germany
60. n ational association of s ocial workers, women’s council, Los a ngeles, california
61. n ational center for Lesbian rights, s an Francisco, california
62. n ational center for transgender Equality, washington, district of columbia 
63. n ational center for Youth Law, oakland, california
64. n ational coalition of a nti-Violence p rograms, n ew York, n ew York
65. n ational gay and Lesbian taskforce, washington, district of columbia
66. n ational Immigrant Justice center, chicago, Ilinnois
67. n ational Lawyer’s g uild, n ew York, n ew York
68. n ational Youth a dvocacy coalition, washington, district of columbia
69. the n ew York city gay and Lesbian a nti-Violence p roject, n ew York, n ew York 
70. n ovember coalition Foundation, colville, washington 
71. p arents, Families and Friends of Lesbians and gays n ational, washington, district of columbia 
72. the p arolee human rights p roject of the n ew York city aIds housing n etwork, n ew York, n ew York
73. p artnership for s afety and Justice, p ortland, oregon
74. p eace o ver Violence, Los a ngeles, california
75. p eople against p rison abuse, odessa, texas
76. p ikes p eak gay & Lesbian community center, colorado s prings, colorado
77. the p rison honor p rogram of the catalyst Foundation, Lancaster, california
78. p rogram for torture Victims, Los a ngeles, california 
79. p rogressive Jewish alliance, Los a ngeles, california 
80. p roject sIstE r, claremont, california 
81. the river Fund, s ebastian, Florida
82. s afespace for L gBtQQ s urvivors of Violence, Burlington, Vermont
83. s an Francisco women against r ape, s an Francisco, california
84. scarlet alliance, s ydney, a ustralia
85. s eattle L gBt community center, s eattle, washington
86. s exual assault crisis agency, Long Beach, california
87. s outh asian n etwork, artesia, california 
88. s outherners on n ew ground, a tlanta, georgia
89. s ylvia rivera Law p roject, n ew York, n ew York
90. t exas Jail p roject, a ustin, texas
91. t ransformative Justice Law p roject of Illinois, chicago, Illinois
92. t ransgender, gender Variant and Intersex Justice p roject, oakland, california
93. t ransgender Law center, s an Francisco, california
94. t ransgender Legal defense & Education Fund, n ew York, n ew York
95. t rans-health Information p roject, p hiladelphia, p ennsylvania
96. t riangle Foundation, detroit, Michigan
97. ucL a LgBt center, Los a ngeles, california
98. unitarian universalist s ervice committee, Boston, Massachusetts 
99. u rban Justice center, n ew York, n ew York 
100. Valley trauma center, Van n uys, california
101. w ashington dc community center for gLB t people, washington, district of columbia
102. w omen Lawyers Jail p roject, Los a ngeles, california 
103. w omen with a Vision, Inc., n ew orleans, Louisiana
104. w omen’s Institute for Leadership development for human rights, s an Francisco, california
105. w omen’s p rison association, n ew York, n ew York
106. Youth Law center, s an Francisco, ca“Call for Change” Signatories  
February 2009 
Continued from reverse
just detention international  february 2009 | call for  change