In the Shadows: A Review of the 
Research on Plea Bargaining
Ram Subramanian, Léon Digard, Melvin Washington II, and Stephanie Sorage
 
September 2020In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargainingiii
From the Director
When most people think of the American justice 
system, they likely picture a courtroom with lawyers, 
a judge, and a jury waiting to determine the facts of 
the case and provide a just outcome. But the majority 
of people “found guilty” in America never stand trial: 
their fate is determined in a courthouse hallway or 
prosecutor’s office via a quick conversation between 
attorneys.
 
Plea bargaining is more a part of the American justice 
system than the formal trial and, in fact, makes up the 
vast majority of criminal justice transactions today. Only 2 percent of federal criminal cases—and a similar 
number of state cases—are brought to trial. More than 
90 percent of convictions, at both federal and state 
levels, are the result of guilty pleas. Plea bargaining is 
so fundamental to the system that even in 1970, Chief 
Justice Warren Burger of the U.S. Supreme Court 
estimated that a 10 percent reduction in guilty pleas 
would require doubling the amount of judicial capacity 
in the system. Scholars in recent years have suggested 
that the criminal legal system could be brought to a 
halt by a mass refusal to plead guilty.
And yet little is known about plea bargaining. 
Pleas are offered and retracted at the unfettered 
discretion of prosecutors. Bargains themselves are 
undocumented and largely unchallenged, save for a 
few formal questions meant to establish that the plea 
is “voluntary, intelligent, and knowing.” To understand 
plea bargaining, then, we must depend on a small but 
growing body of research. Through interviews, data gathered by courts, and other means, scholars are attempting to understand the factors that influence 
plea bargaining as well as whether a plea bargain is a 
“bargain” at all.
These studies are vital to understanding a process that 
is so central to how the criminal legal system currently 
operates, but they remain woefully inadequate and 
incomplete. The sheer lack of trials, for example, 
means that it is difficult to find analogous cases to 
compare to those that end in pleas. In addition, the 
dynamic and recursive nature of bargaining is difficult to isolate into discrete questions for study. Finally, 
the most important voices—the people subject to 
these bargains—are largely absent from these studies. 
Instead, data is provided by police, courts, prosecutors, 
and jails. This one-sided understanding of the bargain 
explains a good deal about how the legal characteristics 
of a case, or pressures such as increasing caseloads, 
drive prosecutorial bargaining, but it offers little 
insight into the reasons that people trade their right to 
a trial for a faster and more certain conviction.
But why does it matter?
The history of the American justice system is a 
history of mass incarceration, with wildly disparate 
consequences for Black and white people. We are 
faced with substantial evidence that people are put 
in untenable positions after arrest. They are kept in 
jails away from their families and communities if 
they cannot afford cash bail or an attorney to argue iv
Vera Institute of Justicefor them. And although representation is guaranteed, 
the tremendous caseload borne by public defenders 
means that “representation” before trial is likely to be 
perfunctory and impersonal. Pretrial incarceration has 
been definitively linked to the likelihood of conviction, 
and most convictions are obtained via plea. And 
although the Supreme Court has indicated that even 
knowing you may be put to death if you face trial is 
not “coercive” pressure to plead guilty, it is difficult 
to say that an incarcerated person faced with the loss 
of their income, housing, family, and community is 
truly free to make a choice. Even after people return to their communities, a conviction—whether it stems 
from a guilty plea or a jury verdict—carries collateral 
consequences that will follow them for years, if not the 
rest of their lives. Today, the American justice system is in crisis, but 
it is also in a moment of unique opportunity. This 
review and analysis of the available literature on plea 
bargaining—released by V era and the Safety and Justice 
Challenge—represents decades of work by dozens 
of scholars. It brings light to the shadowed hallways 
where the majority of justice is transacted and new 
attention to the ways the criminal legal system has 
become an ad hoc administrative process.
Elizabeth Swavola
Acting Project Director
V era Institute of JusticeAbout this report
This report is one of a series that the V era Institute of Justice (V era) is 
releasing with the Safety and Justice Challenge—the John D. and Catherine 
T. MacArthur Foundation’s initiative to reduce overincarceration by 
changing the way America thinks about and uses jails. The initiative 
is supporting a network of competitively selected local jurisdictions 
committed to finding ways to safely reduce jail incarceration. Other 
publications in the series to date include:  
 ›Incarceration’s Front Door: The Misuse of Jails in America; 
 ›The Price of Jails: Measuring the Taxpayer Cost of Local Incarceration; 
 ›Overlooked: Women and Jails in an Era of Reform; 
 ›Out of Sight: The Growth of Jails in Rural America; 
 ›Divided Justice: Trends in Black and White Incarceration 1990-2013;
 ›The New Dynamics of Mass Incarceration; 
 ›Justice Denied: The Harmful and Lasting Effects of Pretrial Detention; 
 ›Gatekeepers: The Role of Police in Ending Mass Incarceration; 
 ›Broken Ground: Why America Keeps Building More Jails and What It Can Do Instead; and
 ›the multimedia storytelling project, The Human Toll of Jail.  
Through the Safety and Justice Challenge, V era’s offices in Los Angeles and New Orleans, and direct partnerships with jurisdictions nationwide, V era 
is providing expert information and technical assistance to support local 
efforts to stem the flow of people into jail, including using alternatives to 
arrest and prosecution for minor offenses, recalibrating the use of bail, 
and addressing fines and fees that trap people in jail. For more information 
about V era’s work to reduce the use of jails, contact Elizabeth Swavola, 
acting project director, at eswavola@vera.org . For more information about 
the Safety and Justice Challenge, visit www.safetyandjusticechallenge.org .Contents 
1  Intr oduction
10 F actors that influence plea bargaining
 10  Coerciv e factors 
 19  L egal characteristics 
 24  Sys temic inequities
 31  The criminal law
 35  Caseloads
39 Plea bar gaining outcomes
 40  Ho w much of a bargain is a plea bargain?
 44  Ar e innocent people induced to plead guilty?
48 Conclusion: Limit ations and future directions
In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining1
Introduction
The common narrative in popular culture is that criminal justice is 
meted out in courtrooms around the country. Facts about a particular 
case inevitably emerge from adversarial proceedings in which 
prosecutors and defense attorneys go to battle in open court over matters of fact and law, juries decide whether people are guilty or not guilty, and 
judges determine appropriate punishments.
1 People have their days in 
court, and the public—including victims, if there are any—witness whether 
justice is done.2 
In fact, criminal trials are rare.3 Instead, most criminal cases that result 
in conviction—97 percent in large urban state courts in 2009, and 90 percent in federal court in 2014—are adjudicated through guilty pleas.
4 Of 
these, researchers estimate that more than 90 percent are a result of plea bargaining—an informal and unregulated process by which prosecutors 
and defense counsel negotiate charging and sentencing concessions in 
exchange for guilty pleas and waivers of constitutionally guaranteed trial 
rights.
5 Indeed, by one estimate, a criminal case is disposed of by plea 
bargaining every two seconds during a typical work day in America.6 
Negotiated deals to resolve criminal cases are so ubiquitous that Justice By one estimate, a criminal case is 
disposed of by plea bargaining every  
two seconds during a typical work day  
in America.2
Vera Institute of JusticeAnthony Kennedy of the U.S. Supreme Court stated in 2012 that “criminal 
justice today is for the most part a system of pleas, not a system of trials.”7
Plea deals—which are entirely within the discretion of a prosecutor to 
offer (or accept)—typically include one or more of the following: 
 ›the dismissal of one or more charges, and/or agreement to a conviction to a lesser offense (known as “charge bargaining”); 
 ›an agreement to a more lenient sentence, which can cover both type of sanction—custodial or community-based—and length (known as 
“sentence bargaining”); and 
 ›an agreement to stipulate to a version of events that omits certain 
facts that would statutorily expose a person to harsher penalties 
(known as “fact bargaining”).8 
Most criminal cases are resolved by plea bargaining.
Researchers 
estimate that 
more than 
90%  of 
criminal cases 
that end in conviction are the result of plea bargaining......a low-
visibility, off-the-record, and informal process that usually occurs far from open court.In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining3
Plea negotiations can be quick and straightforward or long and 
complicated—or anywhere in between.9 When there are no legal issues in 
dispute, or in cases in which it is likely that the prosecution will prevail, 
plea negotiations can be superficial—with people taking given deals 
without any negotiation or counteroffer.10 This is especially so in cases of 
misdemeanors, infractions, and other lesser offenses for which there are 
often standard dispositions routinely offered and accepted with little, if 
any, actual deliberation. (See “Misdemeanor justice and plea bargains” on 
page 16.) Often, in more complex cases where available evidence is subject 
to conflicting interpretations, and/or where sentencing stakes are higher, 
negotiations can be lengthier—potentially occurring over many weeks and 
months.11 In a smaller proportion of cases, no actual offer or negotiation 
occurs, and people plead guilty without any specific promises or assurances 
from the prosecution—called variously taking an “open plea,” taking a 
“blind plea,” or “pleading to the sheet.”12 
In whatever form it takes, plea bargaining remains a low-visibility, off-
the-record, and informal process that usually occurs in conference rooms and courtroom hallways—or through private telephone calls or e-mails—
far away from the prying eyes and ears of open court.
13 Bargains are 
usually struck with no witnesses present and made without investigation, A system of plea bargaining.
Plea Bargaining
Plea Bargaining
Plea BargainingPlea BargainingPlea Bargaining
Plea Bargaining
Plea Bargaining
Plea Bargaining4
Vera Institute of Justicetestimony, impartial fact-finding, or adherence to the required burden 
of proof.14 Moreover, little to no documentation exists of the bargaining 
process that takes place between initial charge and a person’s formal 
admission of guilt in open court, and final plea deals that close out cases 
are themselves rarely written down or otherwise recorded.15 As such, plea 
deals, and the process that produces them, are largely unreviewable and 
subject to little public scrutiny.16 Thus, despite the high frequency with 
which plea deals are used, most people—aside from the usual courtroom actors—understand neither the mechanics of plea bargaining nor the 
reasons so many people decide to plead guilty. 
Plea bargaining has, however, become the central focus of a growing, 
but still small, body of empirical research. In recent years, mounting concerns about plea bargaining’s role in encouraging the widespread 
forfeiture of constitutionally guaranteed trial rights and associated 
procedural protections—and its critical role in fueling mass incarceration—has stimulated further urgency in understanding how the process works. 
Indeed, an array of questions regarding its fairness have emerged. Over the In recent years, mounting concerns about 
plea bargaining’s role in encouraging the 
widespread forfeiture of constitutionally 
guaranteed trial rights and associated 
procedural protections—and its critical 
role in fueling mass incarceration—
has stimulated further urgency in 
understanding how the process works. In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining5last few decades, prosecutorial leverage in plea negotiations has increased 
exponentially as changes in substantive law have bolstered criminal 
penalties and given prosecutors a wider range of choices to use when 
filing charges (such as mandatory penalties, sentencing enhancements, and 
more serious yet duplicative crimes already well covered by existing law). 
But increased exposure to harsher penalties has not been matched with 
increased procedural protections for defendants. Prosecutors’ wide powers 
in plea bargaining still go largely unchecked, and there are no meaningful 
oversight mechanisms or procedural safeguards to protect against unfair 
or coercive practices, raising fears about arbitrariness and inequality. Given 
this lack of regulation, concern has also grown over the extent to which 
innocent people are regularly being induced to plead guilty, as well as plea bargaining’s role in perpetuating racial and ethnic disparities in criminal 
case outcomes—for example, plea bargaining practices that send more 
Black people to prison or jail than similarly situated white people.
17
Plea bargaining’s full impact on the legal system and justice-involved 
people remains unknown, but empirical research on this little understood 
yet immensely influential practice has begun to emerge. In order to provide 
an accessible summary of existing research to policymakers and the public, 
the V era Institute of Justice (V era) examined a body of empirical studies 
that has developed around plea bargaining. Although this review is not 
exhaustive, it provides a picture not only of the current state of scholarship 
on plea bargaining, but also of the gaps in knowledge that must be filled.
As this report will discuss, studies appear to fall into seven main focus 
areas, primarily examining either of two broad questions: (1) which factors 
most influence the plea bargaining decision-making process?; and (2) what 
is the impact of plea bargaining on case outcomes? The seven focus areas covered by this report include the following.
 ›Coercive factors. A number of studies examine whether the punishing circumstances of pretrial detention or the threat of 
onerous sentences—specifically, the death penalty—play an outsized 
role in inducing and expediting guilty pleas. 
 ›Legal case characteristics. Another extensive body of work looks at how legal case characteristics—severity of charge, prior record, 
evidentiary factors—influence the type of plea offers that are made.6
Vera Institute of Justice ›Systemic inequities. There is a growing body of research 
that considers the influence of demographic characteristics in 
determining plea outcomes. These studies primarily look at the 
potential existence of conscious or unconscious biases that may 
create disadvantage and inequality across race, ethnicity, gender,  
or age. 
 ›The criminal law. Another body of work looks at the organization, structure, and content of the criminal code to understand how 
the criminal law—including the existence and type of structured 
sentencing schemes—can affect the likelihood and substance of a 
plea deal. 
 ›Caseloads. Some studies have tested the common assumption that 
the frequent use of plea deals is, at least partly, a function of heavy 
caseloads among prosecutors and a resultant pressure to hasten the 
disposal of as many cases as possible. (No research considered the 
impact of defenders’ caseloads on plea bargaining.) 
 ›Trial penalty. A substantial body of the literature explores the 
so-called “trial penalty” (or “plea discount”)—that is, the difference 
between a criminal sentence produced by guilty plea versus by trial. 
Much of this work is narrowly based on the assumption that plea 
decisions rely on anticipated trial outcomes, such that the higher  
the penalty (or larger the discount) the higher the likelihood of a 
guilty plea. 
 ›Innocence. Finally, given the potential benefits to people of 
accepting a plea deal, a small body of research has considered the 
extent to which innocent people may be coerced into pleading guilty  
to avoid receiving a “trial penalty” if they fail to prove their cases  
at trial.
Whether people are charged with serious crimes or low-level 
misdemeanors, whether they are before busy city courts or slower-paced rural ones, they will likely resolve their cases by negotiated pleas. Plea 
bargaining is the de facto system of justice in America. But despite decades 
of scholarship, little is ultimately known about how it works or why people 
plead. This review of contemporary scholarship only offers mixed clues about the criminal legal system’s primary dispositional process. Although In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining7there is evidence that most people receive more favorable sentencing 
outcomes through plea bargaining than they would if they had taken their 
cases to trial, the exact contours of how such bargains are reached, and 
the factors—whether individual, legal, institutional, or demographic—
that ultimately play a key role in influencing plea outcomes remain both 
ambiguous and opaque. What exists instead is a mix of complicated, 
nuanced, and sometimes contradictory research findings.
In order to bring plea bargaining out of the shadows and ensure its 
equitable use, more transparency is needed about the process by which 
most cases are concluded so that safeguards can be put in place to protect 
people from its misuse. Whether people are charged with serious 
crimes or low-level misdemeanors, whether 
they are before busy city courts or slower-
paced rural ones, they will likely resolve 
their cases by negotiated pleas. 8
Vera Institute of JusticeLaw of plea bargaining: An overview
Plea bargaining emerged in the early years of the Republic 
as a localized legal innovation that would eventually grow to 
become—by the early 20th century—this country’s primary 
method of criminal conviction.a But despite plea bargaining’s 
long history at the center of American criminal justice, a set of 
coherent rules governing its use has never emerged. Indeed, 
for much of its history, plea bargaining remained a largely unregulated and informal form of pretrial negotiation.
Although courts acknowledge plea bargaining as an “essential 
component of the administration of justice”—or, more recently, 
recognized that “it is the criminal justice system”—courts 
have generally taken a hands-off approach in regulating its use, leaving much discretion with prosecutors and defense 
attorneys in shaping plea bargaining processes and outcomes.
b 
This reticence is in part due to the approach that courts have taken to analogize plea bargains to contracts in private law—
describing them as the same as “any other bargained-for exchange” between autonomous actors who proceed from 
a “mutuality of advantage”—even though prosecutor and 
defendant have inherently unequal levels of power, particularly when the accused is being held in jail pretrial.
c Placing 
substantive limits on bargaining tactics, according to this line 
of thought, could potentially cast a chilling effect that might 
foreclose plea negotiations altogether.d In only a few cases 
have courts attempted to define plea bargaining’s contours or 
set its outer bounds. Moreover, the few statutes and procedural 
rules governing plea bargaining processes exert minimal control over the direction and process of how plea bargains are 
made and are largely silent regarding the actual substance 
of plea bargains themselves.
e However, in recent years, courts 
have begun to fill the gaps in procedural rules with case law 
clarifying the limits of prosecutorial discretion.
The constitutional law of plea bargaining
At the heart of plea bargaining law is the 1970 seminal case 
of Brady v. United States. Long after plea bargaining had 
become the norm in resolving the vast majority of criminal 
cases, the Brady court formally recognized plea bargaining as a constitutional method of criminal adjudication and set 
out its minimum requirements.
f To be constitutionally valid, 
guilty pleas must be both “voluntary” and “knowing, intelligent acts.”
g However, courts have since defined both “voluntary” and 
“knowing” in manners that are significantly different from what the average person might suppose those terms to mean. 
Voluntary. Although the voluntariness requirement supposedly 
ensures that people are not misled, tricked, or otherwise 
coerced into forgoing their constitutional right to trial by pleading guilty, courts have still regularly avoided reckoning with the inherent pressures of “the give-and-take of [the] plea bargaining” process on people, including the inherently 
coercive nature of pretrial detention.
h Instead, they have 
concluded that “the imposition of difficult choices [is] an inevitable—and permissible—attribute of any legitimate system 
which tolerates and encourages the negotiation of pleas.”
i 
As a result, courts have decided that few actions will likely 
amount to “improper pressure that would . . . overbear the 
will of some innocent persons” such as to render a guilty plea involuntary.
j Prosecutors have been afforded wide latitude in 
using every bargaining chip that is permissible by law when 
trying to extract guilty pleas from people—including the threat 
of indefinite pretrial detention—so long as the tactics do not involve illegal fraud (such as threatening to use false testimony) 
or outright physical harm, and so long as the bargain is 
upheld.
k These include promises of leniency if a plea is accepted 
and threats of worse punishment, additional charges, or even 
the prosecution and punishment of family members if a plea 
deal is declined.l 
Knowing. Although courts have been clear that people must possess several critical pieces of information in order to validly plead guilty—the nature of the charges, the rights waived by 
pleading guilty, and the sentence that will, or is likely to be, 
imposed—the level of actual understanding that is required is very minimal in practice.
m Usually, a superficial judicial 
inquiry—the “plea colloquy”—probes whether a person’s 
plea bargaining choices are sufficiently informed; these are 
typically highly scripted proceedings that are outlined in state and federal procedural rules governing the formal entrance of 
guilty pleas on the record in open court.
n For the guilty plea 
to pass constitutional muster, people typically need only to provide short, often perfunctory, affirmative responses and a 
basic explanation of the offense to which they are admitting.
o 
Courts rarely conduct a deeper inquiry into whether people 
fully comprehend the consequences of pleading guilty beyond 
what is minimally required by the governing standard set out in Brady and codified in the rules of criminal procedure.
p 
There are also other larger structural curbs on what people can know during the plea bargaining process. For example, people do not have a right to know the full extent of the evidence, or 
lack thereof, against them, because there is no constitutional 
right to discovery in criminal cases.
q The state is not required 
to turn over evidence that may establish a person’s guilt and, 
under United States v. Ruiz, it need not share material evidence 
favorable to the defendant—a due process right established under Brady v. Maryland and successor cases that only 
attaches if a case goes to trial.
r In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining9Recent developments in plea bargaining law
In recent years, the Supreme Court has become incrementally 
more active in regulating the plea bargaining process—
particularly regarding the responsibilities of defense counsel. 
This is in part due to an apparent change in approach. Previously, the court viewed criminal trials as the normative 
“touchstone” guiding its decisions around criminal law and 
procedure—many of which centered on elaborating procedural protections regarding the jury trial guarantee and attendant 
rights.
s But since 2010, in decidedly acknowledging plea 
bargaining’s centrality to the criminal legal system, the court has sought to extend legal protections to better ensure that 
people receive competent legal advice and thus effective bargaining by defense counsel during plea negotiations. For 
example, in four cases decided from 2010 to 2017 , the court 
consistently held that people have a constitutional right to effective legal counsel during the client counseling phase of the 
plea bargaining process—a right that is normally associated 
with criminal trials rather than a process  that sits wholly apart 
from trial proceedings.t 
In another area of development, courts have begun to 
reconsider the scope of appeal rights that are waived when people plead guilty. Generally, people forfeit a number of 
rights simply by choosing to plead instead of going to trial. (For 
example, people forfeit rights that would operate during the trial, such as the right against self-incrimination or to confront 
accusers, as well as certain claims that could have been raised pretrial, such as the racial composition of the grand jury or 
the credibility of prosecution witnesses.)u People can also 
waive other rights through express waiver provisions that may 
accompany a plea offer—although there may be some rights 
that are not waivable.v The definitive scope of which rights are 
impliedly waived by a guilty plea, as well as which rights one 
can expressly waive, remains an open area of debate. But in 
two recent cases, the Supreme Court held that: 
 ›a guilty plea alone—absent an express waiver—does not bar people from challenging the constitutionality of their 
convictions on direct appeal; and 
 ›people who suffer ineffective assistance of counsel retain 
a right to appeal, even if their plea agreements specifically 
waive that right.w 
 In a separate development, echoing civil contract law, the U.S. 
Second Circuit Court of Appeals nullified an appellate waiver in 2018 after finding that the plea agreement was not supported 
by “consideration”—the benefit that each party gets or 
expects as the part of an agreement. The defendant had been sentenced to the statutory maximum and given no benefit of 
sentence reductions that were available due to his acceptance 
of responsibility and timely guilty plea, effectively giving him nothing in exchange for waiving his right to appeal.
x 
* Box notes at end of report.10
Vera Institute of JusticeFactors that influence plea 
bargaining
Given how central plea bargaining is to the functioning of the 
American criminal legal system, understanding how plea deals 
are reached is deeply important. As explained in this section, 
researchers have investigated the extent to which plea deals are shaped by coercive factors (such as a person’s pretrial detention status or the 
possibility of a death penalty sentence), the legal characteristics of a case 
(such as the strength of the evidence, or the severity of the charges), and the 
differential treatment of people based on their demographic characteristics 
such as race, age, and gender.
Coercive factors
Of great concern to advocates, researchers, and defense counsel is the 
inherently uneven playing field between accused and prosecutor in 
plea bargaining situations—especially given the wide arsenal of tools, 
particularly around charging, that prosecutors can use to increase their Of great concern to advocates, 
researchers, and defense counsel is 
the inherently uneven playing field 
between accused and prosecutor in plea 
bargaining situations.In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining11leverage in negotiations. Researchers have looked at how two coercive 
factors in particular influence plea bargaining outcomes: pretrial detention 
and the potential for a death sentence. These studies have concluded that 
these factors likely play a significant role in inducing guilty pleas so that 
people can obtain their liberty—or even sustain their life.
Pretrial detention 
The vast majority of people in local jails are detained pretrial, meaning that 
they have not been convicted of any crime, are legally presumed innocent, 
and are awaiting resolution of their criminal cases behind bars—most 
often because they cannot pay the bail set in their cases.18 Pretrial detention 
status has far-reaching consequences for justice-involved people. Concern 
about this population—and the potential negative impacts of detention on 
their criminal justice outcomes—has spawned a growing body of research 
that has established a strong correlation between pretrial detention and an 
increased likelihood of conviction, longer custodial sentences, and future 
system involvement.19 While it has long been assumed that the pressure 
and isolating circumstances of incarceration induce people to plead guilty more readily during the pretrial phase—potentially explaining why people 
in pretrial detention are more likely to be convicted than those who are 
released—researchers have attempted only recently to specifically examine 
the influence of pretrial detention on a person’s plea bargaining behavior.
20 
Using a variety of different methods, this small body of scholarship has 
established a strong association between pretrial detention and pleading guilty. For example, in a 2012 study examining 634 criminal cases in New 
Jersey courts, researchers found that people who were detained pretrial 
reached faster case dispositions, usually during the pre-indictment phase, 
than people who were released, primarily because, as an interviewee 
described it, “defendants plead guilty to get out of jail . . . get time served 
or to get it over with.”
21 In a 2018 study looking at nearly 76,000 arrests in 
Delaware, researchers similarly uncovered that pretrial detention increased a person’s likelihood of pleading guilty by 46 percent—although there were 
differences depending on the person’s race.
22 Similar to previous research, 
the study found that Black people were 10 percent less likely than white 
people to enter into guilty pleas.23 To explain this finding, researchers 12
Vera Institute of Justicehave postulated that plea bargaining may be less common among Black 
people because they may receive less favorable guilty plea agreements 
from prosecutors than do white people. Another reason may be that Black 
people may be more distrustful of a legal system that disproportionately 
and unfairly impacts them and, thus, less likely to strike a bargain.24 
Both the New Jersey and Delaware studies employed regression 
analyses—a statistical method of measuring the relationship between multiple variables—with only a limited set of controls based on data that 
was available (for example, current charge aggregated into broader offense 
categories, criminal history, and demographic information). This means 
that they did not account for a number of unobservable confounding 
factors that may have also influenced people’s decisions to plead guilty 
(such as strength of evidence, quality of defense, individual cognitive 
biases, or wealth). To correct for this potential bias and better estimate 
the causal effect of pretrial detention on a person’s propensity to plead 
guilty, four recent studies conducted natural experiments—non-controlled 
observational studies that exploit random assignment that occurs in “nature” and which provide social scientists with a stronger inferential tool 
to potentially improve the quality of their empirical inferences, particularly 
when trying to infer causation.
25 These studies exploited the random 
or rotating assignment of bail judges and either variations in judicial 
punitiveness in bail decisions or variations in people’s access to money bail 
by day of the week.26 Pretrial detention increases a person's likelihood of pleading guilty by 46 percent.
pleaIn the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining13Consistent with other empirical research, all four studies confirmed 
that a person’s odds of conviction via guilty plea increased when they 
were held in pretrial detention—often resulting in worse criminal justice 
outcomes. For example, one study that looked at 331,971 criminal cases in 
Philadelphia from 2006 to 2013 found that pretrial detention resulted in 
a 4.7 percentage point increase in the likelihood of pleading guilty among 
people who probably would otherwise have been acquitted, diverted, 
or had their charges dropped.27 Similarly, a second study that examined 
nearly one million criminal cases over five years in New Y ork City found 
that detained people charged with felonies were 10 percent—and detained 
people charged with misdemeanors were just over 7 percent—more likely 
to plead guilty compared to similarly-situated people who were released.28 
Again, not only did pretrial detention increase the odds of pleading guilty, but the study also found evidence that plea offers were less favorable for 
people detained on felony charges in particular.
29 Plea deals for this group 
were 10 percent less likely to include a charge reduction. The study also 
found that pretrial detention may induce people to plead guilty in cases 
that would have been dismissed if those people had been released: 34 
percent of released cases were dismissed, compared to only 19 percent of 
cases among those detained.30 Four studies confirmed that a person’s 
odds of conviction via guilty plea 
increased when they were held in pretrial 
detention—often resulting in worse 
criminal justice outcomes.
14
Vera Institute of JusticeThe two other contemporaneous studies came to similar conclusions. 
In a Harris County (Houston), Texas, study focusing only on misdemeanor 
cases resolved from 2008 to 2013, researchers found that people who were 
detained pretrial pleaded guilty at a 25 percent higher rate than people 
who were released and that data suggested that 17 percent of the detained 
people would likely not have been convicted at all had they been released 
pretrial.31 Conversely, the fourth study found that pretrial release reduced 
a person’s odds of pleading guilty and improved plea outcomes. After examining 420,000 felony and misdemeanor cases from Philadelphia and 
Miami-Dade counties covering an eight-year study period, researchers 
found that people who were released pretrial were nearly 11 percent 
less likely to plead guilty—although these estimates varied across race.
32 
Released white people were nearly 20 percentage points less likely to plead 
guilty, while released Black people were only 12.2 percentage points less 
likely to plead guilty.33 Of those who took a plea offer in the pretrial phase, 
outcomes were still more favorable for people who had been released. They 
were more likely to be convicted of fewer offenses or convicted of a lesser 
charge, suggesting that release can improve a person’s bargaining power in 
plea negotiations.34 
In explaining their results, the researchers speculated that release 
may enable people to engage in certain “prophylactic measures”—such as 
preparing a more robust defense, engaging in treatment (for mental illness, 
substance use disorder, or other behavioral health issues), or providing 
restitution—that can help lead to charges being dismissed or encourage 
more lenient treatment by prosecutors.35 
Some of these studies also found that the observed impacts of pretrial 
detention—or release—on a person’s plea bargaining propensity increased 
in magnitude for two particular types of people: those with no or limited 
criminal justice histories and those charged with lower-level offenses. 
For example, researchers in Harris County found that pretrial detention 
more than doubled the likelihood of conviction for people charged with 
first-time misdemeanors—the vast majority of whom had pleaded guilty.36 
Similarly, the Philadelphia study found that pretrial detention among 
people charged with misdemeanors led to statistically significant increases 
in all observed negative outcomes, including conviction and guilty pleas, 
larger than those observed with felonies.37 The Philadelphia/Miami study 
also found that released people charged with misdemeanors were nearly In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining1519 percent less likely to plead guilty, while released people charged with 
felonies were only 1.2 percent less likely to plead guilty.38 The study also 
found that released people who did not have a recent prior offense were 
more than 14 percent less likely to plead guilty than similarly situated 
people who were detained pretrial.39 
Put together, these findings are consistent with the theory that detained 
people, who may have limited knowledge of the criminal legal system and/
or who are being detained for the first time, have strong incentives to cut 
a quick deal in order to resolve their cases as soon as possible—especially when it involves lower-stakes petty offenses. As was noted earlier, this 
is because a plea deal is often less “painful” in the short term because it 
can get people out of jail if they are detained, purchase certainty in what 
can be a long and unpredictable criminal legal process, or sidestep the 
possibility of harsher punishment that could result from trial. In line with 
these observations about the long and painful process of justice system 
involvement and detention—even for low-level offenses—the New York 
City study found that people detained on misdemeanor charges pleaded 
guilty not only more frequently but also faster  than people detained on 
felony charges.
40 For incarcerated people charged with misdemeanors 
whose cases continued beyond their first court appearance, the median 
time between arraignment and case disposition was less than three weeks 
at every predicted sentence length, but almost 50 days for people charged 
with felonies in the shortest predicted sentence length category, growing 
larger for groups with longer predicted sentence lengths.41 Detained people have strong incentives to 
cut a quick deal in order to resolve their 
cases as soon as possible.16
Vera Institute of JusticeMisdemeanor justice and plea bargains
More serious crimes—rape, murder, aggravated assault, etc.—
may be more likely to capture media and public attention, but 
the American criminal legal system is, in fact, dominated by the 
enforcement of a vast array of minor offenses located both in a state’s criminal code and in local ordinances.
a This enforcement 
is both wide and deep, and it is the point of contact through 
which most Americans experience the criminal legal system.b 
It touches everything from low-level crimes (such as disorderly conduct, simple assault, petty theft, low-level fraud, illegal 
trespass, prostitution, driving under the influence or on a suspended license, and drug possession) to commonplace 
behaviors deemed undesirable or “anti-social” that may either 
be designated “civil” or “criminal” infractions (such as public urination, public intoxication, unlicensed vending, littering, 
graffiti, panhandling, jaywalking, and loitering).
c Misdemeanors 
can involve small harms, or no harms at all, and many are often symptoms of larger social problems with which communities 
grapple—including substance use disorders, mental illness, domestic violence, and poverty.
d 
Given the breadth of issues covered by minor offenses, it is unsurprising that the national misdemeanor caseload volume is large. According to a recent estimate, there were 13.2 million 
misdemeanor cases filed in the United States in 2016—or 4,261 
misdemeanor cases filed per 100,000 people; accounting for 76 percent of statewide criminal caseloads in 31 states.
e It also 
appears that the proportion of such cases among all criminal 
prosecutions has remained relatively stable over the last 
several decades.f Thus, the majority of plea bargains in America 
are products of the country’s diverse and sprawling network 
of lower criminal courts where minor charges are typically 
adjudicated.g 
Despite the preponderance of minor charges in the criminal legal system, a substantial proportion of empirical research on plea bargaining either focuses on people charged (and 
convicted) of felony offenses or comingles felonies and 
misdemeanors, assuming that plea bargains operate with similar goals—or under similar conditions and pressures—
across all types of offenses. But a small body of research—
mainly descriptive in nature—that has explored the real-life operation of the lower courts suggests that guilty pleas 
in misdemeanor and other petty cases are products of a 
process that may be qualitatively different from that of most serious offenses in ways that prevent aggregation in analysis, 
particularly when trying to extend a generalizable explanation 
of how plea bargains work.
h
This body of work confirms, for example, that in the world of misdemeanors, infractions, and other lesser offenses, there are 
often standard “deals”—baseline offers set to specific offense types—that are routinely proposed and accepted that involve 
little actual bargaining between parties.
i For the accused, 
these offers are hard-to-refuse dispositional deals that can 
effectively end cases quickly, often as early as their first court 
appearance.j These include: 
 ›case dismissal; 
 ›unconditional or conditional discharge; 
 ›a conviction of a civil (rather than criminal) infraction; 
 ›a sentence to time served (accounting for any time spent in custody leading up to the court appearance); or 
 ›a community-based sentence of minimal length.k 
Thus, contrary to the notion that prosecutors and defendants/defense counsel “bargain toward settlement in the shadow of expected trial outcomes,” in these cases, initial charging 
decisions—which are in the prosecutor’s discretion—determine 
the type of plea deal that settles a particular matter under established court practices, prosecutor office policies, or 
defense bar customs around similar cases in a particular 
jurisdiction.
l 
Researchers have proposed two main explanations of why cases related to petty offenses are resolved quickly:
 ›Process costs. Prosecutors, defense counsel, defendants, and judges all put a premium on speed because of the 
enormous scale of misdemeanor dockets across the country 
and the high process costs that misdemeanor trials present to all parties when compared to the low-stakes nature of the 
offenses.
m With a criminal legal process that is both slow and 
unpredictable, costs for the accused include uncertainty of outcome and a protracted pretrial and trial process that can 
span many days, weeks, or even months—one that may be experienced in part, or wholly, behind bars and away from 
their families, jobs, and community responsibilities.
n Thus, 
paying the price of a guilty plea may be, counterintuitively, the most “rational” option whether a person is guilty or not.
o 
 ›Managerial justice. Another body of scholarly work 
suggests that prosecutors are not actually trying to 
maximize punishment or even secure a conviction when 
offering standard plea deals to quickly resolve misdemeanor and other petty cases.
p Instead, prosecutors use various 
adjudicatory tools that avoid formal punishment but enable 
them to document a person’s criminal justice encounters 
and track behavior over time (such as conditional discharge or an adjournment in contemplation of a dismissal) so that 
law enforcement agencies (such as police, prosecutors, and 
courts) have a record to use in calibrating future responses.
qIn the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining17The impact of death penalty sentences
Fears about the coercive nature of plea bargaining are perhaps most 
pronounced in cases in which prosecutors have the option to pursue a 
death penalty conviction. Critics note that when taking cases to trial that 
may result in a sentence to death, people may be more likely to accept a 
plea deal that they would otherwise have rejected—due either to the harsh 
terms of the sentence and/or their factual innocence.42 The threat of the 
death penalty is used as leverage by prosecutors in bargaining, and both 
prosecutors and defense lawyers agree that the specter of a death penalty 
puts prosecutors in a uniquely strong position.43 Although analysis of 
actual cases is hampered by a relatively small sample to draw from, the 
quantitative studies suggest that the option to pursue a death penalty has a 
significant effect on plea bargaining.
One such study conducted a natural experiment capitalizing on the 
1995 reinstatement of the death penalty in New Y ork State to analyze changes in case outcomes before and after the law change.
44 The study 
found that people charged in murder cases were 25 percent more likely 
to plead guilty to their charges following the law change, regardless 
of whether the prosecutor had explicitly filed a notice to pursue the 
death penalty in the case.45 The reintroduction of the death penalty, the 
researchers concluded, made people less likely to be offered a charge reduction (typically the more advantageous type of plea offer) and more 
likely to take a sentence deal—suggesting that prosecutors did indeed 
have—and use—greater power in plea bargaining.
46 A study from Georgia Prosecutors and defense lawyers agree 
that the specter of a death penalty puts 
prosecutors in a uniquely strong position.18
Vera Institute of Justiceproduced similar results.47 The study looked at eight years of murder 
cases from across the state that met the criteria necessary to be tried as 
capital cases. The researcher compared the outcomes of cases in which 
prosecutors pursued the death penalty with those in which they did not, 
using sophisticated statistical techniques to control for a variety of case 
characteristics. They found that, all else being equal, people charged in 
murder cases were approximately 20 to 25 percentage points more likely 
to plead guilty when faced with the death penalty.48 Put another way, the 
study suggests that when prosecutors actively pursue a death penalty, 
people in an additional two out of every 10 cases are deterred from going 
to trial.49
These findings have been supported nationally. A comparison of 33 
counties—some with the death penalty, some without—found that, when 
the death penalty was available, 19 percent of first degree murder cases 
were resolved with a guilty plea leading to a prison sentence of more than 
20 years; in counties without the death penalty, this was true for only 5 
percent of cases.50 This large difference in outcomes remained statistically 
significant even when controlling for other case characteristics. In pleading 
guilty to a life sentence, people are relinquishing their right to appeal, the 
chance of an acquittal, and the possibility of a shorter sentence; avoiding 
the death penalty is used as a “substantial incentive” to encourage people to 
make this otherwise unappealing decision.51 People are 25 percentage points more likely to plead guilty when 
faced with the death penalty.
death 
sentence
pleaIn the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining19Legal characteristics
Researchers have looked at how the application of plea bargaining, and the 
potential associated discount in punishment, might vary in relation to the 
legal characteristics of a case. Of these, the strength of the evidence, the 
severity of the charges, and the accused’s criminal history have garnered 
most attention. 
Strength of evidence
The strength of the evidence against a person charged with a crime is 
perhaps the most salient factor prosecutors say they consider when 
deciding whether a plea deal should be extended. Interviews and 
surveys conducted with prosecutors have attempted to shed light on the 
relationship between the strength of the evidence in a case and the plea 
bargaining process, often testing the general assumption that prosecutors 
will offer more lenient deals when the evidence is weaker or harsher deals 
when the evidence is stronger. In a survey of 166 prosecutors in three 
southern states, 82 percent of respondents indicated that they would 
reduce the harshness of the plea if the evidence was weak, and 38 percent 
indicated that they would increase the harshness of the plea if the evidence 
was strong.52 
However, a different survey study asked nearly 400 prosecutors to 
respond to hypothetical legal cases and found that the presence or absence of evidence had very little effect on prosecutors’ likelihood to recommend 
a plea deal, with plea offers being extended in nearly all cases.
53 Again, the 
presence of evidence decreased the leniency of offers recommended by prosecutors, but only by a small amount.
54 The authors noted, however, 
that findings from hypothetical cases such as these—with the absence of real-life court and caseload pressures—may not easily generalize to actual 
practice.
55 As such, a number of studies have attempted to examine the 
relationship between plea bargaining and evidence strength in real  cases.
An analysis of cases relating to person and property offenses 
(misdemeanor and felony) filed in one jurisdiction across multiple years 
sought to determine the relationship between evidence strength and 
plea bargaining using quantitative analysis.56 As a proxy for evidence 20
Vera Institute of Justicestrength, the research considered the total number of pieces of evidence 
listed in a case and the number of pieces of evidence per intake charge.57 
While controlling for a number of other case and defendant variables, the 
researchers found a significant relationship between strength of evidence 
and plea offers—but not on all metrics. The strength of the evidence was 
unrelated to both the seriousness of the top plea offer charge made by 
prosecutors and the length of sentence attached to it. Stronger evidence 
was, however, associated with increases in the number of charges included 
in the plea offer, the total sentence possible if convicted for all charges, 
and the likelihood that the prosecutor would recommend incarceration.58 
A 2015 study of felony drug cases in New Y ork City similarly assessed the relationship between evidence and plea bargain outcomes while 
controlling for other legal and extralegal factors.
59 The researchers found 
that when factors indicating strong evidence were present, the accused 
were less likely to receive reduced plea charge offers and more likely to 
receive custodial, rather than noncustodial, sentence recommendations.60 
However, while significant, the size of these relationships was smaller than 
the researchers had expected.61
Confession evidence is considered extremely persuasive at trial, which 
could make it an important factor during plea bargaining.62 An analysis 
of more than 500 felony cases from two New Y ork counties showed that people who confessed (either fully or partially) overwhelmingly pled guilty 
(more than 97 percent), but received lower plea discounts than others 
(people not interviewed by police and people who denied guilt).
63 As a 
further analysis, researchers in this study coded the apparent strength of the evidence in each case. Contrary to expectations—and to findings 
from earlier studies—cases with stronger evidence received greater plea 
discounts than cases with weaker evidence.
64 The researchers proposed 
that, because in the county they studied the prosecutor’s office had a known policy stating that no offer would be better than the initial offer, 
people with strong cases against them who knew about the policy were 
more likely to accept the first plea deal offered.
65 
Researching the relationship between plea bargaining and the strength 
of the evidence in real cases presents specific and significant challenges: 
the strength of evidence is unlikely to be recorded in ways that are 
amenable to large scale analysis and is difficult to quantify in a meaningful 
way.66 There are nuances to evidence that are difficult to assess and In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining21combine in the aggregate. For example, eyewitness testimony may vary 
in its persuasiveness if it comes from an undercover police officer or a 
witness to the incident, and witnesses may be afforded different levels of 
credibility based on their demographics and relationship to the accused.67 
Furthermore, the strength of a specific piece of evidence is not necessarily 
static and may decay over time as witnesses fall away or forget important 
details or an investigation throws doubt on what first appeared to be 
important evidence.68 
Charge severity
The seriousness of the current offense is a key consideration when 
contemplating plea agreements. Research suggests that the likelihood of 
a person pleading guilty and the leniency of the plea deal offered to them 
by prosecutors may both be influenced by the severity of the charges 
the person faces.69 A study of 200 cases of drunk driving in a southern 
California county in 1993, for example, analyzed the relationship between multiple legal and extralegal case characteristics and case outcomes and 
found that charge severity was the largest predictor of pleas; people with 
more severe charges were less likely to plead guilty.
70 The researchers 
suggested that when the stakes of conviction are higher, there is greater incentive to take one’s chances in court.
71 Another study of 464 felony 
The relationship between charge severity and plea likelihood.
increase in 
charge severity decreased likelihood 
of pleading guilty
!22
Vera Institute of Justicecases from Virginia in the late 1970s, which also controlled for many 
demographic and case characteristics, similarly found that when charged 
with offenses that could result in longer sentences, people became less 
likely to plead guilty.72 
Studies of whether  a deal is reached, however, say nothing of the 
leniency (or lack thereof) in the plea offers made by prosecutors. A large-scale study of federal cases that resulted in conviction in 2001 (excluding 
cases resolved through trial) found that more serious charges were 
associated with a greater likelihood of charge reductions.
73 The researchers 
theorized that this may be, at least in part, because more serious crimes—
and those with more filing charges—allow more opportunities for 
reduction than do lower-level crimes.74 
Criminal history
People’s conviction histories are often used to guide sentencing decisions and are sometimes explicitly included in prosecutors’ plea deal guidelines.
75 
As such, it would make sense that criminal histories might exert a 
significant influence on the plea bargaining process. Although researchers 
frequently control for criminal history when examining the relationship of 
other legal and extralegal factors with plea bargaining outcomes, it is less 
frequently the subject of direct investigation itself. 
Research conducted in county criminal courts in Pennsylvania (using 
data from 1997 through 2000) and, in a separate study, federal criminal 
courts (using data from 2000 through 2002) found that people with more 
substantial criminal histories are penalized less for going to trial than those 
without.76 That is to say, the difference between sentences resulting from 
a jury trial compared to those imposed through plea bargaining becomes smaller as people’s criminal histories increase. Researchers offer several 
plausible explanations for this relationship. First, a jury trial may provide 
an opportunity for defense counsel to argue that a person’s criminal history 
is less serious or meaningful than it may seem on paper and to present 
evidence of the accused’s good character.
77 Second, it is possible that, for 
those with longer criminal histories, prosecutors offer less lenient plea deals or encourage people to plead to the charges set at arraignment. 
The sentence they receive as a result is unlikely to differ markedly from In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining23a sentence they might receive at trial. Although the first explanation is 
difficult to quantify and study, research has lent some support to the 
second—although, as elsewhere, the findings have been mixed. 
A large study of people who were sentenced in federal cases in 2001 
found that criminal history had no influence on the reduction of charges 
during plea bargaining.78 However, other studies—which similarly 
analyze the relationship between criminal history and plea bargaining 
(while controlling for other important variables)—have found that more 
substantial criminal histories are associated with harsher plea deals, 
at least for some charge types. For example, a study of nearly 160,000 
misdemeanor cases prosecuted by the District Attorney of New Y ork 
County found that, holding other case and defendant characteristics 
constant, people with longer criminal histories were more likely than 
people with shorter histories to receive a plea offer that included 
incarceration.79 Similarly, statistical analysis conducted in one unnamed 
jurisdiction found that—for all charge types studied (property, personal, 
and drug)—more serious criminal histories were associated with an When evaluating the association between 
people’s criminal histories and the 
likelihood of receiving a plea deal—or the 
harshness or leniency of that deal—it is 
important to keep in mind that criminal 
histories themselves are subject to deep 
rooted racial biases within the criminal 
legal system.24
Vera Institute of Justiceincreased likelihood that the plea deal would include incarceration and 
with smaller reductions in the total possible sentence a person might 
serve.80 However, more serious criminal histories were only found to be 
associated with smaller reductions in the seriousness of the top charges and smaller reductions in the total number of charges for drug offenses.
81
Criminal histories are, of course, not a neutral factor, but rather one 
rooted in the nation’s historic and continuing systemic racism. When evaluating the association between people’s criminal histories and the 
likelihood of receiving a plea deal—or the harshness or leniency of that 
deal—it is important to keep in mind that criminal histories themselves 
are not created with objective neutrality and are subject to deep rooted 
racial biases within the criminal legal system.
82 Indeed, research conducted 
in New Y ork City found that people with longer criminal histories were more likely to have their cases dismissed, the result of a dynamic in 
which police will more readily arrest people—especially Black and Latinx 
people—whether or not they have sufficient evidence for a prosecutor to 
file charges.
83 
Systemic inequities
As described below, the complete lack of transparency and scrutiny inherent in America’s reliance on plea bargaining—combined with the 
U.S. justice system’s long history of prejudicial operations—leaves the 
administration of plea deals open to bias. Relatedly, people may have 
widely diverging levels of trust in the system, which influence their 
willingness to accept a plea deal or face trial. As such, researchers have 
investigated the degree to which plea offers are affected by demographic 
factors, notably the race, gender, and age of the accused. 
Racism and race inequity
Consistent with the experiences of Black and Latinx people throughout the criminal legal system, several studies have found that people of color 
are often treated less favorably than white people during the plea bargain 
process. For example, two studies of data from the New Y ork County 
District Attorney’s office found that Black people were significantly less Challenges in researching plea bargaining
Guilty pleas constitute the main mechanism for case resolution 
in American criminal courts. Researching the role and 
administration of plea bargaining in this process has, however, 
proved remarkably difficult. 
The process of plea bargaining is rarely recorded in any formal 
documentation and, when it is, these records are often not made available to researchers.
a Simply asking prosecutors 
about the plea bargaining process undoubtedly has some 
value, but researchers have found that there can be substantial 
differences between lawyers’ perceptions of their work, their values, and their actual behavior in plea negotiations.
b More 
importantly, asking prosecutors about plea bargaining ignores 
the voice of the person most affected by the bargain, and few 
studies focus on the perspective of the person pleading guilty.c
With scant records and limited trust in the validity of self-reported behavior, researchers have attempted to infer 
details of the plea bargaining process by looking at case 
outcomes. Although there are many variations in methodology, researchers commonly seek evidence of charge bargaining 
by comparing the initial charges a person faced with those 
to which they ultimately pled guilty. Evidence of sentence bargaining is often inferred by comparing the punishments 
given following a plea with those given following a trial  
for the same charges.
d There are limitations to both approaches. 
Inferring that charge bargaining has occurred on the basis of a reduction in charges (either number or seriousness) is problematic because charges may be reduced prior to case 
disposition for a number of reasons not necessarily related 
to plea bargaining.
e For example, charges could be reduced 
to compensate for mistakes or biases that led to initial 
overcharging or in light of new evidence collected during an 
investigation and not because of any plea deal.f Quantifying the presence and impact of sentence bargaining is also problematic. Cases that go to trial differ in significant, hard-to-measure ways from cases that result in a plea, and researchers 
are inconsistent in how they actually measure sentences—
disagreeing on whether to include noncustodial punishments as “zero-length” sentences, sometimes counting acquittals in a 
similar way, and differing in whether to account for time served 
in pretrial detention.
g 
As prosecutors may employ different bargaining strategies in different circumstances, it is preferable that research studies attempt to measure both charge bargaining and sentence 
bargaining, but this does not always happen.
h Furthermore, 
researchers have also noted that, at least in the federal court system, there is an additional common form of plea 
bargaining in which the prosecutor and defense may reach a deal over the key “sentencing facts” of a case—agreeing to 
omit certain facts about a case that would statutorily expose 
a person to harsher sentences. This process is perhaps even harder to record, identify, or measure than charge or sentence 
bargaining, and it has received even less research attention as 
a result.
i
Perhaps the most confounding aspect of plea bargaining, next to the lack of available records, is its granularity: the type of 
plea bargain favored (charge, sentence, or fact), the frequency 
with which it occurs, and the degree of impact it has on sentencing outcomes can all vary by the specific jurisdiction, 
prosecutor, and charges associated with a case.
j Studies 
that aggregate data across charge types, courts, or type of 
plea bargaining may, therefore, dilute any evidence of plea 
bargaining and its impact, hiding any important associations; conversely, studies that focus on specific charges, courts, or 
metrics are likely to be limited in their generalizability.
k In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining25increased likelihood that the plea deal would include incarceration and 
with smaller reductions in the total possible sentence a person might 
serve.80 However, more serious criminal histories were only found to be 
associated with smaller reductions in the seriousness of the top charges 
and smaller reductions in the total number of charges for drug offenses.81
Criminal histories are, of course, not a neutral factor, but rather one 
rooted in the nation’s historic and continuing systemic racism. When evaluating the association between people’s criminal histories and the 
likelihood of receiving a plea deal—or the harshness or leniency of that 
deal—it is important to keep in mind that criminal histories themselves 
are not created with objective neutrality and are subject to deep rooted 
racial biases within the criminal legal system.
82 Indeed, research conducted 
in New Y ork City found that people with longer criminal histories were more likely to have their cases dismissed, the result of a dynamic in 
which police will more readily arrest people—especially Black and Latinx 
people—whether or not they have sufficient evidence for a prosecutor to 
file charges.
83 
Systemic inequities
As described below, the complete lack of transparency and scrutiny inherent in America’s reliance on plea bargaining—combined with the 
U.S. justice system’s long history of prejudicial operations—leaves the 
administration of plea deals open to bias. Relatedly, people may have 
widely diverging levels of trust in the system, which influence their 
willingness to accept a plea deal or face trial. As such, researchers have 
investigated the degree to which plea offers are affected by demographic 
factors, notably the race, gender, and age of the accused. 
Racism and race inequity
Consistent with the experiences of Black and Latinx people throughout the criminal legal system, several studies have found that people of color 
are often treated less favorably than white people during the plea bargain 
process. For example, two studies of data from the New Y ork County 
District Attorney’s office found that Black people were significantly less Challenges in researching plea bargaining
Guilty pleas constitute the main mechanism for case resolution 
in American criminal courts. Researching the role and 
administration of plea bargaining in this process has, however, 
proved remarkably difficult. 
The process of plea bargaining is rarely recorded in any formal 
documentation and, when it is, these records are often not made available to researchers.
a Simply asking prosecutors 
about the plea bargaining process undoubtedly has some 
value, but researchers have found that there can be substantial 
differences between lawyers’ perceptions of their work, their values, and their actual behavior in plea negotiations.
b More 
importantly, asking prosecutors about plea bargaining ignores 
the voice of the person most affected by the bargain, and few 
studies focus on the perspective of the person pleading guilty.c
With scant records and limited trust in the validity of self-reported behavior, researchers have attempted to infer 
details of the plea bargaining process by looking at case 
outcomes. Although there are many variations in methodology, researchers commonly seek evidence of charge bargaining 
by comparing the initial charges a person faced with those 
to which they ultimately pled guilty. Evidence of sentence bargaining is often inferred by comparing the punishments 
given following a plea with those given following a trial  
for the same charges.
d There are limitations to both approaches. 
Inferring that charge bargaining has occurred on the basis of a reduction in charges (either number or seriousness) is problematic because charges may be reduced prior to case 
disposition for a number of reasons not necessarily related 
to plea bargaining.
e For example, charges could be reduced 
to compensate for mistakes or biases that led to initial 
overcharging or in light of new evidence collected during an 
investigation and not because of any plea deal.f Quantifying the presence and impact of sentence bargaining is also problematic. Cases that go to trial differ in significant, hard-to-measure ways from cases that result in a plea, and researchers 
are inconsistent in how they actually measure sentences—
disagreeing on whether to include noncustodial punishments as “zero-length” sentences, sometimes counting acquittals in a 
similar way, and differing in whether to account for time served 
in pretrial detention.
g 
As prosecutors may employ different bargaining strategies in different circumstances, it is preferable that research studies attempt to measure both charge bargaining and sentence 
bargaining, but this does not always happen.
h Furthermore, 
researchers have also noted that, at least in the federal court system, there is an additional common form of plea 
bargaining in which the prosecutor and defense may reach a deal over the key “sentencing facts” of a case—agreeing to 
omit certain facts about a case that would statutorily expose 
a person to harsher sentences. This process is perhaps even harder to record, identify, or measure than charge or sentence 
bargaining, and it has received even less research attention as 
a result.
i
Perhaps the most confounding aspect of plea bargaining, next to the lack of available records, is its granularity: the type of 
plea bargain favored (charge, sentence, or fact), the frequency 
with which it occurs, and the degree of impact it has on sentencing outcomes can all vary by the specific jurisdiction, 
prosecutor, and charges associated with a case.
j Studies 
that aggregate data across charge types, courts, or type of plea bargaining may, therefore, dilute any evidence of plea 
bargaining and its impact, hiding any important associations; conversely, studies that focus on specific charges, courts, or 
metrics are likely to be limited in their generalizability.
k 
Rarely 
recorded.Limitations to 
researching charge, 
sentence, and fact 
bargaining.Practical and 
policy variations by 
jurisdiction, prosecutor, 
and charges.
A number of issues complicate research into plea bargaining.26
Vera Institute of Justicelikely than white people to receive reduced charges and more likely to 
receive custodial sentence offers, after controlling for various demographic 
and case factors.84 
More punitive plea deals for Black and Latinx people, as compared to 
white people, may partly be explained as the result of worse treatment 
during other stages of case processing. Most notably, they are more likely 
to be held in jail pretrial than similarly situated white people, which can 
lead to a range of worse case outcomes.85 People held in pretrial detention 
are more likely to plead guilty—in part to hasten their release—and to face 
harsher sentencing decisions. In this way, people of color, and especially 
Black and Latinx people, face “cumulative disadvantage” in the criminal 
legal system, and their increased vulnerability to pretrial detention in turn 
increases the likelihood that they will receive a worse plea deal than white 
people (while controlling for other factors such as charge severity and criminal histories).
86 
Several studies suggest that harsher plea deals for Black people are 
not simply a byproduct of pretrial detention, however. Researchers have found evidence to support the hypothesis that prosecutors’ biases may 
lead them to use a person’s race as a proxy for criminality or risk.
87 A study 
of misdemeanor and felony cases in Wisconsin from 1999 to 2006 found that white people were 25 percent more likely than Black people to have Consistent with the experiences of Black 
and Latinx people throughout the criminal 
legal system, several studies have found 
that people of color are treated less 
favorably than white people during the 
plea bargain process.In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining27their initial charges reduced, but only in cases where the accused did not 
have a criminal history; when people had a prior record, this disparity 
disappeared.88 Similarly, white people were found to receive preferential 
plea bargaining treatment over Black people in cases of low-level offenses, but not for more serious charges.
89 The researchers propose that when 
people are accused of serious crimes or have criminal histories, they have already proven the risk they pose and are treated equally harshly.
90 Absent 
this information, prosecutors may find their perceptions influenced by a person’s race. Other studies have found a similar difference in treatment 
favoring white people over people of color, and especially Black and Latinx 
people, to be most pronounced for misdemeanor and lower-level felony 
charges.
91 In misdemeanor cases in New Y ork City, for example, the odds 
of receiving a custodial plea offer were almost 70 percent greater for Black 
people than white people.92
It is difficult to tell how and to what extent race influences plea offers 
because of inconsistencies in study design. One study of felony cases from Cook County (Chicago) in the early 1990s did not find evidence 
of racial bias in plea bargaining; however, the study only measured 
reductions in the number of charges people faced when pleading guilty—a 
narrow definition of plea bargaining.
93 Other studies have only found 
an association between race and plea bargaining for specific charge 
categories.94 For example, Black and Latinx people have been found to be 
significantly less likely than white people to receive charge reductions for The odds of receiving a plea offer that includes incarceration are 
almost 70 percent greater for Black people than white people.
plea28
Vera Institute of Justiceweapons offenses.95 Research that aggregates different types of cases—
combining misdemeanor and felony cases, or multiple offense types—in 
analysis may miss these important relationships, masking significant 
associations between race and the plea deals people are offered.96
Other variables that may not be easily recorded or analyzed—such 
as the race of the alleged victim—may mediate the relationship between 
race and the plea offers people receive. For example, research conducted 
in Rhode Island reinforces the importance of social context, which many 
studies are not able to meaningfully consider.97 This study of plea offers 
in drunk driving cases found that the harshness with which people of color were treated relative to white people was most pronounced when 
the alleged crime was committed in “advantaged” (wealthy and racially 
homogeneous white) areas, such as suburbs.
98
Adding further complexity, a recent study of nearly 180,000 
misdemeanor and felony cases in New Y ork City found that, although Black people were only slightly less likely than white people to receive 
reductions in their charges, the timing of these reductions were notably 
different, with important implications.
99 For white people, charge 
reductions happened most often at disposition—likely reflecting leniency on the part of court actors and the negotiation of a plea deal; for Black 
people, charge reductions happened most frequently at initial case 
screening, suggesting that this was corrective action to perceived bias in 
overcharging by the police and not part of a plea deal.
100 This provides an 
important reminder that, having already faced discrimination by the police, 
people of color often enter the court system at a disadvantage—one for Research into biases in plea bargaining 
will be hampered if it does not take into 
consideration biases in initial charging.In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining29which equitable treatment during plea bargaining, were it to exist, would 
not correct.101 In short, research into biases in plea bargaining will be 
hampered if it does not take into consideration biases in initial charging.102
Disparate treatment by gender
Research has also examined possible gender-based outcomes in plea negotiations. Attempts to study the relationship between gender and 
the use of plea bargains have faced methodological challenges in finding 
sufficiently large and directly comparable samples of men and women, as 
women are arrested less frequently than men and typically for different, 
less violent, charges.
103 When researchers have managed to overcome these 
specific challenges, the results have been mixed. Several studies conducted 
using data from the 1970s through the 1990s failed to find any significant 
relationship between gender and the use of plea bargaining.104 
More recently, researchers have published several studies that suggest 
some association may exist, with women receiving more lenient treatment than men.
105 A study examining felony and misdemeanor data from 2000 
Race and gender both influence plea offers.
Harshest plea treatment 
for Black men
Most lenient plea treatment 
for white womenHarsher for men
More lenient for women!30
Vera Institute of Justicethrough 2006 in Wisconsin, for example, found that women were more 
likely than men to have their top charges reduced or dismissed and that 
this disparity was greatest for people with no prior convictions and in 
cases where the top charge was a misdemeanor or low-level felony.106 The 
researchers hypothesize that, in these cases, with little information to guide 
them, prosecutors may be falling back on gendered assumptions about 
“risk” and “criminality” and treating men more harshly as a result.107 The 
researchers also looked to see how gender interacted with race and found 
that white women were afforded the most lenient treatment through plea 
bargaining while Black men received the harshest.108 A study of federal 
court sentencing data for cases terminating in 2001 (nearly 46,000 cases) 
similarly found that, overall, men were more than 30 percent less likely than 
women to receive a charge reduction, although the study did not review the 
data for evidence of a race/gender interaction and instead focused on which 
individual factor looked more significant across all transactions.109 
Several explanations have been posited to account for relatively 
preferential treatment of women: prosecutors may hold gendered stereotypes that view women as less culpable and as less of a risk to 
society, or women may invoke “selective sympathy” among court actors.
110 
Researchers have noted, however, that many of the reasons invoked for more lenient treatment of women—such as consideration of their mental 
health or parental status—could equally be applied to men and, instead of 
questioning why women are seemingly treated more leniently, the more 
pertinent question should be “why are men treated so harshly. . . ?”
111
Differential plea bargaining experiences by age
Research into the relationship between a person’s age and the use of plea bargains has often focused on the different ways in which young 
people may approach and respond to plea deals compared to their older 
counterparts; qualitative and experimental studies find that younger 
people may be more likely than older people to accept a plea offer and 
give less consideration to the potential negative consequences of the 
decision.
112 Gaps in young people’s understanding of a plea offer may not 
be adequately addressed by their attorneys, and they may not receive important information about alternatives to pleading guilty.
113 Interviews In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining31conducted with 18 attorneys in one jurisdiction asked respondents about 
their most recent juvenile client.114 Nearly all attorneys believed that their 
clients understood that they were giving up a trial, but fewer than half 
reported that they had explicitly discussed this with their clients. Many 
of the attorneys waited to discuss waivers of rights until after their client 
had stated that they would accept a plea, and only about a quarter of the 
attorneys surveyed discussed collateral consequences—a vast array of  
post-sentence civil penalties, disqualifications, or disabilities that flow 
from criminal convictions—with their clients.115 Interviews conducted  
with adolescent and adult participants in an alternative to incarceration 
program in New Y ork City found that, based on self-reports, adolescents 
had less time to make their plea decisions than adults (frequently as little 
as an hour) and that juveniles met with their attorneys fewer times than 
adults did.116
Although there are reasons to believe that young people differ in 
their understanding of and responses to plea offers, the small number 
of attempts made to quantitatively measure differences in plea bargain 
outcomes between older and younger people have yielded mixed results—
potentially due to methodological issues. (See “Challenges in researching 
plea bargaining” on page 25.) A study of misdemeanor and felony cases 
from one jurisdiction across multiple years found mixed results and 
illustrates the complexity of the issue: the relationship between age and 
the favorability of the plea deal reached varied by charge type (person, 
property, or drug) and by the measure of plea deal (changes in the statutory 
rank of the top charge, changes in the possible sentence length of the top 
charge, changes in the possible sentence length of all charges combined, and prosecutor sentence recommendations).
117 For some charge types in 
some measures, increased defendant age was associated with greater plea 
discounts and, for other types, lesser.118 Possible relationships between 
age and plea bargaining may, therefore, be too nuanced and fine-grained to identify using aggregated datasets. And unlike the studies of juveniles, 
this study did not focus on the people affected by the bargain or their 
motivations for making it, but instead on prosecutorial decisions.32
Vera Institute of JusticeThe criminal law
In addition to the significant influence of legal case characteristics; 
systemic biases associated with race, age, and gender; and pretrial detention 
status on plea bargaining practices, the law itself also plays a critical role in 
what agreement can be reached. Although prosecutors’ charging authority 
arguably concentrates a significant amount of adjudicative power into 
their hands—through their ability to control and manipulate a person’s 
sentencing exposure by way of the charges they pursue and then revise as a 
result of plea bargaining—this power is neither subject to any consistently 
identifiable standards or rules, nor after-the-fact review.119 (See “Law of plea 
bargaining: An overview” on page 8.) As a result, plea bargaining is often regarded as an unwritten, latent body of law or, at its worst, a practice 
that inhabits a “lawless” space, where the risk of capricious and arbitrary 
prosecutorial decision making—including invidious discrimination—
remains ever present.
120 This may be, in part, why critics of plea bargaining 
often refer to it as a practice operating “beyond the shadow of the law”—
both driven and governed by the vast, opaque, and unregulated exercise of 
prosecutorial discretion.121 
Given this, the studies discussed below demonstrate that prosecutorial 
decisions in the plea bargaining context do not operate in a vacuum. Rather, prosecutors’ plea bargaining decisions remain contingent on both 
the architecture and substance of the criminal code. The law provides the 
essential framework for plea negotiations. These studies, therefore, stand 
for the proposition that established legal rules still matter in defining the 
contours of plea bargaining behavior.
The criminal code
In two companion descriptive studies that looked at charge bargaining practices in North Carolina in 1999 and 2000—one conducted in 2006 
and another in 2007—researchers confirmed that the substantive criminal 
law still matters in determining plea bargaining outcomes.
122 In the first 
study, the researchers not only found that charge reduction was a frequent 
occurrence, but they also discovered that both charge reduction rate and 
magnitude increased where the criminal code offered prosecutors and In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining33defense lawyers a deeper set of plausible charges as landing spots in plea 
negotiations.123 At the same time, the researchers also uncovered that 
parties were less likely to agree on a particular charge reduction—thus 
minimizing the rate of overall charge movement in plea negotiations—
when there were greater differences between the potential sentences that 
attached to available charging options.124 
While these two main findings held true across both serious and 
nonserious charges, charge reductions were found to be more common 
among serious cases than in less serious ones—with the highest rates 
observed among the highest felony categories for which prison sentences 
were presumptively attached.125 However, the frequency with which cases 
moved from the original charge to a lesser one—and the distance in charge 
and sentence severity between them—varied by the specific charge types 
examined by the study (assault, robbery, burglary, kidnapping, and cocaine-
related).126 For example, the kidnapping group had fewer charge bargains 
because the criminal code contained few charging options, while the large sentencing gap between potential sentences across the felony-misdemeanor 
line for the burglary group inhibited the number of plea deals despite the 
wide availability of many charging options.
127 
The researchers also found that even when circumstances were most 
conducive to charge reductions, other factors (such as prosecutor office 
policies or drug weight) outside the code could reduce the likelihood 
of charge reductions—as was the case with the cocaine cases they 
examined.128 In addition, when many charging options existed across 
the felony-misdemeanor dividing line, the researchers found that more 
available felony options made it less likely that felony charges would be 
reduced to a misdemeanor, resulting in a higher percentage of charge 
reductions that still yielded a felony conviction.129 This was the case for 
both serious and less serious felonies—a result the researchers confirmed was independent of the seriousness of the original felony charge filed.
130
The substance of particular criminal offenses
It is not only the architecture of the criminal code and its sentencing 
provisions that are influential in plea bargaining, but, as a 2012 descriptive 
study found, also the specific content of a particular charged offense. 34
Vera Institute of JusticeAfter examining more than 620,000 criminal cases that terminated in 
federal district court from 2002 to 2009, researchers showed that a crime’s 
“essential elements, the proof required to establish the offense, and the 
basic gravamen of the crime” affect the frequency and composition of plea 
bargains in those cases.131 
 ›Charges that were secondary to the crux of the prosecution’s case 
(such as witness tampering) or that threatened added punishment 
but remained outside the core prosecuted offense (such as use of a 
firearm in the commission of a federal felony) had high dismissal 
rates pursuant to plea agreements.132 Both of these types of charges 
often presume the existence of, and are related to, other often more serious crimes. Prosecutors may be willing to discard these 
charges in order to facilitate a guilty plea because they are viewed as 
superfluous to the central allegations in the case.
133
 ›Crimes that were easiest to prove (such as escape, reentry of a 
deported person, failure to appear, or misprision—deliberate 
concealment—of a felony) had the lowest frequency of charge 
bargains, but high rates of guilty pleas, suggesting that people likely 
accepted plea deals with little bargaining involved.134 Some of these 
charges are also common enough (such as reentry of a deported person, failure to appear, misprision of a felony) that they are easily 
“commoditized” such that parties will likely recognize and agree to 
the understood “going-rate” for a guilty plea in that particular case.
135
 ›Prosecutors in certain higher-stakes cases (such as deprivation 
of civil rights) frequently went to trial, despite a high likelihood 
of acquittal.136 This was in part because sentencing cliffs between 
charging options (for example, within the different gradations of aggravated assault categories) made charge reductions pursuant to 
a plea deal difficult.
137 In other instances, political and institutional 
pressures, combined with few attractive plea options, likely drove 
cases to trial despite the difficulty prosecutors faced in proving 
their case.138 Similarly, people were more likely to prefer trial despite 
low acquittal rates in other types of cases (such as tax evasion or 
possession of child pornography) either out of a belief they held in 
principle (such as “federal taxation is unconstitutional”) or because 
the perceived costs of conviction (such as stigma of sex offenses) 
related to the alleged offense were deemed too high to agree to a In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining35plea deal.139 These findings demonstrate that the likelihood of a plea 
deal is not always driven by parties’ perceptions of the odds of a 
particular trial outcome, but sometimes on a risk-benefit calculus.
Findings related to specific offenses argue against trying to generalize 
plea bargaining behavior and practice across broad categories of charges such as “property offenses” or “violent offenses.” Doing so may hide 
significant variations between specific charges within each offense category 
(for example, under violent offenses, the distinction between simple assault 
and murder). This, in turn, risks masking variations in offense-specific plea 
bargaining behavior and outcomes in practice. This suggests more broadly 
that any effort to reform plea bargaining practices and outcomes must incorporate legal reform, both substantive and procedural.
Caseloads
Beyond the structure of the criminal code, other system-level elements factor into the use of plea bargaining. There has long been a common 
assumption that the high use of plea bargaining in U.S. criminal courts is, 
at least in part, a result of the high caseloads many courts, prosecutors, and 
defense counsel must process.
140 Indeed, it appears undeniable that if even 
a fraction of the people who currently plead guilty were to instead demand their right to a trial, courts and their staff would quickly be overwhelmed. 
The continued functioning of the U.S. justice system is dependent on the 
high number of guilty pleas that are entered every year.
141 
With this in mind, a small body of research has sought to understand 
how variations in caseloads might influence individual cases. Researchers 
have asked to what extent plea deals are influenced by the case volumes 
of the specific court or prosecutor to which the case is assigned. (Research 
has tended to ignore the caseload pressures faced by defense counsel.) 
Studies conducted during the past 40 years have found little evidence of 
a significant relationship.142 Observational and interview-based research 
published almost half a century ago in 1978 compared several low- and 
high-volume criminal courts and found no noticeable differences in the 
ways in which prosecutors approached and applied plea bargaining to 
their cases.143 Quantitative analysis of courts in Chicago published around 36
Vera Institute of JusticeDisplaced sentencing discretion? The impact of sentencing guidelines on  
charge bargaining practices
To help protect against the risk of judges relying on improp-
er factors in sentencing—such as race, gender, or personal 
beliefs—and better ensure that similarly situated people receive 
comparable sentences, at least 20 state jurisdictions, the District of Columbia, and the federal government have promulgated 
sentencing guidelines to both guide and curb judicial discretion 
at sentencing.
a Some jurisdictions have enacted presumptive 
guidelines, meaning that judges are required to impose a 
recommended sentence within the prescribed range or provide 
compelling and substantial reasons for deviating from them.b 
Other jurisdictions put in place voluntary guidelines, which do 
not require judges to impose a recommended sentence.c Even 
within these two broad categories, there are wide variations in the degree to which guidelines curb judicial discretion.
d 
One enduring concern, however, is the extent to which sentenc-
ing guidelines shift the locus of sentencing discretion to prose-cutors—and how this may perpetuate the very disparities that 
sentencing guidelines were supposed to eliminate.
e Under these 
systems, prosecutors can achieve their preferred sentences (or avoid those with which they disagree) through the manipulation 
of the charges they pursue (by choosing the types and number of charges filed, the types of charges they are willing to drop, 
or the types of charge and/or sentence reductions they are 
willing to offer), using this as leverage in plea negotiations. Five studies that looked at the impact of sentencing guidelines on 
plea bargaining practices are examined here, providing mixed 
results on whether sentencing guidelines, or different types of guidelines, increase charge bargaining among prosecutors.
In four of the five studies, researchers examined the effect of 
sentencing guidelines enactment and found little or no evidence 
that sentencing guidelines substantially altered prosecutorial 
charge bargaining practices. For example, a 1987 study looking at the effect of Minnesota’s presumptive sentencing guidelines 
on prosecutors’ plea bargaining practices—comparing cas-
es from 1978 (pre-guidelines) and cases from 1981 and 1982 (post-guidelines)—found that prosecutorial charging practices 
(average severity of the initial charge, rate of charge dismissal, 
rate of charge reduction, and rate of sentence negotiation) were largely the same before and after the guidelines went into 
effect.
f In particular, it found no proof during the post-guidelines 
period that prosecutors had started overcharging cases in order to better facilitate guilty pleas.
g A 2005 study conducting a 
comparable analysis of Ohio’s 1996 enactment of presumptive sentencing guidelines came to a similar conclusion.
h It found no 
significant changes across most measures (the likelihoods of indictment on a first- or second-degree felony, all charges being 
dropped after indictment, pleading guilty with prosecutorial agreement, and some dropped charges), although it did uncov -
er a modest 4 percent increase post-guidelines in the likelihood of charge reductions among people who pled guilty.
i Signifi-
cantly, it found that racial disparities persisted, even worsened, 
after guidelines implementation—for example, finding that for 
Black people, charges were less likely to be dropped under the guidelines system than prior.
jTwo further pre-/post-guidelines studies using different meth-odologies analyzed the implementation of Washington, DC’s 
voluntary sentencing guidelines and found similar results.
k In 
2014, researchers found little statistically significant impact on prosecutors’ charge bargaining practices (for example, 
rate and extent of charge bargaining and extralegal effects on charge bargaining outcomes) after guideline adoption, other 
than a small observed increase in the number of felony charges 
dismissed or reduced for initial charges in the most severe charge category.
l In 2019, after comparing differences in the 
value   of charge bargains—as evidenced by the magnitude of 
sentence reductions that flow from them—researchers again 
found only minimal changes. Prior to sentencing guidelines, 
people accepting charge-bargained pleas received more than 30 percent shorter sentences than if they had been sentenced 
on their arraignment charge; after guidelines enactment, peo-
ple accepting charge-bargained pleas received sentences that were nearly 36 percent shorter.
m 
Although the small differences observed in both Washington, DC, studies suggest that prosecutors may have filed more serious charges in certain cases in the post-guidelines period to 
expedite the plea bargaining process, the relative stability of all 
other outcomes between the pre- and post-guidelines periods in both studies points to little interaction effect between sentenc-
ing guidelines and charge bargaining practices and outcomes.
n 
For all four studies discussed above, one potential explanation for the lack of change across the comparison periods may be 
the relatively narrow time range under examination after guide-lines were implemented. Indeed, looking only six months out 
after guidelines implementation in Ohio—or one to two years 
out after implementation in Washington, DC, and Minnesota, re -
spectively—may not have allowed enough time for practitioners 
to fully understand and use the new rules.
o (Another possible 
explanation is that while prosecutors may not have changed their charging practices after implementation of sentencing 
guidelines, it is possible that they had already been overcharg-ing before the guidelines were implemented.)
A fifth study examined whether the type of sentencing guide-
lines—presumptive or voluntary—makes a difference to pros-
ecutors’ charge bargaining practices and resulting sentencing 
outcomes. After comparing data from one county in one state with presumptive guidelines (Washington State) with data  
from two counties in a state with voluntary guidelines (Mary-
land), the 2007 study found that the county under more rigid sentencing guidelines saw greater charge bargaining impacts, 
demonstrated by larger observed reductions in sentence 
lengths and in declines in the probability of prison sentences.
p 
However, the study used a predictive model that tested what 
would happen if Washington State cases were adjudicated in 
Maryland, and vice versa. This potentially minimizes the extent to which the research’s findings can be applied more generally, 
given its hypothetical nature.
q Future research should investi-
gate the appropriateness of the strong assumptions underlying this approach.In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining37
the same time supported this conclusion.144 More recent analyses found 
that cases tried in courts with higher caseloads are subject to slightly 
harsher trial penalties than those tried in lower-volume courts.145 This may 
indicate that charge and sentencing decisions are influenced, in part, by considerations relating to organizational efficiency—where higher caseload 
courts adjust their practices in order to see fewer cases go to trial.
146 
However, research that has sought to measure the caseload pressures on 
the people directly responsible for plea offers—the prosecutors assigned 
to each case—has offered less support for this hypothesis, finding little 
relationship between case volume and the use of plea bargaining. 
Two studies statistically analyzed drug cases in the office of the New 
Y ork County District Attorney that were disposed of in 2010 and 2011—one looking at approximately 1,200 felony drug cases and the other at a 
similar number of misdemeanor marijuana cases.
147 While controlling for 
multiple case and defendant characteristics, the studies considered the 
active caseload size of the prosecutors assigned to each case.148 The study 
of felony cases found no relationship between the size of each prosecutor’s If even a fraction of the people who 
currently plead guilty were to instead 
demand their right to a trial, courts and 
their staff would quickly be overwhelmed. 
The continued functioning of the U.S. 
justice system is dependent on the high 
number of guilty pleas that are entered 
every year.38
Vera Institute of Justicecaseload and the charge or sentence offers (the measures of plea bargaining) 
made in their cases.149 The researchers noted, however, that prosecutors 
working in New Y ork City may be accustomed to high case volumes and 
that the results may not be generalizable to jurisdictions that traditionally 
process fewer cases.150 The analysis of misdemeanor marijuana cases 
similarly revealed that caseload pressure was unrelated to the charge offers 
made, but the study did find that the likelihood of being offered a plea deal 
that included a custodial sentence increased marginally as prosecutors’ 
caseloads increased.151
Another study of 318,750 felony and misdemeanor cases filed in 
Wisconsin from 2009 to 2013 similarly analyzed the relationship between prosecutor characteristics—including the size and make-up of their 
caseloads—and case outcomes, while controlling for numerous defendant 
and case variables.
152 The researchers found a large range in the number 
of cases the prosecutors worked on—from fewer than 100 in a five-year period to several thousand.
153 However, there was no relationship between 
the size of prosecutors’ caseloads and either their case dismissal rate or the plea bargain outcomes of their cases (in other words, the likelihood of guilty 
pleas to lesser charges or of pleas resulting in noncustodial sentences).
154
Although there was no evidence that caseload size influenced 
prosecutors’ plea bargaining behavior, the composition of prosecutors’ 
caseloads was found to be somewhat predictive of case outcomes. The 
same study of cases in Wisconsin found that prosecutors with a higher 
proportion of violent cases in their caseloads were more likely to dismiss 
cases and more likely to agree to a guilty plea to a lesser charge.155 They 
were, however, less likely to accept a noncustodial sentence than other 
prosecutors; the researchers hypothesize that this may reflect a greater 
willingness to engage in charge bargaining, but less willingness to engage 
in sentence bargaining among these prosecutors.156 
Conversely, prosecutors with high felony caseloads were less  likely 
to dismiss a case and less  likely to agree to a plea to a lesser charge than 
prosecutors with lower felony caseloads.157 The researchers propose that 
prosecutors who handle more felony cases may come to view all cases more seriously and place greater value on securing a more serious criminal 
record.
158 It is notable that the findings of this study led the researchers 
to conclude that prosecutors’ caseloads do not incentivize their plea 
bargaining behavior with the motivation of “clearing their plates” or as In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining39
a concession to limited resources, but rather that the type  of cases that 
prosecutors routinely try will influence how they evaluate plea bargaining 
in all of their cases.159
Although the research presented here suggests that variation in 
prosecutorial caseload size has little notable impact on plea bargaining at the case level, cases are not processed in a vacuum, and differences in 
the working styles of prosecutors—and in the situational contexts of the 
district attorney offices they work in—are likely to be influential.
160 Mixed 
methods research combining focus groups, surveys, and quantitative analysis of cases finds that, despite putting great emphasis on the value of 
consistency in practice, prosecutors employ a wide range of styles in plea 
bargaining, meaning plea offers can differ markedly simply as a function of 
the prosecutor assigned to the case.
161 However, earlier research conducted 
in the 1980s suggests that this variation can be constrained, to a degree, by 
the level of control the local district attorney places on the plea bargaining 
practices of their staff.162
Plea bargaining outcomes
Given the centrality of guilty pleas to the day-to-day functioning of the courts and to the vast majority of people’s experiences of the 
justice system, it is important to understand the impact that plea 
bargaining has on case outcomes. Specifically, researchers have attempted to discern just how much of a bargain people may receive when they plead 
guilty (or, conversely, how much worse their punishment may be if they go 
to trial). A related question also arises: are the benefits of plea bargaining 
large enough to coerce innocent people to plead guilty? And if so, how 
often does this happen? As described below, studies that have sought to 
address these questions have, in the process, revealed how complex and 
opaque the system truly is.40
Vera Institute of JusticeHow much of a bargain is a plea bargain? 
The process of plea bargaining is predicated on the contention that 
prosecutors can offer people the opportunity for more favorable outcomes 
if they plead guilty rather than take their cases to trial. (Whether this more 
favorable outcome is best characterized as a “plea discount” or a “trial 
penalty” is the subject of some debate.)163 However, the typical magnitude 
of this disparity in punishment is uncertain. Some researchers have found evidence of a large difference in sentencing outcomes.
164 Others have 
suggested that the difference may be minimal (or even, as in one study, nonexistent)—although, as discussed below, these studies have been 
critiqued on methodological and conceptual bases.
165 
One study does provide evidence of a substantial trial penalty. 
Researchers looked at serious violent felonies resolved in Pennsylvania trial courts in the late 1990s using regression models to measure the 
relationship between plea bargaining and sentencing while accounting 
for other important factors (such as the severity of the offense and the 
defendant’s characteristics).
166 They found that the odds of incarceration 
were 2.7 times greater for people tried by a jury than for those who pled guilty.
167 In addition, sentence lengths were 57 percent longer for people 
convicted by trial jury compared to those who pled guilty.168 
The trial penalty.
64% longer  
custodial sentences 
imposed at trial
Length of custodial sentencesSentences 
imposed at trial
Sentences 
imposed through pleasIn the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining41
Research has found, however, considerable variation in the magnitude 
of plea discounts both between and within jurisdictions.169 This is perhaps 
unsurprising given the varying levels of constraint in the use of plea 
bargaining that prosecutors work under in different states: jurisdictions 
vary in the use of, and adherence to, plea bargaining guidelines, and 
district attorneys maintain varying levels of oversight and control over 
assistant attorneys’ plea deal offers.170 One analysis of sentencing data 
from five states from 1997 to 2004 used regression analyses to compare 
the sentence lengths received following pleas, bench trials, and jury trials, 
while controlling for case and defendant characteristics.171 In each state 
and for most offenses, sentences received after jury trial were significantly 
longer than those received following a plea; there was, however, notable 
variation by jurisdiction and offense.172 In Maryland, at one end of the 
spectrum, jury trials for heroin distribution cases resulted in incarceration 
sentences that were 350 percent longer than those given following a plea.173 
Similarly, cocaine distribution cases disposed of by jury trial were seven times more likely to result in incarceration than those settled through a 
plea.
174 In Washington State, however, there was no significant difference 
in sentence length among cases resolved through plea, bench trial, or jury 
trial for five of the 12 offenses studied.175 Still, despite the variation, the 
researchers concluded that “judges and prosecutors are imposing more lenient sentences for defendants who plead guilty.”
176 This is, in essence, the 
“bargain” underlying the entire plea bargaining process.
In federal criminal courts, plea discounts are baked into the system, 
with sentencing guidelines allowing for sentence reductions when a person “accepts responsibility” for the alleged crime—a condition that a 
guilty plea can satisfy.
177 A study looking at 207,000 federal cases from 
2006 to 2008 demonstrates the potential impact of these guidelines.178 The 
study used regression analysis to control for a range of case and defendant 
characteristics, including offense severity, and found that the average 
custodial sentence imposed at trial was 64 percent longer than sentences 
reached through pleas.179 As in state courts, the researchers found 
substantial variation by crime type—with firearms trial sentences being 29 percent longer than pled sentences, while larceny and theft offenses were 
associated with a 137 percent trial penalty.
180 
A similar study of 115,000 federal convictions from 2000 to 2002 (in 
which 5 percent of cases were resolved at trial, and 95 percent through 42
Vera Institute of Justicea guilty plea) found that, after accounting for various case and defendant 
characteristics, including offense severity, incarceration sentence lengths 
were 45 percent longer for people convicted at trial than those convicted 
through a plea.181 (The slightly lower trial penalty detected here may be 
because this study excluded cases that resulted in a probation sentence, 
whereas the previous study included these as zero-length sentences 
of incarceration).182 However, trial penalties were not solely a product 
of sentencing guidelines; after guideline-based sentencing changes 
were controlled for, people convicted at trial were still found to receive 
sentences 16 percent longer than people who pled guilty.183 
Two recent studies have attempted to cast doubt on the potential 
“benefits” of pleading guilty (such as reduced sentences), both claiming that people may, on average, experience better outcomes by choosing to 
go to trial due to the possibility of acquittal.
184 The first, a study of more 
than 91,000 misdemeanor cases accepted for prosecution in 2010 and 2011 in New Y ork City, partially corroborated the results of previous research, 
finding that people convicted at trial were more likely to be incarcerated, 
faced longer probation sentences, and received larger fines than people 
who pled guilty—and that these differences remained after controlling 
for case and defendant characteristics.
185 (The researchers were unable 
to control for the effects of pretrial detention on case outcomes due to missing data.)
186 However, the study also found that two cases out of every 
five that went to trial resulted in acquittals—a far higher acquittal rate than expected.
187 This, the researchers concluded, suggests that more people may 
benefit from taking a case to trial than currently do so.188 
There are, however, significant caveats to this conclusion. Importantly, 
fewer than 0.5 percent of cases in the study’s sample actually went to 
trial—and those that resulted in conviction, on average, had more severe 
sentences than cases in which a person pled guilty.189 With such a tiny 
fraction of cases going to trial, it is possible that these are exceptional cases that differ from the average case in unmeasured ways—in fact, the study 
found that people represented by private attorneys, who presumably had 
more resources and who may have had cases deemed more ‘winnable,’ 
were more likely to go to trial—and that the high acquittal rate would 
not be sustained should more people choose not to plead guilty.
190 The 
researchers also do not consider the length of time people may spend in jail awaiting an eventual acquittal and the harms that such pretrial detention In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining43
precipitates. However, the finding that 99.6 percent of these misdemeanor 
cases were resolved through a guilty plea suggests that the plea bargaining 
process is substantially different for misdemeanor cases than it is for 
felonies.191 (See “Misdemeanor justice and plea bargains” at page 16.)
The second study, a contentious examination of more than 40,000 
felony cases resolved before 2004 in Cook County (Chicago), Illinois, went further by concluding that not only is there no real trial penalty, 
but there is, in fact, a “trial discount.”
192 The researcher found that, if all 
sentences were averaged with acquittals counted as “zero-year” sentence lengths, trials resulted in sentences 14 months shorter than guilty pleas.
193 
(However, when acquittals were not counted, people who were convicted at trial were found, as in other studies, to be more likely to receive a custodial 
sentence and to receive longer sentences than those who pled guilty.)
194 
The results and methodology of this study have been heavily criticized, 
however. The analysis assumes that people who pled guilty would have the 
same chances of acquittal as those who went to trial—which is unlikely 
to be true.195 Furthermore, the study categorizes a large number of cases 
as acquittals that were, in fact, other forms of case termination—such as cases that were terminated when a person failed to return to court, cases 
transferred to other jurisdictions, or cases transferred to immigration 
enforcement—thus substantially inflating the likelihood of “acquittal” even 
though the people involved were likely to have been convicted later or in 
another court.
196 Finally, the study does not consider people who were held 
in pretrial detention but then acquitted at trial to have been incarcerated, despite the fact that they may have experienced a significant amount of 
time in custody. 
The studies reviewed here demonstrate that the magnitude of the 
average plea discount, or trial penalty, differs between jurisdictions 
and offenses. Furthermore, the methodological and conceptual choices 
researchers make in studying sentencing outcomes can also create large 
disparities in findings. Despite this disagreement, there is a consensus that, 
if a person is to be convicted and sentenced, it will be better for them if 
this happens following a plea, not a trial.
19744
Vera Institute of JusticeAre innocent people induced to  
plead guilty?
The incentives offered through plea bargaining, or the penalties associated 
with going to trial, may be substantial enough to induce people who are 
innocent of a crime to plead guilty.198 This is perhaps especially true for 
lower-level cases in which a guilty plea may hasten case disposal and secure a person’s release from custody. (See “Misdemeanor justice and plea 
bargains” at page 16.) Innocent people charged with more serious crimes 
may still be induced to plead guilty, either to avoid a harsher punishment 
at conviction or, if they are already incarcerated but likely to win their case 
(and exoneration) on appeal, to secure an immediate release from prison on 
a sentence of time served rather than wait out a lengthy appeal process.
199 
Estimating the frequency with which this happens is, however, 
challenging; researchers have primarily approached the question using defendant interviews and analyses of exonerations, both of which, as 
described below, come with significant limitations. Such challenges 
mean that little research has been conducted specifically on guilty pleas. 
Research into false admissions of guilt has tended to focus more on false 
confessions to the police—and the coercive tactics used in interrogation—
and less on false guilty pleas made to prosecutors or the conditions that 
make them more likely.
200 Researchers hypothesize that false guilty pleas 
may be more common than false confessions because promises of leniency 
(via reduced charges or at sentencing), which may be very compelling to 
people, are not permitted during police interrogations.201 Despite these 
limitations, research does appear to confirm that, among the millions 
of cases that are settled through guilty pleas each year, a meaningful 
number of people are actually innocent of the crimes with which they 
were charged. For example, in a 2018 study of 166 attorneys, 148 of the 
participants said that they had been involved in at least one case in which 
their client chose to plead guilty despite maintaining their innocence.202
Self-reported innocence
Interviews with justice-involved people suggest that false guilty pleas may 
be disturbingly common—at least among people who might be considered In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining45
especially vulnerable, such as young people or those with mental illnesses. 
A survey of more than 1,200 people with mental illnesses who were 
currently in jail or facing criminal charges in court found that more than 
one-third—37 percent—reported having falsely pled guilty at some point 
in their lives.203 In making these false guilty pleas, the majority stated 
that they were motivated to do so by the desire “to end the questioning, get [out] of jail, or go home.”
204 In an interview study of nearly 200 
incarcerated boys between the ages of 14 and 17 years old, nearly one-fifth of participants reported having made false guilty pleas during their lives.
205 
In 51 percent of these cases, the young people reported that they had made a false guilty plea in order to avoid more severe consequences and 
lessen the punishment they received.
206 The likelihood that a young person 
reported a false guilty plea increased with the number of high pressure 
tactics they said they had been exposed to by lawyers (such as threats of 
greater punishment or the use of deception).207 
Exonerations
Another way of studying innocence among people who plead guilty is to look at cases that were subsequently overturned in court—often through 
the discovery of new evidence, such as DNA. Exonerations following guilty 
pleas are not common for several reasons: first, guilty pleas are often given 
in exchange for a reduced sentence or release from jail, diminishing the 
perceived urgency or necessity of proving someone’s factual innocence; 
second, if someone has pled guilty, it is more difficult to convince others 
of their innocence or that it is appropriate to invest the resources needed 
to investigate and secure an exoneration; and third, by pleading guilty, 
people may lose access to mechanisms of appeal and due process that 
would facilitate the exoneration process.
208 Nevertheless, a small number of 
studies have shown that innocent people can be compelled to plead guilty.
One study looked at 466 felony convictions, spanning from 1989 
through 2011, in which the accused were later proven to be factually innocent and were exonerated.
209 The researchers found that in 
approximately 8 percent of these cases, the person was convicted following a guilty plea.
210 Similarly, research conducted by the Innocence Project 
into 362 convictions that were overturned through DNA evidence found 46
Vera Institute of Justicethat people in 11 percent of these cases had pled guilty.211 Researchers in 
studies such as these are unable to estimate the frequency of false guilty 
pleas more generally because the sample they are drawn from—cases 
overturned through exoneration—do not reflect the typical case. They are 
also limited in their generalizability because they focus on felony cases, 
with the majority of convictions in the samples being for homicide and 
sex offenses.212 The results of these studies do not, therefore, indicate the 
frequency of false guilty pleas in lower-level felony or misdemeanor cases. Indeed, exonerations for lower-level cases—in which exculpatory scientific 
evidence might not exist and in which people are less motivated to spend 
time and resources proving someone’s innocence—almost never happen.
213 
Academics theorize, however, that it is for lower-level charges, where the stakes of pleading guilty are lower and the benefits of a faster case 
resolution are higher, that false guilty pleas may be most common.
214 
Much of what has been learned through exonerations about innocent 
people being compelled to plead guilty to misdemeanors comes from Harris County (Houston), Texas.
215 Indeed, while only 4 percent of 
exonerations in the United States from 1989 to 2011 were for misdemeanor 
cases (85 out of 2,145 cases), 67 percent of these cases come from Harris 
County.216 Unlike most other parts of the country, Harris County operates Research shows what is known 
intuitively—that cases exist in which the 
plea offer made, and the opportunity to 
be released from jail, effectively coerce 
people who are factually innocent into 
pleading guilty.In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining47
a drug lab that continues to test substances collected by the police even 
after the case has concluded.217 The county has uncovered hundreds of 
felony and misdemeanor cases in which innocent people pled guilty to 
drug possession.218 A review of the misdemeanor cases found that the 
majority of people pled guilty in order to be released from jail as they were otherwise unable to afford bail; pleading not guilty would likely have 
resulted in several more months in jail, with the prospect of years in prison 
if found guilty at trial.
219 (See “Misdemeanor justice and plea bargains,” on 
page 16.) Indeed, researchers have hypothesized that, at least for lower-level charges, factually innocent people may feel the greatest pressure to plead 
guilty as it is to these people that prosecutors, faced with little compelling 
evidence of their guilt, will make their most generous plea offers in order 
to secure a conviction.
220
Ultimately, research shows what is known intuitively—that cases exist 
in which the plea offer made, and the opportunity to be released from jail, 
effectively coerce people who are factually innocent into pleading guilty. 
The scale of this problem, however, remains difficult to determine.221Harris County, Texas, operates a drug lab 
that continues to test substances collected by 
police even after a case has been concluded. 
The county has uncovered hundreds of felony 
and misdemeanor cases in which innocent 
people pled guilty to drug possession.False guilty pleas in Harris County, Texas.48
Vera Institute of JusticeConclusion: Limitations and 
future directions
Admittedly, the dynamic and iterative nature of plea bargaining—a 
largely undocumented process that permeates the entire life of 
a criminal case, long or short—presents significant challenges to 
researchers trying to identify and isolate relationships between key variables and plea bargaining practices or outcomes. Plea bargaining neither occurs 
at a single moment in time, nor is it a definitive quantifiable product that 
remains constant. Rather, it is a complex, interactive dialogue involving 
multiple people and various considerations, many of which are beyond 
the purview of current criminal justice data collection capabilities (such as 
transaction costs, financial access, or psychological and cognitive biases) and, 
therefore, remain largely untested and unaccounted for in current research. 
As a result, pathways to a negotiated plea deal are not likely 
straightforward, nor as easily predictable as some research, given limited datasets, may suggest. For example, reducing a person’s choice whether 
to accept a plea offer to a single factor—the hypothetical case outcome 
if the case were to go to trial—is perhaps too simplistic a frame. It not 
only ignores the inherently coercive nature of pretrial detention, but also 
structural factors (poor lawyering, agency costs, and lawyers’ self-interest) 
and individual psychological or behavioral ones (such as overconfidence, 
self-serving biases, denial mechanisms, and risk preference) that shape 
people’s actions and motives in ways that can heavily influence plea 
bargaining processes, behavior, and outcomes.
222 Given this complex 
nature, it is understandable why existing studies fail to satisfactorily describe, explain, or prove the full suite of factors that influence plea 
bargaining behavior and outcomes—and why definitive answers are 
difficult to discern.
223 
The result is a mix of complicated, nuanced, and sometimes 
contradictory research findings. For example, when researchers have 
compared bargained-for sentences and sentences that would have resulted 
from trial, only some researchers found evidence of a large difference. In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining49
Nor, evidently, has it been easy for researchers to estimate the true scale 
of innocent people induced to plead guilty, as data and sampling issues 
limit studies to only those cases in which people had been exonerated—
the tiniest subset of total cases and likely not representative of the typical 
American criminal case. Although these mixed results are likely due to 
differences in methodological approaches and sample types, it would be 
unwise to underestimate the inherent difficulty of putting together the 
various pieces of the “plea-bargaining puzzle.”224 And only a handful of 
researchers have managed to design studies that attempted to capture 
the motivations and factors influencing the people pleading guilty or the 
bargaining power and resources of their defense counsel. 
Ultimately, the lack of clarity regarding the administration and impacts 
of plea bargaining is perhaps the most important thing that research has revealed. Guilty pleas account for the vast majority of criminal case 
outcomes and, as such, form the bedrock of the U.S. criminal legal system. 
That plea bargaining should remain so obscured, that its biases and 
injustices should prove so impervious to being seen and understood, is 
beyond problematic. Fixing the major failings of America’s justice system—including mass incarceration and systemic racism—is made exponentially 
more difficult when the most common and most fundamental of court 
operations is largely invisible. It is therefore incumbent upon court actors, 
legislators, advocates, researchers, and the community to demand a system 
that embraces greater transparency. Only by recording plea bargaining 
processes and decisions and by making these records available can U.S. 
courts and prosecutors begin to be held accountable.Only by recording plea bargaining 
processes and decisions and by making 
these records available can U.S. courts and 
prosecutors begin to be held accountable.50
Vera Institute of JusticeBox notes
 
“Law of plea bargaining: An overview” p. 8
a Mary Vogel, “The Social Origins of Plea Bargaining: Conflict and the 
Law in the Process of State Formation, 1830-1860,” Law & Society Review 33, no. 1 (1999), 161-246 (explaining that plea bargaining came about as a legal innovation in response to local political and social forces of the time—a time marked by a perceived rise in crime, increased immigration and thus ethnic diversity, and the erosion of social cohesion and cultural consensus); and Albert Alschuler, “Plea Bargaining and Its History,” Columbia Law Review 79, no. 1 (1979), 24-32 (describing the growth of plea bargaining and extent of its use in the early 20th century), https://perma.cc/ BK4N-ZFR9 . See also Mark H. Haller, “Plea Bargaining: The 
Nineteenth Century Context,” Law & Society Review 13, no. 2 (1979), 273-79, 273 (“[P]lea bargaining was probably nonexistent before 1800, began to appear during the early or mid-nineteenth century, and became institutionalized as a standard feature of American urban criminal courts in the last third of the nineteenth century”).
b Santobello v. New York, 404 U.S. 257 , 261 (1971), https://perma.cc/Z7RT-S9MT ; and Missouri v. Frye, 566 U.S. 134 (2012), https://perma.
cc/5RAT-SCZ8 . Also see Lafler v. Cooper, 566 U.S. 156 (2012) (“The 
criminal justice system for the most part is a system of pleas, not a system of trials”), https://perma.cc/WQH6-TETJ . 
c Mabry v. Johnson, 467 U.S. 504, 508 (1984) (“Because each side may obtain advantages when a guilty plea is exchanged for sentencing concessions, the agreement is no less voluntary than any other bargained-for exchange”), https://perma.cc/JS5J-BAPT ; 
and Brady v. United States, 397 U.S. 742, 752 (1970) (“It is this mutuality of advantage that perhaps explains the fact that, at present, well over three-fourths of the criminal convictions in this country rest on pleas of guilty. . .”), https://perma.cc/D5R9-L4FQ . 
For other cases where courts have used the contract analogy, see Puckett v. United States, 556 U.S. 129, 136 (2009) (“Although the analogy may not hold in all respects, plea bargains are essentially contracts”), https://perma.cc/7MYG-FXXX/; and Frye, 566 U.S. at 8 (“Bargaining is, by its nature, defined to a substantial degree by personal style . . . it may be neither prudent nor practicable to try to elaborate or define detailed standards for the proper discharge of defense counsel’s participation in the [plea bargaining] process.”).
d United States v. Mezzanatto, 513 U.S. 196, 206 (1995), https:// perma.cc/Z62E-PRJM.
e For example, while California defines plea bargaining by statute as “any bargaining, negotiation, or discussion between a criminal defendant, or his or her counsel, and a prosecuting attorney or judge, whereby the defendant agrees to plead guilty or nolo contendere, in exchange for any promises, commitments, concessions, assurances, or consideration by the prosecuting attorney or judge relating to any charge against the defendant or to the sentencing of the defendant,” that section of the code does not contain standards for those negotiations. Cal. Penal Code § 1192.7 , https://perma.cc/VBG5-5CWA. The legislature later added     
 
a separate law that “requires that a defendant’s guilty plea be knowing, intelligent, and voluntary” and defines those terms. Cal. Penal Code § 1016.8,  https://perma.cc/GR2F-7YZA. Also see Wash. Rev. Code § 9.94A.421, https://perma.cc/W39A-PLZF ; and Wash. 
Rev. Code § 9.94A.431 https://perma.cc/C8Y7-AU5Z. Other states have chosen to promulgate administrative rules or court rules rather than statutes to govern the process of plea bargaining. See for example MD Rules, Rule 4-243, https://perma.cc/GS44-SZKN; Mass. Rules of Criminal Procedure, Rule 12, https://perma.cc/3WML-ACVU ; and Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure, Rule 11, https://
perma.cc/G9JZ-PBTQ .
f See Brady v. United States, 397 U.S. 742 (1970). By 1970, almost 90 percent of cases were resolved by guilty plea. Although data collected in 20 states in 1978 suggests that guilty plea rates varied between jurisdictions, it nevertheless confirms the wide use of guilty pleas to resolve cases. See Herbert Miller, William McDonald, and James Cramer, Plea Bargaining in the United States (Washington, DC: National Institute of Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice, Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, U.S. Department of Justice, 1978), xii, https://perma.cc/2MYW-MPEJ . See also Herbert 
Miller, William McDonald, and James Cramer, “Plea Bargaining in the United States,” database (Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, 1978), https:// perma.cc/S2GW-FZWJ .
g Brady, 397 U.S. at 748.
h Bordenkircher v. Hayes, 434 U.S. 357 , 363 (1978) (“[I]n the ‘give-and-take’ of plea bargaining, there is no such element of punishment nor retaliation so long as the accused is free to accept or reject the prosecution’s offer”), https://perma.cc/P5DW-KG8B . 
i Brady, 397 U.S. at 750, 755; and Corbitt v. New Jersey, 439 U.S. 212, 218-219 (1978) (“[T]here is no per se rule against encouraging guilty pleas. We have squarely held that a State may encourage a guilty plea by offering substantial benefits in return for the plea.”), https://perma.cc/5F73-N4HS . Also see Mezzanatto, 513 
U.S. at 209-210 (1995) (“The plea bargaining process necessarily exerts pressure on people to plead guilty and to abandon a series of fundamental rights. . . .”). In addition to giving up their right to trial by pleading guilty, people also give up accompanying guarantees—including their right of confrontation and cross-examination of witnesses, right to a jury, right against self-incrimination, and the right only to be convicted on proof beyond a reasonable doubt. See for example H.M. Emory, “The Guilty Plea as a Waiver of Rights and as an Admission of Guilt,” Temple Law Quarterly 44 (1970).
j United States v. Pollard, 959 F.2d 1011, 1021 (D.C. Cir. 1992), https://perma.cc/UV77-F49X. However, guilty pleas may be voidable (subject to annulment by a court at the request of a party) when the prosecution has threatened physical harm, threatened to use false testimony, or threatened additional prosecutions. Santobello, In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining51
404 U.S. at 265-66 (Douglas, J., concurring). For the definition of 
voidable, see Steven H. Gifis, Law Dictionary (3d ed.) (New York: Barron’s Educational Series, Inc., 1991), 521.
k In Santobello, the Court held that a prosecutor may not trick a person into pleading guilty. It also held that, once a binding plea agreement has been entered into, prosecutors may not renege on their promises. Santobello, 404 U.S. at 266-267 . In Santobello, the original prosecutor for the case had agreed to make no recommendation as to sentencing. However, by the time the plea was entered, a new prosecutor had been assigned to the case and recommended the maximum sentence. The judgment (and sentence) was vacated and the case remanded to the state courts to decide whether the guilty plea should be accepted on its original terms (and the petitioner re-sentenced by a different judge) or allowed to be withdrawn.
l See for example Corbitt, 439 U.S. at 218-219 (promise of leniency); Brady, 397 U.S. at 752 (threatening the death penalty); and Bordenkircher, 434 U.S. 357 (threatening to prosecute under a different charge with a mandatory life sentence). See also United States v. Goodwin, 457 U.S. 368, 380-383 (1982) (no presumption of vindictiveness although harsher charges were not filed until after accused claimed his right to jury trial), https://perma.cc/ 95VP-6QLG; United States v. Usher, 703 F.2d 956, 958 (6th Cir. 1983) (concluding that the person’s guilty plea was not coerced when he was required to plead guilty in order for his wife to get a reduced term), https://perma.cc/9D3E-AMCT ; and Harman v. Mohn, 683 F.2d 
834, 836-838 (4th Cir. 1982) (holding that the person’s guilty plea was not coerced when the government agreed not to prosecute his wife in exchange for a plea), https://perma.cc/QK9D-3WC5 . 
m Henderson v. Morgan, 426 U.S. 637 , 647 (1976) (holding that a person must understand the nature of the charges against him but need not comprehend every element of the charged offense(s), only those elements considered critical), https://perma.cc/T5UZ-4KAA; Bousley v. United States, 523 U.S. 614, 618-619 (1998) (establishing that if the accused is misinformed about the elements of the offense, the plea is constitutionally invalid), https://perma.cc/Y8LZ-T4KS; and Boykin v. Alabama, 395 U.S. 238, 243 & n.5 (1969), (holding that people must understand the constitutional rights waived by pleading guilty and that this understanding cannot be presumed from silence), https://perma.cc/S6Z2-S9S4 .
n See Fed. R. Crim. P . 11, https://perma.cc/P2X3-WJC6 . For examples 
of comparable state rules, see N.Y . Crim. Proc. Law § 220, https://perma.cc/J3T7-8LQN; Tex. Crim. Pro. Code Ann. § 27 , https://perma.cc/YSN8-UCXG; and Cal. Penal Code § 1002-12. Also see Julian Cook III, “Federal Guilty Pleas: Inequities, Indigence and the Rule 11 Process,” Boston College Law Review, 60, no. 4 (2019), 1074 (discussing the plea colloquies in Lee v. United States and Class v. United States). In general, the court also has the responsibility not to enter judgment before determining that there is a factual basis for the plea. However, the factual basis of a plea need not be accurate or complete. See Fed. R. Crim. P . 11. The evidentiary support for a plea’s factual basis can come from a variety of sources—from the prosecution’s recitation of facts, a pre-sentence report, witnesses, admissions from defendants, or even preliminary hearings. See Brandon Garrett, “Why Plea Bargains Are Not Confessions,” William & Mary Law Review 57 , no. 4 (2016), 1415, 1428-1431, https://perma.cc/SZS6-TXUE. People can also plead guilty while simultaneously protesting their innocence—these guilty pleas are known as “Alford pleas,” after the case of North Carolina v. Alford, 400 U.S. 25, 36 n.8 (1970) (accused agreed to plead guilty and accept the maximum sentence that could be imposed judicially—a term of 30 years’ imprisonment—rather than face a jury trial, which had the option of imposing a death sentence; the court held that this was a valid choice among his options and that the plea was valid despite containing a statement that the person had not committed the crime to which he pled guilty), https://perma.cc/DH8V-BET8 .
o Cook, “Federal Guilty Pleas,” (2019), 1074, 1107 and 1109 (discussing the plea colloquies in Lee v. United States and Class v. United States). Also see Stephanos Bibas, “Designing Plea Bargaining from the Ground Up: Accuracy and Fairness Without Trials as Backstops,” William & Mary Law Review 57 , no. 4 (2016), 1055-1081, 1059, 1065, 1074. Silence has been held to be inadequate to waive constitutional rights. Boykin, 395 U.S. at 243 & n.5 (holding that people must understand the constitutional rights waived by pleading guilty and that this understanding cannot be presumed from silence). However, only a brief affirmative is required under United States v. Gardner, 417 F.3d 541 (6th Cir. 2005) (rejecting the defendant’s claim that the mode of inquiry employed by the court during the Rule 11 hearing—which “required only a yes-or-no answer” to most questions—did not satisfy the “core concerns” of Rule 11), https://perma.cc/9HZA-GLWK. The court reiterated its ruling in United States v. Walker  that, “[T]here is no requirement that 
in order to rely on a defendant’s answer in a guilty-plea colloquy to conclude that the defendant pleaded guilty knowingly and voluntarily, those answers must be lengthy and all-encompassing; a straightforward and simple ‘Yes, your Honor’ is sufficient to bind a defendant to its consequences.” 160 F.3d 1078, 1096 (6th Cir. 1998), https://perma.cc/2YBK-VRGR. 
p But see Burdick v. Quarterman, 504 F.3d 545, 547 (5th Cir. 2007) (observing that due process requires a person’s understanding of the maximum punishment that could be imposed), https:// perma.cc/ECR7-PP6S . The lack of clarity as to the sentence to be 
imposed led the Second Circuit to conclude more recently that a guilty plea failed to meet the “knowing” standard as well. See United States v. Johnson, No. 15-3498-cr (2d. Cir. 2017), https://perma.cc/MM4N-T5KQ . In Padilla v. Kentucky, the Supreme Court 
explicitly extended the scope of the understanding required to the collateral consequences of the plea. Padilla v. Kentucky, 559 U.S. 356 (2010) (petitioner was entitled to be advised that a conviction was likely to result in his deportation before pleading guilty), https://perma.cc/8B37-BVE3 .
q Weatherford v. Bursey, 429 U.S. 545, 559 (1977), https:// supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/429/545/. 52
Vera Institute of Justicer See United States v. Ruiz, 536 U.S. 622, 629-633 (2002) (rejecting 
a constitutional right to impeachment or affirmative-defense evidence in advance of a guilty plea), https://perma.cc/NAL9-BK5T . 
Impeachment evidence raises questions about the credibility of a witness while affirmative defense evidence is evidence that could negate liability even if a crime was committed. Compare the fact that civil litigants enjoy broad pretrial discovery from witness depositions to interrogatories to document discovery. See Fed. R. Civ. P . 26-37 , https://perma.cc/TE29-VEAS . The holding in Ruiz seems 
to run counter to that in Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963) (the prosecution in a criminal trial has a duty to disclose evidence that is favorable to the defense (exculpatory) and material to guilt or sentencing), https://perma.cc/X8JP-AFZC .  
 For cases following Brady, see United States v. Agurs, 427 U.S. 97 (1976) (holding that disclosure of material described in Brady must occur even absent specific request), https://perma.cc/D786-BAU7; United States v. Bagley, 473 U.S. 667 (1985) (evidence is material if “there is a reasonable probability that, had the evidence been disclosed to the defense, the result of the proceeding would have been different), https://perma.cc/E5GH-F35X; Giglio v. United States, 405 U.S. 150 (1972) (exculpatory evidence includes “evidence affecting” witness “credibility,” where the witness’ “reliability” is likely “determinative of guilt or innocence”), https://perma.cc/Z42S-XNGZ; and United States. v. Clark, No. 05-80810 (E.D. Mich. 2006) (recognizing that although there is no constitutional right to broad discovery in a criminal case, limited disclosures are required in criminal cases as a result of Brady), https://perma.cc/FDD5-ASUF .  
 It is unclear whether in Ruiz the Court meant to include all material exculpatory evidence referenced in Brady. See McCann v. Mangialardi, 337 F.3d 782, 788 (7th Cir. 2003) (reasoning that “Ruiz indicates a significant distinction between impeachment information and exculpatory evidence” that makes it “highly likely the Supreme Court would find a violation of the Due Process Clause if prosecutors . . . have knowledge of a criminal defendant’s factual innocence but fail to disclose such information to a defendant before he enters into a guilty plea.”), https://perma.cc/74TW-9Z3G. The Second and Fifth Circuits, on the other hand, have found that Ruiz precludes all Brady challenges to guilty pleas. See Friedman v. Rehal, 618 F.3d 142 (2d Cir. 2010), https://perma.cc/W4LM-X354; and United States v. Conroy, 567 F.3d 174 (5th Cir. 2009), https://perma.cc/QPW4-LRJW , respectively.
s Stephanos Bibas, “Regulating the Plea Bargaining Market: From Caveat Emptor to Consumer Protection,” California Law Review 99, no. 4 (2011), 1117-1161, https://perma.cc/HS2T-BLNG.
t These are: Padilla v. Kentucky, 559 U.S. 356 (2010), https:// perma.cc/M9QC-6Z6K; Missouri v. Frye, 566 U.S. 134 (2012), https://perma.cc/2SXR-BW8L; Lafler v. Cooper, 566 U.S. 156 (2012), https://perma.cc/59CN-MFDK; and Lee v. United States, 582 U.S.        (2017), https://perma.cc/AX9M-L56Y . Also see Hill v. Lockhart, 474 U.S. 52 
(1985) (establishing that claims of ineffective assistance of counsel in the plea bargain context are governed by the two-part test set forth in Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668 (1984)), https://perma.cc/64UN-C3C7 . However, there is a circuit split as to whether 
this right to counsel applies during “informal” plea offers. In Frye, the Court used the word “formal;” in Lafler, it did not. Some lower courts are now applying the right to effective legal counsel only to “formal” plea offers. See for example Johnson v. United States, 860 F. Supp. 2d 663, 789-90 (N.D. Iowa 2012) (establishing the requirement of a formal plea offer from the prosecution to be a bright line test governing whether a claim of prejudice arising from counsel’s deficient performance in plea negotiations can be made), https://perma.cc/K3VK-96HB; and DeFilippo v. United States, No. 09-CV-4153 (NGG) (E.D.N.Y . Mar. 1, 2013) (“Thus, the lack of a formal plea offer strongly weighs against a finding that [but for the ineffective assistance of counsel] DeFilippo would have pled guilty”), https://perma.cc/4R3N-4PTG.
u “[A] valid guilty plea “forgoes not only a fair trial, but also other accompanying constitutional guarantees. . . . includ[ing] the privilege against compulsory self-incrimination, the jury trial right, and the right to confront accusers. . . . A valid guilty plea also renders irrelevant—and thereby prevents the defendant from appealing—the constitutionality of case-related government conduct that takes place before the plea is entered. Neither can the defendant later complain that the indicting grand jury was unconstitutionally selected.” Class v. United States, 583 U.S. ___ (2018) (citations omitted), https://perma.cc/77XF-R8XB . For trial 
rights relinquished, see Boykin v. Alabama, 395 U.S. 238, 242-244 (1969) (a guilty plea involves relinquishing the rights to a jury trial, to the assistance of trial counsel, to raise a defense, and to confront accusers, and against self-incrimination). For antecedent rights relinquished, see Tollett v. Henderson, 411 U.S. 258, 266 (1973) (entry of a guilty plea forfeits an accused’s right to raise claims of constitutional deprivation that occurred prior to the entry of the guilty plea), https://perma.cc/S7GV-QU4H. For rights that are not impliedly waived by a plea deal, see Menna v. New York, 423 U.S. 61, 63 & n.2 (1975) (holding that the accused did not waive his double jeopardy claim when he entered the plea because his claim was that the State could not convict him regardless of whether his factual guilt was established), https://perma.cc/3SQH-3WKJ . Also 
see Blackledge v. Perry, 417 U.S. 21 (1974), https://perma.cc/ Z98V-3MFC .
v For a discussion of express waiver provisions, see Alexandra W. Reimelt, “An Unjust Bargain: Plea Bargains and Waiver of the Right to Appeal,” Boston College Law Review 51, no. 3 (2010), 871, 876-879, https://perma.cc/Y682-QYJ3 . For rights that may not be waived, 
see for example United States v. Mezzanatto, 513 U.S. 196, 204 (1995) (suggesting that there are rights, such as the right to conflict-free counsel, that are so integral to the fact-finding process that they cannot be waived), https://perma.cc/LJ8F-3G7B .
w See Class v. United States, 583 U.S.        (2018) (a guilty plea alone does not bar people from challenging the constitutionality of the statute under which they were convicted on direct appeal), https://perma.cc/5S6S-EAUW ; and Garza v. Idaho, 586 U.S.        (2019) In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining53
(people have a constitutional right to an appeal even if they 
have purportedly waived that right because some claims such as whether the waiver is valid are unwaivable), https://perma.cc/U9LV-XTM2.
x United States v. Lutchman, No. 17-291 (2d Cir. Dec. 6, 2018) (a person’s appellate waiver in his plea agreement was not supported by consideration and thus did not bar his challenge to his sentence on appeal), https://perma.cc/J5DS-X2T4 .
“Misdemeanor justice and plea bargains” p. 16
a Robert C. Boruchowitz, Malia N. Brink, and Maureen Dimino, Minor Crimes, Massive Waste: The Terrible Toll of America’s Broken Misdemeanor Courts (Washington, DC: National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, 2009), 10-11 & 25-26, https://perma.cc/ U8RN-AV5T ; and Jenny Roberts, “Why Misdemeanors Matter: 
Defining Effective Advocacy in the Lower Criminal Courts,” UC Davis Law Review 45 (2011), 277 , 280-281, https://perma.cc/ W5JG-WMGV . 
b Ian Weinstein, “The Adjudication of Minor Offenses in New York City,” Fordham Urban Law Journal 31, no. 4 (2004), 1157 , 1159-1160, https://perma.cc/NNG3-ZM9S . 
c Designations vary widely from jurisdiction to jurisdiction and are largely a product of a particular jurisdiction’s labeling choices. See Megan Stevenson and Sandra Mayson, “The Scale of Misdemeanor Justice,” Boston University Law Review 98 (2018), 731, 739-740, https://perma.cc/2YSR-8NAZ. Also see Roberts, “Why Misdemeanors Matter,” 2011, 277 , 291-292; and Ian Weinstein, “The Adjudication of Minor Offenses,” 2004, 1157 , 1164-1166 (discussing the wide breadth of minor criminal statutes in New York). 
d Ram Subramanian, Ruth Delaney, Stephen Roberts et al., Incarceration’s Front Door: The Misuse of Jails in America (New York: Vera Institute of Justice, 2015), https://perma.cc/K6UV-F45J . 
Also see John Irwin, The Jail: Managing the Underclass in American Society (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1985), 2 (describing jail as an institution of control meant to “manage society’s rabble”).
e Stevenson and Mayson, “The Scale of Misdemeanor Justice,” 2018, 731, 737 . The authors note that between 2009 and the publication of their study most people used a national estimate calculated by the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers (NACDL) in a 2009 study about misdemeanors. Extrapolating from 2006 data from 12 states, NACDL estimated that there were 10.5 million misdemeanor cases nationally. Stevenson and Mayson suggest that the discrepancy between their number and NACDL’s estimate may be due to the fact that the 12 states used in the 2009 analysis could have had misdemeanor filing rates lower than the national average, creating a downward bias to the estimate. Ibid., 733 and 763-764. For NACDL’s estimate, see Boruchowitz, Brink, and Dimino, Minor Crimes, Massive Waste, 2009, 11. For the statewide breakdown, see National Center for State Courts, “Statewide Criminal Caseload Composition in 31 States, 2016,” https://perma.cc/8AEX-SPVY . This number has not changed substantially over the last decade. See Robert LaFountain, Richard Schauffler, Shauna Strickland et al., Examining the Work of State Courts: An Analysis of 2008 State Court Caseloads (Washington, DC: National Center for State Courts, 2010), 24 (finding that in 11 state courts, 79 percent of all cases in which a district attorney filed charges involved people accused of misdemeanor crimes), https://perma.cc/92VU-2KLK. Also see Preeti Chauhan, Adam G. Fera, Megan B. Welsh et al., Trends in Misdemeanor Arrests in New York (New York: John Jay College of Criminal Justice, 2018), 16 (reporting that in New York City, misdemeanor arrests numbered 179,427 , and 271,205 criminal summonses were issued in 2016), https://perma.cc/MA8M-FUDX.
f Compare Malcolm Feeley, The Process is Punishment (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1979), 5 (stating that 80 to 90 percent of all criminal prosecutions begin and end in the lower courts); Josh Bowers, “Legal Guilt, Normative Innocence, and the Equitable Decision Not to Prosecute,” Columbia Law Review 110, no. 7 (2010), 1655, 1717 and table 3 (demonstrating that in 2008, misdemeanors in Iowa outnumbered felonies five to one [126,246 to 25,077]);  and Victor Eugene Flango, “Judicial Roles for Modern Courts,” National Center for State Courts, 2013, https://perma.cc/ 9XFM-63AE (noting that “approximately 80 percent of criminal cases are misdemeanors, and more than 70 percent of them are handled by municipal judges, justices of the peace, or magistrates in limited-jurisdiction courts”). Also see Stevenson and Mayson, “The Scale of Misdemeanor Justice,” 2018, 746-747 , (reporting that NCSC confirmed that the three-to-one ratio between misdemeanor and felony caseloads remained stable between 2007 and 2016).
g Alexandra Natapoff, “Misdemeanors,” Annual Review of Law and Social Science 11 (2015), 255, 256 (stating that “the lowly misdemeanor—not homicide or rape—is the paradigmatic American crime and the paradigmatic product of the American criminal system”). Most misdemeanor cases—95 percent—are resolved by guilty plea. Ibid., 255-267 , 259. This is also borne out when looking at specific jurisdictions. For example, in 2014, only 0.2 percent of misdemeanor cases in New York City went to trial. See Michael Rempel, Ashmini Kerodal, Joseph Spadafore, and Chris Mai, Jail in New York City: Evidence-Based Opportunities for Reform (New York: Center for Court Innovation and Vera Institute of Justice, 2017), 70, Table 5.5, https://perma.cc/JTY9-CRAC . 
h See for example Issa Kohler-Hausmann, “Managerial Justice and Mass Misdemeanors,” Stanford Law Review 66, no. 3 (2014), 611, 624, n.27 (arguing that misdemeanor justice in New York City is not particularly interested in evidence or guilt, but rather in exercising social control through marking, procedural hassle, and performance), https://perma.cc/ND67-MAWV .
i Alexandra Natapoff, “Aggregation and Urban Misdemeanors,” Fordham Urban Law Journal 40, no. 3 (2016), 1043, 1070-1071, https://perma.cc/Q3NU-JGCY . Also see Issa Kohler-Hausmann, 
Misdemeanorland: Criminal Courts and Social Control in an Age of Broken Windows Policing (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2018), 125 (noting that two DA’s offices had “standard offers printed 54
Vera Institute of Justiceon a sheet that listed the office policy for arraignment offers by 
charge type and number of prior arrests”) and 656-657 (discussion about standard deals).
j Alisa Smith and Sean Maddan, Three-Minute Justice: Haste and Waste in Florida’s Misdemeanor Courts, (Washington, DC: National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, 2011), 14-15 (of 1,649 misdemeanor adjudications in 21 Florida counties, “[a]lmost 70 percent of defendants observed entered a guilty or no contest plea at arraignment”), https://perma.cc/883L-FSDW . In New York City, 
more than 57 percent of all misdemeanor and violation cases reach a disposition at arraignment. See Kohler-Hausmann, “Managerial Justice,” (2014), 611, 654. Also see Boruchowitz, Brink, and Dimino, Minor Crimes, Massive Waste, 2009, 31-32 (discussing how in many jurisdictions defense lawyers are expected to “meet and plead” their clients in order to resolve cases as soon as first appearance, with cases taking a total of five minutes in certain jurisdictions); and Feeley, The Process is Punishment, 1979, 9-11 (“While a few cases took up as much as a minute or two of the court’s time . . . the overwhelming majority of cases took just a few seconds”).
k For examples of hard-to-refuse deals, see Kohler-Hausmann, “Managerial Justice,” 2014, 645 (in New York City, “[t]he largest misdemeanor disposition category, the adjournment in contemplation of dismissal (ACD), is a conditional dismissal [and] . . . [t]he largest conviction category resulting from misdemeanor arrests is the noncriminal violation or infraction”). For both ACDs and noncriminal convictions, cases are sealed after a certain specified period. Ibid., 649 and 651. Also see Josh Bowers, “Punishing the Innocent,” University of Pennsylvania Law Review 156, no. 5 (2008), 1117 , 1144 (noting that in New York City in 1998, 52 percent of all misdemeanor charges that ended in conviction were reduced to pleas to noncriminal violations and that for defendants with no criminal convictions, the rate of reduction was 86 percent. Even for people with both prior felony and misdemeanor convictions, the rate of that type of reduction was more than 25 percent. Also, more than 50 percent of all misdemeanor charges that ended in conviction resulted in non-jail dispositions. Of jail sentences, 57 percent were for sentences of time served.)
l Josh Bowers, “Legal Guilt, Normative Innocence, and the Equitable Decision Not to Prosecute,” Columbia Law Review 110 (2010), 1655, 1701-1702 and 1709. Indeed, Bowers found that in both Iowa and New York, prosecutors almost never declined to charge misdemeanor offenses largely because they expected to procure quick guilty pleas in these cases. Ibid., 1716-1720. Also see Ibid., 1709 (in which the author discusses how “disposable” cases are where prosecutors’ initial decisions are “dispositive on the question of whether the defendant will ultimately end up with some type of conviction.”). Also see Stephanos Bibas, “Plea Bargaining Outside the Shadow of Trial,” Harvard Law Review 117 , no. 8 (2004), 2463, 2464-2465 (discussing the “shadow of a trial” theory of plea bargaining, in which bargains are struck in anticipation of likely trial outcomes and are affected by procedural safeguards inherent in trial practice).m Bowers, “Punishing the Innocent,” 2008, 1139-1140 (discussing process costs in low-stakes cases for prosecutors, defense attorneys, and judges) and 1132-1134 (discussing defendants’ process costs in low-stakes cases). Also see Milton Heumann, Plea Bargaining: The Experiences of Prosecutors, Judges and Defense Attorneys, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978), 103 (finding that the “central concern [for prosecutors] with . . . nonserious cases is to dispose of them quickly). Heumann also noted that people “in relatively minor cases . . . simply want to ‘get it over with.’” Ibid. at 69. Also see Alexandra Natapoff, “Misdemeanors,” Southern California Law Review 85, no. 5 (2012), 1313, 1343-1347 (discussing why people feel pressure to plead guilty in low stakes misdemeanor cases), https://perma.cc/Q3SF-NV8V ; Issa Kohler-
Hausmann, “Managerial Justice and Mass Misdemeanors,” Stanford Law Review 66, no. 3 (2014), 611, 655 and 691; Weinstein, “Adjudication of Minor Offenses,” 2004, 1157 , 1162-1163; and Feeley, The Process is Punishment, 1979, 31-33. 
n See note m. It can also include the stigma associated with having been arrested and a multitude of process costs related to mounting a defense—including attorney’s fees, the inconvenience and procedural hassle of multiple court appearances, and pecuniary loss due to missed work or unanticipated cost outlays such as those associated with transport or standby childcare. Bowers also notes that the “lead up to even a misdemeanor trial may take weeks or months,” some or all of which may be spent in jail. See Bowers, “Punishing the Innocent,” 2008, 1133. Also see Heumann, Plea Bargaining, 1978, 70 (discussing how people in minor cases compare the cost of pleading guilty with the costs of fighting their case and decide more often than not that pleading guilty is less costly).
o Feeley, The Process is Punishment, 1979, 13 (describing some of the reasons why it may be “rational” for people to plead guilty in petty offense cases). Also see Bowers, “Punishing the Innocent,” 2008, 1139-1140.
p See for example Bowers, “Legal Guilt, Normative Innocence,” 2010, 1655; and Kohler-Hausmann, “Managerial Justice,” (2014), 611. 
q Kohler-Hausmann, “Managerial Justice,” 2014, 611, 643 and 656 (“As the courts shifted away from the adjudicative model toward the managerial model, criminal justice actors increasingly used the misdemeanor process to mark, classify, and supervise people, often without securing a conviction or imposing a sentence”).
“Challenges in researching plea bargaining” p. 25
a Besiki L. Kutateladze, Victoria Z. Lawson, and Nancy R. Andiloro, “Does Evidence Really Matter? An Exploratory Analysis of the Role of Evidence in Plea Bargaining in Felony Drug Cases,” Law and Human Behavior 39, no. 5 (2015), 431-442, 431.
b Kutateladze, Lawson, and Andiloro, “Does Evidence Really Matter?,” 2015, 432. See generally Bruce Frederick and Don Stemen, The Anatomy of Discretion: An Analysis of Prosecutorial Decision Making – Technical Report (New York: Vera Institute of Justice, In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining55
2012), https://perma.cc/E6PW-YCWR, in which the researchers 
found several discrepancies between how prosecutors viewed their work and statistical analysis of actual case outcomes. 
c See for example Allison D. Redlich, Alicia Summers, and Steven Hoover, “Self-Reported False Confessions and False Guilty Pleas Among Offenders with Mental Illness,” Law and Human Behavior 34, no. 1 (2010), 79-90, 79 and 89.
d See for example Kutateladze, Lawson, and Andiloro, “Does Evidence Really Matter?” 2015, 434.
e See Besiki Kutateladze, “Tracing Charge Trajectories: A Study of the Influence of Race in Charge Changes at Case Screening, Arraignment, and Disposition,” Criminology 56, no. 1 (2018), 123-153.
f Kutateladze, “Tracing Charge Trajectories,” 2018, 127 .
g See Andrew Chongseh Kim, “Underestimating the Trial Penalty: An Empirical Analysis of the Federal Trial Penalty and Critique of the Abrams Study,” Mississippi Law Journal 84, no. 5 (2015), 1195-1256.
h Kutateladze, Lawson, and Andiloro, “Does Evidence Really Matter?” 2015, 440.
i Sonja Starr, “Estimating Gender Disparities in Federal Criminal Cases,” University of Michigan Law & Economics Working Papers 57 (2012), 2 and 3, https://perma.cc/N5FP-JZBC . 
j Kutateladze, Lawson, and Andiloro, “Does Evidence Really Matter?” 2015, 431-432.
k Don Stemen and Gipsy Escobar, “Whither the Prosecutor? Prosecutor and County Effects on Guilty Plea Outcomes in Wisconsin,” Justice Quarterly 35, no. 7 (2018), 1166-1194, 1168; Anne Morrison Piehl and Shawn D. Bushway, “Measuring and Explaining Charge Bargaining,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology 23, no. 2 (2007), 105-125; and Kutateladze, Lawson, and Andiloro, “Does Evidence Really Matter?” 2015, 440.
“Displaced sentencing discretion? The impact of 
sentencing guidelines on charge bargaining practices”  
p. 36
a Until the late 1970s, judges had unfettered discretion to fashion 
sentences subject only to statutory maximums. As a result, criminal sentences were not only inconsistent and unpredictable, but also rife with unwarranted disparities between similarly situated offenders. Academic commentators highlighted a “gross disparity in sentencing, with different sentences imposed upon similar offenders who have committed similar offenses by the same judge on different days, different judges on different days, different judges on the same day, and different judges in different jurisdictions.” See Richard Singer, “In Favor of ‘Presumptive Sentences’ Set by a Sentencing Commission,” Crime & Delinquency 24, no. 4 (1978), 401, 402. In her dissent in Blakely v. Washington, U.S. Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O’Connor noted that unguided sentencing discretion “inevitably resulted in severe disparities in sentences received and served by defendants committing the same offense and having similar criminal histories. Indeed, rather than reflect legally relevant criteria, these disparities too often were correlated with constitutionally suspect variables such as race.” 542 U.S. 296, 315 (2004) (O’Connor, J., dissenting). Judge Marvin Frankel criticized this highly discretionary approach to sentencing as lawless and unfair in his book Criminal Sentences: Law Without Order (New York: Hill & Wang, 1973), 8. For additional discussion on the rationale for sentencing guidelines, see Steven Chanenson, “The Next Era of Sentencing Reform,” Emory Law Journal 54, no. 1 (2005), 377-460, 396-397 , https://perma.cc/ 365T-XJEX. For the most recent count of jurisdictions with sentencing guidelines, see “Jurisdictions” tab at “Sentencing Guidelines Resource Center,” Robina Institute of Criminal Law and Criminal Justice, University of Minnesota, https://perma.cc/ Y6G8-RMFF . 
b For the definition of “presumptive” sentencing guidelines, see Chanenson, “The Next Era of Sentencing Reform,” 2005, 384. Also see Jon Wool and Don Stemen, Aggravated Sentencing: Blakely v. Washington: Practical Implications for State Sentencing Systems (New York: Vera Institute of Justice, 2004), 2, https://perma.cc/YC6U-UQTM. 
c For definitions of “voluntary” sentencing guidelines, see Chanenson, “The Next Era of Sentencing Reform,” 2005, 384. Also see Wool and Stemen, Aggravated Sentencing, 2004, 2.
d For a discussion about these differences, see Richard Frase, “Varying Binding Effects of Guidelines: The Mandatory-to-Advisory Continuum,” Robina Institute of Criminal Law and Criminal Justice, University of Minnesota, March 25, 2015, https://perma.cc/HD5X-YHP2.
e See for example Candace McCoy, “Determinate Sentencing, Plea Bargaining Bans, and Hydraulic Discretion in California,” Justice System Journal 9, no. 3 (1984), 256-275. Also see David Boerner, “Sentencing Guidelines and Prosecutorial Discretion,” Judicature 78, no. 4 (1995), 196, 198, https://perma.cc/CK22-8BMQ . 
f Terance D. Miethe, “Charging and Plea Bargaining Practices under Determinate Sentencing: An Investigation of the Hydraulic Displacement of Discretion,” Journal of Criminal Law & Criminology 78, no. 1 (1987), 155, 165-171, https://perma.cc/S2QZ-K4LP . Miethe 
also found little evidence that extralegal attributes became more important predictors of dispositions (severity of initial charges, charge dismissals, charge reductions, sentence negotiations, and overall plea bargains) after the guidelines were implemented.
g Ibid., 175.
h Unlike other states with presumptive sentencing guidelines, Ohio does not have a sentencing grid. Presumptions, required findings or factors, or other guidance, including sentencing ranges, are contained in the criminal code for each criminal offense. John Wooldredge and Timothy Griffin, “Displaced Discretion Under Ohio Sentencing Guidelines,” Journal of Criminal Justice 33 (2005), 301-316. See also John Wooldredge, Fritz Rauschenberg, 56
Vera Institute of JusticeTimothy Griffin, and Travis Pratt, Impact of Ohio’s Senate Bill 2 
on Sentencing Disparities (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice, 2002), 4, https://perma.cc/TLG8-UHU4 .
i Wooldredge and Griffin, “Displaced Discretion, Ohio,” 2005, 301-316. Similar to Miethe’s findings, the researchers also found that any increase in levels of prosecutorial discretion that might have occurred did not result in substantive extralegal disparities in case dispositions.
j Wooldredge and Griffin, “Displaced Discretion, Ohio,” 2005, 301, 310.
k Washington, DC, implemented voluntary sentencing guidelines in 2006 after a pilot period that started in 2004. Previously, the district operated under an indeterminate sentencing structure until 1999 and then a determinate system after discretionary parole was abolished in 2000. See District of Columbia Sentencing Commission, An Evaluation of the DC Voluntary Sentencing Guidelines (Washington, DC: District of Columbia Sentencing Commission, 2017), 5-6, https://perma.cc/G52E-S8FX. 
l Stephen E. Vance and J. C. Oleson, “Displaced Discretion: The Effects of Sentencing Guidelines on Prosecutors’ Charge Bargaining in the District of Columbia Superior Court,” Criminal Justice Policy Review 25, no. 3 (2014), 347-377 .
m Stephen E. Vance, Kerry M. Richmond, and J. C. Oleson, “Weighing the Value of the Bargain: Prosecutorial Discretion After Sentencing Guidelines,” Criminal Justice Policy Review 30, no. 7 (2019).
n Vance and Oleson, “Displaced Discretion, DC,” 2014, 347 , 368; and Vance, Richmond and Oleson, “Weighing the Value of the Bargain,” 2019.
o Wooldredge and Griffin, “Displaced Discretion, Ohio,” 2005, 301, 304; Vance and Oleson, “Displaced Discretion: DC,” 2014, 347 , 353; Vance, Richmond and Oleson, “Weighing the Value of the Bargain,” 2019; and Miethe, “Charging and Plea Bargaining Practices under Determinate Sentencing,” 1987 , 155, 161. 
p Anne Morrison Piehl and Shawn D. Bushway, “Measuring and Explaining Charge Bargaining,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology 23, no. 2 (2007), 105, 118-119.
q Piehl and Bushway, “Measuring and Explaining Charge Bargaining,” 2007 , 105 and 117 .In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining57
Endnotes
1 F or a description of the typical adversarial common law trial, 
see for example, Gerard E. Lynch, “Our Administrative System of 
Criminal Justice,” Fordham Law Review 66, no. 6 (1998), 2117 , 2118-2119, https://perma.cc/YKC7-8TW3 . For a discussion of how this 
trial-centric vision of criminal justice is embedded in the popular imagination and, in particular, cultural depictions of the system, see Stephanos Bibas, The Machinery of Criminal Justice (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012), xv-xvi. 
2
 F or a discussion of how trials create public accountability for 
both the accused and the government through the public airing of charges and evidence, see Mary Jo White, “The Importance of Trials to the Law and Public Accountability,” speech, United States Securities and Exchange Commission, 5th Annual Judge A. Flannery Lecture, November 14, 2013, https://perma.cc/YH5T-JLMU . 
3
 In 2018 , only 2 percent of criminal cases resolved in federal court 
went to trial. United States Courts, “U.S. District Courts—Judicial Business 2018,” https://perma.cc/B33N-8DWE. The percentages for most state courts were comparable. See Nicole Waters, Kathryn Genthon, Sarah Gibson, and Diane Robinson, “Court Statistics Project DataViewer,” database (Washington, DC: Court Statistics Project, 2019), http://popup.ncsc.org/CSP/CSP_Intro.aspx.
4
 F or example, in large urban courts in 2009, the most recent year for 
which data was gathered, 66 percent of people arrested on felony charges were convicted—54 percent of a felony and the remaining 12 percent of a misdemeanor; 97 percent of these convictions were the result of a plea. Brian A. Reaves, Felony Defendants in Large Urban Counties, 2009 - Statistical Tables (Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), 2013), 22, 24, Table 21, https://perma.cc/8PNS-WDA6 . Of the 79,704 people whose criminal cases 
were terminated in federal court in 2018, 73,109 were convicted. 71,550 (98 percent) of them pleaded guilty. United States Courts, “U.S. District Courts—Judicial Business 2018.” Also see Bibas, The Machinery of Criminal Justice, 2012.
5
 F or the proportion of guilty pleas that are a result of plea 
bargaining, see Lindsey Devers, Plea and Charge Bargaining: Research Summary (Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice Assistance, 2011), 1, https://perma.cc/TQR8-79JU . For the definition of plea 
bargaining see, Black’s Law Dictionary 1270 (11th ed., 2014).
6
 Joseph A. Colquitt, “ Ad Hoc Plea Bargaining,” Tulane Law Review 
75, no. 3 (2001), 695, 696.
7 Lafler v. Cooper, 566 U.S. 156, 170 (2012), https://perma.cc/ WQH6-TETJ . 
8
 W esley MacNeil Oliver, “Toward a Common Law of Plea 
Bargaining,” Kentucky Law Review 102, no. 1 (2013), 1, 31-37 , https://perma.cc/TE94-LAJ5 (discussing the near limitless discretion prosecutors possess when making charging and plea bargaining decisions). For definitions, see Marc Miller, Ronald Wright et al., Criminal Procedures, Prosecutions, and Adjudications: Cases, Statutes and Executive Materials, 6th ed. (New York: Wolters Kluwer, 2019), 309 and 363.  
9
 Ger ard E. Lynch, “Screening Versus Plea Bargaining: Exactly What 
Are We Trading Off?,” Stanford Law Review 55 (2003) 1399, 1403 (arguing that most plea negotiations are discussions of the merits of the case in which defense attorneys point out legal, evidentiary, or practical weaknesses in the prosecutor’s case, or mitigating circumstances that merit mercy), https://perma.cc/6FUH-VZVV . Also 
see Cynthia Alkon, “What’s Law Got to Do with It? Plea Bargaining Reform after Lafler and Frye,” Arbitration Law Review 7 , no. 1 (2015), 10, https://perma.cc/X4WG-DW8L. 
10
 See f or example John Lande, “A Framework for Advancing 
Negotiation Theory: Implications from a Study of How Lawyers Reach Agreement in Pretrial Litigation,” Cardozo Journal of Conflict Resolution 16, no. 1 (2014) 1, 15-16 and footnote 47 , https://perma.cc/ 2PNY-ZWMZ. 
11
 Alk on, “What’s Law Got to Do with It?”, 2015, 10 .
12 F or “blind plea,” see LegalMatch, “Blind plea,” https://perma.
cc/6CG9-MSTQ . For “pleading the sheet,” see Laura Berend, 
“Less Reliable Preliminary Hearings and Plea Bargains in Criminal Cases in California: Discovery Before and After Proposition 115,” American University Law Review 48, no. 2 (1998), 465, notes 211 and 227 , https://perma.cc/SN9E-CH76 . For a discussion on the 
varied meanings of an “open plea,” see Harper v. State, 567 S.W.3d 450, 454-455 (Tex. App. 2019), (discussing how one of the two meanings refers to “pleas where no plea bargaining of any kind has occurred”), https://perma.cc/6LFD-UJH8 .
13
 S tephanos Bibas, “Transparency and Participation in Criminal 
Procedure,” New York University Law Review 81, no. 3 (2006), 911, 923 (“Plea bargaining usually occurs in conference rooms, courtroom hallways, or on private telephone calls instead of open court”), https://perma.cc/2LSS-5ASD . Also see Stephanos Bibas, 
“Plea Bargaining Outside the Shadow of Trial,” Harvard Law Review 117 , no. 8 (2004), 2463, 2547 (“plea bargaining hides within a low-visibility process”), https://perma.cc/GA76-3SQX; Robert E. Scott and William J. Stuntz, “Plea Bargaining as Contract,” Yale Law Journal 101, no. 8 (1992), 1909, 1911-1912, (“Most cases are disposed of by means that seem scandalously casual: a quick conversation in a prosecutor’s office or a courthouse hallway between attorneys familiar with only the basics of the case, with no witnesses present”); and Daniel S. McConkie, “Judges As Framers of Plea Bargaining,” Stanford Law and Policy Review 26, no. 1 (2015), 61, 63, (“Plea bargaining happens with little judicial involvement—between prosecutors and defense attorneys, behind closed doors and with practically no public oversight”), https://perma.cc/QV6X-EQTS . See 
also Alkon, “What’s Law Got to Do with It?,” 2015, 1, 11 (discussing a 1984 court ethnography by Douglas Maynard, which found that plea negotiations happened in “spurts and starts” in between other 
conversations).   
14 Sc ott and Stuntz, “Plea Bargaining as Contract,” 1992, 1909, 
1912 (discussing critiques of the illicit and hidden nature of plea bargaining: “critics emphasize the unfairness (and inaccuracy) 58
Vera Institute of Justiceof determining defendants’ fate without full investigation, without 
testimony and evidence and impartial factfinding”).
15 H. Mitchell Caldw ell, “Coercive Plea Bargaining: The Unrecognized 
Scourge of the Justice System,” Catholic University Law Review 61, no. 1 (2011), 63, 82-83, https://perma.cc/XU2L-8L38 . 
16
 Oliv er, “Toward A Common Law,” 2013, 1.
17 See f or example Carlos Berdejó, “Criminalizing Race: Racial 
Disparities in Plea-Bargaining,” Boston College Law Review 59, no. 4 (2018), 1187 , https://perma.cc/E6D8-ZFFJ .
18
 Jac ob Kang-Brown and Ram Subramanian, Out of Sight: The 
Growth of Jails in Rural America (New York: Vera Institute of Justice, 2017), 9-10, https://perma.cc/34ME-RRRT .
19
 F or a review of these studies and their findings, see Léon Digard 
and Elizabeth Swavola, Justice Denied: The Harmful and Lasting Effects of Pretrial Detention (New York: Vera Institute of Justice, 2019), 2-6, https://perma.cc/N42X-TMLK.
20
 Some r esearchers have argued that pretrial detention weakens a 
person’s bargaining power during the plea negotiation stage and highlight the lack of work/income, family contact, and access to social support during incarceration, plus the likelihood of immediate release using time served for sentences given for lower-level charges. See for example Will Dobbie, Jacob Goldin, and Crystal S. Yang, “The Effects of Pretrial Detention on Conviction, Future Crime, and Employment: Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges.” American Economic Review 108, no. 2 (2018), 201-240, https://perma.cc/Y2B7-BSN8; and Emily Leslie and Nolan G. Pope, “The Unintended Impact of Pretrial Detention on Case Outcomes: Evidence from New York City Arraignments,” Journal of Law and Economics 60, no. 3 (2017), 529-557 , https://perma.cc/C8NR-GGB8 .
21
 Meghan Sacks and Alissa R. A ckerman, “Pretrial Detention and 
Guilty Pleas: If They Cannot Afford Bail, They Must Be Guilty,” Criminal Justice Studies 25, no. 3, (2012), 265, 272-273.
22
 Ellen A. Donnelly and John M. MacDonald, “The Do wnstream 
Effects of Bail and Pretrial Detention on Racial Disparities in Incarceration,” Journal of Criminal Law & Criminology 108, no. 4 (2018), 775, 805, https://perma.cc/M3MF-RTKV . 
23
 F or previous research, see for example Celesta A. Albonetti, “Race 
and the Probability of Pleading Guilty,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology 6, no. 3 (1990), 315-334.
24
 Albone tti, “Race and the Probability of Pleading Guilty,” (1990), 
315, 329-332.
25 F or a definition of a natural experiment, see Thad Dunning, 
“Improving Causal Inference Strengths and Limitations of Natural Experiments,” Political Research Quarterly 61, no. 2 (2008), 282-93, 282-83. Note that although two of the studies (Leslie and Pope, “Unintended Impact,” (2017); and Dobbie, Goldin, and Yang, “The Effects of Pre-Trial Detention,” 2018) demonstrated that a quasi-experimental design can improve estimates based on regression analysis, the other two studies (Paul Heaton, Sandra G. Mayson, and Megan Stevenson, “The Downstream Consequences of Misdemeanor Pretrial Detention,” Stanford Law Review 69, no. 3 (2017), https://perma.cc/Y4P4-GQUY ; and Megan Stevenson, 
“Distortion of Justice: How the Inability to Pay Bail Affects Case Outcomes,” working paper (Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Law School, November 8, 2016), https://perma.cc/W4EC-R9MW) found that the differences between the findings of their natural experiments and regression analyses were either not statistically significant or did not vary substantially. This suggests that regression analyses can produce reasonable causal estimates that link pretrial detention to a person’s decision to plead guilty when sufficient controls are deployed.
26
 The ma jor assumption on which these studies are based is that the 
likelihood of being detained pretrial is exogenously affected by the magistrate who presides over the bail hearing.
27
 S tevenson, “Distortion of Justice,” 2016, 3 and 17 .
28 L eslie and Pope, “Unintended Impact,” 2017 , 529, 543 and 547 . The 
estimated effect of detention on pleading guilty is only about 25 percent smaller than the effect on conviction, which suggests that detention primarily affects conviction by inducing some people who would not have pled guilty if released to plead guilty after they are detained.
29
 L eslie and Pope, “Unintended Impact,” 2017 , 529, 548. 
30 L eslie and Pope, “Unintended Impact,” 2017 , 529, 552.
31 Heat on, Mayson, and Stevenson, “Downstream Consequences,” 
2017 , 711, 771 and 776. 
32 Dobbie , Goldin, and Yang, “The Effects of Pre-Trial Detention,” 2018, 
201, 225. 
33 Will Dobbie , Jacob Goldin and Crystal Yang, “The Effects of Pre-
Trial Detention on Conviction, Future Crime, and Employment: Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges,” Working Paper No. 22511 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 2016), 23-24, https://perma.cc/XN26-HFBJ .
34
 Dobbie , Goldin, and Yang, “The Effects of Pre-Trial Detention,” 2018, 
201, 225 and 234.
35 Heat on, Mayson, and Stevenson, “Downstream Consequences,” 
2017 , 711-794, 747 . Also see Dobbie, Goldin, and Yang, “The Effects of Pre-Trial Detention,” Working Paper No. 22511, 2016, 25-26. 
36
 Heat on, Mayson, and Stevenson, “Downstream Consequences,” 
2017 , 711-794, 749. 
37 S tevenson, “Distortion of Justice,” 2016, 1, 21-22 and Table 7 on p. 
35.
38 Dobbie , Goldin, and Yang, “The Effects of Pre-Trial Detention,” 
Working Paper No. 22511, 2016, 23-24 . 
39 Dobbie , Goldin, and Yang, “The Effects of Pre-Trial Detention,” 2018, 
201, 230 . In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining59
40 L eslie and Pope, “Unintended Impact,” 2017 , 529, 542, 553-
54. However, the researchers found that, unlike the felony 
subsample, first-time offender status is not a source of substantial 
heterogeneity. If anything, people without a criminal history were less affected by pretrial detention. Ibid., 548, Table 10. 
41
 Ibid.
42 Susan Ehrhar d, “Plea Bargaining and the Death Penalty: An 
Exploratory Study,” Justice System Journal 29, no. 3 (2008), 313-325, 314.
43
 Ehrhar d, “Plea Bargaining and the Death Penalty,” 2008, 313-325, 
314 and 316.
44 Ilyana K uziemko, “Does the Threat of the Death Penalty Affect 
Plea Bargaining in Murder Cases? Evidence From New York’s 1995 Reinstatement of Capital Punishment,” American Law and Economics Review 8, no. 1 (2006), 116-142.
45
 K uziemko, “Does the Threat of the Death Penalty Affect Plea 
Bargaining,” 2006, 116-142, 126. Confidence in the assumption that this change was the result, at least in part, of changes in the death penalty law is increased by the finding that plea behavior did not change for people charged with robbery, rape, or burglary over the same time period.
46
 K uziemko, “Does the Threat of the Death Penalty Affect Plea 
Bargaining,” 2006, 128.
47 Sher od Thaxton, “Leveraging Death,” The Journal of Criminal Law 
and Criminology 103, no. 2 (2013), 475-552.
48 Thaxt on, “Leveraging Death,” 2013, 525.
49 Ibid., 53 7 .
50 K ent S. Scheidegger, “The Death Penalty and Plea Bargaining to 
Life Sentences,” Working Paper 09-01 (Sacramento, CA: Criminal Justice Legal Foundation, 2009), 10, https://perma.cc/RNM8-TAFG.
51
 Scheidegger , “Plea Bargaining to Life Sentences,” 2009, 13.
52 Dean J . Champion, “Private Counsels and Public Defenders: A Look 
at Weak Cases, Prior Records, and Leniency in Plea Bargaining,” Journal of Criminal Justice 17 , no. 4 (1989), 256, 257 .
53
 Allison D . Redlich, Shawn D. Bushway, and Robert J. Norris, 
“Plea Decision-Making by Attorneys and Judges,” Journal of Experimental Criminology 12, no. 4 (2016), 537-561, 548-549. 
54
 R edlich, Bushway, and Norris, “Plea Decision-Making by Attorneys 
and Judges,” 2016, 552. 
55 Ibid., 556 and 55 7 . 
56 Bruc e Frederick and Don Stemen, The Anatomy of Discretion: An 
Analysis of Prosecutorial Decision Making – Technical Report  (New York: The Vera Institute of Justice, 2012), https://perma.cc/ H6A2-ET78 .
57
 Ibid., 202-219 .58 Ibid., 245 .
59 B esiki L. Kutateladze, Victoria Z. Lawson, and Nancy R. Andiloro, 
“Does Evidence Really Matter? An Exploratory Analysis of the Role of Evidence in Plea Bargaining in Felony Drug Cases,” Law and Human Behavior 39, no. 5 (2015), 431-442, 440. This study was not able to quantify the strength of the evidence, merely the existence of evidence.
60
 Ibid., 436 .
61 Ibid., 44 1.
62 Allison D . Redlich, Shi Yan, Robert J. Norris, and Shawn D. Bushway, 
“The Influence of Confessions on Guilty Pleas and Plea Discounts,” Psychology, Public Policy, and Law 24, no. 2 (2018), 147-157 , 148.
63
 Ibid., 14 7-157 , 153. People who maintained their innocence to the 
police but pled guilty received the largest sentence discounts. Ibid., 155. It is possible that a proportion of these people were factually innocent or otherwise had weak cases against them, incentivizing prosecutors to offer greater discounts in order to secure a conviction. People who provided only partial confessions received worse plea deals than those who fully confessed. Ibid., 152. The researchers hypothesized that such people were seen as being less remorseful than people who gave full confessions and received less leniency as a result. Ibid., 155.
64
 Ibid., 153 . For earlier studies, see Redlich, Bushway, and Norris, 
“Plea Decision-Making by Attorneys and Judges,” 2016.
65 R edlich, Yan, Norris, and Bushway, “Confessions,” 2018, 155.
66 K utateladze, Lawson, and Andiloro, “Does Evidence Really Matter?” 
2015, 431. 
67 Ibid., 439 .
68 F rederick and Stemen, The Anatomy of Discretion, 2012, 200-201.
69 See Albone tti, “Race and the Probability of Pleading Guilty,” (1990), 
315-334, 317; and Jon’a Meyer and Tara Gray, “Drunk Drivers in the Courts: Legal and Extra-Legal Factors Affecting Pleas and Sentences,” Journal of Criminal Justice 25, no. 2 (1997), 157-160.
70
 Meyer and Gr ay, “Drunk Drivers in the Courts,” (1997), 157 .
71 Ibid., 156 , 161. The researchers caution, however, that the sentencing 
guidelines for the specific offense studied may be highly influential in this decision-making process and may, therefore, limit generalizability to other offenses or other jurisdictions.
72
 Albone tti, “Race and the Probability of Pleading Guilty,” 1990, 323.
73 L auren O’Neill Shermer and Brian D. Johnson “Criminal 
Prosecutions: Examining Prosecutorial Discretion and Charge Reductions in U.S. Federal District Courts,” Justice Quarterly 27 , no. 3 (2010), 20, https://perma.cc/T6B9-VUFA. The sample consisted of 45,678 sentencing events and included felonies and class A misdemeanors. 60
Vera Institute of Justice74 Shermer and Johnson, “P rosecutorial Discretion and Charge 
Reductions,” 2010, 27 .
75 F or an example of a jurisdiction that incorporates criminal history 
into its plea bargaining guidelines, see Besiki L. Kutateladze, Nancy 
R. Andiloro, Brian D. Johnson, and Cassia C. Spohn, “Cumulative Disadvantage: Examining Racial and Ethnic Disparity in Prosecution and Sentencing,” Criminology 52, no. 3 (2014), 514-551, 523. For information about jurisdictions that incorporate criminal history into sentencing guidelines, see generally Neal B. Kauder and Brian J. Ostram, State Sentencing Guidelines: Profiles and Continuum (Washington, DC: National Center for State Courts, 2008), https://perma.cc/HG2G-GNCT . 
76
 Jeff ery T. Ulmer, James Eisenstein, and Brian D. Johnson, “Trial 
Penalties in Federal Sentencing: Extra-Guidelines Factors and District Variation,” Justice Quarterly 27 , no. 4 (2009), 1-33, 19, https://perma.cc/LMR4-2QCG; and Jeffery T. Ulmer and Mindy S. Bradley-Engen, “Variation in Trial Penalties Among Serious Violent Offenses,” Criminology 44, no. 3 (2006), 631-670, 653-654.
77
 Ulmer and Br adley-Engen, “Variation in Trial Penalties,” 2006, 661; 
and Ulmer, Eisenstein, and Johnson, “Trial Penalties in Federal Sentencing,” 2010, 584-585.
78
 Shermer and Johnson, “P rosecutorial Discretion and Charge 
Reductions,” 2010, 20.
79 K utateladze, Andiloro, Johnson, and Spohn, “Cumulative 
Disadvantage,” 2014, 532.
80 F rederick and Stemen, The Anatomy of Discretion, 2012, 217 .
81 Ibid., 204 and 209 .
82 K utateladze, Andiloro, Johnson, and Spohn, “Cumulative 
Disadvantage,” (2014), 538.
83 Ibid.
84 B esiki Kutateladze, Nancy R. Andiloro, and Brian D. Johnson, 
“Opening Pandora’s Box: How Does Defendant Race Influence Plea Bargaining?” Justice Quarterly 33, no. 3 (2016); and Kutateladze, Andiloro, Johnson, and Spohn, “Cumulative Disadvantage,” 2014.
85
 Digar d and Swavola, Justice Denied, 2019, 7 .
86 Donnelly and MacDonald, “The Do wnstream Effects of Bail,” 2018; 
and Kutateladze, Andiloro, Johnson, and Spohn, “Cumulative Disadvantage,” 2014.
87
 Carlos B erdejó, “Criminalizing Race,” 2018, 1187-1249.
88 Ibid., 1222.
89 Ibid., 122 6-1227 .
90 Ibid., 12 38.
91 K utateladze, Andiloro, and Johnson, “Pandora’s Box,” 2016; 
and Kutateladze, Andiloro, Johnson, and Spohn, “Cumulative Disadvantage,” 2014.92
 K utateladze, Andiloro, Johnson, and Spohn, “Cumulative 
Disadvantage,” 2014. This study found harsher treatment for Black people at all stages of prosecution, with one exception—they were significantly more likely than white people to have their cases dismissed. The authors speculate that this could be the result of a greater proportion of inappropriate arrests for Black people, which then lack sufficient evidentiary strength to continue. Alternatively, the authors also pose the possibility that victims of or witnesses to crimes in which the arrests were made may be less willing to cooperate with an investigation due to mistrust of the police. See ibid., 538, for more information.
93
 Jer emy D. Ball, “Is it a Prosecutor’s World? Determinants of Count 
Bargaining Decisions,” Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice 22, no. 3 (2006), 241-260, 256.
94
 Shermer and Johnson, “P rosecutorial Discretion and Charge 
Reductions,” 2010, 394-430. Although this study did not find proof of racial bias across all cases in the aggregate, it did uncover systematically poorer treatment of Black and Latinx people in plea bargaining for specific offenses. A later study examined a variety of metrics of treatment by prosecutors, including whether prosecutors recommended a custodial sentence and reductions in the seriousness of the top charge or the sentence length this charge could lead to. The researchers found evidence of harsher treatment towards Black and Latinx people for some offense types using some metrics of treatment, but not all. Frederick and Stemen, The Anatomy of Discretion, 2012.
95
 Shermer and Johnson, “Criminal P rosecutions,” 2010, 415.
96 B erdejó, “Criminalizing Race,” 2018, 1187; and Kutateladze, Lawson, 
and Andiloro, “Does Evidence Really Matter?” 2015, 439.
97 D anielle Rousseau and Gerald Pezzullo, “Race and Context in 
the Criminal Labeling of Drunk Driving Offenders: A Multilevel Examination of Extralegal Variables on Discretionary Plea Decisions,” Criminal Justice Policy Review 25, no. 6 (2014), https://perma.cc/H4DK-RX2F .
98
 R ousseau and Pezzullo, “Drunk Driving Offenders,” 2014, 696.
99 B esiki Kutateladze, “Tracing Charge Trajectories: A Study of 
the Influence of Race in Charge Changes at Case Screening, Arraignment, and Disposition,” Criminology 56, no. 1 (2018), 123-153.
100
 K utateladze, “Tracing Charge Trajectories,” 2018, 127 and 145-146. 
Furthermore, Black and Latinx people were more likely than white people to see their charges increased at screening—perhaps, the researchers theorize, due to a greater perceived threat to public safety posed by them or as a tactical move by prosecutors to create a charging baseline that will make someone more likely to accept a plea deal. 
101
 K utateladze, “Tracing Charge Trajectories,” 2018, 145.In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining61
102 Sonja S tarr, “Estimating Gender Disparities in Federal Criminal 
Cases,” University of Michigan Law & Economics Working Papers 57 
(2012), 3, https://perma.cc/25J2-CEMQ .
103 See f or example Donna Bishop and Charles Frazier, “The Effects 
of Gender on Charge Reduction,” Sociological Quarterly 25, no. 3 (1984), 385-396. A second wave of data collection was needed to secure a large enough sample of cases with female defendants. 
104
 C elesta A. Albonetti, “Charge Reduction: An Analysis of 
Prosecutorial Discretion in Burglary and Robbery Cases,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology 8 (1992), 317-333; Bishop and Frazier, “The Effects of Gender on Charge Reduction,” 1984; Ball, “Is it a Prosecutor’s World?” 2006; and Jeffrey W. Spears and Cassia C. Spohn, “The Effect of Evidence Factors and Victim Characteristics on Prosecutors’ Charging Decisions in Sexual Assault Cases,” Justice Quarterly 14, no. 3 (1997), 501-524. Spears and Spohn used data from the 1970s collected in Michigan and focused on violent felonies. Although initial analysis showed women to be more likely to receive a reduction in their charges, this was not found to be significant when modeled with other variables (see pages 42 and 43). See also Erika Davis Frenzel and Jeremy D. Ball, “Effects of Individual Characteristics on Plea Negotiations Under Sentencing Guidelines,” Journal of Ethnicity in Criminal Justice 5, no. 4 (2008), 59-82. This sample of 1998 data from Pennsylvania showed that men were more likely to go to trial than women, but the researchers did not find a significant relationship between people’s demographic characteristics and prosecutors’ plea bargaining decisions. Ibid., 75. However, the researchers noted that the analysis was unable to distinguish “true” plea bargains (which can be expected to have a measurable effect on sentencing) and “symbolic” plea bargains (in which charges are reduced in ways that ultimately provide little meaningful benefit to the accused). The researchers hypothesized that disentangling these two could reveal disparities in the treatment of different groups of people. Ibid., 77 .
105
 See Carlos B erdejó, “Gender Disparities in Plea Bargaining,” 
Indiana Law Journal 94, no. 4 (2019), https://perma.cc/7N7C-RA93; Shermer and Johnson, “Criminal Prosecutions,” 2010; Frederick and Stemen, The Anatomy of Discretion, 2012; and Starr, “Estimating Gender Disparities,” 2012. Whether this general shift is the result of changes in court practice or deepening nuance in how plea bargaining is understood and researched is unclear.
106
 B erdejó, “Gender Disparities,” 2019, 1272, 1279, and 1283.
107 Ibid., 12 60-61.
108 Ibid., 12 65-66. 
109 Shermer and Johnson, “Criminal P rosecutions,” 2010, 20.
110 See S tarr, “Estimating Gender Disparities,” 2012, 12-16; and Berdejó, 
“Gender Disparities,” 2019, 1259-1260.
111 S tarr, “Estimating Gender Disparities,” 2012, 17 .112 R ebecca K. Helm, Valerie F. Reyna, Allison A. Franz, and Rachel 
Z. Novick, “Too Young to Plead? Risk, Rationality, and Plea Bargaining’s Innocence Problem in Adolescents,” Psychology, Public Policy, and Law  24, no. 2 (2018), 180-191, 187 . In another study, 
interviews conducted with 40 juveniles who had either accepted a guilty plea or were currently considering a plea offer shed more light on this issue. They had an incomplete understanding of what a plea bargain is. Although participants understood that accepting a plea was considered an admission of guilt and could lead to a reduction in charges or lesser punishment, they frequently did not understand that they were also waiving their right to trial and appeal. In explaining the factors that influenced their decisions to plead guilty or not, the majority of participants mentioned short-term consequences (wanting to go home, being tired of the legal process, etc.) and only 17 percent mentioned any long-term consequences (such as the impact of having a criminal history). Tarika Daftary-Kapur and Tina M. Zottoli, “A First Look at the Plea Deal Experiences of Juveniles Tried in Adult Court,” International Journal of Forensic Mental Health 13, no. 4 (2014), 323-336, 328-33.
113
 Ibid., 333 .
114 Erik a N. Fountain and Jennifer L. Woolard, “How Defense Attorneys 
Consult with Juvenile Clients About Plea Bargains,” Psychology, Public Policy, and Law 24, no. 2 (2018), 192-203.
115
 F ountain and Woolard, “Consult with Juvenile Clients,” 2018, 197 .
116 T ina M. Zottoli, Tarika Daftary-Kapur, Georgia M. Winters, and 
Conor Hogan, “Plea Discounts, Time Pressures, and False-Guilty Pleas in Youth and Adults Who Pleaded Guilty to Felonies in New York City,” Psychology, Public Policy, and Law 22, no. 3 (2016), 250-259, 254-255.
117
 F rederick and Stemen, The Anatomy of Discretion, 2012.
118 Ibid., 208 , 211, 214, and 217 .
119 See R achel Barkow, “Institutional Design and the Policing of 
Prosecutors: Lessons from Administrative Law,” Stanford Law Review 61, no. 4 (2010), 869-922, https://perma.cc/MPZ3-TSWF ; and Rachel 
Barkow, “Separation of Powers and the Criminal Law,” Stanford Law Review 58, no.4 (2006), 989-1054, 1024-1028, https://perma.cc/CB5W-DZAP . Also see Erik Luna and Marianne Wade, “Prosecutors 
as Judges,” Washington and Lee Law Review 67 , no. 4 (2010), 1413, 1414-1418, https://perma.cc/G67T-WAPN.
120
 F or a discussion of the concept that plea bargaining is “lawless,” 
see Andrew Crespo, “The Hidden Law of Plea Bargaining,” Columbia Law Review 118, no. 5 (2018), 1303, 1304-1307 , https://perma.cc/NDV3-4XLB . For a discussion of the effects of this decision 
making, see for example Berdejó, “Gender Disparities,” 2019; and Berdejó, “Criminalizing Race,” 2018.
121
 See f or example William Stuntz, “Plea Bargaining and Criminal 
Law’s Disappearing Shadow,” Harvard Law Review 117 , no. 8 (2004) 2548-2569, 2548; Bibas, “Plea Bargaining Outside the Shadow of Trial,” (2004), 2463-2547; and Tracey Meares, “Rewards for Good 62
Vera Institute of JusticeBehavior: Influencing Prosecutorial Discretion and Conduct with 
Financial Incentives,” Fordham Law Review 64, no. 3 (1995), 851, 862-865, https://perma.cc/3RUC-J5VV .
122
 R onald Wright and Rodney Engen, “The Effects of Depth and 
Distance in a Criminal Code on Charging, Sentencing and Prosecutor Power,” North Carolina Law Review 84, no. 6 (2006), 1935-1982, https://perma.cc/4AR3-QP3H; and Ronald Wright and Rodney Engen, “Charge Movement and Theories of Prosecutors,” Marquette Law Review 91, no. 1 (2007), 9-38, https://perma.cc/EB55-USHY .
123
 W right and Engen, “The Effects of Depth and Distance,” 2006, 1940.
124 Ibid.
125 Ibid., 1958 .
126 Ibid.,1959-1967 .
127 Ibid., 1964 and 196 7 .
128 Ibid., 196 7 . 
129 W right and Engen, “Charge Movement and Theories of 
Prosecutors,” 2007 , 25-26, https://perma.cc/EB55-USHY .
130 Ibid., 2 6-27 .
131 K yle Graham, “Crimes, Widgets, and Plea Bargaining: An Analysis 
of Charge Content, Pleas, and Trials,” California Law Review 100, no. 6 (2012), 1573, 1577-1578, https://perma.cc/3XNL-HK44 . 
132
 Ibid., 15 97 and 1602-3.
133 Ibid. 
134 Ibid. The s tudy also found that prosecutors use some of these 
crimes, such as misprision of a felony, as a “pleading crime”—a crime that is rarely the basis for an initial arrest or the most serious charge in charging documents filed with the court (if it appears at all), but is used as the basis of a plea deal once other charges are dropped. Ibid., 1605. 
135
 Ibid., 1608 and 16 18-1619.
136 Ibid., 1605-16 13.
137 Ibid., 1582-1583 and 16 13. A “sentencing cliff” occurs when the 
shortest sentence for one charge might still be significantly longer than the longest sentence for the next most serious charge or might mandate incarceration when the other charge does not.
138
 This w as also the case with civil rights deprivation cases. Ibid., 1616-
1617 . 
139 F or tax evasion, see ibid., 1625. For sexual offenses, see ibid., 1596.
140 See f or example Jerold H. Israel “Excessive Criminal Justice 
Caseloads: Challenging the Conventional Wisdom,” Florida Law Review 48, no. 5 (1996), 761-779, 764, https://perma.cc/5BQJ-V2JT .
141
 In f act, the system is so dependent on plea bargaining over trial 
that recently, scholars have suggested that “crashing the courts”—insisting on right to trial for every accused person—would be an effective means of protesting incarceration by bringing the entire mechanism of the justice system to a halt. See for example Michelle Alexander, “Go to Trial: Crash the Justice System,” New York Times, March 10, 2012, https://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/11/opinion/sunday/go-to-trial-crash-the-justice-system.html. See also John H. Blume and Rebecca K. Helm, “The Unexonerated: Factually Innocent Defendants Who Plead Guilty” Cornell Law Review 100, no. 1 (2014), 157-191, (“More than forty years ago, then Chief Justice Warren Burger stated that ‘a reduction from 90% to 80% in guilty pleas requires the assignment of twice the judicial manpower and facilities’ and, ‘a reduction to 70% trebles the demand.’” (citing Warren E. Burger, “The State of the Judiciary,” A.B.A. Journal 56 (1970) 929, 931)), https://perma.cc/9AD9-TGX9 .
142
 Isr ael, “Excessive Criminal Justice Caseloads,” 1996, 767 . 
143 See gener ally Heumann, The Experiences of Prosecutors, Judges, 
and Defense Attorneys, 1978.
144 P eter F. Nardulli, “The Caseload Controversy and the Study of 
Criminal Courts,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology 70, no. 1 (1979), 89-101, 95, https://perma.cc/9JCL-DKZ4 . In this study 
caseloads were calculated both per judge and per court, though the caseloads of individual prosecutors were not analyzed.
145
 Ulmer and Br adley-Engen, “Variation in Trial Penalties,” 2006, 650; 
and Ulmer, Eisenstein, and Johnson, “Trial Penalties in Federal Sentencing,” 2010, 579.
146
 Ulmer , Eisenstein, and Johnson, “Trial Penalties in Federal 
Sentencing,” 2010, 588.
147 K utateladze, Andiloro, and Johnson, “Pandora’s Box,” 2016; and 
Kutateladze, Lawson, and Andiloro, “Does Evidence Really Matter?” 2015, 431-442.
148
 K utateladze, Andiloro, and Johnson, “Pandora’s Box,” 2016, 409; 
and Kutateladze, Lawson, and Andiloro, “Does Evidence Really Matter?” 2015, 436.
149
 K utateladze, Lawson, and Andiloro, “Does Evidence Really Matter?” 
2015, 439.
150 Ibid., 440 .
151 K utateladze, Andiloro, and Johnson, “Pandora’s Box,” 2016, 418.
152 Don S temen and Gipsy Escobar, “Whither the Prosecutor? 
Prosecutor and County Effects on Guilty Plea Outcomes in Wisconsin,” Justice Quarterly 35, no. 7 (2018), 1166-1194, 1175-1178.
153
 Ibid., 1181.
154 Ibid., 1181 and 1182.
155 Ibid., 1182. 
156 Ibid., 1184 .
157 Ibid., 1181 and 1182.In the Shadows: A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining63
158 Ibid., 1184 and 1185 .
159 Ibid.
160 See f or example Frederick and Stemen, The Anatomy of Discretion, 
2012, 277-280; and Gary D. LaFree, “Adversarial and Nonadversarial 
Justice: A Comparison of Guilty Pleas and Trials,” Criminology 23, 
no. 2 (1985), 289-312, 306.
161 F rederick and Stemen, The Anatomy of Discretion, 2012, 277-280.
162 L aFree, “Adversarial and Nonadversarial Justice,” 1985, 306.
163 See Shi Y an and Shawn D. Bushway, “Plea Discounts or Trial 
Penalties? Making Sense of the Trial-Plea Sentence Disparities,” Justice Quarterly 35, no. 7 (2018), 1226-1249. Beyond the sentence or charge reductions negotiated with prosecutors during plea bargaining, differences in outcomes may also result from sentence increases at trial; this may happen if a judge responds negatively to a defendant or a trial attracts significant attention from the 
public. See Nancy J. King, David A. Soul é, Sar a Steen, and Robert 
R. Weidner, “When Process Affects Punishment: Differences in Sentences After Guilty Plea, Bench Trial, and Jury Trial in Five Guidelines States,” Columbia Law Review 105 (2005), 959-1009, 964, https://perma.cc/K4CT-4FMR. 
164
 See f or example King, Soul é, S teen, and Weidner, “When Process 
Affects Punishment,” 2005, 959-1009.
165 F or an example of a weak relationship between pleading guilty 
and sentencing outcomes, see Celesta A. Albonetti, “Sentencing Under the Federal Sentencing Guidelines: Effects of Defendant Characteristics, Guilty Pleas, and Departures on Sentence Outcomes for Drug Offenses, 1991-1992,” Law and Society Review 31, no. 4 (1997), 789-822. For a critique of the methodology used in this and other studies, see Andrew Chongseh Kim, “Underestimating the Trial Penalty: An Empirical Analysis of the Federal Trial Penalty and Critique of the Abrams Study,” Mississippi Law Journal 84, no. 5 (2015), 1195-1256.
166
 Jeff ery T. Ulmer and Mindy S. Bradley-Engen, “Variations in Trial 
Penalties Among Serious Violent Offenses,” Criminology 44, no. 3 (2006), 631-670.
167
 Ibid., 650 .
168 Ibid., 652.
169 See King, Soul é, S teen, and Weidner, “When Process Affects 
Punishment,” 2005, 959-1009.
170 See f or example LaFree, “Adversarial and Nonadversarial Justice,” 
1985, 289-312, 293-294. Although the United States is not the only country to incorporate plea bargaining as part of its criminal legal system, other countries such as Germany have established laws limiting the bargaining power of prosecutors and incorporating judicial oversight in both the bargaining and sentencing phase. By contrast, few states mandate more than the de minimis judicial inquiry into whether a plea is “knowing, voluntary, and intelligent.” This leaves plea bargaining largely in the discretion of and subject to the policies of individual prosecutors’ offices. See for example Jenia Turner, “Judicial Participation in Plea Negotiations: A Comparative View,” American Journal of Comparative Law 54 (2006), 501-570, https://perma.cc/JGU9-3A9W .
171
 The fiv e states were Kansas, Maryland, Minnesota, Pennsylvania, 
and Washington. King, Soul é, S teen, and Weidner, “When Process 
Affects Punishment,” 2005.
172 Ibid., 975 .
173 Ibid., 97 3.
174 Ibid.
175 Ibid., 974 .
176 Ibid., 975 .
177 See Ulmer , Eisenstein, and Johnson, “Trial Penalties in Federal 
Sentencing,” 2010, 565. The authors identified other sentencing guidelines that may especially benefit people who plead guilty, such as sentence reduction for people who render “substantial assistance” to law enforcement. Conversely, people who “obstruct justice” by presenting false testimony in court (something a person who pleads guilty is unable to do) may have their sentences increased.
178
 Kim, “Under estimating the Trial Penalty,” 2015, 1245.
179 Or , put another way, sentences imposed following a plea were 39 
percent shorter than those given following a trial. Ibid., 1246 and 1252, Table 3.
180
 Ibid., 12 54, Table 5.
181 Ulmer , Eisenstein, and Johnson, “Trial Penalties in Federal 
Sentencing,” 2010, 575.
182 Kim, “Under estimating the Trial Penalty,” 2015, 1235; and Ulmer, 
Eisenstein, and Johnson, “Trial Penalties in Federal Sentencing,” 2010, 570 and note 5. 
183
 Ulmer , Eisenstein, and Johnson, “Trial Penalties in Federal 
Sentencing,” 2010, 575.
184 B esiki L. Kutateladze and Victoria Z. Lawson, “Is a Plea Really a 
Bargain? An Analysis of Plea and Trial Dispositions in New York City,” Crime and Delinquency 64, no. 7 (2018), 856-887; and David S. Abrams, “Putting the Trial Penalty on Trial,” Duquesne Law Review 51 (2013), 777-785, https://perma.cc/886D-M3JV .
185
 K utateladze and Lawson, “Is a Plea Really A Bargain?”, 2018, 874.
186 Ibid., 866 .
187 Ibid., 87 9.
188 Ibid.
189 Ibid., 877-87 8.
190 Ibid., 87 9.64
Vera Institute of Justice191 Ibid.
192 Abr ams, “Putting the Trial Penalty on Trial,” 2013, 778. An earlier 
study using data from 1977 similarly found that the trial penalty 
disappeared when acquittals were taken into account. However, the researcher noted that this would be true only for a hypothetical “average” defendant or for cases in the aggregate, but not for any one actual case. People are faced with the choice of potentially being acquitted or receiving a more punitive sentence. LaFree, “Adversarial and Nonadversarial Justice,” 1985, 307 .
193
 Abr ams, “Putting the Trial Penalty on Trial,” 2013, 782. 
194 Ibid., 7 81. Although here it should be noted that Abrams did not 
include a measure of offense severity other than the number of charges each person faced. This means that the results cannot discern whether people received longer sentences because they went to trial or because they had committed more serious crimes. See Kim, “Underestimating the Trial Penalty,” 2015, 1216.
195
 Kim, “Under estimating the Trial Penalty,” 2015, 1201.
196 Albert W . Alschuler, “Lafler and Frye: Two Small Band-Aids for a 
Festering Wound,” Duquesne Law Review  51 (2013), 673-707 , 690-691, 
https://perma.cc/PJ88-3KWD . 
197 Kim, “Under estimating the Trial Penalty,” 2015, 1214.
198 Jed S . Rakoff, “Why Innocent People Plead Guilty,” New York 
Review of Books, November 20, 2014, https://perma.cc/33UY-7PGE.
199 Blume and Helm, “The Une xonerated,” (2014), 157-191, 173.
200 Allison D . Redlich, Alicia Summers, and Steven Hoover, “Self-
Reported False Confessions and False Guilty Pleas Among Offenders with Mental Illness,” Law and Human Behavior 34, no. 1 (2010), 79-90, 79 and 89.
201
 Ibid., 80 .
202 R ebecca K. Helm, Valerie F. Reyna, Allison A. Franz et al., 
“Limitations on the Ability to Negotiate Justice: Attorney Perspectives on Guilt, Innocence, and Legal Advice in the Current Plea System,” Psychology, Crime, & Law 24, no. 9 (2018), 915-934, https://perma.cc/Q9KX-37ZS . Nearly 45 percent of the attorneys 
involved in the study revealed that they had advised a client to take a guilty plea despite believing that the client was innocent. 
203
 R edlich, Summers, and Hoover, “Self-Reported False Confessions,” 
(2010), 79-90, 89.
204 Ibid., 87 .
205 Lindsay C . Malloy, Elizabeth P . Shulman, and Elizabeth Cauffman, 
“Interrogations, Confessions, and Guilty Pleas Among Serious Adolescent Offenders,” Law and Human Behavior 38, no. 2 (2014), 181-193, 189, https://perma.cc/P7EG-DUUA.
206
 Ibid., 186.
207 Ibid., 189 .208 Samuel R. Gr oss, “Errors in Misdemeanor Adjudication,” Boston 
University Law Review 98 (2018), 999-1011, 1005, https://perma.cc/M3FX-2CR2.
209
 Or en Gazal-Ayal and Avishalom Tor, “The Innocence Effect,” Duke 
Law Journal 62 (2012), 339-401, 352, https://perma.cc/BZ22-NJ8D .
210 Gaz al-Ayal and Tor, “The Innocence Effect,” 2012, 352.
211 Glinda S . Cooper, Vanessa Meterko, and Prahelika Gadtaula, 
“Innocents Who Plead Guilty: An Analysis of Patterns in DNA Exoneration Cases,” Federal Sentencing Reporter 31, no. 4-5 (2019), 234-238, 234, https://perma.cc/QV4G-B8FS .
212
 Gaz al-Ayal and Tor, “The Innocence Effect,” 2012, 352; and Cooper, 
Meterko, and Gadtaula, “Innocents Who Plead Guilty,” 2019, 235.
213 Gr oss, “Errors in Misdemeanor Adjudication,” 2018, 1011.
214 R edlich, Summers, and Hoover, “Self-Reported False Confessions,” 
2010, 80. Samuel R. Gross, Kristen Jacoby, Daniel J. Matheson et al., “Exonerations in the United States 1989 through 2003,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology 95, no. 2 (2005), 523, 536, https://perma.cc/7LXF-7L5D; and Gross, “Errors in Misdemeanor Adjudication,” 2018, 1011.
215
 Gr oss, “Errors in Misdemeanor Adjudication,” 2018, 1003.
216 Ibid., 1000 (4 perc ent figure) and 1003 (Harris County).
217 Ibid., 1003 .
218 Ibid., 1004 . The author also notes that in 46 percent of cases in 
which innocent people pled guilty to drug possession charges in Harris County, the accused was Black—although only 24 percent of Harris County population is Black. Ibid., 1009. This, the author suggests, reflects the targeting of Black men by police when stopping and searching people for drugs.
219
 Ibid., 1004 .
220 See R edlich, Summers, and Hoover, “Self-Reported False 
Confessions,” 2010, 80.
221 Gr oss, “Errors in Misdemeanor Adjudication,” 2018, 1005.
222 Bibas , “Plea Bargaining Outside the Shadow of Trial,” 2004, 2463, 
2465-2467 and 2496-2527 .
223 Gr aham, “Crimes, Widgets, and Plea Bargaining,” 2012, 1573, 1583.
224 Ibid.Acknowledgments
A special thank you to Nancy Fishman and Jim Parsons 
for their insight and guidance throughout drafting and 
to Elizabeth Swavola and Akhi Johnson for reviewing 
the report. Thank you to Cindy Reed, Elle Teshima, 
and Maris Mapolski for their hard work in the editing, 
cite checking, and review processes; to Paragini 
Amin for designing the report; and to Abbi Leman 
for copyediting it. Finally, we’d like to thank Laurie 
Garduque, Patrick Griffin, and Maria Speiser of the 
MacArthur Foundation for their support throughout 
the development of this report.
This report was created with support from the John  
D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation as part  
of the Safety and Justice Challenge initiative, which 
seeks to address overincarceration by changing  
the way America thinks about and uses jails. Core 
to the challenge is a grants competition designed to support efforts to improve local criminal legal  systems in jurisdictions across the country. The 
Foundation is supporting a nationwide network of selected local jurisdictions committed to finding  
ways to safely reduce jail incarceration—particularly  
the disproportionate incarceration of racial and  
ethnic minorities. More information is available at  
www.SafetyandJusticeChallenge.org.
About citations
As researchers and readers alike rely more and  
more on public knowledge made available through  
the Internet, “link rot” has become a widely acknowledged problem with creating useful and 
sustainable citations. To address this issue, the V era 
Institute of Justice is experimenting with the use 
of Perma.cc (https:/ /perma.cc/), a service that helps 
scholars, journals, and courts create permanent links  
to the online sources cited in their work.
Credits 
© Vera Institute of Justice 2020. All rights reserved. An electronic version of this report is posted 
on Vera’s website at www.vera.org/in-the-shadows.
Cover image: Geert Bollen / EyeEm via Getty Images
Graphics: Paragini Amin
For more information, visit www.vera.org.
For more information about this report, contact L é on Digard, research strategy editor, at 
ldigard@vera.org. For more information about Vera’s work to reduce the use of jails, contact 
Elizabeth Swavola, acting project director, Center on Sentencing and Corrections, at eswavola@vera.org.
Suggested citation
Ram Subramanian, L é on Digard, Melvin Washington II, and Stephanie Sorage. In the Shadows: 
A Review of the Research on Plea Bargaining. New York: Vera Institute of Justice, 2020.This report was created with support from the John D. 
and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation as part of the Safety and Justice Challenge, which seeks to reduce over-incarceration by changing the way America thinks about and uses jails.
Vera Institute of Justice34 35th Street, 4-2ABrooklyn, NY 11232T 212.334.1300F 212.941.9407New Orleans Office1307 Oretha Castle Haley Blvd., Suite 203New Orleans, LA 70113T 504.312.4516Los Angeles Office
634 S Spring Street, #300A
Los Angeles, CA 90014
T 213.416.0058
F 213.416.0075Washington DC Office1111 14th Street, Suite 920Washington, DC 20005T 202.465.8900F 202.408.1972