July 2019 
Preventing Suicide and 
Self-Harm in Jail:
A Sentinel Events Approach
Jason Tan de Bibiana, Therese Todd, and Leah PopeFrom the Director 
Suicide is the leading cause of death in jails across 
the country. Each year, more than 300 people take 
their lives while incarcerated in America’s jails, 
accounting for roughly one-third of all deaths in 
custody. Approximately one-quarter of these deaths 
occur within 24 hours of confinement and half occur 
within the first two weeks. This data paints a bleak 
portrait of the acute health risks of incarceration, 
demonstrating that even short stays in jail can have 
deadly consequences. At a time when the public is 
paying closer attention to local jails and their primary 
role in mass incarceration, it is critical to shine light on the persistent problem of jail suicide and the actionable 
steps jails can take to prevent future deaths. 
This report is the second from V era that frames 
suicide and self-harm in correctional facilities as 
“sentinel events” that signal a breakdown in underlying 
systems of care. Sentinel event reviews have been 
used successfully in the field of medicine for decades and have much to offer the corrections community. 
Based on principles of transparency, inclusiveness, 
and systemwide accountability, sentinel event reviews 
acknowledge that bad outcomes are rarely the result 
of an individual mistake and embrace a forward-
looking approach to safety. Put into practice in jails, 
they are one important step toward implementing a 
comprehensive suicide prevention plan.
V era’s first report provided practical guidance on how 
to conduct a sentinel event review in the aftermath of 
a suicide in custody. Here, we share lessons learned from an in-depth study of four jails across the country 
that are trying to innovate in their responses to 
suicide and self-harm. By sharing the practical barriers 
and facilitators to implementing comprehensive, 
nonblaming review processes, jurisdictions can 
learn important lessons about how to improve their 
responses to jail suicide and self-harm and, in turn, 
better protect the people in their care. 
Jim Parsons
Vice President and Research Director
V era Institute of Justice
This study was supported by Award Number 2014-IJ-CX-0030, awarded 
by the National Institute of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, U.S. 
Department of Justice. The opinions, findings, and conclusions or 
recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the authors 
and do not necessarily reflect those of the U.S. Department of Justice. 
Additional support was provided in part by a grant from the Clifford 
Chance Foundation, Inc.Contents
1 Introduction
4 Methodology
 4 Study sites
 4 Study activities
6 Jails’ current responses to suicide and self-harm
9 Creating the conditions for sentinel event reviews
 9 Health care delivery model 
 12 Collaboration and communication
 15 Organizational culture
 21 Legal landscape
27 Conclusion
29 Appendix
32 EndnotesPreventing Suicide and Self-Harm in Jail: A Sentinel Events Approach1
Introduction
Suicide is the leading cause of death for people incarcerated in jail in the 
United States, accounting for more than 30 percent of deaths in custody.1 
In 2014, the rate of suicide in local jails (50 per 100,000 people) was 
the highest observed since 2000 and remained more than three times higher than rates of suicide in either prison (16 per 100,000) or in the community (13 
per 100,000).
2 Although the rate of jail suicide dropped dramatically between 
1986 and its low point in 2008 (from 107 to 29 per 100,000 people), the rate has since fluctuated between 40 per 100,000 and 50 per 100,000.
3 Mortality 
rates in jail are highest for men and white people, and this is even more pronounced for jail suicide: men incarcerated in jail are 57 percent more likely 
to die by suicide than women, and white people who are incarcerated are 5.25 
and 3.5 times more likely to die by suicide than black or Latino people.
4 These 
deaths do not account for the incidence of nonsuicidal self-harm in jails, a phenomenon that is less well researched but also a significant health concern 
and an ongoing challenge in correctional facilities. Although there is little data 
on self-harm in jails, there is good reason to believe it is common. A national 
survey of U.S. prisons found that 2 percent of people who are incarcerated 
engaged in self-injurious behavior each year and that 85 percent of prisons 
reported that it happened at least weekly.
5 
There are multiple reasons for elevated rates of suicide and self-harm 
in jails. People incarcerated in jail may face facility-level risk factors such as overcrowding; situational risk factors such as the stress and isolation of 
incarceration; and individual risk factors such as mental illness, substance 
use, a history of trauma, or a history of engaging in self-harm or suicide 
attempts. Although suicide is not in itself a mental illness, it may be the 
result of undiagnosed or untreated mental health disorders, and decades 
of research show that correctional systems in the United States are ill-
equipped to meet the underlying needs of people with mental illnesses.
6 
A 2017 survey from the Bureau of Justice Statistics found that 26 percent 
of people incarcerated in jail met the threshold for serious psychological 
distress in the past 30 days (compared to 5 percent in the general 
population), yet only one-third (35 percent) of them had received mental 
health treatment since admission to jail.7 Vera Institute of Justice2This complex interplay of risk factors makes suicide prevention in jails 
exceedingly challenging. Despite progress since the 1980s, the relatively 
stable rate of jail suicide across the last 20 years suggests that progress in 
prevention has stalled.8 Experts note that the approach to suicide prevention 
adopted by most jails includes a narrow focus on managing people when 
they are on suicide precautions and that suicide rates will only be reduced 
when facilities adopt a comprehensive suicide prevention program.9 It is 
thus critical that jails receive guidance in developing and implementing such 
a prevention program and that criminal justice stakeholders continue to 
innovate in their responses to suicide and self-harm.
In 2016, the V era Institute of Justice (V era) reported on the potential 
for addressing the problem of jail suicide and self-harm through “sentinel 
event reviews.”10 Recognizing that failures to prevent jail suicide or 
self-harm are rarely the result of a single event or the actions of an individual staff member, V era explored the potential of understanding 
jail suicide as a sentinel event: a significant negative outcome that signals 
underlying system weaknesses, is likely the result of compound errors, 
and may provide, if properly analyzed and addressed, important keys to strengthening the system and preventing future harm.
11 Many high-risk 
fields like aviation and medicine have long responded to known errors 
by implementing review processes characterized by an all-stakeholder, 
nonblaming, and forward-looking examination of the error.12 These sentinel 
event reviews move away from a view of error as solely the product of 
individual negligence and instead encourage an institutionalized approach 
that identifies root causes and underlying system failures.13 
V era is part of an expanding group of researchers and practitioners 
supported by the National Institute of Justice that seeks to understand the feasibility, impact, and sustainability of adopting sentinel event reviews in 
the criminal justice system. In an earlier report, V era provided justification 
for why the problem of jail suicide and self-harm is well-suited to a 
sentinel events approach and offered a step-by-step guide for conducting 
such a review and moving jails beyond their all-too-common adversarial 
approach to reviewing suicide deaths in custody.
14 (See “Conducting a 
sentinel event review” at page 2.) Since the publication of that report, V era’s researchers have studied how four county jail systems review and respond 
to incidents of suicide and self-harm and have explored the feasibility 
of integrating sentinel event reviews into those jails’ regular practices. 
Although best practices for suicide prevention and response exist, the 
majority of jails in the United States (63 percent) do not conduct mortality 
reviews following a jail suicide and few institutionalized responses exist Preventing Suicide and Self-Harm in Jail: A Sentinel Events Approach3
to respond to instances of self-harm.15 Research such as this is therefore 
critical. Not only does this study build the evidence base for the feasibility 
of sentinel event reviews in the justice system, but it also provides rich 
data on why the problem of jail suicide remains such an intractable 
systems issue in the United States and how some jurisdictions are trying to 
innovate their responses. 
For expert guidance on how to conduct a sentinel event 
review, see Vera’s report Creating a Culture of Safety: 
Sentinel Event Reviews for Suicide and Self-Harm in 
Correctional Facilities and guidance from the Sentinel Events Initiative at the National Institute of Justice.
a Sentinel event 
reviews take a “root-cause analysis” approach, guiding 
practitioners through the following eight steps:
1. identify the sentinel event;
2. gather a multidisciplinary team;3. describe the event/create a timeline;
4. identify contributing factors;
5. identify the root cause(s);
6. develop an action plan;
7. share lessons learned; and
8. measure the success of corrective actions.Conducting a sentinel event review
a  Leah Pope and Ayesha Delany-Brumsey, Creating a Culture of Safety: Sentinel Event Reviews for Suicide and Self-Harm in Correctional Facilities (New York: Vera 
Institute of Justice, 2016), https://perma.cc/FF7Q-VT43; and National Institute of Justice (NIJ), “NIJ’s Sentinel Events Initiative,” https://perma.cc/UM2W-WZSG.
This report presents the findings from V era’s recent study. V era 
collaborated with leadership and staff in four geographically diverse jail 
systems over 18 months: the Middlesex Office of Adult Corrections and 
Y outh Services (MCDOC) in Middlesex County, New Jersey; the Middlesex 
Sheriff’s Office (MSO) in Middlesex County, Massachusetts; the Pinellas 
County Sheriff’s Office (PCSO) in Pinellas County, Florida; and Spokane 
County Detention Services (SCDS) in Spokane County, Washington. This 
report first presents data on the jails’ current responses to suicide and 
self-harm and then describes the barriers and facilitators to implementing 
sentinel event reviews. Recommendations are provided throughout for 
jurisdictions looking to improve their responses to jail suicide and self-
harm through the incorporation of sentinel event reviews.  Vera Institute of Justice4Methodology
Vera’s study included four jail systems. For each system, V era 
researchers undertook an administrative document and policy 
review and then conducted site visits and interviews with jail and 
health leadership and staff. In addition, V era worked with the law firm Clifford Chance to analyze the legal landscape of liability, discovery, and 
public record requests in each jurisdiction and to understand the potential 
implications for jails and sentinel event reviews.
Study sites
V era selected four jail systems after outreach to 16 sites about the study and 
conversations with six sites. The four systems were selected due to their 
diversity in geographic location, size, and model of health care delivery. Each 
of the jails had experienced at least one suicide in custody in the two years 
leading up to the study, and two of the jails experienced a suicide during the 
study period. Figure 1 below describes basic site characteristics.16 
Study activities
V era’s researchers engaged in the following activities while completing  this study.
 › Administrative document and policy review. Researchers 
requested and reviewed a variety of administrative documents 
to better understand the jails’ responses to suicide and self-harm. 
These included policies related to suicide prevention and response, 
staff training, staff support, and review processes; training 
materials; and anonymized investigative reports and mortality 
reviews for the most recent suicide in custody. In total, V era 
reviewed 85 documents. Policies were compared to review-process 
standards recommended by the American Correctional Association 
(ACA) and the National Commission on Correctional Health Care 
(NCCHC).17 Preventing Suicide and Self-Harm in Jail: A Sentinel Events Approach5
 › Site visits and interviews with jail leadership and staff. Between 
April and June 2018, V era visited each study site and conducted a 
total of 42 interviews with 56 people, including leadership (n = 32), 
staff from health care (n = 26) and corrections/custody (n = 20), 
legal counsel (n = 3), and internal affairs and investigation team 
members (n = 7). (A complete list of interview participants can be 
found in the Appendix on page 29.) Interviewee recruitment and 
scheduling was facilitated by corrections leadership at each jail. 
Interviews were conducted by one or two V era researchers using a 
semi-structured interview guide with questions exploring the issue 
of suicide and self-harm at the jail, the types of review processes 
currently in place to respond to suicide and self-harm, staff training, relationships between corrections and health care staff, 
staff support, and perspectives on the feasibility of implementing 
sentinel event reviews.
18  
      A team of four V era researchers analyzed the interview 
transcripts using Dedoose, an application that allows researchers 
to organize, analyze, and identify major themes in qualitative data.19 
The team reviewed transcripts and, through an iterative process 
during regular team meetings, defined a set of codes to capture the 
themes of the interviews. Once a complete code list was developed, 
researchers coded all interviews, with 10 percent of the interviews 
double coded by a second researcher to ensure reliability; coding 
discrepancies were subsequently resolved through consensus 
discussions. Researchers then reviewed the coded interviews to 
develop consensus around the key themes and findings from the 
interview data.  
 › Legal landscape analysis. With  pro bono assistance from attorneys 
at the law firm Clifford Chance, V era researchers conducted a 
legal review of the four study jurisdictions, identifying potential 
facilitators or barriers to conducting sentinel event reviews. 
Specifically, V era researchers analyzed the legal landscape of 
liability, discovery, and public record requests in each jurisdiction.Vera Institute of Justice6Jails’ current responses 
to suicide and self-harm 
Jails are constitutionally required to provide adequate health care to 
people in their custody. The Supreme Court has held that evidence of 
“deliberate indifference” to the serious medical needs of a person who 
is incarcerated constitutes a violation of the cruel and unusual punishment clause of the Eighth Amendment.
20 In light of this mandate, accrediting 
bodies such as the NCCHC and the ACA have developed minimum health care standards for people who are incarcerated in the United States. These standards are voluntary and not tied to funding, but they remain the most 
widely used guidelines for ensuring quality health care delivery. Three of the 
four jails in the study were accredited by the NCCHC and/or ACA.
21 (See 
“National standards on suicide prevention in jail” at page 7.)
The four jails in this study are notable for their suicide prevention 
efforts. Each of the jails has a suicide prevention plan detailed in its policies, as well as other written policies that, taken together, address 
the areas consistent with NCCHC standards for a suicide prevention 
program. In particular, it is notable that all of the jails studied conduct 
clinical mortality reviews following deaths from suicide, something that 
the majority of jails (63 percent) in the United States do not do following Figure 1
Characteristics of sentinel event study sites
Site Region2015 jail
population2015 jail
admissions2015 county 
incarceration rate  
(per 100,000)
MCDOC Mid-Atlantic 803 7 ,933 141
MSO Northeast 1,183 5,634 109
PCSO South 2,528 37 ,931 427
SCDS Northwest 834 19,521 259
Source: Vera Institute of Justice, “Incarceration Trends,” https://perma.cc/WS5A-DRUP (accessed March 12, 2019).Preventing Suicide and Self-Harm in Jail: A Sentinel Events Approach7
suicides in custody. (See “National standards on suicide prevention in jail” 
at page 7 for key questions asked and answered in a clinical mortality 
review.) These mortality reviews exist on top of other review processes 
that are in place—some related to specific incidents and some focused 
on ongoing quality improvement. MSO, for example, has established a 
monthly, multidisciplinary suicide review committee. The committee 
reviews suicides, suicide attempts, and self-harm every month whether 
or not there is a specific incident to discuss. At MCDOC, administrative 
staff, including corrections leadership and the mental health director, meet 
weekly to review incidents of suicide and self-harm, if any, as well as other 
incidents related to custody, housing, or health. Other sites also convene 
staff for quality improvement meetings on a monthly or quarterly basis.
As noted above, however, the NCCHC and ACA offer little practical 
guidance on how to implement the various aspects of a comprehensive suicide prevention program. The result is that not only do policies and 
practices differ widely across sites, but also that jails lack direction on what NCCHC standards are the most widely used guidelines for health 
care delivery in jails. These standards include both clinical and 
nonclinical practices to identify people who are at risk of suicide, 
develop treatment plans, and identify process improvements. NCCHC standards explicitly delineate 11 key components 
necessary for a comprehensive suicide prevention program: 
1. training; 
2. identification;
3. referral;
4. evaluation;
5. treatment;
6. housing and monitoring;
7. communication;
8. intervention;
9. notification;
10. review (see below); and
11. debriefing.Recommended review processes. NCCHC’s standards 
recommend three distinct reviews following each death in 
custody in order to identify areas where facility operations, 
policies, and procedures can be improved. These reviews are:
 › an administrative review assessing the correctional 
and emergency response; 
 › a clinical mortality review answering three questions: 
(1) could the medical response at the time of death 
be improved?; (2) is there any way to improve patient 
care?; and (3) was an earlier intervention possible?; and
 › a psychological autopsy if the death is by suicide 
(a reconstruction of the individual’s life and factors 
that may have contributed to death, conducted by a 
qualified mental health professional).a
Even with such standards in place, the NCCHC provides little guidance on how to implement the various aspects 
of a suicide prevention program. Policies and practices 
therefore look markedly different across the jails and, in fact, research suggests that only 20 percent of jails have a suicide 
prevention program that covers all key components.
bNational standards on suicide prevention in jail
a NCCHC, Standards for Health Services in Jails (Chicago: NCCHC, 2014).
b  Lindsay M. Hayes, “Suicide Prevention in Correctional Facilities: Reflections and Next Steps,” International Journal of Law and Psychiatry 36, no. 3-4 (2013), 188-
194; and Lindsay M. Hayes, National Study of Jail Suicide: 20 Years Later (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Corrections, 2010), https://perma.cc/9GXD-LMCY .Vera Institute of Justice8
robust practice looks like. V era’s policy review and interviews revealed, for 
example, that the jails did not include stakeholders from all staffing levels 
in their review processes, had limited mechanisms for communicating 
the findings of reviews back to staff, and did not consistently review 
incidents of nonlethal self-harm. Some of the reasons for these gaps will 
be discussed in the following sections of the report. They point to the 
challenges as well as the potential for an all-stakeholder, nonblaming, and 
forward-looking examination of the errors that occur when a person dies 
from suicide in jail.
a  Pope and Delany-Brumsey, Creating a Culture of Safety, 2016; James M. Doyle, “Learning from Error in the Criminal Justice 
System: Sentinel Event Reviews,” in Mending Justice: Sentinel Event Reviews (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice, 2014), 3-19, https://perma.cc/B5VT-G76W ; The Joint Commission, Root Cause Analysis in Health 
Care: Tools and Techniques, Fifth Edition (Oak Brook, IL: The Joint Commission, 2015); and Katharine Browning, Thomas Feucht, Nancy Ritter et al., Paving the Way: Lessons Learned in Sentinel Event Reviews (Washington, DC: National Institute of Justice, 2015), https://perma.cc/Q8HK-CFYH. Also see guidance from expert Lindsay M. Hayes collected at https://perma.cc/D49E-ZB3R.Key recommendations: Responses to suicide and self-harm
 › Develop suicide prevention plans consistent 
with national standards. Even jails that are not 
accredited can follow guidance available from the NCCHC or the ACA to develop suicide prevention plans that address the 11 key components of robust 
suicide prevention programs. 
 › Seek out guidance on conducting robust 
reviews. The health care and criminal justice 
fields have helpful guidance on how to implement 
an all-stakeholder, nonblaming review process in 
the aftermath of a death.
a This practical guidance provides concrete steps to take and information on how to overcome implementation challenges.
 › Consistently review incidents of nonlethal 
self-harm. Most reviews focus on suicide, and 
sometimes suicide attempts, with less clear criteria on when cases of self-harm warrant 
a review. Given the prevalence of self-harm 
compared to less frequent incidents of suicide, this may be a missed opportunity to strengthen 
practices and policies to prevent suicide and self-
harm on a more regular basis. Preventing Suicide and Self-Harm in Jail: A Sentinel Events Approach9
Creating the conditions for 
sentinel event reviews
At the time of this study, each of the four jails was already taking 
important steps to prevent incidents of suicide and self-harm from 
occurring and to respond comprehensively when an incident did 
occur. At the same time, V era found variability across the sites in terms of readiness to mobilize the “routine, culture-changing practice” that is at 
the heart of the sentinel event review process.
22 Four key themes emerged 
in the interviews as being critical to the success of future sentinel event 
reviews around jail suicide and self-harm: the model of health care delivery, 
the nature of collaboration and communication, the organizational culture, 
and the legal landscape. 
Health care delivery model
Although all jails share the same constitutional requirement to provide 
health care to people in their custody, they can do so in different ways. 
Indeed, since jails are located within counties that have wide variation 
in size and resources, there are also significant differences in how  the 
government decides to deliver health care in a county jail and what services it provides. An increasing number of jails contract with vendors to 
provide at least some health care services. In New Y ork State, for example, 
only 16 percent of jails use a public provider such as a county hospital or 
department of health to provide health services, while the remaining 84 
percent contract with either private local providers or a correctional health 
care firm.
23 In Virginia, 89 percent of jails use vendors to provide at least 
some health care, while the remaining 11 percent of jails deliver services through directly employed staff (i.e., “in-house”).
24 The jails in this study 
have a variety of organizational models, as demonstrated in Figure 2 at page 10. Further, with the exception of MSO, each of the jails has recently 
experienced a transition in its health care arrangements.Vera Institute of Justice10
It was clear from this study that the choices these agencies make around 
health care have implications for institutional practices and working relationships. 
These, in turn, can impact the feasibility of bringing stakeholders together in a 
nonblaming review process. 
There are multiple reasons a county may decide to outsource health care. 
Private vendors can provide access to greater expertise, allow for greater budget 
predictability and financial risk sharing, and free up jail administrators from the 
routine activities of running a health system.25 SCDS, for example, had been unable 
to provide 24-hour medical coverage at the jail until it started contracting with a private vendor. In talking with administrators about the rationale behind their 
decision to procure an outside vendor, a health services administrator noted that 
they had been unsatisfied with the quality of care being provided through the sheriff’s office and that “it became very evident that corrections people could not run 
a health care organization.” Changing to a private vendor, he reported, had improved 
the quality of care in the jail and allowed the agency to move from being primarily 
“reactive” to “proactive.” Leadership at MCDOC also noted improvements as a result 
of finding a different private vendor—better, more accessible care, and electronic 
medical records that allow for improved continuity of care across providers in the 
jail (and across jail stays for people who recidivate).  Figure 2
Health care organizational models
Site Organizational model Explanation Recent transition
MCDOC Contracted out Jail procures all health services (physical 
and mental health) from  
a single, private vendor.Changed contracted 
providers (2016).
MSO Hybrid of in-house and contract providersJail provides the majority of health care services through a private vendor. 
However, some mental health staff are employed through the sheriff’s office.N/A
PCSO In-house Jail provides all services using staff 
employed by the sheriff’s office.Brought services in-house after a period of contracting 
them out to a private vendor (2014).
SCDS Hybrid of in-house and 
contract providersJail provides physical health care through a contracted private vendor. 
Mental health services are provided through a private vendor in collaboration 
with in-house positions, funded by a 
partnering county agency (the regional behavioral health organization). Contracted with a private 
vendor for the first time after 
a history of providing services in-house (2015).Preventing Suicide and Self-Harm in Jail: A Sentinel Events Approach11
Even as private vendors can create more efficiencies in medical care, it is also 
true that this arrangement adds complexity when thinking about sentinel event 
reviews and responses to suicide and self-harm. This complexity occurs on at 
least three levels, by potentially introducing different systems of accountability, 
different training requirements, and different review processes. 
For the three jails in this study that have a hybrid or fully contracted out 
model of health care delivery, the county jail has to manage relationships with 
outside organizations and integrate employees with different management 
structures. In one case, the process of building these relationships has been 
especially fraught because of a widely held perception that the incoming private 
vendor led to the elimination of union positions; this created a “very difficult 
transition” that was still in process at the time of this study, according to a jail administrator. But even in two sites where relationships were perceived as being 
quite good between the jail administration and the health care vendor, leadership 
and staff noted challenges. Staff at one site described how they had worked 
hard to create balanced and collaborative working relationships. Even so, the administrator of that jail noted it remained complicated: 
I struggle with it because I would like it to be one or the other [i.e., all sheriff’s office employees or all contracted out]. . . . Y ou would hope it 
would be tightly organized or the messaging would be the same and I 
think that having that two different kinds of operations can be a challenge 
sometimes. . . . At the end of the day it works out okay, it’s just the 
bifurcated approach sometimes can be challenging. 
These challenges were not reported at PCSO, where all staff are employees in the 
sheriff’s office. Instead, interview participants discussed the benefits of having a 
single hierarchy and point of accountability. “We do a pretty good job,” a PCSO 
health care staff member reflected. “I think a lot of it is the fact that we’re sheriff’s office employees. . . . We all have the same resources as far as care and self-care go. 
We also have a camaraderie that you wouldn’t have perhaps with an agency staff 
for medical or even detention. . . . We’re all a big family here. And there’s not a lot 
of issues with that.”
26 
Different systems of accountability can also result in different training 
requirements (around suicide and self-harm or more generally) for health and 
corrections staff. For example, MCDOC and SCDS contract with the same large 
correctional health care provider that has developed its own set of training 
materials that health care staff complete independently, online. This goes against 
expert guidance recommending that health and corrections staff should receive 
training on suicide prevention together. As jail suicide expert Lindsay Hayes notes, Vera Institute of Justice12“the topic of suicide prevention is one that is best provided in a live, interactive 
environment amongst correctional, mental health, and medical personnel. Suicide 
prevention is all about collaboration. . . .”27 
Finally, when at least part of a jail’s health care delivery is outsourced, the review 
processes undertaken by agencies and vendors after critical incidents might occur 
entirely independent of each other. This is the case in MCDOC and SCDS, where 
health care is contracted out and the private vendor conducts independent mortality 
reviews at the corporate level, but does not share the results back to the jail. These 
issues in and of themselves do not mean that quality training and review processes 
are not in place. But it is clear that multiple strands of management and the presence 
of different reporting structures can create added complexity for developing robust 
review processes when incidents of suicide and self-harm occur in the jail.
Key recommendations: Responses to suicide and self-harm
 › Training on suicide and self-harm prevention 
should include corrections and health staff 
together—in person—to foster collaboration and 
learning across disciplines. › Particularly for jails that contract out their 
health care delivery or have multiple agencies 
providing health care, review processes should 
be consolidated and outcomes should be communicated to both corrections and health 
leadership and staff.
Collaboration and communication
Strong collaboration and effective communication are vital to create the 
conditions that prevent incidents of suicide and self-harm and can also foster 
space for sentinel event reviews and corrective action when an event occurs.28 
At the same time, collaboration and communication within a jail are not easily written as policy directives. Two themes emerged through V era’s study as 
especially relevant in this regard: (1) the relationship between corrections staff 
and health staff; and (2) the extent to which information is communicated across 
disciplines, as well as both up and down the chain of command.
Health care staff and leadership at each of the jails described being reliant on 
corrections staff for suicide prevention, as corrections officers have the most regular 
contact with people incarcerated in the facility. Multiple clinical staff described 
corrections officers as “our eyes and ears,” noting that corrections officers’ close 
proximity and more frequent contact allows them to “pick up any subtle changes that 
are happening” with people in their custody. One nurse reflected:Preventing Suicide and Self-Harm in Jail: A Sentinel Events Approach13
We rely on them. They rely on us. That is the only way to function 
within a correction facility. Because they’re the ones with eyes on. 
They see the behavior day after day after day. The report to us if 
they have any concerns. They watch them if they don’t eat. They 
report to us. That relationship between detention and medical staff 
is essential. . . . It’s like a symbiotic relationship. 
The necessary collaboration across corrections and health does not 
mean that such collaboration is always easy. Staff from both corrections and health were cognizant that they had different roles, different training 
and experience, and different professional cultures that sometimes put 
them at odds with each other. As one corrections official remarked: 
There is always going to be challenges because you have two populations here of employees. Y ou have more of the human 
services piece. . . . And then there are the more conservative 
paramilitary corrections piece. There have been times when they were brought close together and sort of their philosophy was sort 
of brought close together, to the middle. There are times when they 
are very far apart, and that can be a challenge. 
These different subcultures can create conflict at times, particularly when 
there is a sense that one side is not pulling its weight. Even so, staff largely 
described a relationship of respect, recognizing they are, as scholars 
have described it, “united in mutual dependence” as they work across the 
treatment and custody divide.
29 This interdependence is at once basic to jails 
and crucial to prevent and respond to incidents of suicide and self-harm. 
The nature and extent of communication—both across disciplines and 
within the hierarchy of the jail—emerged as a key theme in thinking about 
the necessary conditions for a nonblaming, all-stakeholder review process. 
Much of the communication occurs through the formal chain of command, 
with information and directives pushed down and feedback provided back 
up through the existing hierarchy. The jails in this study use a wide range of 
approaches to communicate information in verbal or written from, including 
through informal conversations, roll calls, shift reports, regular team 
meetings, and formal review processes. This wide range of communications 
strategies is necessary given the practicalities of working in a jail, including 
shiftwork and the lack of electronic communication for corrections officers 
in many jails. For the most part, the strategies being used prove effective and Vera Institute of Justice14
are in line with the spirit of collaboration discussed above. At the same time, 
the traditional default to a top-down communication style presents particular 
challenges in the context of more formal review processes for critical 
incidents. The primary theme reflected across sites when discussing existing 
review processes was that line staff are generally not included in the reviews 
and that there are few or no mechanisms for communicating the outcomes 
or plans for corrective action. 
Staff from different jails and across disciplines (corrections, mental 
health, nursing) informed V era that they did not receive information 
about what was found through review processes. A charge nurse at 
one jail relayed how the details she received were “just through the 
grapevine . . . there’s no formal dissemination that I’m aware of, of any of that information.” At another jail, a mental health clinician reflected 
on a specific death from suicide and recalled how the conclusions 
from the mortality review and other review processes had never been 
communicated to the clinicians. “We didn’t get anything. . . . I think 
it’s fantastic that there’s so many multidisciplinary teams involved in 
everything that happens in here, but then information gets lost all the time. 
. . . We have people who are doing the groundwork and not being included, 
which can be frustrating.” The lack of review processes that include all 
stakeholders and the absence of a feedback loop is related at least in part 
to the fear of litigation. (See “Legal landscape” at page 21.) From V era’s 
interviews, it is clear that jails struggle with communicating the results of review processes and that there is room for improvement around 
developing truly collaborative reviews. Preventing Suicide and Self-Harm in Jail: A Sentinel Events Approach15
Key recommendations: Communication and collaboration 
 › Corrections and health leadership should work 
together to institute review processes that include 
stakeholders from all disciplines and levels, 
with a focus on disseminating findings and recommendations to staff who are in the position 
to implement corrective actions. Including line 
staff who work directly with people who are incarcerated, such as nurses, mental health and 
social workers, and corrections officers, may help 
identify system weaknesses that would otherwise be overlooked. › Review processes for suicide and self-harm must 
establish clear feedback loops to communicate 
findings and recommendations to all staff. 
Increasing transparency in the review process can also facilitate understanding of the full 
purpose of the reviews, which in turn can 
encourage candor during the information-gathering phase.
Organizational culture 
Beyond everyday mechanisms for collaboration and communication 
within a jail, the broader organizational culture of the jail itself plays a 
critical role in the success of sentinel event reviews. At their core, sentinel 
event reviews require a culture that is committed to addressing system 
weaknesses in order to prevent future adverse outcomes, instead of a 
culture of blame that is fixated on identifying bad apples. 
Organizational culture is a multidimensional concept that has been 
described and understood in diverse ways, but is widely believed to be 
linked to organizational successes and failures.30 It includes attributes 
such as the nature of, and people’s confidence in, leadership; qualities of relationships and collaboration; core values and beliefs among staff; capacity 
for and orientation towards individual and organizational learning; and 
more.
31 Three aspects of organizational culture emerged as particularly 
relevant to creating the conditions for sentinel event reviews of jail suicide and self-harm: the way blame operates, openness or resistance to change, and 
attitudes around mental health and suicide prevention efforts.Vera Institute of Justice16A critical, but sometimes overlooked, component of jail suicide 
and self-harm is the impact of these incidents on frontline 
corrections and health staff. Corrections officers often 
experience intense stress while on duty, which places them at increased risk for poor psychological and physical well-
being; studies have found that rates of suicide for corrections 
officers exceed those of the general public and police officers by more than two times.
a Supporting staff wellness in jail and 
correctional settings does not only benefit individual staff 
members, but should also be considered as an organizational 
goal to improve safety for people who are incarcerated and for staff as a whole to prevent burnout and reduce turnover. In 
Vera’s study, site visits and interviews revealed some common 
approaches to promoting staff wellness and providing support to staff involved in corrections deaths, suicides, and 
other critical incidents. 
 › Debriefing meetings. Following critical incidents 
such as a suicide, the majority of the study sites 
held debriefings to ensure the well-being of all staff 
involved by processing thoughts and feelings.b 
However, in some cases not all staff who may be 
emotionally affected are included in debriefings and 
debriefs were described as “minimal.” Other mental health resources may be provided to staff after such 
a debriefing for anyone still in need of assistance.
 › Employee Assistance Programs (EAPs). All study 
sites had EAPs available for their employees, which 
can be utilized for counseling services (e.g., six free 
therapy sessions) following a traumatic event at work. EAPs can also facilitate paid time off for staff 
after they are involved in a traumatic incident. 
 › Critical Incident Stress Management (CISM) 
and peer support teams. CISM is a multifaceted 
approach to offer short-term support, debriefing, 
counseling, and referrals to individuals following critical incidents that has been adapted and implemented in many different settings.
c A key 
element of CISM is having a trained team, usually 
composed primarily of peers, deliver these supports. 
Three of the four study sites had a CISM team or a similar peer support initiative on site. The fourth 
made corrections officers aware of a peer support 
phone line for all law enforcement and corrections officers in the state.
However, although jails can make supportive resources 
available, staff may not be utilizing them. This was noted by 
staff at the jails Vera studied. Others expressed feelings that, although resources may be available, institutions could still 
do more to support staff. Vera’s interviews with staff revealed 
common explanations for why resources go underutilized: (1) often staff are unaware of available resources; (2) staff 
are hesitant and uncomfortable reaching out for help; (3) 
staff lack faith in resources; (4) staff claim to be unaffected by critical events because deaths in jails are somewhat 
commonplace; (5) staff feel the institution and culture is 
quick to move on; and (6) staff turn to alternative supports. 
It is clear that there is a need for institutions to promote 
utilization of resources and ensure that staff have the time and space they need to process distressing emotions 
following critical incidents. Leadership in some of the sites 
made a concerted effort to normalize emotional responses to critical incidents and attempted to foster a supportive 
environment by promoting destigmatizing attitudes toward 
seeking help. These positive messages can be effective, starting from the top down, in helping staff at all levels 
feel comfortable seeking support. Further, institutions may 
consider implementing policies that require all staff involved in critical incidents—both scene responders and treatment 
team members—to see a provided external counselor for an 
initial processing and evaluation session. Doing so could  help reduce shame associated with seeking help, ensure 
all staff have a personal space to process any emotional 
reactions, and provide an avenue to further follow-up treatment if needed. Promoting wellness for corrections and health staff in jails
a New Jersey Police Suicide Task Force, New Jersey Police Suicide Task Force Report (Trenton, NJ: New Jersey Police Suicide Task Force, 2009), https://perma.cc/
LT5S-6KV3; and Steven J. Stack and Olga Tsoudis, “Suicide Risk among Correctional Officers: A Logistic Regression Analysis,” Archives of Suicide Research 3, no. 3 
(1997), 183-186.
b Debriefing is one of the NCCHC’s key components of a suicide prevention plan. Under these standards, debriefings should include the opportunity for staff to ex -
press their thoughts and feelings, develop an understanding of stress response symptoms to critical incidents, and develop effective coping strategies. Debriefings 
are not intended to feel forced or confrontational. 
c George S. Everly, Raymond B. Flannery, and Jeffrey T. Mitchell, “Critical Incident Stress Management (CISM): A Statistical Review of the Literature,” Aggression 
and Violent Behavior 5, no. 1 (2000), 23-40; Richard L. Levenson Jr., “Prevention of Traumatic Stress in Law Enforcement Personnel: A Cursory Look at the Roles of 
Peer Support and Critical Incident Stress Management,” Forensic Examiner 16, no. 3 (2007), 16-19; and Abigail S. Malcolm, Jessica Seaton, Aimee Perera et al., 
“Critical Incident Stress Debriefing and Law Enforcement: An Evaluative Review,” Brief Treatment and Crisis Intervention 5, no. 3 (2005), 261-278.Preventing Suicide and Self-Harm in Jail: A Sentinel Events Approach17
Culture of blame
In the four jails V era studied, many staff described a culture of passing 
around and placing blame on individual people. Corrections officers in one 
jail explained that because all their activities are subject to investigation 
and scrutiny, they are careful to document all their checks and rounds 
and to involve health staff to pass off responsibility. This was summarized 
colloquially as the “cover your ass” mentality: 
I think that there’s just a fear of, “Oh, I should have done this check. 
I missed a check, and this happened, you know, so I’m afraid to 
lose my job now.” So, it’s the, you talked about blame earlier, I think 
that’s a lot of the apprehension of people to say this is what I actually 
did, as opposed to what maybe I should have done. 
In another jail, corrections officers were characterized as wanting to 
keep their heads down, complete their shifts, and get out:
That’s usually how most of the officers go about their day. And so, 
when their name comes up, they’re like, “Well, wait, why?” When I’ve 
asked people to come in for a debrief for, you know, peer support, 
they are like “Why? What did I do?” I’m like, “Y ou didn’t do anything. 
Y ou are just a part of the incident the other night.” He’s like, “Oh, 
well, I’m—” you know, the first thing he says is, “I’m good. I’m fine.” 
Across all four jails, the culture of blame was identified as a key barrier 
to the implementation of truly nonblaming review processes. Many 
staff described that they would be very skeptical if they were invited or 
instructed to participate in a review. As one lieutenant remarked:
I think it would be tough. It would be very tough. The nonblaming 
part would be tough because it would feel like someone would 
always be trying to justify their actions the whole time. 
This was elaborated on by his colleague: 
I think they are going to go into it with a certain mindset of not saying anything at all, because even if it were a completely, you 
know, we’ll call it a “consequence free environment” or “safe place” Vera Institute of Justice18or whatever you want to call it, where this information could be 
said without disciplinary action, there aren’t many people that 
would believe that. They would still see it as . . . you can tell them, 
you can put it in writing, you can do anything, and they are still 
going to be like, they’re not going to take the risk. 
However, some staff were more optimistic about the feasibility of 
sentinel event reviews and felt that if leadership could actually demonstrate  
to line staff that the review process is not designed to single out and 
discipline individual staff, as opposed to just telling them this, it might 
be possible to overcome the prevailing expectation of blame and fear of 
disciplinary action. As one said:
In my mind you have to do it and then we have to prove it to them. . . .  Telling our staff . . . “Nobody’s going to get in trouble, we need 
you to be honest”. . . . If you offered this up to most staff [they 
would say], “I’m good, I’m out,” because, because of that culture . . . 
you have to get it in there and you have to demonstrate it before. 
At PCSO, one interviewee described how the participation, buy-in, and 
discussions in their existing review processes had improved over the years and attributed this to leadership setting the tone:
I think the current sheriff is very much about just open and honest communication, I think him, as the leader, is what makes 
everybody comfortable doing that. He understands that, you 
know, there are such things as human error and mistakes and he 
also is big on if it wasn’t a mistake and it’s some sort of policy and 
procedure that it has to be corrected and the way to do that is to 
acknowledge it, to accept what happened and why it happened, and 
then make sure it doesn’t happen again. 
Attitudes toward change 
Attitudes toward change emerged as another important aspect of 
organizational culture when considering the implementation of sentinel 
event reviews. Many staff across the four jails characterized their colleagues 
and workplace as resistant to change. Jail leadership at one jail expressed: Preventing Suicide and Self-Harm in Jail: A Sentinel Events Approach19
I have a lot of more senior officers who are okay with the 
monotony of day to day. They don’t like change. Y ou know, if you 
were to tell them they had to . . . start using a blue pen instead of 
a black pen they might . . . they might quit or retire. So change 
definitely does not go over well in this environment. 
And a corrections official at a different jail elaborated further:
Change here is brutal. It’s just . . . nobody likes change in the 
real world, but here especially, it is very difficult, change. So, it’s 
a challenge. When, you know, when the administration comes 
and says, “Okay. We’re going to do something different and we’re going to, you know, use a vendor or use an outside [provider],” the 
immediate response is going to be difficult because people feel like 
their job is in jeopardy.
Despite the widespread aversion to change, some staff were still able to 
cite a few specific examples of corrective actions taken to prevent suicide and self-harm within their jails. Most of these were tangible, observable 
aspects of suicide prevention, such as physical changes to cells or increased 
staffing devoted to mental health screening, assessment, or substance 
withdrawal management. Many of these corrective actions were direct 
outcomes of an institutional review process, suicide review, or mortality review. At MSO, for example, a standing suicide review committee that 
meets monthly has allowed staff and leadership to take a more preventive 
approach to suicide and self-harm rather than reacting only when someone 
dies by suicide; for example, as a result of these monthly meetings they 
have made changes to increase visibility into cells. Corrective action and 
culture change can stem from internal changes—such as new leadership 
or transitions in health care delivery—as well as the introduction of 
external supports. These could include bringing back new ideas and good 
practices from conferences or professional networks, or securing technical 
assistance in the form of suicide prevention experts or NCCHC reviews. 
For MCDOC, a recent change in corrections leadership brought fresh eyes to identifying and addressing gaps in suicide prevention. This led 
to a transition to a new health care provider; the allocation of resources 
to suicide prevention training, staffing, and physical cell improvements; 
and proactive engagement with staff around changes. Regardless of their 
source and approach, these examples demonstrate the possibilities for Vera Institute of Justice20shifting staff and organizations from deeply ingrained resistance to change to 
a position of readiness.
Beliefs around mental health 
Another important aspect of organizational culture within jails that is especially relevant to sentinel event reviews pertains to beliefs around 
mental health, suicide, and self-harm. Beliefs and attitudes about—as well as 
approaches to and resources for mental health—have shifted in significant 
ways within the corrections field and these specific jails. Staff with long 
careers in corrections have been able to observe these changes over time. The 
mental health director at one jail remarked, “It’s so different now. It used to 
be mental health, really, didn’t have much of a seat at the table, and now I feel 
like we have, like, the biggest seat at the table.” This growing recognition of the 
mental health needs of people in jail was commented on by many other staff, 
who also noted their jail’s efforts to improve mental health care. 
Despite this progress, V era found that some staff still believe that not all 
instances of suicide in jails are preventable. For example, although leadership at one jail put out a call to action for their staff to “collectively work together to 
figure out how to prevent this, because it’s preventable,” a corrections officer at 
the same jail held the belief that, “If somebody wants to kill themselves, they’re 
going to find a way to do it.” At another jail, staff also felt that a recent suicide 
couldn’t have been predicted and thus couldn’t have been prevented:
Y ou just never know. Now, unfortunately, I would think that a lot of 
people that truly want to commit suicide, they won’t tell you about it. 
They’ll seem as normal as you or I, and then they’ll just do it. And, in 
those cases, you just can’t prevent it . . . [when the] person gives you no warning whatsoever. There’s no way to improve that. 
The fact that suicide is the leading cause of death in jails is a challenging 
reality for both line staff and leadership. For suicide prevention efforts to be effective, staff must feel confident they have the necessary knowledge and 
resources to identify and intervene in cases of potential suicide. Attitudes 
regarding the preventability of suicide may also determine whether jails 
consider sentinel event reviews to be a useful tool. 
Because jails are often large organizations, shaped by strict command and 
control structures and containing multiple subcultures among health and 
corrections staff, the question of how to influence organizational culture within them is complex. Leadership at one jail remarked, “it takes a couple years for Preventing Suicide and Self-Harm in Jail: A Sentinel Events Approach21
you to kind of make cultural changes.” Across the four jails that V era studied, 
attitudes toward blame, change, and mental health and suicide prevention 
emerged as a few of the key aspects of organizational culture that will 
impact the feasibility of more robust review processes for suicide and serious 
incidents of self-harm. Encouragingly, the highest levels of corrections 
leadership recognized how important their role is in fostering change and 
agreed that a proactive approach is critical to shifting attitudes, obtaining buy-
in, and successfully implementing changes to improve practice around suicide 
and self-harm.
Legal landscape 
The barriers and facilitators to sentinel event reviews described above 
operate largely within the jail itself. But the feasibility of conducting 
sentinel event reviews also depends on the complex legal landscape in 
each jurisdiction. Discussions about confidentiality and calculations 
around risk and liability are omnipresent in the criminal justice system 
and likely heightened when thinking about incidents of suicide and self-
harm. V era’s analysis of the legal landscape—as well as the interviews at 
each jail with health and corrections staff, internal investigations, and 
legal stakeholders—focused on four key issues that jurisdictions will have 
to grapple with as they consider implementing sentinel event reviews: 
liability, discovery, public records requests, and confidentiality. 
Liability
Incidents of suicide and serious self-harm in jails may give rise to legal 
liability for jails and may draw particular scrutiny because courts have Key recommendations: Organizational culture 
 › Encourage leadership to actively demonstrate its 
commitment to focusing on system weaknesses 
and addressing root causes, not individual errors 
and staff; this will foster trust and candor during review processes.
 › During the review process, build in opportunities 
for review team members to express their 
misgivings about the process and work through conflicts.
 a › Use trainings on mental health, suicide, and 
self-harm to develop capacity among staff and 
overcome the belief that some suicides are not 
preventable.
 › Highlight positive changes that result from review 
processes to encourage openness to change.
a  Katharine Browning, Thomas Feucht, Nancy Ritter et al., Paving the Way: Lessons Learned in Sentinel Event Reviews (Washington, DC: 
National Institute of Justice, 2015), https://perma.cc/Q8HK-CFYH.Vera Institute of Justice22already established liability under certain circumstances.32 Lawsuits related 
to incidents of suicide and serious self-harm may be based on allegations 
that the jail or a specific staff member deprived an incarcerated person of 
his or her constitutional or statutory rights or that the jail failed to act with 
reasonable care toward the people in its custody.33 
It is important to note that conducting a sentinel event review does not 
give rise to additional liability itself, but the review process could increase 
litigation exposure by aggregating details about the incident into documents 
that could ultimately be obtained either by plaintiffs (through discovery 
during litigation) or the public (through freedom of information requests). 
In the jails V era studied, the fear of liability and litigation was intense for 
many staff, who felt that litigation was inevitable in the event of a death in 
custody. This emerged as a potential barrier for robust review processes. When 
asked about current review processes and the possibility for sentinel event 
reviews, an internal affairs and investigations team member revealed he is 
reluctant to name names and identify areas for improvement in writing: 
I’m totally with you and I think we should do that and I get the nonblaming, but when we say, “Hey,” and somewhere in writing, 
“This policy says 30-minute rounds but it wasn’t done for 45 
minutes,” we’re just opening ourselves up. Y ou don’t have to have a 
name associated with it. The report doesn’t have to be critical. It can 
be, “Hey, we need to do this better,” and as soon as we say that in 
writing somewhere, it costs us a lot of money. 
For corrections leadership who are responsible for implementing 
review processes in their jails, concerns about liability and litigation factor 
into their hesitation to widen the circle of participants involved in reviews 
and contribute to gaps in communicating the findings from reviews 
to facilitate corrective action. A legal counsel at one jail noted it was a 
“tremendous challenge” to balance sharing and protecting information. One 
top official explained that he tries to “find that sweet spot” where they can 
“cover what the lawyers are concerned about but also get information off 
to the appropriate people to make the right changes.”
Discovery
As discussed above, although sentinel event reviews do not themselves give rise to liability against a jail or individual employees, documents Preventing Suicide and Self-Harm in Jail: A Sentinel Events Approach23
produced from a sentinel event review could be obtained by plaintiffs 
through discovery during litigation unless they are deemed to be 
privileged in some way. Two common privileges are likely inapplicable: 
attorney-client privilege only protects communications between lawyers 
and clients made in confidence to obtain legal advice (and does not protect 
the underlying facts gathered in the communication) and work-product 
privilege only protects information prepared by or for an attorney in 
anticipation of litigation.34 Some states, however, have enacted privileges 
that protect from discovery records pertaining to confidential internal 
investigations (known as the “self-critical analysis privilege”) and/or 
documents produced to inform the development of new policies (i.e., 
documents that are “pre-decisional” or related to the processes by which 
policies are formed).35 Depending on the specific state statute, these types 
of privileges for internal policy making may protect documents produced 
during sentinel event reviews for suicide and self-harm in jails.36 In one of 
the four states V era studied (Washington), records, proceedings, and reports from formal medical review boards and hospital quality improvement 
committees—spaces and processes similar to those occurring in jails—
are considered to be privileged.
37 Similarly, Massachusetts has codified a 
medical peer review privilege, which protects the proceedings, reports, and records of eligible committees that function to evaluate or improve the 
quality of health care rendered by health care providers.
38 Those interested 
in protecting information collected by sentinel event review boards in 
Washington, Massachusetts, and states with similar protections could 
advocate to extend these statutory privileges to medical and health policy 
review in jails. 
In the other two states V era studied, there are no such statutory privileges 
that might be extended to protect the records of sentinel event reviews. The 
New Jersey Supreme Court has held that the confidential investigative records 
of a professional licensing board’s inquiry may be discoverable in a medical 
malpractice case involving the physician at issue. The court set forth a three-
part balancing test that takes into account whether the plaintiff could obtain 
the information from other sources, the degree of harm plaintiff would suffer without access to the records, and the potential for prejudice to the board’s 
investigation.
39 In Florida, medical committee meeting minutes and similar 
review reports are now discoverable after a 2017 Florida Supreme Court decision construing a voter-approved amendment to the state constitution to 
allow patients a broad right of access to records relating to adverse medical 
incidents.
40 For PCSO in Florida, minutes from meetings held by its death and Vera Institute of Justice24
serious injury board have been subpoenaed in previous lawsuits. However, 
PCSO’s legal counsel believes that continuing with their existing review 
process or, preferably, an even more robust sentinel event review process, is the 
right thing to do from a liability perspective: 
The advice I give all the time is the only wrong answer here is to 
do nothing. Y ou find a problem and you just identify it and then 
do nothing, then you know it would be discoverable, it would be 
admissible and, quite frankly, you know I kind of think it should 
be. . . . As long as you do something in an attempt to address it and 
identify it, then [it shows] . . . this is why we’re not deliberately 
indifferent, we’re trying and this is what we uncovered and this is what we did and you know we’re sorry yours was the guy that you 
know brought this to light. 
This sentiment encapsulates a key finding highlighted in V era’s previous 
analysis of the law in New Y ork: the risks related to a sentinel event review 
should be considered in proportion to the potentially greater “risks that 
come with leaving problems undiscovered and unaddressed.”
41 Indeed, 
New Jersey and Massachusetts have similar laws to New Y ork. In these 
states, an agency violates its duty of care when there is foreseeable risk and 
the agency fails to take reasonable steps to prevent the harm from coming 
to pass.42 It can thus make good sense to proactively engage in sentinel 
event reviews as a way to both avoid harm and contain liability.
Public records requests
Freedom of information laws provide the public with access to 
government records and information, creating an important channel to 
hold governments accountable. It should be expected that any information 
pertaining to suicide and self-harm in jails, such as the outcomes of a 
sentinel event review, will be of interest to the media and the general 
public, and these laws are another way that internal documents from a 
review could be made available. 
At the state level, the provisions of freedom of information laws can 
vary widely. Some states have enacted specific statutory exemption for 
interagency or intra-agency communications pertaining to policymaking 
within the government, so that frank and honest discourse about options is 
not stifled by the threat of public disclosure.43 In Florida and Washington, Preventing Suicide and Self-Harm in Jail: A Sentinel Events Approach25
however, no such exemptions exist, and SCDS staff expressed frustration 
about public records requests. Internal affairs and investigations staff felt 
“really reluctant” to put anything in writing about “what we could do better 
in a suicide.” A health administrator shared:
[W]hen you go and say, “Hey, we could have done this better or we 
could have done that better,” you are just opening yourself up for [a]  
newspaper article, for claims filed over risk management lawsuits.  
It really is not an environment that is conducive to being honest 
about your performance.
Additional public scrutiny of a suicide or incident of serious self-harm is, understandably, a potential concern for jail officials. However, the same 
rationale used by PCSO in describing the tradeoff between having review 
documents subpoenaed and not doing reviews arguably applies in the case 
of public records requests: that is, demonstrating evidence of a thoughtful 
and regular review process through engagement in sentinel event reviews 
may lead to practices and protocols that prevent “deliberate indifference” to 
the care of people who are incarcerated.
44
Confidentiality
Finally, jails undertaking sentinel event reviews must consider issues that arise around sharing confidential health information during the review 
process. Sentinel event reviews usually aim to bring together stakeholders 
of different disciplines and, sometimes, different agencies. However, 
depending on how jails administer their health care and how sentinel event 
review boards are organized, health information privacy laws may limit 
access to personal health information—including information pertaining to 
incidents of suicide and self-harm—for some review team members. 
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) 
governs how health care providers, health care plans, and health care clearing 
houses (“covered entities”) use and disclose people’s identifiable protected 
health information (PHI) and applies for 50 years following the date of a person’s death.
45 The HIPAA Privacy Rule provides safeguards to protect 
the privacy of individuals’ personal health information, including that 
covered entities cannot share PHI except as explicitly permitted or required 
by the law.46 Additional federal or state laws and regulations providing 
more stringent privacy protection also apply, especially related to mental Vera Institute of Justice26
illness and substance use.47 With respect to HIPAA, there is some debate 
about whether correctional institutions are considered covered entities 
(and therefore must comply with HIPAA standards). One legal scholar 
has cautioned that this determination is complicated and requires careful 
analysis of the institution’s operations and model for delivering health care.48 
HIPAA’s Privacy Rule does have an exception that allows for health 
providers and other covered entities to share PHI with correctional 
institutions having lawful custody of a person if it is necessary for (1) the 
health and safety of the incarcerated person or other people in the facility; 
or (2) the maintenance of safety, security, and good order of a facility.49 At 
SCDS, which has a hybrid model of health care delivery with a contracted 
private vendor, staff said that “the contract allows for the contractor to 
share that mental health or medical information with detention services 
[staff] upon request.” HIPAA’s Privacy Rule also has an exception that 
allows for health providers and other covered entities to share PHI with 
public health authorities (such as a local health department) for the purpose 
of public health activities, including preventing injury and conducting 
public health investigations.50 Therefore, correctional institutions may be 
able to work with their local public health authorities to create a plan for sharing PHI for sentinel event reviews. 
In practice, considerations about confidentiality and HIPAA may prevent 
some participants from having access to personal health information, but 
should not prevent reviews from taking place at all. At one of the jails V era 
studied, stakeholders explained that for their current reviews:
The people that are in there are at the top of the . . . chain of 
command, . . . they all are able to have access to the [medical] file for 
this board review for this purpose. . . . For example, [legal] would get 
the medical file, but training wouldn’t necessarily get the medical file. . . . So, I can’t say that there is no [PHI] that is discussed, but it’s at the 
highest level of people with the need to know based on the review, 
and they get what they need to know and that’s it.
This follows an important principle of HIPAA, which instructs health 
providers and other covered entities to take reasonable steps to limit the use or disclosure of personal health information to the minimum amount 
of information necessary to carry out the purpose of the disclosure.
51 
HIPAA also provides standards for de-identifying personal health information, should sentinel event review boards choose to go this route.
52 Preventing Suicide and Self-Harm in Jail: A Sentinel Events Approach27
Key recommendations: Legal
 › Do not be dissuaded from conducting reviews 
because of concerns around sharing personal 
health information. These issues may limit the 
depth of information available to all review team members, but should not prevent reviews from 
taking place at all.
 › Work with legal counsel to understand the 
protections that exist in state law.  › Champion the value of a sentinel event review 
process even in the face of liability, not only for 
improving practices around suicide and self-
harm—which is an important goal on its own—but also as way to proactively avoid harm and 
contain liability.
Conclusion
Preventing and responding to incidents of suicide and self-harm must 
continue to be urgent priorities for jails across the United States. 
Several hundred people die of suicide in custody each year (372 in 
2014), the majority of whom have not been convicted of crimes and often die within days of arriving in jail (between 2000 and 2014, the median time 
in jail before death from suicide was nine days).
53 Thousands more engage in 
acts of self-harm that can have serious consequences. It is critical to elevate 
the acute health risks of jail and the national crisis of jail suicide and self-
harm, particularly at a time when the public is paying more attention to local 
jails and reform efforts.54 Despite the formidable obstacles, research and 
guidance from experts demonstrate that it is possible to forestall suicides in custody with a comprehensive suicide prevention program—one that 
addresses regular training of all staff, screening and assessment for suicide 
risk, communication procedures, housing commensurate with risk level, 
reporting, and multidisciplinary review processes, among other factors.
55 
That so few jails nationally have the full continuum of comprehensive 
suicide prevention services is startling given the data.  
This research started from the perspective that review processes for 
deaths in custody are all too often adversarial and that practitioners can 
benefit from integrating an all-stakeholder, nonblaming, and forward-
looking error-review process. The success of sentinel event reviews in Vera Institute of Justice28
other industries like medicine and aviation provides evidence that it is 
possible to learn from error and to strengthen overall system reliability by 
understanding the root causes of negative outcomes. V era’s research suggests 
that it is also possible in the criminal justice system, notwithstanding the 
many challenges stakeholders may face when trying to implement such 
reviews. The jails that participated in this study all have review processes 
in place for critical incidents, but were also open to considering how their 
current processes might be improved. This could be achieved by expanding 
the types of staff included in reviews, for example, or making review findings 
and recommendations transparent across their agencies. 
To be sure, no two sentinel event review processes will look the same. 
The results of this study suggest that the design and implementation of any sentinel event review process will depend crucially on four key aspects 
of the jail: how health care is delivered, the communication processes in 
place, the organizational culture of the jail, and the legal landscape of the 
state where the jail is located. Thankfully, there is emerging guidance in the 
field to help jurisdictions walk through the range of factors they should 
consider in designing a sentinel event review and implement the concrete 
steps in the review process.
56 Jails that adopt sentinel event reviews will 
not only demonstrate leadership and commitment to advancing the field of 
suicide and self-harm prevention, but will also help instill a new culture in 
their facilities—one that promotes the safety and well-being of the people 
in their custody, as well as those who work there. With the lives of people 
who are incarcerated at stake, it is critical that more jails work to embrace 
this approach and its ethic of shared responsibility.Preventing Suicide and Self-Harm in Jail: A Sentinel Events Approach29
Appendix 
List of interview participants
Site Interview # Leadership level Role type Role description
MCDOC 33 Leadership Legal counsel Senior deputy county 
counsel
MCDOC 34 Leadership Health Director of nursing
MCDOC 35 Leadership Health Mental health director
MCDOC 36 Line Corrections Officer
MCDOC 36 Line Corrections Officer
MCDOC 37 Leadership Health Health services administrator
MCDOC 38 Mid-level Internal affairs and investigationsChief investigator, internal affairs 
MCDOC 38 Mid-level Internal affairs and investigationsOfficer/investigator, internal affairs
MCDOC 39 Leadership Corrections Chief of staff
MCDOC 40 Leadership Corrections Warden
MCDOC 41 Line Health Social worker
MCDOC 42 Leadership Corrections Operations captain
MSO 23 Leadership Corrections Superintendent
MSO 24 Leadership Legal counsel Chief legal counsel
MSO 25 Leadership Corrections Special sheriff
MSO 26 Leadership Health Health services administrator
MSO 27 Leadership Corrections Assistant deputy superintendent,  policy 
advisor
MSO 28 Leadership Health Mental health directorVera Institute of Justice30
MSO 28 Leadership Health Doctor and CEO of 
contract healthcare 
provider
MSO 29 Leadership Internal affairs and investigationsInternal investigations unit director
MSO 30 Line Health Medical clinician
MSO 30 Line Health Medical clinician
MSO 31 Mid-level Corrections Lieutenant
MSO 31 Mid-level Corrections Sergeant
PCSO 1 Leadership Corrections Colonel
PCSO 1 Leadership Corrections Major
PCSO 2 Line Health Licensed mental health counselor
PCSO 3 Line Health Licensed mental health counselor
PCSO 4 Leadership Health Nursing director
PCSO 5 Line Health Charge nurse
PCSO 6 Mid-level Corrections Sergeant
PCSO 7 Leadership Health Health services administrator
PCSO 8 Leadership Health Medical director
PCSO 9 Leadership Health Psychiatrist
PCSO 10 Mid-level Corrections Shift commander
PCSO 11 Leadership Legal counsel General counsel
PCSO 12 Mid-level Internal affairs and investigationsCorporal, detention investigation unit 
PCSO 12 Mid-level Internal affairs and investigationsSergeant, detention investigation unitPreventing Suicide and Self-Harm in Jail: A Sentinel Events Approach31
SCDS 13 Leadership Corrections Director of  
detention services
SCDS 14 Leadership Health Health services administrator
SCDS 14 Leadership Health Health contract administrator
SCDS 14 Leadership Health Chief legal officer for contract healthcare 
provider
SCDS 14 Leadership Health Chief of operations for contract healthcare 
provider
SCDS 15 Mid-level Corrections Sergeant, training
SCDS 15 Mid-level Internal affairs and investigationsSergeant, internal affairs
SCDS 16 Leadership Health Mental health manager
SCDS 16 Leadership Corrections Lieutenant
SCDS 16 Leadership Corrections Lieutenant
SCDS 17 Leadership Internal affairs and 
investigationsDirector of risk management
SCDS 18 Line Health Psychiatric nurse practitioner
SCDS 19 Line Health Physician assistant
SCDS 20 Line Corrections Officer
SCDS 21 Mid-level Corrections Sergeant
SCDS 22 Line Health Mental health professional
SCDS 22 Line Health Mental health 
professional
SCDS 32 Leadership Health Medical directorVera Institute of Justice32
Endnotes 
1 Margaret E. Noonan, Mortality in Local Jails, 2000-2014—
Statistical Tables (Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice 
Statistics (BJS), 2016), 1, https://perma.cc/E4JX-ULZF .
2 Ibid.; and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, “Web-
based Injury Statistics Query and Reporting System 
(WISQARS),” database (accessed November 30, 2018),  https://perma.cc/7W7W-JAWW . 
3 Lindsay M. Hayes, National Study of Jail Suicide: 20 
Years Later (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, 
National Institute of Corrections, 2010), https://perma.cc/4Y2W-8SPZ; and Noonan, Mortality in Local Jails, 2016, 
6 & table 4. For 1986 data, also see Lindsay M. Hayes and 
Joseph R. Rowan, National Study of Jail Suicides—Seven Years Later (Washington, DC: Jail Suicide Prevention 
Information Task Force, National Center on Institutions and 
Alternatives, 1988), https://perma.cc/RDD7-9ZHS .
4 Noonan, Mortality in Local Jails, 2016, table 9.
5 Kenneth L. Applebaum, Judith A. Savageau, Robert 
L. Trestman et al., “A National Survey of Self-Injurious 
Behavior in American Prisons,” Psychiatric Services 62, no. 3 (2011), 285-290, 287 , https://perma.cc/A2K6-MUMA.
6 Laura Frank and Regina T.P . Aguirre, “Suicide within United 
States Jails: A Qualitative Interpretive Meta-Synthesis,” 
Journal of Sociology & Social Welfare 40, no. 3 (2013), 31-52; Henry J. Steadman, Fred C. Osher, Pamela Clark 
Robbins et al., “Prevalence of Serious Mental Illness among 
Jail Inmates,” Psychiatric Services 60, no. 6 (2009), 761-765, https://perma.cc/VTQ3-CCUG; and Christine Tartaro and 
Rick Ruddell, “Trouble in Mayberry: A National Analysis of 
Suicides and Attempts in Small Jails,” American Journal of Criminal Justice 31, no. 1 (2006), 81-101. 
7 Jennifer Bronson and Marcus Berzofsky, Indicators of Mental Health Problems Reported by Prisoners and Jail Inmates, 2011-12 (Washington, DC: BJS, 2017), 1 & 8,  
https://perma.cc/RF6Y-G426 .
8 See Lindsay M. Hayes, “Suicide Prevention in Correctional Facilities: Reflections and Next Steps,” International Journal 
of Law and Psychiatry 36, no. 3-4 (2013), 188-194. Also see 
Noonan, Mortality in Local Jails, 2016.
9 Hayes, “Suicide Prevention in Correctional Facilities,” 2013.
10 Leah Pope and Ayesha Delany-Brumsey, Creating a Culture of Safety: Sentinel Event Reviews for Suicide and Self-Harm in Correctional Facilities (New York: Vera Institute 
of Justice, 2016), https://perma.cc/FF7Q-VT43. 11 Ibid. 
12 James M. Doyle, “Learning from Error in the Criminal 
Justice System: Sentinel Event Reviews,” in Mending Justice: Sentinel Event Reviews (Washington, DC: U.S. 
Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice, 2014), 
3-19, https://perma.cc/HE2F-CG52.
13 Institute of Medicine, Committee on Quality of Health Care in America, To Err is Human: Building a Safer Health 
System, edited by Linda T. Kohn, Janet M. Corrigan, and 
Molla S. Donaldson (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2000), https://perma.cc/6RWD-A8LV . 
14 Pope and Delany-Brumsey, Creating a Culture of Safety, 2016.
15 Hayes, National Study of Jail Suicide, 2010. 
16 Each jail received an interim report with preliminary 
findings and recommendations specific to its site and 
reviewed the penultimate version of this full report.
17 American Correctional Association (ACA), Core Jail 
Standards, 1st edition (East Peoria, IL: Versa Press, 
2010), https://perma.cc/MSZ9-URLS; ACA, Commission on Accreditation for Corrections, Performance-Based 
Standards for Correctional Health Care in Adult 
Correctional Institutions (Glen Burnie, MD: TrayPML, 2002); and National Commission on Correctional Health Care, 
Standards for Health Services in Jails (Chicago: National 
Commission on Correctional Health Care, 2014).
18 Interviews were audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim 
for analysis, with the exception of one participant who did 
not wish to be audio-recorded but agreed to have detailed notes taken.
19 Kathy Charmaz, Constructing Grounded Theory: A 
Practical Guide through Qualitative Analysis, 1
st edition 
(London: SAGE Publications, 2006); and Dedoose Version 8.1.8 (Los Angeles: SocioCultural Research 
Consultants, LLC, 2018) (web application for managing, analyzing, and presenting qualitative and mixed method 
research data), www.dedoose.com.
20 Estelle v. Gamble, 429 U.S. 97 (1976),  
https://perma.cc/M2FG-ANW5 .
21 SCDS was the only jail in the study not accredited by either 
the NCCHC or the ACA.
22 Katharine Browning, Thomas Feucht, Nancy Ritter et al., 
Paving the Way: Lessons Learned in Sentinel Event Reviews 
(Washington, DC: National Institute of Justice, 2015), 1, Preventing Suicide and Self-Harm in Jail: A Sentinel Events Approach33
https://perma.cc/Q8HK-CFYH. 
23 Pew Charitable Trusts, Jails: Inadvertent Health Care 
Providers (Washington, DC: Pew Charitable Trusts, 2018), 
10 & figure 2, https://perma.cc/R4Y3-GAYZ.
24 Ibid. 
25 Ibid. 
26 There are, of course, other challenges presented when jail 
operations and health care services are provided by the same entity, in particular the challenges that can arise 
when health care services lack clinical independence. 
Health professionals working in corrections often have dual loyalty to their patients and to their institutions, and 
conflicts related to this dual loyalty can be magnified in 
the absence of an independent health service. This was not the focus of this study, although findings are presented 
at page 13 on the sometimes uneasy relationship between 
corrections and health staff. See Jörg Pont, Steffan Enggist, Heino Stöver et al., “Prison Health Care Governance: 
Guaranteeing Clinical Independence,” American Journal of 
Public Health 108, no. 4 (2018), 472-476.
27 Hayes, “Suicide Prevention in Correctional Facilities,” 2013.
28 Doyle, “Learning from Error in the Criminal Justice System,” 
2014.
29 Lorna A. Rhodes, Total Confinement: Madness and Reason 
in the Maximum Security Prison (Berkeley, CA: University 
of California Press, 2004), 133. For a more thorough 
description of the “tentative and shifting alliance” among custody and treatment workers in prisons, see ibid., 134.
30 Tobias Jung, Tim Scott, Huw T.O. Davies et al., “Instruments 
for Exploring Organizational Culture: A Review of the 
Literature,” Public Administration Review 69, no. 6 (2009), 1087-1096; and Mary K. Stohr, Craig Hemmens, Peter A. 
Collins et al., “Assessing the Organizational Culture in a 
Jail Setting,” Prison Journal 92, no. 3 (2012), 358-387 .
31 Jung, Scott, Davis et al., “Instruments for Exploring 
Organizational Culture,” 2009; and Stohr, Hemmens, 
Collins et al., “Assessing the Organizational Culture,” 2012.
32 See for example Gregoire v. City of Oak Harbor, 170 
Wash.2d 628, 635, 244 P .3d 924 (2010), https://perma.cc/
Q6L9-47QF ; Estate of Cills v. Kaftan, 105 F.Supp.2d 391, 397 
(D. N.J. 2000), https://perma.cc/F3A3-UKAS; and Guice v. Enfinger, 389 So.2d 270 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1980) (holding that a jail employee must act to prevent “reasonably 
foreseeable” suicides and acts of self-harm),  
https://perma.cc/6P9E-K3AX. Also see Cook ex rel. Estate of Tessier v. Sheriff Monroe County, 402 F.3d 1092, 1122 (11
th 
Cir. 2005).
33 See 42 U.S.C. § 1983 (providing a civil cause of action for deprivation of federal constitutional rights); and Restatement (Third) of Torts: Physical and Emotional Harm 
§ 40 (American Law Institute 2012) (affirmative duties to 
act), https://perma.cc/6R5L-D72M.
34 For Florida, see Fla. Stat. § 90.502 (lawyer-client privilege); and Florida Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 1.280(b)(4) 
(trial preparation materials). For Massachusetts, see 
Massachusetts Rules of Evidence, Rule 502 (attorney-client privilege); and Massachusetts Rules of Civil Procedure, 
Rule 26(b)(3) (trial preparation materials). For New Jersey, 
see N.J. Stat. Ann. § 2A:84A-20 (lawyer-client privilege); New Jersey Rules of Evidence, Rule 504 (lawyer-client privilege); 
and Rivard v. American Home Products, 917 A.D. 286 (N.J. 
Super. Ct. App. Div., 2007) (discussing both attorney-client and work product privileges). For Washington, see 
Washington Rules of Enforcement for Lawyer Conduct, 
Rule 5.4(b) (attorney-client privilege); and Washington Supreme Court Civil Rule 26(b)(3) (trial preparation 
materials).
35 See for example Libertarians for Transparent Government 
v. Government Records Council, 180 A.3d 327 (N.J. Super. 
App. Div. 2018) (exempting “deliberative material” from 
disclosure); Citizens for Open Government v. City of Lodi, 
205 Cal. App. 4th 296, 305 (2012) (discussing deliberative 
process privilege); Reichhold Chemicals, Inc. v. Textron, 
Inc., 157 F.R.D. 522, 524-26 (N.D. Fla 1994) (discussing self-critical analysis privilege); and O’Connor v. Chrysler 
Corp., 86 F.R.D. 211, 217 (D. Mass. 1980) (discussing critical 
self-evaluation privilege).
36 For example, compare discussion of the scope of public 
record exemptions in New Jersey and Washington in 
Libertarians for Transparent Government, 180 A.3d 327 , 331 (N.J. Super. App. Div. 2018); and Residential Action Council 
v. Seattle Housing Authority, 177 Wash.2d 417 (2013).
37 Wash. Rev. Code § 70.41.200.
38 Mass. Gen. Laws, ch. 111 § 204, https://perma.cc/6JCW-
2Y6P; and ibid., ch. 111 § 1 (definition of medical peer review 
committee), https://perma.cc/6LNQ-UREL.Vera Institute of Justice34
39 McClain v. College Hospital, 99 N.J. 346, 492 A.2d 991 
(1985), https://perma.cc/FU8G-GFMK. Also see Muenken 
v. Toner, No. L-591-06, 2011 WL 2694431 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. 
Div. July 13, 2011).
40 Edwards v. Thomas, 229 So.3d 277 , 286-288 (Fl. 2017), 
https://perma.cc/P8WP-KM2W .
41 Pope and Delany-Brumsey, Creating a Culture of Safety, 
2016, 20.
42 See Sanchez v. State of New York, 99 N.Y .2d 247 , 252 (2002), 
https://perma.cc/MJ65-DZFE; Cook ex rel. Estate of Tessier v. Sheriff Monroe County, 402 F.3d 1092 (11
th Cir. 2005); and 
Slaven v. City of Salem, 438 N.E.2d 348, 449 (Mass. 1982).
43 See for example Md. Code Gen. Prov. § 4-344; Mass. Gen. Laws, ch. 4 § 7(26)(d); N.J. Open Public Records Act, N.J. Stat. Ann. § 47:1A-1.1; N.Y . Public Officers Law § 87(2)(g); and 
Tex. Govt. Code § 552.111. The scope of these exceptions 
may be limited by the common law right of access. See for example Bergen County Imp. Authority v. North Jersey 
Media Group, Inc., 370 N.J.Super. 504 (App. Div. 2004),  
https://perma.cc/M3ZD-SVY2.
44 See Estelle v. Gamble, 429 U.S. 97 (1976).
45 45 C.F.R. § 164.502.
46 45 CFR Part 160; and 45 CFR Part 164, subparts A & E.
47 For example, 42 CFR Part 2 is a federal regulation governing confidentiality for people seeking treatment from substance 
use disorders and, with limited exceptions, requires patient 
consent for disclosure of patient records. For state health privacy laws, see for example Cal. Civ. Code § 56.11; Fla. 
Stat. §§ 119.0712 & 456.046; Mass. Gen. Laws. ch. 111, § 70E; 
N.Y . Social Services Law § 461-d; N.J. Stat. Ann. §§ 26:2B-20 & 30-4:24.3; and Wash. Rev. Code § 70.02.020.48 Melissa M. Goldstein, “Health Information Privacy and Health Information Technology in the US Correctional Setting,” 
American Journal of Public Health 104, no. 5 (2014), 803-809.
49 45 CFR § 164.512; and 45 CFR § 164.104.
50 45 CFR § 164.512(b)(1)(i); and National Center for Fatality 
Review and Prevention, “HIPAA,” https://perma.cc/PV7L-
ZWRG.
51 45 C.F.R. 164.502(b).
52 45 C.F.R. 164.514(a)-(b).
53 Noonan, Mortality in Local Jails, 2016, 12 & table 10.
54 See for example Vera’s “In Our Backyards” project,  
https://perma.cc/624L-Z4XJ .
55 For resources on suicide prevention in correctional 
facilities, see National Center on Institutions and 
Alternatives, “Publications,” https://perma.cc/65ZJ-AVA3 .
56 Pope and Delany-Brumsey, Creating a Culture of Safety, 2016; Doyle, “Learning from Error in the Criminal Justice 
System,” 2014; Browning, Feucht, Ritter et al., Paving the 
Way , 2015; and The Joint Commission, Root Cause Analysis 
in Health Care: Tools and Techniques, Fifth Edition (Oak 
Brook, IL: The Joint Commission, 2015).Preventing Suicide and Self-Harm in Jail: A Sentinel Events Approach35
Acknowledgments 
The authors are grateful for the collaboration and support of the four jail 
systems studied for this project: the Middlesex County Department of 
Correction (MCDOC), the Middlesex County Sheriff’s Office (MSO), the 
Pinellas County Sheriff’s Office (PCSO), and Spokane County Detention 
Services (SCDS). In particular, we appreciate the support of Warden Mark 
Cranston and Captain Robert Grover (MCDOC), Special Sheriff Shawn 
Jenkins and Kashif Siddiqi (MSO), Sheriff Bob Gualtieri, Colonel Paul Halle, 
Major Lora Smith, and Gianluca (John) Martinelli (PCSO); and Director 
Mike Sparber, former Director John McGrath, and Kristina Ray (SCDS).
We are thankful for the generous assistance provided by Kimara Davis, 
Lane Feler, Matthew Cramer, and Sherwin Salar, associates at Clifford Chance who donated their time to provide an excellent legal analysis on 
issues of liability, discovery, and confidentiality in connection with sentinel 
event reviews.
We appreciate the contributions of several former V era staff who helped 
envision this project and carry out data collection and analysis: V edan 
Anthony-North, Karen Tamis, and Ayesha Delany-Brumsey. In addition, we 
wish to thank the numerous staff at V era who assisted on this project: Collin 
Blinder, Mawia Khogali, and Isaac Sederbaum for help with data collection and analysis; Lauren Hobby for her work to help us understand the legal 
landscape in four states; Jim Parsons for his oversight and guidance; Léon 
Digard for his thoughtful editing of the report; Carl Ferrero for design and 
layout; and Cindy Reed and Tim Merrill for editorial support.
About citations
As researchers and readers alike rely more and more on public knowledge 
made available through the Internet, “link rot” has become a widely 
acknowledged problem with creating useful and sustainable citations. To 
address this issue, the V era Institute of Justice is experimenting with the 
use of Perma.cc (https:/ /perma.cc), a service that helps scholars, journals, 
and courts create permanent links to the online sources cited in their work.Vera Institute of Justice36
Credits
© Vera Institute of Justice 2019. All rights reserved. 
An electronic version of this report is posted on Vera’s website at  www.vera.org/preventing-suicide-and-self-harm-in-jail. 
Cover image: © 2019 Brian Stauffer c/o the ispot The Vera Institute of Justice is a justice reform change agent. Vera produces ideas, analysis, and 
research that inspire change in the systems people rely upon for safety and justice, and works in close partnership with government and civic leaders to implement it. Vera is currently pursuing core priorities of ending the misuse of jails, transforming conditions of confinement, and ensuring that justice systems more effectively serve America’s increasingly diverse communities. For more information, visit www.vera.org. 
For more information about this report, contact Leah Pope, senior research fellow, at lpope@vera.org. 
Suggested citation
Jason Tan de Bibiana, Therese Todd, and Leah Pope. Preventing Suicide and Self-Harm in Jail: A 
Sentinel Events Approach. New York: Vera Institute of Justice, 2019.Vera Institute of Justice
233 Broadway, 12th FlNew York, NY 10279T  212 334 1300
F  212 941 9407Los Angeles Office634 S Spring Street, #300ALos Angeles, CA 90014T 213 416 0058F 213 416 0075Washington DC Office1111 14th St., NW, Ste 920 Washington, DC 20005T  202 465 8900
F  202 408 1972New Orleans Office1307 Oretha Castle Haley Blvd., Suite 203New Orleans, LA 70113F 504 312 4517