"Bring the Gun or You’ll Die": Torture, Rape, and Other Serious Human Rights Violations by Kenyan Security Forces in the Mandera Triangle | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the reportSearchDonate NowSearchDownloadsDownload the reportJune 29, 2009"Bring the Gun or You’ll Die"Torture, Rape, and Other Serious Human Rights Violations by Kenyan Security Forces in the Mandera Triangle“Bring the Gun or You’ll Die”Torture, Rape, and Other SeriousHuman Rights Violations by Kenyan Security Forces in the Mandera TrianglePoliticalMap of KenyaMap ofEthnic Somali ConcentrationSummaryMethodologyRecommendationsTo theGovernment of KenyaTo theKenyan ParliamentTo theMinistry of Health and Nongovernmental Organizations Working on Women’sRights, Health Services, and Sexual Violence in KenyaTo the KenyaNational Commission on Human RightsTo theUnited States, the United Kingdom, and Other International Partners of KenyanSecurity ForcesTo theUnited Nations Secretary-GeneralTo theUnited Nations Department of Peacekeeping OperationsBackgroundThe 2008Clashes at AlangoAbuses byKenyan Security ForcesThe SecurityOperationLafeyEleleWargadudEl WakThe HumanToll of the OperationPatterns ofSerious Human Rights Violations in the Mandera OperationTortureRapeDestructionof Property and LootingResponsibilityfor the CrimesLiability ofCommandersTheGovernment’s ResponsePoliceReformAcknowledgementsPolitical Map of KenyaClick to expand Image© 2004 UN Cartographic SectionMap of Ethnic Somali ConcentrationClick to expand Image© 2000 Nadine SchuurmanSummaryOn October 25, 2008, the Kenyan government launched a jointpolice-military operation aimed at disarming warring militias in the Manderaregion of northeastern Kenya. In fact, this operation was planned as less a lawenforcement action than a deliberate and brutal attack on the local civilianpopulation that unfolded systematically over the course of several days.In this operation, the Kenyan army and police targeted 10towns and villages, rounding up the population, beating and torturing maleresidents en masse, and indulging in widespread looting and destruction ofproperty. Members of the security forces raped women in their homes in at leastsome of the targeted communities while the men were being tortured in thestreets. The operation left more than 1,200 injured, one dead, and at least adozen women raped.The attacks followed a similar pattern in each community.Starting early in the morning, police and soldiers went around the town beatingmen, dragging them out of their houses, and forcing them to march or crawl to acentral location. Many suffered fractures and injuries from the beatings on theway to the assembly points. Once there, members of the security forces demandedthat community members produce and hand over illegal firearms. To forcecompliance, detainees were made to lie on the ground, and were repeatedlybeaten over the course of several hours or an entire day and questioned on thewhereabouts of firearms. Human Rights Watch interviewed victims who fainted,vomited blood, and endured continued beating after suffering broken limbs. Somemen had their genitals pulled with pliers, tied with wire, or beaten withsticks as a method of torture designed to make them confess and turn over guns.While the men of each community were being beaten andtortured, members of the security forces went house to house looking for guns,demanding that the women and children at home turn over the weapons of theirhusbands and fathers. Many women told Human Rights Watch how they were beatenin or near their homes and, in several cases, raped.In some communities elders pleaded with the commanders torelent and negotiated the release of their men in return for the surrender ofthe elders’ identity cards, redeemable upon the production of weaponswithin three days. With the blessing of military commanders, families organizedthemselves, recovered some weapons from the bush, and purchased others fromSomalia in order to hand them over to the police and army and reclaim their identitycards.Many of those injured, including all but one of the rape victimsinterviewed by Human Rights Watch, fled to the bush following the operation andtreated themselves using traditional methods. Nevertheless, local clinics atWargadud and Lafey, and the district hospital at El Wak, were overwhelmed. Thehospital in El Wak has 32 beds but treated 112 inpatients and roughly 130 moreoutpatients. The Kenya Red Cross sent mobile clinics to the remote areas and anemergency team to El Wak. They treated more than 1,200 people injured in theattacks and referred several critical cases to Wajir and Nairobi hospitals. Oneman died from internal bleeding while being transferred. Scores of the men andwomen injured suffered lasting harm; four months later many complained to HumanRights Watch of debilitating pain that affected their ability to follow theirlivestock or otherwise earn a living. Several men were still bedridden monthsafter being tortured.The Kenya National Commission on Human Rights and televisioncrews from both major Kenyan TV networks immediately documented what hadhappened during the operation and called on the government to suspend theoperation and hold its forces to account. The initial police reaction was todeny all allegations despite overwhelming evidence including footage of theoverflowing hospital in El Wak. In November 2008 the minister for internalsecurity, George Saitoti, promised an inquiry into the allegations of humanrights abuses committed during the operation, but there has been no officialfollow-up since.An independent inquiry is needed to establish who within theKenyan government and operational chain of command was aware of how theoperation was planned and conducted and why they failed to stop it. Many victimsreported that senior police and army commanders were present and supervised thelarge-scale beating and torture in at least some of the affected communities.Because of the widespread and systematic nature of the torture meted out duringthe operation, these abuses could rise to the level of crimes against humanity.The “Mandera Triangle” area of Kenya’sNorth Eastern province, sandwiched between the borders of Ethiopia and Somalia,has been unstable since colonial times. Its residents, mainly ethnic Somalis,have frequently been the victims of abuses at the hands of Kenyan securityforces, especially during almost three decades of emergency rule imposed on theregion. Many of the factors driving conflict in the area are well known.Endemic poverty and unemployment, lack of development, environmentaldegradation, competition over grazing land and other resources, theproliferation of small arms, and the area’s proximity to Somalia havecontributed to serious communal clashes in recent decades.Pastoralist communities in the Mandera area havecross-border ties with kinsmen in Ethiopia and Somalia. Between July andOctober 2008 a dispute over a borehole escalated into clashes between two ofthese clans—the Garre and Murulle—and drew in militias from Ethiopiaand Somalia. The fighting left 21 people dead, including three securityofficers.  After mediation efforts failed, the government launched thejoint operation to “restore law and order,” and disarm themilitias.The Kenyan police and military have an extensive record ofturning security operations into deliberate and brutal attacks on civilianpopulations. The Mandera joint operation pursued an abusive strategy of massarbitrary detention, torture, and collective punishment—a strategysimilar to that used in Mount Elgon in 2008, where the security forces roundedup and tortured hundreds of men, dozens of whom remain“disappeared.”Yet the joint operations in Mandera and Mount Elgon are justtwo examples of a broader pattern of police abuse and impunity; the securityforces now appear to be a law unto themselves. Police killed protestersindiscriminately during the violence that followed Kenya’s 2007elections. The minister for internal security acknowledged to Parliament inFebruary 2009 that police death squads had carried out extrajudicial killingsof suspected members of the criminal Mungiki gang over several years. And twohuman rights activists who helped document those extrajudicial executions werethemselves gunned down in March 2009—an attack that even Kenya’sprime minister alleged was carried out by the police. No one has been held toaccount for any of these and other abuses. The UN special rapporteur onextrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, Philip Alston, further criticizedabuses by the police and military in unprecedented terms in a May 2009report.The government has recently recognized the urgent need forsecurity sector reform and accountability. In May 2009 President Kibakiannounced that he had appointed a national task force to fast track policereform. And in June the minister for internal security acknowledged the problemof extrajudicial killings and police abuses during a speech at the UN HumanRights Council. Yet impunity for police abuses is not the result of a few badapples in the police force, but rather part of a broader crisis of governanceand accountability. Politicians and commanders repeatedly plan and authorizebrutal operations that violate Kenyan and international law and that includesystematic human rights violations as part of the strategy of the operation. Thegovernment’s commitment to reform will remain untested until it takesaction to replace key officials, undertake sweeping changes in strategy insecurity operations, and initiate genuine investigations and prosecutions ofabusive commanders.There is a broad consensus that the changes proposed in thereport of the Waki Commission to Investigate Post-Election Violence—establishedin the aftermath of the ethnic violence that followed the contested December2007 elections—are the right starting point for fundamental root andbranch reform of the police service. The national accord that followed theelection violence and led to the formation of the coalition government in March2008 also acknowledged the corrosive effect of impunity and the central role ofaccountability for Kenya’s future stability. Implementing the proposedreforms and bringing prosecutions would show that the government is seriousabout ending the impunity that generates these abuses.MethodologyThis report is based on field research conducted by HumanRights Watch researchers in North Eastern province and Nairobi, Kenya, inFebruary 2009. Human Rights Watch visited the towns of Wargadud, El Wak, Elele,Qaramadow, Lafey, and Mandera and interviewed 91 victims of the operation fromthe towns of Wargadud, El Wak, Elele, Qaramadow, Lafey, Warankara, and Damasaidentified by local human rights groups and community leaders. They alsointerviewed staff of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), doctors, nurses, andcommunity leaders in the Mandera region and officials from the Kenya NationalCommission on Human Rights (KNCHR), other NGOs, and diplomats in Nairobi. Theresearchers interviewed victims from both the Garre and Murulle clans and spoketo leaders of both clans. Interviews were conducted in English and Kiswahiliwithout translators and in Somali and Borana with interpreters.The district commissioner in El Wak would not speak to HumanRights Watch and refused permission for Human Rights Watch researchers tointerview police and military commanders there. Human Rights Watch wrote to Ministerfor Internal Security George Saitoti on May 5, 2009, presenting its findingsand seeking a response to the allegations within three weeks. As this reportwent to press in late June, no response had been received. The governmentposition has therefore been deduced from statements by ministers and policeofficials to the press and Parliament.RecommendationsTo the Government ofKenyaInvestigate all claims of arbitrarydetention, torture, inhuman treatment, rape, and looting by security forces andprosecute those responsible for the October 2008 Mandera disarmament operation,including the commanding officers who supervised the operation and did nothingto stem abuses by subordinates.Establish an independent judicial inquiryinto the conduct of the October 2008 disarmament operation in Mandera East andMandera Central districts. The inquiry should examine the formation of policy,operating procedures, and command responsibility for such joint operations. Itshould alsorecord complaints from victims as evidence and facilitatethe provision of compensation to victims of abuse by state security forces.Special attention should be paid to creating a conducive environment for womenand girls who have been sexually assaulted to record their complaints; theinquiry should include trained female investigators and take steps to protectthe identity of rape complainants.Implement the recommendations of the WakiCommission and the UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitraryexecutions as part of the national task force on police reform, chiefly, theestablishment of an independent police conduct authority, the merging of theadministration and regular police, and the overhaul of police commandstructures.Establish a civilian-led inspectorate toinvestigate allegations of abuses committed by the military.Publicly apologize for the torture, rape,and degrading treatment meted out to civilians in the course of the Manderadisarmament operation of October 2008.Pass the National Policy on Small Arms andLight Weapons and conduct future disarmament operations in line with itsprovisions.Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to theConvention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment orPunishment (OPCAT).To the Kenyan ParliamentEstablish a parliamentary inquiry into theallegations of abuses in Mandera in October 2008 and promptly publish itsfindings.Establish a parliamentary committee toexamine the structure, mandate, and rules of engagement of joint securityoperations between the police and military, and consider the responsibility ofministers for crimes resulting from abusive policies and strategies approved bythem.To the Ministry of Health and Nongovernmental OrganizationsWorking on Women’s Rights, Health Services, and Sexual Violence in KenyaProvide accessible and culturallyappropriate information to victims about the health-related consequences,including mental health, of sexual assault to enable women to protect theirhealth following sexual assault.Provide HIV testing and testing for othersexually transmitted infections, access to available treatment, and counselingservices to female victims of sexual abuse by security forces in the Manderatriangle.To the Kenya NationalCommission on Human RightsUse the commission’s statutoryauthority to bring a collective legal case against the state for grossviolations of the rights of the victims of the Mandera disarmament operationand seek redress and compensation. To that end, engage lawyers to collectaffidavits from the affected parties in Mandera.To the United States, theUnited Kingdom, and Other International Partners of Kenyan Security ForcesSupport the Kenyan government’sproposed process of police reform as a matter of urgency.Vet all individuals for training orassistance programs to ensure that they were not deployed to Mandera as part ofthe operation in October 2008.Condition security sector assistance onaccountability for past abuses during operations by the security forces in MountElgon, Mandera, and other locations.Insist on a human rights component for allsecurity force training programs as a condition of security assistance.To the United Nations Secretary-GeneralOn behalf of the whole UN system, urge thegovernment of Kenya to implement the recommendations contained in this reportas well as the recommendations of the UN special rapporteur for extrajudicial,summary or arbitrary executions and pledge the support of the UN system toaddress the concerns raised in this report.To the United Nations Department of PeacekeepingOperationsBar all Kenyan military and police unitssuspected of committing human rights violations from participating in UNpeacekeeping missions until an independent investigation has cleared them ofwrongdoing.BackgroundThe history of Kenya’s North Eastern province, likeother remote Kenyan border regions, is one of neglect and discrimination at thehands of successive authorities, first by the colonial British regime inNairobi and then, after independence in 1963, by the Kenyan government.[1]Despite positive trends in security and governance in the region over the pastdecade, the abusive October 2008 disarmament operation in the Mandera districtsechoes earlier patterns of central government repression.The province’s “Mandera triangle” is madeup of three districts—Mandera West, Central, and East—of arid andundeveloped scrubland bordered by Ethiopia to the north and Somalia to theeast. It is largely populated by ethnic Somali pastoralist communities withclose ties to their ethnic kinsman in both Ethiopia and Somalia.[2]The geography and politics of the region have longcontributed to a feeling, both in Nairobi and amongst the local population,that the region has little meaningful connection with the rest of Kenya. Eventoday, the citizenship of many in the Mandera triangle is questioned by thestate. In colonial times it was known as the Northern Frontier District (NFD).In 1960 Italian and British Somaliland became independentand immediately merged to form a single independent state: Somalia. In responseto pressure from the Somali delegation at the London talks on Somaliindependence, in 1960 the British administration in Kenya invited anindependent commission to assess the views of Somalis living in the NFD onpossible secession from Kenya and unification with Somalia. The commissionfound that a majority of the population favored unification with Somalia.[3]However, the British did not follow the commission’sfindings, acquiescing instead during the talks that led to Kenyan independencein 1963 to the demands of Kenyan nationalists led by Jomo Kenyatta that the NFDremain part of Kenya. This sparked an armed struggle for secession in the NFD,popularly known as the “Shifta War.”[4]The British bequeathed the war to theindependent Kenyan government in December 1963 and the new governmentimmediately declared a state of emergency.[5] It wouldlast for 28 years.Although Somalia formally renounced its claim to the NFD—therebyformally ending the “Shifta War” in 1967—the state ofemergency persisted until 1991.[6] This meant that for over 25 yearsKenya effectively “had two separate legal regimes.”[7]The emergency laws, reinforced in 1966 by theNorth Eastern Province and Contiguous Districts Regulations,[8]“explicitly endorsed instances whenthe fundamental human rights of the person could be violated,” includingenhanced powers of search without warrant, arrest, and detention for up to 56days without trial, the death sentence for unlawful possession of firearms, andthe creation of special courts.[9] Theregulations also created “prohibited” zones along the Kenyan-Somaliborder where unauthorized entry was punishable by a life sentence.[10]Government repression of ethnic Somalis in North Eastern provincecontinued well into the 1980s, after the so-called “Shifta War”ended, partly due to the identification of Somali communities as sources ofcross-border arms-smuggling, banditry, and lawlessness. Successive attempts bythe government to establish or restore “law and order” werecharacterized by abusive or discriminatory operations that failed to treatethnic Somali Kenyans as legitimate citizens.One of the worst atrocities by state security forces inindependent Kenya’s history occurred in North Eastern province in 1984:the infamous “Wagalla massacre,” also known as the Wajir massacre.[11]In February 1984 security forces rounded up several thousand men from theDegodiya clan in a purported disarmament operation and forced them to removetheir clothes and lie down on the Wagalla airstrip for up to five days in thesun, while beating and torturing them. Hundreds of people died on the airstripfrom the beatings and some were shot to death. The Kenyan government initiallyclaimed that 57 people had died, but belatedly admitted in 2000 to a muchhigher death toll of 380.[12]As Somali refugees began fleeing Somalia’s civil warand streaming into Kenya in the late 1980s, the Kenyan government introducedmultiple “screening” operations to distinguish ethnic Somali Kenyancitizens from Somali nationals. The screening operations resulted in manyabuses, including the deportation of hundreds of people without due process.[13]The screening operations ended in 1990; however, identity cards issued toethnic Somalis facilitated continued discrimination and harassment. While thesituation has improved in recent years, even today ethnic Somalis stillcomplain that they face prejudice and discrimination while attaining or usingidentity documents.Like Kenya’s other border areas, the region has consistentlysuffered from underdevelopment and insecurity, partly resulting from theemergency regulations and the effective closing of the district for many years,but also due to low government investment, a very thin police presence, andassociated banditry and cross-border cattle-raiding.[14]The introduction of large numbers of automatic weapons into the area over thepast two decades has exacerbated insecurity.[15] NortheasternKenya has also suffered from the deterioration of security in neighboringSomalia since 1991 and the long-running conflict in Ethiopia’s Ogadenregion. As in Kenya’s other border or “frontier” areas, cross-borderclan-based violence has been a recurring event, often sparked by cattle theftor clashes over grazing land or water points. These clashes have regularlyclaimed lives and seen the theft of livestock that local communities depend onfor their livelihood.[16]In 1998 the Kenyan government appointed a judicial commissionto examine the causes of clan and tribal clashes during the 1990s, headed byJustice Augustus Akiwumi. The commission noted that in North Eastern provincethe traditional practice of cattle rustling had been transformed through thewidespread availability of automatic weapons and exacerbated by frequentdroughts and a shortage of grazing land and water sources for livestock. Thecommission also acknowledged that these clashes had a political dimension asclans vie for parliamentary and local government representation that can thenbe used to dominate local resources and control the best grazing areas forthemselves.[17]The Akiwumi Commission recommended several measures todecrease clan conflict in North Eastern province: opening up the region todevelopment, improving road and telephone communications, improving education,securing the border, increasing marketing outlets for livestock, investing inwater resources (boreholes), and taking care to ensure the fair distribution ofboreholes.[18]By the late 1990s, the region’s reputation for totallawlessness and insecurity declined, though it remained prone to criminal andcommunal violence. Unlike neighboring Wajir and Moyale districts, Mandera wascomparatively calm.[19] Theimproved situation was partly due to positive trends in central governmentpolicy, including the introduction of multiparty politics, and factors like thegrowth of cross-border or regional trade.[20] Localpolitics played both a positive and negative role. The former Mandera districthad been sub-divided into three constituencies in the 1980s—Mandera East,Central, and West—and the identification of these districts and even morelocal-level “locations” along ethnic or clan lines has sometimesexacerbated tensions, particularly given the way local government officialshave used their positions to allocate services, jobs, and water resources as aform of political patronage.[21]Today, the trends shaping the political landscape in Manderaremain problematic. Since 2007 each of the three former constituencies ofMandera district have in fact become districts themselves, part of the Kibakigovernment’s move to greatly increase the number of districts earlierthat year.[22] At the same time, however, there havebeen signs of change for the better. The coalition government established afterthe contested presidential election of December 2007 has paid more attention tonorthern Kenya than most previous governments, establishing a Ministry of Developmentof Northern Kenya and Other Arid Lands and announcing the opening of regionalabattoirs to promote economic activity for pastoralists. Furthermore, therehave been moves towards more local ownership of conflict, with the growth oflocal peace committees and community-based organizations, the involvement ofelders and Islamic leaders in mediation talks, and a less heavy-handed approachby the national government.[23]The dramatic worsening of the security situation in Somaliasince late 2006 has again increased cross-border insecurity, producingcross-border attacks and an increased Kenyan military presence along theborder.[24]The conflict has also caused tens ofthousands of Somali refugees to flee the fighting in Mogadishu and enter Kenya,despite the border closure, putting enormous pressure on the refugee camps atDadaab and the land in North Eastern province. Dadaab now houses more than275,000 refugees—more than any other single location in the world—andis the largest urban development in the region.[25]The 2008 Clashes atAlangoIn July 2008 the provincial administration failed to heedlocal warnings and drilled a well in Alango, one of the so-called buffer zonesand an area of chronic inter-clan conflict between the Mandera East and Centraldistricts where the border was disputed. The drilling provoked renewed conflictbetween the Garre and Murulle clans—both claimed the right to access thewater—resulting in violence that killed 21 people between July andOctober 2008.[26]The Garre and Murulle clans both mobilized to collect moneyand weapons to defend their kin, and both sides received support from alliedclans across Kenya’s borders. Borana militia from Ethiopia came to theaid of the Garre while Marehan militia from Somalia rallied to support theMurulle.[27]The dispute over the borehole at Alango and ensuing clashesbetween the Garre and Murulle clans were the latest of many similar disputesand clashes in recent years. Indeed, inter-clan disputes are so frequent thatwell-established mediation structures exist for their resolution. Previousfighting led to the signing of the Garre and Murulle Peace Accord in April2005.[28]Tensions over the Alango borehole were linked to disputesover the exact boundary between Mandera East and Mandera Central districts,which created confusion among the population because many people associateadministrative boundaries with clan boundaries and thus with their grazing andwater rights. All of this was recognized and apparently resolved at a three-daymediation meeting between Garre and Murulle clan elders in July 2008, observed byarmy and police commanders and district commissioners from both Mandera Centraland East.[29]The government said that it had facilitated dialogue betweenthe two clans three times and had sent a technical team to ascertain thedistrict boundary.[30] Whilemediation efforts were ongoing, however, the hostilities continued, resultingin the killing of 18 citizens and three policemen during August and September2008.[31]Abandoning its previous successful mediated approach toconflict resolution, the government instead stated that a security operationwas necessary because the warring clans had “internationalized theconflict by enlisting support of militias from neighboring countries, whichamounts to gross violation of the country’s sovereignty and territorialintegrity.”[32]However, elders in Wargadud and Eleleinvolved in the mediation claimed that the violence had finished by the timethe security operation to disarm the militias began.[33]A member of parliament, Dr. Abdi Nassir Nuh, voiced whatmany in the Mandera region expressed to Human Rights Watch when he noted,“What brought the flare-up this year was a very trivial matter, namelyallocation [of the borehole].”[34] He saidthat rather than address the violence in the course of regular policing, theauthorities chose to launch a special joint police-military operation to disarmthe militias.Abuses by Kenyan SecurityForcesThe Security OperationThe joint police-military disarmament operation in the ManderaTriangle began on October 25, 2008. It was ostensibly an attempt to address oneof the underlying causes of insecurity in the region by seizing illegalfirearms from warring Garre and Murulle communities. For the next few daysaround 600 personnel from the regular Kenyan police, Administration Police,[35]and Kenyan army targeted Garre and Murulle settlements in the districts ofMandera Central and Mandera East.[36] Theapproach was simple: security forces terrorized the civilian population throughviolence while demanding that they turn over illegal weapons if they wanted theviolence to stop. By the time the operation was over on October 28, more than1,200 people from both clans were injured as a result of severe beatings andtorture by the security forces; one person died.[37]The government hailed the operation as a success because it claimed to haveseized 130 illegal firearms and arrested more than 150 Ethiopian and Somalimilitiamen found on Kenyan soil and implicated in the clashes that triggeredthe operation.[38]The operation swept through Bambo, Gari, and Warankara onOctober 25; Lafey, Elele, Qaramadow, Wargadud, and Damasa on October 26; andreached the town of El Wak and the village of Qalankalesa on October 28 (seemap on page 3).[39] InFebruary 2009 Human Rights Watch visited and conducted interviews in the townsof El Wak, Lafey, Qaramadow, Elele, and Wargadud and spoke to residents ofDamasa and Warankara.The operation unfolded in a largely similar manner in eachlocation. Police, Administration Police, and army personnel attempted to gainan element of surprise by arriving early in the morning, though some peoplewere able to escape and flee into the bush. Men were rounded up en masse andforced to march or crawl to a central gathering point, often beaten by agauntlet of security force members along the way. The security forces thenbegan house-to-house searches for weapons, often beating, and in at least a fewcases, raping women found at home. Widespread looting of homes and businessesby the security forces took place in some communities.Throughout the length of the operation—the better partof a day in most places—the men who had been rounded up were beaten andordered to produce illegal firearms in order to escape further punishment. Inmost cases victims were not even given an opportunity to produce a weaponbefore they had been thoroughly beaten. The security forces kicked and punchedtheir prostrate victims, beat them with clubs, wires, and iron rods, andsqueezed or mutilated the testicles of some of the captive men. In everycommunity visited by Human Rights Watch many of the victims were beaten soseverely that their mistreatment rose to the level of torture. At the operation’sconclusion the security forces moved on, leaving the local populace to nursetheir wounds and search for lost family members. Many people fled into thebush, fearing further attacks, and spent days or weeks living with their herdsbefore returning to their homes. In some communities, residents fled across thenearby border into Somalia to seek shelter there.The following section presents a detailed account of how theoperation unfolded in some of the communities where serious abuses were mostwidespread during the operation.[40]LafeyAn elderly chief told Human Rights Watch that on October 25,the day before the operation came to Lafey town, he was summoned to a meetingwith the district officer along with local members of the Kenya Police Reserveand told to surrender his government-issued weapon.[41]The following day he was rounded up and beaten along with everyone else.Security forces surrounded the town early in the morning ofOctober 26 and began rounding up all the men they could find. A teacher inLafey was about to leave for school when soldiers arrived at his house:“Soldiers came to my house at 7:30 a.m. I said, ‘I am also anofficer of the government, I am a teacher, let us respect each other.’They said, ‘There is nothing like that today. Today we are incharge.’”[42]Another man was shot at during the initialroundup: “When a soldier was trying to enter my plot I was leaving thetoilet,” he told Human Rights Watch. “He shot at me [andmissed]—I think he was surprised.”[43]After being rounded up, men were forced to walk or run to acentral point by security forces wielding sticks, batons, and guns. In Lafey,the place of assembly was near the district administration office. There, themen were made to lie down in the sun and described to Human Rights Watch howthey were severely beaten intermittently until the late afternoon while membersof the security forces periodically shouted at them to produce weapons. The menwere beaten with iron rods, clubs, and even metal-tipped canes which had beentaken from some of the victims. A primary school teacher detained theredescribed the scene to Human Rights Watch:They were beating [us] at the camp with anything they couldget their hands on, everywhere.... some were stripped naked, there was lots ofblood on the ground. Some had arms broken, some legs, blood was flowing frommany heads. I was beaten with a club until I fractured a rib. When it stopped,many could not walk, could not sit up. We carried 10 who could not walk.... Peoplewere beaten mercilessly, like snakes.[44]A Koranic teacher at Lafey told Human Rights Watch how hewas tortured by members of the security forces who ripped his testicles openwith a pair of pliers:I am one of the teachers teaching Koran so they suspectedme, and thought I might give them information. For seven years I haven’teven been to the border.... They stripped me in front of everyone, and pulledmy testicles with pliers—all the skin came off and blood poured down, fortwo weeks it was still bleeding.[45]While the men were detained at the camp, women said thatmembers of the security forces had gone house to house searching homes, beatingup several women they found in their homes while demanding that they turn overillegal weapons. Women were also rounded up and made to sit together in themiddle of the main road running through town. Several of them were beaten bymembers of the security forces who demanded that they identify the whereaboutsof firearms and local militiamen.[46] Many ofthe women there said that at one point two police or soldiers attempted to dragtwo young women away from the crowd, but ultimately relented when one of theirsuperiors intervened to stop them. One elderly woman in Lafey said:They took me and started beating me and took me into thesun. Two girls were beaten up on the road. The officers[47]started quarrelling over them in front of us. Hundreds of women were gatheredthere. I became unconscious when outside there and was taken to the policepost. They refused to let me relax there, they just started asking,“Where is your eldest son, how many militias do you know?” Theydragged me to that police post. They were kicking and slapping women out there,saying, “Where are your husbands and sons? Where are the militia?”My husband died a long time ago. And my son is far from here.[48]Members of the security forces also attacked several girlsin their homes; the girls alleged that they had attempted to rape them. Threeschoolgirls were attacked at home and described security forces attempting tosexually assault them, but claimed they had not succeeded—possiblybecause of shame. One of them recounted:He made me lie down and beat me on the buttocks with a clubfor 30 minutes. He kept asking me, “Where is the gun?” When I replyI don’t know he beat me more, he said I was lying. One tried to forcehimself on me but I refused and he slapped me.[49]While rounding people up some members of the security forceseven beat children. A mother of a 10-year-old boy who was beaten told HumanRights Watch:Physically, nothing happened to me, but when they enteredmy house they broke everything. Six came inside but only two were destroyingeverything. When they came they asked, “Where is your husband, where isyour gun, where are your sons?” I said my husband was with the livestockand I do not have any son. They just started smashing everything. Then theyfound my young son hiding under the bed and they hit him on the head with ametal rod. They hit him once and he fell down and nearly fainted.[50]Male victims in Lafey said they were held until theafternoon, alternately beaten and questioned. Eventually elders pleaded withthe commanders to stop the beating and agreed to provide weapons. An elder inLafey recalled:[We] were pleading with the military to stop and allow usto go and get some weapons. Eventually they relented.  There was onecommander from the army, one from the police, and one from AdministrationPolice. We agreed to get weapons if they would stop beating our people. Webrought 57 guns after two weeks.[51]In order to recover the weapons, a community leader fromLafey described going to Somalia to negotiate with the militia and recoverweapons after the operation. He pointed out, “If elders had beenconsulted, we would have collected the weapons without being harassed.”[52]In addition to abusing Lafey’s residents, the securityforces looted many homes and stores.  Residents interviewed by HumanRights Watch described security forces looting in front of them, while theywere supposedly searching the premises. One woman said, “They took5,000Ksh [US$74] from inside a locked box in the house and destroyed someclothing that was in the box. I cannot wear them now.”[53]Another woman said the members of the security forces who came to her home demanded,“Do you have money, do you have money?” She said she gave them whatlittle money she had, but that “they started smashing our jerrycans—the most valuable thing to us because we use it to get water. Theyalso knocked down my toilet [outhouse].”[54]A woman told how security forces looted from herhusband’s shop:They came to our home. My husband was in the shop. Theyasked, “Where is your husband?” and I told them. They searched thehouse and they looted my husband’s shop—they took around 45,000Ksh[$660] from him. They beat up my husband and marched him to the place wherepeople were being brought together.[55]Another shopkeeper described how they stole all the sugar,cigarettes, and other provisions from her shop—around 40,000Ksh [$590]worth, she claimed.[56] A maleshopkeeper described how members of the security forces beat him in his shopand robbed him of 20,000Ksh [$295] in cash and 30,000Ksh [$440] in provisions.[57]Most people in Lafey and other towns fled following theoperation, and upon their return many found their homes and businesses lootedbare. Those who were not there to witness it did not know if it was the policeand military or opportunistic neighbors that looted their property. One womanfrom Lafey who fled to Somalia for several weeks said, “Nobody knows wholooted because everyone ran away.”[58]It was not only households and businesses that were lootedby the security forces in Lafey.  The solar panels at the primary schoolin Lafey were also confiscated by security forces. The members of the securityforces who took them confronted the headmaster of the school with the chargethat local gangs of bandits were using the school’s solar panels torecharge their radios.[59]In Lafey local councilors claimed that roughly 300 peoplehad been rounded up and detained. They showed Human Rights Watch a listcompiled by community members of 170 people who had been beaten, consisting of115 men, 30 women, and 25 schoolchildren.[60]  According to records in the clinic inLafey, 41 people were treated for second-degree soft tissue injuries resultingfrom “assault by security forces” in the days following theoperation.[61] Manyfled, eschewing treatment, and others treated themselves using traditionalremedies in the bush.EleleAt around 8 a.m., on the morning of October 26, army andpolice officers arrived in Elele, a small community near the larger town ofWargadud. The security forces found only a small number of people in thevillage because, as one witness described it, “Most ran away very earlyin the morning or were out with their herds. Immediately when the army vehiclescame to town people started running in all directions.”[62]But the operation in Elele was even morebrutal and undisciplined than in most other communities: in addition to thesevere beating of at least 25 male members of the community, seven women toldHuman Rights Watch that they were raped in their homes by members of thesecurity forces. More than 10 women were apparently raped in total.As in other locations, the security forces attempted tocordon off the community and then rounded up all of the men they could find.Those men were gathered next to the road that runs through the town, beaten,and in some cases tortured until late afternoon. At the same time, groups ofpolice officers or soldiers searched homes and raped several women. Late in theday most of the men who had been beaten were taken in a police truck toWargadud. Once there they were beaten again along with the captured residentsof that town until evening and then returned to Elele by the same truck.One man, a mason, described what happened to him:That morning we were building a water tank, we were seatedthere [by the road] as the army and police trucks came. People said,“These are the vehicles of the operation that have come to get us.”Two of the men with me ran away. They rounded the rest of us up including someladies.... They brought us to the road, told us to remove our IDs and heldthem. They said, “Where are your guns?” Some people were even readyto accept that they had guns but before they could talk they started beating us.[63]Victims were taken to a central point in the village. Oneman recalled the event:Immediately when they brought us there they started beatingus. When they were finished they said, “Where are the guns?” And ifyou still say you don’t have any, then they beat you again. Some of thepersonnel who were there and talked our language said to us, “Instead ofdying here, just show us your guns.”[64]An elderly man in Elele described how he was caught at home andtortured, including by members of the security forces who squeezed and twistedhis testicles until he fainted:It was soldiers, police and Administration Police alltogether. They brought me to the other group that had gathered there [on theroad] and told us to lie down. We lay down with our hands straight out likethis [stretches his hands out above his head, palms down]. One will walk onyour hands and one will walk on your thighs. One will come with a stick withthorns and scrape it against our heads. Two men will stand on both sideshitting us. They told us to tell where our guns are and we said we don’tknow and they started getting hold of our testicles.[65]In Elele only a handful of residents said that they had hadfirearms and turned them over to the security forces. A victim recounted:Nobody has a gun in this village. Some people have them inthe bushes with the livestock but no one was willing to say that they had one.We thought they would continue to beat us and maybe send us to jail if we saidwe had them. We just have them to defend our livestock. One man said he had agun with his animals and they took him to go and get it.[66]While the men were being rounded up in Elele, members of thesecurity forces went house to house asking the women and children who remainedthere to surrender weapons. Human Rights Watch interviewed seven women fromElele who said that they were raped. One of these had hospital recordsconfirming her injuries—she had been treated by the Red Cross andairlifted to Nairobi Women’s Hospital due to massive bleeding.[67]The others did not seek medical treatment.The women were traumatized by what had happened to them.Some broke down crying when recounting the events of October 26. One began heraccount by saying, “If you want me to remember the incident of that day,I will feel unwell.” She nevertheless insisted on telling her story:Soldiers came to the house in the morning. They said,“Where is your husband and where is the gun of your husband?” I wastold to go into the house. One caught me from behind, one took the child fromme. He started opening his trousers. I told them to kill me instead of rapingme. They hit me with the butt of a gun at the back, and kicked me in thekidneys. Then, when they had finished they went to the neighboring house.[68]Another woman from a house nearby told a similar story:It was 8 a.m. I was at home. I saw people running to thebush and I saw Kenya soldiers surrounding my home. I was pregnant, sevenmonths. Two soldiers threw me into a hut that is in front of our house. Theyhit me with a big stick behind the head and I fell down. They asked me,“Where is the gun?” I said I have no gun, my husband is workingwith a bicycle—this is the bicycle you are seeing in front of thehouse.They put me in the hut and started raping me. One held my headon the ground, and the other one started raping me, like this [she got on herknees and put her head on the ground]. I fainted because I was pregnant andwhen I woke up I just found myself damaged from the rape. I ran to the bushwhere our livestock are. I went with the five children that I could see thereat home.  After three days I found the rest of my kids in the bush. I cameback after six weeks to give birth in Elele. I haven’t seen any doctor orhospital. There is a building of a clinic in Elele but there are no staff.[69]An older woman described being raped alongside her daughter:I was sitting outside my house with my daughter. We hadseen the soldiers in town, then four of them came to the house and asked for myhusband and his gun. I said he is not home and we do not have any gun. They didnot understand [Somali]—they just kept motioning to their guns andpointing for me to bring one.They put us into the house, me and my daughter, she is20-years-old. They started beating us and removing the clothes from us and putthe gun across the door so that we could not run away. They stripped us naked.One was outside and two were inside; one had gone. One was holding me and onewas holding my daughter. They succeeded in what they wanted to do. My daughterbroke the wall of the hut and ran out naked. I stayed holding my child who wasone-year-old, he had been put on the bed by the soldier. I ran to the bush. Ihaven’t seen my daughter since.[70]One of the women who was raped in Elele told Human Rights Watchthat her attackers were police:Three police officers came to our house, took my ID cardand asked for guns. Two of them raped me. And one wearing a military uniformwas outside. When he saw that they had raped me, when I came out and I wasbleeding, he ran away.[71]There is no functioning clinic in Elele; when the mobile RedCross team came on October 28 they treated people who came out of the bush,according to the community health worker there.[72]All of the women who were raped fled to thebush. A woman who had been particularly badly hurt lost consciousness in thebush. The Red Cross team cut a path for the ambulance and took her to El Wak,and then to Nairobi Women’s Hospital.[73]WargadudSecurity forces came toWargadud at dawn on October 26 while some men were already at prayer. One residenttold Human Rights Watch, “As I was leaving the mosque, I saw 10 officersin the road. I was told to run to the pitch [field].” On the way to thefield that served as the central gathering point, other members of the securityforces told him and others to lie down and crawl the rest of the distance alongthe rocky dirt road. Many of the men were wearing sarongs and many of those whowere forced to crawl lost them and were naked by the time they reached thegathering point. “We were told to go like snakes, about 60 of us,”he recalled. “Then they started caning us properly.”[74]When the men got to the field they were made to lie down asothers continued to arrive:At the pitch there was a commander and an inspector ofpolice. The commander was a police officer sitting in a chair. People werebrought from all directions, then we were caned until 1 p.m., about 80 ofus.  After that, we were told to sing like donkeys [...] like cows, [...]like goats, and told to jump like frogs.We were there up to 6 p.m. We were not given water thatwhole time. Some of our women tried to bring us water, but they were beaten andtold to go to their homes. We had to lie down and look at the sun with openeyes. Some people were vomiting from the beating. While beating they wereasking for guns.[75]Individuals who fought back or those believed to havespecific information were singled out for particularly severe torture. One manin Wargadud resisted the members of the security forces who started beating himoutside of his home. “I tried to resist them and they caught hold ofme,” he said to Human Rights Watch. “One stood on both of my legs,and another held both of my hands, and a third caught me by the testicles. Theytied a plastic cord around [my testicles] and pulled. I wentunconscious.”[76]Numerous witnesses told Human Rights Watch that in the lateafternoon a helicopter arrived in Wargadud. One of the men detained on thefield said, “A helicopter arrived around 5 p.m. The officer who got outasked in Swahili if any of us had died yet. When the answer was no, he orderedus to be beaten more.”[77]After several hours of beating and torture, community eldersin Wargadud were able to negotiate with the security forces:Eventually we said we are going to produce guns, just stopbeating us. Whoever said he had a gun and would produce it was taken out of thelot to somewhere else. A total of 38 firearms were taken. Some were taken fromthe bush [where their owners had left them]. Others were given two days, sosome went and purchased [guns] across the [Somali] border. During the beating[the security forces] recovered 10 from within the town [included within the38]. Many of those who said they had guns just said it to stop the beating.Most then went and bought one to give to them. The guns we have with us arejust for defending our livestock.[78]Elders claimed 300 people were rounded up while otherwitnesses put the figure at 170.[79] Community health workers said thatthey had records of 173 men and seven women injured as a result of the assaultand treated at the clinic in Wargadud.[80]One woman told Human Rights Watch that she was raped inWargadud by police officers doing house-to-house searches:Soldiers came to the house at 5 a.m.—my husband wasdragged out of the house, beaten, and taken away. Two of the officers remainedbehind for me. One of them pushed me into the house and onto the bed. He canedme and hit the child strapped to my chest who was three months old. The otherofficer was standing outside blocking the door so no one could come in. The oneinside raped me. He also stole 5,000 shillings that I had in my underwear whichhe found when he stripped me. Then he went to the kitchen and took a stick andsaid, “The gun of your husband is here, bring it!” I said,“My husband is a porter, he doesn’t have any money to buy a gun,and now you have raped me and stolen my money, just leave me alone.” Iwas crying.  The other officer had taken the children outside before, nowhe forced them all back in and started beating them.[81]Human Rights Watch also interviewed six other women fromWargadud who claimed police had attempted to rape them but had not succeeded.[82]El WakNews of the attacks on Elele and Wargadud on October 26caused some residents of El Wak to flee before the operation reached the townat dawn on October 28. But many people remained in spite of the stories oftorture and looting that were circulating. One resident of El Wak explained,“Before, we heard that there will be an operation but I wasn’tafraid. I am not a shifta [bandit]. I don’t have a gun. I havenothing to hide, I am a driver.”[83]The operation in El Wak was on a larger scale than in anyother community—it appears some 700 men were severely beaten over thecourse of several hours, with many suffering serious injuries. Security forcesscoured the town in the early hours of the morning, rounding up men andordering them to gather in a large field near the district commissioner’soffice. The men described being seriously beaten in their homes or along theway to the field. Once there, they were divided into three groups by age andseverely beaten until early afternoon. Many suffered serious injuries.Human Rights Watch interviewed numerous men in El Wak whotold stories similar to this one:About 60 of us were captured as we were leaving the mosque.Immediately they saw us they started beating us and chasing us. They marched usto the police station while beating us and made us lie down on the road. Theywere beating us with electrical wire, sticks, rungus [clubs]. They brokemy arm with a rungu. They made us crawl like snakes up to thechief’s camp. People from all over town were being brought there to thechief’s camp. There were many serious injuries there, broken limbs and soon.[84]An elderly woman who lives in the market in El Wak describedthe scene early in the morning there on October 28:In the street, I saw the whole market place full ofsoldiers, beating young men and taking them to the camp—and they weresmashing up shops. There was a big black truck, a police one.[85]Another man in El Wak was at home when the operation began:At about 5.30 a.m., I saw about 20 police coming down thestreet, driving people [into groups], beating them, going into each house,dragging people out and beating them and shouting, “Go to thepitch.” Three came into my house, went into the bedroom, smashed the boxwith clothes in, turned it upside down and dragged me out, leaving my wife andtwo kids inside.... In front of the police station they made us lie down. Theywere beating us with sticks, rungus, anything. They weren’t sayinganything except beating us and then, “Bring the gun or you’lldie.”[86]Police not only went house to house but also attacked agroup of charity workers in their office. Employees of the Consortium ofCo-operative Partners (COCOP), an NGO working with the World Food Programme onfood distribution in North Eastern province, described how police knocked ontheir gate and then climbed over the wall when they refused to open it.Six staff were beaten in the compound. They described being beaten for an hourthere before being taken to the pitch with the others.[87]Roughly 700 men were made to lie down in rows, broken upinto three different groups according to age: youth, middle-aged, and elderly.[88]Throughout the day police and military personnel beat them, walked across theirprone bodies, and tortured some men by beating or twisting their genitals.Throughout the day they demanded to know the whereabouts of illegal firearms,though the operation’s victims were given scarce opportunity to speak.Several accounts were similar to this one: “At the camp they made us lieon our backs then they aimed the stick at my balls. He was smashing me with astick that he was wielding with two hands.”[89]Victims who had served in the army and police were shockedat the crimes that they witnessed.  An army veteran told Human RightsWatch, “I used to serve in the army for 21 years in 1 Kenya Rifles. Ididn’t get the chance to tell them that I used to serve in thearmy.”[90]The head of the Kenya Red Cross office in ElWak, who was wearing a jacket clearly marked with the organization’slogo, was among the group and was beaten along with the rest.[91]The beating and demands for firearms continued from dawnuntil well into the afternoon. One man described the derision of the securityforces when he asked for water:I fainted. What I can remember is that two people came andcaught hold of my hands and legs and threw me under a tree like a sack. It wasa bit better than being under the sun. When I woke up there were many otherpeople also lying under the tree, badly hurt. I asked for water. One of thearmy personnel shook his finger at me and said, “You are joking.Don’t look at us, look down.”[92]Witnesses in El Wak also described an army helicopterarriving later in the afternoon containing commanders who checked on progress,one of two helicopters that visited during the day.[93]After several hours of beating and torture and repeatedpleading from community elders, the commanders began to engage elders indialogue about the surrender of weapons. Many elders explained to Human RightsWatch the process by which people were organized into sub-clans and the leadersof each surrendered their identity cards to be redeemed upon supply of anagreed number of weapons. One elder explained how the deal was struck:We elders told the army chiefs we had no guns. They said,“In that case you’ll have to buy your own lives, and buyfirearms.” We protested and then he said, “If you don’t bringguns, many people will lose their lives.” The chief and the majordiscussed and then the major said, “I don’t care if you buy them ornot, what I need is firearms, you have three days.” We agreed and mysub-clan gave seven guns.[94]His clan subsequently sent representatives to Somalia to buysecond-hand weapons. Another victim from El Wak was part of the same process:At 2 p.m. they took our IDs and said we must bring weaponsto get our IDs back. We were divided into sub-clans, the elders in eachsub-clan surrendered their ID cards. There are nine elders in my sub-clan andwe promised nine guns. We went away, every clan collected the amount of moneythat is equivalent to the amount of guns they promised. Every gun is 30,000Ksh[$440]. We were given three days by the police to return with nine guns. Icould not move because my arm was broken [by members of the security forces]—Iwas in the hospital. I didn’t have money but my family paid. Some paid10,000, some 5,000. Others went to buy guns and give them to the police, and thenthey brought my ID.[95]For those without weapons the closest small arms market isin the Somali town also called El Wak, just across the border. Many victimsdescribed providing money to relatives who purchased weapons from Somalia.“In my clan, one man went to Somalia to buy two guns and agrenade,” one man said to Human Rights Watch. “He sold his animalsto pay for it. I was in hospital but I contributed 10,000 shillings. It is30,000 per gun.”[96]The government cited the large number of firearms collectedduring the operation—186 according to the government—as evidence ofits success.[97]However, it seems that in fact the disarmament operation may have simply ledmany victims of the operation to import additional firearms from Somalia.Kenya’s El Wak is the largest town in the area, thedistrict capital of Mandera Central. The men detained were told to shoutnumbers in succession as they were released, and so witnesses interviewed byHuman Rights Watch confirmed in separate interviews that the total detained was701.[98] Thetotal number of injured, according to lists of names including ID card numberscompiled by Northern Aid, a local NGO, was 306.[99]El Wak hospital treated 112 inpatients and around 130 outpatients despitehaving only a 32-bed capacity; patients were sleeping on mats outside and inthe corridors.[100]Medical staff at the hospital noted that many other people fled following theoperation and so did not seek treatment.[101] WhenHuman Rights Watch asked community leaders to help locate victims willing togive testimony about what happened to them during the operation, over 100 menturned up at once to be interviewed.One middle-aged man beaten at the pitch in El Wak and incritical condition in the hospital there, Abdillahi Hassan Khala, wastransferred to Mandera district hospital in a Red Cross vehicle. He died enroute from internal bleeding, according to the medical staff who accompaniedhim.[102]The Human Toll of theOperationMany men and women were severely injured during theoperation and many suffered lasting harm as a result of those injuries.Hospital records shown to Human Rights Watch describe fractures, soft tissueinjuries, internal bruising of kidneys, respiratory problems, difficulties urinating,and impotence following the beatings.[103]Several victims showed Human Rights Watch x-rays of the fractures they sufferedfrom being beaten during the operation.Dozens who had suffered genital mutilation and rape as partof their torture described health problems afterwards. Some women complained ofcontinued pain in their kidneys, backs, hips, and problems urinating.[104]One man whose genitals were mutilated bymembers of the security forces during the operation said, “I have nottouched a woman since then.” Another victim of the same form of torturecomplained to Human Rights Watch, “I have been unable to visit my wifesince.”[105] Oneman excreted blood for several days after the beating.[106]Many others were unable to walk or work for weeks or months. A handful of thevictims interviewed by Human Rights Watch were still nearly or completelybedridden four months after the operation.[107]The numbers of people rounded up, raped, and beatenoverwhelmed local medical facilities.  The Kenya Red Cross brought in two emergencyteams from Nairobi and sent a mobile clinic through the bush, treating peoplewhere it could find them.[108]Human Rights Watch did not obtain total figures for thosedetained and injured in Bambo, Gari, Warankara, and Damasa. However, the KenyaRed Cross treated more than 1,200 people in the two weeks following theoperation after it deployed its mobile clinics and an emergency team to El Wakdistrict hospital. Red Cross medical staff referred four people to the largerhospital at Wajir, nine to Mandera, and two were airlifted to Nairobi: oneserious fracture from Warankara and a rape case.[109]The military only allowed the Red Cross access to thoserequiring medical attention after the secretary general and representativesfrom the International Committee of the Red Cross met with military commanders.“There was no warning from the government that this [kind of violence]would happen,” said one Red Cross official. “We were not on goodterms with the military during that time. Our branch chair in El Wak was beatenalong with everyone else, even though he was wearing a Red Cross jacket.”[110]Aside from the direct physical effects, the violence has hadeffects on livelihoods. Some people remain unable to work months afterreceiving the injuries. Human Rights Watch visited two men who four monthsafter their beatings remained bedridden. As a result children’s schoolfees are going unpaid and enrollment in the primary school in El Wak has droppedby 295 according to the head teacher there, partly also due to families fleeingthe area after the operation.[111]Thousands of people stayed away from their homes after theoperation, some moving to Mandera, some to Wajir, Garissa, and even Nairobi,for several months.[112] Otherssurvived in the bush with their herds or crossed into Somalia for days, weeks,or months.Patterns of Serious HumanRights Violations in the Mandera OperationWhether they are police or military, any Kenyan securityforces conducting law enforcement activities are bound by Kenyan and internationalhuman rights law. Kenya’s constitution and international treatyobligations unequivocally prohibit torture, rape, and other inhuman anddegrading treatment.[113]They also provide for the rights to theprotection of the home and family, and specific protection of children.[114]The conduct of Kenyan police officers is also governed by the Police Act[115]and the UN Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials.[116]During the Mandera operation, Kenyan security forcescommitted numerous, serious, and systematic human rights violations, asdescribed in the previous sections and briefly summarized below. Given thewidespread and systematic nature of the violations, the crimes may amount tocrimes against humanity, thus placing the crimes within the jurisdiction of internationalbodies such as the International Criminal Court (ICC), should the Kenyangovernment fail to act.The Kenyan government has a legal obligation to carry outprompt and fair investigations into torture and prosecute and punish thosemilitary and civilian officials responsible.[117] Allstates party to the Convention against Torture are responsible for bringingtorturers to justice.[118] A fullinvestigation into torture should trace the origin of orders that led to thetorture, be they from civilian or military commanders.[119]But the investigation should also determine command responsibility—thatis, those who knew or should have known about the abuses—identifyingthose who were in a position of command yet failed to prevent the abuses orpunish those responsible. The Committee against Torture (CAT) has statedthat it “considers it essential that the responsibility of any superiorofficials, whether for direct instigation or encouragement of torture orill-treatment or for consent or acquiescence therein, be fully investigatedthrough competent, independent and impartial prosecutorial and judicialauthorities.”[120]TortureA large proportion of the hundreds of people who wererounded up in the Mandera region were severely beaten or mutilated by thesecurity forces.The Convention against Torture defines torture as “anyact by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, isintentionally inflicted on a person... by or at the instigation of or with theconsent or acquiescence of a public official or other person acting in anofficial capacity.” In order to amount to torture, such pain must beinflicted for specific reasons, including extracting information or aconfession, punishment, or intimidation.[121]In Mandera scores of people were beaten to the point wherethey lost consciousness, sustained serious physical damage, or suffereddeliberate genital mutilation. Human Rights Watch researchers documented thesecrimes in at least five locations (Lafey, Wargadud, Elele, Qaramadow, and ElWak) and similar crimes are reasonably believed to have occurred in every othercommunity where the operation took place, including Warankara, Bambo, Gari, andDamasa. As such, the acts of torture inflicted by the security forces were bothwidespread and systematic, and may amount to crimes against humanity.[122]RapeFurther investigation isrequired to ascertain how widespread the use of rape and sexual assault wasduring the Mandera operation. Human Rights Watch interviewed seven rape victimsand several women who alleged attempted rape in two communities: Wargadud andElele. Other community members told Human Rights Watch that they believed manyother women had been raped in those locations and possibly others, but the deepsocial stigma attached to rape in northeastern Kenya and the under-reporting ofrape generally in Kenya[123] mayhave prevented many and perhaps most victims from speaking about theirexperiences.As one woman explained, “Officers succeeded inentering the homes of two of my neighbors but the women deny they have beenraped. According to our culture it is shameful, so even if someone is on top ofyou, you [can] deny that you have been raped.”[124]According to a nurse at El Wak hospital, “Because of the stigma they tendto hide what happened to them.”[125]Further details about the pattern of rape cases would helpestablish whether the abuses were confined to certain units and locations orwere part of a broader policy. But irrespective of the numbers of women whowere raped, Kenyan and international law clearly prohibit rape and sexualassault as forms of torture and other ill-treatment, and as discriminationbased on sex.Destruction of Propertyand LootingAs described above, the security forces looted property andmoney from homes, businesses, and public buildings in many of the communities thatthey attacked during the operation. A commissioner from the Kenya NationalCommission on Human Rights described seeing police and military trucks inWarankara packed with household goods and foodstuffs two days after theconclusion of the operation, and many of the local shops were ransacked.[126]When Human Rights Watch visited Lafey in February 2009,hundreds of people lined up to present compensation claims for property thatthey said had either been stolen or destroyed during the operation. Anindependent inquiry or government commission should address the issue ofcompensation for all victims of looting and property destruction by governmentagents.Responsibilityfor the CrimesThe operation in Mandera wasa joint operation between different units of the police and the military. Inmany locations it was difficult to distinguish responsibility for individualcrimes as victims and witnesses are often confused about the minor differencesbetween uniforms worn by different branches of the security forces.Further investigation is urgently needed to gatheradditional evidence and identify those individuals responsible for the abusesand the commanders who supervised the operation.  Victims in differentlocations described both police and military commanders as present during theoperation.Many of the victims interviewed by Human Rights Watch saidthat the police were more actively engaged in beating and torturing civilians,while army personnel stayed back to cordon off possible escape routes. Onevictim in Wargadud said, “It was more police and Administration Policethan army involved in beating.”[127] Anothervictim in Elele told Human Rights Watch:The army came and surrounded the town—they did notcome into the village, just cordoned it off. Senior army officers came in—onewas Borana—they went around and said, “If you have guns, give themto us and we will leave you.” The army did help round people up. Theybrought us to an area where AP [Administration Police] and police were waitingand it was them who beat us.[128]In other locations, however, victims were quite clear thatthe personnel beating them and walking on their backs were military.[129]In addition, the presence of the green Hughes army helicopter in at least two locations—Wargadudand El Wak—points to the army having played a critical role in theoperation.[130]In El Wak, numerous witnesses identified the commanders ofthe operation who were present at the beatings by rank, and some by name. Thesenior police, military, and administrative officers of El Wak district andNorth Eastern province are well known. For example, two former police officerswere caught up in the operation and beaten. One had previously served in El Wakwith some of the commanders who were present. He said, “I recognizedtheir ranks. Among the leaders were the OCPD [officer commanding police district]and an army major [with] two crowns [on his uniform].”[131]According to the two former police officers and several other witnesses in ElWak, the senior security officers present at the pitch in El Wak and witnessingthe beatings were:Josephat Maingi, the provincial commissioner (PC);Stephen Chelimo, the provincial police officer (PPO); andMajor Wambua, the commanding officer of 7 Kenya Rifles regiment,based in Garissa.Others reported to have been present were the officer commandingpolice district (OCPD), the deputy OCPD, and the officer commanding station(OCS) for El Wak.[132]Another victim beaten on the pitch said, “I saw thePPO and the OC [officer commanding] of the operation, a major there.”[133]Yet another man added, “Kenya has done something that no human being cantolerate. They are supposed to send their forces to where the bandits are.Instead of killing bandits they are trying to kill their citizens. The PPO andthe PC were here.”[134]In Lafey several victims claimed that “the district officerwas there that day, watching” and that he was present during theoperation, witnessing the mistreatment of civilians.[135]Individual responsibility for the rapes committed during theoperation remains unclear for many of the cases documented by Human RightsWatch. The women said their assailants were soldiers or police who were notfrom the area and whose names they did not know, but that they could identifythe perpetrators by sight. Several described their attackers as having red orblack braiding similar to that found on regular police or Administration Policeuniforms.[136] Awoman from Wargadud said that the policemen who attacked her remained in thetown for several months afterwards: “I know the ones who raped me,”she said. “They are police officers. I could recognize their faces. Afterraping me, they stayed here for two months. Now they have beentransferred.”[137]None of the victims have reported the crimes to the police.Some simply laughed when asked by Human Rights Watch if they had done so,incredulous at the idea because the police themselves had been their attackers.However, given the willingness of at least some victims to talk and the detailof their testimonies, an independent inquiry would likely be able to identifythose responsible as well as which units were deployed in the communities whererape was carried out. Any independent inquiry should include trained femaleinvestigators to take statements and avoid further retraumatization of victims.It should also have the mandate to take appropriate steps to protect theidentity of rape complainants and be able to refer them to health and mentalhealth services.Liability of CommandersThe way in which the Mandera operation was conducteddemonstrates that security forces were given orders at a senior level thatclearly violate Kenyan and international law. This would not be the firsttime:  Human Rights Watch and other organizations have documented how thejoint operation in Mount Elgon followed a similar pattern.[138]The rounding up and torture of hundreds of people across 10communities was clearly systematic and indicative of a well-planned operation.The fact that the torture and beating was known and possibly planned at a highlevel is supported by the consistent accounts of seven individuals interviewedby Human Rights Watch, all of whom described the presence of numerous senioradministration officials at the sites of the beatings and torture. One witnessadded that a senior commander in a helicopter visited during the operation,checked on the status of the operation, asked whether “anyone had diedyet,” and then ordered the personnel to continue.[139]The evidence indicates that security forces committed humanrights abuses as part of a deliberate strategy that must have been approved byhigh-level officials, possibly including the ministers for internal securityand defense, both of whom are located within the Office of the President. The consistentpattern of mistreatment and torture described by scores of victims is alsoevidence of planning.As such, it is not just the commanders of the Kenyan police,Administrative Police, and army on the ground who should be held to account forthe widespread and systematic torture of civilians, but the politicians whoknew or should have known about the crimes that resulted from the illegalstrategy of the operation, failed to stop it or hold anyone to account, and whobear ultimate responsibility as civilian commanders of the forces.The Government’sResponseSmall arms control and increased security alongKenya’s unstable borders are important and necessary goals forKenya’s government. There is no question that the government should playa significant role in quelling the alarming episodes of armed violence—bothcriminal and ethnic—that plague North Eastern province. There are manychallenges to doing so: a historically limited state presence in the area, highlevels of small arms and private militias, and pastoralist communities withlittle confidence in the central government or security forces.But the manner in which the Mandera operation was conductedexposes not just the government’s failure to provide security, but adeeply entrenched willingness to use systematic and abusive force againstKenyan citizens. With justification, the victims of the operation perceived itnot as an exercise designed to disarm them, but as an exercise in collectivepunishment.Within days of the operation commencing, public allegationsof human rights violations emerged. The Kenya National Commission on HumanRights (KNCHR), a statutory government body,[140]mobilized fast, chartered a plane to reach the remote district on October 29,and brought a media spotlight to the activities of the security forces in ElWak and the surrounding areas.[141] Bothmajor Kenyan television stations broadcast footage of brutalized victimsdisplaying their injuries at El Wak hospital and hundreds of residentsthreatening to burn their national identity cards in protest at the operation.[142]The KNCHR report concluded:There had been use of excessive force in the ongoingsecurity operation in the larger Mandera region and the same should becondemned. Widespread gross atrocities continue to be indiscriminatelyperpetrated against the residents of the area. While it is appreciated thatthere is the need to disarm the communities and find a lasting solution to theinter-clan conflict, the current approach is unsustainable, unconstitutional anddehumanizing. In addition to the current security operation, various humanrights violations have been perpetrated against people living in northern Kenyaunder the guise of security operations, and it is worrying that the securityforces continue to resort to extrajudicial means to resolve insecurity. Theongoing security operation has created a serious humanitarian crisis withregard to medical supplies, food, schooling and displacement.[143]When interviewed by KNCHR, the provincial police officer(PPO) for North Eastern province, Simon Chelimo, “audaciously denied theallegations of human rights violations despite evidence to the contrary.”[144]He even reportedly told KNHCR officials that the wounds of the hundreds ofpeople in El Wak hospital were self-inflicted.[145]On November 4, 2008, the minister for internal security,George Saitoti, said that “the operation has been a success.”[146]But he also told the press, “Allallegations of torture, rape and other related malpractice will be fullyinvestigated.”[147] Thefollowing week his assistant minister told parliament, “On the issue ofbeating up people, I have constituted a committee to investigate thoroughly andelaborately whether there was such a thing.” He also noted that “[t]hegovernment welcomes substantiated information on particular incidents includingbut not restricted to, excessive use of force, gender based violence andassault for necessary disciplinary measures.”[148]Although promising to investigate the allegations, to datethe government has taken a harsher line with those who have made allegationsthan with those security force members who committed the crimes. A formermember of parliament, Billow Kerrow, who questioned the operation on televisionand complained about the treatment of members of his community was arrested andcharged with “incitement to violence and disobedience of the law.”His trial is currently ongoing.[149]The government trumpeted the fact that it had recovered“186 rifles, 6 bombs, 620 detonators and 1,885 rounds ofammunition” as of November 11, 2008, without explaining to the public orto members of Parliament how those weapons had been acquired.[150]The promises to investigate the abuses were made in November2008; yet as this report went to press in June 2009, the government has made nostatement about the status of any inquiry, nor has there been notice of anyaction taken against members of the security forces suspected of criminalactions.Police ReformPolice reform has been high on the agenda of Kenyan humanrights groups for many years. It has now emerged as a matter of nationalurgency in the wake of the woefully inadequate and uneven police response tothe post-election violence, the revelations about police death squads orderedto murder suspected Mungiki members, and the systematic torture anddisappearance of hundreds of suspected insurgents in Mount Elgon.[151]The Kenyan police have an appalling record of extrajudicial killings, torture,corruption, use of excessive force, mistreatment of people in custody, lack ofdiscipline, and failure to abide by applicable norms. Several high-profilereports have called for far-reaching and urgent police reform, including thereport of the Waki Commission to investigate the post-election violence and thereport of the UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions,Philip Alston.[152]In response to the presentation of the special rapporteur’sreport to the UN Human Rights Council in June 2009, the government acknowledgedthe problem of extrajudicial killings and the need for reform, committingitself to implementing some of the recommendations of the report.[153]The scale of reform that is needed is huge. The police have become,in the words of the UN special rapporteur, “a law unto themselves.”[154]As one foreign diplomat put it more mildly, the police are“under-equipped to deal with the security problems in this area.”She went on to note what most Kenyans have come to know, namely that “thepolice have a very antiquated view of how to build security, there’s nosuch thing as interrogation by asking questions.... They [the police] genuinelythink that you have to beat people so they tell you the truth: this is onpurpose, because they think that’s what works.”[155]And even on the same day that Minister Saitoti was acknowledging the need forreform in Geneva, the police released a report exonerating itself of the March2009 killing of two activists who had collected information on extrajudicialkillings.[156]There was an outcry in Kenya following the jointpolice-military operation Okoa Maisha (“save lives” inKiswahili) in Mount Elgon in 2008 when revelations of the scale of thesystematic torture of thousands of suspects and the killing of dozens, if nothundreds, came to public attention.[157]Foreign governments suspended military assistance, at least temporarily,instituted vetting procedures for training programs, and redoubled calls forwidespread police reform.The operations in Mandera region reveal an almost identicalstrategy at work—the rounding up and torture of civilians as a way ofresponding to insecurity and illegal militias. This strategy and operation wasdeployed just months after it had proved so disastrous in Mount Elgon. Not onlythat, but in February and March 2009 the police reportedly conducted similarbrutal house-to-house searches, so-called disarmament operations, in Kuria andSamburu districts respectively, leading to yet more allegations of rape,looting, beating, and mistreatment of civilians.[158]There is now a broad consensus among civil society, donors,and the government of Kenya about the nature of the reforms necessary to cleanup the Kenyan police force and begin to build a force capable of protecting therights of Kenya’s citizens. The core of the necessary reforms wassketched out in some detail in the Report of the Commission to Investigate thePost-Election Violence (the “Waki Commission”). These included: acomplete overhaul of the existing police service, its management structures,procedures and enabling legislation; the establishment of an “IndependentPolice Conduct Authority” to investigate police conduct; and the mergingof the Administration Police and regular police, among other measures.[159]Reinforcing the recommendations of the Waki Commission arethe recommendations of the UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitraryexecutions. He specifically called for the police commissioner and the attorneygeneral to be replaced, describing the latter as “the embodiment ofimpunity in Kenya” for his role in blocking prosecutions.[160]Now that the government has acknowledged the urgent need forreform, the challenge is to make that reform a reality. Investigating andprosecuting those responsible for abuses in Mandera will be a test case of thatcommitment.Foreign governments, especially the European Union, haveplayed a strong role in pushing for security sector reform as an essential partof the reform agenda agreed to by the coalition government, and must keep upthe pressure. The United States should continue to implement the Leahy vettingprocess to prohibit the provision of US foreign assistance to any unit of thesecurity forces credibly implicated in human rights violations unless measuresare taken to hold the individuals responsible to account. The UK and othernations providing assistance to Kenya’s police and military shouldimplement similar procedures.Finally, it is worth noting that some officials within theKenyan government are aware of how disarmament operations should be carried outaccording to international best practice and the rule of law, as laid out inthe draft National Policy on Small Arms. The draft legislation also shows anawareness of the links between small arms proliferation, insecurity, and goodgovernance. If this draft law were passed and implemented as part of a widereffort at security sector reform, and if the government faithfully adhered toit, the policy might offer some way forward to improve security for the unfortunatecitizens of North Eastern province and other unstable parts of Kenya. TheNational Policy on Small Arms states:The Government of Kenya’s (GoK) approach toaddressing the proliferation of SALW [Small Arms and Light Weapons] is foundedon the recognition that sustainable, long-term development and prosperity forall of Kenya’s citizens can only be ensured in a safe and secureenvironment, free from fear. The GoK believes that to create such a safe andsecure environment, it is necessary to identify, understand and subsequentlyaddress the entire range of factors that create, fuel and enable insecurity andconflict in Kenya. As such, efforts to address specific security challenges orneeds, such as the proliferation of SALW or the development of better relationsbetween the police and communities, must complement and be complemented bybroader efforts to address underlying economic, social, cultural or politicalfactors that may cause insecurity or conflict. This means implementing a broadrange of inter-connected initiatives on specific security related factors, suchas SALW control, community-based policing, and conflict management andpeace-building. These efforts will also be linked with broader developmentprogrammes where appropriate.[161]AcknowledgementsThis report was written by Ben Rawlence, researcher in theAfrica division, based on research by Ben Rawlence and Chris Albin-Lackey,senior researcher in the Africa division.The report was edited by Chris Albin-Lackey and LeslieLefkow, senior researcher and Horn of Africa team leader in the Africadivision; Clive Baldwin, senior legal advisor; and Iain Levine, director of theProgram office of Human Rights Watch. Liesl Gerntholtz, director of theWomen’s Rights division, also reviewed sections of the report.Production assistance was provided by McKenzie Price, associatein the Africa division. Anna Lopriore coordinated photo preparation and GraceChoi prepared the report for publication. Nadine Schuurman and John Emersoncreated the maps.Additional thanks to the staff of Northern Aid and the KenyaNational Commission on Human Rights who assisted in the research for thisreport.[1]AfricaWatch (now Human Rights Watch/Africa), Kenya: Taking Liberties (NewYork: Human Rights Watch, July 1991), pp. 268-322. See also Kenya Human RightsCommission, “Foreigners at Home: The Dilemma of Citizenship in NorthernKenya,” February 2009.[2]EthnicSomali and Oromo (Borona) pastoralists are the two main groups in Manderadistricts. See Kenya Human Rights Commission, “Foreigners at Home,”p. 11. For a discussion of the fluidity of ethnic identity in the Kenya-Somaliaborder area, see Ken Menkhaus, “Kenya-Somalia Border ConflictAnalysis,” report produced by USAID, August 31, 2005,http://www.somali-jna.org/downloads/Kenya-Somalia%20Menkhaus%20(2).pdf,(accessed June 10, 2009), pp. 6-9.[3]MajorH.K. Biwott, “Post-independence low intensity conflict in Kenya,”1992, GlobalSecurity.org,http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/report/1992/BHK.htm (accessedApril 27, 2009).[4]Shiftameans bandit and the term was “deliberately used by the government toreduce the political significance of the secessionist war.” Africa Watch,Taking Liberties, p. 271.[5]Forfurther background see Hannah Whittaker, “Pursuing Pastoralists: theStigma of Shifta during the ‘Shifta War’ in Kenya, 1963-68,”Eras, Edition 10, November 2008, http://arts.monash.edu.au/publications/eras/edition-10/whittaker-article.pdf(accessed June 10, 2009); and Nene Mburu, Bandits on the Border: The LastFrontier in the Search for Somali Unity (Trenton, New Jersey: Red Sea Press,2005).[6]For anaccount of the emergency regime in the NEP, see Kathurima M'Inoti, “Beyondthe 'Emergency' in the North Eastern Province: An Analysis of the Use and Abuseof Emergency Powers.” Nairobi Law Monthly 41, February/March (1992). Seealso Jennifer Hyndman, Managing Displacement: refugees and the politics ofhumanitarianism, University of Minnesota Press (2000), p. 44.[7]KenyaHuman Rights Commission, “Foreigners at Home,” p. 19.[8]Theseregulations came under the Preservation of Public Security Act. There is notroom here to list the many regulations of 1966; M’Inoti (1992) provides afull account of the establishment and continuation of the regime of emergencyin “Beyond the ‘Emergency’ in the North EasternProvince.”[9]KenyaHuman Rights Commission, “Foreigners at Home,” p. 20. See alsoAfrica Watch, Taking Liberties, pp. 270 -272.[10]KenyaHuman Rights Commission, “Foreigners at Home,” p. 20.[11]Africa Watch, Taking Liberties, pp. 273-278.[12]“Kenya admits mistake over ‘massacre,’” BBC, October14, 2000, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/978922.stm(accessed April 22, 2009). Most estimates put the total number of deaths at2,000 but local groups investigating the atrocity claim up to 5,000 died andthat the number of 384 only includes those who were identified. The securityforces destroyed the identify documents of many of the people they rounded up,making identification of the dead extremely difficult. Africa Watch, TakingLiberties, p. 274. See also S. Abdi Sheikh, Blood on theRunway—The Wagalla massacre of 1984 (Northern Publishing House:Nairobi, 2007), http://www.scribd.com/doc/2551019/BLOOD-ON-THE-RUNWAY-The-Wagalla-Massacre-of-1984(accessed April 27, 2009); see also Kenya Human Rights Commission, “Foreignersat Home,” p. 41.[13]AfricaWatch, Taking Liberties, pp. 298-322. Screening of Ethnic Somalis—TheCruel Consequences of Kenya’s Passbook System (New York: Human RightsWatch, September 1990), p. 2.[14]Nene Mburu,“Contemporary Banditry in the Horn of Africa: Causes, History andPolitical Implications,” Nordic Journal of African Studies 8, No. 2,1999, pp. 89-107.[15]Human Rights Watch, Playing With Fire: Weapons Proliferation, PoliticalViolence and Human Rights in Kenya (New York: Human Rights Watch, May2002), pp. 22-32.[16]For agood general background on this, see Menkhaus, “Kenya-Somalia BorderConflict Analysis.”[17]Reportof the Judicial Commission on Tribal Clashes, 1991-1998, Chapter 4, p. 280,http://www.marskenya.org/pdfs/2008/jan_08/Judicial_Commission_Report_On_Tribal_Clashes_In_Kenya/Tribal_Clashes_In_North_Eastern_&_Eastern.pdf(accessed April 22, 2009).[18]Reportof the Judicial Commission on Tribal Clashes, 1991-1998, Chapter 4, p. 283.[19]Menkhaus,“Kenya-Somalia Border Conflict Analysis,” p. 27.[20]Menkhaus, “Kenya-Somalia Border Conflict Analysis,” pp. 18-20.[21]Menkhaus,“Kenya-Somalia Border Conflict Analysis,” pp. 27-35.[22]HumanRights Watch interviews, El Wak and Mandera, February 2009.[23]See Menkhaus,“Kenya-Somalia Border Conflict Analysis,” pp. 50-53 for a balancedsummary of these trends.[24]SeeHuman Rights Watch, So Much to Fear: War Crimes and the Devastation ofSomalia, ISBN: 1-56432-415-X, December 8, 2008,http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2008/12/08/so-much-fear-0.[25]SeeHuman Rights Watch, From Horror to Hopelessness: Kenya’s ForgottenSomali Refugee Crisis, ISBN: 1-56432-465-6, March 30, 2009, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2009/03/29/horror-hopelessness,p. 12; Refugees International, “Somalia: Political Progress, HumanitarianStalemate,” April 3, 2009,http://www.refugeesinternational.org/policy/field-report/somalia-political-progress-humanitarian-stalemate(accessed May 21, 2009).[26]See Republic of Kenya, Parliamentary Debates, November 11, 2008, Col. 3345; see“Thirteen dead in Mandera clashes over water,” IRIN, September 12,2009, http://kenvironews.wordpress.com/2008/09/13/thirteen-dead-in-mandera-clashes-over-water/(accessed April 27, 2009); see also “Kenya: Hundreds injured in operation– activist,” IRIN, October 31, 2008, http://www.irinnews.org/report.aspx?ReportId=81225(accessed April 27, 2009).[27]HumanRights Watch interviews, February 2009.[28]“Crackdownon warring clans nets 47 rifles,” The Nation (Kenya), October 29,2008, http://www.nation.co.ke/News/regional/-/1070/485322/-/6l19qt/-/index.html(accessed April 25, 2009).[29]Seethe report, “The inter clan peace dialogue meeting between the Garreh andMurulle community at Air Time resort Mandera East District 12 to 15 July,2008,” http://kenyasomali.blogspot.com/2008/10/case-in-which-kenyan-woman-from-garissa.html(accessed April 27, 2009).[30]Assistant Minister Joshua Orwa Ojode, Ministry of State for ProvincialAdministration and Internal Security, Parliamentary Debates, November 11, 2008,Col. 3344.[31]Ibid. See also Kenya National Commission on Human Rights (KNCHR), “Reportof the Fact-Finding Mission,” October 29, 2008; and “Crackdown onwarring clans nets 47 rifles,” The Nation.[32]AssistantMinister Ojode, Ministry of State for Provincial Administration and InternalSecurity, Parliamentary Debates, November 11, 2008, Col. 3345.[33]Thechairman of the peace committee in Elele, a Garre area, told Human Rights Watch,“There was no talking, no listening, just force, the army came. In fact,the clashes had already ended. Because of the killings, the deaths, the eldershad already stopped the fighting. The truck with Garre militia had already returnedto Ethiopia—the next day the army came.” Human Rights Watchinterview, Elele, February 14, 2009. Another elder in Wargadud confirmed theseevents, Human Rights Watch interview, February 15, 2009.[34]Hon.Dr. Nuh MP, Parliamentary Debates, government of Kenya, November 11, 2008, Col.3347.[35]Kenya’sAdministration Police were originally known as the Tribal Police during thecolonial era and were created to support the chiefs who governed for theBritish. Africa Watch, Taking Liberties, p. 91. The Administration Policeare supposedly distinguished from regular police by their administrative role,but have identical powers of arrest. Their current role is to protectgovernment offices and other official installations and guard administrativeofficials, but they are often used to support regular police operationswherever necessary.[36]Editorial, “Investigate Mandera abuse claims,” The Standard,November 3, 2008, http://www.eastandard.net/InsidePage.php?id=1143998425&catid=16&a=1(accessed June 10, 2009).[37]The figure of at least 1,200 represents the number of people injured during theoperation who were given medical treatment by the Kenya Red Cross. Human RightsWatch interview with Kenya Red Cross officials, Mandera, February 19, 2009.[38]NoorAli, “Kenya arrests 155 Somali, Ethiopian fighters in north,”Reuters, November 5, 2008, http://www.alertnet.org/thenews/newsdesk/L5114704.htm(accessed April 27, 2009).[39]Human Rights Watch interviews with Kenya Red Cross officials, Mandera;representatives of local NGO, Northern Aid; officials from KNCHR; localcouncillors and Billow Kerrow, former member of parliament for Mandera Central,February 2009. See also, KNCHR, “Report of the Fact-FindingMission,” October 29, 2008, which notes that “the areas targetedfor disarmament are El Wak, Wargadud, Lafey, Fino and Arabia.”[40]Human Rights Watch documented a similar pattern of events in Damasa, Warankara,and Qaramadow, but this report focuses on four locations where the events weredocumented in the most detail: Lafey, Elele, Wargadud, and El Wak. Additionalinformation is on file with Human Rights Watch.[41]Human Rights Watch interview, Lafey, February 13, 2009. The Kenya PoliceReserve (KPR) was established in 1948 through the KPR Ordinance and is supposedto “assist police officers in their duties.” KPR members arelegally armed, and in remote areas are allowed to keep their weapons at home.They are legally under the command of the Kenya Police and report on a regularbasis to the officer commanding station at the local level. They are requiredto do so in order to monitor the use of firearms issued to them.[42]HumanRights Watch interview, Lafey, February 13, 2009.[43]HumanRights Watch interview, Lafey, February 13, 2009.[44]Human Rights Watch interview, Lafey, February 13, 2009.[45]HumanRights Watch interview, Lafey, February 13, 2009.[46]HumanRights Watch interviews, Lafey, February 13, 2009.[47]In common parlance, many Kenyans use the term “officer” to refer toany member of the security forces and the police in particular, regardless ofrank.[48]HumanRights Watch interview, Lafey, February 13, 2009.[49]Human Rights Watch interview, Lafey, February 13, 2009.[50]Human Rights Watch interview, Lafey, February 13, 2009.[51]Human Rights Watch interview, Lafey, February 13, 2009.[52]Human Rights Watch interview, Mandera, February 12, 2009.[53]Human Rights Watch interview, Lafey, February 13, 2009.[54]Human Rights Watch interview, Lafey, February 13, 2009.[55]Human Rights Watch interview, Lafey, February 13, 2009.[56]Human Rights Watch interview, Lafey, February 13, 2009.[57]HumanRights Watch interview, Lafey, February 13, 2009.[58]HumanRights Watch interview, Lafey, February 13, 2009.[59]HumanRights Watch interview with head teacher, Lafey primary school, February 13,2009.[60]Human Rights Watch interviews, Lafey, February 13, 2009.[61]HumanRights Watch interviews with community health workers, Lafey, February 13, 2009;and clinic records seen by Human Rights Watch.[62]HumanRights Watch interview, Elele, February 14, 2009.[63]HumanRights Watch interview, Elele, February 14, 2009.[64]Human Rights Watch interview, Elele, February 14, 2009.[65]HumanRights Watch interview, Elele, February 14, 2009.[66]HumanRights Watch interview, Elele, February 14, 2009.[67]HumanRights Watch interview, Wargadud, February 15, 2009; and hospital records seenby Human Rights Watch.[68]HumanRights Watch interview, Elele, February 14, 2009.[69]HumanRights Watch interview, Elele, February 14, 2009.[70]HumanRights Watch interview, Elele, February 14, 2009.[71]HumanRights Watch interview, Wargadud, February 15, 2009.[72]HumanRights Watch interview, Elele, February 14, 2009.[73]HumanRights Watch interview, Wargadud, February 15, 2009.[74]Human RightsWatch interview, Wargadud, February 15, 2009.[75]HumanRights Watch interview, Wargadud, February 15, 2009.[76]Human Rights Watch interview, Elele, February 14, 2009.[77]HumanRights Watch interview, Wargadud, February 15, 2009.[78]HumanRights Watch interview, Wargadud, February 15, 2009.[79]HumanRights Watch interviews, Wargadud, February 15, 2009.[80]HumanRights Watch interview, Wargadud, February 15, 2009.[81]HumanRights Watch interview, Wargadud, February 15, 2009.[82]HumanRights Watch interviews, Wargadud, February 15, 2009.[83]HumanRights Watch interview, El Wak, February 16, 2009.[84]Human Rights Watch interview, El Wak, February 16,2009.[85] Human Rights Watch interview, El Wak, February 16,2009.[86]Human Rights Watch interview, El Wak, February 16, 2009.[87]HumanRights Watch interview with two COCOP staff, El Wak, February 17, 2009.[88]HumanRights Watch interviews, El Wak, February 16, 2009. There were no childrenreportedly detained.[89]HumanRights Watch interview, El Wak, February 16, 2009.[90]HumanRights Watch interview, El Wak, February 16, 2009.[91]HumanRights Watch interview with Kenya Red Cross official, Mandera, February 17,2009.[92]Human Rights Watch interview, El Wak, February 16, 2009.[93]HumanRights Watch interviews, Wargadud and El Wak, February 15 and 16, 2009.[94]HumanRights Watch interview, El Wak, February 16, 2009.[95]HumanRights Watch interview, El Wak, February 16, 2009.[96]HumanRights Watch interview, El Wak, February 16, 2009.[97]AssistantMinister Ojode, Ministry of State for Provincial Administration and InternalSecurity, Parliamentary Debates, November 11, 2008, Col. 3345; see also, Ali,“Kenya arrests 155 Somali, Ethiopian fighters in north,” Reuters.[98]Human Rights Watch interviews, El Wak,February 16 and 17, 2009.[99]List on file with Human Rights Watch.[100]MutindaMwanzia and James Ratemo, “Torture claims against officerssurface,” The Standard, October 30, 2009, http://www.eastandard.net/InsidePage.php?id=1143998187&cid=4(accessed April 27, 2009).[101]Human Rights Watch interview with dutydoctor and nurse, El Wak district hospital, February 17, 2009.[102]Ibid.[103]Human Rights Watch interviews withvictims and community health workers in Elele, Wargadud, El Wak, and Lafey,February 2009.[104]Human Rights Watch interviews, Elele and Wargadud, February 14 and 15, 2009.[105]HumanRights Watch interviews, El Wak and Wargadud, February 15 and 16, 2009.[106]Ibid.[107]Ibid.[108]HumanRights Watch interview with Red Cross official, Mandera, February 17, 2009.[109]HumanRights Watch interview with Kenya Red Cross official, Mandera, February 17,2009.[110]Ibid.[111]HumanRights Watch interview, El Wak, February 16, 2009.[112]“Kenya:Hundreds injured in operation – activist,” IRIN.[113]ChapterV of the Kenya Constitution enshrines in law all the fundamental rights andfreedoms of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Kenya is also bound byits obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights(ICCPR); the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or DegradingTreatment or Punishment (Convention against Torture); and the African (Banjul)Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR). ICCPR, adopted December 16,1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc. A/6316(1996), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23, 1976, acceded to byKenya on March 23, 1976; Convention against Torture, adopted December 10, 1984,G.A. res. 39/46, annex, 39 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 51) at 197, U.N. Doc. A/39/51(1984), entered into force June 26, 1987, acceded to by Kenya on March 23, 1997;and ACHPR, adopted June 27, 1981, OAU Doc. CAB/LEG/67/3 rev. 5, 21 I.L.M. 58(1982), entered into force October 21, 1986, ratified by Kenya on January 23, 1992.[114]Conventionon the Rights of the Child, G.A. res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49)at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into force September 2, 1990,ratified by Kenya on September 3, 1990; Convention on the Elimination of AllForms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), adopted December 18, 1979, G.A.res. 34/180, 34 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 46) at 193, U.N. Doc. A/34/46, enteredinto force September 3, 1981, acceded to by Kenya on September 2, 1990.[115]Republicof Kenya, Police Act, February 1, 1961, See http://www.kenyalaw.org/kenyalaw/klr_app/frames.php(accessed June 10, 2009).[116]SeeUnited Nations Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials, adopted December17, 1979, G.A. res. 34/169, annex, 34 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 46) at 186, U.N.Doc. A/34/46 (1979), art. 1 cmmt. See also Human Rights Committee, GeneralComment No. 31, Nature of the General Legal Obligation on States Parties to theCovenant, U.N. Doc. ICCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.13 (2004), para. 4.[117]Conventionagainst Torture, art. 12.[118]Convention against Torture, arts. 6-9.[119]Committeeagainst Torture (CAT), General Comment No. 2, para. 9.[120]CAT,General Comment No. 2, para. 26.[121]Conventionagainst Torture, art. 1(1).[122]Theattack against a civilian population underlying the commission of crimesagainst humanity must be widespread or systematic. It need not be both.“Widespread” refers to the scale of the acts or number of victims.A “systematic" attack indicates “a pattern or methodicalplan.” Lastly, for individuals to be found culpable for crimes againsthumanity requires their having relevant knowledge of the crime. That is,perpetrators must be aware that their actions formed part of the widespread orsystematic attack against the civilian population. The Rome Statute of the InternationalCriminal Court, of which Kenya is a state party, includes both torture and rapeamong the acts that may, when committed as part of widespread and systematicattack against a civilian population, constitute a crime against humanity. RomeStatute, Crimes against humanity, http://www.un.org/icc/part2.htm, art. 7.[123]See, forexample, Kinyanjui Murigi, “Quantitative research findings on rape inKenya between December 30 2007 and June 30 2008,” Task Group, CSINairobi, August 2008; Amnesty International, “Kenya: Rape - the invisiblecrime,” March 2002, http://www.exclusion.net/images/pdf/439_etuda_Kenya_Amnesty_Report_en.pdf(accessed June 5, 2009).[124]HumanRights Watch interview, Wargadud, February 15, 2009.[125]Human Rights Watch interview, El Wak, February 17, 2009.[126]HumanRights Watch interview with KNCHR Commissioner, February 19, 2009.[127]Human Rights Watch interview, Wargadud, February 15, 2009.[128]HumanRights Watch interview, Elele, February 14, 2009.[129]HumanRights Watch interviews, February 2009.[130]Human Rights Watch interviews, Wargadud and El Wak, February 2009.[131]HumanRights Watch interview, El Wak, February 16, 2009.[132]Ibid.[133]HumanRights Watch interview, El Wak, February 16, 2009.[134]HumanRights Watch interview, El Wak, February 16, 2009.[135]HumanRights Watch interviews, Lafey, February 13, 2009.[136]HumanRights Watch interviews, Elele, February 14, 2009.[137]HumanRights Watch interview, Wargadud, February 15, 2009.[138]See Human Rights Watch, All the Men Have Gone: War Crimes in Kenya’sMt. Elgon Conflict, ISBN: 1-56432-363-3, July 27, 2008, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2008/07/27/all-men-have-gone-0(accessed June 5, 2009); Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), “MountElgon: Does Anybody Care? ,” May 2008, http://www.msf.org/source/countries/africa/kenya/2008/MSF_MtElgon_May2008.pdf(accessed June 5, 2009); KNCHR, “The Mountain of Terror: A Report on theInvestigations of Torture by the Military at Mt Elgon,” May 15, 2008;  andPhilip Alston, “Report of the Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial,Summary or Arbitrary Executions, Philip Alston, On his mission to Kenya (16-25February 2009),” report for the UN Human Rights Council, A/HRC/11/2/Add.6,May 26, 2009, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/11session/A.HRC.11.2.Add.6.pdf(accessed June 5, 2009).[139]HumanRights Watch interview, El Wak, February 16, 2009.[140]The KenyaNational Commission on Human Rights is an independent government agencyestablished by an act of parliament in 2002, http://www.knchr.org/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=51&Itemid=71(accessed May 4, 2009).[141]KNCHR, “Report of the Fact-Finding Mission,” October 29, 2008. Seealso “Kenya: Hundreds injured in operation – activist,” IRIN.[142]SeeKTN news segment, November 2008, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-1ZBYeE1vHI&NR=1(accessed, June 10, 2009).[143]Ibid.See also Mutinda Mwanzia and James Ratemo, “Torture claims againstofficers surface,” The Standard, October 30, 2008, http://www.eastandard.net/InsidePage.php?id=1143998187&cid=4(accessed, April 27, 2009).[144]KNCHR,“Report of the Fact-Finding Mission,” October 29, 2008.[145]HumanRights Watch interview with KNCHR officials, Nairobi, February 19, 2009.[146]Ali, “Kenya arrests 155 Somali, Ethiopian fighters in north,”Reuters.[147]Ibid.[148]AssistantMinister Ojode, Ministry of State for Provincial Administration and InternalSecurity, Parliamentary Debates, Government of Kenya, November 11, 2008, Cols.3346 and 3347.[149]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Billow Kerrow, April 27, 2009. See theNTV news segment, November 5, 2008, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kkSsBvt-214(accessed June 10, 2009); and the original interview that sparked the charges,November 2, 2008, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-1ZBYeE1vHI&NR=1(accessed June 10, 2009).[150]AssistantMinister Ojode, Ministry of State for Provincial Administration and InternalSecurity, Parliamentary Debates, Republic of Kenya, November 11, 2008, Col.3345.[151]Human Rights Watch, All the Men Have Gone and Philip Alston, “Reportof the Special Rapporteur,” May 26, 2009.[152]See,for example, KNCHR, “Preliminary report on alleged executions anddisappearance of persons between June and October 2007,” Nairobi,November 2007, http://www.marsgroupkenya.org/pages/stories/KNCHR_Report/(accessed April 27, 2009); and KNCHR, “Cry of Blood: Report onExtra-Judicial Killings and Disappearances,” Nairobi, September 2008, http://www.marskenya.org/pdfs/2009/03/KNCHR_crimes-against-humanity-extra-judicial-killings-by-kenya-police-exposed.pdf(accessed April 27, 2009). See also, Human Rights Watch, Ballots to Bullets:Organized Political Violence and Kenya’s Crisis of Governance, March2008, Vol. 20, No. 1 (A), http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2008/03/16/ballots-bullets;“Report of the Commission of Inquiry intoPost-Election Violence,” Nairobi, October 16, 2008, http://www.eastandard.net/downloads/Waki_Report.pdf(accessed April 28, 2009); and Philip Alston, “Report of the SpecialRapporteur,” May 26, 2009.[153]ProfessorGeorge Saitoti, minister for internal security, told the UN Human RightsCouncil, “The Government acknowledges there have been cases of unlawfulkillings within the police force, in respect of which investigations into 53cases have been completed and 81 police officers prosecuted since the year2000… We have found most of the recommendations in these reports constructiveand useful, and remain committed to fulfilling our obligations.” SeeDavid Ohito and Beuttah Omanga, “Government eats humble pie in Geneva,accepts verdict,” The Standard, June 4, 2009, http://www.eastandard.net/InsidePage.php?id=1144015973&cid=4&(accessed June 5, 2009).[154]PhilipAlston, press statement on his mission to Kenya, “UN Special Rapporteuron extrajudicial, arbitrary or summary executions, Mission to Kenya, 16-25February 2009,” http://www.marskenya.org/pdfs/2009/02/Philip_Alston_UN_Press_statement_final.pdf(accessed April 27, 2009).[155]Human Rights Watch interview with diplomat, Nairobi, February 4, 2009.[156]Maseme Machuka, “Report finds police, Mutua innocent of activists’deaths,” The Standard, June 3, 2009, http://www.eastandard.net/InsidePage.php?id=1144015840&cid=159&(accessed June 10, 2009).[157]Tristan McConnell, “Kenyan troops trained by Britain are condemned for‘death’ campaign,” The Times, February 26, 2009, http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/world/africa/article5805036.ece(accessed April 28, 2009).[158]PeterAtsiaya and Nick Oluoch, “GSU team a dreaded lot in Kuria,” TheStandard, February 20, 2009, http://www.eastandard.net/InsidePage.php?id=1144007114&cid=4(accessed April 28, 2009); and Job Weru, “Samburu residents cry foul oversecurity operation,” The Standard, March 5, 2009, http://www.eastandard.net/InsidePage.php?id=1144008115&cid=4(accessed April 28, 2009).[159]“Reportof the Commission to Investigate the Post-Election Violence,” Nairobi,October 15, 2009, http://www.eastandard.net/downloads/Waki_Report.pdf (accessedJune 10, 2009). For a complete list of the recommendations on police reform, http://www.marskenya.org/Reports/Government/2008/10/Comprehensive_Reform_of_the_Kenya_Police_CIPEV_Specific_Recommendations_15th_October_2008_pp478_481_.pdf(accessed April 28, 2009).[160]PhilipAlston, press statement on his mission to Kenya.[161]“NationalPolicy on Small Arms and Light Weapons [Draft],” Republic of Kenya, April2008, http://www.recsasec.org/index.htm (accessedApril 27, 2009); see also “In Depth: Guns out of control: the continuingthreat of small arms – Kenya: Illegal small arms fuel ethnic strife andcrime,” IRIN, May 2006, http://www.irinnews.org/InDepthMain.aspx?InDepthId=8&ReportId=58959&Country=Yes(accessed, April 28, 2009).Related ContentJune 29, 2009News ReleaseKenya: Bring Prosecutions for Torture in NortheastBrutal Attack in Mandera Districts Underscores Urgent Need for Police ReformJune 29, 2009News ReleaseKenya: Bring Prosecutions for Torture in NortheastRegion / CountryAfrica,KenyaProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch