Ignoring Executions and Torture: Impunity for Bangladesh’s Security Forces | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload reportDownload report with coverSearchDonate NowSearchDownloadsDownload reportDownload report with coverMay 18, 2009Ignoring Executions and TortureImpunity for Bangladesh’s Security ForcesIgnoring Executions and TortureImpunity for Bangladesh's Security ForcesMap of BangladeshI. SummaryKey RecommendationsMethodologyII. A Short History of ImpunityImpunity for Crimes in the 1971 WarImpunity since IndependenceThe State of Emergency,January 2007–December 2008The GovernmentElected in December 2008III. The SecurityForcesBangladesh ArmedForcesDirectorate Generalof Forces IntelligenceNational SecurityIntelligenceBangladesh PoliceRapid ActionBattalionBangladesh RiflesAnsar and VillageDefence PartyCoast GuardIV. Key Cases ofImpunity the New Government Should AddressThe "Disappearance" of KalpanaChakmaThe Torture of Debu PrasaddasThe Death of Sumon Ahmed MajumderThe Death of Abul Kalam Azad SumonThe Death of Md. Masudur RahmanThe Torture of Shahidul IslamThe Death of Khabirul Islam DulalThe Death of Choles RitchilThe Torture of Tasneem KhalilThe Torture of Jahangir Alam AkashThe Torture of Rizwan HussainV. Causes of andSolutions for Impunity in BangladeshThe Praxis of Immediate DenialIntimidation and InducementsComplaints and InquiriesProsecutions and SanctionsThe Legal FrameworkIndemnityCriminal ProcedureCodeSpecial Powers ActMilitary LawsArmed PoliceBattalions OrdinanceEmergency LawsVI. RecommendationsTo the Bangladeshi GovernmentProtectionInvestigations andProsecutionsInstitutionalReformLaw ReformInternationalCooperationTo Civil Society OrganizationsTo Bangladesh's DonorsTo the United NationsAcknowledgmentsAppendixMap of BangladeshClick to expand ImageI. SummaryOn March 18, 2007, Choles Ritchil, a leader of the indigenous Mandi tribe in Bangladesh, was arrested near his home bysoldiers under the command of Maj. Tofique Elahi, and taken to an army camp.There, according to eyewitnesses, he was beaten with sticks, his genitals weresquashed, and his fingernails and toenails were pulled out. His mutilatedcorpse was left at the local church the following day. A witness told HumanRights Watch:His eyes had beenplucked out and replaced with artificial "marble eyes." His testicles weresmashed into pulp. Both arms were dislocated, the palms of both hands weresmashed, the fingernails of the right hand had been removed, while thethumbnail on the left hand had also been removed. His fingers were broken…there were bruises and cuts all over the body especially on the back. The skinon the back appeared burnt and there were deep cuts under both knees, and nailsmissing from his toes.The military-backed interim government,which took few steps to address abuses of this kind while in office during 2007and 2008, attempted to appease Dhaka-based diplomats by setting up a one-memberjudicial investigation commission to look into Ritchil's death. The commissionertook statements from witnesses, relatives, and local activists. On June 10,2007, Ritchil's body was exhumed and sent for an autopsy to Mymensingh MedicalCollege Hospital. The autopsy report has not been made public. No one has beenpublicly prosecuted in connection with the case. The government has said thatfour army personnel were given disciplinary sanctions, including dismissal fromservice and denial of promotion, but it has made no details public, callinginto question whether any action was actually taken. Even if it was, thepunishment does not reflect the gravity of the crime.Sadly, neither the killing of Ritchil northe failure to prosecute is surprising. Instead, this horrific case issymptomatic of the pervasive culture of impunity in Bangladesh. There has beena lack of political will under successive governments to hold accountable thoseresponsible for human rights violations. Of the thousands of killings ofindividuals in the custody of the security forces since independence in 1971,Human Rights Watch knows of very few cases that have resulted in a criminalconviction. The situation is not significantly different when it comes to otherforms of human rights abuses, including torture, which is endemic in Bangladesh.This report examines cases of extrajudicialkillings, torture, "disappearances," and illegal detentions over the pastdecades in which, despite receiving public attention, impunity has prevailed.Many of the cases and issues discussed in this report have for years beenrepeatedly raised by Human Rights Watch and others. Unfortunately they remainas relevant as ever, especially as the legacy of the past two years of de factomilitary rule.Impunity in Bangladesh was present at thecountry's birth. The 1971 war of independence was marked by atrocities on amassive scale committed against civilians, which are yet to be seriouslyaddressed. Those who were initially detained and convicted for some of theseabuses were shortly afterwards released. The scale and nature of the securityforces' involvement in human rights abuses has since then varied over time, butthe unwillingness of governments to hold these forces to account has beenconstant.As a result, torture, killings ingovernment custody, and other human rights violations by the police, armedforces, and the government's various paramilitary groups have become deeprooted problems. In recent years the Rapid Action Battalion (RAB) and themilitary intelligence outfit, the Directorate General of Forces Intelligence (DGFI),have emerged as symbols of abuse and impunity. RAB, an elite paramilitary forcecreated in 2004 to address public outrage over violent crime, has allegedlybeen responsible for over 550 killings since it began operations. Human RightsWatch and others have long alleged that many of these deaths, often describedas "crossfire killings," were actually extrajudicial executions of people takeninto custody. The police soon adopted these same methods, and several hundredkillings have been attributed to the force over the past few years.Torture of detainees by state officials isroutine. Detainees are subjected to severe beatings, sexual violence, electricshocks, having nails hammered into their toes, and being tied to poles andforced to stand for long periods of time. DGFI runs torture centers in thecantonment in Dhaka with purposely fitted rooms for torture. It has medicalpersonnel on stand-by who can administer first aid and revive unconsciousvictims who can then be subjected to further ill-treatment.Police and other security forces have usedexcessive and often deadly force to break up strikes and demonstrations.Arbitrary arrests on what appears to be flimsy evidence are common, as arepolitically motivated arrests.After a state of emergency was declared onJanuary 11, 2007-which lasted almost two years-and constitutionally guaranteedrights were suspended, Bangladesh's military-backed interim government headedby Chief Advisor Fakhruddin Ahmed acted with unprecedented force anddetermination to root out corruption and the influence of organized crime inelectoral politics. Bangladesh acceded to the United Nations Convention againstCorruption, and the Anti-Corruption Commission was made operational. More than200 senior politicians, including two previous prime ministers, and leadingbusinesspersons were arrested and detained. The interim government's statedintention was to transform the country's political culture into one that meetsthe requirements of a "healthy and stable democratic system" based on the ruleof law.While many Bangladeshis and members of theinternational community welcomed these goals, initial optimism turned to dismaywhen the corruption campaign led to routine illegal detentions, lack of dueprocess, and torture to obtain confessions or implicate politicians. Duringthis period the military was given law enforcement duties. Tens of thousands ofpeople were detained, many illegally. Many detainees alleged they weretortured, and government forces were blamed for hundreds of extrajudicialkillings. To achieve results in its effort to oust the previous political classand attack corruption, the interim government ignored the fundamental principleof the rule of law, which requires that those responsible for law enforcement arealso bound by the very same laws.Further, strong action against politiciansand businesspersons accused of corruption was in sharp contrast to the interimgovernment's complete inaction when it came to addressing allegations ofillegal killings, torture, and other grave abuses committed by the armedforces, the police, and paramilitary law enforcement agencies. In particular,the DGFI was allowed free reign to persecute government or military criticsthrough "disappearances," arbitrary detentions, and torture. Criticism of theseabuses was met by the DGFI with threats, intimidation, and abuse.Members of the security forces were, ineffect, placed above the law in order to, ostensibly, fight corruption andensure public order. Although in January 2008 the government instructed thesecurity forces to put an end to deaths in custody, no one is known to havebeen prosecuted for any of the crimes committed, even though some cases, suchas those of Choles Ritchil and journalist Tasneem Khalil, who was illegallydetained and tortured by the DGFI, have received considerable national andinternational attention. In the rare cases where complaints were filed despitethreats, violence, and bribes, and pressure led to announcements of officialinvestigations, these efforts appeared to have been aimed at calming publicoutrage or ameliorating international concern instead of conducting serious inquirythat could serve as the basis for prosecutions of those who ordered or carriedout abuses.The internal justice and disciplinarysystems of the military, RAB, and police have utterly failed to deliverjustice. Although these institutions have claimed that in some cases theirpersonnel have been punished, details are not made publicly available. There isevery indication, however, that the sanctions handed out to the perpetratorsare wholly inadequate and stand in no relation to the gravity of the crimescommitted. It should be noted that the United Nations Human Rights Committeehas stated that separation from service or dismissal from the force in questionis not a sufficient punishment for violations of human rights.Sadly, the interim government that claimeda commitment to reform has left a legacy of deepening Bangladesh's longstanding impunity for human rights abuses. The failure of the interimgovernment to make the protection of human rights and the end of impunity acentral plank of its tenure-no matter how difficult it would have been toachieve results-has further complicated the prospects of finding a long-termsolution to these problems.Bangladesh's mainpolitical parties also have great responsibility for impunity. During theperiod of the interim government the parties found a new commitment to humanrights. They began to raise human rights concerns when leading politicians andtheir associates became the target of the interim government's anti-corruptioncampaign. Some Bangladeshi activists criticized the parties for raising humanrights concerns while in opposition after having been responsible for or havingignored abuses while in power. Some even went so far as to justify or ignoreabuses on these grounds.There was merit in the criticism directedat the political parties, as many of the same politicians had previously beenresponsible for abuses or, while in power, had been unwilling to hold thesecurity forces accountable. Some failed to act in order to protect theirsubordinates, others out of fear of antagonizing the security forces, whichthey perceived as essential for protecting and furthering their political andeconomic interests. Concerns remain that the new government may fail to act forthe same reasons.Impunity in Bangladesh is also the resultof an outdated legal framework under which law enforcement officers and membersof the armed forces are shielded from prosecution. In violation ofinternational legal standards, article 46 of Bangladesh's constitution empowersparliament to pass laws that provide immunity from prosecution to any stateofficer for any act done to maintain or restore order, and to lift any penalty,sentence, or punishment imposed. Soldiers and RAB officers are also protectedfrom the civilian criminal justice system because the rules ensure that theyare prosecuted only in internal courts by their peers through processes that lackany form of independence or impartiality. While the civilian courts havejurisdiction over cases involving police officers suspected of involvement incriminal activities, such officers are protected by section 197 of the CriminalProcedure Code, which requires explicit government approval for the prosecutionof an officer purporting to act in his or her official capacity. Several otherlaws state that no legal action can be taken against a person who in good faithacts to implement any of its provisions.For all of these reasons, senior lawenforcement and military officers have never been under strong systemicpressure to ensure that soldiers, paramilitaries, or police officers operatewithin the law or human rights norms. They have come to take for granted thatthey have complete discretion in carrying out their mandate, even if itincludes the use of unlawful violence. Secure in their impunity, they send themessage to victims that anyone who attempts to hold them accountable will haveto pay a high price and that, in any case, their efforts will be fruitless.The December 2008 elections ended two yearsof military-backed rule. The Awami League and its allies won a massivemajority. Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina Wazed's government now has aunique opportunity and responsibility to address major human rights problemsthat have been ignored by successive governments. It is a chance that must notbe missed.The new government has stated that it has apolicy of zero tolerance for extrajudicial killings, torture, and deaths incustody. However, there is credible evidence that several members of thecountry's border security force, the Bangladesh Rifles, were tortured to death bythe army following their detention as suspects in an apparent mutiny that tookplace in February 2009 and left more than 70 people dead.Bangladesh's newgovernment will only be successful in ensuring a stable democratic system basedon the rule of law if it fully abides by the constitutional provision that "allcitizens are equal before the law and are entitled to equal protection of law."Politicians who campaigned for the restoration of democracy must make it a toppriority to ensure that allegations of human rights violations are rapidly,thoroughly, and impartially investigated. Laws that shield military and lawenforcement officers accused of violations of human rights from beingprosecuted and tried in a transparent manner should be repealed quickly. Thecivilian criminal justice system must be supported and protected so that it canexercise its jurisdiction over abuses committed by the military, RAB, andpolice.Bangladesh's newgovernment must make it a top priority to address these problems and ensurethat it lives up to its constitutional responsibilities and its obligationsunder international human rights law.Key RecommendationsTake all necessary measures toput an end to the security forces' involvement in extrajudicialexecutions, acts of torture, and other abuses of human rights. Addressimpunity by ensuring that all human rights violations are thoroughlyinvestigated and that those responsible, regardless of rank and politicalaffiliation, are prosecuted and brought to justice.Disband RAB, which has since itsinception based its operating culture on practices such as extrajudicialkillings. In the event RAB is retained, establish anindependent commission to assess RAB's performance, and to identify thosebelieved to be responsible for serious violations such as extrajudicialkillings who should be excluded from a reformed RAB and prosecuted. Theindependent commission should also develop and implement an action plan totransform RAB into an agency that operates within the law and with fullrespect for international human rights norms.Disband DGFI, which has toolong depended on illegal practices such as arbitrary detentions andtorture. In the event that DGFI is retained, establish anindependent commission to assess DGFI's performance, identify thosebelieved to be responsible for serious violations such as torture whoshould be excluded from a reformed DGFI and prosecuted, and develop andimplement an action plan to transform DGFI into an agency that operateswithin the law and with full respect for international human rights norms.DGFI's operations should be strictly limited to lawful militaryintelligence activities, and in no circumstances should it engage insurveillance of the political opposition and critics of the regime.Amend the military legislationcurrently in force and the Armed Police Battalion Ordinance to ensure thatmembers of the armed forces and RAB involved in violations of human rightsare tried in the civilian criminal justice system.Amend all legal provisions, such as articles 132 and 197of the Criminal Procedure Code, which in effect shield law enforcementofficials from being held to account for violations of human rights.MethodologyThis report is based on Human Right Watchinterviews with victims, witnesses, human rights defenders, and key informantsconducted in 2006, 2007, and 2008. Further material was gathered throughtelephone interviews and electronic mail. The report makes extensive use offact-finding reports prepared by nongovernmental organizations in Bangladesh,including Odhikar, Ain O Salish Kendra (ASK), and Hotline Bangladesh. Otherwritten materials we assessed included academic literature, press reports, andreports produced by international nongovernmental organizations, the UnitedNations special procedure mandate holders, and foreign governments. Laws passedbefore 1985 we reviewed in their official English version. For more recentlyadopted laws, for which no official English versions exist, we used unofficialtranslations.In June 2008, when research for this reportwas ongoing, Human Rights Watch requested visas for a three-person delegationto visit Bangladesh to, among other things, discuss issues of relevance for thereport with the interim government and Bangladesh's security forces. We wereinformed that the delegation would not be permitted to visit the country atthat time. In July 2008, we consequently sent a letter to Chief AdvisorFakhruddin Ahmed and the heads of various security forces requestinginformation about the status of investigations into specific cases raised inthe report. At this writing, no reply has been received to this letter.II. A Short History ofImpunityImpunity for Crimes inthe 1971 WarGrave human rights violations committedwith impunity marked the events that accompanied the separation of East and West Pakistan and the establishment of Bangladesh as an independent nation. In the 1971 warPakistani forces and their collaborators indiscriminately killed civilians andengaged in large-scale torture, rape, and destruction of villages and towns.Many of the victims were activists in the Awami League (the largest politicalparty in East Pakistan), members of the Hindu population, students, andintellectuals. Bengali "freedom fighters"[1]engaged in revenge killings of Pakistani soldiers and militia members, and mobsof Bengali civilians carried out violent attacks on the Urdu-speaking Biharipopulation and other non-Bengalis.Persecution of Biharis continuedafter independence and many were dispossessed of their houses and property.[2]Estimates of the number of people killed inconnection with the 1971 war vary greatly from a Pakistani governmentcommission's calculation of approximately 26,000 to figures of about 3,000,000cited by Bangladeshi historians.[3]Rape occurred on a large but undetermined scale (figures of 200,000 to 400,000victims are often mentioned in the literature, though some scholars claim thatthese figures are seriously inflated).[4]Millions, many of them Hindus, fled the country.[5]In a study from 1972, the Secretariat ofthe International Commission of Jurists concluded:In addition tocriminal offences under domestic law, there is a strong prima facie case thatcriminal offences were committed in international law, namely war crimes andcrimes against humanity under the law relating to armed conflict, breaches of Article3 of the Geneva Conventions 1949, and acts of genocide under the GenocideConvention 1949 (Part IV).[6]Following the war, Bangladesh's firstgovernment moved toward holding members of the Pakistan army to account forinternational crimes, including genocide, crimes against humanity, and warcrimes, while establishing a separate process to prosecute and bring to trialthose who had collaborated with the Pakistan army and engaged in acts such asmurder and torture.Underthe Bangladesh Collaborators (Special Tribunals) Order, issued in January 1972,several thousand people were charged, and some were convicted. However, in 1973the government announced clemency to those that had not been accused of murder,rape, or arson. In reality, most of those charged or convicted were released. Allremaining suspects and convicts were freed on December 31, 1975, when the 1972 order was repealed under the rule of Gen. Ziaur Rahman.[7]In 1973, parliament adopted theInternational Crimes (Tribunals) Act. Following a government investigation, 195members of the Pakistan army were accused of war crimes.[8]However, the soldiers had been transferred to the custody of the Indiangovernment in 1972 and no one was ever convicted under the law.[9] Asa result of an agreement in April 1974 between Bangladesh, India, and Pakistan,the 195 prisoners were released and allowed to return to Pakistan.[10]In Pakistan, President Zulfiqur Ali Bhuttohad already in December 1971 established a commission of inquiry headed byChief Justice Hamoodur Rahman. The commission recommended that:[A] high-powered Courtor Commission of Inquiry be set up to investigate into persistent allegationsof atrocities said to have been committed by the Pakistan Army in East Pakistanduring its operations from March to December, 1971, and to hold trials of thosewho indulged in these atrocities.[11]The recommendation was ignored and no oneis known to have ever been brought to justice in Pakistan.For almost four decades, "freedom fighters"and civil society groups in Bangladesh have repeatedly demanded that thoseresponsible for the atrocities during the 1971 war be held to account. Successivegovernments have failed to respond to demands for the establishment of anofficial inquiry to establish responsibility for the crimes. Instead, allegedperpetrators have been allowed to live freely in Bangladesh, as well as inother parts of the world, and have come to hold positions of prominence andpolitical influence. In fact, the country's major political parties have triedto win the support of the anti-liberation forces to create political alliances.In April 2008, the War Crimes Facts Finding Committee, a respected researchorganisation, released lists of 1,597 persons it claimed were responsible foratrocities, including a number of senior politicians belonging toJamaat-e-Islami (which as a party opposed independence) and the BangladeshNationalist Party (BNP, founded 1978).[12]Bangladesh has also failed to bring the perpetrators to justice because of thepressure from countries with which Bangladesh has close political and economicties.[13]In January 2009, the Bangladesh parliamentadopted a resolution requesting the government to take immediate action "to trythe war criminals."[14]In March, Law Minister Shafique Ahmed announced that the trials would be heldunder the International Crimes (Tribunal) Act, 1973.[15]The Act does not require Bangladesh's regular criminal procedure and evidencelaws to be applied.[16]This raises concerns that the trials may not meet international fair trialstandards and may be subject to political influence.[17]Death sentences may be handed down.[18]Impunity since IndependenceThe political situation in the decadessince the end of the war has largely been unstable. The country has beengoverned for extended periods under martial law and/or states of emergency,during which fundamental rights have been set aside.In spite of the presence of many well educatedlawyers and judges, the criminal justice system has been marked by arbitraryand politically motivated arrests, regular use of torture in places ofdetention, judicial proceedings that fall short of international standards,inhumane prison conditions, and frequent imposition of the death penalty. Theauthorities have failed to protect ethnic minorities from evictions and violentattacks; police and other security forces have used excessive and often deadlyforce to break up strikes and demonstrations; and law enforcement officialshave been involved in hundreds, if not thousands, of extrajudicial executions.This has been documented by domestic and international human rightsorganizations,[19]the media,[20]foreign governments,[21]and several of the United Nations special procedure mandate holders,[22]which have also repeatedly expressed their concerns about the situation.The longstanding problem of killings incustody assumed endemic proportions after the creation of the Rapid ActionBattalion (RAB), a paramilitary law enforcement agency, in 2004. RAB startedthe trend of so called "crossfire killings"-apparent extrajudicial killingsthat officials purport were legitimate or accidental killings where the victims(people RAB called "wanted criminals" or "top terrors") died when they resistedarrest or when they were caught in the crossfire during an armed clash betweenRAB and a criminal group. But the police also adopted these methods soon after.Since June 2004, well over 1,000 people have been killed by the police, RAB,and other security forces. It is widely believed that the vast majority ofthese killings in reality are thinly-disguised executions, often preceded bytorture.[23]Although there are no reliable statisticson the extent to which state agents engage in acts of torture, testimoniesindicate that physical abuse is a routine feature in criminal investigations aswell as a tool for extorting money from ordinary citizens. Nongovernmentalorganizations and journalists in Bangladesh have over the years documented andreported thousands of cases. In 2005, for instance, the BangladeshRehabilitation Centre for Trauma Victims recorded 2,297 victims of torture, and15 deaths that it said were due to torture by security forces.[24]Human Rights Watch has in previous reportsdescribed how criminal suspects have been subjected to severe beatings withbatons, sexual violence, electric shocks, having their fingers and other bodyparts crushed, nails hammered into their toes, body parts burned with acid, andbeing tied to poles and forced to stand for long periods. Agencies such as RABand DGFI are known to have medical personnel on stand-by who can administerfirst aid and revive unconscious victims who can then be subjected to furtherill-treatment.[25]Most of this institutionalized violence hasbeen perpetrated by the members of the police force, and, in recent years, RAB.Others have also been accused of such abuses, such as Jatiyo Rakkhi Bahini, anelite parallel army established by Prime Minister Sheikh Mujibur Rahman afterindependence and merged with the regular army following his assassination in1975; the Bangladesh Rifles (BDR), a border security force; and armed groupslinked to different political parties.[26]Whenever the military has been called outof the barracks to assist in law enforcement operations, its members have beeninvolved in acts of torture and extrajudicial executions. The army has beendeployed in the Chittagong Hill Tracts in the southeastern part of Bangladesh for decades; there are regular reports of soldiers subjecting members of theindigenous minorities to such abuses as forced evictions, destruction ofproperty, arbitrary arrests, kidnapping, torture, and murder.[27]Apart from ethnic or religious minorities,those who are most often victim of human rights violations by government forcesare young adults from poor backgrounds with little formal education. These areindividuals without access to political protection or influence. They are oftenaccused of involvement in criminal activities and arrested on what appears tobe flimsy evidence. Many have been connected to political movements, oftenbelonging to the youth wing of a party. Other frequent victims have beencritics of government policies, such as labor activists and journalists.The State of Emergency, January 2007–December2008On January 11, 2007, only weeks before parliamentary elections were to be held, PresidentIajuddin Ahmed, under pressure from the armed forces, declared a state ofemergency. The emergency had been preceded by a period of mass demonstrationsand street violence by opposition parties led by the Awami League alleging thatthe Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) was planning massive vote rigging.Fakhruddin Ahmed, a former World Bankemployee, was appointed as the new head of a non-party caretaker government,fundamental rights were suspended, and the armed forces were given lawenforcement duties. While a caretaker government has the limited constitutionalmandate to facilitate the election commission to hold free and fair electionsand to carry out routine functions of an interim government in periods betweenelections,[28]Chief Advisor Ahmed and his government interpreted this mandate broadly.The country's political culture had long beenmarked by personalized politics, politically motivated violence, lack ofpolitical accountability, weak institutions, and an ability of those in powerto operate outside the realms of the law. In its stated efforts to transformthat culture into one that meets the requirements of a "healthy and stabledemocratic system" based on the rule of law,[29]the interim government adopted dozens of ordinances and undertook a wide rangeof institutional reform initiatives, with no or little connection to itselection-related mandate.Some of these were considered positivesteps, such as the formal separation of the judiciary from the executive branchof government, and an ordinance for the establishment of a National HumanRights Commission. The Anti-Corruption Commission was empowered to initiate anunprecedented campaign to root out corruption and the influence of crime inelectoral politics. Hundreds of senior politicians, including the past twoprime ministers, Khaleda Zia of the BNP and Sheikh Hasina of the Awami League,and businesspersons were arrested on corruption-related and other grounds.However, the interim government's rule wasmarked by strict limitations on freedom of expression, assembly, andassociation. It also included mass arrests on apparently political grounds,[30]and removal of due process safeguards. Torture and extrajudicial executionscontinued. Between January 12, 2007, and October 11, 2008, according to the leading human rights organization Odhikar, at least 297 people wereextrajudicially killed by security forces.[31]To implement the anti-corruption agenda,the interim government and its Anti-Corruption Commission relied heavily on thearmed forces, and in particular the DGFI. As the military operated with littleor no civilian oversight and restraint on its powers, numerous human rightsviolations occurred, in particular targeting politicians and businesspersons.[32]Even though the interim governmentannounced radical reform efforts, there are few indications that it made anyheadway toward meeting its stated goals. The Anti-Corruption Commission clearlylacked the capacity to investigate economic crimes and produce credibleevidence. Instead, torture was used by the security forces to obtainconfessions and implicate third parties. A household survey issued byTransparency International Bangladesh (TIB) in June 2008 showed that theseverity of corruption had not diminished in comparison with previous years.[33]During 2008, most of the politicians and businesspersons arrested were releasedfrom detention as dialogue began between the political parties and the interimgovernment to prepare for elections.As corruption remains rampant and the nexusbetween politics and crime persists, the main legacy of the past two years isarguably a militarization of society. By ensuring the appointment of militaryofficers and other individuals to key positions in the bureaucracy and in stateand private enterprises, the military has managed to significantly strengthenits influence in both the public and private spheres.[34]The caretaker government appointed many senior military officials to civilianinstitutions so that the military could retain maximum influence after thereturn to an elected government. All of this has sent an unambiguous signal tothe political parties that the army will resist any attempts by an electedgovernment at limiting its powers, holding it accountable, and prosecuting itsofficers for human rights abuses and other illegal acts.The GovernmentElected in December 2008The interim government handed power to anelected government following parliamentary elections in December 2008 in whichthe Awami League won a large majority. In its election manifesto, the party announceda commitment to bring war criminals to justice and to put an end toextrajudicial killings.[35]The new government, headed by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, has reiterated its humanrights commitments. In February 2009, at the United Nations Human RightsCouncil's Universal Periodic Review, Foreign Minister Dipu Moni stated that Bangladesh had a policy of zero tolerance for extrajudicial killings, torture, and deathsin custody.[36]The prime minister stated a few days later that legal action would be takenagainst those responsible for extrajudicial killings.[37]III.The Security ForcesApart from a police force tasked withregular law enforcement duties and a military primarily responsible for defendingthe country against external threats, Bangladesh has traditionally had a numberof powerful paramilitary forces and influential military and civilianintelligence agencies with separate mandates and reporting lines. While some ofthese have roots that go back to the times of British and Pakistani rule,others are later creations that have been established to protect the interestsof the government of the day. Today, the following agencies are amongst themost important:Bangladesh Armed ForcesThe military consists of the BangladeshArmy, Bangladesh Navy, and Bangladesh Air Force, all established in 1971, asthe country broke away from Pakistan. These forces, which stand under thesupreme command of the president of Bangladesh, inherited their institutionalstructures from the Pakistan military and are governed by a legal frameworkestablished before independence. Their main duty is to defend the integrity andsovereignty of the country, but they also assist the civil administration, asnecessary, to uphold law and order.[38]The army has a reported strength of 200,000 personnel,[39]navy 24,000,[40] and air force 22,000.[41] They all have theirown intelligence agencies for gathering information in support of militaryoperations.The armed forces, and in particular thearmy, have traditionally exercised considerable direct and indirect politicalpower and influence. They have for extended periods of time governed thecountry under martial law or states of emergency. After the declaration ofemergency on January 11, 2007, the armed forces were involved in arbitraryarrest, torture of detainees, and several extrajudicial executions.[42]Among the victims were a number of students of Dhaka University who weredetained and severely beaten.[43]Bangladesh's military is one of the largestcontributors to United Nations peacekeeping forces:[44]To date, about 70,000 of its members have taken part in internationalpeacekeeping missions.[45]DirectorateGeneral of Forces IntelligenceDGFI is Bangladesh's most importantmilitary intelligence agency and operates subdivisions serving all branches ofthe armed forces. Established in 1977, under the rule of Gen. Ziaur Rahman, ithas been modelled after Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) agency. Itreports directly to the prime minister and maintains offices in all of thecountry's districts and sub-districts. According to the webpage bdmilitary.com,DGFI personnel are trained by intelligence agencies in the United States, United Kingdom, and Pakistan.[46]DGFI is widely regarded as a driving forcebehind the military-backed regime that took power on January 11, 2007, and exercised a central role in its anti-corruption campaign. It intimidated,arrested, and arbitrarily detained dozens of businesspersons, senior partyofficials, journalists, and academics and placed them in illegal detentionfacilities inside the military cantonment in Dhaka.[47]Many were physically and mentally tortured, often threatened with "crossfire,"to make forced confessions or implicate others in crimes.[48]Some businesspersons were also forced to pay substantial and arbitrary sums ofmoney to the state coffers or to individual DGFI accounts to escapeimprisonment or secure their release.[49]During much of the state of emergency, DGFIexercised control over media outlets. In May 2008, a group of editors andsenior journalists, with obvious reference to DGFI, expressed concern about"the increasing interference of a security agency in discharging professionalresponsibilities of both print and electronic media."[50]Lawyers defending some of the politicians accused of corruption made similarcomplaints.[51]NationalSecurity IntelligenceEstablished in 1972 through an executiveorder, National Security Intelligence (NSI), is the main civilian intelligenceagency in Bangladesh and is primarily responsible for monitoring politicalaffairs. Traditionally, the agency is headed by a major general of the Bangladesh army. NSI stands under the direct authority of the prime minister and its chiefis considered to be one of the closest advisors to the prime minister onsecurity and political affairs. Reports of torture in the custody of NSI goback to the 1970s.[52]During the state of emergency, Human Rights Watch found that NSI was, amongother things, involved in the harassment and arbitrary arrest of labouractivists.[53]Bangladesh PoliceBangladesh Police operates under theMinistry of Home Affairs. It was established in its current form in 1971 andhas a strength of about 120,000 personnel.[54]Its administrative structure, laws, and regulations go back to the Britishcolonial era, particularly the Police Act of 1861. On the international front,it is a member of Interpol[55]and a contributor to UN peacekeeping forces.[56]The police force has a well documentedhistory of frequent human rights abuses, including use of arbitrary arrests andtorture to extort money and extract confessions.[57]It is regarded as one of the most corrupt institutions in Bangladesh.[58]Since the trend of "crossfire" killings started in 2004, human rights workershave attributed several hundred killings to the force.[59]According to Odhikar, the police were involved in 135 killings during the stateof emergency.[60]Several officers alleged to be responsiblefor human rights abuses have been sent on United Nations missions.[61]The need for police reform is recognized bysenior officers. In August 2008, Nur Mohammed, the inspector general of police,in reference to the law of 1861, stated, "This Act is very good for exercisingcontrol, but not for service and development."[62]RapidAction BattalionThe Rapid Action Battalion is aparamilitary elite force that became operational in mid-2004 with a mission to"prevent crime and apprehend criminals."[63]It has a total strength of roughly 9,000 personnel and is made up of staffseconded mainly from the armed forces and the police, but also from otherservices. While the force is under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of HomeAffairs and has civilian law enforcement duties, its legal foundation is partlymilitary in nature and most of its senior officers come from the army.By the end of 2008, more than 550 personshad reportedly been extrajudicially killed by the force since it wasestablished. Of these, 173 had been killed in 2007 and 2008 during theemergency.[64]BangladeshRiflesBangladesh Rifles (BDR), set up in itscurrent form in 1972, is a paramilitary force primarily responsible for bordersecurity. It is also tasked with assisting military and civilian authorities,and is often used for riot control. It operates under the Ministry of Home Affairs.The force currently has 67,000 personnel.[65]Most of its mid- and high-level commanders have traditionally been secondedfrom the armed forces.[66]BDR has occasionally engaged incross-border skirmishes with the Indian Border Security Forces (BSF), resultingin civilian injuries and deaths on both sides of the India-Bangladesh border.[67]It has on several occasions been accused of using excessive force in breakingup demonstrations.[68]In August 2006, together with police, BDR forces opened fire on peopledemonstrating against the establishment of an open coal mine in Dinajpurdistrict, killing five and injuring about 100.[69]Between January 12, 2007, and October 11, 2008, the force allegedly unlawfully killedthree persons and injured others.[70]Ansarand Village Defence PartyThe "voluntary forces," Ansar and VDP(Village Defence Party), are combined under the Ministry of Home Affair's Ansarand VDP Directorate.[71]The forces have the stated mission of ensuring safety and security in ruralBangladesh and contributing to socioeconomic development, and work underoperational control of the army during emergency and war. They are divided intothree basic components: Ansar Bahini, Battalion Ansar, and VDP.[72]Ansar Bahini is said to have a company of100 men and a platoon of 32 women in every sub-district, as well as a platoonof 32 persons in every union of the country. Battalion Ansar is made up of 35male battalions and one female battalion. Many of these are deployed in theChittagong Hill Tracts and used for counterinsurgency operations. The VDP ispresent in every village of the country and is said to have a total strength ofabout 5.6 million people, of whom 50 percent are women. There is an urbanversion of VDP called the Town Defence Party.[73]CoastGuardBangladesh Coast Guard, established in1994, stands under the authority of the Ministry of Home Affairs and has theduty to control and protect national maritime interests.[74]During the state of emergency, the force was allegedly responsible for five unlawfulkillings.[75]IV.Key Cases of Impunity the New Government Should AddressBelow are 11 cases of grave human rightsviolations that exemplify the pattern of impunity that exists in Bangladesh. These cases have all previously been highlighted by Human Rights Watch, otherinternational nongovernmental organizations, domestic human rights groups,diplomats, and the media. While in many of these cases the abuses have beendocumented in detail, less has been reported about the outcome of efforts to securejustice.While we could describe hundreds of cases,these cases, which occurred between 1996 and 2008, were selected because of theconsiderable public attention they have received. This public attention putstrong pressure on the authorities to investigate and prosecute thoseresponsible, yet they failed to do so. Action now to address them could go along way toward gaining public confidence that impunity will end and the ruleof law will prevail.The newly elected government led by SheikhHasina Wazed has the opportunity to ensure that victims or family members inthese and other cases receive an effective remedy and that those responsibleare brought to trial. Before the December 2008 elections, political parties hadcommitted to reform and effective protection of human rights. The first step shouldbe a determined effort to end impunity. Transparent investigation andprosecution of those responsible for serious violations will serve as effectivedeterrence to future abuses.The "Disappearance" ofKalpana ChakmaAccording to reports by domestic NGOs andwitnesses, in the early hours of June 12, 1996, a group of armed men arrived atthe family home of Kalpana Chakma in Lallyaghona village in Rangamati districtof the Chittagong Hill Tracts. They entered her home by force, tied the handsof Chakma and her two brothers, blindfolded them, and took them away. Chakma'smother and her sister-in-law, who were also staying in the house, were leftbehind. The brothers escaped, but Kalpana Chakma remains missing.[76]Chakma and her two brothers were taken to alake a short distance from the house, where the two brothers managed to escapeunhurt even though their captors shot at them. As Chakma's younger brother,Kalicharan, was running for his life, he says he heard her crying out,"Brother, brother, save me."[77]Kalicharan has stated that he recognizedthree of the captors: Lieutenant Ferdous, a commander of Kojoichari army camp,and two members of the Village Defence Party, Nurul Haque and Salah Ahmed.[78]When Kalicharan, accompanied by the Union Parishad (elected local governmentbody) chairperson, went to the nearby army camp the morning after her abductionto determine Chakma's whereabouts and secure her release, he says he wasthreatened by military personnel. Her other brother, Khudiram, went the sameday to the police in Baghaichari and requested they file a First InformationReport (FIR).[79]According to the prominent human rightsorganization Ain O Salish Kendra, the First Information Report, which was readout to ASK staff by the police, does not mention the involvement of the army orthe fact that Kalicharan had identified three of the abductors.[80]ASK reported in July 1996 that it feared that the police may intentionally haveomitted vital information to protect the army.[81]Chakma, a women's rights activist, was wellaware of the dangers she was facing. She was the organizing secretary of theHill Women's Federation, an organization working in the Chittagong Hill Tractson the rights of women belonging to ethnic minority groups. She also campaignedfor an independent candidate in the parliamentary elections that took place thesame day as her abduction.Two months before she was abducted, shewrote in a letter to Shaikat Dewan, a member of Pahari Chhatra Parishad (theGreater Chittagong Hill Tracts Hill Students' Council), saying, "We are in goodhealth. But I feel unsure. Something terrible might happen any moment. I amvery worried."[82]She also wrote in the letter that an army officer came to Lallyaghona village,burnt down nine homes, and beat up night guards.The authorities shortly after the abductionpresented different and contradictory theories as to what happened. They firstproposed that her disappearance was related to a "love story," and then that itwas staged by Chakma herself or her allies for political reasons.[83]A little known NGO called the Bangladesh Mahabodhikar Commission claimed inAugust 1996 that Kalpana Chakma had been found in Tripura in India, and that her mother had been in contact with her.[84]At a press conference a few days later, Chakma's mother stated that the reportwas a "blatant lie."[85]On August 6, 2004, Mithun Chakma, KalpanaChakma's friend, was picked up by the army when he was giving a speech at aPahari Chhatra Parishad rally. He was taken to Khagrachari army camp, where hewas severely beaten. He said that his torturers said to him, "The Kalpanathing, well we did that, but nothing happened, right?"[86]In late August 1996, the government formed athree-member committee to investigate the "disappearance" and identify thoseresponsible. The report of the committee has not been made public despiterepeated requests from human rights workers and others. No charges were everfiled based on the findings of the committee.[87]Human Rights Watch urges the government andits relevant authorities to:Ensure that the report ofthe committee established to investigate Kalpana Chakma's "disappearance" ismade public.Bring to justice in a fairtrial those responsible for Kalpana Chakma's "disappearance."Ensure that all witnessesare protected from possible reprisals.The Torture of Debu PrasaddasOn August 9, 1999, while taking photographsof the police in connection with a local transport union strike near Chittagongport, Debu Prasaddas, a photojournalist with the Bangladesh Observernewspaper and Agence France-Presse, was attacked by several police officers whobeat him with sticks and rifle butts.Prasaddas was at the office of the truckdrivers' union, monitoring the growing tension between transport workers whointended to call a strike and others who wanted to prevent such an action. Whenthe police arrived around 10:30 a.m. and started to ransack the office wherethe pro-strike faction was based, Prasaddas began taking photographs. Accordingto Prasaddas, seven or eight police officers, apparently angered by thepresence of a photographer, took hold of him, threw him to the ground, andstarted beating him with their rifle butts, hitting him with sticks andstamping on his legs with their boots even as he kept shouting, "I am areporter, I am a reporter."When the beating stopped a few minuteslater, Prasaddas was left with severe bruises on his back, legs, and around thewaist. His left arm, with which he had been covering his head, was fractured.Shop owners took Prasaddas to the hospital where over 100 reporters gathered insolidarity. He was transferred to his home the same night, as both Prasaddasand his colleagues felt that his safety could not be guaranteed at thehospital.Shortly after the incident, according to Prasaddas,the police started to request that he not file a complaint against thoseresponsible for the assault. In exchange, the police offered to pay his medicalbills. The Chittagong police commissioner also offered to assign a policeofficer to ensure Prasaddas's safety.Nevertheless, Prasaddas made severalattempts to file a complaint with the Port police station. Among those heaccused was the station's officer in charge, Sub-Inspector Zafrullah, who,according to Prasaddas, ordered that he be beaten. He had also identified Sub-InspectorMd. Rafique, who explicitly ordered his subordinates to confiscate Prasaddas'scamera. However, the officers at the police station made various excuses andrefused to register the complaint.With the help of the journalists' union, Prasaddasinstead filed a case with the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate Court in Chittagongon August 30. A magisterial inquiry into the incident was eventually carriedout.However, Prasaddas says that he waspressured into withdrawing his case. He and the police signed a "contract" inwhich he agreed to not pursue the matter and the police apologized and assuredthat he would never be subjected to the same treatment again. "If I had notcompromised I would have been harassed and tortured," he told Human RightsWatch.[88]Despite the medical care Prasaddas receivedat Chittagong Medical Hospital and at the Bangladesh Rehabilitation Centre forTrauma Victims he continued to suffer "pain and occasional restricted movementof the left hand."[89] He had to travel to India for further medical treatment to fullyrestore the functioning of his injured hand.The assault on Prasaddas receivedinternational attention. Amnesty International highlighted the case and two UnitedNations special rapporteurs expressed their concern in letters to thegovernment.[90]The rapporteurs havereceived no response to their letters.Prasaddas has suffered attacks in thecourse of journalistic work on several other occasions. The United Nations specialrapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinionand expression, in a 2002 report, drew attention to this fact by stating that Prasaddashad been "subjected to ill-treatment by police on several occasions during assignmentin connection with his work as a journalist."[91]No one has ever been punished for theassault on Prasaddas. Sub-Inspector Zafrullah was transferred to Dhaka in earlyJanuary 2000 and was subsequently sent on a United Nations peacekeepingmission.Human Rights Watch urges the government andits relevant authorities to:Make public theinvestigation report of the inquiry commission.Prosecute and dismiss fromservice those responsible for the torture of Debu Prasaddas.Ensure that all witnessesare protected from possible reprisals.The Death of SumonAhmed MajumderOn July 15, 2004, Sumon Ahmed Majumder, a23-year-old garment trader and activist in the Awami League's youth wing, theJubo League, was arrested by members of RAB at his family home in Tongi. Hedied approximately 10 hours later, apparently from wounds sustained in custody.Majumder was vice president of the JuboLeague's ward No. 10 in Tongi. He was also a witness to the May 7, 2004, murderof Awami League parliamentarian and well-known trade union leader Ahsan UllahMaster.[92]According to members of Majumder's family,a policeman identified as Assistant Sub-Inspector Monir from Tongi and a BNPactivist named Abdul Ali-the brother of one of the 22 men later sentenced todeath for the murder of Ahsan Ullah Master-came to their house around 2:30 p.m.on July 15. Majumder's mother told Human Rights Watch that Sub-Inspector Moniradvised Majumder to end his political activities with the Awami League and jointhe BNP. If he did, Abdul Ali would pay him 2,000 taka per day (about US$30).Majumder refused to switch sides. Monir warned him that his decision wouldcause him big trouble.[93]Around 3 p.m., shortly after Monir and Abdul Ali had left the house, a man who identified himself as Sub-InspectorShajahan from RAB in Uttara arrived with a large group of armed men, Majumder'smother said. They arrested Majumder and took him to a minibus waiting nearby.The force also picked up two other men from the area: Akbar Hossain Pinku, age20, and Majumder's cousin, known as Lokman, age 22. All three men wereblindfolded.[94]The minubus drove to the RAB-1 headquartersin Uttara, where, according to a witness, RAB officials beat the three menrepeatedly with large batons and asked them who had killed Assan Ullah Master.At one point, some RAB members got a large electric drill with a bit as thickas an index finger. An eyewitness told Human Rights Watch that he saw how theydrilled into the side of Majumder's right calf and put live wires on the wound.[95]Following hours of torture, the three menwere taken to Tongi police station by RAB officials led by Sub-InspectorShajahan. However, the officer in charge at the station, Sub-Inspector Rafique,refused to accept them into his custody because of their poor physical state. RABtook them to the Tongi Hospital instead.[96]Hospital records viewed by the human rightsgroup ASK showed that Majumder was treated around 10:30 p.m. for assault and shock, a deep laceration on the right leg, and swelling on differentparts of the body.[97]Around 11:20 p.m. the three men werebrought back to the police station with medical certificates. Sub-InspectorRafique told the human rights organization Odhikar that he learned soon afterthat Majumder's condition had worsened, and, therefore, ordered that he be sentback to the hospital again. At 1:30 a.m. he was informed that Majumder haddied.[98]When Majumder's father saw the body a few hourslater, he observed a deep cut under one of the knees. Under one foot he sawwounds that looked as if they were made by an electric drill. There were deepholes in several places on the legs as well as a bruise on the right cheek.[99]Majumder's uncle, Abdus Salam, prepared thebody for funeral. He told Human Rights Watch that Majumder had deep wounds onhis legs, shins, and calves. He had a 15-centimeter cut on the back of hisneck, although that might have been from the autopsy. He also saw bruises allover the body, in particular on the upper parts of the arms.[100]The authorities have provided different andcontradictory explanations as to what happened to Majumder. A police reportexamined by ASK said that Majumder was injured while resisting arrest.[101]In a public statement RAB said, however, that Majumder was killed when an angrymob beat him after he was caught collecting extortion money with twoaccomplices from a local businessman.[102]The two men arrested at the same time as Majumderwere charged with extortion, but acquitted on appeal and released in July 2005.In late 2006, Human Rights Watch raised thekilling of Majumder in a report about RAB entitled "Judge, Jury, andExecutioner: Torture and Extrajudicial Killings by Bangladesh's Elite SecurityForce."[103]In a September 2007 response to the report, RAB maintained that Majumder wasattacked by a mob, but added that the mob beat him to death after he walkedinto a trap organized by the law enforcement agency.[104]After Majumder's death his father receivedanonymous warnings not to file a complaint. He nevertheless tried to file acase with the local police, but a police official named Tharikul Islam told himthat no complaints could be filed against RAB.[105]At this writing, no RAB members are knownto have been punished for Majumder's death and no investigating authority hasever been in contact with his family.[106]Noone is known to have been punished for the death of Majumder.Human Rights Watch urges the government andits relevant authorities to:Institute an independentand impartial investigation into the torture and death of Sumon Ahmed Majumderand make the outcome of the investigation public.Bring to justice in a fairtrial those found to be responsible for the torture and death of Sumon AhmedMajumder.Ensure that all witnessesare protected from possible reprisals.The Death of Abul KalamAzad SumonOn May 30, 2005, RAB forces arrested three young men in Dhaka, including Abul Kalam Azad Sumon, a professional accountantand an active member of the Awami League's student wing. He was taken to theRAB-3 headquarters. The next morning his family found him dead in the back of avan at the local police station.[107]Sumon and two of his colleagues werearrested shortly after 9 p.m. by RAB officers at their workplace, a local cableoperator called Lorel International in Dhaka's Khilgaon district. The three menwere handcuffed, placed in a vehicle, and taken away. The RAB offices explainedto others who had gathered during the arrest that they had been searching forthe men in relation to hidden arms.[108]Sumon's parents started looking for theirson as soon as they heard that he had been taken away. Around 2:30 a.m. theyarrived at the RAB-3 compound. They were not allowed to enter, but could seetheir son sitting in the back of a white minibus. According to his father,Sumon was blindfolded and looked only semi-conscious. A RAB-3 official toldthem that Sumon would be transferred to the Khilgaon police station in themorning. The parents waited outside until the minibus, with Sumon inside, leftthe compound a few minutes later.Around 5 a.m. Abdul Hakim, Sumon's father,went to the police station, where he saw his son's body lying in the back of apolice van. In the evening, the body was handed over to the family. Abdul Hakimsaid that there were several bullet wounds to the chest, as well as signs oftorture.[109]A relative of Sumon who was present whenthe autopsy was conducted at Dhaka Medical College and who later preparedSumon's body for funeral told Human Rights Watch that he saw severe bruises onSumon's legs, under his feet, and on his back. He saw a gash on his forehead,and the cheek bones were broken on both sides. There were six bullet wounds inhis chest and upper abdomen, and two more in the right arm.[110]Human Rights Watch viewed a copy of the magistrate'sbody exam report which was largely consistent with the relative's claim,reporting six bullet wounds, a half-inch cut above the nose, and a quarter-inchcut above the left eyebrow.However, a day after his arrest, May 31,2005, RAB issued a statement saying that in a fierce gun battle around 3:30that morning, RAB forces had shot and killed a notorious criminal named GoailyaSumon, who had murdered two men in Khilgaon. RAB struck the victim with bulletsthree times in the head and chest when he tried to escape the scene during ashootout.[111]It is significant that RAB could make this claim despite the fact that therewere witnesses to Sumon's arrest and to his presence in the custody of the RAB.Some media reports suggested that Goailya Sumon and Abul Kalam Azad Sumon weretwo different people, with the former being the criminal, and that RAB hadarrested-and killed-the wrong person.[112]After Sumon's death, his parents attemptedto file a complaint with the Khilgaon police station, but officers at thestation refused to register the case.[113]OnJuly 6, 2006, Sumon's mother instead filed a case with the Dhaka court against then-StateMinister Lutfozzaman Babar, then-Home Secretary Safar Raj Hossain, several RABofficers, and a leader of Jatiyatabadi Chhatra Dal (the BNP's student wing). Inher complaint, Sumon's mother said that her son had switched support from theBNP to the Awami League. This had angered Mirza Abbas, then minister of public worksand member of parliament for the Khilgaon area. The judge ordered a judicialinquiry into Sumon's death.[114]However, no inquiry is known to have taken place.According to Abdul Hakim, during the firstyear after Sumon's death, the family received repeated threats from visitors incivilian clothes, and anonymous phone calls. They were warned against pursuingthe case and told they would face the same fate as their son if they did. On March 18, 2006, Sumon's father said, the police detained him without explanation and beathim with a large baton. Four days later he showed Human Rights Watch dark andlarge bruises on both legs and the right arm.[115]There haveallegedly also been attempts at buying the family's silence. In May 2008, AbdulHakim told Human Rights Watch, "Before January 11, 2007 [when the state ofemergency was declared], people from Mirza Abbas's side tried to negotiate withus, offered us huge sums of money, but I declined that. After January 11,everything stopped. Though Mirza Abbas is in jail, he was not shown arrested inmy son's case."[116]The other two men picked up with Sumon werereleased without charge after having spent about a month in detention.Sumon's family has not stopped searchingfor justice. "I check with my lawyer every month," Abdul Hakim said.[117]Human Rights Watch urges the government andits relevant authorities to:Ensure implementation of the judicialinquiry, with full participation of Abul Kalam Azad Sumon's family.Bring to justice in a fairtrial those found to be responsible for the torture and death of Abul KalamAzad Sumon.Ensure that all witnessesare protected from possible reprisals.The Death of Md.Masudur RahmanOn March 8, 2006, RAB forces in Dhakaarrested Md. Masudur Rahman (known as Iman Ali), a businessman and local leaderof the Jubo League. His body was found the next morning in a field near hishome with bullet wounds and signs of torture.[118]According to Rahman's uncle, who witnessedthe arrest, Rahman was leaving the Dhaka court around noon on March 8 when aman with a black beard, wearing a white punjabi (long shirt) and a cap, told Rahmanthat he had to come with him. Six or seven other men then gathered and Rahmanreluctantly went with them into a white minibus parked nearby.[119]Suspecting that the men were securitypersonnel in plainclothes, and concerned for Rahman's safety, his uncle andother family members visited several police and RAB stations. They coulddiscover no information about the apparent arrest. Around 6 a.m. the next day the family was informed by factory workers who came to their house in Savar,northwest of Dhaka, that Rahman had been killed and that RAB forces wereguarding his body near the Panna Textile Mill, located about a kilometer fromhis home.[120]The family went to the mill, where theyfound Rahman's dead body lying face up in a nearby field. Nazrul Islam, Rahman'sbrother, did not inspect the body closely but he saw bullet wounds in thechest, and blood on the shirt.[121]Others who saw the body gave a consistent account. "There were three bullethits in Rahman's chest, but surprisingly none of the bullets went through theshirt he was wearing," an unnamed security guard at the textile mill who sawthe body told the press.[122]Human Rights Watch interviewed a witness who saw the body. He said that, inaddition to the bullet wounds, Rahman had no skin on the left side of his back,as if he had been burned. His fingers looked broken and swollen and he had ahole in his right big toe.[123]The police took the body to the DhakaMedical College Hospital and returned it to the family later that day. Whilepreparing the body for funeral, Nazrul Islam said, the family saw three bulletwounds in Rahman's chest, as well as other wounds that they attributed totorture. The body had no skin on the back, shoulders, and part of the rightarm. There were holes in the tips of both big toes, as if someone had hammered ina nail. The left cheek was black and blue around the eye and ear. Except forthe thumbs, all of the fingers were swollen and bruised.RAB issued a press release giving its sideof the story. Acting on a tip-off, a team of RAB-4 had arrested the "top terrorIman Ali" around 2:15 p.m. on March 8, the statement said. Duringinterrogation, Iman Ali confessed to having a large cache of arms andammunition and that his accomplices were preparing "some major kind of crime." Thestatement continued:A team of RAB-4, onMarch 9, 2006, around 4:35, with Iman Ali, went near Akrain Panna Textiles Millin Birulia Union under Savar Thana when a group of unidentified criminalsstarted indiscriminately shooting at RAB members who, in self defense and inorder to save public property, started firing back. At one point while theshootout was going on terrorist Iman Ali tried to use the chance and escape,thus he came in the line of fire of both the shooting parties. After theexchange of fire was over, RAB searched the area and saw Iman Ali bullet riddenand dead.[124]The reason for Rahman's apparent murderremains unknown, but it is possibly due to his political activity in the AwamiLeague's youth wing, and in particular his advocacy on behalf of poor villagersengaged in a land dispute.[125]One person interviewed by Human Rights Watch said that a private company hadplaced a bounty of 3 million taka (about US$45,000) on Rahman's head.[126]Rahman's family tried to file a complaintabout his death with the Savar police station, but the police refused to acceptthe complaint, Nazrul Islam said. Instead, Nazrul Islam brought charges againstthen-State Minister Lutf0zzaman Babar, his cousin Mirza Hafizur Rahman, andseveral RAB officers.[127]At this writing, the case is pending before the High Court Division of theSupreme Court. In September 2008, the family's lawyer told Human Rights Watchthat he had no hope that any of those responsible would be held to accountanytime soon.[128]Rahman's family is continuing to receivethreats. In May 2008, some of the accused came to the area where Rahman used tolive and, according to a witness, looked for his brother. The witness recountedthat the accused said, "We killed one of the brothers, now we will kill theother."[129]Human Rights Watch urges the government andits relevant authorities to:Investigate, identify, andbring to justice in a fair trial those found to be responsible for the tortureand death of Md. Masudur Rahman (known as Iman Ali).Ensure that all witnessesare protected from possible reprisals.The Torture of ShahidulIslamOn January 27, 2007, soldiers from the Tala army camp in Shatkhira district arrested, detained, and tortured Shahidul Islam,the director of the well established social development organization Uttaran.[130]According to eyewitnesses, army officialsapproached Islam at the Uttaran training center at around 10:30 a.m. Shortlyafterwards two military vehicles with over a dozen additional soldiers arrived.Islam was taken to the nearby Tala military camp, where his colleagues, localcitizens, and journalists quickly gathered outside.One eyewitness told Human Rights Watch thathe saw Islam being questioned by camp commander Major Mehedi Hasan. Islam wasasked about Uttaran's sources of funding and about his visits to an area whereMaoist groups operate. The eyewitness then heard the major order some soldiersto "take him inside." The eyewitness crept to the back to see where Islam hadbeen taken. He told us:I saw that they tookhim to the bathroom. I could hear them beating him. I could hear the sound ofsticks. When they brought him out, his shirt was covered in blood. He could notwalk and had to be carried. I think he was unconscious.[131]Islam himself, who has only partialmemories of what happened, told Human Rights Watch:At the army camp I wasblindfolded and my hands were tied. Then they started beating me withstick-like objects-I am not sure since I could not see anything. The beatingwent on for a long time and soon I became totally disoriented. At one stage Ifell unconscious. When I came back to my senses, I found myself in a policestation where a doctor carried out medical checkups.[132]According to the human rights organizationHotline Bangladesh, Islam was unable to move by the time he arrived at the localpolice station. He suffered from severe pain in his throat and was unable tospeak properly. There were multiple bruises all over his body, but especiallyon his legs and back. Both sides of his feet were dark.[133]On January 28, Islam was taken to the districtprison in Satkhira town, where he was treated at the prison hospital. Thefollowing day he was transferred to the general hospital in Satkhira town. Hesuffered from low blood pressure and a foot fracture. About a week later, Islamwas sent back to prison to await trial on several charges.As the news of Islam's arrest and torturespread, Uttaran's development partners took immediate action to try to ensurehis safety, and at least one foreign diplomatic delegation in Dhaka raisedtheir concerns with the law advisor in the military-backed interim government.[134]Among those who acted on the case were the United Nations special representativeof the secretary-general on the situation of human rights defenders, the specialrapporteur on torture, and the chairperson-rapporteur of the Working Group onArbitrary Detention, who sent the interim government an urgent appeal on February 5, 2007. In a reply, the Mission of Bangladesh to the United Nations in Genevastated that Islam was arrested by the security joint forces on the basis ofspecific information about his links to political party activities, bannedduring the state of emergency. It further said that Islam was interrogatedaccording to existing procedure. The allegation of torture was rejected.[135]On August 21, 2007, Islam was granted bailby the High Court Division of the Supreme Court. Later all charges against himwere dismissed.At this writing, no investigating authorityhas ever been in contact with Islam to hear his side of what took place in thearmy camp, and Human Rights Watch is not aware of anyone being punished orsanctioned in connection with the case.[136]Human Rights Watch urges the government andits relevant authorities to:Institute an independentand impartial investigation into the torture of Shahidul Islam, with the fullparticipation of the victim, and make the outcome of the investigation public.Bring to justice thosefound to be responsible for the torture.Ensure that all witnessesare protected from possible reprisals.The Death of KhabirulIslam DulalOn February 20, 2007, navy officersarrested Khabirul Islam Dulal, a 32-year-old ward commissioner and leader ofJubo Dal, BNP's youth wing, in Bhola district. Dulal was beaten in front ofseveral witnesses and taken to a nearby naval base where he died the same day.According to witnesses interviewed by HumanRights Watch, media reports, and investigations by human rights organizations,colleagues witnessed the arrest of Dulal around noon at his office in CharFashion Municipality by navy personnel under the command of Lt. SM Reza.[137]According to his wife and father, Dulal wasthen blindfolded, accused of possessing illegal arms, and taken to the navycamp where he was stripped of his clothes and beaten. A large group of people thatgathered outside the camp was not allowed to enter, but could see from theoutside what was going on inside.[138]Still blindfolded and with his arms tiedbehind his back, Dulal was then taken to his aunt's house and after that, at around3 p.m. to his own home. Dulal's wife Jesmin Akter Khuku was at home at the time.She told Human Rights Watch:When the navy officers came inside ourcourtyard, they started kicking and hitting my husband with their sticks. Oneof the soldiers told me that he would not survive. When I tried to run over tohim, they hit me as well. They searched our house at the same time. They brokeour furniture and took 50,000 taka [US$725] and gold worth 150,000 taka.[139]According to an investigation report byOdhikar, Dulal's two young children, who were also present at the time, wereslapped by the soldiers and held at gunpoint.[140]When the search was completed, Dulal was pushedand forced to run, still blindfolded and with his hands tied behind his back,to a nearby house belonging to Nazimuddin Alam, a former BNP member ofparliament. The caretaker of the house was reportedly beaten as he tried tointervene when the soldiers broke into the house and started vandalizing it intheir search for weapons. None were found.[141]Dulal was then dragged to the next doorhouse where he was again beaten and the soldiers requested chilli powder, ricehusks, and salt, which he was forced to drink. He was also thrown into a pond.[142]In a state of unconsciousness, he was carried to the navy officers' car andtaken to their base.[143]Odhikar has reported that navy officers informed the organization that Dulal fellinto a pond and drowned while trying to escape.[144]When Dulal was taken to the Char Fashionhealth complex at around 10:30 p.m., he had been dead for some time. A doctorwho examined Dulal's body told Odhikar that there were large amounts of waterin the stomach, that the throat had been distended and that toe and fingernails were missing. He also noticed that the body, including the testicles, wasseverely bruised and that pieces of skin were falling off. According toOdhikar, the doctor also said that there were clear marks from the ropes thathad been tied around Dulal's wrists.[145]Photographs examined by Human Rights Watch showed wounds under Dulal'sfeet, and bruises and cuts on his legs and arms.While there are various theories as to why Dulalwas tortured and killed, his family members believe that his death is relatedto a land dispute they had with a local resident with military connections. Thisperson had allegedly filed a complaint with the navy base.[146]On February 21, Dulal's family tried tofile a report at the local police station, but the police refused to receivetheir complaint. When they turned directly to the deputy police commissioner inBhola, they were told that he was unable to take any action against the jointforces.[147]Eventually a case was instead filed with the magistrate court againstLieutenant Reza and 16 others.[148]The family has tried, without success, to obtain a copy of the post mortem examreport.[149]At this writing, no one has been prosecutedfor the torture and death of Dulal and Human Rights Watch is not aware of anydisciplinary actions being taken against anyone involved in the case. Dulal'sfather told Human Rights Watch that he had written letters to the police, ChiefAdvisor Fakhruddin Ahmed, the navy chief, and human rights organizationsinforming them of what happened to his son and requesting that they help himfind justice. He has never received any reply from the authorities and noinvestigating authorities have ever been in contact with him.[150]Dulal's family members have told HumanRights Watch that they have been threatened and warned against pursuing thecase.[151]According to Odhikar, local journalists were told by navy officers to onlywrite that Dulal died while trying to escape, and that they would meet the samefate as him if they disclosed any other information.[152]In March 2007, an Odhikar investigatorquestioning navy personnel was told by Lieutenant Reza that he would have himarrested as a terrorist.[153]On May 3, Odhikar's acting director Nasiruddin Elam was summoned to the NavyHeadquarters where he says he was briefly detained, threatened by Navyintelligence Director Jobaer Ahmed and DGFI officers, and accused of being anenemy of the state. Nasiruddin Elam told Human Rights Watch that theintelligence director also said that it was the duty of the armed forces tokill him.[154]A few weeks after Khabirul Islam Dulal'sdeath, Lt. SM Reza and other navy officers were transferred from the CharFashion area.[155]Human Rights Watch urges the government andits relevant authorities to:Institute an independentand impartial investigation into the death of Khabirul Islam Dulal and make theoutcome of the investigation public.Bring to justice in a fairtrial those found to be responsible for the torture and death of Khabirul IslamDulal.Ensure that all witnessesare protected from possible reprisals.The Death of CholesRitchilOn March 18, 2007, a group of soldiers ledby Maj. Toufique Elahi arrested Choles Ritchil, a political leader of theindigenous Mandi tribe, and three of his companions and brought them to an armycamp in Modhupur district, where they were allegedly beaten. The following day thefamily received his dead body.[156]According to investigations by NGOs, mediareports, and witnesses interviewed by Human Rights Watch, at around 1:30 p.m. men in plainclothes stopped and surrounded the vehicle in which Ritchil, PratapJambil, Tuhin Hadima, and Piren Simsang were travelling on their way home froma wedding. The four men were forced into a waiting van and taken to Kakraidharmy camp where soldiers started beating Ritchil and asking him about possessingillegal weapons.[157]An eyewitness interviewed by Human RightsWatch described the treatment of Ritchil:They started beating Choleswith two canes and poured hot water on his back. Then they applied a mixture ofgreen pepper and salt on his bruises and cuts...A soldier startedpulling off Choles's right toenail with the pliers. Choles started screaminglike a beast and told the officer that he did not have any illegal arms...Choles was thenstripped naked and a soldier administered the pliers on his penis andtesticles. Another soldier lit a candle and started dropping hot wax on thearea. Choles was by that point nearly unconscious and was moaning in pain. Thena young second lieutenant who spoke in Chittagongian dialect came into the roomand started caning Choles himself.[158]Hadima and Simsang were released around 6:20p.m. and were told to come back to collect Ritchil's body.[159]Later the same evening the soldiers decided to take Ritchil and Jambil to thehospital. It is likely that Ritchil was already dead at that stage.[160]The family received Ritchil's body thefollowing day.[161]Jambil went into hiding after having spent some time in hospital.[162]The police officer in charge of Modhupurpolice station told journalists that"acting on a tip, the joint forces raidedMaguntinagar Sunday [March 18] evening. Sensing the presence of the jointforces, Ritchil tried to escape and fell to the ground and lost consciousness."[163]He further said that the joint forces rushed Ritchil to Modhupur Upazila HealthComplex where he died at 8:15 p.m.Members of the army had a slightlydifferent explanation for Ritchil's death. They said that he died of heartfailure while fleeing arrest. The initial autopsy report said that he died ofnatural causes.[164]A week after Ritchil's death, Human RightsWatch interviewed two relatives who had washed and prepared the body forfuneral. Both gave identical descriptions of torture marks seen on the deadbody. According to one testimony:His eyes had beenplucked out and replaced with artificial "marble eyes." His testicles weresmashed into pulp. Both arms were dislocated, the palms of both hands weresmashed, the fingernails of the right hand had been removed, while thethumbnail on the left hand had also been removed. His fingers were broken…there were bruises and cuts all over the body especially on the back. The skinon the back appeared burnt and there were deep cuts under both knees, and nailsmissing from his toes.[165]Ritchil's family has repeatedly triedfiling a case against the army officers. However, indigenous leaders inModhupur and relatives interviewed by Human Rights Watch said that the policeand local administration have refused to record their complaint, as the policehave already filed a case of "unnatural death."[166]A witness to the arrest and torture of Ritchiltold Human Rights Watch that the army officers did not wear any nametags andthat the only person he could identify with certainty was Major Toufique.However, he said he picked up a few names the soldiers used while addressingeach other, including Sadaat, Jamal, Sajal, Kaiser, and Nuru.[167]Human rights defenders and journalistsreported widely on the torture and murder of Ritchil.[168]The case has also been taken up by diplomats based in Dhaka who raised it withthe interim government.On May 5, 2007, the government formed a one-member judicial investigation commission.[169]Family members, human rights workers, and local activists testified before thecommissioner.[170]On June 10, 2007, Ritchil's body was exhumed and sent for an autopsy toMymensingh Medical College Hospital.However, the report of the commission wasnot made public, nor were family and friends informed of its findings.[171]One relative told Human Rights Watch:The autopsy orforensic report was never made public. We tried several times to obtain copiesbut failed due to pressure from different intelligence agencies on the hospitalauthorities. However, one person from the hospital claimed the reason given inthe report was that Choles died from a heart attack. Some people from theintelligence agencies also tried spreading this rumor in Modhupur.[172]As far as Human Rights Watch is aware, noone has been prosecuted in connection with the case. The government has saidthat four army personnel were given disciplinary sanctions, including dismissalfrom service and denial of promotion.[173]Maj. Toufique Elahi was allegedly transferred out of Modhupur shortly after theincident.[174]The military, together with the administrative authorities, have given thefamily compensation of 52,000 taka (approximately US$750), two sewing machines,kitchen items, and food.[175]Activists in Modhupur have been advised bythe local administration, intelligence agencies, and the army "not to doanything that tarnishes the image of the country."[176]HumanRights Watch urges the government and its relevant authorities to:Make public the report ofthe judicial investigation commission.Bring to justice in a fairtrial those found to be responsible for the torture and death of CholesRitchil.Ensure that all witnessesare protected from possible reprisals.Make public the names ofthose who have received disciplinary sanctions for Choles Ritchil's death.Ensure that CholesRitchil's family are provided with a copy of the autopsy report.The Torture of Tasneem KhalilOn May 11, 2007, DGFI arrested Tasneem Khalil, a reporter for The Daily Star who also worked on projects for HumanRights Watch and was CNN's news representative in Bangladesh. Khalil was takento the DGFI headquarters inside the Dhaka cantonment and severely andrepeatedly beaten. Following massive media attention and interventions fromhuman rights organizations and Dhaka-based diplomats, Khalil was released 22hours later.According to Khalil and his wife, at around12:50 a.m., four or five men presenting themselves as being from the "joint forces"came to their apartment in central Dhaka. They started searching throughdocuments, papers, and a computer. When Khalil objected, one of the men pulled hisrevolver from its holster, pushed it against Khalil's lips and shouted, "Youare under arrest."Khalil was handcuffed and blindfolded andtaken to the DGFI headquarters. He was given a medical examination and placedin a soundproofed room that according to Khalil was equipped and designed fortorture. He was forced to provide information about his email accounts andpasswords. He went through several rounds of interrogation during which he wasthreatened that he would be killed, and was repeatedly punched in the head,poked in the stomach, and beaten on other parts of the body:Suddenly people on bothsides of me started brutally beating me with batons on the lower back, justbelow and next to my kidneys. The pain was excruciating...They started beatingme again. The senior officer took a baton and kept ramming it hard under mynavel and lower abdominal area. I was in severe pain. The beating and torture seemedto go on for an eternity.Khalil was forced to write a confessionadmitting that he was engaged in various activities against the interests ofthe state and the security forces. He also had to twice read out his confessionin front of a videocamera.As soon as the soldiers had left with Khalilin their custody, his wife called Human Rights Watch and CNN. The news of hisarrest spread quickly in the international media. Foreign diplomats raisedtheir concerns with government officials within hours of his arrest (a group ofdiplomats had a few days earlier been briefed about a number of threateningphone calls Khalil had received from individuals claiming to be from DGFI andRAB). Following negotiations, involving The Daily Star's editor MahfuzAnam, Khalil was released around 11 p.m. Before he was let go, he wasinstructed to not tell anyone about what had happened to him in custody and tonever write anything against the army or the government.Khalil immediately went into hiding.However, it took four weeks, and several meetings between foreign diplomats andleading representatives of the interim government and the armed forces, beforeDGFI agreed to return Khalil's passport and guarantee his safe passage out ofthe country. Khalil, his wife, and their infant son were granted asylum inSweden, where they currently live.On May 14, four United Nations specialprocedure mandate holders in a communication with the interim governmentexpressed concern that, "the arrest and detention of Mr Khalil might bedirectly related to his peaceful work in defence of human rights…" In lettersdated May 15 and October 31, 2007, the government informed that Khalil had beenbrought in for interrogation and that no information regarding discourteousbehavior toward him was reported.[177]In February 2008, Human Rights Watchreleased the report "The Torture of Tasneem Khalil: How the Bangladesh ArmyAbuses its Power under the State of Emergency,"[178]which contained a detailed statement from Khalil about the 22 hours he spent inthe custody of DGFI. The report received extensive international mediaattention. Due to the repressive media climate that prevailed at the time, itreceived almost no attention in Bangladesh.There has been no official inquiry into thearbitrary detention and torture of Khalil and no one has been reported as beingheld to account.Human Rights Watch urges the government andits relevant authorities to:Institute an independentand impartial investigation into the torture of Tasneem Khalil and make theoutcome of the investigation public.Bring to justice thosefound to be responsible for the torture.Ensure that all witnessesare protected from possible reprisals.The Torture of JahangirAlam AkashOn October 24, 2007, Jahangir Alam Akash, ajournalist and human rights activist, was arrested by RAB-5 officials and takento their headquarters where he was tortured and injured.According to Akash, a group of 10-12plainclothes RAB-5 officials under the command of Maj. Rashidul Hassan Rashidarrived at his home in Rajshahi at around 1:30 a.m. The men stated that theywere searching for illegal arms, but did not present a warrant. Theynevertheless entered the house, grabbed Akash, and started beating him in frontof his wife, children, and landlord. Handcuffed and with a black cloth over hishead, Akash was taken to the RAB-5 headquarters.[179]At the headquarters ropes were tied aroundhis wrists and he was suspended from the ceiling, still blindfolded. He wasquestioned about his reporting on RAB and beaten with bamboo canes, Akash toldHuman Rights Watch. After six hours, he was untied from the ceiling and givensome water to drink. He was then suspended again, beaten by Major Rashidhimself, and given electric shocks in his left leg and foot. At that point Akashlost consciousness.Around 11:30 a.m., Akash says he woke toMajor Rashid kicking and beating him. Akash realized that his legs werebleeding. At 2:30 p.m. he was taken to another room where he was photographedand fingerprinted.Later in the afternoon, Akash wastransferred to Boalia police station. Before being dropped off, RAB officerswarned him that "if you disclose anything about the torture we will crossfireyou." Around 7 p.m. he was taken to a Rajshahi court. No magistrate was presentat the court and the police decided to take him straight to prison. As Akash'sphysical state was such that he was unable to walk, he spent the following 10 daysat the prison hospital.[180]On November 19, Akash, who had been chargedwith extortion, was released on bail. He was treated at the BangladeshRehabilitation Centre for Trauma Victims until February 2008, as he was"suffering from various physical and psychological problems."[181]When Human Rights Watch interviewed Akash in July 2008, he still suffered frompain in his leg, and feared for his life.Prior to his arrest, Akash had on severaloccasions reported on the activities of RAB and had been warned by Major Rashidthat he would face retribution if he did not end this reporting.[182]United Nations special procedure mandate holders sent communications to thegovernment concerning this threat as well as the subsequent arrest and torture.In a response dated November 26, 2007, the government stated that Akash wasinvolved in toll collection, blackmail, and had a record of reporting false andfabricated stories. The government also claimed that he had started aninternational campaign to make the government refrain from taking lawful actionagainst him.[183]No investigation has been launched into thearrest, detention, and torture of Akash. Maj. Rashidul Hassan Rashid wasreportedly promoted to acting commanding officer of the battalion.[184]He has subsequently, according to Akash, been recruited to serve in the UnitedNations peacekeeping operation in Côte d'Ivoire.[185]Human Rights Watch urges the government andits relevant authorities to:Institute an independentand impartial investigation into the torture of Jahangir Alam Akash and makethe outcome of the investigation public.Bring to justice thosefound to be responsible for the torture.Ensure that all witnessesare protected from possible reprisals.The Torture of RizwanHussainOn April 14, 2008, Rizwan Hussain, a Bengali-British citizen residing in London and a well known TV personality in theBangladeshi community in the United Kingdom, was detained by air forcepersonnel at Zia International airport in Dhaka. He has given a detailedaccount to Human Rights Watch of how the air force personnel tortured him indetention.When Human Rights Watch interviewed Hussainin London one month after the event, he was still walking on crutches and had aleg and an arm in plaster cast. He described how the beatings to which he hadbeen subjected had caused a fracture above the left ankle and a broken bone inhis left arm.Early in the morning of April 14, Hussainwas at the airport to see off family members leaving for the United Kingdom ona British Airways flight. As he was about to leave the airport, he was approachedin the check-in area by a security officer who asked what he was doing insidethe airport building and requested that he come with him.Hussain was then taken to an officedownstairs and interviewed by Deputy Security Officer Iftekhar Jahan and twoother officers. He was asked to confess to having entered the airport illegallywith the intention of assisting illegal immigrants, Hussain told Human RightsWatch. He was asked to sign a blank paper, but refused to do so. Shortly afterwardsfive uniformed air force officers arrived and took Hussain to another room. Theroom contained nothing more than a row of chairs and a metal drum, in whichseveral wooden batons, approximately one meter long and three inches thick,were placed.While one of the officers, Mujib, remainedoutside the room to guard the door, the other four, Anwar, Saiful, Mizan, andDelawar, without asking any questions, started beating Hussain with the batonson his back, legs, and arms.Hussain was then dragged to another room,where an air force officer was sitting behind a desk. Hussain told the officerthat he was being beaten and pleaded for his help. The officer ignored hispleas and instead ordered the torturers to get a statement out of him, Hussaintold Human Rights Watch.Back at the room with the metal drum, the airforce personnel started beating Hussain again:I tried to protectmyself with my feet. They therefore asked me to take off my shoes. They forcedme to lie down and then started hitting me on my bare feet and ankles. That waswhen my leg broke.When Hussain had recovered to the pointthat he could hold a pen, he was forced to write a statement saying that he hadentered the airport illegally, that he had helped an illegal immigrant, andthat he did not write the statement under duress.Around 11 a.m. Hussain was released throughthe staff entrance. Shortly after his release, Hussain started talking publiclyabout the incident, and while he was still in Dhaka DGFI field officersrecorded his account of what had happened.[186]On April 21, the Ministry of Defence issueda first statement saying that Hussain had used abusive words and misbehaved,but that his allegations of having been assaulted by security forces were foundto be true. The statement further said that the air force authorities had takenthose responsible into custody, a high-level inquiry committee had beenestablished, and proper punitive action had been taken against thoseresponsible.[187]In a second statement, issued a week later,the ministry said that a general court martial had been established to trypersonnel responsible for the assault. Tough punishments would be handed downto the guilty persons "on charge of irregularities and breaking discipline,"the statement said.[188]Hussain was initially asked to appearbefore the court martial on May 18, but he was unable, due to his injuries, totravel from London to Dhaka at that time. A new date was, therefore, set forthe hearing and he testified in person before the court martial in October 2008.According to Hussain, four of the air forcemembers were found guilty in connection with the case and received a mixture ofshort prison sentences and disciplinary sanctions.[189]However, following its usual procedure, the armed forces have not officiallyreleased any information about the outcome of the court martial.Human Rights Watch urges the government andits relevant authorities to:Make public the details ofthe court martial, including the names of those who have allegedly beensuspended for the torture of Rizwan Hussain, and their sentences.V.Causes of and Solutions for Impunity in BangladeshUnder international human rights law, Bangladesh is obliged to thoroughly and promptly investigate serious violations of humanrights, prosecute those implicated by the evidence, and, if their guilt isestablished following a fair trial, impose proportionate penalties.[190]Implied in this is that all victims shall have the opportunity to assert theirrights and receive a fair and effective remedy, that those responsible standtrial, and that the victims themselves obtain reparations. As the casesdescribed above have indicated, thorough investigations are in reality unusual,prosecutions very rare, and reasonable punishments almost unheard of, even forthe most serious of human rights violations.Impunity in Bangladesh is aninstitutionalised phenomenon. The Constitution, Criminal Procedure Code, ArmyAct, Air Force Act, Navy Ordinance, Armed Police Battalion Ordinance, and otherlaws contain provisions that protect agents of the state from being subjectedto prosecution and punishment. By granting state agents vast authority and onlyproviding for limited checks on their powers, the laws in force have also cometo facilitate human rights abuses. Some of these laws are part of Bangladesh'scolonial heritage, while others are more recent creations.The Praxis of ImmediateDenialJudging from the cases presented above andnumerous other cases reported in the press and by NGOs, the authorities areoften quick in presenting their own version of events and in resolutely denyingthat any violations have taken place. This serves to prevent any seriousinvestigations and discourages victims and their family members from trying toseek justice.RAB and the police regularly issue pressstatements when a person has been killed during their operations. As a matterof routine, these statements are published in the press without the mediamaking any efforts to verify the presented facts.A review of the statements issued by RABbetween 2004 and 2006 shows that the agency presented the events thatsurrounded most of the deaths in almost identical terms. Its statementstypically said that a dangerous criminal was arrested, interrogated, and takento recover hidden arms in the middle of the night. When RAB arrived near theplace where the arms were allegedly hidden, the suspect's accomplices openedfire on RAB and the suspect managed to escape. He was then killed in the"crossfire" that followed between RAB and his accomplices.[191]Lately, the version of events described inRAB's press statements has become more varied. In January 2008, the governmentinstructed the security forces to put an end to deaths in custody.[192]Since then the press releases have rarely said that the victim died afterarrest.[193]Statements from relatives and witnessesindicate, however, that RAB is continuing to torture and kills its victimsafter they have been taken into custody.On the evening of July 26, 2008, the mother of Dr. MizanurRahman Tutul, the head of the outlawed Purbo Banglar Communist Party (Red Flagfaction), held a press conference at Jhenidah Press Club, stating that her sonhad been arrested by RAB in Dhaka and urging the government not to kill him by"crossfire." According to the police, Tutul was killed in crossfire on July 27,the day after his mother talked to the press.[194]Regardless of the exact content of RAB'sand the police's statements, however, the speedy issuing of statements is aclear signal to anyone considering filing an official complaint: these agenciesare protecting their own staff; they will not undertake or cooperate with anyattempts at establishing the truth; and they have the ability to influence theway media report on a case.Intimidation andInducementsHuman rights violations frequently gounreported. Victims, family members, and potential witnesses are discouraged bythe very slim prospect that a formal complaint will eventually lead to thoseresponsible being punished. Often they are also warned that any efforts theymake to find justice will come at great personal risk.When Tasneem Khalil was released after 22hours in the custody of DGFI, he was told to not even tell his wife about whathad happened to him. He was also reminded that "next time you will be picked upand no one will even find your bloody dead body."[195]Abdul Hakim, the father of Abul Kalam AzadSumon, was beaten by the police to dissuade him from further pursuing justicefor the murder of his son. Similarly, others who have ignored these types ofwarnings have sometimes paid a high price.As there is no witness protection programin Bangladesh, those who are prepared to testify against human rights abusershave no alternative but to try to protect themselves as best they can. In theend they have few options but to try to change their daily routines and toperhaps leave their homes and stay with friends and relatives. However, mostpeople are not in a position to uproot their lives and leave their houses,families, and work responsibilities and are, therefore, an easy target.Another reason why criminal complaints arenot filed is widespread police corruption. According to a 2008 study byTransparency International Bangladesh, 96.6 percent of all households surveyedexperienced corruption and harassment in their interactions with lawenforcement agencies. The average sum paid to have a first information reportfiled amounted to nearly 4,000 taka (about US$60).[196]Sometimes inducements are offered to ensurethat no criminal action is initiated. According to Odhikar, the family of AbulHossain Dhali was offered 15,000 taka (about $220) by the police if theyrefrained from filing a complaint in relation to Dhali's death in the custodyof Botiyaghata Police on March 7, 2008.[197]Unconditional compensation is rarely ornever provided. Even though Bangladesh is a state party to the UN Conventionagainst Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,it has limited its obligations under article 14.1, which says that a stateparty shall ensure that its legal system provide for redress and compensationfor victims of torture. Bangladesh's declaration that it will apply article14.1 "in consonance with the existing laws and legislation in the country" hasbeen opposed by several other nations, which have stated that it raises doubtsas to the commitment of Bangladesh to the object and purpose of the Convention.[198]Complaints andInquiriesAs is evident from the cases presented inChapter IV, when victims or relatives do attempt to file complaints, the policeoften refuse to accept them. Even though threats, bribes, and refusals toreceive complaints are effective means of ensuring that human rights violationsare not investigated, the absence of a formal complaint does not remove theauthorities' legal obligations to investigate.As in the cases of Abul Kalam Azad Sumon,Iman Ali, Debu Prasaddas, and Khabirul Islam Dulal, when the police refused toaccept a complaint, there are occasionally attempts to turn directly to thejudiciary, which has the power to order or conduct its own investigations intodeaths in custody.[199]On other occasions, especially when facing strong public pressure, thegovernment establishes special commissions of inquiry to determine thecircumstances surrounding an alleged human rights violation. However, thesecommissions rarely help to provide accountability and the general public, aswell as those striving to find justice in the particular case, are generallynot informed of a commission's terms of reference, findings, and conclusions. Inmany cases there are reasons to believe that orders regarding the establishmentof executive inquiry commissions and for judicial inquiries are ignored, asvictims and witnesses are never called to testify. In 1998, in a writ petitionto the High Court Division of the Supreme Court, several human rightsorganizations pointed out that the only purpose of commissions of inquiryseemed to be to distract public outrage.[200]Little seems to have changed since then.Prosecutions andSanctionsThe fact that no one has been prosecutedand sentenced to imprisonment for any of the cases presented in this report isa sad reflection of Bangladesh's larger impunity problem. Of the more than1,100 "crossfire" or "encounter" killings that RAB and the police have committedover the past four-and-a-half years, not a single person is known to have beenheld criminally responsible. Since Bangladesh's independence, there are, as faras Human Rights Watch has been able to determine, only two reported cases inwhich a member of the security forces has been convicted for a death ingovernment custody. Our written request in July 2008 to the interim government forfurther information did not get a response.[201]With regard to torture, the picture is notsignificantly different. The first conviction ever of a police officer becauseof torture appears to have been handed down as late as 1998.[202]Apart from a few instances of torture leading to custodial death and a smallnumber of custodial rape cases, very few criminal convictions are known to havebeen imposed since then.While the cases described in this reporthave not resulted in criminal convictions, it appears that in several casesthose responsible have been subjected to disciplinary actions. That is because,apart from the publicity they have received, the victims' families wereexceptionally courageous and committed to pursuing justice. Generally, it alsoappears that those who receive support from individuals with influence havebetter chances of ensuring that the perpetrators receive at least some form ofreprimand.The first time RAB officers are known tohave been disciplined for a human rights violation concerned the 2005 tortureof a businessman, Sheik Abubakkar Sultan, known as Bitan, whose family hadclose relations with a top RAB official. While RAB denied any wrongdoing in anyof the other cases Human Rights Watch described in the "Judge, Jury, andExecutioner" report, RAB referred to the torture of Bitan as an "unfortunateincident" and stated that "actions were taken against those found responsible."[203]About a year after the torture of Bitan,RAB claimed that many others had been "punished" for involvement in "crossfire"deaths. In May 2006, it was reported that RAB punished 133 of its personnel forsuch deaths.[204]The most serious punishment handed down was "dishonorable discharge." There areno details available about disciplinary actions taken against officers involvedin "crossfire" since then, but there are indications that the authorities, inrecent years, have not acted against those responsible for such deaths. InAugust 2008, in a response to the Bangladesh section of Human Rights Watch'sWorld Report, the interim government wrote, "In 2007, total 93 criminals diedduring gunfight between RAB Forces and the armed criminals. In all those cases,firing of RAB Forces were carried out in exercising the right of self defenceand to save government property ..."[205]It is virtually impossible to determine thedetails of what action, if any, is taken against members of RAB, as well as thearmed forces, responsible for human rights violations, because such sanctionsare handled internally by the forces themselves and generally keptconfidential. Victims, family members, and the general public are thus deniedthe right to know the truth.Even in the few cases where the military orRAB acknowledge that an investigation has been initiated or that sanctions havebeen handed down, details about the process, the name of the persons foundguilty, what punishment the perpetrators have been given, and for what specificacts they were prosecuted, are generally kept secret. There is everyindication, however, that the sanctions handed down are wholly inadequate andstand in no relation to the gravity of the crimes committed. It should be notedthat the United Nations Human Rights Committee has stated that restrictingpunishment to separation from service or dismissal from the force in questionis not sufficient for such acts as extrajudicial executions, torture, andarbitrary arrests.[206]Even though violations committed by policeofficers and BDR personnel are investigated and tried under the civiliancriminal justice system, the likelihood of such officers being held to accountis not significantly higher than in cases involving members of RAB and thearmed forces.No response has been received to writtenrequests by Human Rights Watch seeking information on the cases presented inthis report, as well as on several other cases.[207]Neither was any informationprovided in response to a similar letter sent in 2006, when Human Rights Watchprepared its report on RAB. However, in September 2007, nine months after the "Judge,Jury, and Executioner" report was released, the government sent a 27-pageresponse from RAB. While the response presented information about the allegedcriminal backgrounds of those killed and tortured, it contained, with only oneexception, no information about any action taken against RAB personnel. Instead,RAB explained that the deaths were the result of encounters between RAB andcriminals, accidents during alleged attempts by the suspect to escape, and mob killings.These explanations are not only contrary to the findings of Human Rights Watchand other human rights groups, but in several instances they also contradictinformation provided by the police, as well as earlier statements by RAB.The Legal FrameworkThe United Nations Human Rights Committeehas repeatedly stated that amnesties and other legal measures that preventinvestigation, prosecution, and punishment of perpetrators of human rightsviolations and hinder the victims of such violations from being grantedreparations are incompatible with a state's obligations under the InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political Rights.[208]To meet the requirements of the Covenant, the Constitution of Bangladesh andseveral of the laws that make up the country's largely anachronistic legalframework need to be amended.IndemnityArticle 46 of Bangladesh's constitutionentitles parliament to provide indemnity through law to any state officer forany act done to maintain or restore order, and to lift any sanctions inflictedon this person:Parliament may by lawmake provision for indemnifying any person in the service of the Republic orany other person in respect of any act done by him in connection with thenational liberation struggle or the maintenance or restoration of order in anyarea in Bangladesh or validate any sentence passed, punishment inflicted,forfeiture ordered, or other act done in any such area.[209]On February 23, 2003, parliament passed the Joint Drive Indemnity Act, 2003, which protects members of the security forcesfrom prosecution for involvement in any casualty, damage to life and property,violation of rights, physical or mental damage, between October 16, 2002, andJanuary 9, 2003.[210]The law was adopted following an army-led anti-crime drive called OperationClean Heart. By the time the troops were withdrawn on January 9, 2003, thousands of people had been detained and more than 40 individuals were reported tohave died in custody. The authorities attributed many of these deaths to heartfailure, but family members of the deceased claimed that they had been torturedto death.[211]The indemnity law was heavily criticizedboth nationally and internationally. Following a visit to Bangladesh, theEuropean Parliament's Delegation for Relations with South Asia and SAARC issueda press statement saying that:In particular, the recent Indemnity Law limiting retrospectively thepossibility to prosecute members of the armed forces but in court martial, andtotally indemnifying police forces and political personnel from acts of murder,torture, illegal arrests and other Human Rights violations committed during the"Clean Heart Operation" is a blatant violation of the responsibility ofBangladesh to abide by the Rule of Law.[212]The 2003 Act was not the first time theindemnity laws have been used to protect the security forces and the interestsof civilian and military leaders. In 1974, under Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, membersof the paramilitary Jatiyo Rakkhi Bahini were granted immunity from prosecutionand other legal proceedings.[213]When Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and several of his family members were assassinatedthe following year, a presidential ordinance provided indemnity to thoseinvolved in this and other assassinations, the related coup d'etat, and theintroduction of martial law.[214]In 1979, the constitution was amended to legalize activities and militaryorders between August 15, 1975 (the day Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was murdered),and April 9, 1979 (the day martial law was lifted).[215]In 1986, under the rule of General Ershad, a similar constitutional amendmentwas made to legalize military coups led by Ershad himself.[216]Criminal Procedure CodeThe Criminal Procedure Code also containsprovisions that shield government officials from being held accountable fortheir actions. Section 197(1) of the code prohibits criminal actions from beinginitiated against public officials-including police officers-without governmentapproval, if the offense is committed while the officer is acting or purportingto act in his official capacity.[217]The Supreme Court has, in several cases,declared that police officers committing murder and other human rightsviolations are not acting within the scope of their official duties. However,in practice the provision discourages the police and the courts from takingaction against public servants. Even when permission is requested, the relevantgovernment department often fails to grant approval. In other cases, theapproval is granted only after a substantial delay, thereby violatinginternational law provisions that call for prompt investigation and prosecutionof human rights abuses. Delay also allows a suspect to abscond.Further protection is given in section 132,which provides that prior government permission is required for the prosecutionof persons assisting in dispersing an assembly that is unlawful or likely todisturb public peace. It is furthermore said that a person who acts in good faithor in accordance with an order given shall never be considered to havecommitted a crime while involved in dispersing such a crowd. This section is ofparticular relevance in light of the fact that mass demonstrations and generalstrikes have traditionally been a common means of protest in Bangladesh, and that law enforcement officials conducting crowd control duties often useexcessive force.[218]Special Powers ActLaws giving the authorities the power todeprive a person of his or her liberty in order to prevent potential futurecriminal acts have been in place on the subcontinent since British colonialrule. As no crime has been committed, these laws are by their very nature inconflict with the right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty, as well asto not be arbitrarily detained.[219]When Bangladesh's constitution waspromulgated in 1972, no provision allowing for preventive detention wasincluded. However, the constitution was amended the following year to allow thepractice.[220]In 1974, Bangladesh's parliament passed theSpecial Powers Act, 1974, which under sections 2 and 3 empowers the governmentto detain an individual without charge if satisfied that it is necessary to doso to prevent him or her from committing such "prejudicial acts" as underminingthe sovereignty or security of Bangladesh, interfering with the maintenance oflaw and order, creating or exciting feelings of enmity and hatred betweendifferent communities, and affecting the maintenance of services or economicinterests of the state.[221] Under the emergency rules in force after January 2007, the types ofacts for which a person could be held in preventive detention weresubstantially increased.[222]The Special Powers Act allows forindefinite detention. The only substantial safeguards against such detention isa requirement that it shall be reviewed, initially after 120 days, andthereafter every six months, by a government-constituted advisory board made upof two persons qualified to be high court judges, and one senior officer in theservice of the Republic.[223]The proceedings before the board are confidential and the detainee has no rightto be represented by a lawyer or to examine the evidence on which his detentionis based. As stated in the Dhaka Law Reports commentary of the act:There is no way ofjudging the accuracy of these materials or the sources from which they havebeen gathered, whether there are verified statements collected from reliablesources and not hearsays or rumours from any quarter tainted or otherwise... Whenmatters take a course like this it is difficult to say that justice has notbeen denied.[224]Those that can afford a lawyer challengetheir detention through habeas corpus petitions. For those without access tolegal counsel, the only hope is that the government revokes the detention orderon its own initiative or that the advisory board finds that there isinsufficient cause for the detention.[225]Successive governments have used theSpecial Powers Act widely to suppress political opposition and participants inpeaceful demonstrations, as well as against individuals engaged in personaldisputes with people in positions of authority. Often, detentions have beenbased on mere allegations. Over the years, several hundred thousand individualshave been detained under the Act.[226]It was also frequently used during the recent state of emergency. Section 14 ofthe Emergency Power Rules, 2007, explicitly listed the Act among those that the"law enforcement agencies will take active measures to implement...  inrelation to grave offences likely to prejudice the public security or economiclife of Bangladesh."From 1974 to March 1995, according to courtrecords, of the 10,372 habeas corpus writs that were moved before the HighCourt Division of the Supreme Court to challenge detentions, only in less than9 percent did the court find the detention to be valid-an indication of theextent to which the Act has historically been misused.[227]However, the executive seems to have taken little or no notice of the SupremeCourt's repeated criticism of the law and its implementation. It has evenignored release orders, forcing the court to initiate contempt of courtproceedings.[228]As long as the Special Powers Act remainsin force, it is likely to be utilised as a tool for arbitrary detention. Thosewho use it are protected by section 34, which states, "[N]o suit, prosecutionor other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government or any person foranything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act."Military LawsBangladesh'smilitary laws effectively shield members of the armed forces from beingprosecuted by the civilian justice system for human rights violations. Instead,they allow them to be tried by their peers in military courts.The Army Act, 1952, Air Force Act, 1953,and Navy Ordinance, 1961, provide that a serviceman who commits a crime whileon active duty shall be tried by a military court martial regardless of thenature of the crime or the circumstances under which it was committed. The onlysituation under which a serviceman may be prosecuted and tried by a civiliancourt rather than a court martial is when he or she is not on active duty andis suspected of having committed one of the following crimes against acivilian: murder, culpable homicide not amounting to murder, and rape.[229]Once a person has been convicted by a court martial, he or she cannot be triedby a civilian court.[230]Bangladesh'smilitary laws stand in stark conflict with the opinions of the Human RightsCommittee and other treaty bodies and mechanisms of the United Nations, whichhave held that military tribunals should only have jurisdiction over offensesthat are strictly military in nature and that gross human rights violations bymembers of the armed force cannot be considered military offenses.[231]The Human Rights Committee has also recognized that the powers of militarycourts to deal with violations of human rights contribute to impunity.[232]Armed Police Battalions OrdinanceMembers of RAB enjoy wide immunity underthe Armed Police Battalions Ordinance (as amended in 2003). Section 13 statesthat "no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall be against anymember of the Force for anything which is done or intended to be done in goodfaith under this Ordinance."[233]Although RAB is tasked with civilian lawenforcement duties, jurisdiction over RAB offenses, under the ordinance, arereferred to internal tribunals, similar to a court martial. Like their militaryequivalent, these courts operate without any systematic form of transparency andlittle is, therefore, known about how they function and what decisions theyhave made in specific cases. The courts are headed by senior RAB or policeofficers and a conviction can be appealed to either the president of Bangladeshor the inspector general of police.The offenses listed in the ordinance arealmost identical to those set out in the Army Act and most relate to suchissues as neglect of duty, disobedience, and providing assistance to an enemy.[234]While the listed offenses include two crimes that may be considered civilian innature-extortion, and rape of a woman-concerns have been raised about theabsence of any guidance on how other crimes under the Penal Code, includingmurder, should be dealt with.[235]The absence of such guidance has been cited by RAB as a reason why it has notbeen able to adequately punish those responsible for human rights violations.[236]Emergency LawsIn the 38 years since its independence, Bangladesh has spent nearly half under a state of emergency or martial rule. The emergencylaws have served to legalize abuses and arbitrariness, and thus to provideprotection for those who violate human rights.The emergency declared in 2007 remained inforce for 23 months even though it is clear that the country did not duringthis entire period face, as required under the constitution, a grave emergency"in which the security or economic life of Bangladesh, or any part thereof, isthreatened by war or external aggression or internal disturbance."[237]International law and modern constitutionalthinking provide that emergency situations must be governed by standards andnorms that are of a protective rather than repressive nature. They shouldguarantee that an emergency can only be declared for the purpose of restoringnormality and guaranteeing that the most fundamental of human rights areprotected. Any emergency measures introduced should be proportional to thethreats and should not remain in force longer than strictly necessary.When a state of emergency is proclaimed in Bangladesh, the constitutionally guaranteed freedoms of movement, assembly, association,thought, conscience, speech, and profession, as well as the right to property,are automatically suspended.[238]The enforcement of any other rights can be suspended by an order of thepresident.[239]As currently written, the constitution doesnot ensure compliance with Bangladesh's international human rights obligations.International law does not allow for the suspension of all rights during astate of emergency. Certain rights are non-derogable, including the right tolife, prohibition of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment, and theprinciple of legality in the field of criminal law.[240]Furthermore the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to whichBangladesh is a state party, provides that any derogation permissible under thecovenant must be limited to the extent strictly required by the exigencies ofthe situation.[241]The UN Human Rights Committee, the body incharge of overseeing the implementation of the ICCPR, has in the past declaredthat restricting certain rights, such as freedom of movement or freedom ofassembly, may be permissible during a situation of mass demonstrations thatinclude instances of violence.[242]It may be argued that this is exactly what characterized the situation in Bangladesh in January 2007. However, the extensive emergency measures introduced were notproportional to any threat faced. They explicitly enforced restrictions onfreedom of assembly, association, and expression, limited the right to privacy,expanded the grounds for preventive detention, impacted on the right to a fairtrial, and, perhaps most importantly, undermined accountability for thesecurity forces.Under the recent emergency, military andparamilitary forces, usually responsible for matters relating to nationalsecurity, were handed responsibility for civilian law enforcement for whichthey have no training and experience. These forces were utilised by thegovernment to investigate crimes, carry out arrests, and generally maintain lawand order.[243]Under section 16(2) of the Emergency Power Rules, 2007, they were given thesame powers as the police to conduct searches and arrests. They were alsogranted the power to carry out arrests without a warrant if there were reasonablesuspicion that a person was linked to a crime. Under section 6 of the EmergencyPowers Ordinance, they were provided with immunity from criminal and civilproceedings for actions taken in good faith to implement any emergencyregulations.[244]The suspension of the right of judicial recourse for anyone subjected to aviolation of fundamental rights, as allowed for under article 141(c) of the constitution,enhanced the impunity even further.VI.RecommendationsTo the BangladeshiGovernmentProtectionMake strong and repeatedpublic statements, at the highest institutional level, against unlawfulkillings and custodial abuse by RAB, and that all those responsible for abuseswill be prosecuted.Publicly provideinformation on the location of all places of detention; persons should only beheld in officially recognized places of detention.Promptly communicateinformation on persons taken into custody to relatives and legal counsel.Provide detainees promptaccess to legal counsel, medical personnel, and family members.Allow nongovernmental humanrights organizations improved access to all places of detention.Develop a policy to provide compensationto the victims of abuse by the security forces.Investigations and ProsecutionsPromptly and impartiallyinvestigate all allegations of torture and deaths in the custody of thesecurity forces.Prosecute to the fullestextent of the law all former and current members of the military, police, RAB,or other security forces of whatever rank who are responsible for unlawfulkillings, torture, and other human rights abuses. Similarly punish commandingofficers who knew or should have known of such abuse, and who failed to preventor punish it.Immediately suspend fromthe military, police, RAB, and other security forces any individual for whomthere exists credible evidence that he or she has committed torture orparticipated in the extrajudicial execution of a detainee, pendinginvestigation.Establish an independentcivilian authority charged with receiving complaints and investigatingallegations of crimes committed by members of the police, military, and otherarmed forces.Make public past and futurereports of inquiry commissions tasked with investigating alleged violations ofhuman rights.Publicly release detailedinformation on all arrests, prosecutions, and convictions against members ofthe military, RAB, police, and other law enforcement agencies for human rightsviolations.Ensure that administrativeand judicial proceedings regarding alleged violations of human rights are opento public scrutiny.Investigate all allegationsthat public officials have intentionally acted to obstruct efforts by victims,their family members, and others to seek justice for violations of humanrights, and prosecute those responsible for such obstructions.Establish a comprehensive witnessprotection program to guarantee that anyone who files a complaint or isprepared to testify against an alleged human rights abuser is able to doso without fear of being subjected to harassment or violence.Institutional ReformDisband RAB, which from its inception hasbased its operating culture on practices such as extrajudicial killings.In the event RAB is retained, establish an independent commission toassess RAB's performance, to identify those believed to be responsible forserious violations such as extrajudicial killings who should be excludedfrom a reformed RAB and prosecuted, and to develop an action plan totransform RAB into an agency that operates within the law and with fullrespect for international human rights norms. The commission should:Be composed of respectedmembers of law enforcement, independent judges and lawyers, and members of Bangladesh's human rights community;Include the activeparticipation of independent international experts on law enforcement and humanrights;Have full access to allrelevant government documents, as well as the power to subpoena;Provide witness protectionas necessary;Have a time limit of nomore than six months to complete its inquiry and present its report, withconcrete recommendations on RAB reform;Have the power to makepublic statements during and after its inquiry, including on the government'sresponse to the commission's recommendations; andHave the power at any timeduring its mandate to publicly recommend the immediate suspension, pendinginvestigation, of any current or former RAB member implicated in serious humanrights violations.Disband DGFI, which has too long dependedon illegal practices such as arbitrary detentions and torture. In theevent that DGFI is retained, establish an independent commission to assessDGFI's performance, identify those believed to be responsible for seriousviolations such as torture who should be excluded from a reformed DGFI andprosecuted, and develop an action plan to transform DGFI into an agencythat operates within the law and with full respect for international humanrights norms. DGFI's operations should be strictly limited to lawfulmilitary intelligence activities, and in no circumstances should it engagein surveillance of the political opposition and critics of the regime. Thecommission should:Be composed of respectedmembers of the Armed Forces, independent judges and lawyers, and members ofBangladesh's human rights community;Include the activeparticipation of independent international experts on intelligence work andhuman rights;Have full access to allrelevant government documents, as well as the power to subpoena;Provide witness protectionas necessary;Have a time limit of nomore than six months to complete its inquiry and present its report, withconcrete recommendations on DGFI reform;Have the power to makepublic statements during and after its inquiry, including on the government'sresponse to the commission's recommendations; andHave the power at any timeduring its mandate to publicly recommend the immediate suspension, pendinginvestigation, of any current or former DGFI member implicated in serious humanrights violations.Duly consider and, whereverpossible, promptly implement the recommendations from the commissions on RABand DGFI reform.Establish an Ombudsman for lawenforcement affairs, with a mandate to monitor and report on the work ofRAB and the police.Law ReformRepeal or amend article 46of the constitution, which gives parliament the power to grant indemnity forhuman rights violations.Amend all legal provisions,such as articles 132 and 197 of the Criminal Procedure Code, which in effectshield law enforcement officials from being held to account for violations ofhuman rights.Amend the Armed PoliceBattalions Ordinance, 1979, and its 2003 amendment, which form the legal basisfor RAB. The law should abolish the special RAB tribunals to allow for greatertransparency and accountability.End the practice ofpreventive detention, and amend article 33 of the constitution and repeal theSpecial Powers Act, 1974, and any other laws allowing for such detention.Amend the Army Act, Air ForceAct, Navy Ordinance, Armed Police Battalions Ordinance, and any other relevantlegislation to ensure that all allegations of human rights abuses againstmembers of the armed forces are investigated, prosecuted, and tried under thecivilian criminal justice system.End the practice of usingmembers of the armed forces for law enforcement purposes, and make necessarylegislative amendments to prohibit the future use of soldiers for such duties.Adopt legislation thatmakes torture a specific criminal offense in accordance with article 1 of theConvention against Torture, with punishment that is commensurate with thecrime.Amend the National Human RightsCommission Ordinance, 2007, and establish a commission that meets therequirements of the Paris Principles and best international practice.[245]International CooperationInvite relevant UnitedNations special mechanisms, such as the special rapporteur on torture and othercruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and the special rapporteuron extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions to Bangladesh to investigateand make recommendations.Make the requireddeclarations under articles 21 and 22 of the Convention against Torture so thatthe Committee against Torture can receive individual communications.Accede to the OptionalProtocol to the UN Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman orDegrading Treatment or Punishment.Accede to the OptionalProtocol and Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civiland Political Rights.Ratify the InternationalConvention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance.Ratify the Rome Statute ofthe International Criminal Court.Thoroughly vet allBangladeshi military and police who apply for UN peacekeeping missions toensure that they have not committed violations of human rights.Ban from participation in UN peacekeepingoperations any individual from RAB, the police, or military whom thegovernment identifies as having responsibility for serious human rightsviolations, pending investigation.To Civil SocietyOrganizationsConsider establishing a broad-basedcoalition against impunity, involving lawyers, NGO workers, medicalpractitioners, media representatives, victims of human rights abuses,politicians, and others. Such a coalition should strive to raise awarenessabout the impunity problem, mobilize public demand for change, and engagein strategic lobbying efforts.To Bangladesh's DonorsPress thegovernment, through public and private diplomacy, to implement the aboverecommendations.Refuse to workwith Bangladesh's security forces on law enforcement or counterterroroperations until the force ceases its use of torture and extrajudicialexecutions, promotes transparency, and pursues accountability forviolations of human rights.Refuse to supporttraining programs for Bangladesh's security forces-unless specifically forhuman rights-until the force ends the pattern and practice of torture andextrajudicial executions.Withholdmaterial and financial assistance to Bangladesh's security forces untilRAB and the police take serious measures to end extrajudicial executionsand to actively prosecute those implicated in torture and unlawfulkillings.Ensure propervetting of all participants in military training and exchange programs inorder to guarantee that officers against whom there are credibleallegations of involvement in human rights violations are barred fromtaking part.Call for RAB tobe disbanded. In the event that RAB is retained, ask for the creation of acommission on RAB reform, and support the commission's work.Call for DGFI tobe disbanded. In the event that DGFI is retained, ask for the creation ofa commission on DGFI reform, and support the commission's work.Request theUnited Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to thoroughlyreview the participation in peacekeeping operations of all Bangladeshisoldiers and law enforcement officials, including commanders, to ensurethat they have not committed, ordered, or tolerated serious human rightsviolations.Support civilsociety initiatives that bring pressure on those responsible for humanrights violations to desist from such acts, strive to ensure that membersof the security forces responsible for violations are prosecuted, and aimat convincing the government and political parties of the need to takelegislative and other measures to address the impunity problem.Providefinancial support to a civil society coalition against impunity.Continue to support efforts to promoteindependence of the judiciary.To the United NationsThe Department of Peacekeeping Operations(DPKO) should thoroughly review the participation in peacekeepingoperations of all Bangladeshi soldiers and law enforcement officials,including commanders, to ensure that they have not committed, ordered, ortolerated serious human rights violations.AcknowledgmentsThis report was researchedand written by Henrik Alffram, consultant to the Asia Division of Human RightsWatch. Journalist Tasneem Khalil, student M. Sanjeeb Hossain, and Human RightsWatch intern Julie Drapala provided valuable research and translation support.The report was edited byBrad Adams, executive director of the Asia Division, and Meenakshi Ganguly,senior researcher in the Asia Division. Clive Baldwin, senior legal advisor,and Ian Gorvin, senior program officer, reviewed the report.Production assistance wasprovided by Jonathan Cohen, associate in the Asia Division. Grace Choi,publications director, and Fitzroy Hepkins, mail manager, prepared the reportfor publication, and Anna Lopriore, creative manager, assisted with the coverphotograph.Human Rights Watch thanksthe many witnesses and victims who took time to share their stories, as well asthe Bangladeshi human rights activists, lawyers, and journalists who greatlyassisted the work.AppendixLetter to ChiefAdvisor Fakhruddin Ahmed on July 14, 2008Click to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand Image[1] Collective name for thosewho fought against the Pakistan Army in the 1971 war.[2] International Commissionof Jurists, "The Events in East Pakistan, 1971: A Legal Study," 1972,reproduced at http://www.globalwebpost.com/genocide1971/ (accessed August 5,2008); Redress, "Torture in Bangladesh 1971-2004: Making InternationalCommitments a Reality and Providing Justice and Reparations to Victims," August2004, http://www.redress.org/publications/Bangladesh.pdf (accessed August 5,2008); Anthony Mascarenhas, "Genocide," Sunday Times (London), June13, 1971, reproduced at http://www.docstrangelove.com/uploads/1971/foreign/19710613_tst_genocide_center_page.pdf(accessed March 27, 2009); "East Pakistan: Even the Skies Weep," Time (NewYork), October 25, 1971, http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,877316,00.html(accessed March 28, 2009); Kasturi Rangan, "Bengalis Hunt Down Biharis, WhoAided Foe," Washington Post, December 19, 1971; Dennis Neeld, "BengalisAct to Avenge Slain Kin," Washington Post, December 21, 1971; LaurenceStern, "Reprisals, Starvation Haunt Dacca Minority," Washington Post,December 24, 1971;Sydney H. Shanberg, "Bengalis Ashamed Of Burst ofRevenge Against the Biharis," New York Times,  March 16, 1972; BumitaChakma, "Bangladesh State and the Refugee Phenomenon," Refugee Watch (SouthAsia Forum For Human Rights, Kathmandu, Nepal), no. 18, April 2003, http://www.safhr.org/refugee_watch18_4.htm(accessed March 27, 2009); Sarmila Bose, "Anatomy of Violence: Analysis ofCivil War in East Pakistan in 1971," Economic and Political Weekly(Mumbai, India), October 8, 2005, reproduced at http://www.politics.ox.ac.uk/about/staff/materials/SBose-Anatomy_of_Violence-EPW_v_40_no_41_(2005).pdf(accessed February 10, 2009).[3] Redress, "Torture in Bangladesh 1971-2004," http://www.redress.org/publications/Bangladesh.pdf.[4] See Susan Brownmiller, AgainstOur Will: Men, Women and Rape (London: Penguin books, 1976), pp. 78-86;Sarmila Bose, "Losing the Victims: Problems of Using Women as Weapons inRecounting the Bangladesh War," Economic and Political Weekly, September22, 2007, reproduced at http://www.politics.ox.ac.uk/about/staff/materials/SBose-Losing_the_Victims-EPW_v_42_no_38_(2007).pdf(accessed February 10, 2009); Nayanika Mookherjee, "Skewing the history of rapein 1971: A prescription for reconciliation?" Forum (Dhaka), vol. 1,issue 2, December 2006, http://www.thedailystar.net/forum/2006/december/skewing.htm(accessed April 7, 2009).[5] UNCHR, "Rupture in South Asia," chap. 3 in The State of The World's Refugees 2000: Fifty Years ofHumanitarian Action, (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2000), http://www.reliefweb.int/library/documents/ch03.pdf(accessed March 28, 2009); "East Pakistan: Even the Skies Weep," Time, http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,877316,00.html;Rangan, "Bengalis Hunt Down Biharis, Who Aided Foe," Washington Post.[6] International Commissionof Jurists, "The Events in East Pakistan, 1971," http://www.globalwebpost.com/genocide1971/.[7] "EC to collect records ofwar criminals' trial," Daily Star (Dhaka), May 12, 2008, http://www.thedailystar.net/pf_story.php?nid=36150 (accessed July 29, 2008); Ahmed Ziauddin, "The original sin: Justice for 1971 crimes," Daily Star, March 29, 2008, http://www.thedailystar.net/law/2008/03/04/index.htm (accessed July 27, 2008).[8]HowardS. Levie, "The Indo-Pakistani Agreement of August 28, 1971," AmericanJournal of International Law, vol. 68, no. 1, 1974, pp. 95-97; Redress, "Torturein Bangladesh 1971-2004," http://www.redress.org/publications/Bangladesh.pdf.[9] Rounaq Jahan, "Genocidein Bangladesh" in Samuel Totten, William S. Parson, and Israel W. Charny, eds.,Century of Genocide: Critical Essays and Eyewitness Accounts (New York: Routledge, 2004), p. 305; Fayazuddin Ahmad, "Unfinished justice for the crimes of1971," Daily Star, January 17, 2009, http://www.thedailystar.net/law/2009/01/03/index.htm(accessed March 28, 2009).[10] The tri-partiteagreement of Bangladesh-Pakistan-India signed in New Delhi on April 9, 1974,reproduced at http://www.genocidebangladesh.org/?p=196 (accessed March 28,1971); and Ziauddin, "The original sin," Daily Star, http://www.thedailystar.net/law/2008/03/04/index.htm.[11]"HamoodurRahman Commission Report," reproduced athttp://www.globalwebpost.com/genocide1971/ (accessed August 5, 2008).[12]WarCrimes Fact Finding Committee, "List of Rajaker's [sic] who were directlyinvolved with war crimes, crimes against humanity and crime of genocide,"undated; "List of civilian war criminals in different classification," undated;"Details of names of Political Members accused of war crimes, crimes againsthumanity and crime of genocide," undated; "Al-Badar List," undated;"Non-Bengalees who are directly involved with war crimes, crimes againsthumanity and crime of genocide," undated; See also "List of 1,597 war criminalsreleased," Daily Star, April 4, 2008,http://www.thedailystar.net/story.php?nid=30697 (accessed July 29, 2008).[13]  "Adifferent sort of emergency," Economist (London), April 17, 2008, http://www.economist.com/world/asia/displaystory.cfm?story_id=11058143 (accessed July 29, 2008); Lawrence Lifschultz, Bangladesh the Unfinished Revolution (London,Zed Press, 1979), p. 124.[14] "JS passes proposal totry war criminals," Daily Star, January 30, 2009, http://www.thedailystar.net/newDesign/news-details.php?nid=73557 (accessed March 31, 2009).[15] "War criminal trialunder Int'l crime act," Daily Star, March 27, 2009, http://www.thedailystar.net/story.php?nid=81408 (accessed March 27, 2009); "War crimes tribunal formation: Law ministry to seekSC consultation," New Age (Dhaka), March 28, 2009, http://www.newagebd.com/2009/mar/28/front.html (accessed March 27, 2009).[16]InternationalCrimes (Tribunals) Act, 1973, sec. 23.[17] "Politics must notinfluence trial," Daily Star, March 27, 2009, http://www.thedailystar.net/newDesign/news-details.php?nid=81538 (accessed March 27, 2009).[18] International Crimes(Tribunals) Act, 1973, sec. 20 (2).[19] See, for example, AmnestyInternational Report annually for the years 1977-2008; Amnesty International,"Bangladesh: Torture and Impunity," AI Index: ASA 13/07/00, November 29, 2000,http://www.amnesty.org/ar/library/asset/ASA13/007/2000/en/dom-ASA130072000en.html(accessed June 2, 2004); Article 2, "Special Report: Lawless law-enforcement& the parody of the judiciary in Bangladesh," vol. 4, no. 5, August 2006;Human Rights Watch, Bangladesh – Political Violence on All Sides, vol.8, no. 6(c), June 1996, http://www.hrw.org/reports/1996/BANGLA.htm, Ravagingthe Vulnerable: Abuses Against Persons at High Risk of HIV Infection inBangladesh, vol. 15, no. 6(C), August 2003,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2003/bangladesh0803/, Judge, Jury andExecutioner: Torture and Extrajudicial Killings by Bangladesh's Elite SecurityForce, vol. 18, no. 16(C), December 2006, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2006/bangladesh1206/,The Torture of Tasneem Khalil: How the Bangladesh Military Abuses Its Powerunder the State of Emergency, vol. 20, no. 1(C), February 2008,http://hrw.org/reports/2008/bangladesh0208/.[20] See, for example,Tasneem Khalil, "Justice, Bangladesh style," Forum,vol. 1, issue2, December 2006, http://www.thedailystar.net/forum/2006/december/justice.htm(accessed March 30, 2009); "Non-compliance with HC order on tortureunacceptable," New Age, June 27, 2008, http://www.newagebd.com/2008/jun/27/edit.html(accessed March 30, 2009); and "Tortures in Custody," Bangladesh Today, January 20, 2008.[21] See, for example, USDepartment of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, "CountryReports on Human Rights Practices – 1999: Bangladesh," February 23, 2000, http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/1999/432,"Country Reports on Human Rights Practices – 2002, Bangladesh," March 31, 2003,http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2002/18309.htm, and "Country Reports onHuman Rights Practices – 2008: Bangladesh," February 25, 2009, http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2008/sca/119132.htm(all accessed March 30, 2009); and Kingdom of Sweden Cabinet Office, Ministryof Foreign Affairs (Regeringskansliet, Utrikesdepartementet), "Human Rights inBangladesh 2007" ("Mänskliga rättigheter i Bangladesh 2007"), 2008, http://www.manskligarattigheter.gov.se/dynamaster/file_archive/080313/c11eb53fe3cba640d1765df1d4cdd4a7/Bangladesh.pdf(accessed March 30, 2009).[22] See, for example, UNCommission on Human Rights, Report of the Special Rapporteur on torture andother cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, Nigel Rodley,E/CN.4/1999/61,  January 12, 1999, http://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G99/101/62/pdf/G9910162.pdf?OpenElement(accessed October 10, 2008), paras. 79-83; UN Commission on Human Rights,Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, AsmaJahangir, E/CN.4/2001/9/Add.1, January 17, 2001, http://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G01/102/61/pdf/G0110261.pdf?OpenElement(accessed October 10, 2008), paras. 18-19; UN Commission on Human Rights,Report of the Special Representative of the Secretary General on the situationof human rights defenders, E/CN.4/2006/95/Add.1, March 22, 2006,  http://daccessdds.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G06/119/58/PDF/G0611958.pdf?OpenElement(accessed October 10, 2008), paras. 31-42; UN Human Rights Council, Report ofthe Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, A/HRC/7/4, January 10, 2008, http://daccessdds.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G08/100/91/PDF/G0810091.pdf?OpenElement,paras. 7 and 23.[23]See Human Rights Watch, Judge,Jury and Executioner, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2006/bangladesh1206/;ASK, "RAB:Eradicating Crime or Crimes of the State?" 2005, sections of the reportavailable in English athttp://www.askbd.org/RAB/RAB_eng.htm(accessed March 30, 2009); Odhikar, "322 allegedly killed by law enforcingagencies during the State of Emergency in Bangladesh (12 January 2007-16 December 2009), December 2009.[24] InternationalRehabilitation Council for Torture Victims, "Country Report on Torture RelatedIssues – Bangladesh," http://www.irct.org/Default.aspx?ID=632 (accessed August 6, 2008).[25]SeeHuman Rights Watch, Judge, Jury and Executioner, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2006/bangladesh1206/,The Torture of Tasneem Khalil,http://hrw.org/reports/2008/bangladesh0208/.[26]See, forexample, Human Rights Watch, Bangladesh – Political Violence on All Sides,http://www.hrw.org/reports/1996/BANGLA.htm; and Amnesty International,"Bangladesh: Torture and Impunity," AI Index: ASA 13/07/00,http://www.amnesty.org/ar/library/asset/ASA13/007/2000/en/dom-ASA130072000en.html.[27]See, forexample, Amnesty International, "Bangladesh: Human Rights in the ChittagongHill Tracts," AI Index: ASA 13/001/2000, February 1, 2000, http://asiapacific.amnesty.org/library/Index/ENGASA130012000?open&of=ENG-BGD (accessed October 10, 2008).[28]TheConstitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, art. 58(B).[29] "Address to the Nationby the Honourable Chief Advisor of the Non-Party Caretaker Government Dr.Fakhruddin Ahmed," May 12, 2008, http://www.cao.gov.bd/ (accessed August 6, 2008).[30]See, forexample, "Bangladesh: End Mass Arrests, Release Detainees," Human Rights Watchnews release, June 5, 2008,http://hrw.org/english/docs/2008/06/05/bangla19037.htm.[31] Odhikar, "Report onTwenty One Months of State of Emergency," October 2008.[32]HumanRights Watch interviews with politicians, businesspersons, lawyers andjournalists (identifying details withheld), September-November 2008. See alsoHuman Rights Watch, The Torture of Tasneem Khali,http://hrw.org/reports/2008/bangladesh0208/.[33] TransparencyInternational Bangladesh, "National Household Survey 2007 on Corruption inBangladesh," June 18, 2008,http://www.ti-bangladesh.org/research/HHSurvey07full180608.pdf (accessed August4, 2008); Human Rights Watch interview with Iftekhar Zaman, executive director,Transparency International Bangladesh, Dhaka, September 10, 2008.[34] Asian Human RightsCommission, "Bangladesh: Military must not dominate civil administration,"August 29, 2008, http://www.ahrch.net/statements/mainfile.php/2008statements/1671/(accessed April 1, 2009); and Human Rights Watch interview with foreigndiplomat (identifying details withheld), Dhaka, May 13, 2007.[35] Bangladesh Awami League,"Election Manifesto of Bangladesh Awami League – 2008," http://www.albd.org/autoalbd/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=367&Itemid=1(accessed March 31, 2009).[36] UN Human Rights Council,Draft Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review: Bangladesh,A/HRC/WG.6/4/L.4, February 5, 2009, para. 87.[37] "Seat row in JS: Hasinaturns down opposition demand," New Age, February 12, 2009,  http://www.newagebd.com/2009/feb/12/front.html#2(accessed March 30, 2009).[38] Bangladesh Ministry ofDefence, http://www.mod.gov.bd/services.html (accessed October 12, 2008).[39]"BangladeshArmy-Overview," Bangladesh Military Forces,http://www.bdmilitary.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=68&Itemid=124(accessed February 15, 2009).[40] "BangladeshNavy-Overview," Bangladesh Military Forces, http://www.bdmilitary.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=90&Itemid=125(accessed February 15, 2009).[41] "Bangladesh AirForce-Overview," Bangladesh Military Forces, http://www.bdmilitary.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=79&Itemid=127(accessed February 15, 2009).[42]See HumanRights Watch, The Torture of Tasneem Khalil, http://hrw.org/reports/2008/bangladesh0208/;and ASK, "Human Rights Report 2008," 2008, http://www.askbd.org/web/wp-content/uploads/2008/11/ASK_Human%20Rights%20Report_07.pdf(accessed March 30, 2009).[43]HumanRights Watch interviews with students (names withheld), Dhaka, October 29 and December 31, 2008.[44] As of March 31, 2008, only Pakistan had more uniformed personnel in United Nations peacekeepingoperations.[45] Bangladesh Army,http://www.army.mil.bd/newahq/index5.php?category=177 (accessed October 12, 2008).[46] "Directorate General ofForces Intelligence – Overview," Bangladesh Military Forces, http://www.bdmilitary.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=55&Itemid=46(accessed February 15, 2009).[47]SeeHuman Rights Watch, The Torture of Tasneem Khalil,http://hrw.org/reports/2008/bangladesh0208/.[48] Human Rights Watchinterviews with politicians and businesspersons (identifying details withheld),September-November 2008.[49]HumanRights Watch interviews with businesspersons and lawyers (identifying detailswithheld,), September-November 2008.[50]"Editorsconcerned about intel interference in media," New Age, May 9, 2008, http://www.newagebd.com/2008/may/09/front.html#10 (accessed July 29, 2008).[51]HumanRights Watch interviews with lawyers (names withheld) London, May 13, and Dhaka, September 1 and 2, 2008.[52] See AmnestyInternational, "Amnesty International Report 1977."[53] See, for example, "Bangladesh: Labor Activists in Export Sector Harassed," Human Rights Watch news release,January 31, 2008, http://hrw.org/english/docs/2008/01/31/bangla17939.htm.[54] Bangladesh Police, "Strengthof Bangladesh Police," http://www.police.gov.bd/index5.php?category=19(accessed October 12, 2008).[55]Interpol,http://www.interpol.int/Public/ICPO/Members/default.asp (accessed April 25,2009).[56] Bangladesh Police, http://www.police.gov.bd/cmission.php?category=39(accessed April 25, 2009).[57] See Redress, "Torture inBangladesh 1971-2004," http://www.redress.org/publications/Bangladesh.pdf.[58] TransparencyInternational Bangladesh, "Corruption in Bangladesh: A Household Survey,Summary Findings," April 20, 2005, http://www.ti-bangladesh.org/documents/HouseholdSurvey200405-sum1.pdf(accessed August 5, 2008).[59] See Odhikar, "HumanRights Report 2008," January 15, 2009, "Human Rights Concerns 2007," http://www.odhikar.org/documents/hr_report_2007.pdf,"The State of Human Rights: 2006," http://www.odhikar.org/report/pdf/hr_report_2006.pdf,"Annual Activity Report 2005,"http://www.odhikar.org/report/pdf/activity_report_2005.pdf  (all accessed March30, 2009).[60] Odhikar, "322 allegedlykilled by law enforcing agencies."[61] Asian Human RightsCommission, "Bangladesh: Killer, torturer list submitted to UN peacekeepingunit," August 24, 2006, http://www.ahrchk.net/pr/mainfile.php/2006mr/377/(accessed March 30, 2009).[62] "Promulgate police ordnto remove cop-people gap," Daily Star, August 3, 2008, http://www.thedailystar.net/story.php?nid=48723 (accessed August 6, 2008).[63] Rapid Action Battalion,http://www.rab.gov.bd/about_mmc.php (accessed August 6, 2008).[64]NazrulIslam, "RAB's extrajudicial killings under US microscope," New Age, July 15, 2008, http://www.newagebd.com/2008/jul/15/front.html#3 (accessed July 15, 2008); Odhikar, "322 allegedly killed by law enforcing agencies during."[65]BangladeshRifles, http://www.bdr.gov.bd/index.php?node=node/about (accessed August 6, 2008).[66] "Bangladesh:Bangladesh Rifles," Library of Congress Country Studies, September1988,http://lcweb2.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/r?frd/cstdy:@field(DOCID+bd0154)(accessed October 12, 2008).[67] See, for example, SubirBaumik and Saleem Samad, "India and Bangladesh trade fire, business as usual infrontier towns," Durdesh, August 11, 2006,http://www.durdesh.net/news/article63.html(accessed October 12, 2008); "BSF kills 2 villagers, trades fire with BDR," DailyStar, January 8, 2004, http://www.thedailystar.net/2004/01/08/d4010801044.htm(accessed March 31, 2009); "BDR-BSF gunfight on Dinajpur border," BangladeshNews.com.bd, January 30, 3008, http://www.bangladeshnews.com.bd/2008/01/30/bdr-bsf-gunfight-on-dinajpur-border/(accessed March 21, 2009).[68] "Mourning day observedto protest killings in Phulbari," BangladeshNews.com.bd , August 29,2006, http://www.bangladeshnews.com.bd/2006/08/29/mourning-day-observed-to-protest-killings-in-phulbari/(accessed March 30, 2009).[69] Amnesty International,"Bangladesh: Killings by security forces must be fully investigated," AI Index:ASA 13/007/2006, August 31, 2006,http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/ASA13/007/2006/en/dom-ASA130072006en.html(accessed October 12, 2008).[70] Odhikar, "Report onTwenty One Months of State of Emergency"; See also, for example, "50 injured inBDR action in Satkhira," Daily Star, May 20, 2008,http://www.thedailystar.net/story.php?nid=37374 (accessed July 29, 2008).[71] "Ansar and VillageDefence Party," Banglapedia,http://banglapedia.search.com.bd/HT/A_0256.htm (accessed October 14, 2008).[72]Bangladesh Ansar & VDP, http://www.ansarvdp.gov.bd/about/org.php (accessedApril 23, 2009).[73]Ibid.[74]BangladeshCoast Guard, http://www.coastguard.gov.bd/history.html (accessed October 10, 2008).[75] Odhikar, "Report onTwenty One Months of State of Emergency."[76] Human Rights Watch firstraised concerns about the disappearance of Kalpana Chakma in the June 1996report Bangladesh: Political Violence on All Sides, http://www.hrw.org/reports/1996/BANGLA.htm.[77] Mithun Chakma,"Flashback," New Age, June 12, 2008,http://newagebd.com/2008/jun/12/oped.html (accessed October 14, 2008).[78] Ibid.[79] A first informationreport (FIR) is a document that should be prepared by the police once theyreceive information about the commission of a cognizable offense. A FIR isrequired for the police to initiate an investigation.[80] ASK, "Kidnapping ofKalpana Chakma," Draft Field Report, July 6, 1996.[81] ASK, "Abduction of HillWomen's Federation Leader: Recent Developments," ASK Appeal for Action, July 8,1996.[82] "Kalpana's letter toShaikat Dewan," New Age, June 12, 2008,http://newagebd.com/2008/jun/12/oped.html (accessed October 14, 2008).[83]  ASK, "Kidnapping ofKalpana Chakma."[84] "Kalpana Chakma now inTripura, Claims BHRC," Daily Star, August 9, 1996.[85] "Kalpana's MotherProtest BHRC Report," Daily Star, August 19, 1996.[86] Chakma, "Flashback," NewAge.[87]HumanRights Watch interview with Nicholas Chakma, Dhaka, September 15, 2008.[88] Human Rights Watchinterview with Debu Prasaddas, Dhaka, October 31, 2008.[89] BangladeshRehabilitation Centre for Trauma Victims, Medical Certificate for DebuPrasaddas, signed by Akram H. Chowdhury, executive director, on file with HumanRights Watch.[90]UN Commission on Human Rights, Report of the SpecialRapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinionand expression, Mr. Abid Hussain, E/CN.4/2002/75/Add.2,  February 22, 2002, 12,para. 130; and Report of the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel,inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, Nigel Rodley,E/CN.4/2002/76/Add.1, March 14, 2002, para. 132.[91]UNCommission on Human Rights, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotionand protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, Mr. AbidHussain,  E/CN.4/2002/75/Add.2,  para. 130.[92] See Waliur Rahman, "TopBangladeshi Politician Killed," BBC News Online, May 7, 2004, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/south_asia/3693035.stm (accessed September 27, 2006). The gunmen also killed another man, Omar Faruq Ratan, and wounded 17. See Chaitanya ChandraHalder, Shamim Ashraf, and Shameem Mahmud, "22 to WalkGallows for KillingAhsanullah," Daily Star, April 17, 2005,http://www.thedailystar.net/2005/04/17/d5041701011.htm (accessed October 5,2006).[93] Human Rights Watchinterview with Solema Begum, Tongi, March 20, 2006.[94] Ibid.[95] Human Rights Watchinterview with eyewitness, name and place withheld, March 20, 2006.[96] Odhikar, "Report 2004,Project on Investigation, Research and Publication of Human Rights Violations,"2004, p. 59.[97] Sheikh Nasir Ahmed,"Main Witness in Ahsanullah Master Murder Case Killed by RAB," published inASK, "RAB: Eradicating Crime or Crimes of the State?" 2005, sections of thereport available in English at www.askbd.org/RAB/RAB.htm.[98]Odhikar, "Report 2004,Project on Investigation, Research and Publication of Human Rights Violations,"p. 59.[99] Human Rights Watchinterview with Moher Asman Majumder, Dhaka, March 20, 2006.[100] Human Rights Watchinterview with Abdus Salam, Dhaka, March 20, 2006.[101]SheikhNasir Ahmed, "Main Witness in Ahsanullah Master Murder Case Killed by RAB."[102]"Death of Sumon CreatesSerious Resentment," Bangladesh Observer, July 18, 2004.[103]HumanRights Watch, Judge, Jury and Executioner, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2006/bangladesh1206/.[104] Rapid Action Battalion,"Response on Human Rights Watch Report Entitled 'Judge, Jury and Executioner:Torture and Extra Judicial Killings by Bangladesh's Elite Security Force,'"September 18, 2007.[105] Human Rights Watchinterview with Moher Asman Majumder, March 20, 2006.[106] Human Rights Watchinterview with Monir Ahmed Majumder, Tongi, May 25, 2008.[107] Human Rights Watchfirst reported on the death of Abul Kalam Azad Sumon in its December 2006reportJudge, Jury and Executioner,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2006/bangladesh1206/.[108] Human Rights Watchinterview with eyewitness (name withheld), Dhaka, March 22, 2006.[109] Human Rights Watchinterview with Abdul Hakim, Dhaka, March 22, 2006.[110] Human Rights Watchinterview with relative of Abul Kalam Azad Sumon (name withheld), Dhaka, March 22, 2006.[111]"2Alleged Gangsters Killed in Encounters with RAB-Police," Bangladesh Observer,June 1, 2005; and Shariful Islam and Shaheen Mollah, "Rab's 'Shootout' ClaimShrouded in Questions," Daily Star, June 1, 2005, http://www.thedailystar.net/2005/06/01/d5060101022.htm (accessed December 1, 2006).[112] Islam and Mollah,"Rab's 'Shootout' Claim Shrouded in Questions," Daily Star.[113] "Khilgaon Police Refuseto Register Case Against RAB," Daily Star, June 5, 2005,http://www.thedailystar.net/2005/06/05/d50605012920.htm (accessed December 1,2006).[114] "Mother Files MurderCase Against Ministers, RAB men," Daily Star, June 7, 2005, http://www.thedailystar.net/2005/06/07/d5060701044.htm (accessed December 1, 2006).[115] Human Rights Watchinterview with Abdul Hakim, Dhaka, March 22, 2006.[116] Human Rights Watchinterview with Abdul Hakim, May 25, 2008. Mirza Abbas was arrested in February2007 and was charged with corruption-related offenses unrelated to the death ofSumon. He was released on bail in December 2008.[117] Ibid.[118] Human Rights Watch haspreviously reported on the death of Iman Ali in its December 2006reportJudge, Jury and Executioner,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2006/bangladesh1206/.[119] Human Rights Watchinterview with Ishaq Miah, Savar, March 16, 2006.[120] Human Rights Watchinterview with Nazrul Islam, Savar, March 16, 2006.[121] Ibid.[122]SharifulIslam, "Jubo League Leader's Death; Intact Shirt Saps Crossfire Claim," DailyStar, March 13, 2006,http://www.thedailystar.net/2006/03/13/d60313012116.htm (accessed December 1,2006).[123] Human Rights Watchinterview with witness (name withheld), Dhaka, March 16, 2006.[124]"ListedGangster, Extortionist, Killer and Land Grabber Md. Iman Aliaka Masud Pervez Dies in a Shootout with RAB-4; Arms and Ammunition Recovered,"RAB press release, March 2006.[125] "Villagers FeelHelpless Before Cops, Goons," Daily Star, February 20, 2006,http://www.thedailystar.net/2006/02/20/d6022001108.htm (accessed December 1,2006).[126]HumanRights Watch interview with relative of Masudur Rahman (name withheld), Savar,June 17, 2008.[127]"CourtDoes Not Accept Case Against Babar," Daily Star, March 23, 2006,http://www.thedailystar.net/2006/03/23/d60323012116.htm (accessed November 8,2006).[128] Human Rights Watchinterview with Abdul Matin Kashru, September 9, 2008.[129]HumanRights Watch interview with witness (name withheld), Dhaka, June 17, 2008.[130] Human Rights Watchfirst reported about the torture of Shahidul Islam in its February 2008 report TheTorture of Tasneem Khalil, http://hrw.org/reports/2008/bangladesh0208/.[131] Human Rights Watchinterview with eyewitness (name and details withheld).[132] Human Rights Watchinterview with Shahidul Islam, Shatkhira, July 27, 2008.[133] Hotline Human Rights Bangladesh, "Urgent Appeal: Shahidul Islam," February 10, 2007.[134] Communication to HumanRights Watch from foreign diplomat, February 4, 2007.[135]UNHuman Rights Council, Report submitted by the Special Representative of theSecretary-General on the situation of human rights defenders, Hina Jilani, A/HRC/7/28/Add.1,March 3, 2008, para. 73.[136] Human Rights Watchinterview with Shahidul Islam, July 27, 2008.[137]"Half-dayhartal observed in Bhola," New Age, February 22, 2007; and Odhikar, "MunicipalityCommissioner tortured to death in Navy custody in Char Fashion, Bhola," 2007.[138]HumanRights Watch interview with Jesmin Akter Khuku  and UjirAli Master, respectively Khabirul Islam Dulal's widow andfather, Dhaka, March 17, 2009.[139]Ibid.[140]Odhikar,"Municipality Commissioner tortured to death in Navy custody."[141]Human RightsWatch interview with Jesmin Akter Khuku  and Ujir AliMaster, March 17, 2009.[142]ASK,"Strange death of Dulal, Municipal Commissioner of Bhola and Jubodal leader," undated;andOdhikar, "MunicipalityCommissioner tortured to death in Navy custody."[143] Human Rights Watchinterview with Jesmin Akter Khuku and Ujir Ali Master, Dhaka, March 17, 2009.[144] Odhikar, "MunicipalityCommissioner tortured to death in Navy custody."[145]Ibid.[146] Human Rights Watchinterview with Jesmin Akter Khuku and Ujir Ali Master, March 17, 2009. See also ASK, "Strange death of Dulal."[147] "Family of Charfassonward commissioner wants justice," New Age, March 5, 2007, http://www.newagebd.com/2007/mar/05/nat.html (accessed March, 29, 2009).[148] Odhikar, "MunicipalityCommissioner tortured to death in Navy custody."[149] Human Rights Watchinterview with Jesmin Akter Khuku and Ujir Ali Master, March 17, 2009.[150] Ibid.[151] Ibid.[152] Odhikar, "MunicipalityCommissioner tortured to death in Navy custody."[153] Ibid.[154] Human Rights Watchinterview with Nasiruddin Elam, Odhikar's acting director, Dhaka, March 17,2009; and email communication from Odhikar to Human Rights Watch, May 3, 2007.[155] Human Rights Watch interviewwith Jesmin Akter Khuku and Ujir Ali Master, March 17, 2009.[156]HumanRights Watch first reported on the death of Choles Ritchil in its WorldReport 2008 (New York: Human Rights Watch, 2008),http://www.hrw.org/wr2k8/.[157]HumanRights Watch interviews with witness and relatives of Choles Ritchil (nameswithheld), Modhupur, March 24, 2007; Odhikar, "Death of Advasi (Garo) Leader inArmy Custody," April 4, 2007; and Hotline Human Rights Bangladesh, "SpecialAppeal: Gross Human Rights Violation by Army/Joint Forces," May 17, 2007.[158]HumanRights Watch interview with eyewitness (name withheld), Modhupur, March 24, 2007.[159] Odhikar, "Death ofAdivasi (Garo) Leader in Army Custody."[160] Human Rights Watchinterview with witness (name withheld), Modhupur, March 24, 2007.[161] Odhikar, "Death ofAdivasi (Garo) Leader in Army Custody."[162]HumanRights Watch interview with relative of Choles Ritchil (name withheld), March24, 2007.[163]HanaShams Ahmed, "Nightmare in Modhupur," Star Weekend Magazine (Dhaka),March 30, 2007, http://www.thedailystar.net/magazine/2007/03/05/sfeature.htm(accessed April 29, 2007).[164] US State Department,Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, "Country Reports on Human RightsPractices – 2007: Bangladesh," March 11, 2008,http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2007/100612.htm (accessed August 6, 2008).[165] Human Rights Watchinterviews with relatives of Choles Ritchil (nameswithheld), Modhupur, March 24, 2007.[166] Human Rights Watchinterviews with indigenous leaders in Modhupur and relativesof Choles Ritchil (names withheld), Modhupur, March 24, 2007, and April28, 2008.[167] Human Rights Watchinterview with eyewitness (name withheld), Modhupur, March 24, 2007.[168] See, for example, AsianCentre for Human Rights, "Torture to death of a prominent tribal leader, MrCholes Ritchil of Bangladesh: An Appeal to the Heads of Delegations of the 14thSAARC Summit," April 2, 2007, http://www.achrweb.org/urgent_action/UA-BD0207.htm(accessed April 29, 2007). Bangladeshi human rights groups Odhikar and ASK havealso investigated the case.[169] "Judicial body probedeath of indigenous leader," Daily Star, May 6, 2007, http://www.thedailystar.net/2007/05/06/d70506013319.htm (accessed August 2, 2008).[170] Human Rights Watchinterview with relative of Choles Ritchil (name withheld), Modhupur, April 28,2008.[171]"Garoleader Ritchil's body exhumed," Daily Star, June 11, 2007, http://www.thedailystar.net/2007/06/11/d70611013425.htm (accessed October 14, 2008).[172] Human Rights Watchinterview with a relative of Choles Ritchil (namewithheld), Modhupur, April 28, 2008.[173]US State Department, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights,and Labor, "Country Reports on Human Rights Practices – 2007: Bangladesh," http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2007/100612.htm.[174] Human Rights Watchinterview with relative of Choles Ritchil (name withheld), Modhupur, April 28,2008.[175] "Indigenous leadersdemand reinvestigation of Chales Ritchil's death" Daily Star, March, 19, 2008,http://www.thedailystar.net/story.php?nid=28450 (accessed July 29, 2008).[176] Human Rights Watchinterview with relative of Choles Ritchil (name withheld), Modhupur, April 28,2008.[177]UNHuman Rights Council, Report of the Special Rapporteur on torture and othercruel, inhuman ordegrading treatment orpunishment, Manfred Nowak, A/HRC/7/3/Add.1, February 19, 2008, p. 25-26.[178]Human Rights Watch, The Torture of Tasneem Khalil, http://hrw.org/reports/2008/bangladesh0208/.[179]HumanRights Watch interview with Jahangir Alam Akash, Dhaka, June 19, 2008.[180]Ibid.[181] BangladeshRehabilitation Centre for Trauma Victims, Medical Certificate dated November26, 2007, on file with Human Rights Watch.[182]Asian Human RightsCommission,"UPDATE (Bangladesh): An investigation began into the allegedthreats against a human rights defender by the RAB official," July 24, 2007,http://www.ahrchk.net/ua/mainfile.php/2007/2504/, and "BANGLADESH: Allegedserious intimidation by the Rapid Action Battalion in Rajshahi against a humanrights defender," http://www.ahrchk.net/ua/mainfile.php/2007/2371/ (bothaccessed October 14, 2008).[183]UN Human Rights Council,Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the rightto freedom of opinion and expression, Ambeyi Ligabo, A/HRC/7/14/Add.1, February25, 2008, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/7session/A-HRC-7-14-Add1.pdf(accessed 14 October, 2008), paras. 45-47.[184]Asian Human RightsCommission, "UPDATE (Bangladesh): Mr. Akash faces three alleged false charges;Judge issued warrant against him," January 9, 2008, http://www.ahrchk.net/ua/mainfile.php/2008/2713/(accessed October 14, 2008).[185] Email communicationfrom Jahangir Alam Akash to Human Rights Watch, June 25, 2008.[186] Human Rights Watchinterview with Rizwan Hussain, London, May 14, 2008.[187] "BAF body to probealleged assault on UK national: ISPR," New Age, April 22, 2008, http://www.newagebd.com/2008/apr/22/front.html (accessed May 23, 2008).[188] "Assault At Zia: Courtmartial formed to try air force men," Daily Star, April 30, 2008, http://www.thedailystar.net/story.php?nid=34486 (accessed May 23, 2008).[189] Human Rights Watchinterview with Rizwan Hussain, London, April 27, 2009.[190] See, for example,International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc.A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23, 1976, acceded to by Bangladesh September 6, 2000, art. 2; UN Human Rights Committee,Bautista de Arellana v. Colombia, Communication No. 563/1993, 13 November 1993(UN doc. CCPR/C/55/D/563/1993), reproduced at http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/undocs/html/563-1993.html(accessed April 8, 2009); and UN Human Rights Committee, Basilio LaureanoAtachahua v. Peru, Communication No. 540/1993, 16 April 1996 (UN doc.CCPR/C/56/D/540/1993), reproduced at http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/undocs/540-1993.html(accessed April 8, 2009).[191]SeeHuman Rights Watch, Judge, Jury and Executioner, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2006/bangladesh1206/.[192] "Home adviser warnsagainst custodial death," Daily Star, January 30, 2008, http://www.thedailystar.net/story.php?nid=21225 (accessed August 6, 2008).[193] Ibid.[194] "PBCP Chief killed in'crossfire,'" New Age, July 28, 2008,http://www.newagebd.com/2008/jul/28/front.html#7 (accessed August 6, 2008); and"Top outlaw Dr Tutul killed in 'crossfire,'" Daily Star, July 28, 2008,http://www.thedailystar.net/story.php?nid=47800 (accessed August 6, 2008).[195] Human Rights Watch, TheTorture of Tasneem Khalil, http://hrw.org/reports/2008/bangladesh0208/.[196]TransparencyInternational Bangladesh, "National Household Survey 2007 on Corruption inBangladesh," June 18, 2008,http://www.ti-bangladesh.org/research/HHSurvey07full180608.pdf (accessed August4, 2008).[197]Odhikar,"Fact finding report: One allegedly beaten to death in the custody ofBotiyaghata Police Station in Khulna," 2008.[198]UNTreaty Collection, Chapter IV, Human Rights, Convention against Torture andOther Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,http://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=IV-9&chapter=4&lang=en (accessedApril 26, 2009).[199] Criminal ProcedureCode, art. 176.[200]  AmnestyInternational, "Bangladesh: Torture and Impunity," AI Index: ASA 13/07/00,http://www.amnesty.org/ar/library/asset/ASA13/007/2000/.en/dom-ASA130072000en.html.[201] See Appendix.[202] Amnesty International,"Bangladesh: Torture and Impunity," AI Index: ASA 13/07/00,http://www.amnesty.org/ar/library/asset/ASA13/007/2000/en/dom-ASA130072000en.html.[203] "Response on HumanRights Watch Report entitled 'Judge, Jury and Executioner: Torture andExtrajudicial Killings by Bangladesh's Elite Security Force,'" letter to HumanRights Watch from the Permanent Mission of Bangladesh to the United Nations,September 18, 2007.[204] "Two Years of RAB," Shomokal(Dhaka), May 17, 2006.[205] "Report of BangladeshGovernment in response to Human Rights Watch report of Bangladesh Events 2007,"August 8, 2008, reproduced athttp://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/related_material/Response_from_Bangladesh_gov0808.pdf.[206]See, forexample, UN Human Rights Committee, "Consideration of Reports Submitted byState Parties under Article 40 of the Covenant, Concluding Observations of theHuman Rights Committee, Guatemala," CCPR/CO/72/GTM, August 27,2001, http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)/CCPR.CO.72.GTM.En?Opendocument(accessed August 3, 2008), para. 13.[207] See Appendix.[208] See UN Human RightsCommittee, General Comment No. 20, Prohibition of Torture and Cruel Treatmentor Punishment (Forty-fourth session, 1992), http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/0/6924291970754969c12563ed004c8ae5?Opendocument(accessed April 8, 2009), para. 15. See also UN Human Rights Committee,"Consideration of Reports Submitted under Article 40 of the Covenant, Commentsof the Human Rights Committee, Argentina," CCPR/C/79/Add.46, 1995, http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/hrcommittee/ARGENTNA.htm(accessed August 3, 2008), paras. 3 and 11; "Consideration of Reports Submittedby State Parties under Article 40 of the Covenant, Concluding Observations ofthe Human Rights Committee, Argentina," CCPR/CO/70/ARG, November 3, 2000, http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)/CCPR.CO.70.ARG.En?Opendocument(accessed August 3, 2008) para. 9; "Consideration of Reports Submitted by StateParties under Article 40 of the Covenant, Concluding Observations of the HumanRights Committee, Chile," CCPR/C/79/Add.104, March 30, 1999, http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)/c1804ad46b00b64880256763004abebe?Opendocument(accessed August 3, 2008), para. 7; "Consideration of Reports Submitted underArticle 40 of the Covenant, Comments of the Human Rights Committee, Chile," CCPR/C/CHL/CO/5, May 18, 2007, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrc/docs/AdvanceDocs/CCPR.C.CHL.CO.5.pdf?Opendocument(accessed August 3, 2008), para. 5; "Consideration of Reports Submitted byState Parties under Article 40 of the Covenant, Concluding Observations of theHuman Rights Committee, France," CCPR/C/79/Add.80, August 4, 1997, http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)/CCPR.C.79.Add.80.En?Opendocument(accessed August, 3, 2008), para. 13; and "Consideration of Reports Submittedby State Parties under Article 40 of the Covenant, Concluding Observations ofthe Human Rights Committee, Croatia," CCPR/CO/71/HRV, April 30, 2001,http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)/CCPR.CO.71.HRV.En?Opendocument(accessed August 3, 2008), para. 11.[209] Constitution, art. 46.[210] Joint Drive IndemnityAct, 2003, sec. 3.[211] See "Revoke'Shoot-at-Sight,'" Human Rights Watch news release, June 4, 2003,http://hrw.org/english/docs/2003/06/04/bangla6123.htm.[212] European Parliament,Delegation for Relations with South Asia and SAARC, "Visit of a delegation ofthe European Parliament, Press Communiqué," Dhaka, February 27, 2003, http://www.eudelbangladesh.org/en/newsroom/pressrelease/03022701mepvisit.htm (accessed August 7, 2008).[213] Jatiyo Rakkhi Bahini(Amendment) Act, 1974, art. 3.[214]In 1996, during theAwami League-led government, parliament repealed the indemnity ordinance of1975 and thereby opened the way for holding trials against the killers ofSheikh Mujibur Rahman and his family.[215]Constitution,Fifth Amendment Act, 1979.[216]  Constitution,Seventh Amendment Act, 1986.[217]Criminal ProcedureCode, sec. 197(1) states, "When any person who is a Judge within the meaning ofsection 19 of the Penal Code, or when any Magistrate, or when any publicservant who is not removable from his office save by or with the sanction ofthe Government, is accused of any offence alleged to have been committed by himwhile acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty, noCourt shall take cognizance of such offence except with the  previous sanctionof the Government."[218]Section 132 states, "No prosecution against any personfor any act purporting to be done under this Chapter shall be instituted in anyCriminal Court, except with the sanction of the Government; and-(a) no Magistrate or police-officer acting under this Chapter in good faith,(b) no officer acting under section 131 in good faith,(c) no person doing any act in good faith, in compliance with a requisitionunder section 128 or section 130, and(d) no inferior officer, or soldier, or volunteer, doing any act in obedienceto any order which he was bound to obey,shall be deemed to have thereby committed an offence:Provided that no such prosecution shall be instituted in any Criminal Courtagainst any officer or soldier in the Bangladesh Army except with the sanctionof the Government."[219]ICCPR, art. 14(2)  states,"Everyone charged with a criminal offence shall have the right to be presumedinnocent until proved guilty according to law."[220] Constitution, art. 33.[221] Special Powers Act,1974, secs. 2(f) and 3.[222] Emergency Power Rules,2007, sec. 21.[223]SpecialPowers Act, 1974, secs.  9, 10, and 12.[224]"TheSpecial Powers Act and Anti-Corruption Commission Act with some other alliedlaws," Dhaka Law Reports, Eighth Edition, 2007, p. 81.[225]SpecialPowers Act, sec. 12(2).[226] Cathy McWilliam,"Exercising the big stick," in "States of Insecurity," Seminar (New Delhi), issue 512, April 2002, http://www.india-seminar.com/2002/512/512%20cathy%20mcwilliam.htm(accessed March 31, 2009).[227]"Dealingwith Dissent: The 'Black Laws' of Bangladesh," Human Rights Features,October 11, 1999, http://www.hrdc.net/sahrdc/hrfeatures/HRF08.htm (accessedAugust 7, 2008).[228] Mahmudul Islam, ConstitutionalLaw of Bangladesh, second edition (Dhaka: Mullick Brothers, 2008), p. 206.[229]ArmyAct, 1952, sec. 9; Air Force Act, 1952, secs. 71 and 72; Navy Ordinance, 1961,secs. 78 and 79.[230] Army Act, 1952, sec.96; Air Force Act, 1953, sec. 150.[231]See, for example, UN HumanRights Committee, "Consideration of Reports Submitted by State Parties underArticle 40 of the Covenant, Concluding Observations of the Human RightsCommittee, Chile," CCPR/C/CHL/CO/5, May 18, 2007, http://daccessdds.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G07/419/97/PDF/G0741997.pdf?OpenElement(accessed August 3, 2008), para. 5; "Consideration of Reports Submitted byState Parties under Article 40 of the Covenant, Concluding Observations of theHuman Rights Committee, Guatemala," CCPR/CO/72/GTM, August 27, 2001, http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)/CCPR.CO.72.GTM.En?Opendocument(accessed August 3, 2008) , para. 20; "Concluding Observations of the HumanRights Committee, Lebanon", CCPR/C/79/Add. 78, April 1, 1997, http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)/CCPR.C.79.Add.78.En?Opendocument(accessed August 3, 2008), para. 14.[232] UN Human RightsCommittee, "Concluding observations of the Human Rights Committee,Guatemala," CCPR/CO/72/GTM, http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/hrcommittee/guatemala2001.html.[233] The Armed PoliceBattalions Ordinance (as amended in 2003), sec. 13.[234]ArmedPolice Battalion Ordinance, 1979, secs. 8 and 9.[235]M IFarooqui, "Armed Police Battalions Ordinance: A Hybrid Law," Dhaka LawReport , 57, 2005.[236] "13 RAB Men Suspendedfor Torturing Businessman," New Age, July 24, 2005; "Torture of Bitan: ASP Among 3 RAB Men Withdrawn," New Nation (Dhaka), July 23, 2005.[237]Constitution,art. 141A.[238] Ibid., art. 141B.[239]Ibid.,art. 141C.[240] ICCPR ,art. 4(2).[241] Ibid., art. 4(1).[242]UNHuman Rights Committee, General Comment 29, States of Emergency (Article 4),CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add/11 (2001).[243] Article 2 of theEmergency Power Rules, 2007, states that the following are to the be consideredlaw enforcement agencies:thePolice Force, Armoured Police Battalion, Rapid Action Battalion, Ansar,Battalion Ansar, Bangladesh Rifles, Coast Guard, National SecurityIntelligence, Directorate General of ForcesIntelligence, and Bangladesh Armed Forces.[244]The EmergencyPower Ordinance, 2007, section 6(1) states, "No criminal or civil suit or anyother legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything which is ingood faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this ordinance or anyrules made there under or any order made under any such rule."[245] For specificrecommendations regarding the National Human Rights Commission Ordinance, seeletter from Human Rights Watch to Iajuddin Ahmed, President, Republic ofBangladesh, "National Human Rights Commission," April 8, 2008,http://hrw.org/english/docs/2008/04/08/bangla18475.htm.Related ContentMay 18, 2009News ReleaseBangladesh: Executions, Torture by Security Forces Go UnpunishedNew Government Must Address Impunity to Make Good on Human Rights PromisesMay 18, 2009News ReleaseBangladesh: Executions, Torture by Security Forces Go UnpunishedRegion / CountryAsia,BangladeshProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch